9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

2
1

 
 

1
v
1
8
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

towards a unied description of the four
interactions in terms of dirac-bergmann

observables.

luca lusanna

sezione infn di firenze,

largo e.fermi 2, 50125 firenze, italy

e-mail; lusanna@.infn.it

december 2, 2013

invited contribution to the book of the indian national science academy for the

international mathematics year 2000 ad.

abstract

a review is given of the status and developments of the research program
aiming to reformulate the physics of the four interactions at the classical level
in a unied way in terms of dirac-bergmann observables with special emphasis
on the open mathematical, physical and interpretational problems.

at the classical level the accepted mathematical description of the four inter-
actions at the basis of our understanding of nature (gravitational, electromagnetic,
weak and strong; without or with the not yet experimentally veried supersymme-
try between half-integer and integer spin elds, i.e. between fermions and bosons)
, is based on action principles which, due to manifest lorentz invariance, to local
gauge invariance (minimal coupling) and/or dieomorphism invariances, make use
of singular lagrangians implying the dirac-bergmann theory of constraints[1, 2] for
their hamiltonian formulation. while behind the gauge freedom of gauge theories
proper there are lie groups acting on some internal space so that the measurable
quantities must be gauge invariant, the gauge freedom of theories invariant under
dieomorphism groups of the underlying spacetime (general relativity, string theory
and reparametrization invariant systems of relativistic particles) concerns the arbi-
trariness for the observer in the choice of the denition of what is space and/or
time (and relative times in the case of particles), i.e. of the denitory proper-
ties either of spacetime itself or of the measuring apparatuses. this is the classical
mathematical background on which our understanding of the quantum eld theory

0

of electromagnetic, weak and strong interactions in the modern brs formulation is
based. the same is true for our attempts to build quantum gravity notwithstand-
ing our actual incapacity to reconcile the inuence of gravitational physics on the
existence and formulation of spacetime concepts with the basic ideas of quantum
theory, which requires a given absolute background spacetime.

current research on electromagnetic, weak and strong interactions in special
relativity, namely in minkowski spacetime, has partially bypassed the problem by
the covariant approach based on the brs symmetry which, at least at the level
of the algebra of innitesimal gauge transformations, allows a regularization and
renormalization of the relevant theories inside the framework of local quantum eld
theory (see for instance ref.[3]). however, problems like the understanding of nite
gauge transformations and of the associated moduli spaces, the gribov ambiguity
dependence on the choice of the function space for the elds and the gauge transfor-
mations, the connement of quarks, the denition of relativistic bound states and
how to put them among the asymptotic states, the nonlocality of charged states in
quantum electrodynamics, not to speak of the foundational and practical problems
posed by gravity, suggest that we should revisit the foundations of our theories.
it is not yet known whether we can understand which are the physical degrees of
freedom hidden behind manifest gauge and/or general covariance and whether we
can rstly meaningfully reformulate classical physics in terms of them and secondly
to quantize the resulting theories. this will require to abandon local eld theory at
the nonperturbative level and to understand how to regularize and renormalize the
coulomb gauge of electrodynamics to start with. moreover, the special relativistic
theories will have to be reformulated in such a way to allow a natural transition
to the coupling to gravity. even if usually gravitational contributions are ignored
because they are too weak with respect to the other interactions, the existing so-
lution to the ultraviolet divergences of quantum eld theory is distributional, so
that, at least at the mathematical level, it is not justied to ignore gravity with all
its nonlinearities. in turn general relativity must be formulated in a way allowing
its deparametrization to recover physics in minkowski spacetime when the newton
constant is put equal to zero. one also needs a formulation in which some notion of
elementary particle exists so to recover wigners denition based on the irreducible
representations of the poincare group in minkowski spacetime with the further en-
richment of the known good quantum numbers for their classication. moreover, one
needs some way out from the problem of time[4, 5, 6], since neither any consistent
way to quantize time (is it a necessity?), and generically any timelike variable, nor
a control on the associated problem of the relative times of a system of relativistic
particles are known. finally, one has to nd a solution to the more basic problem
of how to identify physically spacetime points in einsteins formulation of general
relativity, where general covariance deprives the mathematical points of the under-
lying 4-manifold of any physical reality [7, 8], while, on the experimental side (space
physics, gravitational waves detectors) , we are employing a theory of measurements
of proper times and spacelike lengths which presuppones the individuation of points.

1

this problem will appear also in the nowaday most popular program of unication
of all the interactions in a supersymmetric way, i.e.
in superstring theory and in
its searched m-theory extension (see for instance ref.[9]; string theory will not be
touched in this review), when someone will be able to reformulate it in a background
independent way.

these motivations induced me to revisit the classical hamiltonian formulation of
theories described by singular lagrangians trying to choose the mathematical frame-
works which at each step looked more natural to clarify the physical interpretational
problems by means of the use of suitable adapted coordinates. in particular, after
many years of dominance of the point of view privileging manifest lorentz, gauge
and general covariance at the price of loosing control on the physical degrees of
freedom and on their deterministic evolution (felt as a not necessary luxury only
source of diculties and complications), i went back to the old concept of dirac
observables, namely of those gauge invariant deterministic variables which describe
a canonical basis of measurable quantities for the electromagnetic, weak and strong
interactions in minkowski spacetime. instead, in general relativity, due to the prob-
lem of the individuation of the points of spacetime, measurable quantities have a
more complex identication, which coincides with diracs observables (in any case
indispensable for the treatment of the cauchy problem) only in a completely xed
gauge (total breaking of general covariance).

in the next sections i will review the various achievements of the program at the
present stage of development (see refs.[10] for previous reviews). since there is too
vast a bibliography to be covered in this review, i made the choice to concentrate it
on my point of view omitting to quote many aspects of the theory and the work of
many researchers.

1 singular lagrangians, presymplectic geometry,

the shanmugadhasan canonical transformations
and generalized coulomb gauges in minkowski
spacetime.

a) if a nite-dimensional system with conguration space q [qi, i=1,..,n, are local
coordinates in a global (assumed to exist for the sake of simplicity) chart of the
atlas of q; (t, qi(t)) is a point in r  q, where r is the time axis; qi(t) = dqi(t)/dt]
is described by a singular lagrangian l [so that the hessian matrix is degenerate:
det (cid:16)2l/ qi qj(cid:17) = 0], its euler-lagrange equations are in general a mixture of
equations i) depending only on the qi (holonomic constraints); ii) depending only
on qi and qi (lagrangian, in general nonholonomic, constraints and/or intrinsic rst
order equations of motion violating the so called second order dierential equation
(sode) conditions); iii) depending on qi, qi, qi (genuine second order equations of
motion, which however cannot be put in normal form, i.e. solved in the qi). more

2

equations of the types i) and ii) can be deduced from the euler-lagrange equations
and their time derivatives. the study of this type of degenerate equations can
be traced back to levi-civita[11]. the solutions of the euler-lagrange equations
depend on arbitrary functions of time, namely they are not deterministic.

n1 , (2)

m } are tangent to ); ii) the second class ones (2)

the canonical momenta pi = l/ qi are not independent: there are relations
among them (q, p)  0 called primary hamiltonian constraints, which dene a
submanifold  of the cotangent space t q [the model is dened only on this sub-
manifold; one uses the poisson brackets of t q in a neighbourhood of  and diracs
weak equality  means that the equality sign cannot be used inside poisson brackets].
the canonical hamiltonian hc(q, p) has to be replaced by the dirac hamiltonian
hd = hc +p (t), which knows the restriction to the submanifold  due to the
arbitrary dirac multipliers (t). the time constancy of the primary constraints ,
t = {, hd}  0, either pruduces secondary hamiltonian constraints or deter-
mines some of the dirac multipliers. this procedure is repeated for the secondary
constraints (this is the dirac- bergmann algorithm) and so on. at the end there is a
nal set of constraints a  0 dening the nal submanifold  of t q on which the
dynamics is consistently restricted, and a nal dirac hamiltonian with a reduced
set of arbitrary dirac multipliers describing the remaining indetermination of the
time evolution. the constraints are divided into two subgroups:
i) the rst class
ones (1)
m  0, having weakly zero poisson bracket with all constraints and being the
generators of the gauge transformations of the theory (the associated vector elds
{., (1)
n  0 (their number is even)
with det (cid:16){(2)
n2 }(cid:17) 6= 0, corresponding to pairs of inessential eliminable variables
(the associated vector elds are normal to ). the solutions of the hamilton-dirac
equations with the nal dirac hamiltonian depend on as many arbitrary functions
of time as the left dirac multipliers. the restriction of the symplectic 2-form of t q
to  is a closed degenerate 2-form, which in case of only rst class constraints gen-
erates a so called presymplectic geometry:  is said to be a presymplectic manifold
coisotropically embedded in t q [see ref.[12, 13] for what is known on presym-
plectic structures (they are dual to poisson structures, but much less studied not
being connected with integrable systems) and on the more general ones when second
class constraints are present]. when many mathematical conditions are satised,
the vector elds associated with the rst class constraints (they are in the kernel
of the degenerate 2-form on ) generate a foliation of the submanifold : each leaf
(hamiltonian gauge orbit) contains all the congurations which are gauge equivalent
and which have to be considered as the same physical conguration[1] (equivalence
class of gauge equivalent congurations); the canonical hamiltonian hc (if it is not
hc  0) generates an evolution which maps one leaf into the others. therefore, the
physical reduced phase space is obtained: i) by eliminating as many pairs of conju-
gate variables as second class constraints by means of the so called associated dirac
brackets; ii) by going to the quotient with respect to the foliation (a representative
of the reduced phase space can be build by adding as many gauge-xing constraints
as rst class ones, so to obtain a set of second class constraints). in general this

3

procedure breaks the original lorentz invariance.

let us remark that only the primary rst class constraints are associated with
arbitrary dirac multipliers. the secondary, tertiary... rst class constraints are, in
general, present in the canonical hamiltonian hc multiplied by well dened functions
of qi,
qi, which turn out to be arbitrary because they are not determined by the
hamilton-dirac equations (they are gauge variables). this contradicts the dirac
conjecture[1] that the secondary rst class constraints can be added to the dirac
hamiltonian with extra multipliers (the resulting extended dirac hamiltonian would
not allow the reconstruction of the original singular lagrangian by inverse legendre
transformation; since the dierence in the dynamics is only o-shell, this explains
why the extended hamiltonian is used in the bfv approach[14]). the natural way
to add gauge-xing constraints when there are secondary rst class constraints[15],
is to start giving the gauge xings to the secondary constraints. the requirement
of time constancy of these gauge xings will generate the gauge xings for the
primary rst class constraints and the time constancy of these new gauge xings
will determine the dirac multipliers eliminating every residual gauge freedom.

the dirac observables are the gauge invariant functions on the reduced phase
space, on which there is a deterministic evolution generated by the projection of the
canonical hamiltonian. therefore, the main problem is to nd a (possibly global)
darboux coordinate chart of the reduced phase space, namely a canonical basis of
dirac observables (or at least a poisson algebra of them, according to ref.[16] ).

one would expect that when this is not possible, the relativistic system is in-
trinsically ill dened already at the classical level: at the quantum level this should
manifest itself with the presence of not curable anomalies (which can be present also
for a classically well dened system). since the mathematical theory of the anoma-
lies relies on cohomological properties of the manifolds (like q and ) relevant to the
description of the system, which have to be dened already at the classical level, one
expects that a classical background of these properties in the form of obstructions
to the determination of the observables should be present in the theory of classical
gauge canonical transformations.

when there is reparametrization invariance of the original action s = r dtl, the
canonical hamiltonian vanishes and the reduced phase space is said frozen (like it
happens in hamilton-jacobi theory). when the canonical hamiltonian vanishes,
both kinematics and dynamics are contained in the rst class constraints describing
the system: these can be interpreted as generalized hamilton-jacobi equations[17],
so that the dirac observables turn out to be the jacobi data. when there is a
kinematical symmetry group, like the galileo or poincare groups, an evolution may
be reintroduced by using the energy generator as hamiltonian.

in a series of papers[18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23] i made a reformulation of the general
theory of singular lagrangians and hamiltonian constraints based on an extension of
the second noether theorem[24] to include also second class constraints. by means
of the resulting noether identities the dirac-bergmann algorithm was reproduced
at the lagrangian level. all the obscure and/or ambigous points of the theory were

4

claried. the understanding[19] of the pathological examples known in the litera-
ture led to the discovery of third- and fourth-class constraints [with their associated
singularities of the jacobi equations (linearization of the euler-lagrange equations)
and their connection with the reject of the dirac conjecture about adding the sec-
ondary rst class constraints to the dirac hamiltonian with extra dirac multipliers]
and of the phenomena of proliferation of constraints, ramication and joining of
chains of constraints. also the classication of all possible patterns of second class
constraints was given[23]. all these phenomena have their counterpart in the study
of the euler-lagrange equations for a singular lagrangian in the second-order for-
malism. in ref.[22] there is also the status of the art for the much more dicult
and still incomplete rst-order formulation of the theory on the tangent space t q
or on the rst jet bundle j 1(q)  t q  r, while in ref.[21] there is the connection
with brs theory.
b) now i will delineate the main steps for the determination of the dirac observ-
ables for the case in which only primary rst class constraints   0 are present at
the hamiltonian level.
the euler-lagrange equations associated with a singular lagrangian do not de-
termine the gauge part of the extremals. however it cannot be totally arbitrary,
but must be compatible with the algebraic properties of the noether gauge trans-
formations induced by the rst class constraints under which the action is either
invariant or quasi-invariant as implied by the second noether theorem.
in the
hamiltonian formulation these properties are contained in the structure constants,
or functions, of the poisson brackets of the rst-class constraints among themselves
[{, } = c, {, hc} = c] and the gauge arbitrariness of the trajec-
tories is described by the dirac multipliers appearing in the dirac hamiltonian. in
both formulations one has to add extra equations, the either lagrangian or hamil-
tonian multitemporal equations[20], to have a consistent determination of the gauge
part of the trajectory (see the generalized lie equations of ref.[25]). these equa-
tions are obtained by rewriting the variables qi(t), pi(t) in the form qi(t, ), pi(t, ),
and by assuming that the original t-evolution generated by the dirac hamiltonian
hd = hc + p (t) is replaced by: i) a deterministic t-evolution generated by
hc; ii) a -evolution (reassorbing the arbitrary dirac multipliers (t)), for each
, generated in a suitable way by the rst class constraints . the -dependence
of qi, pi determined by these multitemporal (or better multiparametric) equations,
which are integrable due to the rst-class property of the constraints, describes their
dependence on the gauge orbit containing the given cauchy data for the hamilton-
dirac equations. from the point of view of the study of the multitemporal equations,
the secondary rst class constraints are treated like the primary ones, namely as if
there would be associated extra dirac multipliers, and one should use as canonical
hamiltonian hc restricted to zero value of the secondary constraints.

when the poisson brackets of the hamiltonian rst class constraints imply a
canonical realization of a lie algebra, the extra hamiltonian multitemporal equa-
tions have the rst class constraints as hamiltonians (so that the dirac hamiltonian

5

is reduced to the canonical hamiltonian) and the time parameters (replacing the
dirac multipliers) are the coordinates of a group manifold for a lie group whose
algebra is the given lie algebra: they enter in the multitemporal equations via a set
of left invariant vector elds y on the group manifold [ya(q, p) = {a(q, p), }].
in the ideal case in which the gauge foliation of  is nice, all the leaves (or gauge or-
bits) are dieomorphic and in the simplest case all of them are dieomorphic to the
group manifold of a lie group. in this ideal case to rebuild a gauge orbit from one
of its points (and therefore to determine the gauge part of the trajectories passing
through that point) one needs the lie equations associated with the given lie group:
the hamiltonian multitemporal equations are generalized lie equations describing
all the gauge orbits simultaneously.
in a generic case this description holds only
locally for a set of dieomorphic orbits, also in the case of systems invariant under
dieomorphisms.

once one has solved the multitemporal equations, the next step is the determi-
nation of a shanmugadhasan canonical transformation[26]. in the nite dimensional
case general theorems[27] connected with the lie theory of function groups[28] en-
sure the existence of local canonical transformations from the original canonical
variables qi, pi, in terms of which the rst class constraints (assumed globally de-
ned) have the form (q, p)  0, to canonical bases p, q, pa, qa, such that
the equations p  0 locally dene the same original constraint manifold (the p
are an abelianization of the rst class constraints); the q are the adapted abelian
gauge variables describing the gauge orbits (they are a realization of the times 
of the multitemporal equations in terms of variables qi, pi); the qa, pa are an
adapted canonical basis of dirac observables. these canonical transformations are
the basis of the hamiltonian denition of the faddeev-popov measure of the path
integral[29] and give a trivialization of the brs construction of observables (the brs
method works when the rst class constraints may be abelianized[30]). therefore
the problem of the search of the dirac observables becomes the problem of nding
shanmugadhasan canonical transformations. the strategy is to nd abelianizations
p of the original constraints, to solve the multitemporal equations for qi, pi asso-
ciated with the p, to determine the multitimes q =  and to identify the dirac
observables pa, qa from the remaining original variables, i.e. from those their com-
binations independent from p and q. second class constraints, when present, are
also taken into account by the shanmugadhasan canonical transformation[26].

putting equal to zero the abelianized gauge variables one denes a local gauge
of the model. if a system with constraints admits one (or more) global shanmugad-
hasan canonical transformations, one obtains one (or more) privileged global gauges
in which the physical dirac observables are globally dened and globally separated
from the gauge degrees of freedom [for systems with a compact conguration space
q this is impossible]. these privileged gauges (when they exist) can be called gen-
eralized coulomb gauges. when the system under investigation has some global
symmetry group, the associated theory of the momentum map[31] is a source of
globality.

6

c) now all the physical systems dened in the at minkowski spacetime, have
the global poincare symmetry. this suggests to study the structure of the constraint
manifold  from the point of view of the orbits of the poincare group. if p is the
total momentum of the system, the constraint manifold has to be divided in four
strata (some of them may be absent for certain systems) according to whether p2 > 0,
p2 = 0, p2 < 0 or p = 0. due to the dierent little groups of the various poincare
orbits, the gauge orbits of dierent sectors will not be dieomorphic. therefore the
manifold  is a stratied manifold and the gauge foliations of relativistic systems
are nearly never nice, but rather one has to do with singular foliations.




p)


p

,




p

 (p,

 (p,


p) (p = l

for an acceptable relativistic system the stratum p2 < 0 has to be absent to
avoid tachyons. to study the strata p2 = 0 and p = 0 one has to add these
relations as extra constraints. for all the strata the next step (see however the next
section) is to do a canonical transformation from the original variables to a new set
consisting of center-of-mass variables x, p and of variables relative to the center of
mass. let us now consider the stratum p2 > 0. by using the standard wigner boost
= p2(1;~0),  = sign po), one boosts the relative
l
variables at rest. the new variables are still canonical and the base is completed by
p and by a new center-of-mass coordinate x, diering from x for spin terms. the
variable x has complicated covariance properties; instead the new relative variables
are either poincare scalars or wigner spin-1 vectors, transforming under the group
o(3)(p) of the wigner rotations induced by the lorentz transformations. a nal
canonical transformation[32], leaving xed the relative variables, sends the center-of-
mass coordinates x, p in the new set p x/p2 = p x/p2 (the time in the rest
frame), p2 (the total mass), ~k = ~p/p2 (the spatial components of the 4-velocity
k = p/p2, k2 = 1), ~z = p2(~x  xo~p/po). ~z is a noncovariant center-of-mass

canonical 3-coordinate multiplied by the total mass: it is the classical analog of the
newton-wigner position operator (like it, ~z is covariant only under the little group
o(3)(p) of the timelike poincare orbits). analoguous considerations could be done
for the other sectors. in ref.[33] there is the denition of other canonical bases, the
spin bases, adapted to the spin casimir of the poincare group.

the nature of the relative variables depends on the system. the rst class
constraints, once rewritten in terms of the new variables, can be manipulated to nd
suitable global and lorentz scalar abelianizations. usually there is a combination of
the constraints which determines p2, i.e. the mass spectrum, so that the time in
the rest frame p x/p2 is the conjugated lorentz scalar gauge variable. the other

constraints eliminate some of the relative variables (in particular the relative energies
for systems of interacting relativistic particles and the string): their conjugated
coordinates (the relative times) are the other gauge variables: they are identied
with a possible set of time parameters by the multitemporal equations. the dirac
observables (apart from the center-of-mass ones ~k and ~z) have to be extracted from
the remaining relative variables and the construction shows that they will be either
poincare scalars or wigner covariant objects. in this way in each stratum preferred
global shanmugadhasan canonical transformations are identied, when no other

7

kind of obstruction to globality is present inside the various strata.

d) in gauge eld theories the situation is more complicated, becouse the theo-
rems ensuring the existence of the shanmugadhasan canonical transformation have
not been extended to the innite-dimensional case. one of the reasons is that some
of the constraints can now be interpreted as elliptic equations and they can have
zero modes. let us consider the stratum p2 > 0 of free yang-mills theory as a pro-
totype and its rst class constraints, given by the gauss laws and by the vanishing
of the time components of the canonical momenta. the problem of the zero modes
will appear as a singularity structure of the gauge foliation of the allowed strata, in
particular of the stratum p2 > 0. this phenomenon was discovered in ref.[34] by
studying the space of solutions of yang-mills and einstein equations, which can be
mapped onto the constraint manifold of these theories in their hamiltonian descrip-
tion. it turns out that the space of solutions has a cone over cone structure of
singularities: if we have a line of solutions with a certain number of symmetries, in
each point of this line there is a cone of solutions with one less symmetry. in the
yang-mills case the gauge symmetries of a gauge potential are connected with
the generators of its stability group, i.e. with the subgroup of those special gauge
transformations which leave invariant that gauge potential (this is the gribov am-
biguity for gauge potentials; there is also a more general gribov ambiguity for eld
strengths, the gauge copies problem). since the gauss laws are the generators of
the gauge transformations (and depend on the chosen gauge potential through the
covariant derivative), this means that for a gauge potential with non trivial stability
group those combinations of the gauss laws corresponding to the generators of the
stability group cannot be any more rst class constraints, since they do not gen-
erate eective gauge transformations but special symmetry transformations. this
problematics has still to be claried, but it seems that in this case these components
of the gauss laws become third class constraints, which are not generators of true
gauge transformations. this new kind of constraints was introduced in refs.[19, 22]
in the nite dimensional case as a result of the study of some examples, in which the
jacobi equations (the linearization of the euler-lagrange equations) are singular, i.e.
some of their solutions are not innitesimal deviations between two neighbouring ex-
tremals of the euler-lagrange equations. this interpretation seems to be conrmed
by the fact that the singularity structure discovered in ref.[34] follows from the
existence of singularities of the linearized yang-mills and einstein equations. these
problems are part of the gribov ambiguity, which, as a consequence, induces an
extremely complicated stratication and also singularities in each poincare stratum
of .

other possible sources of singularities of the gauge foliation of yang-mills theory
in the stratum p2 > 0 may be:
i) dierent classes of gauge potentials identied
by dierent values of the eld invariants; ii) the orbit structure of the rest frame
(or thomas) spin ~s, identied by the pauli-lubanski casimir w 2 = p2 ~s2 of the
poincare group.
the nal outcome of this structure of singularities is that the reduced phase-

8

space, i.e. the space of the gauge orbits, is in general a stratied manifold with
singularities[16]. in the stratum p2 > 0 of the yang-mills theory these singularities
survive the wick rotation to the euclidean formulation and it is not clear how the
ordinary path integral approach and the associated brs method can take them into
account. the search of a global canonical basis of dirac observables for each stratum
of the space of the gauge orbits can give a denition of the measure of the phase
space path integral, but at the price of a non polynomial hamiltonian. therefore,
if it is not possible to eliminate the gribov ambiguity (assuming that it is only a
mathematical obstruction without any hidden physics), the existence of global dirac
observables for yang-mills theory is very problematic.

e) firstly, inspired by ref.[35] where a canonical basis of dirac observables was
found for the electromagnetic eld interacting with a fermion eld (whose dirac
observable is a fermion eld dressed with a coulomb cloud), the canonical reduction
to noncovariant generalized coulomb gauges, with the determination of the physical
hamiltonian as a function of a canonical basis of diracs observables, has been
achieved for the following isolated systems (for them one asks that the 10 conserved
generators of the poincare algebra are nite so to be able to use group theory;
theories with external elds can only be recovered as limits in some parameter of a
subsystem of the isolated system):

1) relativistic particle mechanics. its importance stems from the fact that quan-
tum eld theory has no particle interpretation: this is forced on it by means of the
asymptotic states of the reduction formalism which correspond to the quantization
of independent one-body systems described by relativistic mechanics [or relativistic
pseudoclassical mechanics [36], when one adds grassmann variables to describe the
intrinsic spin]. besides the scalar particle (p2  m2  0 or p2  0), one has control
on: i) the pseudoclassical electron[37] (p  m5  0 or p  0, where , 5 are
grassmann variables; p2m2  0 or p2  0 are implied; after quantization the dirac
equation is reproduced); ii) the pseudoclassical neutrino[38] (p+ i
3 p 
0, p2  0, giving the weyl particle wave equation p(1  5)(x) = 0 after quan-
  0,
tization); iii) the pseudoclassical photon[39] (p2  0, p  0, p  0, 
where ,  are a pair of complex grassmann four-vectors to describe helicity 1;
after quantization one obtains the photon wave equations a(x) = 0, a(x) = 0;
the berezin-marinov grassmann distribution function allows to recover the classical
polarization matrix of classical light and, in quantization, the quantum polarization
matrix with the stokes parameters); iv) the vector particle or pseudoclassical mas-
sive photon[40] [p2  2 + (1 )pp  0, 
  0, which, after quantization,
reproduce the proca-like wave equation ( + 2)a(x)  (1  )a(x) = 0].
the most important two-body system is the drozvincent-todorov-komar model
[41] with an arbitrary action-at-a-distance interaction instantaneous in the rest
frame as shown by its energy-momentum tensor[42] [p2
)  0, i=1,2,
r
 = (  pp/p2)r, r = x
2 , p = p1 + p2]. this model has been
completely understood both at the classical and quantum level [32]. its study led
to the identication of a class of canonical transformations (utilizing the standard

1  x

i  m2

i + v (r2

9

wigner boost for timelike poincare orbits) which allowed to understand how to de-
ne suitable center-of-mass and relative variables (in particular a suitable relative
energy is determined by a combination of the two rst class constraints, so that
the relative time variable is a gauge variable), how to nd a quasi-shanmugadhasan
canonical transformation adapted to the constraint determining the relative energy,
how to separate the four, topologically disjoined, branches of the mass spectrum (it
is determined by the other independent combination of the constraints; therefore,
there is a distinct shanmugadhasan canonical transformation for each branch). at
the quantum level it was possible to nd four physical scalar products, compatible
with both the resulting coupled wave equations (i.e. independent from the relative
and the absolute rest-frame times): they have been found as generalization of the
two existing scalar products of the klein-gordon equation: all of them are non-local
even in the limiting free case and dier among themselves for the sign of the norm
of states on dierent mass-branches. this example shows that the physical scalar
product knows the functional form of the constraints.

the connection with the bethe-salpeter equation of the quantized model has
been studied in ref.[43], where it is shown that the constraint wave function can be
obtained from the bethe-salpeter one by multiplication for a delta function contain-
ing the relative energy to exclude its spurious solutions (non physical excitations in
the relative energy). the extension of the model to two pseudoclassical electrons
and to an electron and a scalar has been done in ref.[44], and the rst was used to
get good ts to meson spectra.

the previous canonical transformations were then extended to n free particles
described by n mass-shell rst class constraints p2
i  0 [45]: n-1 suitable rel-
ative energies are determined by n-1 combinations of the constraints (so that the
conjugate n-1 relative times are gauge variables), while the remaining combination
determines the 2n branches of the mass spectrum. the n gauge freedoms associ-
ated with these n combinations of the rst class constraints are the freedom of the
observer: i) in the choice of the time parameter to be used for the overall evolution
of the isolated system; ii) in the choice of the description of the relative motions
with any given delay among the pairs of particles.

i  m2

in ref.[46] 2- and n-body newton mechanics was reformulated in a multitem-
poral way in terms of n rst class constraints obtained from the relativistic ones
in the limit c  . after a comparison with predictive mechanics, it was shown
that the no-interaction-theorem (namely that the multitemporal congurational
and canonical position coordinates of a particle coincide only in absence of interac-
tions) exists also at the nonrelativistic level, being a property of the multitemporal
description of particles and not of the kinematical symmetry group.

2) both the open and closed nambu string, after an initial study with light-
cone coordinates, have been treated[47] along the lines of the two-body model in
the stratum p2 > 0. both abelian lorentz scalar constraints and gauge variables
have been found and globally decoupled, and a redundant set of diracs observables
[~z, ~k,~an] has been found. it remains an open problem whether one can extract a

10

global canonical basis of diracs observables from the wigner spin 1 vectors ~an,
which satisfy sigma-model-like constraints; if this basis exists, it would dene the
liouville integrability of the nambu string and would clarify whether there is any
way to quantize it in four dimensions.

3) yang-mills theory with grassmann-valued fermion elds [48] in the case of a
trivial principal bundle over a xed-xo r3 slice of minkowski spacetime with suit-
able hamiltonian-oriented boundary conditions; this excludes monopole solutions
(to have them, even if they have been not yet found experimentally, one needs a
nontrivial bundle and a variational principle formulated on the bundle[49], because
the gauge potentials on minkowski spacetime are not globally dened) and, since r3
is not compactied, one has only winding number and no instanton number. after
a discussion of the hamiltonian formulation of yang-mills theory, of its group of
gauge transformations and of the gribov ambiguity, the theory has been studied in
suitable weighted sobolev spaces where the gribov ambiguity is absent [50] and the
global color charges are well dened. the global dirac observables are the trans-
verse quantities ~aa(~x, xo), ~ea(~x, xo) and fermion elds dressed with yang-mills
(gluonic) clouds. the nonlocal and nonpolynomial (due to the presence of classi-
cal wilson lines along at geodesics) physical hamiltonian has been obtained: it is
nonlocal but without any kind of singularities, it has the correct abelian limit if
the structure constants are turned o, and it contains the explicit realization of the
abstract mitter-viallet metric.

4) the abelian and non-abelian su(2) higgs models with fermion elds[51],
where the symplectic decoupling is a renement of the concept of unitary gauge.
there is an ambiguity in the solutions of the gauss law constraints, which reects
the existence of disjoint sectors of solutions of the euler-lagrange equations of higgs
models. the physical hamiltonian and lagrangian of the higgs phase have been
found; the self-energy turns out to be local and contains a local four-fermion inter-
action.

5) the standard su(3)xsu(2)xu(1) model of elementary particles[52] with

grassmann-valued fermion elds. the nal reduced hamiltonian contains nonlocal
self-energies for the electromagnetic and color interactions, but local ones for the
weak interactions implying the nonperturbative emergence of 4-fermions interac-
tions.

f) when a good description of the system in terms of dirac observables exists,
one is going to face the problem of quantizing only the true physical degrees of
freedom, which generically are nonlinear and nonlocal functions or functionals of
the original variables. when a quantization is possible, there is a high probability
to get a quantum theory inequivalent to that obtained by rst quantizing the original
variables and then making the reduction to the physical degrees of freedom at the
quantum level (see for instance the brs method).

with regards to eld theory, this method has the drawback that generically the
physical hamiltonian, and therefore also the lagrangian, is non polynomial in the
physical degrees of freedom. power counting methods cannot be used when looking

11

for regularizations and renormalizations of the theory, and the advantages of a global
control of the dynamics of physical quantities and of the possibility to check whether
a model is classically well dened are destroyed by our present inhability to solve
these problems. the question, which puzzled both dirac and yukawa, reappears,
whether it is possible to dene an intrinsic ultraviolet cuto and a regularization
scheme independent from the power counting.

2 the separation of the center of mass in spe-
cial relativity, the rest-frame instant form of
dynamics and wigner-covariant generalized
coulomb gauges.

the next problem is how to covariantize these results valid in minkowski space-
time with cartesian coordinates. again the starting point was given by dirac[1]
with his reformulation of classical eld theory on spacelike hypersurfaces foliating
minkowski spacetime m 4 [the foliation is dened by an embedding r    m 4,
(, ~) 7 z()(, ~)   , with  an abstract 3-surface dieomorphic to r3, with 
its copy embedded in m 4 labelled by the value  (the minkowski at indices are
(); the scalar time parameter  labels the leaves of the foliation, ~ are curvilinear
coordinates on  and (, ~) are  -adapted holonomic coordinates for m 4); this
is the classical basis of tomonaga-schwinger quantum eld theory].
in this way
one gets a parametrized eld theory with a covariant 3+1 splitting of minkowski
spacetime and already in a form suited to the transition to general relativity in
its adm canonical formulation (see also ref.[53], where a theoretical study of this
problem is done in curved spacetimes). the price is that one has to add as new in-
dependent conguration variables the embedding coordinates z()(, ~) of the points
of the spacelike hypersurface  [the only ones carrying lorentz indices] and then
to dene the elds on  so that they know the hypersurface  of  -simultaneity
[for a klein-gordon eld (x), this new eld is (, ~) = (z(, ~)):
it contains
the nonlocal information about the embedding]. then one rewrites the lagrangian
of the given isolated system in the form required by the coupling to an external
gravitational eld, makes the previous 3+1 splitting of minkowski spacetime and
interpretes all the elds of the system as the new elds on  (they are lorentz
scalars, having only surface indices). instead of considering the 4-metric as describ-
ing a gravitational eld (and therefore as an independent eld as it is done in metric
gravity, where one adds the hilbert action to the action for the matter elds), here
one replaces the 4-metric with the the induced metric gab[z] = z()
b on 
[a functional of z(); here we use the notation a = (, r); z()
a = z()/a are at
tetrad elds on minkowski spacetime with the z()
s tangent to  ] and considers
the embedding coordinates z()(, ~) as independent elds [this is not possible in

a ()()z()

r

12

metric gravity, because in curved spacetimes z
a 6= z/a are not tetrad elds so
that holonomic coordinates z(, ~) do not exist]. from this lagrangian, besides a
lorentz-scalar form of the constraints of the given system, we get four extra primary
rst class constraints

sys(, ~), t  r

[z](f lat)z()

r

sys(, ~)  0

sys(, ~)  zr()(, ~)t  r

h()(, ~) = ()(, ~)  l()(, ~)t  
[here t  
sys(, ~), are the components of the energy-momentum tensor in
the holonomic coordinate system, corresponding to the energy- and momentum-
density of the isolated system; one has {h()(, ~),h()(, ~ )} = 0] implying the
independence of the description from the choice of the 3+1 splitting, i.e. from the
choice of the foliation with spacelike hypersufaces. the evolution vector is given by
z()
 = n[z](f lat)l() +n r
, where l()(, ~) is the normal to  in z()(, ~) and
n[z](f lat)(, ~), n r
[z](f lat)(, ~) are the at lapse and shift functions dened through
the metric like in general relativity: however, now they are not independent variables
but functionals of z()(, ~).

the dirac hamiltonian contains the piece r d3()(, ~)h()(, ~) with ()(, ~)
dirac multipliers. it is possible to rewrite the integrand in the form [3grs is the in-
verse of grs]

()(, ~)h()(, ~) = [(()l())(l()h())  (()z()
def= n(f lat)(, ~)(l()h())(, ~)n(f lat)r(, ~)(3grszs()h())(, ~)
with the (nonholonomic form of the) constraints (l()h())(, ~)  0, (3grszs()h())
(, ~)  0, satisfying the universal dirac algebra of the adm constraints. in this
way we have dened new at lapse and shift functions

r )(3grszs()h())](, ~)

n(f lat)(, ~) = ()(, ~)l()(, ~),
n(f lat)r(, ~) = ()(, ~)z()
r (, ~).

which have the same content of the arbitrary dirac multipliers ()(, ~), namely
they multiply primary rst class constraints satisfying the dirac algebra. in
minkowski spacetime they are quite distinct from the previous lapse and shift func-
tions n[z](f lat), n[z](f lat)r, dened starting from the metric. instead in general relativ-
ity the lapse and shift functions dened starting from the 4-metric are the coecients
(in the canonical part hc of the hamiltonian) of secondary rst class constraints sat-
isfying the dirac algebra.

in special relativity, it is convenient to restrict ourselves to arbitrary spacelike
r ( )r. since they are described by only 10 vari-
hyperplanes z()(, ~) = x()
ables, after this restriction we remain only with 10 rst class constraints determining
the 10 variables conjugate to the hyperplane in terms of the variables of the system:

s ( )+b()

13

s

 s()()

s  p()

(sys)  0.

(sys)  0, h()()( ) = s()()

h()( ) = p()
after the restriction to spacelike hyperplanes the previous piece of the dirac hamil-
tonian is reduced to ()( )h()( )  1
()()( )h()()( ). since at this stage we
have z()
[z](f lat)(, ~)
r ( )r = ()( )  ()()( )br()( )r, it is only now that
r (, ~)  x()
b()
we get the coincidence of the two denitions of at lapse and shift functions (this
point was missed in the older treatments of parametrized minkowski theories):

 (, ~)  n[z](f lat)(, ~)l()(, ~) + n r

r (, ~)  b()

r ( ), so that z()

s ( ) + b()

2

s

s

s ( )s.

s ( ), p()

r ( )  b()

a ( ) (with the b()

s ( )s,
r ( )()()( )b()

, parametrizing the origin of the coordinates on the family of spacelike
is determined by the

n[z](f lat)(, ~)  n(f lat)(, ~) = ()( )l()  l()()()( )b()
n[z](f lat)r(, ~)  n(f lat)(, ~) = ()( )b()
the 20 variables for the phase space description of a hyperplane are:
i) x()
hyperplanes. the four constraints h()( )  0 say that p()
4-momentum of the isolated system.
ii) b()
r ( )s being three orthogonal spacelike unit vectors gener-
ating the xed  -independent timelike unit normal b()
 = l() to the hyperplanes)
b = 4ab
and s()()
a  4()()b()
, b()
a } = 4()()b()
[enforced by assuming the dirac brackets {s()()
a ,
{s()()
the structure constants of the
lorentz algebra]. in these variables there are hidden six independent pairs of degrees
of freedom. the six constraints h()()( )  0 say that s()()
coincides the spin ten-
s
s +s()()
s x()
= x()
sor of the isolated system. then one has that p()
,
satisfy the algebra of the poincare group.

with the orthonormality constraints b()
a

} = c ()()()()

with c ()()()()

= s()()

4()()b()

, s()()

, j ()()

s p()

s p()

s()()

()()

()()

s

s

s

s

s

s

s

s

s

s

s  [invariant mass of the isolated system under investigation] = msys;

let us remark that, for each conguration of an isolated system there is a priv-
ileged family of hyperplanes (the wigner hyperplanes orthogonal to p()
, existing
when p2
s > 0) corresponding to the intrinsic rest-frame of the isolated system. if we
choose these hyperplanes with suitable gauge xings, we remain with only the four
constraints h()( )  0, which can be rewritten as
qp2
~psys = [3  momentum of the isolated system inside the w igner hyperplane]  0.
there is no more a restriction on p()
s gives the ori-
entation of the wigner hyperplanes containing the isolated system with respect to
an arbitrary given external observer.

in this special gauge we have b()
ps) (the standard wigner boost
for timelike poincare orbits), s()()
system, and the only remaining canonical
variables are the noncovariant newton-wigner-like canonical external center-of-
mass coordinate x()
. now 3 degrees
of freedom of the isolated system [an internal center-of-mass 3-variable ~sys dened

s ( ) (living on the wigner hyperplanes) and p()

a  l()
 s()()

s (ps) = p()

, because u()

s /p2

a(ps,

s

s

s

14

inside the wigner hyperplane and conjugate to ~psys] become gauge variables [the
natural gauge xing is ~sys  0, so that it coincides with the origin x()
s ( ) =
z()(, ~ = 0) of the wigner hyperplane], while the x() is playing the role of a
kinematical external center of mass for the isolated system and may be interpreted
as a decoupled observer with his parametrized clock (point particle clock). all the
elds living on the wigner hyperplane are now either lorentz scalar or with their 3-
indices transformaing under wigner rotations (induced by lorentz transformations
in minkowski spacetime) as any wigner spin 1 index.

s

sys

sys ; iii) a noncanonical fokker-pryce center of inertia ~(f p )

one obtains in this way a new kind of instant form of the dynamics (see ref.[54]),
the wigner-covariant 1-time rest-frame instant form[55] with a universal breaking
of lorentz covariance. it is the special relativistic generalization of the nonrelativistic
separation of the center of mass from the relative motion [h = ~p 2
2m + hrel]. the
role of the center of mass is taken by the wigner hyperplane, identied by the point
x()( ) and by its normal p()
. the invariant mass msys of the system replaces
the nonrelativistic hamiltonian hrel for the relative degrees of freedom, after the
addition of the gauge-xing ts    0 [identifying the time parameter  , labelling
the leaves of the foliation, with the lorentz scalar time of the center of mass in the
rest frame, ts = ps  xs/msys; msys generates the evolution in this time].
the determination of ~sys may be done with the group theoretical methods of
ref.[56]: given a realization on the phase space of a given system of the ten poincare
generators one can build three 3-position variables only in terms of them, which in
i) a canonical
our case of a system on the wigner hyperplane with ~psys  0 are:
center of mass (the internal center of mass ~sys); ii) a noncanonical mller center
of energy ~(e)
. due to
sys  ~(f p )
~psys  0, we have ~sys  ~(e)
. by adding the gauge xings ~sys  0 one
can show that the origin x()
s ( ) becomes simultaneously the dixon center of mass
of an extended object and both the pirani and tulczyjew centroids (see ref.
[57]
for the application of these methods to nd the center of mass of a conguration
of the klein-gordon eld after the preliminary work of ref.[58]). with similar
methods one can construct three external collective positions (all located on the
i) the external canonical noncovariant center of mass x()
wigner hyperplane):
;
ii) the external noncanonical and noncovariant mller center of energy r()
; iii)
s
the external covariant noncanonical fokker-pryce center of inertia y ()
(when
there are the gauge xings ~sys  0 it also coincides with the origin x()
it
s ).
turns out that the wigner hyperplane is the natural setting for the study of the
dixon multipoles of extended relativistic systems[59] and for dening the canonical
relative variables with respect to the center of mass. after having put control on the
relativistic denitions of center of mass of an extended system, the lacking kinematics
of relativistic rotations in now under investigation. the wigner hyperplane with its
natural euclidean metric structure oers a natural solution to the problem of boost
for lattice gauge theories and realizes explicitly the machian aspect of dynamics that
only relative motions are relevant.

sys

s

s

the isolated systems till now analyzed to get their rest-frame wigner-covariant

15

i

( ), p()

i

i

i  m2

generalized coulomb gauges [i.e. the subset of global shanmugadhasan canonical
bases, which, for each poincare stratum, are also adapted to the geometry of the cor-
responding poincare orbits with their little groups; these special bases can be named
poincare-shanmugadhasan bases for the given poincare stratum of the presymplec-
tic constraint manifold (every stratum requires an independent canonical reduction);
till now only the main stratum with p2 timelike and w 2 6= 0 has been investigated]
are:
a) the system of n scalar particles with grassmann electric charges plus the
electromagnetic eld [55]. the starting conguration variables are a 3-vector ~i( )
for each particle [x()
( ) = z()(, ~i( ))] and the electromagnetic gauge potentials
aa(, ~) = z()(,~)
a a()(z(, ~)), which know the embedding of  into m 4. one
has to choose the sign of the energy of each particle, because there are not mass-
shell constraints (like p2
i  0) among the constraints of this formulation, due
to the fact that one has only three degrees of freedom for particle, determining the
intersection of a timelike trajectory and of the spacelike hypersurface  . for each
choice of the sign of the energy of the n particles, one describes only one of the
2n branches of the mass spectrum of the manifestly covariant approach based on
the coordinates x()
i  0 (in
the free case).
in this way, one gets a description of relativistic particles with a
given sign of the energy with consistent couplings to elds and valid independently
from the quantum eect of pair production [in the manifestly covariant approach,
containing all possible branches of the particle mass spectrum, the classical coun-
terpart of pair production is the intersection of dierent branches deformed by the
presence of interactions]. the nal diracs observables are: i) the transverse radia-
tion eld variables ~a, ~e; ii) the particle canonical variables ~i( ), ~i( ), dressed
with a coulomb cloud. the physical hamiltonian contains the mutual instanta-
neous coulomb potentials extracted from eld theory and there is a regularization
of the coulomb self-energies due to the grassmann character of the electric charges
qi [q2
i = 0]. in ref.[60] there is the study of the lienard-wiechert potentials and
of abraham-lorentz-dirac equations in this rest-frame coulomb gauge and also
scalar electrodynamics is reformulated in it. also the rest-frame 1-time relativistic
statistical mechanics has been developed [55].

( ), i=1,..,n, and on the constraints p2

i  m2

b) the system of n scalar particles with grassmann-valued color charges plus
the color su(3) yang-mills eld[61]: it gives the pseudoclassical description of the
relativistic scalar-quark model, deduced from the classical qcd lagrangian and with
the color eld present. the physical invariant mass of the system is given in terms
of the dirac observables. from the reduced hamilton equations the second order
equations of motion both for the reduced transverse color eld and the particles
are extracted. then, one studies the n=2 (meson) case. a special form of the
requirement of having only color singlets, suited for a eld-independent quark model,
produces a pseudoclassical asymptotic freedom and a regularization of the quark
self-energy. with these results one can covariantize the bosonic part of the standard

16

model given in ref.[52].

2, 0) or (0, 1

c) the system of n spinning particles of denite energy [( 1

2) rep-
resentation of sl(2,c)] with grassmann electric charges plus the electromagnetic
eld[62] and that of a grassmann-valued dirac eld plus the electromagnetic eld
(the pseudoclassical basis of qed) [63]. in both cases there are geometrical com-
plications connected with the spacetime description of the path of electric currents
and not only of their spin structure, suggesting a reinterpretation of the supersym-
metric scalar multiplet as a spin bration with the dirac eld in the ber and the
klein-gordon eld in the base; a new canonical decomposition of the klein-gordon
eld into center-of-mass and relative variables [58, 57] will be helpful to clarify
these problems. after their solution and after having obtained the description of
grassmann-valued chiral elds [this will require the transcription of the front form of
the dynamics in the instant one for the poincare strata with p 2 = 0] the rest-frame
form of the full standard su(3)  su(2)  u(1) model can be achieved.
tion.

the rest-frame description of the relativistic perfect gas is now under investiga-

all these new pieces of information will allow, after quantization of this new
consistent relativistic mechanics without the classical problems connected with pair
production, to nd the asymptotic states of the covariant tomonaga-schwinger for-
mulation of quantum eld theory on spacelike hypersurfaces (to be obtained by
quantizing the elds on  ): these states are needed for the theory of quantum
bound states [since fock states do not constitute a cauchy problem for the eld
equations, because an in (or out) particle can be in the absolute future of another
one due to the tensor product nature of these asymptotic states, bound state equa-
tions like the bethe-salpeter one have spurious solutions which are excitations in
relative energies, the variables conjugate to relative times]. moreover, it will be
possible to include bound states among the asymptotic states.

as said in ref.[60, 61], the quantization of these rest-frame models has to over-
come two problems. on the particle side, the complication is the quantization of
the square roots associated with the relativistic kinetic energy terms:
in the free
case this has been done in ref.[64] [see refs.[65] for the complications induced by
the coulomb potential]. on the eld side (all physical hamiltonian are nonlocal
and, with the exception of the abelian case, nonpolynomial, but quadratic in the
momenta), the obstacle is the absence (notwithstanding there is no no-go theorem)
of a complete regularization and renormalization procedure of electrodynamics (to
start with) in the coulomb gauge: see ref.[66] (and its bibliography) for the existing
results for qed.

however, as shown in refs.[55, 48], the rest-frame instant form of dynamics au-
tomatically gives a physical ultraviolet cuto in the spirit of dirac and yukawa: it is

the mller radius[67]  = w 2/p2 = |~s|/p2 (w 2 = p2 ~s2 is the pauli-lubanski

casimir when p2 > 0), namely the classical intrinsic radius of the worldtube, around
the covariant noncanonical fokker-pryce center of inertia y (), inside which the non-
covariance of the canonical center of mass x is concentrated. at the quantum level

17

 becomes the compton wavelength of the isolated system multiplied its spin eigen-

value qs(s + 1) ,  7  = qs(s + 1)h/m = qs(s + 1)m with m = p2 the

invariant mass and m = h/m its compton wavelength. therefore, the criticism to
classical relativistic physics, based on quantum pair production, concerns the testing
of distances where, due to the lorentz signature of spacetime, one has intrinsic clas-
sical covariance problems: it is impossible to localize the canonical center of mass
x adapted to the rst class constraints of the system (also named pryce center of
mass and having the same covariance of the newton-wigner position operator) in a
frame independent way.

let us remember [55] that  is also a remnant in at minkowski spacetime of the
energy conditions of general relativity: since the mller noncanonical, noncovariant
center of energy r()has its noncovariance localized inside the same worldtube with
radius  (it was discovered in this way) [67], it turns out that for an extended
relativistic system with the material radius smaller of its intrinsic radius  one has:
i) its peripheral rotation velocity can exceed the velocity of light; ii) its classical
energy density cannot be positive denite everywhere in every frame.

now, the real relevant point is that this ultraviolet cuto determined by  exists
also in einsteins general relativity (which is not power counting renormalizable) in
the case of asymptotically at spacetimes, taking into account the poincare casimirs
of its asymptotic adm poincare charges (when supertranslations are eliminated with
suitable boundary conditions). the generalization of the worldtube of radius  to
asymptotically at general relativity with matter, could also be connected with the
unproved cosmic censorship hypothesis.

h

= h

p + hp
l2
cs

tcs

p + hp

moreover, the extended heisenberg relations of string theory[68], i.e. x =
implying the lower bound x > lcs = qh/tcs due to the y+1/y
p + p
structure, have a counterpart in the quantization of the mller radius[55]: if we ask
that, also at the quantum level, one cannot test the inside of the worldtube, we must
ask x >  which is the lower bound implied by the modied uncertainty relation
x = h
2 . this could imply that the center-of-mass canonical noncovariant
3-coordinate ~z = p 2(~x  ~p
p o xo) [55] cannot become a self-adjoint operator. see
hegerfeldts theorems (quoted in refs.[48, 55]) and his interpretation pointing at
the impossibility of a good localization of relativistic particles (experimentally one
determines only a worldtube in spacetime emerging from the interaction region).
since the eigenfunctions of the canonical center-of-mass operator are playing the
role of the wave function of the universe, one could also say that the center-of-
mass variable has not to be quantized, because it lies on the classical macroscopic
side of copenhagens interpretation and, moreover, because, in the spirit of machs
principle that only relative motions can be observed, no one can observe it (it is only
used to dene a decoupled point particle clock). on the other hand, if one rejects
the canonical noncovariant center of mass in favor of the covariant noncanonical
fokker-pryce center of inertia y , {y , y } 6= 0, one could invoke the philosophy
of quantum groups to quantize y  to get some kind of quantum plane for the

18

center-of-mass description. let us remark that the quantization of the square root
hamiltonian done in ref.[64] is consistent with this problematic.

in conclusion, the best set of canonical coordinates adapted to the constraints and
to the geometry of poincare orbits in minkowski spacetime and naturally predisposed
to the coupling to canonical tetrad gravity is emerging for the electromagnetic,
weak and strong interactions with matter described either by fermion elds or by
relativistic particles with a denite sign of the energy.

3 tetrad gravity, physical hamiltonian degrees
of freedom of the gravitational field and the
deparametrization of general relativity.

tetrad gravity is the formulation of general relativity natural for the coupling to
the fermion elds of the standard model. however, we need a formulation of it,
which allows to solve its constraints for doing the canonical reduction and to solve
the deparametrization problem of general relativity (how to recover the rest-frame
instant form when the newton constant is put equal to zero, g=0). since neither a
complete reduction of gravity with an identication of the physical canonical degrees
of freedom of the gravitational eld nor a detailed study of its hamiltonian group of
gauge transformations (whose innitesimal generators are the rst class constraints)
has ever been pushed till the end in an explicit way, a new formulation of tetrad
gravity [69, 70, 71, 72] was developed.

i) globally hyperbolic 4-manifolds, i.e.

to implement this program we shall restrict ourselves to the simplest class
of spacetimes [time-oriented pseudo-riemannian or lorentzian 4-manifold (m 4, 4g)
with signature  (+  ) ( = 1 according to either particle physics or general
relativity convention) and with a choice of time orientation], assumed to be:
topologically they are m 4 = r  ,
so to have a well posed cauchy problem [with  the abstract model of cauchy
surface] at least till when no singularity develops in m 4 [see the singularity theorems].
therefore, these spacetimes admit regular foliations with orientable, complete, non-
intersecting spacelike 3-manifolds  [ : m 4  r, z 7  (z), is a global timelike
future-oriented function labelling the leaves (surfaces of simultaneity)]. in this way,
one obtains 3+1 splittings of m 4 and the possibility of a hamiltonian formulation.
ii) asymptotically at at spatial innity, so to have the possibility to dene
asymptotic poincare charges [73, 74, 75]: they allow the denition of a mller ra-
dius also in general relativity and are a bridge towards a future soldering with the
theory of elementary particles in minkowski spacetime dened as irreducible rep-
resentation of its kinematical, globally implemented poincare group according to
wigner. this excludes einstein-wheeler closed universes without boundaries (no
asymptotic poincare charges), which were introduced to eliminate boundary condi-
tions at spatial innity to make the theory as machian as possible.

19

iii) admitting a spinor (or spin) structure[76] for the coupling to fermion elds.
since we consider noncompact space- and time-orientable spacetimes, spinors can
be dened if and only if they are parallelizable [77], like in our case. this implies
that the orthonormal frame principal so(3)-bundle over  (whose connections are
the spin connections determined by the cotriads) is trivial.

iv) the noncompact parallelizable simultaneity 3-manifolds (the cauchy sur-
faces)  are assumed to be topologically trivial, geodesically complete and, nally,
dieomorphic to r3. these 3-manifolds have the same manifold structure as eu-
clidean spaces: a) the geodesic exponential map expp : tp   is a dieomor-
phism ; b) the sectional curvature is less or equal zero everywhere; c) they have no
conjugate locus [i.e. there are no pairs of conjugate jacobi points (intersection
points of distinct geodesics through them) on any geodesic] and no cut locus [i.e.
no closed geodesics through any point].

v) like in yang-mills case [48], the 3-spin-connection on the orthogonal frame
so(3)-bundle (and therefore cotriads) will have to be restricted to suited weighted
sobolev spaces to avoid gribov ambiguities [48, 78]. in turn, this implies the absence
of isometries of the noncompact riemannian 3-manifold ( , 3g) [see for instance the
review paper in ref. [79]].

dieomorphisms on  (dif f  ) are interpreted in the passive way, following
ref.[80], in accord with the hamiltonian point of view that innitesimal dieomor-
phisms are generated by taking the poisson bracket with the 1st class supermomen-
tum constraints [passive dieomorphisms are also named pseudodieomorphisms].
the new formulation of tetrad gravity [see refs. [81] for the existing versions of
the theory] utilizes the adm action of metric gravity with the 4-metric expressed in
terms of arbitrary cotetrads. let us remark that both in the adm metric and tetrad
formulation one has to introduce the extra ingredient of the 3+1 splittings of m 4
with foliations whose leaves  are spacelike 3-hypersurfaces. however, their points
z(, ~) [(, ~) are  -adapted holonomic coordinates of m 4] are not congurational
variables of these theories in contrast to what happens in minkowski parametrized
theories as already said [ z
a are not tetrads when m 4 is not minkowski spacetime
with cartesian coordinates, because 4gab z
a

by using  -adapted holonomic coordinates for m 4, one has found a new

z

b = 4g 6= 4()()].

parametrization of arbitrary tetrads and cotetrads on m 4 in terms of cotriads on 
[3e(a)r(, ~)], of lapse [n(, ~)] and shift [n(a)(, ~) = {3e(a)rn r}(, ~)] functions and
of 3 parameters [(a)(, ~)] parametrizing point-dependent wigner boosts for time-
like poincare orbits. putting these variables in the adm action for metric gravity
[73] (with the 3-metric on  expressed in terms of cotriads: 3grs = 3e(a)r
3e(a)s with
positive signature), one gets a new action depending only on lapse, shifts and cotri-
ads, but not on the boost parameters (therefore, there is no need to use schwingers
time gauge). there are 10 primary and 4 secondary rst class constraints and a
weakly vanishing canonical hamiltonian containing the secondary constraints like
in adm metric gravity [73]. besides the 3 constraints associated with the vanishing
lorentz boost momenta (abelianization of boosts), there are 4 constraints saying

20

that the momenta associated with lapse and shifts vanish, 3 constraints describing
rotations, 3 constraints generating space-dieomorphisms on the cotriads induced
by those (dif f  ) on  (a linear combination of supermomentum constraints and
of the rotation ones;a dierent combination of these constraints generates so(3)
gauss law constraints for the momenta 3r
(a) conjugated to cotriads with the co-
variant derivative built with the spin connection) and one superhamiltonian con-
straint. the six constraints connected with lorentz boosts and rotations replace
the constraints satisfying the lorentz algebra in the older formulations. the boost
parameters (a)(, ~) and the three angles (a)(, ~) hidden in the cotriads are the
extra variables of tetrad gravity with respect to metric gravity: they allow a hamil-
tonian description of the congruences of timelike accelerated observers used in the
formulation of gravitomagnetism[82, 83].

it turns out that with the technology developed for yang-mills theory, one can
abelianize the 3 rotation constraints and then also the space-dieomorphism con-
straints so that we can arrive at a total of 13 abelianized rst class constraints. in
the abelianization of the rotation constraints one needs the green function of the
3-dimensional covariant derivative containing the spin connection, well dened only
if there is no gribov ambiguity in the so(3)-frame bundle and no isometry of the
riemannian 3-manifold ( , 3g). the green function is similar to the yang-mills one
for a principal so(3)-bundle [48], but, instead of the dirac distribution for the green
function of the at divergence, it contains the synge-dewitt bitensor [84] dening
the tangent in one endpoint of the geodesic arc connecting two points (which re-
duces to the dirac distribution only locally in normal coordinates). moreover, the
denition of the green function now requires the geodesic exponential map.

in the resulting quasi-shanmugadhasan canonical basis, the original cotriad
can be expressed in closed form in terms of 3 rotation angles, 3 dieomorphism-
parameters and a reduced cotriad depending only on 3 independent variables (they
are diracs observables with respect to 13 of the 14 rst class constraints) and with
their conjugate momenta, still subject to the reduced form of the superhamiltonian
constrain: this is the phase space over the superspace of 3-geometries[85].

till now no coordinate condition[86] has been imposed. it turns out that these
conditions are hidden in the choice of how to parametrize the reduced cotriads in
terms of three independent functions. the simplest parametrization (the only one
studied till now) corresponds to choose a system of global 3-orthogonal coordinates
on  , in which the 3-metric is diagonal. with a further canonical transformation on
the reduced cotriads and conjugate momenta, one arrives at a canonical basis con-
taining the conformal factor (, ~) = eq(,~)/2 of the 3-geometry and its conjugate
momentum (, ~) plus two other pairs of conjugate canonical variables ra(, ~),
a(, ~), a = 1, 2. the reduced superhamiltonian constraint, expressed in terms of
these variables, turns out to be an integro-dierential equation for the conformal
factor (reduced lichnerowicz equation) whose conjugate momentum is, therefore,
the last gauge variable. if we replace the gauge xing of the lichnerowicz[87] and
york[88, 89, 83] approach [namely the vanishing of the trace of the extrinsic curva-

21

ture of  , 3k(, ~)  0, also named the internal extrinsic york time[90]] with the
natural one (, ~)  0 and we go to dirac brackets, we nd that ra(, ~), a(, ~)
are the canonical basis for the physical degrees of freedom or diracs observables of
the gravitational eld in the 3-orthogonal gauges. let us remark that the functional
form of the non-tensorial objects ra, a, depends on the chosen coordinate condition.
the next step is to nd the physical hamiltonian for them and to solve the
deparametrization problem. if we wish to arrive at the soldering of tetrad gravity
with matter and parametrized minkowski formulation for the same matter, we must
require that the lapse and shift functions of tetrad gravity [which must grow lin-
early in ~, in suitable asymptotic minkowski coordinates, according to the existing
literature on asymptotic poincare charges at spatial innity [74]] must agree asymp-
totically with the at lapse and shift functions, which, however, are unambigously
dened only on minkowski spacelike hyperplanes as we have seen.

adm , j ab

in metric adm gravity the canonical hamiltonian is h(c)adm = r d3[n h +
nr hr](, ~)  0, where h(, ~)  0 and hr(, ~)  0 are the superhamilto-
nian and supermomentum constraints. it is dierentiable and nite only for suit-
able n(, ~) = n(, ~) |~| 0, nr(, ~) = nr(, ~) |~| 0 dened by beig and
omurchadha[74] in suitable asymptotic coordinate systems. for more general lapse
and shift functions one must add a surface term [85] to h(c)adm , which contains the
strong poincare charges [73] p a
adm [they are conserved and gauge invari-
ant surface integrals]. to have well dened asymptotic poincare charges at spatial
innity[73, 74] one needs:
i) the selection of a class of coordinates systems for 
asymptotic to at coordinates; ii) the choice of a class of hamiltonian boundary
conditions for the elds in these coordinate systems [all the elds must belong to
some functional space of the type of the weighted sobolev spaces]; iii) a denition
of the hamiltonian group g of gauge transformations (and in particular of proper
gauge transformations) with a well dened limit at spatial innity so to respect i)
and ii). the scheme is the same needed to dene the non-abelian charges in yang-
mills theory[48]. the delicate point is to be able to exclude supertranslations[76],
because the presence of these extra asymptotic charges leads to the replacement of
the asymptotic poincare group with the innite-dimensional spi group[75] of asymp-
totic symmetries, which does not allow the denition of the poincare spin due to the
absence of the pauli-lubanski casimir. this can be done with suitable boundary
conditions (in particular all the elds and gauge transformations must have direction
independent limits at spatial innity) respecting the parity conditions of beig and
omurchadha[74].

let us then remark that in ref.[91] and in the book in ref.[1] (see also ref.[74]),

dirac introduced asymptotic minkowski rectangular coordinates

()(, ~) = x()
z()

()( ) + b()

() r( )r

in m 4 at spatial innity s =  s2
()( )
labels a point, near spatial innity chosen as origin of  . on it there is a at tetrad

, for each value of  , the coordinates x()

22

()b()
b  b()

()()()b()

() = b()

()  = ()

() 2( )b()

() 3( );
4()() b()

b()
() a( ) = { l()
() 1( )b()
b()
()  -independent, satisfying b()
() r( ) }, with l()
() b = 4ab for ev-
ery  [at this level we do not assume that l()
() is tangent to s, as the nor-
mal l to  ]. there will be transformation coecients b
a(, ~) from the holo-
nomic adapted coordinates a = (, r) to coordinates x = z(a) in an atlas
of m 4, such that in a chart at spatial innity one has z(, ~) = 
()z()(, ~)
and b
4()() and
4gab = b
a

()a( ) [for r   one has 4g  ()

a(, ~) = 

()b = 4ab ].

4()()b()

 ()


4gb

() a

()a

()( ) + b()

()(, ~) = x()

dirac[91] and, then, regge and teitelboim[74] proposed that the asymptotic
minkowski rectangular coordinates z()
()r( )r should dene
10 new independent degrees of freedom at the spatial boundary s, as it happens
for minkowski parametrized theories[55] when restricted to spacelike hyperplanes
r ( )r]; then, 10 conjugate momenta should ex-
[dened by z()(, ~)  x()
ist. these 20 extra variables of the dirac proposal can be put in the form: x()
()( ),
p()
(), b()
, with dirac brackets im-
plying the orthonormality constraints b()
() and
()a
j ()()
() = x()
satisfy a poincare algebra]. in analogy with
minkowski parametrized theories restricted to spacelike hyperplanes, one expects to
have 10 extra rst class constraints of the type

()  -independent], s()()

()b = 4ab [so that p()

()a( ) [with b()

()  x()

() + s()()

() = l()

s ( ) + b()

4()()b()

()p()

()p()

()

()

adm , j ab

adm  0

() and s()()

()  s()()

let us remark that if we replace p()

adm related to the adm poincare charges p a

adm  0, s()()
adm , s()()

p()
()  p ()
with p ()
adm . the origin
x()
() is going to play the role of a decoupled observer with his parametrized clock.
, whose poisson algebra is the
direct sum of an abelian algebra of translations and of a lorentz algebra, with
()()p()
the new variables (with holonomic indices with respect to  ) pa
(),
()()s()()
], the poisson brackets for p()
j ab
() = ba
[6= ba
()()bb
(),
b()
()a, s()()
imply that pa
(), j ab
() satisfy a poincare algebra. this implies that
the poincare generators p a
adm , j ab
adm dene in the asymptotic dirac rectangular
coordinates a momentum p ()
adm and only an adm spin tensor s()()
adm [to dene an
angular momentum tensor j ()()
adm one should nd a center of mass of the gravi-
tational eld x ()
adm [3g, 3 ] (see ref.[58] for the klein-gordon case) conjugate to
adm = x ()
p ()
adm , so that j ()()

adm + s()()
adm ].

()()j ()()

adm p ()

adm p ()

() = ba

()()bb

()

()

()

()

the following splitting of the lapse and shift functions and the following set of
boundary conditions fulll all the previous requirements [soldering with the lapse
and shift functions on minkowski hyperplanes; absence of supertranslations [strictly
speaking one gets p r

adm = 0 due to the parity conditions; r = |~|]

adm  x ()

23

2

as( )s,

r )rs + o4(r3/2),

3krs(, ~) = o3(r5/2),

2r )(a)r + o4(r3/2),

r )rs + 3hrs(, ~) = (1 + m

n(, ~) = o(r(3+)),
nr(, ~) = o(r),

3grs(, ~) r  (1 + m
3 rs(, ~) r 
n(, ~) = n(as)(, ~) + n(, ~),
nr(, ~) = n(as)r(, ~) + nr(, ~),
n(as)a(, ~) def= (n(as) ; n(as)r )(, ~) = a( )  1
 3e(a)r(, ~) = (1 + m
with3hrs(,~) = 3hrs(, ~), 3krs(,~) = 3krs(, ~); here 3 rs(, ~) is the mo-
mentum conjugate to the 3-metric 3grs(, ~) in adm metric gravity.
these boundary conditions identify the class of spacetimes of christodoulou and
klainermann[92] (they are near to minkowski spacetime in a norm sense, contain
gravitational radiation but evade the singularity theorems, because they do not
satisfy the hypothesis of conformal completion to get the possibility to put control
on the large time development of the solutions of einsteins equations). these
adm = 0 (this requires ar( ) = 0
spacetimes also satisfy the rest-frame condition p r
like for wigner hyperplanes in parametrized minkowski theories) and have vanishing
shift functions (but non trivial lapse function).

after the addition of the surface term, the resulting canonical and dirac hamil-

tonians of adm metric gravity are

adm ,

adm =

adm + ab( )j ab

adm + ab( ) j ab

adm + ab( ) j ab

3 hr](, ~) + a( ) p a

h(c)adm = r d3[(n(as) + n) h + (n(as)r + nr) 3 hr](, ~) 7
(c)adm = r d3[(n(as) + n) h + (n(as)r + nr) 3 hr](, ~)+
7 h 
+a( )p a
= r d3[n h + nr
adm 
 a( ) p a
with the weak conserved improper charges p a
adm [they are volume in-
tegrals diering from the weak charges by terms proportional to integrals of the
constraints]. the previous splitting implies to replace the variables n(, ~), nr(, ~)
with the ones a( ), ab( ) = ba( ), n(, ~), nr(, ~) [with conjugate momenta
a( ), ab( ) = ba( ), n(, ~), r
with these assumptions one has the following form of the line element (also its
form in tetrad gravity is given)

~n(, ~)] in the adm theory.

adm , j ab

(a)

ds2 = ([n(as) + n]2  [n(as)r + nr]3er
2[n(as)r + nr]d dr   3e(a)r
the nal suggestion of dirac is to modify adm metric gravity in the following
way:
i) add the 10 new primary constraints pa

3es
(a)[n(as)s + ns])(d )2

3e(a)sdrds.

adm  0, where

()  p a

adm  0, j ab

()  j ab

24

()

()()p()

()()s()()

()()bb

() = ba

(), j ab

[remember that pa

pa
() = ba
a poincare algebra];
ii) consider a( ), ab( ), as dirac multipliers for these 10 new primary constraints,
and not as congurational (arbitrary gauge) variables coming from the lapse and
shift functions [so that there are no conjugate (vanishing) momenta a( ), ab( )
and no associated dirac multipliers a( ), ab( )], in the assumed dirac hamilto-
nian [it is nite and dierentiable]

() and j ab

() satisfy

()  p a

()  p a

adm ]  ab( )[j ab

h(d)adm = r d3[n h + nr hr + nn + ~n
r r
~n](, ~)
a( )[pa
()  j ab
adm ]  0,
the reduced phase space is still the adm one: on the adm variables there are only
the secondary rst class constraints h(, ~)  0, hr(, ~)  0 [generators of proper
gauge transformations], because the other rst class constraints pa
adm  0,
()  j ab
j ab
adm  0 do not generate improper gauge transformations but eliminate 10
of the extra 20 variables.
in this modied adm metric gravity, one has restricted the 3+1 splittings of m 4
to foliations whose leaves  tend to minkowski spacelike hyperplanes asymptoti-
cally at spatial innity in a direction independent way. therefore, these 
 should
be determined by the 10 degrees of freedom x()
()a( ), like it happens for at
spacelike hyperplanes: this means that it must be possible to dene a parallel trans-
port of the asymptotic tetrads b()
()a( ) to get well dened tetrads in each point of
 . while it is not yet clear whether this can be done for ab( ) 6= 0, there is a so-

lution for ab( ) = 0. this case corresponds to go to the wigner-like hypersurfaces
[the analogue of the minkowski wigner hyperplanes with the asymptotic normal
l()
() = l()
adm ]. following the same procedure dened for minkowski
()], ab( ) = 0
spacetime, one gets srs
and a( )[pa
()  p a
()],
so that the nal form of these four surviving constraints is (p r
adm = 0 implies
adm  0; madm = q p 2
p r
()  p 
on this subclass of foliations [whose leaves (w sw )
will be called wigner-sen-witten
hypersurfaces; they dene the intrinsic asymptotic rest frame of the gravitational
eld] one can introduce a parallel transport by using the interpretation of ref.[93]
of the witten spinorial method of demonstrating the positivity of the adm energy
[94]. let us consider the sen-witten connection [95, 94] restricted to (w sw )
(it
depends on the trace of the extrinsic curvature of (w sw )
) and the spinorial sen-
witten equation associated with it. as shown in ref.[96], this spinorial equation
can be rephrased as an equation whose solution determines (in a surface dependent

()  j rs
adm ] =  ( )[()  p 

adm [see ref.[55] for the denition of sab

adm is the adm mass of the universe)

() parallel to p ()

adm [() = qp2

adm  0, p r

adm ] + r( ) p r

adm  p 





()( ), b()

adm  0.



25

dynamical way) a tetrad in each point of (w sw )
once it is given at spatial innity
(again this requires a direction independent limit). therefore, at spatial innity
there is a privileged congruence of timelike observers, which replaces the concept of
xed stars in the study of the precessional eects of gravitomagnetism on gyro-
scopes and whose connection with the denition of post-newtonian coordinates has
still to be explored.



on the wigner-sen-witten hypersurfaces the spatial indices have become spin-1
wigner indices [they transform with wigner rotations under asymptotic lorentz
transformations]. as said for parametrized theories in minkowski spacetime, in this
special gauge 3 degrees of freedom of the gravitational eld [ an internal 3-center-
of-mass variable ~adm [3g, 3 ] inside the wigner-sen-witten hypersurface] become
gauge variables, while x()
() [the canonical non covariant variable replacing x()
()]
becomes a decoupled observer with his point particle clock [4, 5] near spatial
innity. since the positivity theorems for the adm energy imply that one has
only timelike or lightlike orbits of the asymptotic poincare group, the restriction
to universes with timelike adm 4-momentum allows to dene the mller radius

()  p(i)

()x(o)

()/p(o)

()), k(i)

adm , w 2

adm .

()/(), (), z(i)

() = ()(x(i)

adm  0, where r = r

adm / p 2
by going from x()

adm from the asymptotic poincare casimirs p 2
(), p()

(), to the canonical basis t() = p()() x()
() = p(i)

am d = q w 2
()/() =
p()()x()
()/() =
u(i)(p()
()), like in the at case one nds that the nal reduction requires the gauge-
xings t()    0 and r
adm is a variable representing
the internal center of mass of the 3-metric of the slice  of the asymptotically
at spacetime m 4. since {t(), ()} = , with the gauge xing t()    0 one
gets  ( )  , and the nal dirac hamiltonian is hd = madm + r( ) p r
adm with
madm the natural physical hamiltonian to reintroduce an evolution in the math-
ematical t()   : namely in the rest-frame time identied with the parameter 
of the foliation of m 4. physical times (atomic clocks,
labelling the leaves (w sw )
ephemeridis time...) must be put in a local 1-1 correspondence with this mathe-
matical time. this point of view excludes any wheeler-dewitt interpretation of
an internal time (like the extrinsic york one or the wkb times), which is used in
closed universes of the einstein-wheeler type.



all this construction holds also in our formulation of tetrad gravity (since it uses
the adm action) and in its canonically reduced form in the 3-orthogonal gauges.
the nal physical hamiltonian of tetrad gravity for the physical gravitational eld
is the reduced volume form of the adm energy p 
adm [ra.a, (ra, a)] with the con-
formal factor  solution of the reduced lichnerowicz equation in the 3-orthogonal
gauge with (, ~)  0. the hamilton-dirac equations generated by this hamilto-
nian for ra, a generate the pair of second order equations in normal form for ra
hidden in the einstein equations in this particular gauge.

let us compare the standard generally covariant formulation of gravity based on
the hilbert action with its invariance under dif f m 4 with the adm hamiltonian
formulation.

26

regarding the 10 einstein equations of the standard approach, the bianchi iden-
tities imply that four equations are linearly dependent on the other six ones and
their gradients. moreover, the four combinations of einsteins equations projectable
to phase space (where they become the secondary rst class superhamitonian and
supermomentum constraints of canonical metric gravity) are independent from the
accelerations being restrictions on the cauchy data. as a consequence the einstein
equations have solutions, in which the ten components 4g of the 4-metric depend
on only two truly dynamical degrees of freedom (dening the physical gravitational
eld) and on eight undetermined degrees of freedom. this transition from the ten
components 4g of the tensor 4g in some atlas of m 4 to the 2 (deterministic)+8
(undetermined) degrees of freedom breaks general covariance, because these quanti-
ties are neither tensors nor invariants under dieomorphisms (their functional form
is atlas dependent).

since the hilbert action is invariant under dif f m 4, one usually says that a
dynamical gravitational eld is a 4-geometry over m 4, namely an equivalence
class of spacetimes (m 4, 4g), solution of einsteins equations, modulo dif f m 4.
see, however, the interpretational problems about what is observable in general
relativity for instance in refs.[7, 8], in particular the facts that at least before the
restriction to the solutions of einsteins equations i) scalars under dif f m 4, like
4r, are not diracs observables but gauge dependent quantities; ii) the functional
form of 4g in terms of the physical gravitational eld and, therefore, the angle
and distance properties of material bodies and the standard procedures of dening
measures of length and time based on the line element ds2, are gauge dependent.

instead in the adm formalism with the extra notion of 3+1 splittings of m 4,
the (tetrad) metric adm action (diering from the hilbert one by a surface term)
is quasi-invariant under the (14) 8 types of gauge transformations which are the
pull-back of the hamiltonian group g of gauge transformations, whose generators
are the rst class constraints of the theory . the hamiltonian group g has a sub-
group (whose generators are the supermomentum and superhamiltonian constraints)
formed by the dieomorphisms of m 4 adapted to its 3+1 splittings, dif f m 3+1 [it
is dierent from dif f m 4]. moreover, the poisson algebra of the supermomentum
and superhamiltonian constraints reects the embeddability in m 4 of the foliation
associated with the 3+1 splitting [97].

now in tetrad gravity the interpretation of the 14 gauge transformations and of
their gauge xings (it is independent from the presence of matter) is the following
[a tetrad in a point of  is a local observer] :
i) the gauge xings of the gauge boost parameters associated with the 3 boost
constraints and of the gauge angles associated with the 3 rotation constraints are
equivalent to choose the congruence of timelike observers to be used as a standard
of non rotation;
ii) the gauge xings of the 3 gauge parameters associated with the passive space
dieomorphisms [dif f  ; change of coordinates charts] are equivalent to a xation
of 3 standards of length by means of a choice of a coordinate system on  [the

27

measuring apparatus (the rods) should be dened in terms of diracs observables
for some kind of matter, after its introduction into the theory];
iii) according to constraint theory the choice of 3-coordinates on  induces the gauge
xings of the 3 shift functions [i.e. of 4goi], whose gauge nature is connected with
the conventionality of simultaneity [98] [therefore, the gauge xings are equivalent
to a choice of synchrinization of clocks and, as a consequence, to a statement about
the isotropy or anisotropy of the velocity of light in that gauge];
iv) the gauge xing on the the momentum (, ~) conjugate to the conformal factor
of the 3-metric [this gauge variable is the source of the gauge dependence of 4-tensors
and of the scalars under dif f m 4, together with the gradients of the lapse and shift
functions] is a nonlocal statement about the extrinsic curvature of the leaves 
of the given 3+1 splitting of m 4; since the superhamiltonian constraint produces
normal deformations of  [97] and, therefore, transforms a 3+1 splitting of m 4
into another one (the adm formulation is independent from the choice of the 3+1
splitting), this gauge xing is equivalent to the choice of a particular 3+1 splitting;
v) the previous gauge xing induces the gauge xing of the lapse function (which
determines the packing of the leaves  in the chosen 3+1 splitting) and, therefore,
is equivalent to the xation of a standard of proper time [again clocks should be
built with the diracs observables of some kind of matter].

in the hamiltonian formalism it is natural to dene a hamiltonian kinematical
gravitational eld as the equivalence class of spacetimes modulo the hamiltonian
group g, and dierent members of the equivalence class have in general dierent
4-riemann tensors [these equivalence classes are connected with the conformal 3-
geometries of the lichnerowicz-york approach and contain dierent gauge-related
4-geometries]. then, a hamiltonian dynamical gravitational eld is dened as
a hamiltonian kinematical gravitational elds which is solution of the hamilton-
dirac equations generated by the weak adm energy p 
adm . since the hilbert and
adm actions, even if they have dierent local symmetries and invariances, both
generate the same einstein equations, the equivalence classes of the hamiltonian
dynamical gravitational elds and of the standard dynamical gravitational elds
(a 4-geometry solution of einsteins equations) coincide. indeed, on the solutions
of einsteins equations the gauge transformations generated by the superhamilto-
nian constraint (normal deformations of  ) and those generated by the canonical
momenta of the lapse and shift functions together with the  dieomorphisms gen-
erated by the supermomentum constraints are restricted by the jacobi equations
associated to einsteins equations to be those noether symmetries of the adm ac-
tion which are also dynamical symmetries of the hamilton equations and therefore
they are a subset of the spacetime dieomorphisms dif f m 4 (all of which are dy-
namical symmetries of einsteins equations).

the 3-orthogonal gauges of tetrad gravity are the equivalent of the coulomb
gauge in classical electrodynamics (like the harmonic gauge is the equivalent of the
lorentz gauge). only after a complete gauge xing the 4-tensors and the scalars
under dif f m 4 become measurable quantities (like the electromagnetic vector po-

28

tential in the coulomb gauge): an experimental laboratory does correspond by de-
nition to a completely xed gauge. at this stage it becomes acceptable the proposal
of komar[99] and bergmann[80] of identifying the points of a spacetime (m 4, 4g),
solution of the einsteins equations in absence of matter, in a way invariant under
spacetime dieomorphisms, by using four bilinears and trilinears in the weyl tensors,
scalar under dif f m 4 and called individuating elds(see also refs.[7, 8]), which
do not depend on the lapse and shift functions (but only on the gauge variables
corresponding to the 3-coordinates on  and to the momentum conjugate to the
conformal factor of the 3-metric, so that these elds carry the information on the
choice of the 3-coordinates and of a generalized extrinsic time), to build physical
4-coordinates (in each completely xed gauge they depend only on the two canon-
ical pairs of diracs observables of the gravitational eld), justifying a posteriori the
standard measurement theory presented in all textbooks on general relativity, which
presuppones the individuation of spacetime points.

our approach breaks the general covariance of general relativity completely by
going to the special 3-orthogonal gauges. but this is done in a way naturally asso-
ciated with theories with rst class constraints: the global shanmugadhasan canon-
ical transformations (when they exist) correspond to privileged darboux charts for
presymplectic manifolds dened by the rst class constraints. therefore, the gauges
identied by these canonical transformations should have a special (till now unex-
plored) role also also in generally covariant theories, in which traditionally one looks
for observables invariant under dieomorphisms and not for not generally covariant
dirac observables.

let us remember that bergmann[80] made the following critique of general co-
variance: it would be desirable to restrict the group of coordinate transformations
(spacetime dieomorphisms) in such a way that it could contain an invariant sub-
group describing the coordinate transformations that change the frame of reference
of an outside observer (these transformations could be called lorentz transforma-
tions; see also the comments in ref.[100] on the asymptotic behaviour of coordinate
transformations); the remaining coordinate transformations would be like the gauge
transformations of electromagnetism. this is what we have done. in this way pre-
ferred coordinate systems will emerge (the wsw hypersurfaces with their preferred
congruences of timelike observers whose 4-velocity becomes asymptotically normal
to (w sw )
at spatial innity), which, as said by bergmann, are not at: while the
inertial coordinates are determined experimentally by the observation of trajectories
of force-free bodies, these intrinsic coordinates can be determined only by much more
elaborate experiments (probably with gyroscopes), since they depend, at least, on
the inhomogeneities of the ambient gravitational elds. see also ref.[101] for other
critics to general covariance: very often to get physical results one uses preferred co-
ordinates not merely for calculational convenience, but also for understanding (this
fact has been formalized as the principle of restricted covariance).



since in the 3-orthogonal gauges we have the physical canonical basis ra, a,
it is possible, but only in absence of matter, to dene void spacetimes as the

29

equivalence class of spacetimes without gravitational eld, whose members in the
3-orthogonal gauges are obtained by adding by hand the second class constraints
ra(, ~)  0, a(, ~)  0 [one gets (, ~) = 1 as the relevant solution of the
reduced lichnerowicz equation] and, in particular, their poincare charges vanish
(this corresponds to the exceptional p() = 0 orbit of the poincare group and shows
the peculiarity of these solutions with zero adm mass). it is expected that the void
spacetimes can be dened in a gauge-independent way by adding to the adm action
the requirement that the leaves  of the 3+1 splitting be 3-conformally at, namely
that the cotton-york 3-conformal tensor vanishes. the members of this equivalence
class (the extension to general relativity of the galilean non inertial coordinate
systems with their newtonian inertial forces) are gauge equivalent to minkowski
spacetime with cartesian coordinates and it is expected that they describe pure
acceleration eects without physical gravitational eld (no tidal eects).

see ref.[102] for the c   contraction of the adm action of metric gravity:
a theory with 26 independent elds (most of them describe inertial forces) and
with general galileo covariance has been obtained. this formulation of newton
gravity should be the natural nonrelativistic limit of einsteins general relativity
in the framework of singular lagrangians; however, its connection with the post-
newtonian approximations has still to be explored.

since, as a preliminary result, we are interested in identifying explicitly the in-

if we add [72] to the tetrad adm action the action for n scalar particles with
positive energy in the form of ref.[55] [where it was given on arbitrary minkowski
spacelike hypersurfaces], the only constraints which are modied are the superhamil-
tonian one, which gets a dependence on the matter energy density m(, ~), and the
3 space dieomorphism ones, which get a dependence on the matter momentum
density mr(, ~). the canonical reduction and the determination of the dirac ob-
servables can be done like in absence of matter. however, the reduced lichnerowicz
equation for the conformal factor of the 3-metric in the 3-orthogonal gauge and with
(, ~)  0 acquires now an extra dependence on m(, ~) and mr(, ~).
stantaneous action-at-a-distance (newton-like and gravitomagnetic) potentials
among particles hidden in tetrad gravity (like the coulomb potential is hidden in
the electromagnetic gauge potential), we shall make the strong approximation of ne-
glecting the (tidal) eects of the physical gravitational eld by putting ra(, ~)  0,
a(, ~)  0, even if it is not strictly consistent with the hamilton-dirac equation
if, furthermore, we develop the conformal
(extremely weak gravitational elds).
factor (, ~) in a formal series in the newton constant g [ = 1 + p
n=1 gnn],
one can nd a solution  = 1 + g1 at order g (post-minkowskian approximation)
of the reduced lichnerowicz equation where we put ra = a = 0. however, due to
a self-energy divergence in  evaluated at the positions ~i( ) of the particles, one
7 2(, ~i( ))m(phys)
needs to rescale the bare masses to physical ones, mi
, and
to make a regularization of the type dened in refs.
[103]. then, the regularized
solution for  can be put in the reduced form of the adm energy, which becomes
[~i( ) are the particle momenta conjugate to ~i( ); ~nij = [~i  ~j]/|~i  ~j|]

i

30

c2+~2

j ( )

i

i

|~i( )~j ( )|

i ( )

j
|~i( )~j ( )|

i=1 cqm(phys)2
qm(phys)2

c2 + ~2
i ( )qm(phys)2

c2+~2

3~i( )~j( )5~i( )~nij ( )~j ( )~nij ( )


+ o(g2, ra, a).

p 
adm = pn
 g
c2 pi6=j
 g
8c2 pi6=j
one sees the newton-like and the gravitomagnetic (in the sense of york) poten-
tials (both of them need regularization) at the post-minkowskian level (order g but
exact in c) emerging from the tetrad adm version of einstein general relativity
when we ignore the tidal eects. for g=0 we recover n free scalar particles on the
wigner hyperplane in minkowski spacetime, as required by deparametrization. for
c  , we get the post-newtonian hamiltonian
hp n = pn
|~i( )~j ( )| )  g
 g
8c2 pi6=j
which is of the type of the ones implied by the results of refs.[103, 104] [the dier-
ences are probably connected with the use of dierent coordinate systems and with
the fact that one has essential singularities on the particle worldlines and the need
of regularization].

2 pi6=j
+ o(g2, ra, a),

m(phys)

m(phys)
|~i( )~j ( )| 

(1  2g

c2 pj6=i

3~i( )~j( )5~i( )~nij ( )~j ( )~nij ( )

~2

i ( )

2m(phys)

i

|~i( )~j ( )|

i=1

m(phys)

j

i

j

the main open problems now under investigation are: i) the linearization of the
theory in the 3-orthogonal gauges in presence of matter to nd the 3-orthogonal
gauge description of gravitational waves and to go beyond the previous instanta-
neous post-minkowskian approximation at least in the 2-body case relevant for the
motion of binaries; ii) the replacement of scalar particles with spinning ones to iden-
tify the precessional eects (like the lense-thirring one) of gravitomagnetism; iii)
the coupling to perfect uids for the simulation of rotating stars and for the compar-
ison with the post-newtonian approximations; iv) the coupling of tetrad gravity to
the electromagnetic eld, to fermion elds and then to the standard model, trying
to make to reduction to diracs observables in all these cases and to study their
post-minkowskian approximations; v) the quantization of tetrad gravity in the 3-
orthogonal gauge with (, ~)  0 (namely after a complete breaking of general
covariance): for each perturbative (in g) solution of the reduced lichnerowicz equa-
tion one denes a schroedinger equation in  for a wave functional [ ; ra] with
the associated quantized adm energy p 
] as hamiltonian; no problem of
physical scalar product is present, but only ordering problems in the hamiltonian;
moreover, one has the mller radius as a ultraviolet cuto. also a comparison with
loop quantum gravity [105], which respects general covariance but only for xed
lapse and shift functions, has still to be done.

adm [ra, i 
ra

therefore, a well dened classical stage for a unied description of the four inter-
actions is emerging, even if many aspects have only been claried at a heuristic level
so that a big eort from both mathematical and theoretical physicists is still needed.

31

it will be exciting to see whether in the next years some reasonable quantization
picture will develop from this classical framework.

references

[1] p.a.m.dirac, can.j.math. 2, 129 (1950); lectures on quantum mechanics,
belfer graduate school of science, monographs series (yeshiva university, new
york, n.y., 1964).

[2] j.l.anderson and p.g.bergmann, phys.rev. 83, 1018 (1951).

p.g.bergmann and j.goldberg, phys.rev. 98, 531 (1955).

[3] s.weinberg, the theory of fields, 2 volumes (cambridge univ.press, cam-

bridge, 1995 and 1996).

[4] c.j.isham, canonical quantum gravity and the problem of time, in inte-
grable systems, quantum groups and quantum field theories, eds.l.a.ibort
and m.a.rodriguez, salamanca 1993 (kluwer, london, 1993); conceptual and
geometrical problems in quantum gravity, in recent aspects of quantum
fields, schladming 1991, eds. h.mitter and h.gausterer (springer, berlin,
1991); prima facie questions in quantum gravity and canonical quantum
gravity and the question of time, in canonical gravity: from classical to
quantum, eds. j.ehlers and h.friedrich (springer, berlin, 1994).

[5] k.kuchar, time and interpretations of quantum gravity,

in proc.4th
canadian conf. on general relativity and relativistic astrophysics, eds.
g.kunstatter, d.vincent and j.williams (world scientic, singapore, 1992).

[6] j.buttereld and c.j.isham, space-time and the philosophical challenge of

quantum gravity, imperial-tp-98-99-45 (gr-qc/9903072).

[7] j.stachel, in general relativity and gravitation, gr11, stockholm 1986, ed.
m.a.h.mac callum (cambridge univ. press, cambridge, 1987); the meaning
of general covariance, in philosophical problems of the internal and external
worlds, essays in the philosophy of a.grunbaum, eds. j.earman, a.i.janis,
g.j.massey and n.rescher (pittsburgh univ.press, pittsburgh, 1993).

[8] c.rovelli, class.quantum grav. 8, 297 and 317 (1991).

[9] j.polchinski, string theory, 2 volumes (cambridge univ. press, cambridge,

1998).

[10] l.lusanna, solving gauss laws and searching dirac observables for the
four interactions, talk at the second conf. on constrained dynamics and
quantum gravity, s.margherita ligure 1996, eds. v.de alfaro, j.e.nelson,

32

g.bandelloni, a.blasi, m.cavagli`a and a.t.filippov, nucl.phys. (proc.suppl.)
b57, 13 (1997) (hep-th/9702114). unied description and canonical reduc-
tion to diracs observables of the four interactions, talk at the int.workshop
new non perturbative methods and quantization on the light cone, les
houches school 1997, eds. p.grange, h.c.pauli, a.neveu, s.pinsky and
a.werner (springer, berlin, 1998) (hep-th/9705154). the pseudoclassical rel-
ativistic quark model in the rest-frame wigner-covariant gauge, talk at the
euroconference qcd97, ed. s.narison, montpellier 1997, nucl.phys. (proc.
suppl.) b64, 306 (1998).

[11] t.levi-civita, prace mat.fiz. 17, 1 (1906); t.levi-civita and u.amaldi,

lezioni di meccanica razionale, vol.ii, part 2 (zanichelli, bologna, 1927).

[12] a.lichnerowicz, c.r.acad.sci.paris, ser. a, 280, 523 (1975). w.tulczyiew,
symposia math. 14, 247 (1974). n.woodhouse, geometric quantiza-
tion (clarendon, oxford, 1980). j.`sniatycki, ann.inst. h.poincar`e 20, 365
(1984). g.marmo, n.mukunda and j.samuel, riv.nuovo cimento 6, 1
(1983). m.j.bergvelt and e.a.de kerf, physica 139a, 101 and 125 (1986).
b.a.dubrovin, m.giordano, g.marmo and a.simoni, int.j.mod.phys. 8, 4055
(1993).

[13] m.j.gotay, j.m.nester and g.hinds, j.math.phys. 19, 2388 (1978). m.j.gotay
and j.m.nester, ann.inst.henri poincar`e a30, 129 (1979) and a32, 1 (1980).
m.j.gotay and j. `sniatycki, commun. math.phys. 82, 377 (1981). m.j.gotay,
proc.am.math.soc. 84, 111 (1982); j.math.phys. 27, 2051 (1986).

[14] m.henneaux and c.teitelboim, quantization of gauge systems (princeton

univ. press, princeton, 1992).

[15] r.sugano, y.kagraoka and t.kimura, int.j.mod.phys. 7, 61 (1992).

[16] j.sniatycki, in non-linear partial dierential operators and quantization
procedures, clausthal 1981, lecture notes math. 1037 (springer, berlin,
1983). j.snyaticki and a.weinstein, lett.math.phys. 7, 155 (1983).

[17] p.g.bergmann, phys.rev. 144, 1078 (1966). k.kuchar, j.math.phys. 13, 758
(1972). k.komar, phys.rev. d18, 1881, 1887 and 3017 (1978); d19, 2908
(1979). d.dominici, j.gomis, g.longhi and j.m.pons, j.math.phys. 25, 2439
(1984).

[18] l.lusanna, phys.rep. 185, 1 (1990).

[19] l.lusanna, riv. nuovo cimento 14, n.3, 1 (1991).

[20] l.lusanna, j.math.phys. 31, 2126 (1990).

[21] l.lusanna, j.math.phys. 31, 428 (1990).

33

[22] l.lusanna, int.j.mod.phys. a8, 4193 (1993).

[23] m.chaichian, d.louis martinez and l.lusanna, ann.phys.(n.y.)232, 40

(1994).

[24] e.noether, nachr.ges.wiss.gottingen, mathphys.kl.h. 2, 235 (1918); en-
glish translation in transp.theory stat.phys. 1, 183 (1971). j.d.logan, in-
variant variational principles (academic, new york, 1979). n.p.konopleva
and v.n.popov, gauge fields (harwood, new york, 1981). b.m.barbashov
and v.v.nesterenko, fortschr.phys. 31, 535 (1983).

[25] i.a.batalin and g.a.vilkoviski, nucl.phys. b234, 106 (1984).

[26] s.shanmugadhasan, j.math.phys. 14, 677 (1973).

[27] j.a.schouten and w.v.d.kulk, pfas problem and its generalizations

(clarendon, oxford, 1949).

[28] s.lie, theorie der transformation gruppe, vol. ii (b.g.teubner, leipzig,
1890). a.r.forsyth, theory of dierential equations, vol. v, ch. ix (dover,
new york, 1959). l.p.eisenhart, continuous groups of transformations
(dover, new york, 1961). r.o.fulp and j.a.marlin, pacic j. math. 67, 373
(1976); rep.math.phys. 18, 295 (1980).

[29] l.d.faddeev and popov, phys.lett. b25, 30 (1967).

[30] m.henneaux, phys.rep. 126, 1 (1985).

[31] j.m.souriau, structure des systemes dynamiques (dunod, paris, 1970).
b.konatant, quantization and unitary representations, lecture notes
math.
1970). j.e.marsden and a.weinstein,
rep.math.phys. 5, 121 (1974).

(springer, berlin,

170

[32] g.longhi and l.lusanna, phys.rev. d34, 3707 (1986).

[33] a.lucenti, l.lusanna and m.pauri, j.phys. a31, 1633 (1998).

[34] j.m.arms, j.e.marsden and v.moncrief, commun.math.phys. 78, 455 (1981).
j.m.arms, acta phys.pol. b17, 499 (1986). l.bos and m.j.gotay, j.di.geom.
24, 181 (1986).

[35] p.a.m.dirac, can.j.phys. 33, 650 (1955).

[36] r.casalbuoni, nuovo cimento 33a, 115 and 389 (1976). f.a. berezin and
m.s.marinov, ann.phys.(n.y.) 104, 336 (1977). a.barucci, r.casalbuoni and
l.lusanna, nuovo cim.lett. 19, 581 (1977); nucl.phys. b124, 93 (1981) and
b180[fs2], 141 (1981).

34

[37] a.barducci, r.casalbuoni and l.lusanna, nuovo cim. 35a, 377 (1976).

[38] a.barducci, r.casalbuoni, d.dominici and l.lusanna, phys.lett. 100b, 126

(1981).

[39] a.barducci and l.lusanna, nuovo cim. 77a, 39 (1983).

[40] a.barducci and l.lusanna, j.phys. a16, 1993 (1983).

[41] ph.droz vincent, lett.nuovo cim. 1, 839 (1969); phys.scr. 2, 129
(1970); rep.math.phys.8, 79 (1975). i.t.todorov, report comm. jinr
e2-10125,dubna 1976 (unpublished); ann.inst.h.poincare 28a, 207 (1978).
a.komar, phys.rev. d18, 1881 and 1887 (1978).

[42] a.barducci, r.casalbuoni and l.lusanna, nuovo cim. 54a, 340 (1979).

[43] h.sazdjian, ann.phys.(n.y.) 136, 136 (1981); phys.rev. d33, 3401 (1986);
j.math.phys. 28, 2618 and 1988 (1987), 29, 1620 (1987); ann.phys. (n.y.)
191, 52 (1989);
in proc.int. symp. extended objects and bound sys-
tems, eds. o.hara, s.ishida and s.naka (world scientic, singapore, 1992).
j.bijtebier and j.brockaert, nuovo cim. a105, 351 and 625 (1992);
in
proc.int.symp. extended objects and bound systems, eds. o.hara, s.ishida
and s.naka (world scientic, singapore, 1992).

[44] h.w.crater and p.van alstine, j.math.phys. 23, 1697 (1982); ann.phys.(n.y)
148, 57 (1983); phys.rev.lett. 53, 1577 (1984); phys.rev. d30, 2585 (1984);
d34, 1932 (1986); d36, 3007 (1987); d37, 1982 (1988); j.math.phys. 31, 1998
(1990); phys.rev. d46, 766 (1992). h.w.crater, r.l. becker, c.y.wong and
p.van alstine, phys.rev. d46, 5117 (1992); in proc.int.symp. extended ob-
jects and bound systems, eds. o.hara, s.ishida and s.naka (world scientic,
singapore, 1992). h.w.crater and d.yang, j.math.phys. 32, 2374 (1991).

[45] l.lusanna, nuovo cim. 64a, 65 (1981).

[46] g.longhi, l.lusanna and j.m.pons, j.math.phys. 30, 1893 (1989).

[47] f.colomo, g.longhi and l.lusanna,

int.j.mod.phys. a5, 3347 (1990);
mod.phys.letters a5, 17 (1990). f.colomo and l.lusanna, int.j.mod.phys.
a7, 1705 and 4107 (1992).

[48] l.lusanna, int.j.mod.phys. a10, 3531 and 3675 (1995).

[49] h.cendra,

and

j.marsden,

a.ibort

183
(1987). a.p.balachandran, g.marmo, b.s.skagerstam and a.stern, classical
topology and quantum states (world scientic, singapore, 1991).

j.geom.phys.

4,

[50] v.moncrief, j.math.phys. 20, 579 (1979). m.cantor, bull.am.math.soc. 5, 235

(1981).

35

[51] l.lusanna and p.valtancoli,

int.j.mod.phys. a12, 4769 (1997)
th/9606078) and int.j.mod.phys. a12, 4797 (1997). (hep-th/9606079).

(hep-

[52] l.lusanna and p.valtancoli,

int.j.mod.phys. a13, 4605 (1998)

(hep-

th/9707072).

[53] k.kuchar, j.math.phys. 17, 777, 792, 801 (1976); 18, 1589 (1977).

[54] p.a.m.dirac, rev.mod.phys. 21 (1949) 392.

[55] l.lusanna, int.j.mod.phys. a12, 645 (1997).

[56] m.pauri and m.prosperi, j.math.phys. 16, 1503 (1975).

[57] l.lusanna and m.materassi, the canonical decomposition in collective and
relative variables of a klein-gordon field in the rest-frame wigner-covariant
instant form, firenze univ.preprint (hep-th/9904202).

[58] g.longhi and m.materassi, j.math.phys. 40, 480 (1999) (hep-th/9803128);
collective and relative variables for a classical klein-gordon field, firenze
univ.preprint (hep-th/9890024), to appear in int.j.mod.phys. a.

[59] w.g.dixon, j.math.phys. 8, 1591 (1967). extended objects in general rel-
ativity: their description and motion, in isolated gravitating systems in
general relativity, ed.j.ehlers (north-holland, amsterdam, 1979).

[60] d.alba and l.lusanna, int.j.mod.phys. a13, 2791 (1998) (hep-th/9705155).

[61] d.alba and l.lusanna, int.j.mod.phys. a13, 3275 (1998) (hep-th/9705156).

[62] f.bigazzi and l.lusanna, int.j.mod.phys. a14, 1429 (1999) (hep-th/9807052).

[63] f.bigazzi and l.lusanna, int.j.mod.phys. a14, 1877 (1999) (hep-th/9807054).

[64] c.lammerzahl, j.math.phys. 34, 3918 (1993).

[65] i.herbst, commun.math.phys. 53, 285 (1977); 55, 316 (1997).

b. and l. durand, phys.rev. d28, 396 (1983); erratum phys.rev. d50, 6642
(1994).
j.j.basdevant and s.boukraa, z.phys. c28, 413 (1985).
a.martin and s.m.roy, phys.lett. b233, 407 (1989).
a.leyaouanc, l.oliver and j.c.raynal, ann.phys.(n.y.) 239, 243 (1995).
w.lucha and f.f.schoberl, phys.rev. d50, 5443 (1994).

[66] g.leibbrandt, non-covariant gauges, ch.9 (world scientic, singapore,

1994).

[67] c.mller, ann.inst.h.poincare 11, 251 (1949); the theory of relativity (ox-

ford univ.press, oxford, 1957).

36

[68] g.veneziano, quantum strings and the constants of nature, in the chal-
lenging questions, ed.a.zichichi, the subnuclear series n.27 (plenum press,
new york, 1990).

[69] l.lusanna and s.russo, tetrad gravity i): a new formulation, firenze

univ. preprint 1998 (gr-qc/9807073).

[70] l.lusanna and s.russo, tetrad gravity ii): diracs observables, firenze

univ. preprint 1998 (gr-qc/9807074).

[71] r.depietri and l.lusanna, tetrad gravity iii): asymptotic poincare charges,

the physical hamiltonian and void spacetimes, in preparation.

[72] r.depietri, l.lusanna and m.vallisneri, tetrad gravity iv): the n-body

problem, in preparation.

[73] r.arnowitt, s.deser and c.w.misner, phys.rev. 117, 1595 (1960); in gravi-
tation: an introduction to current research, ed.l.witten (wiley, new york,
1962).

[74] t.regge and c.teitelboim, ann.phys.(n.y.) 88, 286 (1974). r.beig and o
murchadha, ann.phys.(n.y.) 174, 463 (1987). l.andersson, j.geom.phys. 4,
289 (1987).

[75] a.ashtekar, asymptotic structure of the gravitational field at spatial in-
nity, in general relativity and gravitation, vol. 2, ed.a.held (plenum,
new york, 1980). a.ashtekar and r.o.hansen, j.math.phys. 19, 1542 (1978).
a.ashtekar and a.magnon, j.math.phys. 25, 2682 (1984). a.ashtekar and
j.d.romano, class.quantum grav. 9, 1069 (1992).

[76] r.m.wald, general relativity (chicago univ.press, chicago, 1984).

[77] r.geroch, j.math.phys. 9, 1739 (1968); 11, 343 (1970).

[78] v.moncrief, j.math.phys. 16, 1556 (1975).

[79] y.choquet-bruhat, a.fischer and j.e.marsden, maximal hypersurfaces and
positivity of mass, lxvii e.fermi summer school of physics isolated gravi-
tating systems in general relativity, ed.j.ehlers (north-holland, amsterdam,
1979).

[80] p.g.bergmann, rev.mod.phys. 33, 510 (1961).

[81] h.weyl, z.physik 56, 330 (1929). j.schwinger, phys.rev. 130, 1253
(1963). t.w.b.kibble, j.math.phys. 4, 1433 (1963). s.deser and c.j.isham,
phys.rev. d14, 2505 (1976). j.e.nelson and c.teitelboim, ann.phys.(n.y.)
116, 86 (1978). m.pilati, nucl.phys. b132, 138 (1978). j.e.nelson and

37

t.regge, ann.phys.(n.y.) 166, 234 (1986);
int.j.mod.phys. a4, 2021
(1989). j.m.charap and j.e.nelson, j.phys. a16, 1661 and 3355 (1983).
class.quantum grav. 3, 1061 (1986).
j.m.charap, the constraints in vierbein general relativity,
in con-
straints theory and relativistic dynamics, eds. g.longhi and l.lusanna
(world scientic, singapore, 1987). m.henneaux, gen.rel.grav. 9, 1031
(1978). m.henneaux, phys.rev. d27, 986 (1983). j.m.charap, m.henneaux
and j.e.nelson, class.quantum grav. 5, 1405 (1988). m.henneaux, j.e.nelson
and c.schonblond, phys.rev. d39, 434 (1989).

[82] r.t.jantzen, p.carini and d.bini, ann.phys.(n.y.) 215, 1 (1992).

[83] i.ciufolini and j.a.wheeler, gravitation and inertia (princeton univ.press,

princeton, 1995).

[84] j.l.synge, relativity:

the general theory (north-holland, amsterdam,
1960). b.s.de witt, phys.rev. 162, 1195 (1967); the spacetime approach to
quantum field theory, in relativity, groups and topology ii, les houches
1983, eds. b.s.dewitt and r.stora (north-holland, amsterdam, 1984).

[85] b.s.de witt, phys.rev. 160, 1113 (1967).

[86] c.j.isham and k.kuchar, ann.phys.(n.y.) 164, 288 and 316 (1984).

k.kuchar, found.phys. 16, 193 (1986).

[87] a.lichnerowicz, j.math.pure appl. 23, 37 (1944).

y.choquet-bruhat, c.r.acad.sci.paris 226, 1071 (1948); j.rat.mech.anal. 5,
951 (1956); the cauchy problem in gravitation: an introduction to cur-
rent research, ed.l.witten (wiley, new york, 1962).

[88] j.w.york jr, phys.rev.lett. 26, 1656 (1971); 28, 1082 (1972). j.math.phys.

13, 125 (1972); 14, 456 (1972). ann.ins.h.poincare xxi, 318 (1974).
n.omurchadha and j.w.york jr, j.math.phys. 14, 1551 (1972). phys.rev.
d10, 428 (1974).

[89] j.w.york jr., kinematics and dynamics of general relativity, in sources of
gravitational radiation, battelle-seattle workshop 1978, ed.l.l.smarr (cam-
bridge univ.press, cambridge, 1979).

[90] a.qadir and j.a.wheeler, yorks cosmic time versus proper time,
in from su(3) to gravity, y.neemans festschrift, eds. e.gotsma and
g.tauber (cambridge univ.press, cambridge, 1985).

[91] p.a.m.dirac, canad.j.math. 3, 1 (1951).

[92] d.christodoulou and s.klainerman, the global nonlinear stability of the

minkowski space (princeton univ. press, princeton, 1993).

38

[93] a.ashtekar and g.t.horowitz, j.math.phys. 25, 1473 (1984).

[94] e.witten, commun.math.phys. 80, 381 (1981).

[95] a.sen, j.math.phys. 22, 1781 (1981); phys.lett. 119b, 89 (1982).

[96] j.frauendiener,class.quantum grav. 8, 1881 (1991).

[97] c.teitelboim, the hamiltonian structure of space-time,

in general
relativity and gravitation, ed.a.held, vol.i (plenum, new york, 1980).
a.s.hojman, k.kuchar and c.teitelboim, ann.phys. (n.y.) 96, 88 (1971).

[98] p.havas, gen.rel.grav. 19, 435 (1987). r.anderson,

i.vetharaniam and

g.e.stedman, phys.rep. 295, 93 (1998).

[99] a.komar, phys.rev. 111, 1182 (1958). p.g.bergmann and a.komar,

phys.rev.lett. 4, 432 (1960).

[100] l.landau and e.lifschitz, the classical theory of fields (addison-wesley,

cambridge, 1951).

[101] g.f.r.ellis and d.r.matravers, gen.rel.grav. 27, 777 (1995). r.zalaletdinov,

r.tavakol and g.f.r.ellis, gen.rel.grav. 28, 1251 (1996).

[102] r.depietri, l.lusanna and m.pauri, class.quantum grav, 12, 219 (1995).

[103] a.einstein, b.homan and l.infeld, ann.math. 39, 66 (1938). a.einstein and
l.infeld, ann.math. 41, 797 (1940); canad.j.math. 1, 209 (1949). l.infeld,
rev.mod.phys. 29, 398 (1957).

[104] h.a.lorentz and l.droste, amst.akad.versl. 26, 392 (1917). a.eddington
and g.l.clarke, proc.roy.soc.london a166, 465 (1938). v.fock, j.phys.
(u.s.s.r.) 1, 81 (1939). a.papapetrou, proc.phys.soc.(london) 64, 57 (1951).

[105] a.ashtekar, phys.rev.lett. 57, 2244 (1986); new perspectives in canon-
ical gravity (bibliopolis, naples, 1988); lectures on non-perturbative
canonical gravity (world scientic, singapore, 1991); quantum me-
chanics of riemannian geometry,
http://vishnu.nirvana.phys.psu.edu/
riemqm/riemqm.html. c.rovelli and l.smolin, nucl.phys. b331, 80 (1990);
b442, 593 (1995). c.rovelli, loop quantum gravity, living reviews in rel-
ativity http://www.livingreviews.org/articles/volume1/1998-1rovelli.

39

