9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

6
1

 
 

2
v
7
2
1
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

magnetic monopoles, vortices and the topology of gauge fieldsab

h. reinhardt

institute for theoretical physics

tubingen university

lattice calculations performed in abelian gauges give strong evidence that con-
nement is realized as a dual meissner eect, implying that the yang-mills vacuum
consists of a condensate of magnetic monopoles. alternative lattice calculations
performed in the maximum center gauge give strong support that center vortex
congurations are the relevant infrared degrees of freedom responsible for conne-
ment and that the magnetic monopoles are mostly sitting on vortices.
in this
talk i study the continuum yang-mills-theory in abelian and center gauges. in
polyakov gauge the pontryagin index of the gauge eld is expressed by the magnetic
monopole charges. the continuum analogues of center vortices and the continuum
version of the maximum center gauge are presented.
it is shown that the pon-
tryagin index of center vortices is given by their self-intersection number, which
vanishes unless magnetic monopole currents are owing on the vortices.

1 introduction

there are two fundamental essentially non-perturbative features of qcd: con-
nement and spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry. the latter can be
more or less understood in terms of instantons. by the atiah-singer theorem1
instanton elds having a non-trivial pontryagin index give rise to zero modes
of the quarks and after averaging over all gauge elds favour a non-zero quark
level density () 6= 0 at zero virtuality  = 0. by the banks-casher theorem2
hqqi = (0) this implies a non-zero quark condensate, which is the order
parameter of spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry. however, one should
stress that this explanation of spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry does
not really rely on instantons, i.e. on nite action solutions of the classical eld
equation but only on topologically non-trivial eld congurations.

on the other hand the connement mechanism is much less understood. how-
ever, lattice calculations performed over the last couple of years3,4, have accu-
mulated evidence that connement is realized either as dual meissner eect5
implying a condensation of magnetic monopoles in the qcd vacuum or by
a condensation of magnetic vortices6. in fact, recent lattice calculations also
indicate that the magnetic monopoles are related to the vortices4.

asupported in part by deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft under contract no. dfg-re 856/4-1
binvited talk given at the international workshop understanding deconnement in qcd,
trento, 1.-13. march, 1999

1

from the conceptional point of view it is not very appealing that sponta-
neous breaking of chiral symmetry and connement are attributed to dier-
ent types of eld congurations. this is because lattice calculations indicate
that the deconnement phase transition is accompanied by the restauration
of chiral symmetry. moreover, the spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry
is determined by topologically non-trivial eld congurations. since magnetic
monopoles are long-range elds they should be relevant for the global topolog-
ical properties of gauge elds. one can therefore expect an intimate relation
between magnetic monopoles and the topology of gauge elds.
in this lec-
ture i will show that in abelian gauges the non-trivial topology of gauge elds
is generated by magnetic monopoles. in these gauges instantons give rise to
magnetic monopoles but the latter do exist without instantons. furthermore,
magnetic vortices can be topologically non-trivial only if they host magnetic
monopoles. in this sense, magnetic monopoles have to be considered as the
fundamental topological objects of gauge elds, at least in abelian gauges.

2 emergence of magnetic monopoles in abelian gauges

magnetic monopoles arise in the so-called abelian gauges8 which x the coset
g/h of the gauge group g, but leave abelian gauge invariance with respect
to the cartan subgroup h. recent lattice calculations show that the dual
meissner eect is equally well realized in all abelian gauges studied7, while
the abelian and monopole dominance is more pronounced in the so-called
maximum abelian gauge3. here, for simplicity, we will use the polyakov gauge,
dened by a diagonalization of the polyakov loop

(~x) = p exp


t

z

0

dx0 a0

 = v v   ,

(1)

where   h is the diagonal part of the polyakov loop and the matrix v  g/h
is obviously dened only up to an abelian gauge transformation v  gv ,
g  h. this gauge is equivalent to the condition ach
0 = 0 , where
an
0 denote the diagonal (neutral with respect to h) and o-diagonal
(charged) parts of the gauge eld, respectively. for simplicity, we will assume
g = su (2) below.

0 = 0 , 0an

0 and ach

when the polyakov loop (1) becomes a center element of the gauge group at
some isolated point xi in 3-space

(xi) = (1)ni ,

(2)

2

there is a topological obstruction in the diagonalization and the induced gauge
eld

a = v v  ,

(3)

arising from the gauge transformation v  g/h which makes the polyakov
loop diagonal, develops a magnetic monopole8. an important property of the
magnetic monopoles arising in the abelian gauges is that their magnetic charge

m[v ] =

1

4 z

s2

d~ ~b3

(4)

is topologically quantized and given by m[v ]  2(su (2)/u (1)), i.e. by the
winding number of the mapping v (~x)  su (2)/u (1)8,9. in the above equation
s2 is an innitesimal 2-sphere around the monopole position with the piercing
point of the dirac string left out.

3 magnetic monopoles as sources of non-trivial topology

since the magnetic monopoles are long-range elds, we expect that they are
relevant for the topological properties of gauge elds. as is well known, the
gauge elds a(x) are topologically classied by the pontryagin index

 = 

1

162 z d4x tr f f .

(5)

in the gauge 0a0 = 0 (which is satised by the polyakov gauge) and for
temporally periodic spatial components of the gauge eld ~a(~x, t ) = ~a(~x, 0),
the pontryagin index [a] (5) equals the winding number of the polyakov loop
(x) (1):

n[] =

1

242 z d3x ijk tr liljlk ,

li = i .

(6)

for this winding number to be well dened, (~x) has to approach at spatial
innity, |~x|  , a value independent of the direction x, so that the 3-space
r3 can be topologically compactied to the 3-sphere s3. without loss of
generality we can assume that for |~x|   , (~x) approaches a center element
(~x)  (1)n0 with n0 integer. in ref. 9 the following exact relation for the
winding number n[] has been derived

n[] = xi

imi .

3

(7)

here the summation runs over all magnetic monopoles, mi being the monopole
charges, and the integer

i = ni  n0

(8)

is dened by the center element (xi) = (1)ni which the polyakov loop
aquires at the monopole position xi (cf. eq. (6)), and by the boundary condition
to (~x) specied above. the quantity i represents the invariant length of the
dirac string in group space, i.e. the distance in group space between the center
elements taken by the polyakov loop at the monopoles connected by the dirac
string.

eq. (7) shows that in the polyakov gauge the topology of gauge elds is exclu-
sively determined by the magnetic monopoles. therefore, magnetic monopoles
should be also sucient to trigger spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry,
which is usually attributed to instantons. instantons in abelian gauges give rise
to magnetic monopoles, but monopoles can exist in the absence of instantons.
the above considerations show that in the abelian gauges both connement
and spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry can be generated by the same
eld congurations: magnetic monopoles.

although the above considerations have been explicitly carried out in polyakov
gauge, i strongly believe that also in other abelian gauges the pontryagin index
is given by magnetic charges. in fact, a direct relation between the topological
charge and the magnetic monopole charges has been also seen in lattice cal-
culations in the maximum abelian gauge10,11. these lattice calculations show
that the pontryagin index vanishes when the monopole part of the abelian
gauge eld is removed10. finally let me mention that a relation simular to
eq. (7) has been subsequently derived in refs. 12,13. the precise connection
between refs. 12,13 and ref. 9 has been established in ref. 14.

4 center vortices

the center z(n ) of the gauge group is known to play a crucial role for the
connement of charges in the fundamental representation6.
in the so-called
maximum center gauge4 the gauge freedom is used to bring the link variables
u(x) as close as possible to a center element of the gauge group. after xing
the coset su (n )/z(n ) , leaving the center symmetry z(n ) untouched, center
projection of the links implies for su (2) replacing the link variables u(x) by
their sign. thereby vortices arise as strings (in d = 3) and sheets (in d = 4) of

4

plaquettes (1), which are closed by the bianchi identity. the remarkable lat-
tice result is that center projection reproduces the full string tension4 which has
been referred to as center dominance and implies vortex dominance. in fact,
removing the eld congurations which after center projection result in center
vortices removes completely the string tension. in this sense center vortices
have been interpreted as the conners of the theory. furthermore, the cen-
ter vortex picture gives also a natural explanation of the deconnement phase
transition15. it has been also shown, that removal of the vortex congurations
destroys the spontaneous breaking of chiral symmetry16.

center dominance without center gauge xing is trivial17. therefore, the max-
imum center gauge xing seems to accumulate the dominant infrared physics
on the vortices. to illustrate the eect of the maximum center gauge xing let
us consider the following abelian vortex eld (in cylindric coordinates , , z)

~a =

1


~e t3 ,

(9)

which represents a singular magnetic ux line on the z-axis. (ignoring the
group generator t3 this eld represents the gauge potential of a thin solenoid.)
putting this eld conguration on the lattice the maximum center gauge con-
centrates the gauge potential on a sheet of plaquettes (1) bounded by the
vortex at  = 0 with all other links equal to 1. this conguration is not
changed by center projection, while center projection before maximum center
gauge xing would remove the vortex totally. this illustrates the important
role of the maximum center gauge xing before center projection. in the con-
tinuum limit the maximal center gauge xed eld conguration corresponding
to (9) becomes

a = 2(y)(x) ,

(10)

i.e. the gauge potential is concentrated after maximal center gauge xing on a
singular sheet (given here by the right half of the x-z-plane), which is bounded
by the vortex. we will refer to this center vortex arising after maximum center
gauge xing as ideal center vortex.

in d = 4 the ideal center vortices arising after center projection are given by
closed magnetic ux sheets s =  with all links in the enclosed 3-dimensional
volume  being (1). in the continuum these ideal vortices are given by

a(k, , x) = e(k)z

d3  (x  x()) ,

(11)



5

where x() denotes a parametrization of the volume  enclosed by the vortex
sheet s = . furthermore, d3 = 1
3! d3 , d3 being the 3-
dimensional volume element and e(k) = ea(k)ta denotes a vector of the
root lattice of su (n )/z(n ), which lives in the cartan subalgebra and whose
exponent gives rise to a center element

exp(e(k)) = z(k)  z(n ) ,

k = 0, 1, 2, . . . , n  1 .

(12)

the ideal vortex eld a(k, , x) indeed contributes the center element z(k) to
each wilson loop c non-trivially linked to the vortex s = 

dx a(k, , x)

w [a](c) = exp
i
i(c, ) = i

c

where

 = exp [e(k)i(c, )] = z(k)i(c,) ,

(13)

dxz



d3 4(x  x())

(14)

c

is the intersection number between c and . performing the abelian gauge
transformation a  av (k,)
, v (k, ) = exp (e(k)(, x)) , where (, x)
is the solid angle in d = 4 , the ideal vortex a(k, , x) is converted into the
thin vortex



a(k, , x) = a + e(k) = e(k)z



d2 k kd(x  x()) ,

(15)

where d(x  x) = 4(x  x). eq. (15) is the d = 4 generalization
of eq. (9) for arbitrary vortex shapes s. unlike the ideal center vortex eld
a(k, , x) the thin vortex eld a(k, , x) does not depend on the precise shape
of the hypersurface  but depends only on its boundary s =  , i.e. on the
ux sheet of the vortex. since a(k, , x) is gauge equivalent to a(k, , x) it
yields the same wilson loop as it is immediately seen by noticing that

dx a(k, , x) = e(k)l(c, ) ,

(16)

i

c

where l(c, ) is the linking number between c and s = , which equals
the intersection number i(c, ).

a careful analysis18 shows that the continuum analogue of the maximum center
gauge is given by the condition

z tr (cid:0)ag

 + a(k, )(cid:1)2

 min ,

6

(17)

where the minimalization is performed with respect to all coset gauge trans-
formations g  su (n )/z(n ) and with respect to all vortex elds a(k, , x).
note that the gauge condition depends only on the thin vortex a(k, ). for
xed a(k, , x) minimalization with respect to all gauge transformations g
leads to the background gauge condition

[  a(k, , x), a(x)] = 0

(18)

with the thin vortex guring as background eld. to arrive at eq. (18) we have
used that a(k, , x) = 0.

the continuum version (17 ) shows that the maximum center gauge condition
brings a given gauge potential as close as possible to a center vortex eld,
which we can either represent as a thin vortex a(k, , x) or as an ideal vortex
a(k, , x). the latter is the direct analogue of the center vortices arising on
the lattice after maximum center gauge xing and center projection. there
is, however, an important dierence between the ideal center vortices in the
continuum and on the lattice. contrary to a(k, , x) the lattice center vortices
dened after center projection by 3-dimensional volumes  of links (1) do
not distinguish between the direction of the magnetic ux on s = , i.e. the
lattice vortex sheets s =  are not oriented. as a consequence the center
projection on the lattice removes topological properties of the vortices related
to their orientations, which enter the pontryagin index.

in the continuum theory the eld strength of (thin or ideal) center vortices is
given by

f [a] = e(k)z



d2  4(x  x()) ,

d2  =

1
2

d .

(19)

from this expression one nds for the pontryagin index of a center vortex

[a] = [a] =

1
4

i(s, s) ,

(20)

where i(s, s) is the self intersection number of the vortex sheet s = .
a more detailed analysis shows that the pontryagin index is indeed integer
valued and vanishes unless there are magnetic monopole currents owing on
the vortex sheet. thus even in the vortex picture the non-trivial topology is
generated by magnetic monopole loops in agreement with the ndings in the
polyakov gauge given above.

acknowledgment:
i thank m. engelhardt, k. langfeld, m. quandt, a. schafke and o. tennert
for collaboration on various aspects of this work.

7

references

1. m.f. atiyah and i.m. singer, bull. amer. math. soc. 69 (1963) 422
2. t. banks, a. casher, nucl. phys. b 169 (1980) 103
3. t. suzuki and i. yotsuyanagi, phys. rev. d42 (1990) 4257

s. hioki et al., phys. lett. b 272 (1991) 326
g. bali, ch. schichter, k. schilling, hep-lat/9802005 and references
therein

4. l. del debbio, m. faber, j. greensite, s. olejnik, phys. rev. d53 (1996)

5891, hep-lat/9708023 and references therein

5. g. t hooft, high-energy physics, ed. a. zichichi, editorice composi-

tori, bologna, 1975
s. mandelstam, phys. rep. c23 (1976) 245

6. g. mack, in recent developements in gauge theories, eds. g. t hooft

et al, plenum, ny, (1980)
g. mack, phys. rev. lett. 45 (1980) 1378

7. a. di giacomo, this meeting
8. g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 190 (1981) 455

a.s. kronfeld, g. schierholz, j.-u. wiese, nucl. phys. b 293 (1987)

9. h. reinhardt, nucl. phys. b 503 (1997) 505
10. s. thurner, m. feuerstein, h. markum, w. sakuler, phys. rev. d54

(1996) 3457
h. suganuma et al., nucl. phys. b (proc. suppl.) 53 (1997) 528

11. g. sasaki, o. miyamura, hep-lat/9811029
12. c. ford, u.g. mitreuter, t. tok, a. wipf, j.m. pawlowski, hep-

th/9802191

13. o. jahn, f. lenz, hep-th/9803177
14. m. quandt, h. reinhardt, a. schafke, phys. lett. b 446 (1999) 290
15. m. engelhardt, k. langfeld, h. reinhardt, o. tennert, phys. lett. b

431 (1998) 141, hep-lat/9904004
r. bertle, m. faber, j. greensite and s. olejnik, hep-lat/9903023

16. p. de forcrand, m. d elia, hep-lat/9901020
17. m. ogilvie, hep-lat/9806018

f. faber, j. greensite, s. olejnik, hep-lat/9810008
18. m. engelhardt and h. reinhardt, hep-th/9907139

8

