9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

4
2

 
 

1
v
2
8
1
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

yang-mills theory as an abelian theory without gauge xing

sergei v. shabanov 1

l.p.t.h.e., universite pierre et marie curie, 4 place jussieu,

tour 16, 1er etage, paris cedex 05, f-75252, france

abstract

a general procedure to reveal an abelian structure of yang-mills theories by
means of a (nonlocal) change of variables, rather than by gauge xing, in the space
of connections is proposed. the abelian gauge group is isomorphic to the max-
imal abelian subgroup of the yang-mills gauge group, but not its subgroup. a
maxwell eld of the abelian theory contains topological degrees of freedom of orig-
inal yang-mills elds which generate monopole-like and ux-like defects upon an
abelian projection.
t hoofts conjecture that monopole dynamics is projection
independent is proved for a special class of abelian projections. a partial duality
and a dynamical regime in which the theory may have massive excitations being
knot-like solitons are discussed.

1. general remarks. one of the physical scenarios of the color connement is
based on the idea that the vacuum state of quantum yang-mills theory is realized by
a condensate of monopole-antimonopole pairs [1]. in such a vacuum the eld between
two colored sources would be squeezed into a tube whose energy is proportional to its
length. the picture is dual to the magnetic monopole connement in a superconductor of
the second kind. monopoles as classical solutions with nite energy are absent in a pure
yang-mills theory. to realize the dual scenario of the connement, t hooft proposed
an abelian projection where the gauge group is broken by a suitable gauge condition
to its maximal abelian subgroup [2]. since the topology of the su(n) manifold and
that of its maximal abelian subgroup [u(1)]n 1 are dierent, any such gauge is singular,
meaning that a gauge group element which transforms a generic su(n) connection onto
the gauge xing surface is not regular everywhere in spacetime. the singularities may form
worldlines that are usually interpreted as worldlines of magnetic monopoles (whose charges
are dened with respect to the unbroken abelian subgroup). as a result the original yang-
mills theory turns into electrodynamics with magnetic monopoles. recent numerical
simulations show that the monopole degrees of freedom in the abelian projection can
indeed form a condensate responsible for the connement [3].

although the numerical results look rather appealing and stimulating, they still do not
provide us with an understanding of the connement mechanism and a nonperturbative
spectrum in yang-mills theory. in particular, monopoles seem to emerge as an artifact
of gauge xing. the abelian group appears as a subgroup of the full yang-mills gauge
group. however one can easily construct colored states which are singlets with respect
to the unbroken (maximal) abelian subgroup, and, hence, they would not be conned
even if the monopoles condense. a choice of the gauge may be convenient in practical

1on leave from laboratory of theoretical physics, jinr, dubna, russia

1

computations. however, no physical phenomenon can depend on it. this suggests that
in yang-mills theory there seems to be a new mechanism of connement at work which
has yet to be understood, and the reason of why abelian projections work so well in the
lattice theory must be explained in a gauge independent way. a rst and necessary step
in this direction is to reveal an abelian structure of yang-mills theory without any gauge
xing.

in this letter, a yang-mills theory is reformulated as an abelian gauge theory via
a (nonlocal) change of variables in the space of connections, rather than via a gauge
xing (or an abelian projection). in particular, it turns out to be possible to construct
the eld variables in the abelian theory so that they are invariant under the original
non-abelian gauge transformations. therefore an eective abelian structure is inherent
to the yang-mills theory and gauge independent. an abelian vector potential carries
some topological degrees of freedom of the original yang-mills connection which generate
monopole-like and ux-like defects upon an abelian projection (in which the gauge group
is broken to its maximal abelian subgroup by a gauge xing [2]). for a rather wide class of
abelian projections, which have a characteristic property that topological defects occur
in the abelian components of projected connections, we oer theoretical arguments to
prove t hoofts conjecture that dynamics of monopoles does not depend on the choice
of a projection, i.e., it is gauge independent.

a generalization of the parameterization of the yang-mills connection proposed by
faddeev and niemi [4] is considered as a special example. while revealing a partial
duality in yang-mills theory, it has an important advantage that it is a genuine change
of variables in the functional integral. therefore it provides a description of the o-
shell dynamics of physical degrees of freedom which is compatible with the gauss law.
following the wilsonian arguments of [4], we discuss the partial duality in the theory
and a dynamical regime in which the topological degrees of freedom may form massive
excitations being knot-like solitons.

2. gauge group su(2). let a be an su(2) connection. consider the following

parameterization of the connection

a =  + nc + w  ,  = g1n  n , w   n = 0 ,

(1)

where g is a coupling constant,  is a connection introduced by cho [5], n is a unit
isotopic vector, n2 = 1. the dot and cross stand, respectively, for the dot and cross
products in the isotopic space whose elements are denoted by boldface letters. relation
(1) is not yet a genuine change of variables in the ane space of connections. two more
conditions have to be imposed on w  in order for (1) to be a change of variables. we
may set in general

(w , n, c) = 0 ,

  n  0 .

(2)

the function  can be chosen so that a solution of eq. (2) determines a local and explicit
parameterization of eight components in w  by six functional variables (see section 5),
thus leading to a generalization of the parameterization given in [4]. we will also show that
some s, for which eq. (2) admits nonlocal parameterizations of the su(2) connection,

2

can naturally be associated with t hoofts abelian projections where an abelian vector
potential contains magnetic monopoles described by the eld n.

before specifying  let us rst analyze the gauge transformation law of the new vari-

ables. an innitesimal gauge transformation of the su(2) connection reads

a = g1(a) = g1 [ + ga  ] .

from (1) we infer

c = n  a , w  = g1n  (a)n .

(3)

(4)

substituting these relations into (2) and solving them for n (two equations for two in-
dependent variables in n), we nd n = n(a). the latter together with (4) species the
inverse change of variables. let n be an innitesimal gauge transformation of n. then
from (4) and (3) it follows that

c = a  (n  n  ) + g1n   ,
w  = w    n[w   (n  n  )] + g1n  (n  n  ) ,

(5)
(6)

where we have used that n  n = 0. an explicit form of n can be found from the
equation (n, a) = 0 (taken on the surface  = 0) where (n, a) is obtained by a
substitution of (4) into (w , c, n). we emphasize that n is determined by the choice
of  and so are c and w .

let us introduce a local orthonormal basis in the isotopic space n, nr and n
r = 0 and nr  n

r = 1. we also have n  nr = inr and nr  n

0, n2
the basis is determined modulo local transformations

r: nr  n =
r = in. with n xed,

nr  einr .

(7)

it should be noted that this gauge freedom is not associated with the gauge group of the
yang-mills theory because the new variables remain unchanged under (7). the local basis
may not exist globally and the eld nr may have singularities. the reason is as follows.
at the spatial innity, the connection must be a pure gauge. therefore n becomes a
constant as |x| approaches innity, say, n0 = (0, 0, 1). the eld n is a map of the
three-sphere s3, being the compactied space, to the target two-sphere s2 in the isotopic
space. the homotopy group 3(s2)  z is not trivial. integers from z are given by the
hopf invariant. if one attempts to transform n to n0 everywhere in space by rotation,
the rotation matrix will be ill-dened on some closed and, in general, knotted contours.
another type of singularities is associated with the homotopy group 2(s2)  z when
the eld n is restricted on some s2 being a subspace of s3. we will show that in the
new variables (1), the yang-mills theory looks like an abelian theory in which a maxwell
potential contains magnetic monopoles and uxes associated with the nontriviality of
2(s2) and 3(s2), respectively.
consider the decomposition

w  = w 

 nr + wn
r .

(8)

3

the elds strength is, by denition, f (a) = a  a + ga  a. in particular,

f ( + nc) = n(c  h) ,

c = c  c ,

h = g1n  (n   n) = h  h  h (st)


,

(9)
(10)

 and h (st)

 = ig1n

r  nr = h 

r  [, ]nr = h (st)

where h = ig1n
 which is the
eld strength of dirac strings associated with the singularities of the local basis. for
example, the wu-yang monopole conguration is determined by n = x/r, r2 = x2
and c = w = 0. the dirac string is extended along the negative part of the z-axis (if
x = (x, y, z)). it is also not dicult to give an example of n for which dirac strings would
form closed linked and/or knotted contours (see, e.g., [6]). thus, the vector potential h
describes possible monopole-like and closed-ux-like degrees of freedom to which we refer
as to topological degrees of freedom in the yang-mills theory. after a modest computation
we obtain

 = hc  h + ig(w 
f 2

 w  w 

 w)i2

+ |dw  dw|2 ,

(11)

where dw = w  igaw is the u(1) covariant derivative, a = c  h. the
abelian gauge transformations have the form

a  a + g1 , w = eiw .

(12)

the transformations (12) can obviously be generated by (7), and therefore they are not
from the original su(2) gauge group. in contrast to the abelian gauge transformations
(12), the su(2) transformations depend on a concrete parameterization of w . because
of topological defects associated with the nontriviality of 2(s2), the bianchi identity for
the abelian strength tensor f = c  h is violated. let f be the dual tensor.
then one can dene a conservative current

j = 

f ,

j = 0 .

(13)

the conservation of the topological current j indicates the existence of the u(1) (mag-
netic) symmetry on the classical level in the theory (11).

3. abelian projections. an abelian projection is introduced by imposing a gauge
condition on a that breaks the gauge group su(2) to its (maximal) abelian subgroup
u(1). as has already been pointed out in section 1, a gauge group element which trans-
forms a generic connection to the gauge xing surface in the space of connections is not
regular everywhere in spacetime. the transformed (or projected) connections contain
topological defects (singularities). consider a special class of abelian projections with
the characteristic property that topological defects appear only in the abelian compo-
nents of the projected potentials. let us describe this class in the new variables (1). had
the gauge transformations of the eld n been just isotopic rotations,

n = n   ,

(14)

then the connection  + nc would become purely abelian upon the projection n  n0
for any choice of  which is compatible with (14). recall that in our formulation the

4

gauge transformation law for n depends on . the addition to the abelian component
c resulting from  upon the projection determines exactly the same topological defects
as the connection h in the abelian theory (11), i.e.,  + nc  n0a.

now we show that for every abelian projection from the special class dened above
one can construct  in (2) which determines a special parameterization of w  such that
(14) holds. moreover the topological current (13) is invariant under the su(2) gauge
transformations (5), (6) and (14). thus, the very existence of the (magnetic) symmetry
(13) is not at all related to any gauge xing in the theory. we rst give an example of
 associated with the so called maximal abelian projection [7] which is mostly used in
numerical studies of the monopole dynamics:

 = ( + nc)w  .

(15)

the compatibility of (15) with (14) follows from the fact [8] that under the transformations
(5), (6) and (14) the isovector (15) is covariant,  = , and it also fullls the condition
  n  0 as one can easily be convinced by a direct computation. upon the projection
n  n0,  turns into the maximal abelian gauge condition. the abelian part of the
connection equals a and contains magnetic monopoles whose charges are dened with
respect to the unbroken u(1) subgroup (rotations about n0) [8]. by construction, the
corresponding conservative monopole current coincides with (13).

 + w (0)

 and n0  w (0)

suppose an abelian projection is specied by a gauge condition (n0a(0), w (0)) = 0,
where a = n0a(0)
 = 0. we also assume that  is covariant (or
even invariant) under the abelian gauge transformations aa(0)
 =
w (0)
  n0. this ensures that the gauge symmetry is broken to u(1). consider the
change of variables (1) in which the condition (2) is obtained by a simple replacement
n0a(0)
  w  in the above gauge condition. by construction,
the gauge transformation law (14) is guaranteed. all topological degrees of freedom of
the yang-mills theory, which are singled out as magnetic monopoles upon the abelian
projection, are contained in the abelian vector potential a of the maxwell theory (11).
thus, in the new variables the aforementioned special class of abelian projections is

   + nc and w (0)

 = g1 and aw (0)

described by a single projection n  n0.

from (9) and (10) it follows that

j = 

f = 0 ,

(16)

that is, the topological current (13) is invariant under the su(2) gauge transformations.
note that c is not transformed by a simple gradient shift. the contribution of non-
abelian gauge transformations to c is compensated in f by h which is generated
by gauge rotations of the local basis nr = nr  ,   n = 0. the restriction on  has
been imposed because n = 0 if  = n, while c = g1. therefore there are two
groups u(1) in the theory. one is associated with the subgroup of the gauge group which
preserve c, c = 0, while the other is given by transformations (12). the abelian
potential a is invariant under the u(1) subgroup of u(1)u(1) which is selected by
the condition  = . the charged eld w is also invariant under this u(1) subgroup.

5

according (6) and (8), the su(2) gauge transformations can be regarded as local generic
rotations of any rigid local basis in the isotopic space, nr = nr   (no restriction on
), provided the  in (2) is such that (14) holds. in this case all eld variables in the
maxwell theory (11) are invariant under the su(2) yang-mills gauge group.

4.

t hoofts conjecture.

in lattice simulations one is interested in an eective
dynamics of the topological degrees of freedom, i.e., in an eective theory of the eld
n in our formulation. recently the dual scenario of the color connement in the lattice
yang-mills theory has been reported to occur in several abelian projection [9]. all the
projections studied have a characteristic property that monopole-like topological defects
are contained in abelian components of projected connections. this certainly supports t
hoofts conjecture that all abelian projections are equivalent [2]. can one nd theoretical
arguments to prove this conjecture? here we explain how the proof can be done.

in our parameterization all the abelian projections in question are described by one
simple (singular) gauge condition n = n0. the dierence between projections is related
to a reparameterization of w . as we have a genuine change of variables in the functional
integral, we can, in principle, integrate out w , and get an eective action for n and
c. from a technical point of view, this procedure involves two important steps. first,
one has to compute a jacobian of the change of variables. second, a gauge has to be
xed, otherwise the integral is divergent. the latter can be done by means of the con-
ventional faddeev-popov recipe with a nonsingular gauge (e.g. a background or lorentz
gauge) before the change of variables. the rst problem is solved in the following way
[8]. consider the identity 1 = r dn(a, n)() where  = (a, n) is obtained by a
substitution of (4) into (w , c, n). clearly, (a, n) = det[/n]. next, the identity
is inserted into the integral r da exp(s), with s being the yang-mills action (gauge
xing and faddeev-popov ghost terms are not written explicitly), then a is replaced by
nc + w , with a generic w  perpendicular to n so that da  dcdw . finally,
one shifts the integration variables w   w  + . as a result one arrives at the
following representation

z  z da es  z dndcdw (a, n)[(w , c, n)] es .

(17)

in the integrand of the right-hand side of eq. (17), a must be replaced by (1). the
integral over w  seems to depend on the choice of . however, this is not always the
case.

various choices of  can be regarded as gauge xing conditions for the gauge sym-
metry associated with a reparameterization of w . as it stands, eq.(1) contains 14
functions in the right-hand side, while there are only 12 components in a. therefore
the gauge transformations (3) would, in general, be induced by ve-parametric trans-
formations of the new variables. there are two-parametric transformations of the new
variables under which a remains invariant. precisely this gauge freedom is xed by (2)
and by the corresponding delta function in (17). the key point is that the invariance of
the integral over w  in (17) under variations of  can be established just as the gauge
invariance of the perturbative faddeev-popov path integral is proved. since  is a de-
terminant, it can be lifted up to the exponential by introducing ghosts  (which should

6

not be confused with the conventional faddeev-popov ghosts), and () is replaced by

r df exp(f 2/2)(  f ). a change of  is equivalent to some brst transformation
of  and the new variables. when w  is integrated out, the invariance of the eective
action for the remaining variables under variations of  should be guaranteed by the
invariance under the corresponding brst transformations of n and c. now we recall
that a change of  implies a modication of the gauge transformation law of n and c.
but for all abelian projections in question  varies within the special class for which
n transforms according to (14), that is, neither the gauge transformation of n nor c
depend on w . hence, the brst transformations of n and c generated by varying 
cannot be anything, but a subset of the conventional brst transformations associated
with a gauge xing in the original integral over a. owing to the brst invariance of
the faddeev-popov action, we conclude that the eective action for n and c will also
be invariant under the brst transformations generated by variations of . in short, one
can say that t hoofts conjecture is a simple consequence of the gauge invariance. in the
new nonlocal variables, a relevance of the gauge symmetry is obvious, while in the original
variables it is less evident because of singularity of gauges used in abelian projections.
the general case when (14) is not valid will be considered elsewhere.

if the dual scenario takes place, as suggested by lattice simulations, the eective action
for the topological current j has to be of the london type (as for superconductor).
since the abelian theory (11) is su(2) invariant, the u(1) symmetry associated with
the conservation of j can be dynamically broken regardless of any gauge xing used
to compute the functional integral. by means of the representation (17), where the
integration over the eld n provides the sum over topological congurations of yang-mills
elds, we have circumvented a dicult problem of summing over monopole congurations
in singular abelian projection gauges.

5. partial duality. the homotopy group arguments show that the eld n may also
contain congurations that upon the abelian projection n  n0 form closed magnetic
uxes which are linked and/or knotted. their topological number is known as the hopf
invariant and associated with the nontriviality of 3(s2) of the map n. due to a nonlo-
cality of the hopf invariant, there is no conservative current related to such topological
defects. the magnetic uxes cannot be observed in numerical studies by the same pro-
cedure as that used for magnetic monopoles because they do not contribute to the total
magnetic eld ux through any closed surface.
it has been conjectured that quantum
uctuations of other degrees of freedom of yang-mills elds may stabilize uxes against
shrinking so that they would behave like knot solitons [4]. the dynamical regime in which
uxes exist as physical excitations is dual to some higgs phase which is revealed via a
special parameterization of the yang-mills connection [4].

to verify this conjecture, one needs a more general parameterization of the connec-
tion than that used in [4] in order to correctly describe an o-shell quantum dynamics of
relevant physical degrees of freedom. the problem is to nd an explicit and local parame-
terization of w  by six functional variables, while keeping the partial duality between n
and some components of w . then in the new variables the yang-mills theory will be a
local abelian theory (11) to which the wilsonian arguments of [4] can be applied.

7

the necessary six functional variables can be unied into an antisymmetric tensor

w = w. consider the following representation

w  = g [w + v(w, n)]  ,

(18)

where v is a symmetric tensor which depends on w and n. this is the most general
form of w . it should be noted that w is dimensionless just as the topological eld n,
which is necessary for w to be a dual variable to n. in principle, one can take a generic
isotopic vector (n), perpendicular to n, instead of  in (18). however, by a redenition
of the symmetric and antisymmetric components of the tensor w + v,   can always
be replaced by  because any isotopic vector perpendicular to n is a linear combination
of the lorentz components of . the simplest choice v = 0 would already provide
us with a sought-for parameterization to develop the o-shell dynamics of the physical
degrees of freedom. it implies only one gauge condition on a generic connection (1), while
we are allowed to impose three without solving the gauss law. indeed, if v = 0, w 
satises three (not two as required by (2)) equations

w    +   w  = 0 .

(19)

the tensor product contains three independent components because both w  and 
are perpendicular to n. therefore there is one constraint on the components of w:
wh = 0. since for the functional integral one needs a change of variables, the latter
restriction on w can be relaxed to achieve this goal if, for example, we set

w  = gw + g ,

(20)

where  = (w, n)  wh is determined by (19). the eld  in (20) is, in general,
specied modulo a factor which may depend on n. for instance, the condition (19) can
be modied by multiplying each of the two terms in the tensor product by coecients
depending on n.

thanks to the gauge invariance of the yang-mills action, a particular choice of  should
not be relevant for the partial duality because  can always be removed by an appropriate
gauge transformation (6). quantum dynamics of the charged elds in the abelian theory
(11) is described by the antisymmetric eld w. the jacobian of the change of variables
is the determinant of the euclidean metric ds2 = r dxda  da on the ane space of
connections in the new variables (1) and (20); da denotes a functional dierential of the
ane (eld) coordinate a. the jacobian induces quantum corrections, associated with
the curvilinearity of the new eld variables, to the classical action (11). if the dynamics
of the charged eld w is such that the average over them yields

h(w  w) (w  w)i  m2 ,

(21)

then in the large distance limit, the leading term of the gradient expansion of the eective
action for the eld n would contain the term m2   = m2(n)2. together with
the tree level term proportional to h 2
, it forms, as follows from (11), the action of the

8

faddeev model [10] which describes knot-like massive solitons. such solitonic excitations
could be good candidates for glueballs. their stability in the eective theory depends on
other terms which are contained in the gradient expansion of the eective action.

consider the decomposition n = b

b  bb
)
and w = iwb + ib. the dual (higgs) phase reported in [4] may also exist in the
abelian theory (11), provided the average over the eld n has the property that

r. we have h = ig1(b

nr + bn

hbbi = 0 ,

hb

bi  m 2 .

(22)

in particular, the property (22) implies that hhi = 0 and hhhi  2g2m 4( 
) (neglecting by a four-point function of the eld b). the eective potential for w
would have classical minima: hwwi  , therefore the maxwell eld acquires a
mass proportional to m.

the parameterization relevant for the partial duality is given by the rst term in
(18). therefore the choice of v does not seem to be important. this suggests that the
property (21) should be universal relative to a choice of v. the ansatz (18) can be used
to solve eq. (2) for v. in this case v may even be nonlocal (cf., e.g., (15)). it would
be interesting to nd arguments to prove that (21) holds for any v = v(w, n) if it
holds for at least one choice of v. this amounts to the existence of the gauge v = 0
for any  (for algebraic conditions like (19), this is the case). the nontriviality of the
problem is that the gauge transformation law of the new variables depends on .

6. gauge group su(n). to extend our description of the yang-mills theory as
an abelian theory with topological degrees of freedom to the gauge group su(n), we
introduce the cartan-weyl basis in the lie algebra [11]. let k be simple roots, k =
1, 2, ..., n  1 (= rank of su(n)), and  be a positive root. it can be written in the form
 = k + k+1 +    + k+j. all simple roots have the same norm. the angle between
k and k1 is 2/3, while k and kj, j  2, are perpendicular. as a consequence,
all roots have the same norm. for every root  two basis elements e and e = e
 are
dened so that

[h, e] = (h, )e ,

[e, e] = n,e+ ,

[e, e] =  ,

(23)

where h is any element from the cartan subalgebra; and for any two elements v and w of
the lie algebra the killing form is dened by (v, w) = tr (ad vad w). the operator ad v
acts on any element w as [v, w]. the structure constants n, = n, are not zero
only if  +  is a root. for su(n), n 2
, = (2n)1 and relative signs can be xed by the
jacobi identity for the basis elements. let hk = h
k be an orthonormal basis with respect
to the killing form in the cartan subalgebra. with the normalization of the structure
constants as given in (23), the elements hk, e and e
 form an orthonormal basis in the
lie algebra, (hk, e) = 0, (e, e) = 0 and (e, e

) = .

let u = u(x) be a generic element of the coset su(n)/[u(1)]n 1. consider a local
orthonormal basis nk = u hku, n = u eu. the commutation relations (23) hold for
the local basis too. for any element v one can prove the identity

v = n[nk, [nk, v]] + nk(nk, v) .

(24)

9

a proof is based on a straightforward computation of the double commutator in (24) in
the cartan-weyl basis and the fact that all roots of su(n) have the same norm which
is (, ) = 1/n relative to the killing form. a change of variables in the ane space of
su(n) connections reads

a =  + nkc k

 + w ,  = ig1n[nk, nk] ,

(w, nk) = 0 ,

(25)

where w is subject to n 2  n conditions (w, c k, nk) = 0, (, nk)  0 thus, in four
dimensional spacetime, 4(n 2  1) independent components of a are now represented by
n 2 n = dim su(n)/[u(1)n 1] independent components of nk, by 4(n 1) components
of c k
 and by 3(n 2  n) components of w. the two rst terms in (25) are constructed
so that the corresponding eld strength is purely abelian in the local basis

 , h k

 = ig1n (nk, [nj, nj]) ,

(26)

f( + c) = nk (cid:16)c k
  c k
 = c k

  h k

(cid:17)  nkf k

and c k
a + ig[a, a] by a successive use of the jacobi identity and (24).

. relation (26) is obtained from the denition f(a) = a 

the homotopy groups 2(g/h) and 3(g/h), where g = su(n) and h = [u(1)]n 1,
of the map nk are nontrivial. therefore nk carry topological (physical) degrees of freedom
of yang-mills elds. it is not hard to establish the identity

ig1u u =  + nkh k

 , h k

 = h k

  h k

  h k(st)



,

(27)

where the group element u species an orientation of the local basis with respect to the
 = ig1(nk, [, ]u u) is the eld of dirac strings. the
cartan-weyl basis, and h k(st)
abelian strength tensor f k
 does not satisfy the bianchi identity if the monopole-like de-
fects associated with a nontriviality of 2(g/h) are present. the conservative topological
current is a simple multi-component generalization of (13): j k
 = 0. there
is a (magnetic) symmetry group [u(1)]n 1 responsible for its conservation.

, j k

 = 

f k

to reformulate the yang-mills theory as an abelian theory without gauge xing, we
. the lagrangian

 and set ak

 = c k

introduce the decomposition w = w 
 n+w 
density in the new variables assumes the form

h k

 n

 = nc  h + ig(hk, )hw 
f 2
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
i + x=

+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

 = x+=

  dw 
n, hw 
 w 

 + ig
  w 

 w 
2

dw 

 w 

,

  w 

 w 

io2

n, hw 

 w 

  w 

 w 

 i ,

(28)

(29)

where ,  and  are positive roots, and dw 
 . a calcula-
tion of the eld strength tensor is somewhat tedious but straightforward. the identities
()n  n + ig[, n] = ig(hk, )hkn and (nj, nk) = (nk, nj) = 0, which
can be deduced from (27), are useful to simplify the computation. the lagrangian density
(28) is invariant under the abelian gauge transformations

  ig(, hk)ak

 = w 

w 

ak

  ak

 + k , w 

  eig(,hk)k w 

 .

(30)

10

the abelian gauge group [u(1)]n 1 is not a subgroup of the original gauge group. just as
in the su(2) case, it is related to the fact that the basis elements n can be transformed
locally

n  ei(,hk)k n

(31)

without spoiling both the orthogonality and commutation relations in the local cartan-
weyl basis.

the gauge transformation law of the new variables can be found by the same method
as in the su(2) case.
it depends on the choice of . there is a wide class of s,
associated with abelian projection gauges as explained in section 3, for which the gauge
transformation law has a particularly simple form

nk = i[nk, ] ,

c k

 = g1(nk, ) ,

w = i[w, ] .

(32)

in this case, the su(n) gauge transformations are generated by adjoint transformations
of any rigid local cartan-weyl basis, under which the eld variables in the abelian theory
are invariant

ak

 = 0 ,

w 

 = 0 .

(33)

all abelian projections in which topological defects occur in abelian components of pro-
jected connections fall into one class dened by the projection nk  hk in the new
variables. a proof of the t hooft conjecture is a straightforward generalization of the
su(2) case. the key point is the gauge symmetry (32) which does not mix w with the
abelian variables c k
 and nk. therefore the monopole dynamics in the su(n) yang-mills
theory is projection independent.

the coupling constants of the interaction of w 

 among each other and with the
 in (28) are proportional to n 1/2 because n,  n 1/2 and |(, hk)| 
  n 1/2. therefore in the large n limit the dynamics of the topological

maxwell elds ak
n 1/2, while h k
elds nk dominates [8].

finally, we observe that precisely in four dimensional spacetime, the 3(n 2  n) inde-
pendent components of w can be unied into a tensor w jk
 which is antisymmetric in
the lorentz indices and symmetric in the cartan indices, w jk
 = w jk
 = w kj
 .
this suggests the following local parameterization to reveal a partial duality in the su(n)
yang-mills theory

 and w jk

w = nw jk

 + v jk

 (w, n)o jk
 can be specied as an explicit and local function of w jk


jk
 = i[nj, nk] = kj

 ,

(34)

,



where the symmetric tensor v jk
and nk via a simple generalization of the method of section 5.

7. conclusions. an abelian structure and the abelian magnetic symmetry can
be established in the su(n) yang-mills theory without any gauge xing (or abelian
projections). by making use of such an abelian theory we have shown that the eective
dynamics of the topological degrees of freedom that are singled out as magnetic monopoles
in abelian projections is independent of the projection (t hooft conjecture). we have
also generalized a parameterization of faddeev and niemi in order to study an o-shell

11

dynamics of physical degrees of freedom which may form knot-like solitons in the infrared
region of the yang-mills theory. a general parameterization of the yang-mills connection
to reveal a partial duality between the topological eld n and a dimensionless antisym-
metric eld w has been proposed. it is believed that the separation of the topological
degrees of freedom of the yang-mills theory via a change of variables in the functional
integral is important for developing the corresponding eective action by analytical means.

references

[1] y. nambu, phys. rev. d 10 (1974) 4262;

s. mandelstam, phys. rep. c 23 (1976) 245; phys. rev. d 19 (1979) 2391;
a.m. polyakov, nucl. phys. b 120 (1977) 429;
g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 138 (1978) 1.

[2] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 190 [fs3] (1981) 455.

[3] j.d. stack, s.d. neiman and r.j. wensley, phys. rev. d 50 (1994) 3399;

a. di giacomo, in: connement and nonperturbative aspects of qcd (p. van baal,
ed.) nato asi series, vol. 368 b, plenum press, london, 1998; p. 415;
t. suzuki et al, ibid.; p. 439.

[4] l.d. faddeev and a.j. niemi, phys. rev. lett. 82 (1999) 1624; phys. lett. b 449

(1999) 214.

[5] y.m. cho, phys. rev. d 21 (1980) 1080; phys. rev. lett. 46 (1981) 302; phys. rev.

d 23 (1981) 2415.

[6] l.d. faddeev and a.j. niemi, nature 378 (1997) 58;

j. gladikowski and m. hellmund, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 5194;
r.a. battye and p.m. sutclie, phys. rev. lett. 81 (1998) 4798;
j. hietarinta and p. salo, phys. lett. b451 (1999) 60.

[7] a.s. kronfeld, g. schierholtz and u.j. wiese, nucl. phys. b 293 (1987) 461.

[8] s.v. shabanov, phys. lett. b (1999) (in press); hep-th/9903223.

[9] a. di giacomo, b. lucini, l. montesi and g. pauti, colour connement and dual

superconductivity of the vacuum -i, hep-lat/9906024.

[10] l.d. faddeev, quantisation of solitons, ias preprint, print-75-qs70, princeton,

1975.

[11] d.p. zhelobenko, compact lie groups and their representations, translations of

mathematical monographs, vol. 40, ams, providence, ri, 1973.

12

