9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

0
3

 
 

1
v
1
2
2
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

superconnections:

an interpretation of the standard model1

gert roepstor

institute for theoretical physics

rwth aachen

d-52062 aachen, germany

e-mail: roep@physik.rwth-aachen.de

dedicated to eyvind h. wichmann

on occasion of his 70th birthday

abstract. the mathematical framework of superbundels as pioneered by d.
quillen suggests that one considers the higgs eld as a natural constituent
of a superconnection. i propose to take as superbundle the exterior algebra
obtained from a hermitian vector bundle of rank n where n = 2 for the
electroweak theory and n = 5 for the full standard model. the present
setup is similar to but avoids the use of non-commutative geometry.

1

introduction

the key to our present-day understanding of the electroweak interactions is
the spontaneous breakdown of local gauge symmetries. however, the mass
generating mechanism requires the introduction of the so-called higgs eld.
a long-standing problem is to give meaning to scalar elds as natural ingre-
dients of a gauge theory. the subject has received special attention, since,
up to now, the higgs particle has not been observed in experiments. it would
be impossible to provide a coherent account of all attempts to interpret the
higgs eld within the context of supersymmetry or non-commutative geom-
etry, nor shall i try to review the history of the standard model, or discuss
its details. in the present approach, which i believe is new, i continue the
work begun in [2,3] and concentrate on one aspect only: the possible use of
quillens concept of a superconnection [1] in physics, since it became increas-
ingly clear to me that euclidean eld theory is the study of g superbundles.
the goals that motivate such a study are:

 to reduce the number of free parameters of the standard model

 to think of the higgs eld as some extension of the conventional gauge

potential

1talk presented at the wichmann symposium held at uc berkeley, june 1999

1

 to naturally explain the form of the higgs potential

 to unite the gauge coupling and the yukawa coupling to fermions in

one lagrangian, id, where d is a generalized dirac operator

 to predict the mass of the higgs boson

 to predict the number of fermion generations and the structure of the

cabibbo-kobayashi-maskawa (ckm) matrix.

let us start with a few denitions. by a superspace we mean a z2-graded
vector space v = v +  v . elements of v  are said to be

 even/odd,
 right-handed/left-handed,
 positive/negative,
 matter-/antimatter-like, or
 bosonic/fermionic

depending on their use in physics. examples of spaces with such a struc-
ture are abundant in the theory of elementary particles. in most instances,
dim v + = dim v . for brevity we shall refer to the even(odd)ness indicated
by the  sign as the parity of elements in v . notice also that the z2-grading
carries over to direct sums and tensor products of graded vector spaces in
an obvious manner.

a superalgebra is a superspace whose product respects the grading, i.e.

the even(odd)ness of its elements. examples are:

 the exterior algebra of an ungraded vector space,
 the cliord algebra of an ungraded vector space,
 the endomorphism algebra of a superspace.

exterior algebras will be seen to play a particular role in what follows. we

e is z-graded by the degree p of the exterior power and z2-graded by the

therefore remind the reader that the exterior algebra ve of a vector space
parity (1)p. notice that dimv+e = dimve = 2n1 where n = dim e.

within a superalgebra a the supercommutator is dened as follows:

[a, b] = (cid:26) ab + ba if a, b are odd

ab  ba else

(a, b  a).

hence, the supercommutator of a pair of odd elements is in fact their anti-
commutator. from now on brackets [, ] will always denote the supercom-
mutator provided the parity of its arguments are unambigeously dened.
by construction, any exterior algebra is supercommutative, i.e., all brackets
vanish. one calls supertrace any linear functional that vanishes on super-
commutators. with exterior algebras any linear functional is a supertrace.

2

when it comes to studying dierential operators on manifolds, the con-
cept of derivations in a superalgebra will be essential. such derivations
may be even/odd depending on whether they preserve parity or not. even
derivations are dened as usual. by contrast, an odd derivation d of a
superalgebra satises

d(ab) = (cid:26) (da)b + a(db)

(da)b  a(db)

if a is even
if a is odd.

inner derivations are given by supercommutators d = [c, ] where c is xed.
moreover, the linear space of all derivations is a lie superalgebra since any
bracket [d, d] is a derivation, too.

we shall frequently use tensor products. it is important to realize that
tensor products of superalgebras are special. generally speaking, if x and
y are z2-graded algebras, the multiplication in x  y is given by

(x  y)(x  y) = (cid:26) xx  yy

xx  yy

if x and y are odd
otherwise.

in physics, such tensor products are familiar constructions when dealing with
fock spaces of dierent fermions. for, if e and f are two vector spaces,
there is a natural isomorphism

v(e  f ) = ve vf .

2 superconnections and the higgs field

let m now be a (connected, oriented) dierentiable manifold. it is helpful
to think of m as a model of euclidean spacetime. later, we shall assume
that its dimension is even. by a superbundle we mean a vector bundle on
m whose bers are superspaces. examples are:

 the bundle vt m of exterior dierentials,

 the cliord bundle c(m ) of a riemannian manifold,
 the endomorphism bundle of a superbundle.

sections of a superbundle b obviously form a superspace (b).

the most common object for integration on manifolds is the exterior

algebra of dierential forms (a supercommutative algebra),

 = (vt m ).

elements of  of degree p are said to be p-forms on m . they are are
even (odd) if p is even (odd). the even elements constitute a commutative
subalgebra + of . there is a canonical odd derivation d on , commonly
known as the exterior derivative, mapping p-forms into (p + 1)-forms such

3

that d2 = 0, which reduces to the ordinary derivative df on functions f :
m  r.

in gauge theory one chooses a compact lie group g, called the gauge
group, and some principal g bundle p over m to start from. a vector
bundle, which is an associated g bundle, may be obtained from any rep-
resentation  of the group g. the choice of  is dictated by the multiplet
of particles (or elds) one wishes to describe. here we shall be interested
in representations spaces (real or complex) carrying a z2-grading respected
by . this in particular implies that  has subrepresentions  of same
dimension.

let b some g superbundle obtained in the above manner. we will then

consider the superspace of b-valued dierential forms,

and also the superalgebra of local operators on s(b),

s(b) = (vt m  b),

a(b) = (vt m  end b).

as opposed to a dierential operator, a local operator preserves bers, that
is to say, it commutes with the multiplication by functions f  c(m ).
since the algebra  acts berwise on the vector space s(b) in an obvious
manner, there is a natural embedding   a(b). the following notion, due
to d. quillen, generalizes the concept of a covariant derivative. see also [4]
for details.

denition. a superconnection on b is a (rst-order) dierential operator id
on s(b) of odd type satisfying the leibniz rule

[id, )] = d,

    a(b).

a few observations are immediate.

1. if id and id are two dierent superconnections, their dierence su-
percommutes with  and so is a local operator of odd type: supercon-
nections form an ane space modelled on the vector space a(b).

2. id2 = 1

2 [id, id] is even. from the generalized jacobi identity and the
relation [id[id, ] = d2 = 0 we see that id2 commutes with i() and
hence is a local operator. we call if = id2  a+(b) the curvature of
the superbundle b.

3. bianchis identity [id, if ] = 0 holds.

4. any superconnection gives rise to an odd derivation of the superalgebra
a(b), again denoted id, in a way consistent with the leibniz rule:
ida = [id, a] (a  a(b)). thus, idif = 0 is another way to write
bianchis identity.

4

it is not dicult to prove the following structure theorem. any supercon-
nection decomposes as id = d + l where d is a covariant derivative on b
while l  a(b) (with no further restriction on l). thus, d maps p-forms
into (p + 1)-forms and, in local coordinates,

d = dx( + a(x))

where a(x) is the gauge potential, taking values in some representation of
the lie algebra of g, and

l = l(x) +xp2

dx1  . . .  dxpl1p(x)

(1)

with scalar eld l(x) (the p = 0 contribution) and tensor elds l1p(x) of
degree p  2. fields in l are thought of as sections of the endomorphismen
bundle endb if p is even or end+b if p is odd. the idea of supercon-
nections has thus provided new elds other than the gauge potential with a
denite behavior under gauge transformations. we shall refer to the scalar
eld l(x) as the higgs eld of the superconnection id. at present, we
need not introduce tensor elds of degree p  2 in a superconnection if we
merely wish to accommodate the particles of the standard model, and we
will assume from now on that the series (1) truncates after the zeroth order
term:

l = l(x)  (endb).

with respect to the grading b = b+  b, we may conveniently represent
any superconnection as a matrix of operators:

id = (cid:18) d+ i
i d(cid:19)

l = (cid:18) 0

i

i

0 (cid:19) .

clearly, d are covariant derivatives on b. we also assume that b is a
hermitian vector bundle and id is skew-selfadjoint in the sense that

(idv, w) + (v, idw) = d(v, w),

v, w  s(b)

where (v, w)  c(m ) denotes the induced scalar product of sections. at
each point x  m , the eld (x) is the adjoint of the eld (x) and may
be looked upon as an n  n matrix if the bundle b has rank 2n and some
frame has been chosen. with no further restrictions on l, the higgs eld
has n2 independent components.
the curvature decomposes as

if = d2 + [d, l] + l2

where the 2-form f = d2 is referred to as the eld strength, the 1-form [d, l]
is the covariant derivative of the higgs eld, and the 0-form l2 determines
the higgs potential, once a scalar product (if, if ) has been dened (details
in [2]).

5

3 constructing the standard model

assume now that p is a principal g bundle where the gauge group g is
either the unitary group u (n) or a subgroup thereof. since g acts on p but
also on cn (equipped with the standard scalar product), we may construct
the associated g bundle

v = p g cn

having bers isomorphic to cn. though there is no natural graded structure

on v , the exterior algebra b = vv is in fact a g superbundle of rank
2n. the representation v of g acting on its bers respects parity and
has subrepresentations v of equal dimension. by construction, v is a
hermitian vector bundle and so is vv . we will be mainly concerned with

the following two cases:

n = 2 g = u (2)
n = 5 g  u (5) standard model.

electro-weak theory

to introduce fermions into the theory we need a few more assumptions.
let m now be a riemannian manifold of dimension 2m and c(m ) be its
cliord bundle (canonically associated with the cotangent bundle t m ). its
construction formalizes diracs notion of an algebra of  matrices connected
with spacetime. let c : t m  end s be a spinc-structure on m , i.e., s is
a complex vector bundle of rank 2m on m , called the spinor bundle, and the
bundle map c satises c(v)2 + (v, v) = 0 with respect to the scalar product
(, ) on t m induced by the riemannian structure. it may be shown that
c extends to an algebraic isomorphism c(m )  end s and thus gives s
the structure of a cliord module. the  matrices are locally recovered
by setting  = c(dx). cliord modules formalizes diracs concept of a
space on which the s act. the eigenvalues 1 of the chirality operator
5 = im12    2m give s the structure of a superbundle.

in order to incorporate gauge symmetries we consider the twisted spinor

bundle,

e = vv  s.

since both s and vv are superbundles, so is e. in particular,

e+ = (v+v  s+)  (vv  s).

dirac elds describing leptons and quarks are thought of as components of
one master eld   (e+). the restriction to e+ couples the helicity of s
to the parity of the exterior algebra. note that the master eld  is capable
of describing 2n elementary fermion elds. left- and right-handed elds
count as dierent components. the fact that fermion elds are grassmann
variables in euclidean eld theory will not be discussed. nevertheless, the
reader should be aware that (x) and (x) anticommute and, contrary to
the situation in minkowski eld theory, are unrelated.

6

the fermionic part of the lagrangian is taken to be id where d is
a generalized dirac operator. we shall not go into the details here except
to say that d is constructed from the superconnection id in very much the
same way as the conventional dirac operator d/ is constructed from the
covariant derivative d. formally, d is a (rst-order) dierential operator
on (e) of odd type satisfying [d, f ] = c(df ) for all f  c(m ). being
odd in particular means that a generalized dirac operator cannot contain a
mass term. leptons and quarks must acquire their masses by the higgs
mechanism. our ansatz for the lagrangian takes care of both the yukawa
and the gauge coupling of fermions.

let us rst turn to the u (2) model describing weak isospin (quantum
number i) along with hypercharge (quantum number y ). it goes without
saying that u (1)y is considered the center of the group u (2). but, as a
matter of convention, the generator of u (1)y is taken here as the negative
hypercharge. irreducible representations are characterized by i and y sub-
ject to the restriction 2i + y =even. after symmetry breaking the residual
gauge group will be

u (1)q = (cid:26)(cid:18) 1

0

0

ei(cid:19) , 0   < 2(cid:27)

giving rise to the notion of the electric charge q as a conserved quantity.
likewise, the generator of u (1)q in any representation is taken as q. by
construction, the charge then satises the relation q = i3 + 1
2 y of gell-
mann-nishijima.

the master eld  in the u (2) model has four components,

 = (er, er, el, eel)  (e+),

associated to three invariant subspaces of vc2. as indicated, the com-

ponents describe the electron (and the accompanying neutrino). there is
another master eld for the muon and one for the  lepton. left- and right-
handed elds have dierent properties under gauge transformations:

er  v0c2
er  v2c2
el, eel  v1c2

singlet,
singlet,
doublet,

y = 0
y = 2
y = 1

i = 0 q = 0
i = 0 q = 1
i = 1

2 q = 0, 1.

the appearance of a right-handed neutrino eld, foreign to most weak in-
teraction theories, signalizes that the neutrino is assumed to acquire a small
mass after symmetry breaking.

the bosonic sector has a spin-one gauge eld of four components, corre-
sponding to the photon, the z, and the w . in addition, there are two higgs
doublets of opposite hypercharge. if the lagrangian is at most quadratic in
the curvature if and gauge invariant, there are only very few free parameters
left that enter the action functional.

7

we now turn to another lie group g with lie algebra

lie g = su(3)  su(2)  u(1)

(2)

large enough to enable us to incorporate quark elds and strong interactions.
in addition, we require that g be a subgroup of su (5), i.e., we dene

g = {(u, v)  u(3)  u(2) | det u  det v = 1}

(3)

and let the embedding g  su (5) be given by

(u, v) 7 (cid:18) u 0

v(cid:19) .

0

there are in fact three basic symmetry groups involved in our model. note
that they are related by the following exact sequence

1su(3)

j
g su(2)1

(4)

where j(u) = (u, 1) and s(u, v) = v. though there is the isomorphism
(2) between lie algebras, the group g cannot be identied with the direct
product su (3)  u (2). it is correct to say that the color group su (3) of
quantum chromodynamics is embedded in g as a subgroup. but the gauge
group u (2) of leptons is recovered only as the quotient g/su (3). this fact
inuences our idea of what the hypercharge y should be. to see the point
more clearly we consider the exact sequence

1z3

j
 u (1)y

su (1)y 1

(5)

obtained from (4) by restricting to the centers. in this way we learn that
the group u (1)y , a threefold cover of u (1)y , may also be looked upon as a
one-dimensional closed subgroup of the two-torus:

u (1)y = {(ei, ei) | 3 + 2 = 0 mod 2}.

as before, u (1)y denes the hypercharge. so does u (1)y by the local
isomorphism s whose inverse is

s1(ei) = (ei2/3, ei).

(6)

locally, the group u (1)y is represented by a phase factor eiy in any
unitary irreducible representation of g. notice, however, that y  q in
general.

the vector bundle v is now modelled on the ber space

c5 = c3  c2

8

with subspaces c3 and c2 carrying the fundamental representations of the
color group su(3) and the weak-isospin group su (2) respectively. as ex-

plained above, passage to the exterior algebra vc5 is very essential, the
ber space of the superbundle vv carrying the reducible representation v
of g. from the natural isomorphism v(c3  c2) = vc3 vc2 we obtain
v(u, v) = vu vv for (u, v)  g and hence
vr(u, v) = pp+q=rvpu vqv,

consequently, any fundamental fermion (quark or lepton) must belong to
one of the irreducible representations of g,

r = 0, . . . , 5.

whose dimension is (cid:0)p

p = 0, 1, 2, 3,

vp,q = vp vq
eiy = vp,q(s1(ei)) = exp(i2p/3 + iq)

2(cid:1). to nd its hypercharge we use eq. (6):

3(cid:1)(cid:0)q

q = 0, 1, 2

and thus obtain the fundamental relation

y = 2

3 p  q

.

(7)

clearly, y is integer valued if p = 0 mod 3 (for leptons) and fractional
otherwise (for quarks). a similar statement holds for the electric charge q.
the master eld  has 25 = 32 components. dirac elds that enter 
are characterized by three dierent parities owing to the z2-gradings of

vc5, vc3, and vc2. their interpretation is as follows:

p + q =even : right-handed

p + q =odd : left-handed
p =odd : antimatter
q =odd : doublets.

p =even : matter
q =even : singlets

hence, there are left-handed and right-handed elds of equal number. like-
wise, there are matter elds and antimatter elds of equal number. each
doublet is accompanied by two singlets. the following table shows the de-
tails.

q = 0

q = 2

q = 1

p = 0

er

u1r

er

d1r

el

u1l

el

d1l

p = 2 u2r d2r u2l d2l

u3r

dc
1l
dc
2l
dc
3l
ec
l

p = 1

p = 3

u3l

d3l

dc
1r uc
1r
dc
2r uc
2r
3r uc
dc
3r
ec
r c
er

d3r

uc
1l
uc
2l
uc
3l
c
el

9

quarks elds such as u(up) and d(down) come in three colors: i = 1, 2, 3.
the upper index c is used to indicate antimatter. for instance, dc is the
charge conjugate eld obtained from the dirac eld d. charge conjugation

passes from vp,q to v3p,2q and therefore reverses the electric charge, the

hypercharge, and the helicity:

dc
l := (dc)l = (dr)c,

dc
r := (dc)r = (dl)c.

obviously, the operations c, p (charge conjugation and parity) are well
dened on , though they need not be symmetries. the introduction of elds
together with their charge conjugates in one multiplet is welcome, because
it eliminates  as an independent variable in the lagrangian. contrary to a
wide-spread assumption, the elds for the antiquarks, in the present scheme,
are assigned the dening representation 3 of su (3), while the elds for the
quarks are assigned the complex conjugate representation 3. interchanging
the role of the two fundamental representations, however, has no physical
implication.

we emphasize once more that there is a natural place for the right-
handed neutrino eld, er, as well as for and its charge conjugate eld,
c
el. both will be needed if the neutrino acquires a nonzero mass. the
su (5) gauge model of georgi and glashow, however, discards this possibility

leaving the representations v0,0 and v3,2 (trivial representations of su (3)

it seems that nature provides several generations of
su (2)) unoccupied.
fundamental fermions. we oer no explanation for this fact, but mention
that each generation has to be introduced by a separate master eld.

we have presented a systematic and well-motivated analysis of some
structural aspects of the standard model, leaving out all quantitative results:
some of them have already been published [2]. others are deferred to the
future investigations.

references

1. d. quillen, topology 24,89 (1985)

v. mathai, d. quillen, topology 25, 85 (1986);

2. g. roepstor, superconnections and the higgs field, hep-th/9801040

published in j.math.phys. 40, 2698 (1999)

3. g. roepstor, superconnection and matter, hep-th/9801045

4. n. berline, e. getzler, m. vergne: heat kernels and dirac operators,

springer, berlin 1996

10

