on the equivalence of four dimensional

and two dimensional field theories

f.ghaboussi

department of physics, university of konstanz

p.o. box 5560, d 78434 konstanz, germany

e-mail: ghabousi@kaluza.physik.uni-konstanz.de

abstract

we investigate the dimensional, the dynamical and the topological structures

of four dimensional einstein and yang-mills theories. it is shown that these

theories are constructed from two dimensional quantities, so that they pos-

sess always a distinguished two dimensional substructure.

in this sense the

four dimensional eld theories are equivalent to related two dimensional eld

theories.

9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
6
2

 

 
 

2
v
5
0
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1

the theories of fundamental interactions of physics are given by the four dimensional eld theories,

from which the three yang-mills theories can be considered only as partly renormalizable quantum eld

theories [1], whereas the einstein theory of gravitation is a non-renormalizable and hence non-quantizable

theory. the mathematical frame work of these theories is based on the one hand on the class of non-

trivial and simple forms up to the two form, i. e. up to the curvature two forms [2]. on the other

hand it is based on the class of dierential operators up to the second order operators, i. e. up to

the laplace/dalembert operators. in other words, beyond the trivial volume forms, all higher forms

in eld theories are restricted to be constructed by exterior products of simple one and two forms. a

fact which is related, in view of the relations between invariant dimensions of cohomology elements

and invariant indicies of dierential operators, with the mentioned restriction of physical dierential

operators to the dierential operators of rst and second order. such relations are due to the duality

between the homology and cohomology elements in accord with de rham theorem and the equality of

their dimensions: the betti numbers. in other words it is due to the relation between the cohomology

dimensions and the indicies of dierential operators which determine the dynamics of eld theories [3].

in view of these restrictions, the physical or dynamical content of four dimensional theories, which can

be derived from an action principle, should be equivalent to the physical or dynamical content of related

two dimensional theories where the two forms are the natural geometrical limit [4]. thus in both cases

the dynamical content is restricted to be given by dierential operators up to the second order, which

act on quantities up to the two forms.

now dierential operators on the physically interesting compact manifolds have invariant indices which

do not depend on the dimension of the underlying compact manifolds [5]: thus the topological dimen-

sions of forms, as the dynamical quantities of eld theories, which are given by the dimensions of the

harmonic forms or the cohomology elements, i. e. betti numbers, also do not depend on the dimension

of the underlying manifold ( see below). furthermore such numbers are equal for poincare dual elements

on a manifold in view of h a = h na, which reduces such invariant numbers, in the case of four dimen-

sional theory, to the invariants of up to two forms, i. e. to those of the related two dimensional theory.

therefore, in view of such a reducibility and related circumstances one can speak from the reduction

of four dimensional eld theories on compact manifolds ( s4), to related two dimensional theories on

2

compact manifolds ( s2), with respect to such topological characteristics [5]. we show after dimen-
sional, dynamical and topological discussions of structure of four dimensional eld theories that, in view

of the fact that the topological invariants of the four dimensional eld theories, i. e. the dimensions of

cohomology/homology elements of the theory or the indicies of dierential operators which determine

the dynamics of equations of motion of four dimensional eld theory, are given by the invariants of the

two dimensional eld theory. therefore the four dimensional theories can be considered to be equivalent

to related two dimensional eld theories. note that the same dierential operators and forms determine

the dynamical behaviour of the physical quantities of the eld theories for example by the number of

solutions of the related dierential equations of motion, which is given by the index of the involved

dierential operator. in other words considering the topological strucuture of eld theories disclose also

the invariant local or dynamical structure of these theories.

from physical point of view, the above restriction of physical theories to quantities which are represented

by forms up to the second order, i. e. up to the curvature form, can be understood as follows: any

regular physical eect is due to some force or potential which is related with a curvature. thus in view

of the fact that a true force have dimension

l  t  l2 in geometric units [6]. therefore such eects,
i. e. all regular physicall eects, should be of such a two dimensional origin ( l2) in the mentioned
sense: since the two dimensional structure is charcterized by its highest and lowest dimensions: the

1

dimension of its area: l2 and its curvature tensor: l2 (see also below).

thus we will show that from dynamical and topological point of views the four dimensional theories are

equivalent to the related two dimensional theories where the action function are given by the topological

invariant surface integrals of related curvature two forms. thus one can describe the same physical fact

by a four dimensional theory with four dependent variables from which only two are independent, or by a

related two dimensional theory with the two independent variables. note that the two dimensional theo-

ries have the advantage to be integrable and hence quantizable, without constraints and renormalization

problems of four dimensional theories which could not be solved yet in a satisfactory manner. thus the

two diomensional theory of gravity can be considered as the only quantizable theory of gravity, since as

it is mentioned above the four dimensional theory of gravity is non-quantizable.

there are various hints for a two dimensional foundation of physical theories of fundamental interactions,

3

from the mathematical- and physical frame works of such theoris: among them, as already mentioned,

the very fundamental fact that we are given, not only from physical side but even from the mathematical

side, only simple forms up to the second order. in other words the mathematical quantities to describe

mathematical and physical processes are restricted to dierential forms or antisymmetric tensors up to

two forms or second rank tensors, respectively: 0 , 1 = idxi and 2 = ijdxi  dxj which correspond
to the scalar functions, the connections or momentums or potentials and the curvatures or eld strengths

or forces on manifolds or in eld theories, respectively. note that all forms are of invariant dimension

l0, since the invariant dimensions of their tensor components and their coframe basis are reciprocal, in

accord with the dimensional convention: (dx  x  l), ((dx  dy)  l2) etc.. thus such dimensions
are determined in accord with the coframe structure of the volumes invariants on orientable manifolds:

((dx1, ...,dxn)  ln) [6].
in this sense the symmetric tensors are considered with respect to the exterior algebra as zero forms or

scalar functions, i. e. of dimension l0: since symmetric tensors possess no antisymmetric components

and the volumes which dene the fundamental dimensions of manifolds and theories, are dened entirely

by the antisymmertic coframe basis. this consideration is also in accord with the denition of the

fundamental symmetric metric tensor by: ds2 := g(ij)dxi  dxj where ds2  (dxi  dxj ) and also the metric
g(ij), all can be considered of dimension l0, in view of their symmetric structure.


xi 

1
xi ) and
) can be considered of dimensions l1 and l2, respectively. whereas the symmetric

note that in the same sense, the tensor components of dierential operators, such as (i 
(ijij 
derivatives like laplace operator:  = (dd + dd), can be considered of dimension l0 in accord with

1
x  y

their symmetric structures, thus their application on forms does not change their order. in the same

sense, the antisymmetric tensor components of vector- and tensor elds on a n-dimensional manifold has

dimensions l, ..., ln and their antisymmetric frame basis are of dimensions l1, ..., ln. note further

that such invariant dimensions of tensor components are independent of the dimension of the underlying

manifold, thus they are in accord with the well known physical dimensions of related physical quantities

such as (( force or curvature or eld strength )  l2) and (( potential or momentum or mass )  l1),
in geometric units. thus a force is the gradient of a regular potential which is a component of a
etc.

connection one form.

4

recall also that in accord with the phase space philosophy the time is not a true phase space variable,

i. e. it is not an independent variable beside the canonical position and momentum variables in phase

space, but it can be introduced only as a parameter for this variables. thus the canonical conjugate

variable of time parameter , i. e. the hamiltonian function, is a function of momentum and position,

i. e. a depndent variable. this circumstance reduces the number of true variables of phase space of four

dimensional theories to three. thus any theory like the four dimensional eld theories which consider,

in spite of this, the time as a true variable; will possess constraints and the time component of its eld

variable should be eliminated by a gauge xing condition.

there is a further hint for the fundamental role played by the two dimensional thories in physics, which

is described by the fact that in view of kam and morse-smale stability theorems on the integrability

of physical sytems, only systems with two independent degrees of freedom are stable against small

perturbations [7]. in other words only two dimensional theories, i. e. those with only two independent

degrees of freedom, are integrable and stable with respect to small perturbations of related systems.

note that in this sense the small perturbation or deviation from the two dimensional structure of the

system can not be considered as an independent variable or degree of freedom [7].

therefore it is plausible to consider that any physical theory which modelizes a stable physical process,

e. g. the above mentioned fundamental theories, should be itself an stable model and hence should

possess such a two dimensional foundation, in accord with the mentioned relation between the two

dimensionality and the stability of sytems. this will means that integrable physical theories should

possess two dimensional substructures.

note further that in view of the fundamentality of such a possible invariant equivalence between the

four dimensional and two dimensional eld theories, the essential features of this equivalence should

be embodied in the internal invariant structure of four dimensional eld theories. nevertheless the

dominance of local point of view in theoretical physics diverted the interest from such features of theories.

thus the main interest in the local approach in physics was to obtain the equations of motion and their

solutions, where the conditions or assumptions to obtain the equations of motion, and the topological or

global character of these conditions and equations were not of much interest.

therefore the simplest way to consider the invariant or topological character of boundary conditions

5

and assumptions on physical quantities under which one obtains equations of motion, is to consider

the invariant dimensions of physical quantities and their mathematical representants, i. e. the tensor

components of dierential forms, in accord with the above invariant determinations.

to investigate the aspired equivalence, recall that any reasonable eld theory is dened on a dierentiable

manifold of some dimension n. thus in the same sense that such a n-dimensional manifold implies

invariant or constant volume of dimension: ln, i. e. ln = (constant) and constant tensor components

of highest form of dimension ln, i. e. ln = (constant). the n-dimensional theory implies also an

invariant or constant volume of dimension: ln and an invariant lagrangian density of dimension ln, i.

e. again ln = (constant) and ln = (constant). note also that the product ln ln = l0 = (constant)
represents the well known action invariant of the n-dimensional theory. therefore it is possible to write an

n dimensional action function in two equivalent ways: by r

0  dx1, ...,dxn where the lagrangian
1,...,ndx1, ...,dxn where the lagrangian density is an n form which
n
is the hodge dual of the mentioned zero form in n diemsions. this is in accord with the well known

(nd)

density is a zero form, or by r

(nd)

hodge duality of zero forms and the highest forms on a manifold, from which the ln dimensional

tensor components are proportional to the ln dimensional lagrangian density of the related theory. in

other words any n-dimensional manifold and theory implies two equivalent characteristic invariants of

dimensions ln and ln and one invariant product of them. thus any of such characteristic invariants

implies the other one by denition. hence a theory which possess one of these characteristic invariants

can be considered as n-dimensional theory or equivalent to this, thus it possess the other invariant also.

furthermore a higher dimensional theory which implies lower dimensional characteristic invariants, as

well as higher dimensional invariants, should be considered as equivalent to the lower dimensional theory

which is dened by the related lower dimensional invariant lagrangian and volume: since the higher

dimensional invariants in this case can be constructed from the lower dimensionmal invariants, e. g.

by their product or by multiplication with dimensional constants, as in the case of einstein theory (see

below).

therefore a theory with an l2 invariant, or equivalentely an l2 invariant, can be considered as a two

dimensional theory which is formulated on a two dimensional manifold, or it is equivalent to such a two

dimensional theory, in view of the fact that both l2 dimensional voloume element and the dual l2

6

dimensional lagrangian density in a two dimensional theory should be invariants. in other words from

the invariant dimensional point of view, a higher dimensional theory with l2 and/or l2 invariants or

constants, should be equivalent to a two dimensional theory which possess these invariants by denition.

thus one can formulate a theory either with higher number of dependent variables on a higher dimensional

manifold with conditions which reduce the number of independent variables to the independent ones;

or one can formulate an equivalent theory with these independent variables on the lower dimensional

manifold.

another direct fact about the n dimensionality of a eld theory is that, if its solutions, i. e. the actual

eld variable of theory possess n independent components, then the theory should be reduciable to an

n-dimensional theory: since a eld theory with n independent variables, or with a eld variable with

only n independent components, can be dened as a n-dimensional theory on a n-dimensional manifold.

in other words a theory with only n independent solutions is actually a n dimensionsl theory. this

statement is in accord with the dynamical, invariant dimensional and topological statements on the n

dimensionality of a theory.

further note that the above introduced invariant dimensions of tensor- and coframe basis components of

forms which are independent of the diemnsion of the underlying manifold and therefore called invariant

dimensions, are also independent of the local transformations of cocordinates. the reason is that we con-

sider these invariant dimensions in accord with the measures of invariant integrals of forms: r
ca

a ; a  n
on the n-dimensional manifold. in other words the invariant dimension of the coframe components of

forms is considered to be equal to the dimension of the cartesian coframe basis of forms which is equal

to the invariant dimension of the invariant integral measure. this means that we consider the invariant

dimensions of tensor- and coframe components of equivalence classes of forms with respect to their local

transformations. it is in this sense that such a dimension is independent of local transformations and can

be considered as a globally or topologically invariant dimension. in other words the introduced invariant

dimensional consideration of components of forms, as the main ingredients of eld theories, are in accord

with their integrals, where 0 = r
ca

ij...adxi  dxj  ... dxa) = la  la.
we will show that in accord with these statements the classical four dimensional theories of elctrody-

a and dim(0) = l0 = dim(r a

namics and gravitation are indeed equivalent to two dimensional theories. note however that the phase

7

space structure of four dimnsional and two dimensional theories are dierent and hence their quantum

structures are also dierent. thus the two dimensional theories have the advantage to be renormalizable,

whereas the four dimensional theories have essential problems with constraints and renormalization [1].

to begin with the discussion of topological and dynamical equivalence of einstein theory of gravity with

a two dimensional theory: note that the four dimensional theory possess the einstein constant , which

is an invariant of dimension l2, that is introduced in the theory as the reciprocal l2 dimensional

constant. note further that it is this invariant which makes possible to formulate the einstein-hilbert

action invariant in four dimensions, i. e. on a four dimensional manifold with the l4 dimensional volume,

since the dimension of the lagrangian density of the theory: (gr) is only l2: in view of the l0
dimensionality of metric and its determinant, and the l2 dimensionality of curvature: (r 
recall that the construction of einstein-hilbert action bears already a distinguished two dimensional

1
r2 ).

structure within the four dimensional envelope of this theory, in view of the neccessity of l2 dimension-

ality of the ricci scalar r to dene this theory in four dimension: since as a scalar function or zero form

r should be considered of dimension l0 = (invariant) with respect to the exterior calculus. therefore in

view of the neccessary equivalence between these two dimensions of r, i. e. ((invariant) = l0 = l2),

there is a neccessary distinguished two dimensional structure in this theory, which is just dened by

the equivalence relation: ((invariant) = l0 = l2). thus the ricci tensor and ricci scalar can be
considered to be of dimension l2, also in view of their extraction from the l2 dimensional tensor

components of the curvature form.

note further that the theory possess the cosmological constant , which is an invariant of dimension

l2.

therefore in accord with the above discussion of characteristic invariants of a n-dimensional theory, the

four dimensional einstein theory of gravity should be equivalent to a two dimensional theory of gravity

which is formulated on a two dimensional manifols, in view of the fact that eintein theory possess with

 and , both l2- and l2-dimensional characteristic invariants of a two dimensional theory.

there is a further fundamental fact that implies the two dimensionality of einstein theory from algebraic

point of view: if the equations of motion of a theory with a non-abelian curvature, e. g. einstein theory

with riemann curvature, are obtained in local geodesic coordinate system, then this theory can be

8

considered to be equivalent to a two dimensional theory. the reason is that in local geodesic coordinate

system the non-abelian algebra and curvature transit to the abelian algebra and curvature, respectively.

on the other hand the abelian algebra is equivalent to the so(2) algebra which denes the symmetry

group on a two dimensional manifold. thus an abelian curvature is equivalent to rotation on the space

of connections or to a curvature on the related two dimensional base manifold; and a theory with such

a curvature should be equivalent to a two dimensional theory.

in retrospect, the fact that the einstein equations of motion are obtainable and hence they are obtained

in the local geodesic coordinates manifests the two dimensional nature of einstein theory, although there

is an equivalent method to obtain them.

the main dierential geometric reason that the einstein equations and so the whole dynamical content of

the four dimensional theory of gravity is of two dimensional nature is the existence of the second bianchi

identity: d r = 0 where r is the curvatur form r  2. thus, a trace of this identity results in the
gijr) = 0 ; i, j = 1, ..., 4.
contracted bianchi identity with respect to the einstein tensor: i(rij 
however in view of the fact that the symmetric einstein tensor can be considered as a scalar function

1
2

with respect to the exterior calculus, i. e.

gijr)  0: therefore in accord with
relation: (d r = 0  i(rij 
in accord with (d2 = 0  d0 = 0), the einstein
theory which contains such an identity is a two dimensional theory or equivalent to that: since only a

gijr) = 0), i. e.

in view of (rij 

1
2

1
2

two dimensional theory implies a relation: (d2 = 0  d0 = 0), in accord with the hodge duality:
2 = 0 (see also below). thus in a two dimensional theory on the two dimensional manifold the
r, s2d  0 and the curvature two form of theory r  2 can
action function of theory: s2d = r
2d
be considered as the dual zero- and two forms 2 = 0 of the two dimensional- theory and manifold.
recall that this fact is consistent with the fact that, on the one hand the ricci tensor is of dimension

l2, in view of its extraction from the tensor components of the l2 dimensional curvature form. on the

other hand it is of dimension l0, in view of its symmetric tensor character which is a zero form or scalar

function. thus the invariant l2 dimension, is not missed here in view of the trace operation over the

symmetric riemann tensor components of curvature two form; but it is just rewritten in its equivalent

dimension: l0, in accord with the invariant relation l2 = (constant) = l0 on the two dimensional

manifold.

9

nevertheless we prove further arguments in favour of this statement, which concern the conditions to

obtain the einstein equations, and its structurte: in other words we show in the following that even the

invariant dimensional character of conditions to obtain the eintein equations, shows a distinguished two

dimensional substructure within the assumed four dimensional structure, in accord with the discussed

invariant structures of the two and four dimensional theories:

recall that the main condition under which one obtains the einstein equations from the einstein-hilbert

action function, is the vanishing of the term which contains the variation of ricci tensor: rij, in the

variation of action function. such a condition is fullled, without lose of generality, by the assumption

of rij = 0, and hence it is equivalent to such an assumption.

in other words one can obtain form

the same action function the same einstein equations by the assumption of rij = 0. considering the

equivalence of variation with the exterior derivative, i. e. a = da [8], the condition to obtain the

einstein equations is given by: drij = 0. further note that the bianchi identity is equivalent to the

divergencelessness of ricci tensor: drij = 0. these results together mean that the ricci tensor which

obeys the einstein equation, is a harmonic or constant function, since both its derivatives are zero. thus

symmetric tensors are considered as functions with respect to the exterior calculus and the hodge-de

rham theory. hence in view of l2 dimensionality of such a ricci tensor and its constancy, i. e. in view

of l2  (constant) = l0, the underlying einstein theory possess by such a rij a constant of dimension
l2. therefore in accord with the dimensional analyses, the einstein theory is, in principle, a two

dimensional theory in agreement with the above analysis of the einstein constant and the cosmological

constant. in other words the two dimensionality of einstein theory or its equivalence to a two dimensional

theory is embodied in the stucture of this theory and is incorporated in several fundamental properties

and quantities of the theory.

recall also that the wave equation for gravitational eld which results from einstein equations by lin-

earization, i. e. 2gij = 0, is no more than the statement of harmonicity of metric eld. further recall

that such a metric which obeys the einstein equations, possess only two components or two degrees of

freedom, which are manifested by the two directions of polarizations of gravitational waves. accordingly

also the riemann- and ricci tensors which obeys the einstein equations in form of wave equation, should

possess only two independent components, since they are obtained from such a two component metric

10

[9]. moreover note that in view of the fact that the gravitational eld is represented, equivalently, by the

metric gij- or by the ricci eld rij, therefore the dynamical equations of gravitational eld can be repre-

sented also by the harmonicity of ricci eld: 2rij = 0, in accord with the above statements. therefore

also the actual or dynmical ricci eld which obeys the einstein equation, possess only two degrees of

freedom, which are represented by the two non-vanishing components of ricci tensor for gravitational

wave, that are given by the second time derivative of the two components of the metric [9]. nevertheless

one can prove the two componentness of the curvature- or ricci tensor also directly:

thus the ten symmetric components of ricci tensor should obey in addition to the four conditions to

full the bianchi identities: drij = 0, also the four variation conditions: rij = drij = 0 to obtain

the einstein equations, as it is discussed above. the reason that the number of last conditions is four,

is that the symmetric ricci tensor should be considered as a scalar function with respect to the exterior

dierentiation d. then in accord with this condition, the one form drij  d0 on the space-time four
manifold, should possess four vanishing components in order to full the variation conditions. therefore

only two components of ricci tensor which obeys the einstein equations and bianchi identities, remain

independent. hence, in accord with the statement on the independent number of dimensions of a theory

and the number of its independent solutions, the einstein theory of gravity is a two dimensional theory;

or at least, it is dynamically equivalent to such a two dimensional theory.

note with respect to the four last conditions that, as it was asserted above, the symmetric metric- and

ricci tensors are indeed zero forms, i. e. scalar functions, with respect to the exterior dierential calculus:

thus the above mentioned relation: drij = 0 which are equivalent to bianchi identity, can be considered

indeed as an identity, since in view of the absence of less than zero forms one has: d0  0 or drij  0.
such an accordance between the identity: drij  0 and the identity of divergencelessness of zero forms
or scalar functions, shows the consistency of our considerations, in accord with our consideration of

symmetric tensors of second rank as zero forms with respect to the exterior dierential calculus.

note further, the fact of harmonicity of gravitational eld and that it possess only two degrees of

freedom, can be considered as the main invariant statement of einstein equations. nevertheless such a

harmonicity and two dimensionality of gravitational eld can be described also by the two dimensional

gravitational curvature eld with its two dimensional action function: s(2d) = r

r(2d) over a

(2d)

11

suitable two dimensional submanifold of the original four manifold, which should belong to the second

homology class, in view of invariant theoretical requirements (see below). here r(2d) = d(2d) =

rmndxm  dxns, m, n = 1, 2 is the curvature form in two dimensions: since the equations of motion
which follow from this action by its vriation with respect to the gravitational connection form (2d)

are: d r = 0. this equation, together with the trivial clossedness of two forms on a two dimensional

manifold: d r(2d) = 0, result in the harmonicity of the two dimensional gravitational curvature eld
r(2d). thus such a two dimensional result is equivalent to the above discussed two dimensional result

for the four dimensional gravitational eld or the ricci tensor which obeys the einstein equations. thus

in view of the fact that the ricci tensor is given by the mixed trace of tangential- or algebraic components

of curvature two form: the invariant result of einstein equations, that their solutions possess only two

degrees of freedom, should be obtainable from the equations of motion which are obtained from the two

dimensional action function of einstein-hilbert type in two dimensions: s2d = r

(2d)

pg(2d)r(2d).

therefore the dynamical content of the four dimensional einstein theory of gravity is equivalent to the

dynamical content of the two dimensional theory of gravity, in accord with the above discussions.

the topological equivalence between the four dimensional einstein theory of gravity and the discussed

two dimensional theory is partly obvious from the above invariant dimensional considerations. to see

this directly, note that on the one hand, in view of the principle of least action, the vanishing of variation

of einstein-hilbert action function results in einstein equations of motion which are equivalent to the

harmonicity of ricci tensor: (s(eh) = 0  rij  harm0), in accord with the above discussions of
variation condition and bianchi identities. on the other hand, since the einstein-hilbert action function

is a zero form, therefore the vanishing of its variation or its gradient: s(eh) = ds(eh) = 0, s  0,
means that it is a harmonic zero form, i. e. (s(eh) = 0  s(eh)  harm0) [8]. therefore this theory
possess the relation: (s(eh)  harm0  rij  harm0), thus both s(eh) and rij are zero forms with
respect to the exterior calculus. further, in view of the fact that the ricci tensor is a mixed traced

tensor component of the four dimensional curvature two form: r(4d)  2: therefore its harmonicity
can be obtained from, and hence it can be considered to be equivalent to, the harmonicity of cuvature

two form: (rij  harm0 = r  harm2). therefore, in this theory, the harmonicity of the action zero
form s(eh) results in the harmonicity of the curvature two form r(4d) and vice versa, i. e.: (s(eh) 

12

harm0  r(4d)  harm2) or they are equivalent to each other: harm0
the subscript (g) means the gravitational eld on a gravitational manifold, where other interactions are

(g)(4d) = harm2

(g)(4d). here

neglected.

nevertheless such a relation is a typical relation of a two dimensional theory, i. e. on a two dimensional

manifold, since only in a two dimensional theory or on a two dimensional manifold one has the very

general invariant relation: harm0(2d) = harm2(2d) in accord with poincare duality and hodges

theorem.

therefore in view of the fact that the actual gravitational eld rij or gij of the four dimensional theory

of gravity which full the equations of motion, express the above invariant relation and possess only two

independent components, so the theory can be considered to be equivalent to a two dimensional theory

of gravity, in accord with the above discussions also from the invariant theoretical point of view.

now we investigate the dynamical, the invariant dimensional and the topological structures of yang-mills

theories by the example of four dimensional electrodynamics which is the only stablished yang-mills

theory [1]:

here rst recall that only two of six components of the antisymmetric eld strength tensor fij , which

obey the identities df (a) = dda  0, are independent components: since these identities can be written
in the component form by i = ijklj fkl = 0 which are 4-relations between the 6-components of f .

thus the actual number of indepndent components of the electromagnetic eld is (6  4 = 2) which
is in accord with the well known fact that the photon posses only two polarization directions or two

components. therfeore in view of our statement about the relation between the independent number of

eld variables of a eld theory and the actual dimension of the theory, the four dimensional theory of

elctrodynamics is equivalent to a two dimensional theory of electrodynamics.

further recall that, as it is mentioned above, from the two groups of maxwell equations: df (4d) = 0

and df (4d)  0 which follows from the action function: s(4d) = r
f (a(4d))  f (a(4d)), the
second group are identities, in view of f := da. thus the non-trivial part of maxwell equations, i. e. the

(4d)

rst group, with its two independent components does not need to be derived from a four dimensional

theory.

in other words the rst group of these equations for a two component eld strength form:

f (2d), can be derived in accord with the usual variation with respect to a(2d), from a two dimensional

13

theory with the action function: s(2d) = r

f (a(2d)) over a suitable two dimensional submanifold

(2d)

of the original four manifold which should belong to the second homology class in view of invariant

theoretical requirements (see below). note also that, as it is known from maxwell theory, even in this

four dimensional theory the actual electromagnetic eld f (a(4d)) or a(4d) possess only two degrees of

freedom or two independent actual components. thus one reduces the assumed four degrees of freedom

to these two by the application of gauge conditions. hence, in view of the fact that the two dimensional

eld f (a(2d)) also possess two degrees of freedom, by denition, therefore the two dimensional eld

f (a(2d)) with its two dimensional action invariant: s = r

f (a(2d)) can also represent the usual

(2d)

elctromagnetic eld with its two degrees of freedom. thus the non-trivial equations of motion in both

cases are the same.

from invariant dimensional point of view the harmonicity of f in view of maxwell equations, i. e. the

constancy of its tensorial components fij (4d), means that l2 = (constant) = l0, since dimension

of (fij ) is l2. this is but, as we discussed for the general case of n-dimensional theories, a two

dimensional relation, since only on a two dimensional manifold and in a two dimensional theory, the

l2-dimensional area and so the l2-dimensional lagrangian density are invariants or constants. thus

this is exactly what one has in the two dimensional theory of elecrodynamics with the action function

f (a(2d)) and the equations of motion: (df (2d) = 0 and df (2d)  0)  (f (2d)  harm2)

s = r

(2d)

.

hence the dynamical structure of electromagnetic eld and its true number of degrees of freedom are

well represented and described by the two dimensional theory of electrodynamics. therefore from the

dynamical and invariant dimensional point of views the four dimensional theory of electrodynamics can

be considered as equivalent to its two dimensional theory.

the toplogical equivalence between the four dimensional yang-mills theory and its two dimensional

theory is given beyond of the discussed invariant dimensional considerations, by the following aspects of

topological contents of these two theoris:

first note in this relation that invariants of a four dimensional manifold and hence of a four dimensional

theory, are given by the dimensions of cohomology elements or of harmonic forms, i.

e. by betti

numbers: b4(4d) = dimh 4(4d), b3(4d) = dimh 3(4d), b2(4d) = dimh 2(4d), b1(4d) = dimh 1(4d)

14

and b0(4d) = dimh 0(4d). nevertheless in view of poincare dualities on the this manifold, i.

e.:

h 4(4d) = h 0(4d) and h 3(4d) = h 1(4d) one has b4 = b0 and b3 = b1. therefore all invariants of a four
dimensional eld theory can be given by only dimensions of cohomologies up to the second order: h 2, h 1

and h 0, i. e. by: b2(4d), b1(4d) and b0(4d); which are also the cohomologies of two manifolds or of

two dimensional eld theories: b2(2d) = dimh 2(2d), b1(2d) = dimh 1(2d) and b0(2d) = dimh 0(2d).

thus in view of de rham theorem one can choose a homology basis where: b2(4d) = b2(2d), b1(4d) =

b1(2d) and b0(4d) = b0(2d) [3]: since also in the four dimensional case the betti numbers are given

by the integrals of related cohomology elements over the related homology elements, which are two and

one dimensional submanifolds of the four dimensional manifolds. in oder words the invariants of four

dimensional case are given by the invariants of the two dimensional substructures. this fact shows on the

one hand the fundamental relation between the four dimensional eld theories and the two dimensional

eld theories as intended in this work, in view of their common dierential structure basis up to the

second order and the resulting common invariants. on the other hand it underlines so the topological

background of the restriction of four dimensional eld theories to dierential forms up to the second

order.

note that in a four dimensional or two dimensional manifold without boundary b1 = b3 = 0 or b1 = 0.

thus the desired two dimensional eld theory can be formulated on the mentioned two dimensional sub-

manifold of the four manifold of the original four dimensional eld theory, i. e. on the mentioned second

homology manifold, which enables also the denition of betti number b2(2d) in the four dimensional

case. thus in the four and two dimensional cases without boundary, all invariants can be obtained from

these two: b2 and b0, in view of the above discussion.

therefore in view of the above discussed and also following consideration, one can stablish a closed

toplogical equivalence between the four- and two dimensional eld theories:

1.

in view of the mentioned restriction of mathematical-physical simple forms to zero- , one- and

two forms, the invariants of a four dimensional yang-mills theory result from the invariants of these

forms, i. e.

from the invariants of cohomology elements h 0(4d)  0(4d), h 1(4d)  1(4d) and

h 2(4d)  2(4d).
2. the invariants of h 0(4d), h 1(4d) and h 2(4d) are given by their betti numbers which are dened by:

15

b0 = dimh 0 = dimharm0 , b1 = h
c1

1(4d) and b2 = r
c2

2(4d), respectively; where the integrations of

cohomology elements 1(4d) and 2(4d) are considered over the related homology elements c1 and c2

which are, respectively, one- and two dimensional submanifolds of the four dimensional basis manifold.

thus in this sense in accord with de rham duality ba = ba = dimha, the classes of homological

submanifolds of the four manifold, up to the two dimensional ones, play the same essential role like the

cohomology elements up to the second order in the topology and invariant aspects of four dimensional

theories.

3. from (1.) and (2.) it follows that the invariants of a four dimensional yang-mills theory result from

the mentioned betti numbers as the dimensions of the harmonic- or cohomolgy- or homology elements

on the four dimensional maniofold.

4. the invariants of the above discussed related two dimensional theory, result from the invariants

of h 0(2d)  0(2d), h 1(2d)  1(2d) and h 2(2d)  2(2d) on the underlying two dimensional
manifold of the theory which is a submanifold of the four dimensional manifold. these are given, as

in (2.) by b0 = dimh 0 = dimharm0 , b1 = h
c1

1(2d) and b2 = r
c2

2(2d), respectively; where the

integrations are considered over the homology elements c1 and c2 which are, respectively, one- and two

dimensional submanifolds of the two dimensional basis manifold.

5. from (3.) and (4.), i. e.

from (1.) - (4.), it follows that the invariants of the four dimensional

yang-mills theory should be the same as the invariants of the related two dimensional theory.

6. the result in (5.) is in accord with the invariants of the four dimensional theory and of the related

two dimensional theory which are deduced from their equations of motion, in view of the above discussed

invariant dimensional considerations.

furthermore note that considering the action function as a zero form which is a harmonic form in view

of the principle of least action, if we identify as above the variation of action zero form, by its exterior

derivative [8]. then the resulting equations of motion in the four dimensional yang-mills theory, i. e.

the harmonicity of the f form: or f  harm2, manifests the following invariant relation: that the
harmonicity of the action zero form of the four dimensional yang-mills theory results in the harmonicity

of the four dimensional yang-mills two form and vice versa. in other words in the four dimensional

yang-mills theory these two harmonicities are isomorphic to each other:

16

harm0

y m (4d) = harm2

y m (4d)

(1)

nevertheless such a relation manifests a two dimensional theory with the above discussed action function

s(2d) = r

(2d)

f , since only in a two dimensional theory or on a two dimensional manifold one has the

very general invariant relation: harm0(2d) = harm2(2d), in accord with poincare duality and hodges

theorem. thus this result is in accord with the above result for the betti numbers of both theories, in

view of the fact that ba = dimh a = dimharma.

this proves again the topological equivalence of the four dimensional yang-mills theory and its two

dimensional counterpart.

therefore one can understand why one was forced to reduce the number of components of electromagnetic

eld in the four dimensional electrodynamics from four to the two independent ones by gauge conditions.

the reason is that the four dimensional abelian yang-mills theory describes, as we showed, from dy-

namical and invariant theoretical point of views, nothing else than the two dimensional dynamical and

invariant facts, in view of the only two independent dynamical degrees of freedom of elctromagnetic eld

and in accord with the two polarization of photons.

furthermore with respect to both type of two dimensional theories on compact manifolds note that,

since on a two dimensional manifold the general element of the second cohomology group 2  h 2 is
given by: 2 = d1  harm2 [3]. therefore gausss law: r
da = 0 does not apply here, since:
r
s 2
is proportional to the value of the applied constant eld strenght or the constant curvature: harm2 on

2 is an invariant of s2 which is a multiple of the area of s2, and

d1. thus the integral r
s 2

2 6= r

s 2

f = r
s 2

s 2

s2, since not only the area is an invariant of s2, but also the harm2.

thus we proved by various consistent methodes the equivalence of both types of four- and the related two

dimensional theories with respect to their dynamical, invariant dimensional and topological contents.

in conclusion let us recall that the mentioned topological invariants, such as betti numbers b2 or b1,

are related with the main quantum numbers in bohr-sommerfeld qunatization and in ux quantization,

which are integrals of closed one or two forms over two or one dimensional manifolds, respectively. thus

there is no known main quantum number which is related with higher betti numbers than the second

one.

17

footnotes and references

references

[1] for example in view of the non-convergence of renormalized perturbation series in qed (see f.

dyson, phys. rev. 85, (1952) 631).

[2] we mean by non-trivial forms on a n-dimensional manifold, those beyond the n-dimensional

volume forms: dx1  dx2, ...,dxn which is dual to the zero form 0. thus we mean by simple
forms, those which are not given by the exterior product of other forms. in this sense the non-

trivial and simple forms are connection one forms 1 and curvature two forms 2. the chern-

simons form: 1  2 and the yang-mills form: 2  2 are examples of non-simple or product
forms.

[3] for topological notations see among others: m. nakahara: geometry, topology and physics

(adam hilger, 1990); c. nash: dierential topology and quantum field theory, (academic

press 1991).

note that on a two dimensional manifold the general element of the second cohomology group

2  h 2 is given in accord with the hodge decomposition: a = da1  da+1  harma, by:
2 = d1  harm2, since there is no three form 3 on a two dimensional manifold. in this sense
d1. note further that
the gausss law: r
s 2

d1 = 0 does not apply here, since: r
s 2

2 = r

s 2

2 6= r

s 2

in this paper we consider: (f, r)  2.

[4] on a two dimensional manifold the highest form is the two form. note further that we use the con-

cept of degrees of freedom of a eld, equivalent to the independent dynamical or actual components

of the eld. thus the assumed number of coordinates or eld components that full dynamical

equations (of motion) is reduced always to such independent components or degrees of freedom

which full such equations.

[5] since the euler characteristic and thereby the index of dierential operator on s2 and s4 manifolds

are equal. in other words, since these indicies can be given by the euler characteristics on compact

18

manuifolds, which is equal to two for the even dimensional spheres as the importent class of

compact manifolds; whereas it is zero for the spheres of odd dimensions. therefore not the number

of dimensions of compact manifolds, but only its odd- or evenness plays a role for this index. note

that we consider, as usual, the s4 as the mathematical model of the underlying four dimensional

manifold of four dimensional eld theories, specially with respect to the compactness requirement

of the underlying manifold of quantum eld theories.

[6] as it will be claried in the text: in geometric units a scalar function is dimensionless l0, the

components of connection one forms, i. e. potentials and momentums, are of dimension l1 and

the components of two forms, i. e. curvatures or eld strengths or forces, are of dimension l2.

note that in geometric units the dimension of time is the same as length, i. e. l.

[7] r. abraham, j. e. marsden: foundattions of mechanics, (benjamin/cummings publishing

co., inc. 1978); v. i. arnold: mathematical methodes in classical mechanics, (graduate text in

mathematics, springer-verlag 1978).

note also the so called restricted three body problem, which is a two body problem with a small

third body on the same plane as a small perturbation.

[8] this is the only possibility of a non-trivial denition of variation for functions, since a function

is, as a zero form, divergenceless by denition: d0  0, and rij  0. note that also in the
phase space, the variation of variable functions are considered to be equal to their dierentials, i.

e. pi = dpi and qi = dqi

[9] h. stephani: general relativity, (cambridge university press 1982).

19

