9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

1

 
 

1
v
2
0
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

membrane horizons: the black holes new clothes

maulik kirit parikh

a dissertation

presented to the faculty

of princeton university

in candidacy for the degree

of doctor of philosophy

recommended for acceptance

by the department of

physics

october 1998

abstract

this thesis addresses some classical and semi-classical aspects of black holes,

using an eective membrane representation of the event horizon. this membrane

paradigm is the remarkable view that, to an external observer, a black hole appears

to behave exactly like a dynamical uid membrane, obeying such pre-relativistic

equations as ohms law and the navier-stokes equation. it has traditionally been

derived by manipulating the equations of motion. here, however, the equations are

derived from an underlying action formulation which has the advantage of clarifying

the paradigm and simplifying the derivations, in addition to providing a bridge to

thermodynamics and quantum mechanics. within this framework, previous mem-

brane results are derived and extended to dyonic black hole solutions. it is explained

how an action can produce dissipative equations. the classical portion of the study

ends with a demonstration of the validity of a minimum entropy production principle

for black holes.

turning next to semi-classical theory, it is shown that familiar thermodynamic

properties of black holes also emerge from the membrane action, via a euclidean path

integral. in particular, the membrane action can account for the holes bekenstein-

hawking entropy, including the numerical factor. two short and direct derivations

of hawking radiation as an instanton process are then presented. the rst is a

tunneling calculation based on particles in a dynamical geometry, closely analogous

to schwinger pair production in an electric eld. the second derivation makes use of

the membrane representation of the horizon. in either approach, the imaginary part

of the action for the classically forbidden process is related to the boltzmann factor

for emission at the hawking temperature. but because these derivations respect

ii

conservation laws, the exact result contains a qualitatively signicant correction to

hawkings thermal spectrum.

finally, by extending the charged vaidya metric to cover all of spacetime, a pen-

rose diagram for the formation and evaporation of a charged black hole is obtained.

it is found that the spacetime following the evaporation of a black hole is predictable

from initial conditions, provided that the dynamics of the time-like singularity can

be calculated.

iii

coee ... is the fuel of science

 john archibald wheeler, overheard at tea

contents

abstract

acknowledgments

notation

1 black holes from the outside

1.1 causality and the horizon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.2 background and overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 classical theory: the membrane paradigm

2.1

introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

ii

vii

viii

1

1

3

9

9

2.2 horizon preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

2.3 action formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

2.3.1 the electromagnetic membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

2.3.2 the gravitational membrane

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

2.3.3 the axidilaton membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

2.4 dissipation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

2.5 hamiltonian formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

2.6 appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

v

3 semi-classical theory: thermodynamics

36

3.1

introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36

3.2 string theory or field theory? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

3.3 entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39

3.4 pictures of hawking radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

3.5 tunneling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44

3.5.1 tunneling from a charged black hole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48

3.6 emissions from the membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50

3.6.1 emission from a charged membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55

4 the causal structure of evaporating black holes

58

4.1

introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58

4.2 extending the charged vaidya metric

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59

4.3 patches of spacetime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63

references

68

vi

acknowledgments

first, i owe immeasurable thanks to frank wilczek, my supervisor, who guided

this thesis from beginning to end. he not only treated me to a perfect blend of ad-

vice, encouragement, ideas, and independence, he also taught me a style of physics.

in addition, i have beneted from interactions with the physics community.

other physicists on whom i have imposed in various ways include david gross,

igor klebanov, p. j. e. peebles, alexandre polyakov, joseph taylor, kip thorne,

and herman verlinde.

the foundations of much of my understanding lay in structured study groups and

impromptu discussions. for these i would like to thank my physics friends, fourth-

oor xtures john brodie, seth bruder, ekaterina chashechkina, erick guerra,

marco moriconi, christopher wiggins, and h. elcin yildirim.

more generally, i must thank my circle of friends and relatives, a crucial support-

ing cast. it was by their continual presence, by their admonitions-blandishments-

cajolery, that this thesis did not take considerably longer. in particular, my deepest

gratitude goes to otute akiti, katerina papadaki, nina and indra shah, wai-hong

tham, and yingrui yang.

and, nally, i owe thanks to my sister, anokhi, and to jyoti and kirit, my

parents  to whom this thesis is dedicated  for their love and nonstop support.

to all the above, and to any i may have missed, thank you.

vii

notation

in this work, we use lowercase indices for four-dimensional tensors and uppercase

indices for the two-dimensional tensors that occupy space-like sections of the horizon.

repeated indices are implicitly summed over.

the spacetime metric tensor is denoted by gab, the induced metric on the time-

like stretched horizon is hab, the metric on a space-like slice of spacetime is 3gab, and

the metric on a space-like section of the horizon is written ab. correspondingly, we

denote the 4-covariant derivative by a, the 3-covariant derivative on the stretched
horizon by |a, and the 2-covariant derivative on a space-like slicing by ka.

we take the spacetime metric to have signature ( + ++). our sign conven-
tions are those of misner, thorne, and wheeler, with the exception of the extrinsic

curvature which we dene to have a positive trace for a convex surface.

throughout, we use geometrized units in which newtons constant, g, and the

speed of light, c, are set to one. we shall also usually set plancks constant, h, and

boltzmanns constant, kb, to one. the appropriate factors of these constants may

always be restored through dimensional analysis.

viii

chapter 1

black holes from the outside

1.1 causality and the horizon

a black hole is a region of spacetime from which, crudely speaking, there is no

escape. the boundary of a black hole is called an event horizon because an outside

observer is unable to observe events on the other side of it; light rays from inside

cannot propagate out, hence black hole.

from these basic denitions, several properties of the horizon emerge as conse-

quences. we emphasize four that will be especially important to this study:

 the horizon is a causal boundary. since no signal can get out, the
inside of a black hole cannot inuence the outside; we say that the black

holes interior is causally disconnected from the outside.

 the spacetime containing a solitary black hole is inherently time-
reversal asymmetric. the time reverse of infall  escape  does not

occur, so a direction for the arrow of time is implicit.

 because nothing can travel faster than light, the event horizon must
be a null hypersurface, a surface along which light travels.

1

1.1. causality and the horizon

2

 the denitions are really global statements, requiring knowledge of
extended regions of spacetime. for, to know whether one is inside a

black hole, one has to to know whether one can eventually escape, and

that requires knowing ones future. thus it is impossible to divine on

the basis of local  here and now  measurements whether one is already

inside a black hole. indeed, the event horizon is an unmarked border,

with no local signiers of its presence such as a divergent curvature

scalar.

in fact, in nonstationary situations, an event horizon may be

present even in at space.

now, since the inside of a black hole is causally disconnected from the outside,

classical physics for an outside observer should be independent of the black holes

interior. one can therefore ask what an observer who always stays outside the

horizon sees. as a number of authors have discovered, the answer is remarkable. the

same horizon which we have just noted is invisible to an infalling observer, appears,

to an outside observer, transformed into a dynamical membrane with tangible, local

physical properties such as resistivity and viscosity. moreover, the equations of

motion governing the membrane are nonrelativistic  ohms law and the navier-

stokes equation  even though they describe what is a quintessentially relativistic

entity. furthermore, these equations are dissipative, even though they may be

derived in an action formulation. and the analogies with membranes go quite far;

the horizon shares not only the classical properties of real membranes, but also

their semi-classical ones. in particular, a membrane description of the horizon is

able to account for such thermodynamic notions as entropy and the black holes

tendency to radiate as if it possessed a temperature. the main dierence between

1.2. background and overview

3

horizon membranes and real membranes such as soap bubbles is that the black hole

membrane is acausal, reacting to events before they occur. and, of course, it is

not really there; as we have already noted, the observer who falls through the event

horizon sees nothing, nothing at all.

that elaborate illusion is the main subject of this dissertation.

1.2 background and overview

the earliest relativistic studies of spherically symmetric gravitational sources began

with the schwarzschild line element,

ds2 = (cid:18)1 

2m

r (cid:19) dt2 +

dr2
1  2m

r

+ r2(cid:16)d2 + sin2 d2(cid:17) ,

(1.1)

from which it seemed that there was a singularity at the schwarzschild radius,

r = 2m. it was not realized initially that this singularity was merely a coordinate

singularity, an artifact of using a pathological system of coordinates.

instead, it

was thought that the region r  2m was somehow unphysical. einstein himself
contributed to this faulty view by showing that no stationary conguration of matter

could exist inside the schwarzschild radius, in the process repeating his cosmological

blunder of overlooking nonstationary congurations (for a history, see [1]).

but later, with the work of oppenheimer and snyder, it became clear that

a collapsing star could actually pass through the schwarzschild radius and would

eectively disappear from the outside, becoming a black hole. thus, wheeler:

...

it becomes dimmer millisecond by millisecond, and in less than a

second is too dark to see. what was once the core of a star is no longer

visible. the core like the cheshire cat fades from view. one leaves

1.2. background and overview

4

behind only its grin, the other, only its gravitational attraction ...

the idea that one could fall through the schwarzschild radius opened up the study

of the inside of black holes and of its relationship to the outside, a chain of work

which culminated in the modern view of the event horizon as a causal boundary

with the properties described above. finally, in the work of damour, thorne, and

others, the dynamical nature of the boundary, and its membrane interpretation, was

claried.

our own study begins in chapter 2 by considering these classical aspects of

the event horizon. actually, because null surfaces have a number of degenerate

properties, mathematical descriptions of the event horizon are a little inconvenient.

however, if, instead of the light-like event horizon, we consider a time-like surface

innitesimally outside it, then we can gain mathematical ease while still retaining

the event horizons other properties. this time-like surrogate, because it encloses the

event horizon, is known as the stretched horizon, and it is this surface that we will be

working with mostly. after collecting some mathematical facts about the stretched

horizon, we demonstrate that its equations of motion can be derived from an action

principle [2], and that they can be considered to describe a dynamical membrane.

we provide concrete examples for the membrane interacting with electromagnetic,

gravitational, and axidilaton elds, including derivations of ohms law, the joule

heating law, and the navier-stokes equation as they apply to black holes. this is

followed by a discussion of the origin of dissipation, and its relation to the breaking

of time-reversal symmetry. we conclude the chapter by providing a hamiltonian

formulation, and showing that, for quasi-stationary black holes, the equations of

motion follow also from a minimum heat production principle, as advocated by

1.2. background and overview

5

prigogine.

when the elds the black hole interacts with are not classical but quantum elds,

new phenomena emerge. because the part of the wave function that lies within the

black hole is inaccessible to the outside observer, we expect the black hole to have an

entropy, associated with ignorance of those degrees of freedom. in addition, particles

just inside the black hole can now escape, since the quantum uncertainty principle

blurs the exact position of the horizon or, equivalently, of the particles. thus black

holes radiate [3]. moreover, the spectrum of the outgoing radiation is, at least to

rst approximation, the planckian spectrum of a thermal black-body. hence one

can associate a temperature to a black hole.

historically, the concept of temperature and entropy for black holes was fore-

shadowed by several results in the classical theory [4, 5, 6, 7], in which something

proportional to the surface gravity played the role of temperature, and some fac-

tor times the horizons surface area mimicked the entropy. as we shall see the

classical membrane equations similarly hint at thermodynamics. however, to go be-

yond analogies to actually identify the corresponding quantities requires quantum

mechanics, and in particular a mechanism by which black holes can radiate.

of course, escape from a black hole contradicts its very denition.

it is easy

to see that, when pushed to its logical limit, the whole concept of a black hole

becomes unreliable, an essentially classical description. thus, although quantum

eld theory around black holes does resolve some thermodynamic paradoxes, the

tension between quantum mechanics and general relativity remains. in particular, a

new information puzzle arises if the prediction of thermal radiation is taken literally.

specically, the question arises whether the initial state that formed the black hole

can be reconstructed from the outgoing radiation. the main problem here is this:

1.2. background and overview

6

when matter falls into a black hole, the external conguration is determined by only

a few quantities  this is the content of the no-hair theorem [8]. at this point,

one could consider the information to reside inside the black hole. however, once

the black hole starts to radiate, the inside disappears and one is essentially left with

the outgoing radiation. but now purely thermal radiation is uncorrelated, so the

outgoing radiation does not carry sucient information to describe what made up

the black hole.

if this is true, if the radiation is purely thermal as has been claimed [9], then

physics loses its predictive power since the nal state is not uniquely determined by

the initial state, with the many dierent initial congurations of matter that could

form a black hole all ending up as the same bath of thermal radiation. at stake in

the information puzzle is the very idea that the past and the future are uniquely

connected.

to decisively settle such questions, one really needs a quantum theory of gravity,

one in which the quantum states that are counted by the black holes entropy can

be precisely enumerated, and any nonthermal aspects of black hole evaporation

can be probed through scattering calculations. however, string theory, currently

our only candidate theory of quantum gravity, is at present limited in its ability

to answer some important questions about spacetime. hence, in chapter 3, we

take an alternative approach: we truncate einstein gravity at a semi-classical level,

with the understanding that the innite higher order corrections will actually be

rendered nite by a suitable theory of quantum gravity. within this approximation,

we nd continued success for the membrane action. by means of a euclidean path

integral, we nd that the membrane action is also responsible for the black holes

bekenstein-hawking entropy, including the important numerical factor.

1.2. background and overview

7

next, we turn to black hole radiance. in previous derivations of hawking ra-

diation, the origin of the radiation has been somewhat obscure. here we provide

two short and physically appealing semi-classical derivations of hawking radiation

[10]. first, we show that the heuristic notion of black hole radiance as pair pro-

duction through tunneling does indeed have quantitative support. the imaginary

part of the action for tunneling across the horizon is related to the emission rate,

just as in schwinger pair creation in an electric eld. alternatively, an outside ob-

server can consider the outgoing ux as consisting of spontaneous emissions from the

membrane, rather than as particles that have tunneled across the horizon. since we

already have an action for the membrane, we can compute the rate for the membrane

to shrink spontaneously; the emission rate agrees with the tunneling calculation.

we nd that the probability for emission is approximately consistent with black-

body emission. however, unlike the original derivations of black hole radiance, our

calculations respect energy conservation. indeed, energy conservation is a funda-

mental requirement in tunneling, one that drives the dynamics, and without which

our calculations do not even go through. the constraint that energy be conserved

modies the emission rate so that it is not exactly planckian; there is a nonthermal

correction to the spectrum. the correction to the hawking formula is small when

the outgoing particle carries away only a small fraction of the black holes mass.

however, it is qualitatively signicant because nonthermality automatically implies

the existence of correlations in the outgoing radiation, which means that at least

some information must be returned.

energy conservation has another, long-term, consequence: the black hole can

actually disappear entirely if all its mass and charge are radiated away. the ques-

tion of the causal structure of a spacetime containing an evaporating black hole is

1.2. background and overview

8

of some interest, not least because it is closely related to the possibility of informa-

tion retrieval. in chapter 4, we examine the causal structure of such a spacetime.

approximating the radiating black hole geometry by the vaidya solution that de-

scribes the spacetime outside a radiating star, we construct a spacetime picture of

the formation and subsequent evaporation of a charged black hole [11] in a special

case. we nd that the resultant penrose diagram is predictable in the sense that

post-evaporation conditions are causally dependent on initial conditions, a result

consistent with information conservation.

chapter 2

classical theory: the membrane

paradigm

2.1 introduction

the event horizon of a black hole is a peculiar object:

it is a mathematically de-

ned, locally undetectable boundary, a surface-of-no-return inside which light cones

tip over and time becomes spatial (for a review see, e.g., [12]). otherwise natural

descriptions of physics often have trouble accommodating the horizon; as the most

primitive example, the familiar schwarzschild metric has a coordinate singularity

there. theories of elds that extend to the horizon face the additional challenge of

having to dene boundary conditions on a surface that is innitely red-shifted, has

a singular jacobian, and possesses a normal vector which is also tangential. these

considerations might induce one to believe that black hole horizons are fundamen-

tally dierent from other physical entities.

on the other hand, further work has established a great variety of analogies

between the horizon and more familiar, pre-relativistic bodies. in addition to the

9

2.1.

introduction

10

famous four laws of black hole thermodynamics [4, 5, 13, 6], which are global state-

ments, there is also a precise local mechanical and electrodynamic correspondence.

in eect, it has been shown [14, 15, 16, 17, 18] that an observer who remains outside

a black hole perceives the horizon to behave according to equations that describe

a uid bubble with electrical conductivity as well as shear and bulk viscosities.

moreover, it is possible to dene a set of local surface densities, such as charge or

energy-momentum, which inhabit the bubble surface and which obey conservation

laws. quite remarkably, a general-relativistically exact calculation then leads, for

arbitrary nonequilibrium black holes, to equations for the horizon which can be

precisely identied with ohms law, the joule heating law, and the navier-stokes

equation.

these relations were originally derived for the mathematical, or true, event hori-

zon. for astrophysical applications it became more convenient to consider instead a

stretched horizon, a (2+1)-dimensional time-like surface located slightly outside

the true horizon. because it has a nonsingular induced metric, the stretched horizon

provides a more tractable boundary on which to anchor external elds; outside a

complicated boundary layer, the equations governing the stretched horizon are to

an excellent approximation [19, 20] the same as those for the true horizon. this

view of a black hole as a dynamical time-like surface, or membrane, has been called

the membrane paradigm [21].

most of the mentioned results have been derived through general-relativistic

calculations based on various intuitive physical arguments.

in this chapter, we

show that the gravitational and electromagnetic descriptions of the membrane can

be derived systematically, directly, and more simply from the einstein-hilbert or

maxwell actions. aside from the appeal inherent in a least action principle, an

2.2. horizon preliminaries

11

action formulation is a unifying framework which is easily generalizable and has the

advantage of providing a bridge to thermodynamics and quantum mechanics (see

[22] for related work).

the key idea in what follows is that, since (classically) nothing can emerge from

a black hole, an observer who remains outside a black hole cannot be aected by

the dynamics inside the hole. hence the equations of motion ought to follow from

varying an action restricted to the external universe. however, the boundary term

in the derivation of the euler-lagrange equations does not in general vanish on the

stretched horizon as it does at the boundary of spacetime. in order to obtain the

correct equations of motion, we must add to the external action a surface term that

cancels this residual boundary term. the membrane picture emerges in interpreting

the added surface term as electromagnetic and gravitational sources residing on the

stretched horizon.

2.2 horizon preliminaries

in this section, we x our conventions, rst in words, then in equations. through

every point on the true horizon there exists a unique null generator la which we

may parameterize by some regular time coordinate whose normalization we x to

equal that of time-at-innity. next, we choose a time-like surface just outside the

true horizon. this is the stretched horizon, h, whose location we parameterize by
  1 so that   0 is the limit in which the stretched horizon coincides with the
true horizon. we will always take this limit at the end of any computation. since

many of the useful intermediate quantities will diverge as inverse powers of , we

renormalize them by the appropriate power of . in that sense,  plays the role of

2.2. horizon preliminaries

12

a regulator.

for our purposes, the principal reason for preferring the stretched horizon over

the true horizon is that the metric on a time-like  rather than null  surface is

nondegenerate, permitting one to write down a conventional action. generically (in

the absence of horizon caustics), a one-to-one correspondence between points on the

true and stretched horizons is always possible via, for example, ingoing null rays

that pierce both surfaces (see [20] for details).

we can take the stretched horizon to be the world-tube of a family of time-like

observers who hover just outside the true horizon. these nearly light-like du-

cial observers are pathological in that they suer an enormous proper acceleration

and measure quantities that diverge as   0. however, although we take the
mathematical limit in which the true and stretched horizons conate, for physical

purposes the proper distance of the stretched horizon from the true horizon need

only be smaller than the length scale involved in a given measurement.

in that

respect, the stretched horizon, although a surrogate for the true horizon, is actu-

ally more fundamental than the true horizon, since measurements at the stretched

horizon constitute real measurements that an external observer could make and re-

port, whereas accessing any quantity measured at the true horizon would entail the

observers inability to report back his or her results.

we take our ducial observers to have world lines u a, parameterized by their

proper time,  . the stretched horizon also possesses a space-like unit normal na

which for consistency we shall always take to be outward-pointing. moreover, we

choose the normal vector congruence on the stretched horizon to emanate outwards

along geodesics. we dene  by requiring that u a  la and na  la; hence
u a and na are equal in the true horizon limit. this is nothing more than the

2.2. horizon preliminaries

13

statement that the null generator la is both normal and tangential to the true

horizon, which is the dening property of null surfaces. ultimately, though, it will

be this property that will be responsible for the dissipative behavior of the horizons.

the 3-metric, hab, on h can be written as a 4-dimensional tensor in terms of the
spacetime metric and the normal vector, so that ha
b projects from the spacetime

tangent space to the 3-tangent space. similarly, we can dene the 2-metric, ab,
of the space-like section of h to which u a is normal, in terms of the stretched
horizon 3-metric and u a, thus making a 2+1+1 split of spacetime. we denote the

4-covariant derivative by a, the 3-covariant derivative by |a, and the 2-covariant
derivative by ka. for a vector in the stretched horizon, the covariant derivatives are
bcna is the stretched horizons
related by hc

dcwa = wa

dwcna where k a

|d  k c

b  hc

extrinsic curvature, or second fundamental form. in summary,

l2 = 0

lim


u a = la

lim


na = la

d!a

u a =   d
, u 2 = 1 ,
n2 = +1 , ac = naanc = 0 ,
b  nanb , a
k a
b  hc

b = ha

bcna , kab = kba , kabnb = 0

ha
b = ga

b + u aub = ga

b  nanb + u aub

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

(2.4)

(2.5)

(2.6)

wch  hc

dcwa = wa

|d  k c

dwcna  cwc = wc

|c + wcac = wc

|c .

the last expression relates the covariant divergence associated with gab to the co-

variant divergence associated with hab.

for example, the reissner-nordstrom solution has

ds2 =  1 

2m
r

+

q2

r2 ! dt2 + 1 

2m
r

+

q2

r2 !1

dr2 + r2d2 ,

(2.7)

2.3. action formulation

so that a stretched horizon at constant r would have

 =  1 

2m
r

+

q2

r2 !1/2

,

ua =  (dt)a ,

na = +1 (dr)a .

and

14

(2.8)

(2.9)

(2.10)

2.3 action formulation

to nd the complete equations of motion by extremizing an action, it is not sucient

to set the bulk variation of the action to zero: one also needs to use the boundary

conditions. here we take our dirichlet boundary conditions to be  = 0 at the

boundary of spacetime, where  stands for any eld.

now since the elds inside a black hole cannot have any classical relevance for

an external observer, the physics must follow from varying the part of the action

restricted to the spacetime outside the black hole. however, this external action

is not stationary on its own, because boundary conditions are xed only at the

singularity and at innity, but not at the stretched horizon. consequently, we

rewrite the total action as

sworld = (sout + ssurf) + (sin  ssurf) ,

(2.11)

where now sout + ssurf  0, which implies also that sin  ssurf = 0. the total
action has been broken down into two parts, both of which are stationary on their

own, and which do not require any new boundary conditions.

2.3. action formulation

15

the surface term, ssurf, corresponds to sources, such as surface electric charges

and currents for the maxwell action, or surface stress tensors for the einstein-hilbert

action. the sources are ctitious: an observer who falls through the stretched hori-

zon will not nd any surface sources and, in fact, will not nd any stretched horizon.

furthermore, the eld congurations inside the black hole will be measured by this

observer to be entirely dierent from those posited by the membrane paradigm.

on the other hand, for an external ducial observer the source terms are a very

useful artice; their presence is consistent with all external elds. this situation

is directly analogous to the method of image charges in electrostatics, in which a

ctitious charge distribution is added to the system to implement, say, conducting

boundary conditions. by virtue of the uniqueness of solutions to poissons equation

with conducting boundary conditions, the electric potential on one  and only one

 side of the boundary is guaranteed to be the correct potential. an observer who

remains on that side of the boundary has no way of telling through the elds alone

whether they arise through the ctitious image charges or through actual surface

charges. the illusion is exposed only to the observer who crosses the boundary to

nd that not only are there no charges, but the potential on the other side of the

boundary is quite dierent from what it would have been had the image charges

been real.

in the rest of this section, we shall implement eq. (2.11) concretely in important

special cases.

2.3. action formulation

16

2.3.1 the electromagnetic membrane

the external maxwell action is

sout[aa] = z d4xg (cid:18)

1

16

f 2 + j  a(cid:19) ,

(2.12)

where f is the electromagnetic eld strength. under variation, we obtain the inho-

mogeneous maxwell equations

bf ab = 4j a ,

as well as the boundary term

1

4 z d3xh f abnaab ,

(2.13)

(2.14)

where h is the determinant of the induced metric, and na is the outward-pointing

space-like unit normal to the stretched horizon. we need to cancel this term. adding

the surface term

we see that we must have

ssurf[aa] = +z d3xh js  a ,

ja
s = +

1
4

f abnb .

(2.15)

(2.16)

the surface 4-current, ja

s , has a simple physical interpretation. we see that its

time-component is a surface charge, , that terminates the normal component of

the electric eld just outside the membrane, while the spatial components, ~js, form

a surface current that terminates the tangential component of the external magnetic

eld:

e = uaf abnb = 4
bb

a f abnb = 4(cid:16)~js  n(cid:17)a

~ba

k = a

.

(2.17)

(2.18)

2.3. action formulation

17

it is characteristic of the membrane paradigm that  and ~js are local densities, so

that the total charge on the black hole is the surface integral of  over the membrane,

taken at some constant universal time. this is in contrast to the total charge of a

reissner-nordstrom black hole, which is a global characteristic that can be dened

by an integral at spatial innity.

from maxwells equations and eq. (2.16), we obtain a continuity equation for

the membrane 4-current which, for a stationary hole, takes the form




+ ~2  ~js = j n ,

(2.19)

is the two-dimensional divergence of the membrane surface

where ~2~js  (cid:16)a
s(cid:17)ka
a ja
current, and j n = j ana is the amount of charge that falls into the hole per
unit area per unit proper time,  . physically, this equation expresses local charge

conservation in that any charge that falls into the black hole can be regarded as

remaining on the membrane: the membrane is impermeable to charge.

the equations we have so far are sucient to determine the elds outside the

horizon, given initial conditions outside the horizon. a plausible requirement for

initial conditions at the horizon is that the elds measured by freely falling observers

(ffos) at the stretched horizon be nite. there being no curvature singularity at

the horizon, inertial observers who fall through the horizon should detect nothing out

of the ordinary. in contrast, the ducial observers (fidos) who make measurements

at the membrane are innitely accelerated. their measurements, subject to innite

lorentz boosts, are singular. for the electromagnetic elds we have, with  the

lorentz boost and using orthonormal coordinates,

efido



bfido





 (cid:16)effo
 (cid:16)bffo

  bffo
  effo





(cid:17) , bfido
(cid:17) ,

efido





 (cid:16)bffo
 (cid:16)effo

(cid:17) ,
  effo
(cid:17) ,
  bffo



(2.20)

(2.21)

2.3. action formulation

or, more compactly,

~efido

k

= n  ~bfido

k

.

18

(2.22)

that is, the regularity condition states that all radiation in the normal direction is

ingoing; a black hole acts as a perfect absorber. combining the regularity condition

with eq. (2.18) and dropping the fido label, we arrive at

~ek = 4~js .

(2.23)

that is, black holes obey ohms law with a surface resistivity of  = 4  377 .
furthermore, the poynting ux is

~s =

1

4 (cid:16) ~e  ~b(cid:17) = j2

s  n .

(2.24)

we can integrate this over the black hole horizon at some xed time. however, for a

generic stretched horizon, we cannot time-slice using ducial time as dierent ducial

observers have clocks that do not necessarily remain synchronized. consequently

we must use some other time for slicing purposes, such as the time at innity, and

then include in the integrand a (potentially position-dependent) factor to convert

the locally measured energy ux to one at innity. with a clever choice of the

stretched horizon, however, it is possible to arrange that all ducial observers have

synchronized clocks.

in this case, two powers of , which is now the lapse, are

included in the integrand. then, for some given universal time, t, the power radiated

into the black hole, which is also the rate of increase of the black holes irreducible

mass, is given by

dmirr

dt

= z 2 ~s  d ~a = +z 2j2

s  da .

(2.25)

that is, black holes obey the joule heating law, the same law that also describes

the dissipation of an ordinary ohmic resistor.

2.3. action formulation

19

2.3.2 the gravitational membrane

we turn now to gravity. the external einstein-hilbert action is

sout[gab] =

1

16 z d4xg r +

1

8 i d3xh k + smatter ,

(2.26)

where r is the ricci scalar, and k is the trace of the extrinsic curvature, and where

for convenience we have chosen the eld variable to be the inverse metric gab. the

surface integral of k is only over the outer boundary of spacetime, and not over the

stretched horizon. it is required in order to obtain the einstein equations because

the ricci scalar contains second order derivatives of gab. when this action is varied,

the bulk terms give the einstein equations

rab 

1
2

gabr = 8tab .

(2.27)

we are interested, however, in the interior boundary term. this comes from the

variation of the ricci tensor. we note that

gabrab = ahb (gab)  gcda (gcd)i ,

where gab = gacgbdgcd. gauss theorem now gives

z d4xg (cid:16)gabrab(cid:17) = z d3xh nahbc [c (gab)  a (gbc)] ,

(2.28)

(2.29)

where the minus sign arises from choosing na to be outward-pointing. applying the

leibniz rule, we can rewrite this as

z d4xg (cid:16)gabrab(cid:17) = z d3x

h hbc [a (nagbc)  gbca (na)
 c (nagab) + gabc (na)] .

(2.30)

now, in the limit that the stretched horizon approaches the null horizon, the

rst and third terms on the right-hand side vanish:

z d3x

h hbc [a (nagbc)  c (nagab)] = 0 .

(2.31)

2.3. action formulation

20

a proof of this identity is given in the appendix. with k ba = hbccna, the variation
of the external action is

sout[gab] =

1

16 z d3xh (khab  kab) gab .

(2.32)

since the expression in parentheses contains only stretched horizon tensors, the

normal vectors in the variation gab = hab + nanb + nanb contribute nothing. as

in the electromagnetic case, we add a surface source term to the action to cancel

this residual boundary term. the variation of the required term can therefore be

written as

ssurf[hab] = 

1

2 z d3xh ts abhab .

(2.33)

we shall see later that this variation is integrable; i.e., an action with this variation

exists. comparison with eq. (2.32) yields the membrane stress tensor

tab
s = +

1

8 (cid:16)khab  k ab(cid:17) .

(2.34)

now just as a surface charge produces a discontinuity in the normal component

of the electric eld, a surface stress term creates a discontinuity in the extrinsic

curvature. the relation between the discontinuity and the source term is given by

the israel junction condition [23, 24],

tab
s =

1

8 (cid:16)[k]hab  [k]ab(cid:17) ,

(2.35)

where [k] = k+  k is the dierence in the extrinsic curvature of the stretched
horizon between its embedding in the external universe and its embedding in the

spacetime internal to the black hole. comparing this with our result for the mem-

brane stress tensor, eq. (2.34), we see that

k ab

 = 0 ,

(2.36)

2.3. action formulation

21

so that the interior of the stretched horizon molds itself into at space. the einstein

equations, eq. (2.27), can be rewritten via the contracted gauss-codazzi equations

[24] as

s |b = ha
tab

c t cdnd .

(2.37)

equations (2.34) and (2.37) taken together imply that the stretched horizon can

be thought of as a uid membrane, obeying the navier-stokes equation. to see this,

recall that as we send  to zero, both u a and na approach la, the null generator

at the corresponding point on the true horizon. hence, in this limit we can equate

u a and na, permitting us to write the relevant components of k a

b , in terms of

the surface gravity, g, and the extrinsic curvature, ka

b, of a space-like 2-section of

the stretched horizon:

u ccna  2lccla  2ghla  k u

u = g , k a

u = a

a k a

b u b = 0 ,

where gh  g is the renormalized surface gravity at the horizon, and

c
acnb  1c

aclb  k b

a = a

ak b

ab

b = 1kb
a ,

(2.38)

(2.39)

where kab is the extrinsic curvature of a space-like 2-section of the true horizon,

kab  d

albkd =

1
2

laab ,

(2.40)

where la is the lie derivative in the direction of la. we can decompose kab into a

traceless part and a trace, kab = ab + 1

2 ab, where ab is the shear and  the

expansion of the world lines of nearby horizon surface elements. then

tab
s =

1

8 (cid:20)ab + ab(cid:18)1

2

 + g(cid:19)(cid:21) .

(2.41)

but this is just the equation for the stress of a two-dimensional viscous newtonian

uid [25] with pressure p = g/8, shear viscosity  = 1/16, and bulk viscosity

2.3. action formulation

22

 = 1/16. hence we may identify the horizon with a two-dimensional dynamical
uid, or membrane. note that, unlike ordinary uids, the membrane has negative

bulk viscosity. this would ordinarily indicate an instability against generic pertur-

bations triggering expansion or contraction. it can be regarded as reecting a null

hypersurfaces natural tendency to expand or contract [18]. below we shall show

how for the horizon this particular instability is replaced with a dierent kind of

instability.

inserting the a-momentum density ts

b
aa

aub = t u

s a  a into the einstein equa-

tions, eq. (2.37), we arrive at the navier-stokes equation

 a = ap + a + 2b

a kb  t n
a ,

(2.42)

where  a = a/ is the lie derivative (which is the general-relativistic equiva-
lent of the convective derivative) with respect to proper time, and t n
is the ux of a-momentum into the black hole.

a = a

at c

a nc

inserting the u-momentum (energy) density t a

s buau b   = /8 gives

  +  = p + 2 + 2abab + t a

b nau b ,

(2.43)

which is the focusing equation for a null geodesic congruence [26]. we might now

suspect that if the analogy with uids extends to thermodynamics, then eq. (2.43),

as the equation of energy conservation, must be the heat transfer equation [25] for a

two-dimensional uid. writing the expansion of the uid in terms of the area, a,

of a patch,

 =

1

da

a

d

,

(2.44)

we see that we can indeed rewrite eq. (2.43) as the heat transfer equation (albeit

2.3. action formulation

with an additional relativistic term on the left)

t  ds
d 

1
g

d2s

d 2 ! = (cid:16)2 + 2abab + t a

b nau b(cid:17) a ,

23

(2.45)

with t the temperature and s the entropy, provided that the entropy is given by

and the temperature by

s = 

kb
h

a ,

t =

h

8kb

g ,

(2.46)

(2.47)

where  is some proportionality constant.

thus, the identication of the horizon with a uid membrane can be extended to

the thermodynamic domain. nonetheless, the membrane is an unusual uid. the

focusing equation itself, eq. (2.43), is identical in form to the equation of energy

conservation for a uid. however, because the energy density, , is proportional to

the expansion,  = /8, one obtains a nonlinear rst-order dierential equation
for  which has no counterpart for ordinary uids. the crucial point is that, owing

to the black holes gravitational self-attraction, the energy density is negative, and

the solution to the dierential equation represents a horizon that grows with time.

for example, the source-free solution with a time-slicing for which the horizon has

constant surface gravity is

 (t) =

2g

1 +(cid:16) 2g

(t0)  1(cid:17) eg(t0t)

.

(2.48)

because of the sign of the exponent, this would represent an ever-expanding horizon

if  (t0) were an initial condition; the area of the horizon, which is related to  by  =
(d/d ) ln , expands exponentially with time. to avoid this runaway, one must

impose teleological boundary conditions (that is, nal conditions) rather than

2.3. action formulation

24

initial conditions. hence, the horizons growth is actually acausal; the membrane

expands to intercept infalling matter that is yet to fall in [21]. this is because the

membrane inherits the global character of the true horizon: the stretched horizon

covers the true horizon whose location can only be determined by tracking null rays

into the innite future.

in fact, the left-hand side of the heat transfer equation,

eq. (2.45), is of the same form as that of an electron subject to radiation reaction;

the acausality of the horizon is therefore analogous to the pre-acceleration of the

electron.

at this classical level, using only the equations of motion, the parameter  in eq.

(2.46) is undetermined. however, because we have an action we hope to do better,

since the normalization in the path integral is now xed. by means of a euclidean

path integral, we should actually be able to derive the bekenstein-hawking entropy,

including the coecient , from the membrane action. we do this in the next

chapter.

2.3.3 the axidilaton membrane

another advantage of the action formulation is that it is easily generalized to ar-

bitrary elds. for example, we can extend the membrane paradigm to include the

basic elds of quantum gravity. here we use the tree-level eective action obtained

from string theory after compactication to four macroscopic dimensions. this ac-

tion is a generalization of the classical einstein-hilbert-maxwell action to which it

reduces when the axidilaton, , is set to i/16. the action is

s[, , aa, gab] = z d4xg   r

16  ||2

22
2

+

i

4 (cid:16)f 2

+  f 2

(cid:17)! ,

(2.49)

2.3. action formulation

25

where r is the four-dimensional ricci curvature scalar, f  f  i f are the self-
and anti-self-dual electromagnetic eld strengths, and   1 +i2 = a+ie2 is the
axidilaton, with a the axion and  the dilaton. solutions to the equations of motion

arising from this action include electrically (reissner-nordstrom) and magnetically

charged black holes [27, 28], as well as their duality-rotated cousins, dyonic black

holes [29],which carry both electric and magnetic charge.

the equations of motion are

a  a

2 ! + i||2
2 
3

2

i
2

f 2

 = 0

and

a(cid:16)f ab

+  f ab

 (cid:17) = 0 ,

(2.50)

(2.51)

besides the einstein equations.

as before, we require the external action to vanish on its own. integration by

parts on the axidilaton kinetic term leads to a variation at the boundary,

z d3xh " naa

22

2 ! +  naa

2 !# ,

22

(2.52)

where na is again chosen to be outward-pointing. to cancel this, we add the surface

term

so that

ssurf = z d3x

h (cid:16)q + q(cid:17) ,

q = 

naa

2
2

.

(2.53)

(2.54)

to interpret this, we note that the kinetic term in  is invariant under global

sl (2, ir) transformations of the form

 

a + b
c + d

, ad  bc = 1 ,

(2.55)

2.3. action formulation

26

which are generated by peccei-quinn shifts, 1  1 + b, and duality transforma-
tions,   1/. the peccei-quinn shift of the axion can be promoted to a classical
local symmetry to yield a nother current:

j a
p q = 

1
22

2 (cid:16)a + a(cid:17) .

therefore, under a peccei-quinn shift,

ssurf = z d3xh  (q + q) = z d3xh (cid:16)naj a

p q(cid:17) .

(2.56)

(2.57)

the sum of the q and q terms induced at the membrane, eq. (2.54), is the normal

component of the peccei-quinn current. hence, at the membrane,

(cid:16)ha
p q(cid:17)|a
b j b

= f f  a [(q + q) na] .

(2.58)

that is, the membrane term a [(q + q) na] augments the dyonic f f term as a
source for the three-dimensional peccei-quinn current, ha
p q, at the membrane.

b j b

the membrane is again dissipative with the peccei-quinn charge accounting for

the dissipation in the usual   0 limit. the local rate of dissipation is given by
the bulk stress tensor at the membrane:

tabu anb =

1

ab + ab

16

22
2

u anb 

2
2|q|2
16

.

(2.59)

in addition, the presence of the axidilaton aects the electromagnetic membrane.

(the gravitational membrane is unaected since the surface terms come from the

ricci scalar which has no axidilaton factor.) the electromagnetic current is now

ja

s = 2i(cid:16)f ab

+  f ab

 (cid:17) nb .

the surface charge is therefore

 = 4 (2e + 1b) ,

(2.60)

(2.61)

2.4. dissipation

and the surface current is

~js = 4(cid:16)2n  ~bk  1n  ~ek(cid:17) ,

which, by the regularity of the electromagnetic eld, eq. (2.22), satises

j
s

j
s







= 4


2

1

1 2

e

e







.




27

(2.62)

(2.63)

the conductivity is now a tensor. when the axion is absent, the resistivity is

 =

1
42

.

(2.64)

the inverse dependence on 2 is to be expected on dimensional grounds. the pure

dilaton action can be derived from kaluza-klein compactication of pure gravity in

ve dimensions, where the fth dimension is curled into a circle of radius e2 = 2.

in ve dimensions, with c  1, resistance (and hence resistivity for a two-dimensional
resistor such as the membrane) has dimensions of inverse length. using the regularity

condition, eq. (2.22), the rate of dissipation, for a stretched horizon dened to have

uniform lapse  with respect to time at innity, t, is

dmirr

dt

k da = z 2 2
4||4
which is the joule heating law in the presence of an axidilaton.

= z 2 ~s  d ~a = z 422e2

2

~js

da ,

(2.65)

2.4 dissipation

given that the bulk equations of motion are manifestly symmetric under time-

reversal, the appearance of dissipation, as in joule heating and uid viscosity, might

seem mysterious, all the more so since it has been derived from an action.

2.4. dissipation

28

the procedure, described here, of restricting the action to some region and

adding surface terms on the boundary of the region cannot be applied with im-

punity to any arbitrary region: a black hole is special. this is because the region

outside the black hole contains its own causal past; an observer who remains out-

side the black hole is justied in neglecting (indeed, is unaware of) events inside.

however, even past suciency does not adequately capture the requirements for

our membrane approach. for instance, the past light cone of a spacetime point

obviously contains its own past, but an observer in this light cone must eventually

leave it. rather, we dene the notion of a future dynamically closed set:

a set s in a time-orientable globally hyperbolic spacetime (m, gab) is fu-

ture dynamically closed if j (s) = s, and if, for some foliation of cauchy

surfaces t parameterized by the values of some global time function, we
have that  t0  p  (s  t0)  (t > t0)  q  (i +(p)  s  t).

that is, s is future dynamically closed if it contains its own causal past and if from

every point in s it is possible for an observer to remain in s. classically, the region

outside the true horizon of a black hole is dynamically closed. so too is the region

on one side of a null plane in at space; this is just the innite-mass limit of a black

hole. the region outside the stretched horizon is strictly speaking not dynamically

closed since a signal originating in the thin region between the stretched horizon and

the true horizon can propagate out beyond the stretched horizon. however, in the

limit that the stretched horizon goes to the true horizon,   0, this region becomes
vanishingly thin so that in this limit, which is in any case assumed throughout, we

are justied in restricting the action.

the breaking of time-reversal symmetry comes from the denition of the stretched

2.4. dissipation

29

horizon; the region exterior to the black hole does not remain future dynamically

closed under time-reversal.

in other words, we have divided spacetime into two

regions whose dynamics are derived from two dierent simultaneously vanishing ac-

tions,  (sout + ssurf) =  (sin  ssurf) = 0. given data on some suitable achronal
subset we can, for the exterior region, predict the future but not the entire past,

while, inside the black hole, we can postdict the past but cannot determine the

entire future. thus, our choice of the horizon as a boundary implicitly contains the

irreducible logical requirement for dissipation, that is, asymmetry between past and

future.

besides the global properties that logically permit one to write down a time-

reversal asymmetric action, there is also a local property of the horizon which is

the proximate cause for dissipation, namely that the normal to the horizon is also

tangential to the horizon. without this crucial property  which manifests itself

as the regularity condition, or the identication of the stretched horizon extrinsic

curvature with intrinsic properties of the true horizon  there would still be surface

terms induced at the stretched horizon, but no dissipation.

the regularity condition imposed at the boundary is not an operator identity, but

a statement about physical states: all tangential electromagnetic elds as measured

by a ducial observer must be ingoing. such a statement is not rigorously true. for
any given value of  = (1  2m/r)1/2, there is a maximum wavelength, max, for
outgoing modes that are invisible to the observer:

max =

r  2m

(1  2m/r)1/2  2m .

(2.66)

dissipation occurs in the membrane paradigm because the nite but very high-

frequency modes that are invisible to the ducial observer are tacitly assumed not

2.5. hamiltonian formulation

30

to exist. the regularity condition amounts to a coarse-graining over these modes.

we conclude this section with an illustration of the intuitive advantage of the

membrane paradigm. it is a famous result that the external state of a stationary

black hole, quite unlike that of other macroscopic bodies, can be completely charac-

terized by only four quantities: the mass, the angular momentum, and the electric

and magnetic charges. that such a no-hair theorem [8] should hold is certainly not

immediately apparent from other black hole viewpoints. in the membrane picture,

however, we can see this fairly easily. for example, an electric dipole that falls into

the black hole can now be considered as merely two opposite charges incident on a

conducting surface. the charges cause a current to ow and the current eventually

dissipates; in the same way, all higher multipole moments are eaced. similarly, the

gravitational membrane obeys the navier-stokes equation, which is also dissipative;

higher moments of an infalling mass distribution are thus obliterated in the same

way. the only quantities that survive are those protected by the conservation laws

of energy, angular momentum, and electric and magnetic charge. while far from

an actual proof, this is at least a compelling and physically appealing argument for

why black holes have only four hairs.

2.5 hamiltonian formulation

the equations of motion can equally well be derived within a hamiltonian formu-

lation. this involves rst singling out a global time coordinate, t, for the external

universe, which is then sliced into space-like surfaces, t, of constant t. we can

write, in the usual way,

dt!a
ta    d

= u a  va ,

(2.67)

2.5. hamiltonian formulation

31

where u a is the unit normal to t, u 2 = 1, and  and va are wheelers lapse and
shift, respectively, with va = dxa/dt the ordinary 3-velocity of a particle with world-

line u a. for convenience we choose the stretched horizon to be a surface of constant

lapse so that , which goes to zero at the true horizon, serves as the stretched

horizon regulator. the external hamiltonian for electrodynamics, obtained from

the lagrangian via a legendre transform and written in ordinary three-dimensional

vector notation, is

hout[, ~a, ~] =

1

4 zt

d3xq3g(cid:18)1

2

(cid:16) ~e  ~e + ~b  ~b(cid:17) + ~v (cid:16) ~e  ~b(cid:17)  (cid:16)~  ~e(cid:17)(cid:19) ,

(2.68)

where 3gab is the 3-metric on t,   aata is the scalar potential, ~aa  3g b
the three-dimensional vector potential, and ~a  3g ~ea its canonical momentum
conjugate. note that ea = f abub is the co-moving electric eld; ~e and ~b above refer

a ab is

to the elds measured by a ducial observer with world-line u a. finally, the scalar

potential is nondynamical; its presence in the hamiltonian serves to enforce gauss

law as a constraint. the equations of motion are now determined by hamiltons

equations and the constraint:

h
~

~a ,

=

h
 ~a

=  ~ ,

h


= 0 .

(2.69)

in the bulk these equations are simply maxwells equations but, because of the inner

boundary, the usually discarded surface terms that arise during integration by parts

now need to be canceled. it is easy to show then that the above equations hold only

if additional surface terms are added to the hamiltonian:

h = hout z d2x js  a .

(2.70)

for maxwells equations to be satised in the bulk, the surface terms are once again

the surface charges and currents necessary to terminate the normal electric and

2.5. hamiltonian formulation

32

tangential magnetic elds at the stretched horizon. thus, the membrane paradigm

is recovered.

however, it is perhaps more interesting to proceed in a slightly dierent fashion.

instead of adding new terms, we can use the external hamiltonian to prove the

validity of a principle of minimum heat production. such a principle, which holds

under rather general circumstances for stationary dissipative systems, holds for black

holes also in slightly nonstationary situations.

now the time derivative of the external hamiltonian is not zero, again because of

the inner boundary. we can use hamiltons equations to substitute expressions for

the time derivative of the eld and its momentum conjugate. hamiltons equations

are

~a =  ~e + ~v  ~b  ~
~e = ~ (cid:16) ~b + ~v  ~e(cid:17) ,

so that, making repeated use of the vector identity

~ (cid:16)~v  ~w(cid:17) = ~w (cid:16)~  ~v(cid:17)  ~v (cid:16)~  ~w(cid:17) ,

we nd that the energy loss is

(2.71)

(2.72)

(2.73)

 h = 

1

4 z d2x hn (cid:16) ~ek   ~bk(cid:17) + ~v (cid:16)e ~ek + b ~bk(cid:17)i .

(2.74)

so far, we have used only hamiltons equations. it remains, however, to implement
the constraint. hence we may regard  h as a functional of the lagrange multiplier,
. we therefore have

 h




d
dt

h


= 

= 0 .

(2.75)

that is, the equations of motion follow from minimizing the rate of mass increase

of the black hole with respect to the scalar potential. this is an exact statement;

2.5. hamiltonian formulation

33

we now show that this reduces to a minimum heat production principle in a quasi-

stationary limit. now we note that the rst law of black hole thermodynamics allows

us to decompose the mass change into irreducible and rotational parts:

dm
dt

=

dq
dt

+ h

dj
dt

,

(2.76)

where h is the angular velocity at the horizon, and j is the holes angular momen-

tum. since |~v|  h at the horizon, we see that the second term on the right in eq.
(2.74) corresponds to the torquing of the black hole. when this is small, we may

approximate the mass increase as coming from the rst, irreducible term. hence, in

the quasi-stationary limit, for a slowly rotating black hole, the black holes rate of

mass increase is given by the dissipation of external energy. invoking the regularity

condition, eq. (2.22), then gives

d[] = +

1

4 z d2x (cid:16) ~ek(cid:17)2

,

d


= 0 ,

(2.77)

where  ~ek is given by eq. (2.71). this is the principle of minimum heat production:

minimizing the dissipation functional leads to the membrane equation of motion.

we observe that we could have anticipated this answer. the numerical value of

the hamiltonian is the total energy of the system as measured at spatial innity

(assuming an asymptotically at spacetime). the time derivative is then simply the

rate, as measured by the universal time of distant observers, that energy changes.

the rate of decrease of energy is the integral of the poynting ux as measured by

local observers, multiplied by two powers of , one power to convert local energy to

energy-at-innity and one power to convert the rate measured by local clocks to the

rate measured at innity. thus we can immediately dene a dissipation functional:

d[]  

1

4 z d2x n (cid:16) ~eh  ~bh(cid:17) ,

(2.78)

2.5. hamiltonian formulation

34

where the subscript h denotes that a power of  has been absorbed to renormalize

an otherwise divergent ducial quantity.

in this manner, we can easily write down the dissipation functional for gravity

for which time-dierentiating the hamiltonian is a much more laborious exercise.

the local rate of energy transfer is given by the right-hand side of the heat transfer

equation, eq. (2.45). the hamiltonian for gravity satises two constraint equations

with the lapse and shift vector serving as lagrange multipliers. since the mem-

brane picture continues to have a gauge freedom associated with time-slicing, the

constraint equation associated with the lapse is not implemented. this implies that

the dissipation is a functional only of the shift. hence we have

d[va] = z d2x(cid:16)2

h + 22

h + 2t a

b nau b(cid:17) ,

(2.79)

where again the two powers of  have been absorbed to render nite the quantities

with the subscript h. extremizing d with respect to va leads to the membrane

equations of motion, enforcing the gauge constraint or, equivalently, obeying the

principle of minimum heat production.

2.6. appendix

2.6 appendix

35

in this appendix, we shall prove that eq. (2.31) is zero in the limit that the stretched

horizon approaches the true horizon. in that limit, na  la. we shall make liberal
use of gauss theorem, the leibniz rule, and the fact that habnb = k abnb = 0. in
order to use gauss theorem, we note that since the acceleration ac  nddnc
of the normal vector (not to be confused with the ducial acceleration u ddu c) is
zero, the 4-covariant divergence and the 3-covariant divergence of a vector in the

stretched horizon are equal, eq. (2.6).

now, variations in the metric that are in fact merely gauge transformations can

be set to zero. using a vector va where va vanishes on the stretched horizon, we can

gauge away the variations in the normal direction so that gab  hab. then the
left-hand side of eq. (2.31) becomes

h hbc [a (nahbc)  c (nahab)]

z d3x
= z d3xh ha(cid:16)hbcnahbc(cid:17) (cid:16)ahbc(cid:17) nahbc  c(cid:16)hbcnahab(cid:17) +(cid:16)chbc(cid:17) nahabi
= z d3xh (cid:20)a(cid:16)hbcnahbc(cid:17) +(cid:16)ncab + nbac(cid:17) hbc (cid:16)hbcnahab(cid:17)|c

hbcnahabac  knbnahab  abnahabi

(using hbc = gbc  nbnc, kab = +hc

acnb, and cwc = wc

|c + wcac for wch)

(using gauss theorem, and ac = 0)

= z d3xh ha(cid:16)hbcnahbc(cid:17)  knbnahabi
= z d3x
h (cid:20)a(cid:18)hbc 
 z d3xha(cid:18)hbc 1
= z d3x
h (cid:18)hbc 1





nahbc(cid:19)  kh(cid:16)nbnahab(cid:17)  nahabnb  nbhabnai(cid:21)
lahbc(cid:19) (using habnb = 0, and na  la)
lahbc(cid:19)|a



= 0 .

(2.80)

chapter 3

semi-classical theory:

thermodynamics

3.1 introduction

a strong hint that the so far classical membrane analogy might remain valid at a

thermodynamic level has already come from the focusing equation, eq. (2.43), which

we saw could be written as the heat transfer equation, eq. (2.45), provided that

the temperature was identied with the surface gravity and the entropy with the

area. however, there are proportionality factors that cannot be determined through

classical arguments alone. in this chapter we shall rst show that the correct entropy

with the correct numerical factor does indeed appear from the membrane action,

though with a somewhat surprising sign.

one way to interpret the black holes entropy is as the logarithm of the num-

ber of modes that propagate along the thin layer between the true horizon and the

stretched horizon. the regularity condition, which led to dissipation even in the

classical theory, essentially coarse-grained over these high-frequency modes. how-

ever, it is conceivable that in a quantum theory with benign ultraviolet behavior

36

3.2. string theory or field theory?

37

the amount of information contained in that region is nite. einstein gravity is not

such a theory but one may still ask abstractly whether an eective horizon theory

could exist at a quantum level [30, 31]. quantum eects cause the black hole to

emit radiation. in order to preserve time-evolution unitarity, one might require the

emitted radiation to be correlated with the interior state of the black hole. in this

case, the membrane viewpoint remains valid only as a classical description, since

quantum-mechanically the external universe receives information from the black

hole in the form of deviations of the radiation from thermality; the crucial premise

that the outside universe is emancipated from the internal state of the black hole

is violated. it is important to emphasize, however, that correlations between the

radiation and the horizon itself (as opposed to the inside of the hole) do not preclude

the membrane paradigm. indeed, the fact that the bekenstein-hawking entropy is

proportional to the surface area of the black hole suggests that, even at the quantum

level, an eective horizon theory may not be unfeasible.

3.2 string theory or field theory?

in treating the quantum mechanical aspects of black holes, one is faced with a

choice of two dierent approaches. one of the most exciting recent developments in

theoretical physics has been the series of spectacular resolutions that string theory

has brought to some longstanding problems in black hole physics.

in particular,

by constructing black hole solutions out of collections of d-branes, strominger and

vafa were able to provide a microscopic account of black hole entropy in terms of

excitations in higher, compactied dimensions [32]. on the heels of this triumph,

came a description of black hole radiation as the emission of closed strings from

3.2. string theory or field theory?

38

the d-brane conguration [33]. moreover, this process had an underlying unitary

theory, indicating that information might not be lost.

these successes and the ultraviolet niteness of string theory would indicate

that a study of the quantum properties of black holes should proceed within the

framework of string theory and indeed, in the long run, this may be true. however,

at present, there are several limitations in the string theoretic approach to black

holes that support continuing a eld theoretic investigation. for example, the string

calculations are only reliable for very special black holes (supersymmetric, four or

ve dimensional, extremal or near-extremal). also the methods are not very general,

with the entire calculation having to be repeated for each case, though the answer

for the entropy  one-fourth the area  is simple enough. by contrast, the eld

theory calculation is short and valid at once for all black holes in any number of

dimensions. similarly, for black hole radiance, string theory has not progressed much

beyond conrming eld theory results, despite its unitary promise. in particular,

statements about the changing nature of spacetime are dicult to make in string

theory because the calculations are not controllable in the regime in which there is

a classical spacetime. by contrast, in the next chapter, we shall obtain a penrose

diagram depicting the causal features of the spacetime. finally, since the horizon

can be in essentially at space, it is not obvious that black hole radiance necessarily

calls for a quantum theory of gravity (although see [34]). for these reasons, we shall

take a eld theory approach in this thesis.

before moving on to the calculations, we mention as an aside that there are

some intriguing parallels between the matrix formulation of m theory [35] and the

membrane paradigm: both have a kind of holographic principle [36, 37], both have

3.3. entropy

39

galilean equations emerging from a lorentz-invariant theory, and in both the ap-

pearance of locality is somewhat mysterious. quite possibly at least some of these

similarities are related to the fact that both are formulated on null surfaces.

3.3 entropy

we have mentioned that black hole entropy was something to be expected, since

the part of the wavefunction or density matrix that lies within the black hole is

inaccessible and must be traced over. thus, the entropy can be thought of as origi-

nating in correlations across the horizon. this entanglement, or geometric, entropy

may be computed in eld theory [38, 39]. however, the eld theory computations

run aground because of uncontrollable ultraviolet divergences, and so this is not the

approach taken here. instead, we work with the path integral, making contact with

thermodynamics by performing an analytic continuation to imaginary time,  = it,

so that the path integral of the euclideanized action becomes a partition function.

for a stationary hole, regularity (or the removal of a conical singularity) dictates a

period  = r d = 2/gh in imaginary time [40], where gh is the surface gravity;

for a schwarzschild hole,  = 8m. this is the inverse hawking temperature in

units where h = c = g = kb = 1. the partition function is then the path integral

over all euclidean metrics which are periodic with period 2/gh in imaginary time.

we can now evaluate the partition function in a stationary phase approximation:

z = z dgab

e exp(cid:18)

1

h (cid:16)se

out[gab

e ] + se

surf[hab

e cl](cid:17)(cid:19) .

(3.1)

e ](cid:17)(cid:19)  exp(cid:18)

1

h (cid:16)se

out[gab

e cl] + se

surf[hab

the external action itself can be written as sout = sbulk + s, where sbulk is

zero for a black hole alone in the universe. the boundary term s is the integral of

3.3. entropy

40

the extrinsic curvature of the boundary of spacetime. in fact, a term proportional

to the surface area at innity can be included in s without aecting the einstein

equations since the metric is held xed at innity during variation. in particular,

the proportionality constant can be chosen so that the action for all of spacetime is

zero for minkowski space:

s =

1

8 z d3x

h [k] ,

(3.2)

where [k] is the dierence in the trace of the extrinsic curvature at the spacetime

boundary for the metric gab and the at-space metric ab. with this choice, the path

integral has a properly normalized probabilistic interpretation. the euclideanized

value of s for the schwarzschild solution is then [40]

se

 = lim
r

1

8 (cid:16)322m(cid:17)"(2r  3m)  2r(cid:18)1 

2m

r (cid:19)

1/2# = +4m 2 .

(3.3)

to obtain an explicit action for the membrane, we must integrate its variation,

eq. (2.33):

we see that

ssurf[hab] = 

1

16 z d3x

h (khab  kab) hab .

ssurf[hab] = z d3xh (cid:16)babhab  b(cid:17)

(3.4)

(3.5)

is a solution, provided that the (undierentiated) source terms are bab = (+1/16)kab

and b = (1/16)k. this action has the form of surface matter plus a negative
cosmological constant in three dimensions. the value of the membrane action for a

solution to the classical eld equations is then

ssurf[hab

cl ] = +

1

8 z d3xqhclkcl .

(3.6)

to evaluate this, we can take our ducial world-lines u a to be normal to the

isometric time-slices of constant schwarzschild time. the stretched horizon is then

3.3. entropy

41

a surface of constant schwarzschild r. hence  = (1  2m/r)1/2,  = 0, and k =
g +  = g, the unrenormalized surface gravity of the stretched horizon. inserting

these into eq. (3.6), we nd that the euclidean action is

se

surf = lim
rrh

1

8 (cid:18)z d(cid:19) 4r2g = rh

2 = 4m 2 ,

(3.7)

where rh = 2m is the black holes radius, and gh = g = 1/4m is its renormalized

surface gravity.

the euclidean membrane action exactly cancels the external action, eq. (3.3).

hence the entropy is zero! that, however, is precisely what makes the membrane

paradigm attractive: to an external observer, there is no black hole  only a mem-

brane  and so neither a generalized entropy nor a strictly obeyed second law of

thermodynamics. the entropy of the outside is simply the logarithm of the number

of quantum states of the matter outside the membrane. this number decreases as

matter leaves the external system to fall through and be dissipated by the mem-

brane. when all matter has fallen into the membrane, the outside is in a single

state  vacuum  and has zero entropy, as above.

to recover the bekenstein-hawking entropy, we must then use not the combi-

nation of external and membrane actions, which gave the entropy of the external

system, but the combination of the internal and membrane actions,

zbh = z dgab

e exp(cid:18)

1

h (cid:16)se

in[gab

e ]  se

surf[hab

e ](cid:17)(cid:19) ,

(3.8)

where now ssurf is subtracted [see eq. (2.11)]. with sin = r d4xg r = 0, the

partition function for a schwarzschild hole in the stationary phase approximation is

zbh  exp(cid:18)

1

h (cid:16)+4m 2(cid:17)(cid:19) ,

(3.9)

3.3. entropy

42

from which the bekenstein-hawking entropy, sbh , immediately follows:

sbh =  m +

ln zbh



! = 8m (cid:18)m 

1

8m

4m 2(cid:19) =

1
4

a ,

(3.10)

which is the celebrated result.

for more general stationary (kerr-newman) holes, the helmholtz free energy

contains additional chemical potential terms corresponding to the other conserved

quantities, q and j,

f = m  t s  q  j ,

(3.11)

where  = q/r+ and  = j/m, where r+ is the boyer-lindquist radial coordinate at

the horizon. for a charged hole, the action also contains electromagnetic terms. the

however, in order to have a regular vector potential, we must gauge transform it

surface electromagnetic term, eq. (2.15), has the value (1/4)r d3xh f abaanb.
to aa = (q/r  ) at which vanishes on the surface. hence, the surface action
is again given by the gravitational term, which has the euclideanized value se
surf =

+. it is easy to verify using eq. (3.11) that this again leads to a black hole

r2
entropy equal to one-fourth of the horizon surface area and an external entropy of

zero.

for nonstationary black holes, the extrinsic curvature also includes a term for

the expansion of the horizon, k = g + .

inserting this into the surface action

enables us to calculate the instantaneous entropy as matter falls into the membrane

in a nonequilibrium process. of course, like the horizon itself, the entropy grows

acausally.

3.4. pictures of hawking radiation

43

3.4 pictures of hawking radiation

we now turn to the phenomenon of black hole radiance. although several derivations

of hawking radiation exist in the literature [3, 40], none of them correspond very

directly to either of the two heuristic pictures that are most commonly proposed as

ways to visualize the source of the radiation. according to one picture, the radiation

arises by a process similar to schwinger electron-positron pair creation in a constant

electric eld. the idea is that the energy of a particle changes sign as it crosses the

horizon, so that a pair created just inside or just outside the horizon can materialize

with zero total energy, after one member of the pair has tunneled to the opposite

side.

in the second picture, we work with the eective membrane representation

of the horizon. hawking radiation is then a special property of the membrane: its

tendency towards spontaneous emission, as if it had a nonzero temperature.

here we shall show that either of these pictures can in fact be used to provide

short, direct semi-classical derivations of black hole radiation. in both cases energy

conservation plays a fundamental role; one must make a transition between states

with the same total energy, and the mass of the residual hole must go down as it

radiates. indeed, it is precisely the possibility of lowering the black hole mass which

ultimately drives the dynamics. this supports the idea that, in quantum gravity,

black holes are properly regarded as highly excited states.

in the standard calculation of hawking radiation the background geometry is

considered xed, and energy conservation is not enforced. (the geometry is not

truly static, despite appearances, as there is no global killing vector.) because we

are treating this aspect more realistically, we must  and do  nd corrections to

the standard results. these become quantitively signicant when the quantum of

3.5. tunneling

44

radiation carries a substantial fraction of the mass of the hole.

3.5 tunneling

to describe across-horizon phenomena, it is necessary to choose coordinates which,

unlike schwarzschild coordinates, are not singular at the horizon. a particularly

suitable choice is obtained by introducing a time coordinate,

t = ts + 22mr + 2m ln

r  2m
r + 2m

,

(3.12)

where ts is schwarzschild time. with this choice, the line element reads

ds2 = (cid:18)1 

2m

r (cid:19) dt2 + 2s 2m

r

dt dr + dr2 + r2d2 .

(3.13)

there is now no singularity at r = 2m, and the true character of the spacetime, as

being stationary but not static, is manifest. these coordinates were rst introduced

by the french mathematician paul painleve [41] and the swedish opthalmologist and

nobel laureate allvar gullstrand [42], who used them to criticize general relativity

for allowing singularities to come and go! their utility for studies of black hole

quantum mechanics was emphasized more recently in [43].

for our purposes, the crucial features of these coordinates are that they are

stationary and nonsingular through the horizon. thus it is possible to dene an

eective vacuum state of a quantum eld by requiring that it annihilate modes

which carry negative frequency with respect to t; such a state will look essentially

empty (in any case, nonsingular) to a freely-falling observer as he or she passes

through the horizon. this vacuum diers strictly from the standard unruh vacuum,

dened by requiring positive frequency with respect to the kruskal coordinate u =

3.5. tunneling

45

r  2m exp(cid:16) tsr

4m (cid:17) [44]. the dierence, however, shows up only in transients,

and does not aect the late-time radiation.

the radial null geodesics are given by

dr
dt

= 1 s 2m

r

,

r 

(3.14)

with the upper (lower) sign in eq.

(3.14) corresponding to outgoing (ingoing)

geodesics, under the implicit assumption that t increases towards the future. these

equations are modied when the particles self-gravitation is taken into account.

self-gravitating shells in hamiltonian gravity were studied by kraus and wilczek

[45]. they found that, when the black hole mass is held xed and the total adm

mass allowed to vary, a shell of energy  moves in the geodesics of a spacetime with

m replaced by m + . if instead we x the total mass and allow the hole mass

to uctuate, then the shell of energy  travels on the geodesics given by the line

element

ds2 =  1 

2(m  )

r

! dt2 + 2s 2(m  )

r

dt dr + dr2 + r2d2 ,

(3.15)

so we should use eq. (3.14) with m  m  .

now one might worry that, since the typical wavelength of the radiation is of the

order of the size of the black hole, a point particle description might be inappropriate.

however, when the outgoing wave is traced back towards the horizon, its wavelength,

as measured by local ducial observers, is ever-increasingly blue-shifted. near the

horizon, the radial wavenumber approaches innity and the point particle, or wkb,

approximation becomes in fact excellent.

the imaginary part of the action for an s-wave outgoing positive energy particle

3.5. tunneling

46

which crosses the horizon outwards from rin to rout can be expressed as

im s = imz rout

rin

pr dr = imz rout

rin z pr

0

dp

r dr .

(3.16)

remarkably, this can be evaluated without entering into the details of the solution,

as follows. we multiply and divide the integrand by the two sides of hamiltons

equation r = + dh

, change variable from momentum to energy, and switch the

order of integration to obtain

dpr(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r
im s = imz +

0 z rout

rin

dr

1 q 2(m )

r

(d) ,

(3.17)

where the minus sign appears because h = m  . but now the integral can be
done by deforming the contour, so as to ensure that positive energy solutions decay

in time (that is, into the lower half  plane). in this way we obtain

im s = +4(cid:18)m 



2(cid:19) ,

(3.18)

provided rin > rout. to understand this ordering  which supplies the correct sign

 we observe that when the integrals in eq. (3.16) are not interchanged, and with

the contour evaluated via the prescription     i, we have
dr = imz rout

im s = +imz rout

rin z m 

dm 

m

rin r dr .

1 q 2m 

r

hence rin = 2m and rout = 2 (m  ). (incidentally, comparing the above equation
with eq. (3.16), we also nd that im pr = r.) thus, over the course of the
classically forbidden trajectory, the outgoing particle travels radially inward with

(3.19)

the apparent horizon to materialize at the nal location of the horizon, viz. r =

2 (m  ).

alternatively, and along the same lines, hawking radiation can also be regarded

as pair creation outside the horizon, with the negative energy particle tunneling

3.5. tunneling

47

into the black hole. since such a particle propagates backwards in time, we have to

reverse time in the equations of motion. from the line element, eq. (3.13), we see

that time-reversal corresponds to q 2m

r  q 2m

r . also, since the anti-particle sees

a geometry of xed black hole mass, the upshot of self-gravitation is to replace m

by m + , rather than m  . thus an ingoing negative energy particle has

im s = imz 

0 z rin

rout

dr

1 +q 2(m +)

r

d = +4(cid:18)m 



2(cid:19) ,

(3.20)

where to obtain the last equation we have used feynmans hole theory deformation

of the contour:    + i.

both channels  particle or anti-particle tunneling  contribute to the rate for

the hawking process so, in a more detailed calculation, one would have to add

their amplitudes before squaring in order to obtain the semi-classical tunneling rate.

that, however, only aects the pre-factor. in either treatment, the exponential part

of the semi-classical emission rate, in agreement with [46], is

  e2 im s = e8(m  

2 ) = e+sbh ,

(3.21)

where we have expressed the result more naturally in terms of the change in the

holes bekenstein-hawking entropy, sbh. when the quadratic term is neglected,

eq. (3.21) reduces to a boltzmann factor for a particle with energy  at the inverse

hawking temperature 8m. the 2 correction arises from the physics of energy

conservation, which (roughly speaking) self-consistently raises the eective temper-

ature of the hole as it radiates. that the exact result must be correct can be seen on

physical grounds by considering the limit in which the emitted particle carries away

the entire mass and charge of the black hole (corresponding to the transmutation of

the black hole into an outgoing shell). there can be only one such outgoing state.

3.5. tunneling

48

on the other hand, there are exp (sbh) states in total. statistical mechanics then

asserts that the probability of nding a shell containing all the mass of the black

hole is proportional to exp (sbh), as above.

following standard arguments, eq.

(3.21) with the quadratic term neglected

implies the planck spectral ux appropriate to an inverse temperature of 8m:

 () =

d
2

| t ()|2
e+8m   1

,

(3.22)

where | t ()|2 is the frequency-dependent (greybody) transmission co-ecient for
the outgoing particle to reach future innity without back-scattering. it arises from

a more complete treatment of the modes, whose semi-classical behavior near the

turning point we have been discussing.

3.5.1 tunneling from a charged black hole

when the outgoing radiation carries away the black holes charge, the calculations

are complicated by the fact that the trajectories are now also subject to electro-

magnetic forces. here we restrict ourselves to uncharged radiation coming from a

reissner-nordstrom black hole. the calculation then proceeds in an exactly similar

fashion as in the case of schwarzschild holes but, for completeness, we shall run

through the corresponding equations.

the charged counterpart to the painleve line element is

ds2 =  1 

2m
r

+

q2

r2 ! dt2 + 2s2m
r 

q2
r2 dt dr + dr2 + r2d2 ,

(3.23)

which is obtained from the standard line element by the rather unedifying coordinate

transformation,

t = tr + 2q2mr  q2 + m ln  r  2mr  q2
r + 2mr  q2!

3.5. tunneling

+

q2  m 2

m 2  q2 arctanh m 2  q22mr  q2

mr

49

! ,

(3.24)

where tr is the reissner time coordinate. the equation of motion for an outgoing

massless particle is

dr
dt

= +1 s 2m
r 

q2
r2 ,

r 

(3.25)

with m  m   when self-gravitation is included. the imaginary part of the
action for a positive energy outgoing particle is

im s = imz +

0 z rout

rin

dr

1 q 2(m )

r

(d) ,

 q2

r2

(3.26)

which is again evaluated by deforming the contour in accordance with feynmans

w  w  i prescription. the residue at the pole can be read o by substituting
u  q2 (m  ) r  q2. finally, the emission rate is
  e2 im s = e

2 )(m )(m )2q2+mm 2q2(cid:17) = e+sbh .

4(cid:16)2(m  

(3.27)

to rst order in , this is consistent with hawkings result of thermal emission at

the hawking temperature, th , for a charged black hole:

th =

1
2

m 2  q2

(cid:16)m + m 2  q2(cid:17)2 .

(3.28)

but again, energy conservation implies that the exact result has corrections of higher

order in ; these can all be collected to express the emission rate as the exponent

of the change in entropy.

we conclude this section by noting that only local physics has gone into our

derivations. there was neither an appeal to euclidean gravity nor a need to invoke

an explicit collapse phase. the time asymmetry leading to outgoing radiation arose

instead from use of the normal local contour deformation prescription in terms of

the nonstatic coordinate t.

3.6. emissions from the membrane

50

3.6 emissions from the membrane

as we have seen in the previous chapter, an outside observer can adopt another,

rather dierent, description of a black hole, regarding the horizon eectively as a

membrane at an inner boundary of spacetime. but again, quantum uncertainty in

the position of the membrane complicates the issue in an essential way.

before presenting the calculation, we briey outline the strategy here. starting

with a fundamental action for the bulk, we obtain the membrane action as well as

the bulk equations of motion. after continuing the equations to complex time, we

look for solutions that connect the lorentzian geometries before and after emission.

finally, we evaluate the action for our instanton to obtain the semi-classical rate.

the external action for an uncharged massless scalar eld minimally coupled to

gravity is

s[, gab] = +

1

16 z d4xg r 

1

2 z d4xg ()2 + sm + ssurf .

(3.29)

here the bulk terms have support only outside the black hole, and sm is the term at

the external boundaries of the spacetime manifold that is needed to obtain einsteins

equations [40]. the membrane action takes the classical value,

ssurf[, hab] = +

1

8 z d3xh k z d3xh js ,

(3.30)

where hab is the metric induced on the stretched horizon, h is its determinant, and
k  +ana is the trace of the membranes extrinsic curvature. the scalar eld
source, js, induced on the membrane is

js = +naa ,

(3.31)

with na the outward-pointing space-like normal to the membrane.

3.6. emissions from the membrane

51

the eld equations are einsteins equations and the source-free klein-gordon

equation. the energy-momentum tensor is

whose trace is simply

tab = ab 

1
2

gabcc ,

t =  ()2 .

(3.32)

(3.33)

from this we see that the einstein-hilbert and klein-gordon bulk actions cancel,

so surface actions account for all the classical and semi-classical physics.

next, we seek an instanton solution that connects the lorentzian schwarzschild

geometry of mass m with a horizon at rh = 2m, to a similar geometry of mass

m  and a horizon at rh = 2 (m  ). at this point, it is important to distinguish
the stretched horizon, a surrogate for the globally-dened and acausal true horizon,

from the locally-dened apparent horizon. for an evaporating hole, the true horizon

(hence the stretched horizon) lies inside the apparent horizon; this is because the

acausal true horizon shrinks in anticipation of future emissions before the local

geometry actually changes. hence, our analytically-continued solution must describe

the geometry interior to the apparent horizon.

now, in the usual analytic continuation (t = i ), the apparent horizon is at the
origin, and r < 2m is absent from the euclidean section of the geometry. however,

there is no real need for a euclidean section. euclidean solutions may have positive

euclidean action, but the (lorentzian) action for a general tunneling motion in a

time-dependent setting need not be purely imaginary, and the instanton can be a

more complicated trajectory in the complex time plane. it should not be surprising

then that for a time-dependent shrinking black hole, one has to consider intermediate

metrics of arbitrary signature. indeed, the usual analytic continuation prescription

3.6. emissions from the membrane

52

yields, for r < 2m,

ds2 = (cid:18) 2m

r  1(cid:19) d 2 (cid:18)2m

1

r  1(cid:19)

dr2 + r2d2

(3.34)

which has two time-like coordinates. substituting x  4m (cid:16) 2m
the coordinate singularity at r = 2m to obtain a spacetime with topology s1s2r,
in which  has a period of 8m about the apparent horizon. the line element now

, we eliminate

r  1(cid:17)1/2

describes the complexied geometry interior to the apparent horizon; moreover, it

is regular everywhere except at the real singularity at r = 0.

in addition, we note that birkhos theorem  spherically symmetric vacuum

solutions are stationary  is valid irrespective of the metric signature. hence, one

schwarzschild solution can go to another only if there is matter present. the matter

is produced by the membrane during the complex time process, and materializes as

the shell. we expect the membrane to be able to produce matter since it is also able

to destroy (dissipate) matter; hawking emission is the counterpart of absorption.

as matter is emitted during the emission process, the membrane is subject to a

changing interior geometry which in turn implies a changing periodicity. in order

to adapt eq. (3.34) to a geometry with changing periodicity, we guess that the line

element takes the form

ds2 = u()x2d2  v(, x)dx2 + r2(, x)d2

(3.35)

which has a radial (x) and an angular () coordinate, both with dimensions of

length. the period changes if u(), and v(, x) are not constant functions of .

the shell and the apparent horizon are at x = 0; the shell trajectory is parametrized

by . a convenient choice of  is one for which the shells radius decreases linearly

with . then the radius of the apparent horizon is

rh = 2(m  b) ,

(3.36)

3.6. emissions from the membrane

where b is dimensionless.

the important christoel symbols are



 = +

x
 = 

u
2u

ux
v

, 

xx = 

, x

xx = +

x =

1
x

v
2ux2 , 
v
2v

, x

x =

v
2v

,

53

(3.37)

(3.38)

where  and  denote dierentiation by  and x, respectively. a normalized trajectory

of constant x has

u 2 = 1 , u  =

1
xu

,

so its proper acceleration has magnitude

 =

1
xv

.

the normal vector, na, normal to u a obeys

n2 = 1 , nx =

1
v

.

hence the trace of the extrinsic curvature of a surface of constant x is

k = ana =

1

v (cid:18) 1

x

+

2
r

r(cid:19) .

we will also need one component of the ricci tensor:

rx =

1

r (cid:18)2 r +

2
x

r + r v

v(cid:19) .

now the ux of energy-at-innity (per local proper time), f , is

1

4r2

d
d

1

4r2

r
2

1
xu

.

= 

f =

this is related to the local stress tensor by f = uxtabu anb. hence

tx =

1
2

1

4r2r v

u

r
x

.

(3.39)

(3.40)

(3.41)

(3.42)

(3.43)

(3.44)

(3.45)

3.6. emissions from the membrane

comparing eq. (3.45) with eq. (3.43) in the x  0 limit, we nd

r u

v

=

1
2r

.

incidentally, by eq. (3.40), this implies that the temperature-at-innity is

t = xu


2

=

1

4rh

,

54

(3.46)

(3.47)

indicating a changing periodicity; as rh decreases from 2m to 2(m  ), the tem-
perature varies accordingly.

now, for single-particle emission, both the true and the apparent horizon start

out at r = 2m and nish at r = 2(m  ). thus, the membrane moves along the
apparent horizon. but now this is mapped to the origin by euclideanization, so the

stretched horizon has a vanishing proper volume element, even in euclidean space.

thus, in the absence of a compensating divergence in the integrand, membrane

integrals are zero. in particular, the scalar eld current induced on the membrane

has no divergence so the scalar part of the membrane action vanishes. therefore

the entire contribution to the emission rate comes from the gravitational term.

to evaluate that, note that there is a factor of x in the action, contained in

g. then, as x  0,

xk 

1
v

.

combining this with eqs. (3.36) and (3.46), we have

s =

1

8 z d3xh k = 

i

2 z r2r u

v

d = 

i

16b

r2 .

(3.48)

(3.49)

when b = 1

8 , we obtain the desired result, eq.

(3.18). this may be xed by

matching it with the rate exp(4m) for emission of the entire mass of the hole.
alternatively, we note that for single-particle emission from a schwarzschild hole,

3.6. emissions from the membrane

55

there is no scale other than the mass of the hole. since the instanton simply scales

the horizon radius, we must have kh = gh = 1

4m throughout the motion. hence
the proper length along the stretched horizon, d  ud, must also scale. thus,

we have

 = z d = 8m  d = 8dm ,

(3.50)

so that b = 1

8 , as required. we note here that b can be written as m

 where  is the

inverse temperature. as we shall see, with this form as an ansatz, the membrane

action gives the right rate for emission from reissner holes.

3.6.1 emission from a charged membrane

for emission from charged black holes, there are a few modications to the preceding

equations. the action now has an additional term because of the electromagnetic

eld:

s[gab, aa, ] = +

1

16 z d4xg r

1

2 z d4xg ()2

1

16 z d4xg f 2+ssurf ,

(3.51)

which yields a membrane action of

ssurf[hab, aa, ] = +

1

8 z d3x

h k z d3x

h js +z d3x

h ja

s aa . (3.52)

in addition to the scalar term induced on the membrane, there is now also an

electromagnetic current, eq. (2.16),

ja
s = +

1
4

f abnb ,

as we saw in the previous chapter. the stress tensor is

tab = ab 

1
2

gabcc +

1

4 (cid:18)facf c
b 

1
4

gabf 2(cid:19) ,

(3.53)

(3.54)

3.6. emissions from the membrane

56

but the trace is still given by eq. (3.33), so the einstein-hilbert and klein-gordon

bulk actions again cancel. now, in the absence of sources, the maxwell action can

be expressed as a surface integral:

1

16 z d4xg f 2 = +

1

8 i d3x



h naf abab ,

(3.55)

where the sign on the right-hand side stems from choosing the normal to point into

the bulk. this term is added to the membrane term to give a total electromagnetic

action of

sem

surf = +

1

8 z d3xh f abaanb .

(3.56)

thus, we have succeeded in eliminating all the bulk terms in the action. to evaluate

the surface terms, we note rst of all that, because the volume element along the

membrane vanishes, the scalar membrane term contributes nothing to the rate. the

electromagnetic and gravitational membrane terms can be combined, in the x  0
limit, to give

i

ssurf = 

8 z d 4r2"m 2  q2

r2

+

q2

r3 # ,

where we have skipped the steps analogous to eqs. (3.36) - (3.46). using

and our ansatz,

we have that

rh = m  b +q(m  b)2  q2 ,

m


b 

=

m
2

m 2  q2

r2

,

ssurf = i


2

r2

+ ,

which yields the correct tunneling rate.

when the hole emits charged radiation, the analysis become more complicated.

however, one can consider the case in which the emitted radiation has the same

(3.57)

(3.58)

(3.59)

(3.60)

3.6. emissions from the membrane

57

charge-to-mass ratio as the hole itself. then the problem again becomes one of

scaling. letting q  m with || < 1, we have

 = 2(cid:16)1 + 1  2(cid:17)2

1  2

m  d = 2(cid:16)1 + 1  2(cid:17)2
1  2

dm .

(3.61)

with kh = gh, we have

s = iz m (cid:18)1 +q1  2(cid:19)2

dm = i


2

r2

+ .

(3.62)

calling the change in the holes charge q, the emission rate to rst order in  and

q is hawkings result,

  e 2

gh

(q) ,

(3.63)

where   +q/r+ is the electromagnetic scalar potential at the horizon; emissions
which discharge the membrane are favored. the exact rate is again proportional to

the exponent of the change in entropy.

chapter 4

the causal structure of

evaporating black holes

4.1 introduction

it is challenging to envision a plausible global structure for a spacetime containing

a decaying black hole. if information is not lost in the process of black hole decay,

then the nal state must be uniquely determined by the initial state, and vice versa.

thus a post-evaporation space-like hypersurface must lie within the future domain

of dependence of a pre-evaporation cauchy surface. one would like to have models

with this property that support approximate (apparent) horizons.

in addition, within the framework of general relativity, one expects that singu-

larities will form inside black holes [47]. if the singularities are time-like, one can

imagine that they will go over into the world-lines of additional degrees of freedom

occurring in a quantum theory of gravity. ignorance of the nature of these degrees of

freedom is reected in the need to apply boundary conditions at such singularities.

(on the other hand, boundary conditions at future space-like singularities repre-

sent constraints on the initial conditions; it is not obvious how a more complete

58

4.2. extending the charged vaidya metric

59

dynamical theory could replace them with something more natural.)

in this chapter, we use the charged vaidya metric to obtain a candidate macro-

scopic penrose diagram for the formation and subsequent evaporation of a charged

black hole, thereby illustrating how predictability might be retained. we do this by

rst extending the charged vaidya metric past its coordinate singularities, and then

joining together patches of spacetime that describe dierent stages of the evolution.

4.2 extending the charged vaidya metric

the vaidya metric [48] and its charged generalization [49, 50] describe the spacetime

geometry of unpolarized radiation, represented by a null uid, emerging from a

spherically symmetric source. in most applications, the physical relevance of the

vaidya metric is limited to the spacetime outside a star, with a dierent metric

describing the stars internal structure. but black hole radiance [3] suggests use of

the vaidya metric to model back-reaction eects for evaporating black holes [51, 52]

all the way upto the singularity.

the line element of the charged vaidya solution is

ds2 =  1 

2m(u)

r

+

q2(u)

r2 ! du2  2 du dr + r2(cid:16)d2 + sin2 d2(cid:17) .

(4.1)

the mass function m(u) is the mass measured at future null innity (the bondi

mass) and is in general a decreasing function of the outgoing null coordinate, u.

similarly, the function q(u) describes the charge, measured again at future null

innity. when m(u) and q(u) are constant, the metric reduces to the station-

ary reissner-nordstrom metric. the corresponding stress tensor describes a purely

4.2. extending the charged vaidya metric

electric coulomb eld,

and a null uid with current

fru = +

q(u)

r2

,

ka = kau , k2 = +

1

4r2



u  m +

q2

2r! .

60

(4.2)

(4.3)

in particular,

tuu =

1

8r2 " 1 

2m(u)

r

+

q2(u)

r2 ! q2(u)
r2 +

1
r

q2(u)

u  2

m(u)

u # .

(4.4)

like the reissner-nordstrom metric, the charged vaidya metric is beset by coor-

dinate singularities. it is not known how to remove these spurious singularities for

arbitrary mass and charge functions (for example, see [53]). we shall simply choose

functions for which the relevant integrations can be done and continuation past the

spurious singularities can be carried out, expecting that the qualitative structure we

nd is robust.

specically, we choose the mass to be a decreasing linear function of u, and the

charge to be proportional to the mass:

m(u)  au + b  u , q(u)  u ,

(4.5)

where a < 0 and ||  1, with || = 1 at extremality. we always have u  0. with
these choices, we can nd an ingoing (advanced time) null coordinate, v, with which

the line element can be written in a double-null form:

ds2 = 

g(u, r)

a

du dv + r2(cid:16)d2 + sin2 d2(cid:17) .

thus

dv =

1

g(u, r) " 1 

2u
r

+

2u2

r2 ! du

a

+ 2 dr# .

(4.6)

(4.7)

4.2. extending the charged vaidya metric

61

the term in brackets is of the form x(u, r) du + y (u, r) dr. since x(u, r) and

y (u, r) are both homogeneous functions, eulers relation provides the integrating

factor: g(u, r) = x(u, r)u + y (u, r)r. hence

v
r

=

v
 u

=

r2

r3 + u

2a(r2  2ur + 2 u2)

1

2a(r2  2ur + 2u2)

2a(r2  2ur + 2 u2)

r3 + u

(4.8)

(4.9)

.

from the sign of the constant term of the cubic, we know that there is at least one

positive zero. then, calling the largest positive zero r, we may factorize the cubic

as (r  r)(r2 + r + ). hence

 = 

2u3
2ar > 0 ,   r = 

u2
2a

> 0 ,   r =

u
2a

< 0 .

(4.10)

consequently, the cubic can have either three positive roots, with possibly a double

root but not a triple root, or one positive and two complex (conjugate) roots. we

consider these in turn.

i) three positive roots

when there are three distinct positive roots, the solution to eq. (4.8) is

v = a ln(r  r) + b ln(r  r2) + c ln(r  r1) ,

(4.11)

where r > r2 > r1 > 0, and

a =

+r2

(r  r2)(r  r1)

> 0 , b =

2

r2

(r  r2)(r2  r1)

< 0 , c =

2

+r1

> 0 .

(r  r1)(r2  r1)

(4.12)

we can push through the r singularity by dening a new coordinate,

v2(v)  ev/a = (r  r)(r  r2)b/a(r  r1)c/a ,

(4.13)

4.2. extending the charged vaidya metric

62

which is regular for r > r2. to extend the coordinates beyond r2 we dene

v1(v)  k2 + (v2)a/b = k2 + (r  r)a/b(r2  r)(r  r1)c/b ,

(4.14)

where k2 is some constant chosen to match v2 and v1 at some r > r > r2. v1(r) is

now regular for r2 > r > r1. finally, we dene yet another coordinate,

v (v)  k1 + ((v1  k2))b/c = k1 + (r  r)a/c(r2  r)b/c(r  r1) ,

(4.15)

which is now free of coordinate singularities for r < r2. a similar procedure can be

applied if the cubic has a double root.

ii) one positive root

when there is only one positive root, v is singular only at r = r:

v = a ln(r  r) +

1
2

b ln(r2 + r + ) +

2c  b
4  2

arctan  2r + 

4  2! .

(4.16)

we can eliminate this coordinate singularity by introducing a new coordinate

v (v)  ev/a = (r  r)(r2 + r + )b/2a exp"+

2c  b
a4  2

which is well-behaved everywhere. the metric now reads

arctan  2r + 

4  2!# ,

(4.17)

ds2 = g(u, r)

a

v (u, r)

du
a

dv + r2d2 .

(4.18)

in all cases, to determine the causal structure of the curvature singularity we ex-

press dv in terms of du with r held constant. now we note that, since u is the

only dimensionful parameter, all derived dimensionful constants such as r must be

proportional to powers of u. for example, when there is only positive zero, eq.

(4.17) yields

dv |r = du

v
u




r
r  r +

b
2a

r + 2

r2 + r + 

+

2c  b
a4  2

1

1 +(cid:18) 2r+42(cid:19)2 2r
4  2

(4.19)

.




4.3. patches of spacetime

thus, as r  0, and using the fact that a + b = 1, we have

ds2  

q2(u)

r2

du2 ,

so that the curvature singularity is time-like.

63

(4.20)

4.3 patches of spacetime

our working hypothesis is that the vaidya spacetime, since it incorporates radiation

from the shrinking black hole, oers a more realistic background than the static

reissner spacetime, where all back-reaction is ignored. in this spirit, we can model

the black holes evolution by joining patches of the collapse and post-evaporation

(minkowski) phases onto the vaidya geometry.

to ensure that adjacent patches of spacetime match along their common bound-

aries, we can calculate the stress-tensor at their (light-like) junction. the absence

of a stress-tensor intrinsic to the boundary indicates a smooth match when there

is no explicit source there. surface stress tensors are ordinarily computed by ap-

plying junction conditions relating discontinuities in the extrinsic curvature; the

appropriate conditions for light-like shells were obtained in [54]. however, we can

avoid computing most of the extrinsic curvature tensors by using the vaidya metric

to describe the geometry on both sides of a given boundary, because the reissner-

nordstrom and minkowski spacetimes are both special cases of the vaidya solution.

initially then, we have a collapsing charged spherically symmetric light-like shell.

inside the shell, region i, the metric must be that of at minkowski space; outside,

region ii, it must be the reissner-nordstrom metric, at least initially. in fact, we

4.3. patches of spacetime

64

can describe both regions together by a time-reversed charged vaidya metric,

ds2 =  1 

2m(v)

r

+

q2(v)

r2 ! dv2 + 2 dv dr + r2d2 ,

(4.21)

where the mass and charge functions are step functions of the ingoing null coordi-

nate:

m(v) = m0(v  v0) , q(v) = m(v) .

the surface stress tensor, ts

vv, follows from eq. (4.4). thus

ts
vv =

1

4r2  m0 

q2
0

2r! .

(4.22)

(4.23)

the shell, being light-like, is constrained to move at 45 degrees on a conformal dia-

gram until it has collapsed completely. inside the shell, the spacetime is guaranteed

by birkhos theorem to remain at until the shell hits r = 0, at which point a

singularity forms.

meanwhile, outside the shell, we must have the reissner-nordstrom metric. this

is appropriate for all r > r+. once the shell nears r+, however, one expects that

quantum eects start to play a role. for nonextremal (|| < 1) shells, the killing vec-
tor changes character  time-like to space-like  as the apparent horizon is traversed,

outside the shell. this permits a virtual pair, created by a vacuum uctuation just

outside or just inside the apparent horizon, to materialize by having one member of

the pair tunnel across the apparent horizon. thus, hawking radiation begins, and

charge and energy will stream out from the black hole.

we shall model this patch of spacetime, region iii, by the vaidya metric. this

must be attached to the reissner metric, region ii, innitesimally outside r = r+.

a smooth match requires that there be no surface stress tensor intrinsic to the

boundary of the two regions. the reissner metric can be smoothly matched to the

radiating solution along the u = 0 boundary if b = m0 in eq. (4.5).

4.3. patches of spacetime

65

now, using eqs. (4.7) and (4.17), one can write the vaidya metric as

ds2 = 

g2(u, r)a
r + q2(u)

r2 (cid:17) v 2

(cid:16)1  2m (u)

dv 2 + 2

g(u, r)a
r + q2(u)

r2 (cid:17) v

(cid:16)1  2m (u)

dv dr .

(4.24)

we shall assume for convenience that g(r) has only one positive real root, which we

call r. then, since v and g both contain a factor (r  r), eq. (4.17), the above
line element and the coordinates are both well-dened for r > r+(u). in particular,

r =  is part of the vaidya spacetime patch. moreover, the only solution with
ds2 = dr = 0 also has dv = 0, so that there are no light-like marginally trapped

surfaces analogous to the reissner r. in other words, the vaidya metric extends
to future null innity, i +, and hence there is neither an event horizon, nor a second
time-like singularity on the right of the conformal diagram.

the singularity on the left exists until the radiation stops, at which point one

has to join the vaidya solution to minkowski space. this is easy: both spacetimes

are at once encompassed by a vaidya solution with mass and charge functions

m(u) = (au + b)(u0  u) , q(u) = m(u) .

(4.25)

as before, the stress tensor intrinsic to the boundary at u0 can be read o eq. (4.4):

ts
uu =

1

4r2 "(au + b) 

(au + b)2

2r

# ,

(4.26)

which is zero if u0 = b/a, i.e., if u = 0. this says simply that the black hole must
have evaporated completely before one can return to at space.

collecting all the constraints from the preceding paragraphs, we can put together

a possible conformal diagram, as in fig. 1. (we say possible because a similar

analysis for an uncharged hole leads to a space-like singularity; thus our analysis

demonstrates the possibility, but not the inevitability, of the behavior displayed in

4.3. patches of spacetime

66

fig. 1.) fig. 1 is a penrose diagram showing the global structure of a spacetime

in which a charged imploding null shock wave collapses catastrophically to a point

and subsequently evaporates completely. here regions i and iv are at minkowski

space, region ii is the stationary reissner-nordstrom spacetime, and region iii is

our extended charged vaidya solution. the zigzag line on the left represents the

singularity, and the straight line separating region i from regions ii and iii is the

shell. the curve connecting the start of the hawking radiation to the end of the

singularity is r+(u), which can be thought of as a surface of pair creation. the

part of region iii interior to this line might perhaps be better approximated by an

ingoing negative energy vaidya metric.

from this cut-and-paste picture we see that, given some initial data set, only

regions i and ii and part of region iii can be determined entirely; an outgoing ray

starting at the bottom of the singularity marks the cauchy horizon for these regions.

note also that there is no true horizon; the singularity is naked. however, because

the singularity is time-like, fig. 1 has the attractive feature that predictability for

the entire spacetime is restored if conditions at the singularity are known.

it is

tempting to speculate that, with higher resolution, the time-like singularity might

be resolvable into some dynamical planck-scale object such as a d-brane.

4.3. patches of spacetime

67

figure 4.1: penrose diagram for the formation and evaporation of a charged black
hole.

bibliography

[1] israel, w. (1987), dark stars: the evolution of an idea, in three hundred

years of gravitation, eds. s. w. hawking and w. israel, p. 199 (cambridge:

cambridge university press).

[2] parikh, m. k. and wilczek, f. (1998), an action for black hole membranes,

phys. rev., d58, 064011, gr-qc/9712077.

[3] hawking, s. w. (1975), particle creation by black holes, commun. math.

phys., 43, 199.

[4] christodoulou, d. (1970), reversible and irreversible transformations in black-

hole physics, phys. rev. lett., 25, 1596.

[5] christodoulou, d. and runi, r. (1971), reversible transformations of a

charged black hole, phys. rev., d4, 3552.

[6] bardeen, j. m., carter, b., and hawking, s. w. (1973), the four laws of black

hole mechanics, commun. math. phys., 31, 161.

[7] hawking, s. w. (1971), gravitational radiation from colliding black holes,

phys. rev. lett., 26, 1344.

68

bibliography

69

[8] carter, b. (1971), axisymmetric black hole has only two degrees of freedom,

phys. rev. lett., 26, 331.

[9] hawking, s. w. (1976), breakdown of predictability in gravitational collapse,

phys. rev., d14, 2460.

[10] parikh, m. k. and wilczek, f. (1999), hawking radiation as tunneling,

princeton university pre-print pupt-1775, hep-th/9907001.

[11] parikh, m. k. and wilczek, f. (1999), global structure of evaporating black

holes, phys. lett., b449, 24, gr-qc/9807031.

[12] hawking, s. w. and ellis, g. f. r. (1973), the large scale structure of space-

time (cambridge: cambridge university press).

[13] bekenstein, j. d. (1973), black holes and entropy, phys. rev., d7, 2333.

[14] hanni, r. s. and runi, r. (1973), lines of force of a point charge near a

schwarzschild black hole, phys. rev., d8, 3259.

[15] damour, t. (1978), black-hole eddy currents, phys. rev., d18, 3598.

[16] znajek, r. l. (1978), the electric and magnetic conductivity of a kerr hole,

mon. not. roy. astr. soc., 185, 833.

[17] damour, t. (1979), quelques proprietes mecaniques, electromagnetiques, ther-

modynamiques et quantiques des trous noirs, ph.d. thesis, university of paris

vi.

bibliography

70

[18] damour, t. (1982), surface eects in black hole physics, in proceedings of

the second marcel grossmann meeting on general relativity, ed. r. runi, p.

587 (amsterdam: north-holland publishing company).

[19] macdonald, d. and thorne, k. s. (1982), black-hole electrodynamics: an

absolute-space/universal-time formulation, mon. not. roy. astr. soc., 198,

345.

[20] price, r. h. and thorne, k. s. (1986), membrane viewpoint on black holes:

properties and evolution of the stretched horizon, phys. rev., d33, 915.

[21] thorne, k. s., price, r. h., and macdonald, d. a., eds. (1986), black holes:

the membrane paradigm (london: yale university press).

[22] carlip, s. (1995), statistical mechanics of the (2+1)-dimensional black hole,

phys. rev., d51, 632, gr-qc/9409052.

[23] israel, w. (1966), singular hypersurfaces and thin shells in general relativity,

nuovo cimento, 44b, 1.

[24] misner, c. w., thorne, k. s., and wheeler, j. a. (1973), gravitation (new

york: w. h. freeman and company).

[25] landau, l. d. and lifshitz, e. m. (1987), fluid mechanics (oxford: pergamon

press).

[26] hawking, s. w. and hartle, j. b. (1972), energy and angular momentum ow

into a black hole, commun. math. phys., 27, 283.

[27] gibbons, g. w. and maeda, k.-i. (1988), black holes and membranes in

higher-dimensional theories with dilaton elds, nuc. phys., b298, 741.

bibliography

71

[28] garnkle, d., horowitz, g. t., and strominger, a. (1991), charged black

holes in string theory, phys. rev., d43, 3140.

[29] shapere, a., trivedi, s., and wilczek, f. (1991), dual dilaton dyons, mod.

phys. lett., 6, 2677.

[30] t hooft, g. (1990), the black hole interpretation of string theory, nuc. phys.,

b335, 138.

[31] susskind, l., thorlacius, l., and uglum, j. (1993), the stretched horizon and

black hole complementarity, phys. rev., d48, 3743, hep-th/9306069.

[32] strominger, a. and vafa, c. (1996), microscopic origin of the bekenstein-

hawking entropy, phys. lett., b379, 99, hep-th/9601029.

[33] callan, jr., c. g. and maldacena, j. m. (1996), d-brane approach to black

hole quantum mechanics, nuc. phys., b472, 591, hep-th/9602043.

[34] schoutens, k., verlinde, e., and verlinde, h. (1993), quantum black hole

evaporation, phys. rev., d48, 2670, hep-th/9304128.

[35] banks, t., fischler, w., shenker, s. h., and susskind, l. (1997), m theory as

a matrix model: a conjecture, phys. rev., d55, 5112, hep-th/9610043.

[36] t hooft, g. (1993), dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, utrecht uni-

versity pre-print thu-93/26, gr-qc/9310026.

[37] susskind, l. (1995), the world as a hologram, j. math. phys., 36, 6377,

hep-th/9409089.

bibliography

72

[38] srednicki, m. (1993), entropy and area, phys. rev. lett., 71, 666, hep-

th/9303048.

[39] callan, c. and wilczek, f. (1994), on geometric entropy, phys. lett., b333,

55, hep-th/9401072.

[40] gibbons, g. w. and hawking, s. w. (1977), action integrals and partition

functions in quantum gravity, phys. rev., d15, 2752.

[41] painleve, p. (1921), la mecanique classique et la theorie de la relativite,

compt. rend. acad. sci. (paris), 173, 677.

[42] gullstrand, a. (1922), allgemeine losung des statischen einkorper-problems

in der einsteinschen gravitationstheorie, arkiv. mat. astron. fys., 16, 1.

[43] kraus, p. and wilczek, f. (1994), some applications of a simple stationary

line element for the schwarzschild geometry, mod. phys. lett., a9, 3713.

[44] unruh, w. g. (1976), notes on black-hole evaporation, phys. rev., d14,

870.

[45] kraus, p. and wilczek, f. (1995), self-interaction correction to black hole

radiance, nuc. phys., b433, 403, gr-qc/9408003.

[46] keski-vakkuri, e. and kraus, p. (1997), microcanonical d-branes and back

reaction, nuc. phys., b491, 249, hep-th/9610045.

[47] penrose, r. (1965), gravitational collapse and space-time singularities, phys.

rev. lett., 14, 57.

bibliography

73

[48] vaidya, p. c. (1951), the gravitational eld of a radiating star, proc. indian

acad. sci., a33, 264.

[49] plebanski, j. and stachel, j. (1968), einstein tensor and spherical symmetry,

j. math. phys., 9, 269.

[50] bonnor, w. b. and vaidya, p. c. (1970), spherically symmetric radiation of

charge in einstein-maxwell theory, gen. rel. and grav., 1, 127.

[51] hiscock, w. a. (1981), models of evaporating black holes. ii. eects of the

outgoing created radiation, phys. rev., d23, 2823.

[52] balbinot, r. (1986), evaporating black hole space-times and the back re-

action, in proceedings of the fourth marcel grossmann meeting on general

relativity, ed. r. runi, p. 713 (amsterdam: north-holland publishing com-

pany).

[53] fayos, f., martin-prats, m. m., and senovilla, j. m. m. (1995), on the ex-

tension of vaidya and vaidya-reissner-nordstrom spacetimes, class. quant.

grav., 12, 2565.

[54] barrab`es, c. and israel, w. (1991), thin shells in general relativity and cos-

mology: the light-like limit, phys. rev., d43, 1129.

