spht/99-073, nbi-he-99-22

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

2
1

 
 

1
v
4
8
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

integrable 2d lorentzian gravity

and random walks

p. di francesco1, e. guitter2

cea-saclay, service de physique theorique,

f-91191 gif sur yvette cedex, france

c. kristjansen3

the niels bohr institute,

blegdamsvej 17, dk-2100 copenhagen , denmark

we introduce and solve a family of discrete models of 2d lorentzian gravity with higher

curvature weight, which possess mutually commuting transfer matrices, and whose spectral

parameter interpolates between at and curved space-times. we further establish a one-to-

one correspondence between lorentzian triangulations and directed random walks. this

gives a simple explanation why the lorentzian triangulations have fractal dimension 2 and

why the curvature model lies in the universality class of pure lorentzian gravity. we also

study integrable generalizations of the curvature model with arbitrary polygonal tiles. all

of them are found to lie in the same universality class.

07/99

1 philippe@spht.saclay.cea.fr, partially supported by nsf grant phy-9722060
2 guitter@spht.saclay.cea.fr
3 kristjan@alf.nbi.dk, supported by the carlsberg foundation

1. introduction

the invention of a transfer matrix technique for dynamical triangulations [1,2] has

made it possible to introduce a concept of distance in two-dimensional quantum gravity.

this again has made it possible, in the case of pure gravity, to calculate analytically a loop-

loop correlation function as a function of geodesic distance and to show that the scaling

relations from at space statistical mechanics have analogues in the quantum theory [3]. an

intriguing result of these investigations is that the fractal dimension of the quantum space

times turns out to be four and not two. unfortunately, when it comes to the inclusion of

matter elds the transfer matrix technique for dynamical triangulations has not yet proven

as ecient as its regular lattice counterpart. correlators as a function of geodesic distance
have been studied numerically [47] but analytical calculations have not been possible.4

time

space

fig. 1: a typical discretized universe of (1+1)-dimensional lorentzian quan-
tum gravity. each constant-time strip is an arbitrary succession of triangles
pointing up or down. boundary conditions can be chosen to be periodic, free,
xed according to the model at hand.

recently, a dierent discrete approach to two-dimensional quantum gravity has been

proposed [12,13]. in this approach which is known as lorentzian quantum gravity only

triangulations which admit a causal structure are allowed in the state sum. an example of

such a triangulation is shown in fig. 1. the elementary building blocks are triangles with

one space-like and two time-like edges which are glued together at random so as to form

4 there have, however, been such calculations using an alternative, fully valid, but not equiv-

alent denition of distance [810], see also [11].

1

a piling of constant-time slices. in a sense such triangulations represent only the space

uctuations of the universe while respecting chronology. in lorentzian quantum gravity,

baby universes are not allowed.

in other words, a given time slice of the triangulation

has only one connected component. this, in particular, means that a universe always

has spherical topology. the model of pure lorentzian quantum gravity was solved in [12]

exploiting the fact that the generating functional for its transfer matrix obeyed a certain

iterative equation. the continuum limit of the model proved to be dierent from that of

usual euclidean quantum gravity or liouville theory. for instance, the fractal dimension

of the quantum universes turned out to be equal to two. however, the continuum limit

of lorentzian quantum gravity is in accordance with continuum results obtained from
calculations carried out in the proper time gauge [14].5 a lorentzian lattice by construction

is something between a regular lattice and a truly random one. it is therefore interesting to

know if the introduction of matter elds on such lattices leads to any interaction between

matter and geometry. in [15] the eect of coupling an ising model to lorentzian quantum

gravity was studied. the investigations were based partly on a high temperature expansion,

partly on monte carlo simulations. no sign of interaction between matter and geometry

was seen. numerical simulations currently being carried out indicate, however, that for

matter elds with c > 1 a non-trivial interaction between matter and geometry takes place

[16].

in a rst part of the present article we formulate and solve exactly various other

extensions of two-dimensional lorentzian quantum gravity. the simplest extension, which

we develop in details throughout the paper, is that of lorentzian gravity with a higher

curvature term which is equivalent to lorentzian quantum gravity coupled to a simple

dimer model or to lorentzian quantum gravity with universes built from triangles and

squares. we show that this model is integrable in the sense that its transfer matrix can be

explicitly diagonalized and that there exists a set of commuting transfer matrices which

allow us to interpolate between regular and random lorentzian lattices. furthermore we

describe how to construct models of lorentzian quantum gravity allowing general p-gons

as building blocks while preserving the integrability structure. as will become evident

the transfer matrix formulation is by far more ecient for lorentzian than for euclidean

triangulations.

in fact the integrability structure revealed has many treats in common

5 if baby universes are allowed in lorentzian quantum gravity the usual euclidean gravity

continuum limit is obtained. we refer to [12] for a discussion of this point.

2

with the integrability structure found in regular lattice transfer matrix studies and it is

our hope that our further investigation of this structure will enable us to solve exactly more

realistic systems of matter elds coupled to lorentzian quantum gravity such as lorentzian

triangulations equipped with ising spins. for all the models that we have considered so

far the universality class of the geometrical system is the same as that of pure lorentzian

quantum gravity.

in a second part of this article we study the relationship between lorentzian quan-

tum gravity and random walks. we prove that there exists a one-to-one correspondence

between lorentzian triangulations and directed random walks drawn on the regular tri-

angular lattice. this allows us to set up a dictionary connecting concepts in lorentzian

quantum gravity to concepts in the theory of random walks. for instance, the expression

for the loop-loop correlation function follows from a similar expression for large excursion

probabilities for random walks. furthermore, the integrability structure of the model of

lorentzian quantum gravity with a higher curvature term can be understood in terms of

the possibility of a simple block decomposition of the corresponding random walk. finally

the random walk equivalence provides an explanation why lorentzian triangulations have

fractal dimension two and why we can not obtain from our model with a higher curvature
term other critical behaviour than that of pure lorentzian quantum gravity.6

the simple extension of lorentzian quantum gravity involving a higher curvature term

as well as its various alternative interpretations are described in sect. 2. sect. 3 treats

the equivalence between random walks and lorentzian triangulations and sect. 4 contains

a discussion of lorentzian gravity involving general polygonal building blocks. finally, in

sect. 5 we conclude and discuss the future prospects of transfer matrix techniques for

lorentzian triangulations.

2. discrete lorentzian 2d gravity via triangulations

2.1. lorentzian quantum gravity with a higher curvature term

we consider quantum universes of the type depicted in fig. 1. generally we will be

interested in a time evolution from, say, time t = 1 to t = t , i.e. a time strip of width t .

6 dimensional analysis indicates that adding a higher curvature term to the einstein-hilbert
action should not modify continuum physics. however, this argument is only valid perturbatively

and one could still hope for the existence of a (non-perturbative) ultra-violet xed point, a scenario

(in 4d) denoted by weinberg as asymptotic safety [17].

3

in the course of the article we will consider various possible boundary conditions in space.

these will be explained at the relevant points.

as usual in two-dimensional gravity, we will attach a weight g per triangular face,
resulting in an overall factor of ga for each triangulation, where a is the total number of

triangles, measuring the area if we decide that triangles have unit area.

we now generalize the model by also attaching to each triangulation an intrinsic cur-

vature weight dened as follows. for a two-dimensional triangulated manifold, curvature
resides on vertices, and the curvature at a vertex is proportional to (v  6) where v is the
valence of the vertex. here we do not wish to add an ordinary curvature term (which is

trivial in two dimensions) but a term which suppresses (or enforces) local curvature. due

to the time slice structure of the triangulation we take as a measure of the curvature at a
vertex the quantity |v1  3| +|v2  3| where v1 and v2 are the number of triangles adjacent
to the vertex in the upper and the lower time-slice respectively, and we attach to each
vertex of the triangulation the weight a(|v13|+|v23|)/2. introducing this weight factor can
be viewed as adding a higher curvature term to the einstein-hilbert action (note, however,
that one can have v  6 = 0 and |v1  3| + |v2  3| 6= 0). our model is similar in spirit to
the models considered in [18], where the eect of adding a higher curvature term to usual

dynamically triangulated gravity was considered. since any vertex is linked to exactly

two up (resp. down) triangles is its upper (resp. lower) slice, with an arbitrary number of

down (resp. up) triangles in-between, a simpler, completely equivalent way to introduce

the curvature weight is to attach a weight a per pair of adjacent triangles pointing both up

or both down, within the same constant-time slice. the graphical representation of fig.1

is more transparent in the dual picture, where a constant-time strip becomes a succession

of half-edges attached to the dual constant-time line, where the half-edges lying above

(resp. below) the line correspond to triangles pointing down (resp. up). moreover, as each

triangle has exactly one space-like edge, the triangles pointing down in the strip of time t

all share an edge with the triangles pointing up in the strip of time t + 1, henceforth the

dual half-edges are connected to form edges between the lines of time t and t + 1.

the boltzmann weights dened above are depicted in fig.2, where we also give an

example of a world-sheet conguration in the dual picture.

the lorentzian gravity problem above, and its generalization with intrinsic curvature

admit a transfer matrix formulation. indeed, if we compute the boltzmann weight of a

single time-line with i lower half-edges and j upper ones, and sum over all possible relative

positions of these half-edges, we nd a number ti,j(g, a) that depends only on the numbers

4

g

g

a

a

1

1

fig. 2: the boltzmann weights of the lorentzian gravity model with a
higher curvature term. each vertex (of the dual lattice) receives a factor g.
in addition each sequence of neighbouring up-up or down-down half-edges
receives a factor a. we have represented a typical world-sheet conguration.

of half-edges, but not on their specic relative positions. this can in turn be taken as the

transfer matrix element (i, j), that transfers from a row of i half-edges to one of j. for

instance, the partition function of a strip of time width t , with 1 lower triangles pointing
up and 2 upper ones pointing down is simply

z1,2(t|g, a) = (cid:18)t (g, a)t(cid:19)1,2

.

(2.1)

for periodic boundary conditions, this is the so-called two-loop correlator of lorentzian

gravity, which describes world sheets of cylindric form bounded by two loops of respective

lengths 1 and 2.

let us adopt the following choice of xed boundary conditions, that dier from the

periodic ones of [13]. we assume that each time strip always has one lower half-edge

(i.e. triangle pointing up) on its leftmost end and one upper one (triangle pointing down)
on its rightmost end. this implies in particular that i, j  1 in the transfer matrix, i.e.
that the time slices never degenerate into the vacuum. these boundary conditions can be

5

described as staircase conditions since they imply that the left and right hand side space-

like boundaries of the world-sheet have the shape of a staircase with the stairs extending

to the right at each successive time line (see the example of fig.2). for reasons that will
become clear later, we attach a weight g only to each of the two boundary half-edges in
each slice.

we may now compute the transfer matrix element ti,j(g, a) by summing over all
possible congurations of upper and lower half-edges. this is done by rst summing over
the number k  1 of blocks made, say, of nr  1 consecutive lower half-edges, followed by
mr  1 upper ones, r = 1, 2, ..., k, and then summing over the corresponding partitions of
i =pr nr and j =pr mr, with positive integers nr, mr. note that the conditions n1  1
and mk  1 are a direct consequence of the boundary conditions we have imposed. we get

nmm
n

mk

nk

nr =i, mr =j

xnr ,mr 1, r=1,2,...,k
xnr ,mr 1, r=1,2,...,k

ti,j(g, a) =xk1
=xk1
= gi+j1ai+jxk1

nr =i, mr =j
1

gi+j1a(nr1)+(mr1)

a2k(cid:18) i  1

k  1(cid:19).
k  1(cid:19)(cid:18)j  1

(2.2)
this is in general a polynomial of a, as the range of the summation is nite (k  min(i, j)).

the formula (2.2) is best encapsulated into the generating function

1

k  1(cid:19)(gax)ixjk(cid:18)j  1

k  1(cid:19)(gay)j

1

1

=

xiyjti,j(g, a)

(x, y|g, a) = xi,j1
g xk1
g xk1
1  ga(x + y)  g2(1  a2)xy

a2k xik(cid:18)i  1
(1  gax)k(1  gay)k
.

(gax)k(gay)k

1
a2k

gxy

=

=

(2.3)

in the particular case a = 1, this reduces to the generating function for pure lorentzian

gravity discretized via triangulations to be compared with that of [12], but with dierent

boundary conditions. when a = 0, (2.3) reduces to the generating function for at world-
sheets. indeed, (x, y|g, 0) = gxy/(1  g2xy) simply means that ti,j(g, 0) = gi+j1i,j.

6

in other words, the pattern of triangles becomes regular (successions of triangles pointing

up,down,up,...etc...), and the discrete world-sheet becomes a rhombus-shaped portion of
the triangular lattice, with area 2  t , where  denotes the number of lower triangles
pointing up in the rst time slice. hence our parameter a allows us to interpolate between

at and curved spaces.

2.2. diagonalization of the transfer matrix

to solve our model, and be able to compute quantities like (2.1), the simplest strategy

is to diagonalize the transfer matrix t (g, a). but as the number of triangles in each time

slice is not bounded, the matrix has innite size. nevertheless, at the expense of extra

precautions, we have been able to construct a complete set of orthonormal eigenvectors for
t (g, a), as a linear map acting on the innite-dimensional vector space e = ir  ir  ....
they read as follows.

unless otherwise noted, we will always assume that the parameters g and a are real

and satisfy the inequalities

1  g2(1  a2)

ga

|

| > 2,

|ga| < 1.

let q  q(g, a) be the real solution to the quadratic equation

ga(q +

1
q

) = 1  g2(1  a2),

such that |q| < 1. then the functions

fm(x|q) =xi1

xiv(m)

i

(q)

=p1  q2 x(q  x)m1
(1  qx)m ,

(2.4)

(2.5)

(2.6)

for m = 1, 2, 3, ... are the generating functions for the components v(m)
of the m-th eigen-
vector v(m)  v(m)(g, a) for t (g, a). moreover the corresponding vectors form an orthonor-
mal basis of e.

i

7

the second statement is readily proved by considering the following contour integral

over the unit circle

v(m)
i

v(m+p)
i

dx
2ix

v(m+p)  v(m) =xi1
=i
= (1  q2)i dx
=(cid:26) 0 if p  1

1 if p = 0

2i

fm+p(x|q)fm(

1
x|q)
(q  x)p1
(1  qx)p+1

(2.7)

where, using the cauchy residue formula, we have noted that there was no pole of the
integrand inside the unit disc when p  1 (recall that |q| < 1), and the result for p = 0 is
simply given by the residue at the pole x = q. this proves the orthonormality of the set

of vectors {v(m)}m=1,2,.... it is also easy to see that the matrix v with entries vi,m = v(m)

i

is symmetric. this is proved by noting that the generating function

v(x, y|q) = xi,m1

xiymv(m)

i = p1  q2 xy
1  q(x + y) + xy

,

(2.8)

is manifestly symmetric in x and y. from this symmetry and the orthogonality relation

(2.7), we deduce the following completeness relation

v(m)
i

v(m)
j = ij .

xm1

(2.9)

the rst statement above, that v(m) be the m-th eigenvector of t (g, a), is proved

analogously, by means of a contour integral over the unit circle:

xi(cid:18)t (g, a)v(m)(cid:19)i

xi1

= xi,j1

xiti,j (g, a)v(m)

j

1
y|q)

gxy

(x, y|g, a)fm(

dy
2iy

=i
=p1  q2i
ga + g2(1  a2)x

dy
2iy

=

gx

ga + g2(1  a2)x

(1  gax)  y(ga + g2(1  a2)x)
fm(cid:0)
=p1  q2gx(cid:0)(1  gax)q  (ga + g2(1  a2)x)(cid:1)m1
(cid:0)1  gax  q(ga + g2(1  a2)x)(cid:1)m .

1  gax

|q(cid:1)

8

1

y (q  1
(1  q

y )m1
y )m

(2.10)

note that only the pole y = y0(x) = (1  gax)/(ga + g2(1  a2)x) has contributed to
the contour integral, as we have taken now only the poles lying outside the unit disc, and
y0(x) > 1 for |x| < 1, thanks to the inequalities (2.4). using the equation (2.5), we may
write g2(1a2) = 1ag(q+ 1
q ), and notice that the numerator and denominator monomials
in the last line of (2.10) respectively read

(1  gax)q  (ga + g2(1  a2)x) = (q  x)(1 
1  gax  q(ga + g2(1  a2)x) = (1  qx)(1  qga),

),

ga
q

so that we nally arrive at the eigenvalue equation

t (g, a)v(m) = mv(m),

m  m(g, a) = g

(1  ga
q )m1
(1  qga)m ,

where

for m = 1, 2, 3, ...

(2.11)

(2.12)

(2.13)

let us examine our result in the pure lorentzian gravity case a = 1. the quadratic

equation (2.5) is solved as

q(g, 1) = gc(g2),

for |g| < 1

2 , where

c(x) =

1  1  4x

2x

(2n)!

(n + 1)!n!

xn,

= xn0

(2.14)

(2.15)

is the generating function of the catalan numbers, satisfying xc2(x) = c(x)  1. the
eigenvalues can then be simplied to read

m = [gc(g2)]2m1 = q2m1.

(2.16)

note that as |q| < 1, we have 1 > 2 > ... > 0, and all the eigenvalues have series
expansions in powers of g with positive integer coecients.

9

2.3. commuting transfer matrices

we now make the crucial observation that the eigenvectors v(m)(g, a) of the previous

section only depend on q, which is itself a certain function of g and a. hence there exists an

innite family of matrices t (g, a) sharing the same eigenvectors, namely those for which

the values of g, a lead to the same value of q. but matrices which can be diagonalized

simultaneously form a commuting set. more precisely, the following statement holds:

[t (g, a), t (g, a)] = 0 i

1  g2(1  a2)

ga

=

1  (g)2(1  (a)2)

ga

= q +

1
q

,

(2.17)

for arbitrary q (assumed to be real and such that |q| < 1). moreover, the common eigenvec-
tors are given by (2.6). again, eq.(2.17) can be proved directly by use of contour integrals

involving the product of two generating functions (2.3).

to better understand the mechanism of this commutation, let us express the transfer

matrix t in terms of its orthonormal eigenvectors and of its eigenvalues, namely

(x, y|g, a) = xm1

fm(x|q)mfm(y|q)
g

=

1  qga xm1
=  xm1

fm(x|q)m1fm(y|q)

fm(x|q)m1fm(y|q),

where we have identied

 =

q

1  ga
1  qga

,

(2.18)

(2.19)

by use of (2.13). for any xed q with |q| < 1, we may use the (spectral) parameter  to
characterize the dierent commuting matrices (2.17). denoting

tq() = t (g, a)

for

1  g2(1  a2)

ga

= q +

1
q

and ga =

1  
q  q

1

,

and

v (m)
q = v(m)(g, a),

independently of , we have from (2.18)

tq() =  xm1

m1v (m)

q

(v (m)

q

)t ,

10

(2.20)

(2.21)

(2.22)

where we have used the orthogonal projector p (m)
of tq(). thanks to the orthogonality relation for the eigenvectors, which translates into
q p (m)
p (m)

)t onto the m-th eigenspace

, we easily get that

q  v (m)

q

= m,m p (m)

q

(v (m)

q

q

tq()tq() = tq().

(2.23)

this relation trivially implies the commutation of transfer matrices (2.17). but this is
a much stronger constraint. note that all real values of  and q such that |q| < 1 are
allowed. note also that both the commutation (2.17) and the multiplicativity property

of spectral parameters (2.23) hold only with the help of the curvature weight a. the

solvability of the case without a curvature term (allowing for the solution of [12]) is

simply a consequence of these more general properties. finally, let us mention that the

transfer matrix of the regular lattice is a member of the family indexed by the parameter
q for any q, as it can be obtained by taking the limit a  0, g  1 while keeping the ratio
(1 g2(1 a2))/(ga) = q + (1/q) xed. in this limiting case,  = 1 and the transfer matrix
tq(1) is nothing but the identity matrix.

to conclude this section, let us rewrite the generating function (2.3) in terms of q and

 only

q(x, y|) = xi,j1

=

2.4. squares and triangles

xiyj(cid:2)tq()(cid:3)i,j

xy(1  q2)

(1  qx)(1  qy)  (q  x)(q  y)

(2.24)

.

the curvature model introduced above may be reinterpreted as a discrete model

for lorentzian gravity, where the world-sheet is generated by arbitrary tessellations with

squares and triangles that respect chronology. this is easily seen by performing the fol-

lowing transformation on the congurations of the previous model.

let us expand again in powers of x and y the generating function (2.3)

(x, y|g, a) =

gxy

1  ga(x + y)  g2(1  a2)xy

.

(2.25)

and interpret each contribution to xiyj as a conguration of i lower and j upper half-edges.

by expanding the denominator of (2.25), we get an arbitrary sequence of terms gax, gay
or g2(1  a2)xy. whenever a term gax (resp. gay) is picked, we interpret it as an isolated
lower (resp. upper) half edge, which comes with a weight ga. whenever a term g2(1a2)xy

11

ga

ga

g((cid:0)a)

fig. 3: the boltzmann weights of the square and triangle formulation of the
curvature model for discrete 2d lorentzian gravity. we have also represented
a typical world-sheet conguration in this new interpretation, together with
its dual, made of squares and triangles.

is picked, we now have a pair of a lower and an upper half-edge which we can regroup so

as to form a crossing of the time line (see fig.3). such crossings come with a weight factor
g2(1  a2). finally, the numerator gxy in (2.25) is there to ensure staircase boundary
conditions for these new congurations. it corresponds to adding a lower half-edge at the
far left and an upper one at the far right, each of which comes with a factor g only (and
no a).

we thus get another representation for the congurations contributing to the transfer

matrix element ti,j(g, a), with the boltzmann weights dened in fig.3. dually, these

correspond to supplementing the triangulations we have considered so far, by squares with

two time-like and two space-like edges (see the example of a world-sheet conguration

and its dual depicted in fig.3). all the weights have now been translated into dierent

fugacities for the triangles and for the squares. each triangle comes with a weight ga,
while each square receives a weight g2(1  a2). note that this latter weight is positive
or negative according to whether a is larger or smaller than 1. finally, the case of the
boundary triangles is special since they receive a weight g only. let us also mention that,

12

in the limit a  0 corresponding to a regular lattice, only squares and boundary triangles
survive, in which case it is clear that the only possible arrangement for the tessellation is

regular and the transfer matrix is the identity matrix as it should be.

((cid:0)a)
aa
aa
a
a
aa
((cid:0)a)+a=
a
a
a
a
aa

splitting

fig. 4: the connection between square-triangle tessellations and simple
triangulations is done by splitting each square (i.e. each crossing) into two
triangles (i.e into two half-edges). to recover the proper curvature weight,
we transfer the a factors as shown by the arrows. we then add up weights
corresponding to the same nal triangulation.

to make the contact with the curvature model, the idea is to split each square of

the tessellation into a pair of triangles. to recover the proper curvature weights, we

chose to split each square into a down triangle followed by an up one. now the same

triangulation is obtained from several square-triangle tessellations and the matrix element

ti,j(g, a) is obtained by summing over all these congurations. in the dual language, our

splitting corresponds to separating each crossing into a lower and an upper half, such that

the upper-half sits at the left of the lower one (see fig.4). as far as the g factors are
concerned, since each crossing receives a factor g2, which after splitting, gives a weight g
per half edge, it is clear that these factors are well taken into account. the g factors
at the boundary are also correct. the a factors are more subtle. before we collect all

these factors, we remark that we can transfer the weight a of each lower half-edge, which

13

is not at the left boundary, to the horizontal link sitting just above it and to its left (see

fig.4). similarly, we transfer the factor a attached to each upper half-edge, which is not

at the right boundary, to the horizontal link sitting just below to its right. then all the

horizontal links which separate two lower half-edges (resp. two upper half-edges) receive a

factor a from their right lower half-edge (resp. their left upper half-edge) as they should in

the curvature language, while all the horizontal links with a lower half-edge on the left and

an upper half-edge on the right receive a factor 1 as they should. finally the horizontal

links with an upper half-edge on the left and a lower half-edge on the right receive a
weight a2 from the two half-edges, together with a contribution (1  a2) coming from the
conguration where these two half-edges were connected to form a crossing. adding these

weights restores a factor 1, as required.

2.5. dimers

from our experience with two-dimensional euclidean quantum gravity we know that

the simplest way of introducing matter in two-dimensional universes is to allow for dimers.

dimers are decorated links which have a certain weight associated with them and each

triangle in a triangulation can carry at most one dimer. it is well known that by ne-

tuning the weight of the dimers in two-dimensional euclidean quantum gravity to some

specic negative value one can reach a critical point where the universality class of the

underlying geometrical system changes from that of pure gravity to that characteristic
of gravity coupled to non-unitary matter with central charge c = 22/5. it is therefore
interesting to note that our model of triangles and squares can be viewed as a simple dimer

model. this interpretation simply comes about if one views each square as consisting of

two triangles sharing a dimer which lies along either one of the diagonals of the square.

in this picture the triangle building blocks do not have any dimers associated with them.

the weight of a square, g2(1  a2) is hence to be understood as 2  (ga)2(cid:0)(1  a2)/(2a2)(cid:1)
where ga is the weight of a triangle, (1 a2)/(2a2) is the weight of a dimer and the factor 2
in front takes into account that there are two ways of placing the dimer inside the square.

from this decomposition it follows that if new critical behaviour occurs it should happen

at a value of a for which a > 1. however, it is important to note that our model only

includes a subset of congurations of the full dimer model since we do not have any dimers

on the space-like links. thus, if we do not see any new critical behaviour for the model in

question it does not necessarily imply that such behaviour does not occur for the full dimer

model. in this connection, let us mention that there have been studies of two-dimensional

14

euclidean quantum gravity coupled to dimers in a spirit similar to this one. namely, one

has calculated loop-loop correlation functions as a function of distance, not leaving out

any matter congurations but modifying the concept of distance so as to avoid dimers on

the entrance and exit loop. in that approach a continuum behaviour dierent from that

of pure gravity was seen [11].

2.6. solution and continuum limit

the property (2.23) yields immediately the generating function of the t -th power of

the transfer matrix, describing a world-sheet of time-size t :

q,t (x, y|) = xi,j1
= xi,j1
(1  qx)(1  qy)  t (q  x)(q  y)

xiyjzi,j(t|g, a)
xiyj(cid:2)tq()t(cid:3)i,j
xy(1  q2)

=

t
2

for all t = 0, 1, 2, ....

(2.26)

.

as noted in [13], one can derive a continuum limit of the expression (2.26), that
corresponds in our notations to the limit q  1 (ga  a/(a + 1)). the critical values
x = y = 1 (corresponding to the limiting convergence radii of the series fm(x|q) and
fm(y|q)) must be approached simultaneously. we see then from (2.26) that  must also
tend to 1 for the expression to remain nite. but from (2.19), a natural way to realize the
latter limit is to simply keep a constant while q  1 (and g  1/(a + 1)).

let us therefore perform the following scaling transformations for some small param-

eter 

t =




,

x = 1  x,

y = 1  y,

q = e,

(2.27)

where  is the renormalized cosmological constant,  the continuous time variable, and 

an innitesimal parameter with the dimension of a length. this corresponds in turn to the

scaling behaviour

 = 1  2a + o(2),

g =

1

a + 1

(1 

a
2

2) + o(4),

(2.28)

for xed a. applying the transformations (2.27) to (2.26), we get the rescaled two-loop

generating function

(x, y |, , a)  lim

0

q,t (x, y|)

=

(x + )(y + )  e2 a(x  )(y  )

(2.29)

,

2e a

15

the actual two-loop correlator

g(l1, l2|, , a)  lim

0

1


zl1,l2 (t|g, a),

(2.30)

with li = li, i = 1, 2 is obtained by performing the inverse laplace transformation of
(2.29), leading to (we have set  = ea for simplicity)

dxdy el1x+l2y (x, y |, , a)
(l1u+l2v)

i

dudv

g(l1, l2|, , a) =z i
i
2e
=z i
= 2z i
i
= 2el2

1+2

du

e

u(1+2 )+(12 )

(u + 1)(v + 1)  2(u  1)(v  1)
(cid:16)l1ul2
u(12)+(1+2 )(cid:17)
u(1  2) + (1 + 2)
(cid:16)l1u+l2
12 l2(cid:19)k
(cid:18) 42

12 z i

42
12

i

1+2

du

e

1

u(12 )+(1+2 )(cid:17)

u(1  2) + (1 + 2)

(2.31)

= 2el2

l2

12 xk0
12 xk0

1+2

(l1+l2) 1+2

k!

i

z i
l2(cid:19)k dk
duk e
(1  2)2 l1l2(cid:19)k

1

(k!)2 (cid:18) 42
(1  2)2
(k!)2 (cid:18) 42
1

12 xk0

=

=

2
1  2 e
2
1  2 e

l1u

du e

(u(1  2) + (1 + 2))k+1

l1u(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)u= 1+2

12

,

where we have rst made the change of variables x = u and y = v, and then
used the cauchy formula to express the integral as a sum over residues (only one pole in
v contributes, located at v(u) = (u(1 + 2) + (1  2))/(u(1  2) + (1 + 2)), whereas
only the multiple poles at u = (1 + 2)/(2  1) occur). in terms of the rescaled variables,
the two-loop correlator reads nally

g(l1, l2|, , a)


=

e(l1+l2)cotanh(a)i0(cid:18) 2l1l2
sinh(a)(cid:19) ,
where i0 is the modied bessel function i0(x) =pk0(x/2)2k/(k!)2.

sinh(a)

a few remarks are in order. first note that the dependence on the curvature parameter

(2.32)

a is quite simple, and that the physics of the model is not aected by it. so we must draw

16

the rather negative conclusion that the introduction of curvature in the model cannot

change its scaling behaviour. it has just shifted the critical value of g (from 1/2 for the pure

gravity case to 1/(a + 1) in the model with curvature). moreover the explicit dependence
on a can be entirely absorbed in redenitions of l1, l2,  and g, namely l1  al1,
l2  al2,   /a2 and g  ag. this triviality of the curvature dependence will be
explained in sect. 3 below, from a very dierent perspective.

as a nal consistency check, let us compute the a  0 limit of the two-loop correlator
(2.32). using the asymptotics of the bessel function i0(x)  ex/2x for large x, we get

 a (l1l2)2

e 1

g(l1, l2|, , a  0) 


p4 al1l2
2l1

1

(pl1 pl2) = (l1  l2),

(2.33)

where we have used the limit lims0+ ex2/s/s = (x). we recover therefore the
expected at world-sheet result (also stated as z1,2 (t|1, 0) = 1,2 ).

2.7. other boundary conditions

in [13], where boundary conditions were chosen to be periodic, the result for the two-

loop correlator in the scaling limit is very similar to (2.31) except that a = 1 (no curvature)

and more importantly that the modied bessel function i0 is replaced by i1. we have a
very simple explanation for this fact, that involves computing the p-seam loop correlator

which we will dene now. up to now, we only considered triangulations with staircase

boundary conditions. let us denote these triangulations as being of type (i). starting

from such a type (i) triangulation in its dual picture, a seemingly easy way to get periodic

boundary conditions would be simply to identify the left and right staircase boundaries of

the triangulation to construct a cylinder marked by a seam, remnant of the staircase. this

construction is however problematic. indeed, on each horizontal step of the left staircase

boundary, we can have an arbitrary number of incoming lower half edges. similarly, on any

horizontal step of the right staircase boundary, we have an arbitrary number of incoming

upper half-edges. when connecting these two staircases, there is no well dened natural

prescription for deciding how to place these lower and upper half edges with respect to

one-another.

to overcome this problem , we need to introduce a new type of triangulations, which

we will call type (ii), and which can be glued without ambiguity to a type (i) triangulation.

17

(i)

(ii)

(ii)

(i)

fig. 5: an example of triangulation of type (i) and a triangulation of type
(ii). the boundary chaplets serve as seams to connect type (i) to type (ii)
triangulations. we give an example of cylinder made of two glued triangula-
tions. any marked point (black dot) on the lower (resp. upper) loop denes
a unique chaplet of triangles pointing up (resp. pointing down).

let us rst see how the existence of a staircase in the dual representation translates into

the original (i.e. non-dual) representation made of triangles. each leftmost lower half-

edge of the dual picture becomes a triangle pointing up. each such leftmost triangle is

attached by its lower left vertex to the upper vertex of the leftmost triangle in the layer

just below, so as to form a chaplet (see fig.5). similarly, the right staircase translates into

a chaplet of triangles pointing down, each triangle being attached by its upper right vertex

to the lower vertex of the triangle in the layer just above. the space between these two

chaplets is lled with strips of triangles of arbitrary length, including strips of length zero

corresponding to the case where the two chaplets would be in contact. the two chaplets

will serve as seams in our construction. in order to glue our type (i) triangulation to a

type (ii) triangulation, this type (ii) triangulation must itself have boundaries made of

chaplets but now with the reverse convention, i.e. with a chaplet of triangles pointing up

as its right boundary and a chaplet of triangles pointing down as its left boundary (see

18

fig.5). again, the space between these chaplets is to be lled with strips of arbitrary,

possibly zero, length. it is clear that we can glue a type (i) triangulation to a type (ii)

triangulation on any side by simply superimposing the left (resp. right) chaplet of the

former to the right (resp. left) chaplet of the latter. we can thus construct a p-seam loop

correlator by gluing p triangulations of alternating type (i) and (ii), and, assuming that

p is even, gluing the last triangulation to the rst one so as to form a cylinder (see fig.5

for p = 2). if the number p of triangulations is odd, we can build an open object with
p  1 seams and either type (i) or type (ii) boundary conditions, depending on whether
to two extremal triangulations are of type (i) or of type (ii). this construction gives a
nice a posteriori explanation for our choice of weight g per boundary half-edge: this is
because the edges (or the triangles) have to be identied by pairs to form the seam, hence

the weight is right to get a factor g per half-edge of the seam.

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

fig. 6: the one-to-one correspondence between type (i) and type (ii) trian-
gulations. starting from a type (i) triangulation (a), we move each slice one
step to the left with respect to the slice just below to obtain (b). we then
send the lower left and upper right vertices of the boundary triangles thus
released in each slice to respectively upper left and lower right position to
obtain the type (ii) triangulation (c), or equivalently (d). the passage from
(a) to (d) is clearly invertible.

we have computed in sect. 2.1 the transfer matrix for type (i) triangulations, given

by (2.2). a remarkable result is that, although type (ii) triangulations are dierent from

type (i) triangulations, the transfer matrix for type (ii) triangulations is identical to that

of type (i), i.e.

t (ii)
i,j (g, a) = t (i)

i,j (g, a) = ti,j(g, a),

(2.34)

with ti,j(g, a) given by (2.2). to understand this property, we remark that starting from
a type (i) triangulation, we can deform it into a type (ii) triangulation by simply letting

19

each time slice move one step to the left with respect to the slice just below, and by sending

the lower left and upper right vertices of the boundary triangles so released in each slice, to

respectively upper left and lower right positions (see fig.6). this transformation is clearly

invertible, hence the announced result (2.34).

thanks to the above construction, we may dene and compute the p-seam two-loop

correlator by juxtaposing side by side p copies of alternating (i) and (ii) triangulations,

with a total lower (resp. upper) loop length of 1 (resp. 2), in which we simply have

to identify the consecutive chaplet boundaries (again, the boundary weights produce the

desired weight g per half-edge of seam). assuming p even and gluing the last triangulation

to the rst one, this leads to the p-seam two-loop correlator

z(p)
1,2

(t|g, a) =(cid:2)(cid:0)t (g, a)  t (g, a)  ...  t (g, a)(cid:1)t(cid:3)1,2

(2.35)

where there are p factors in the tensor product, and the matrix element (1, 2) actually

corresponds to the sum over all p-tuples of pairs of indices (mi, ni) for each t (g, a), with

pi(ni  1/2) = 1 and pi(mi  1/2) = 2. in terms of generating functions, the p-seam

correlator (2.35) is simply generated by:

(p)

q,t (x, y|) =(cid:18) q,t (x, y|)

xy

(cid:19)p

,

p even .

(2.36)

for odd p, gluing p triangulations of alternating type (i) and (ii) leads to an open object

of either type (i) or type (ii) with the two-loop correlator now generated by:

(p)

q,t (x, y|) = xy(cid:18) q,t (x, y|)

xy

(cid:19)p

,

p odd .

(2.37)

let us now perform the scaling transformations (2.27) on (2.36) or (2.37).we obtain

the p-seam scaling function (note that it has required a multiplication by p to produce a

nite limit)

(p)(x, y |, , a) = (x, y |, , a)p.

(2.38)

we get the corresponding two-loop correlator by applying the inverse laplace transform,

20

and performing integrations analogous to those of (2.31):

g(p)(l1, l2|, , a) =z i

i

dxdy el1x+l2y (x, y |, , a)p

=

du

i

dudve

= z i
=z i
(p  1)!
i
(2l2)p
(p  1)!l2 z i
(2l2)p
(p  1)!l2 xk0
2(l1l2)p1
(1  2)(p  1)!

i
1

=

=

2

l1u

(2)pe

(l1u+l2v)(cid:18)
((u(1  2) + (1 + 2)))p

((u + 1)(v + 1)  2(u  1)(v  1))(cid:19)p
l2v(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)v= u(1+2 )+(12 )

dp1
dvp1 e
(cid:16)l1ul2
u(12 )+(1+2 )(cid:17)
(u(1  2) + (1 + 2))p

u(1+2 )+(12 )

u(12 )+(1+2 )

du

e

(l1ul2
e

1+2
12 )

du

k!(cid:18) 42
1  2
e(l1+l2) 1+2

l2(cid:19)kz i
(u(1  2) + (1 + 2))p+k
12l1l2(cid:17)2k+p1
(cid:16) 2
k!(k + p  1)!

i

12 xk0

,

(2.39)

(2.40)

for p  1. in terms of the rescaled variables, the p-seam two-loop correlator reads

g(p)(l1, l2|, , a)

=

(l1l2)p1
sinh(a)(p  1)!

e

(l1+l2)cotanh(a)ip1(cid:18) 2l1l2
sinh(a)(cid:19) ,

where im denotes the m-th modied bessel function, dened by the series im(x) =

pk0(x/2)m+2k/(k!(m + k)!).

when p = 1 this reduces to (2.32), as it should. more interestingly, when p = 2, in

the pure gravity case a = 1, the expression reduces, up to a factor of l2, to the result
for the two-loop correlator in periodic boundary conditions with one marked point on the

lower loop [12], i.e. equivalently, the two-loop correlator in periodic boundary conditions

with one marked point on the lower loop and one marked point on the upper loop (note

that marking a point on the external loops simply amounts to multiplying by the length

of this loop in the correlator).

on can easily explain this coincidence by noticing that, starting from a cylindric

world-sheet with a marked point, say, on the lower loop, this marked point denes a unique

chaplet of up triangles crossing the cylinder from the lower to the upper loop. indeed this

point is the lower left vertex of a unique up triangle in the rst slice, whose upper vertex

21

is itself the lower left vertex of a unique triangle in the second slice, and so on (see fig.5).

similarly, any marked point on the upper loop denes a unique chaplet of triangles pointing

down. thus marking a point on the upper loop and one on the lower loop amounts to

marking two chaplets, one made of up triangles and one made of down triangles. such

chaplets cannot intersect and thus divide the cylinder into two triangulations, one of type

(i) and one of type (ii). this explains the connection between the two-seam two-loop

correlator and the periodic loop correlator. note that this nice property breaks down as

soon as p > 2 because, for more than one point on each external loop, we cannot guaranty

for arbitrary chosen marked points that the corresponding chaplets alternate along the

cylinder between up and down chaplets, which is crucial to keep our interpretation as

p-seam correlator. in particular two successive chaplets of the same (up or down) type can

now merge into a single chaplet.

note nally that we have the following relation between our (2p + 2)-seam correlator

and the amplitude ap (with p + 1 a type of winding number) obtained by nakayama in a

continuum calculation using proper time gauge [14]

g(2p+2)(l1, l2|, , a = 1) =

(l1l2)pl1l2

(2p + 1)!

ap.

(2.41)

3. lorentzian triangulations as random walks

in this section, we will discuss the equivalence between lorentzian gravity congura-

tions and ordinary random walk (rw) congurations in one dimension. this connection

will allow us to re-phrase the quantities computed above in the language of rw statis-

tics. for instance we will see how the two-loop correlator of lorentzian gravity relates

to a well-known generating function for the large excursions of a brownian motion. this

equivalence will also explain why lorentzian triangulations have fractal dimension 2 and
why introducing a curvature weight (i.e. taking a 6= 1) cannot change the continuum large
scale properties of lorentzian gravity, as found in sect. 2.4. finally, the rw picture will

also provide a very direct derivation of the crucial property (2.23) for the product of two

transfer matrices.

22

3.1. equivalence between lorentzian triangulations and random walks

the random triangulations describing lorentzian gravity can be seen as deformations

of a regular triangular lattice. more precisely, if we view the regular triangular lattice as

made of regular time slices of alternating up and down triangles, then removing some of

these triangles and gluing together the remaining ones along their time-like edges within

each strip leads to a triangulation like that of fig.1. conversely, we can, starting from

a random triangulation of this type, insert a number of additional triangles to make it

regular. it is therefore possible to visualize a random triangulation as a regular one with

two types of triangles: real triangles which are to be kept and form the triangulation

and virtual triangles which have to be shrunk or removed.

this splitting procedure into real and virtual triangles can be made according to a well

dened procedure which we shall now describe, and which takes the form of a one-to-one

correspondence between lorentzian triangulations and directed random walks drawn on

the regular triangular lattice.

the equivalence is as follows:

consider a directed random walk drawn on the regular lattice, starting at height
h = 0, making h = 1 steps to the right and ending at height h = t + 1 after s steps
(see fig.7). since the walk is directed, the horizontal direction can be viewed as well

as an eective time dimension for the random walk whose motion takes place in the one

dimensional vertical h-direction. this height variable h will however correspond to the
time variable t of the triangulation, with each time slice t lying between heights h = t  1
and h = t. the random walk is moreover required to stay conned within the strip
0  h  t + 1. now to each elementary ascending step of the rw between heights h and
h + 1, we associate the pair of triangles of the regular lattice made of the up triangle lying

immediately to its right in the time slice h + 1 and the down triangle lying just below

in the slice h (see fig.7). these triangles will be the real triangles to be kept in the

triangulation. removing all the other triangles and gluing the real ones together along

their time-like edges, we end up with a random lorentzian triangulation of width t , and

decorated by l1 down triangles in time slice t = 0 and l2 up triangles in time slice t = t +1.

these extremal time slices are then removed to recover the relevant triangulation. note

that from the above construction where we add triangles only to the right of the ascending

23

t+1

1
0

h=

t

2
1

t=

t

2

1

(a)

+1t

t

2

1

0

(b)

(c)

fig. 7: starting from a directed random walk (a) drawn on the regular
triangular lattice, we associate to each ascending step of the walk the pair of
triangles lying just below it (grey triangles). we then eliminate all the other
triangles and glue the grey triangles together along their time-like edges inside
each strip, thus forming a random lorentzian triangulation (b). the 0 and
t + 1 slices (light-grey triangles) are nally removed (c).

steps, it follows that the resulting triangulation satises the staircase condition of sect.
2.17.

we can thus associate to each directed rw of the type described above a lorentzian

triangulation with staircase boundary conditions. let us now describe how, starting now

from such a lorentzian triangulation, we recover the associated rw. this reverse construc-

tion can be performed in three steps as shown in fig.8. the rst step is to go to the dual

representation of the triangulation (fig.8-b). in a second step, the dual world-sheet con-

guration can be transformed into a tree conguration (fig.8-c) by attaching each vertical

dual bond to the bond sitting in the strip just below and to its left. in a third step, this

tree-like structure is transformed into a directed random walk (fig.8-d) by simply following

7 note that the triangles can be viewed as well as being added on the left side of the descending
slopes of a directed walk, now going from height h = t and reaching height h = 1 after s steps

to the left.

24

(a)

(b)

(d)

(c)

fig. 8: starting from a lorentzian triangulation satisfying staircase bound-
ary conditions (a), we go to the dual conguration (b) and attach each vertical
dual bond to the bond to its left in the preceding strip, as shown by the ar-
rows, to get a tree structure (c). following the contour of the trees from
the lower left branch to the upper right one (black points), the sequence of
ascents and descents can be translated into a directed random walk (d).

the contour of the trees from the lower left branch to the upper right one and making a
step h = +1 for each ascent along a branch and a step h = 1 for each descent along
a branch. it is easy to check that the resulting rw is precisely the expected one.

our main result here is thus a one-to-one correspondence between directed random

walks and lorentzian triangulations, which in turn implies a direct equivalence for the

various quantities describing them. some of these relations will be described in the next

25

section. let us simply note here that we can deal with all types of boundary conditions.

the staircase boundary condition described in this section corresponds to random walks

starting at h = 0 and ending at height h = t + 1. the case of walks starting and ending

at h = 0 would describe periodic boundary conditions with a marked point in the lower

loop of the triangulation.

3.2. two-loop correlator as a generating function for large excursions

let us now re-interpret some of the natural statistical properties of random lorentzian

triangulations in the language of random walks.

since we associate a pair of triangles to each ascending step, the number nt of triangles

is directly related to the length s of the walk by:

nt + (l1 + l2) = s + t + 1.

(3.1)

here nt counts all the triangles with 1  t  t , ignoring the (l1 + l2) triangles in the
slices t = 0 and t = t + 1 which are removed in the construction of the triangulation. we

also used the fact that there are t + 1 more ascending steps than descending steps in the
walk. setting a = 1 for the time-being, the triangulation comes with a factor gntt due
to the particular treatment of the extremal left and right triangles in each of the t slices.
the corresponding weight gs(l1+l21) can be interpreted as a fugacity g per step for the
random walk, together with a reection factor (1/g) for each of the l1 contacts at h = 0

or the l2 contacts at h = t + 1, except for the last contact. note that for the critical value
g = 1/2, we can view these weights as a probability 1/2 for the walk to make a step up or

down inside the strip and a probability 1 for the walk to make an up (resp. a down) step

at the h = 0 (resp. h = t + 1) boundary, i.e. we have an unbiased random walk between

two reecting walls.

the sizes l1 and l2 of the bottom and top loops of the triangulation correspond pre-

cisely to the number of contacts at h = 0 and at h = t + 1 respectively. we can thus
reinterpret the two-loop correlator zl1,l2 (t|g, a = 1) as the generating function

zl1,l2 (t|g, a = 1) =

1

(2g)l1+l21 xs0

(2g)spt (l1, l2, s)

(3.2)

where pt (l1, l2, s) is the probability for an unbiased walker starting at h = 0 and evolving

between two reecting walls at h = 0 and h = t + 1 to reach the wall h = t + 1 in s steps

26

after exactly l1 contacts (including the rst one) at the bottom wall and l2 (including the

last one) at the top wall.

more generally, if we re-instate the factor x (resp. y) per space like link in the bottom
(resp. top) loop, the triangulation generating function t (x, y|g, a = 1) (given by eq. (2.26)
for a = 1, i.e. q = (1 p1  4g2)/(2g) and  = q2) becomes the generating function for

random walks between two walls with a weight g per step and a weight x/g (resp. y/g) per

contact to the bottom (resp. the top) wall. in the rw language, we call each portion of

walk between two successive contacts an excursion. since the walk is a markov process,

each of these excursions is an independent random object. excursions here are of four

types: bottom-bottom and top-top excursions, which have the same generating function

(up to the exchange of x and y), and bottom-top and top-bottom excursions which also

have the same generating function. for instance the bottom-bottom excursion counts the

walks starting and ending at h = 0 and staying below h = t . the distribution probability

for, say, the height and the length of bottom-bottom excursions is a basic quantity of

the random walk statistics and enters many dierent physical problems. its continuous,

brownian motion limiting scaling expression is well known, as are many other more involved

excursion properties appearing in many dierent areas of physics. as an example, we would

like to show here how the two-loop correlator of lorentzian gravity directly relates to a well

known probability distribution describing the diusion of a particle in a one-dimensional

random energy landscape.

the diusion of a particle in a random energy landscape can be modelled by the so-

called sinai model [20], where a particle jumps to one of its two neighbouring sites with
a probability p  exp(u ) involving the energy dierence u with this neighbouring
if we represent the energy landscape as a random walk, with the height h  u
site.
corresponding to the energy, a bottom-bottom excursion describes an energy barrier of

height less than t . exact expressions for the large time properties of the diusion have

been obtained and it was recognized that a good way to recover these expressions is to

assume that the particle at time t is localized precisely in the lowest energy minimum it

can reach by passing all the energy barriers of height less than a certain maximal size t (t),
with the relation t (t)  ln(t). let us for instance consider the example of fig.9 (b) where
a particle, starting at a wall, jumps to the right by passing all barriers of height strictly

less than t , looking for lower and lower minima to the right until it reaches a barrier of

27

(a)

(b)

+1t

0

t

fig. 9: (a) a random walk entering the denition of zm+1,1(t|g, a), i.e.
with m + 1 contacts (here m = 4) at h = 0 and 1 contact at h = t +
1.
(b) the corresponding energy landscape obtained by erasing in (a) all
the ascending steps following immediately a contact at h = 0. the deepest
minimum reachable by a diusing particle (black dot) passing energy barriers
of height strictly less than t is at depth m (white circle).

height larger than or equal to t . how far and how deep does the particle go? from (3.2),

we know that the quantity

zl1=m+1,l2=1(t|g, a = 1) =

1

(2g)m+1 xs0

(2g)spt (m + 1, 1, s) ,

(3.3)

relates to the probability pt (m + 1, 1, s) that the walk reaches h = t + 1 for the rst time

after s steps and passes m times at h = 0. if we deform the walk by suppressing the rst

ascending step after each contact point at h = 0, the quantity pt (m + 1, 1, s) becomes

the probability for the diusing particle to have reached a depth m by passing barriers of
length strictly less than t and being blocked after s  m  1 steps by a barrier of height
larger or equal to t . going to the continuous limit and using (2.32), we obtain that the

two-loop correlator

g(l, 0| = 1, , a = 1) =



sinh()

lcotanh(),

e

should be equal to the laplace transform

p (l, ) z 

0

dxp (l, x)ex,

28

(3.4)

(3.5)

of the probability density p (l, x) for the particle to reach the deepest minimum at depth

l and being blocked at a distance x from the wall, in the scaling limit of large t , m, and s
with m/t = l and s/t 2 = x xed8. this probability is the convolution of the probability

p1(l, x1) that the particle reaches the deepest minimum at depth l and distance x1 from
the wall, and the probability p2(x2) that the last excursion to the blocking point is of
length x2. the expression (3.4) is then a direct consequence of the following expressions

p1(l, ) z 
p2() z 

0

0

dx1p1(l, x1)ex1 = e


dx2p2(x2)ex2 =

sinh()

lcotanh(),

,

(3.6)

which are well known in the context of the sinai model [21].

the rw equivalence also provides an explanation for the fractal dimension 2 of

lorentzian triangulations. it is well-known that the brownian motion has fractal dimen-

sion 2, meaning that the time (represented here by the length s of the walk) needed to
travel over a distance t (here the height h  t ) scales as t 2. since s corresponds in our
equivalence to the number nt of triangles, i.e to the area a of the triangulation, we obtain
that a  t 2 and thus get a fractal dimension 2 for lorentzian triangulations. note that
the fact that l1 (or l2) scales as t is also clear in the sinai model language (with l1  m)
where it means that the depth reached by passing maximal barriers of order t is itself of

order t .

3.3. curvature and universality

let us now re-instate a curvature weight a 6= 1 in the problem, and let us see how
it translates into the random walk language. as for the equivalence with tessellations of

triangles and squares of sect. 2.4, we can regroup the up and down triangles in each strip

as follows. one rst re-groups all pairs of triangles made of an up triangle immediately
followed to its right by a down triangle and assign a weight g2 to these pairs. the remaining

up triangles necessarily have an up triangle to their right. we thus assign them a weight ga

accounting for the fugacity g per triangle and the curvature weight a for their interaction

with their right neighbour. similarly, each remaining down triangle necessarily has a

down triangle to its left and again receives a weight ga for the same reasons. with this

8 strictly speaking, the particle is blocked after s  m  1 steps, not s, but this correction

scales less rapidly than t 2 and is thus negligible.

29

construction, all the weights have been collected properly and we simply need an extra

factor 1/g to correct for the special boundary weights. otherwise stated, we can assign
a weight ga for each triangle and correct with a factor 1/a2 for each pair made of an

up triangle followed by a down one and a global 1/g factor. this way of correcting is

alternative to that of sect. 2.4 consisting in adding squares in the game. denoting by p

the total number of up-down pairs in the whole triangulation, we get a weight:

1
gt

(ga)nt
(a2)p .

(3.7)

now in the rw picture, it is easy to see that up triangles lie immediately to the right of

an ascending step, and that they are followed by a down triangle if and only if the next

step is also ascending. in other words, pairs of up-down triangles correspond exactly to
pairs made of two successive ascending steps. denoting by n++ (resp. n+, n+, n) the
pairs of successive ascending-ascending (resp. ascending-descending, descending-ascending,

descending-descending) steps, we have the relations

n+ = n+,
p = n++,
t = n++  n,
s = n++ + n+ + n+ + n .

(3.8)

the rst relation simply states that there are as many summits as valleys in the rw

landscape. thanks to these relations and to eq. (3.1), we can rewrite (3.7) as

gs(l1+l21)an+++n++n++n+t(l1+l21)

an+++n+t

= gs

1

(ga)l1+l21 an++n+ .

(3.9)

the introduction of a 6= 1 has thus two eects in the rw weight: (i) it changes the
interaction of contact with the walls from (1/g) to (1/ga) and (ii) introduces a factor a for

each change of slope in the walk. note that the two eects cancel exactly at the walls so

that the net contribution is simply a factor a for each change of slope inside the strip. such
a weight is nothing but an extrinsic curvature energy e   ln(a) for the one dimensional
random walk. it is thus remarkable that the intrinsic curvature weight of two-dimensional

lorentzian gravity translates into an extrinsic one-dimensional curvature weight for the

equivalent random walk problem. note that according to whether a is less or larger than

30

one, one has a positive (favoring straight lines) or negative (favoring u-turns) curvature

elastic constant.

it is well known that extrinsic curvature is an irrelevant perturbation for the large

scale properties of the random walk. at most it introduces a nite correlation length below

which the random walk is rigid (positive curvature) or crumpled (negative curvature) but at

scales larger than this correlation length, the curvature plays no role. up to an appropriate

rescaling, one thus recovers asymptotically the same continuum limit as without curvature

energy. this is precisely what we observed in (2.32).

3.4. product of two transfer matrices

from the rw picture of lorentzian triangulations, we can easily re-derive the relation

(2.23) for the product of two transfer matrices.
indeed, a two-matrix product element
like [t (g, a)t (g, a)]i,j corresponds to a sum with appropriate weights over all lorentzian
triangulations made of exactly two time slices, with a xed number i of up triangles in

their lower slice, a xed number j of down triangles in their upper slice, and with staircase

boundary conditions. in the rw representation, we thus have to consider all the random
walks in a strip of height three 0  h  3, starting at h = 0, ending at h = 3 and having
exactly i contacts at h = 0 and j contacts at h = 3. we thus have to sum over all these
rw with a xed number of contacts at the top and at the bottom of the strip 0  h  3.
now we can decompose any such random walk into i + j  1 blocks corresponding
to the i + j  1 portions of the walk between two successive contacts (see fig.10). the
blocks are of four types, numbered (1) to (4), according to whether these contacts are

at the bottom or the top of the strip, namely (see fig.10): (1) bottom-bottom, (2) top-

top, (3) bottom-top, and (4) top-bottom. these blocks dier only by the (up or down)

nature of their rst and last steps while the intermediate steps form a saw-tooth sequence
h = , , , , , ,   , with  = 1 or 1, of arbitrary (possibly zero) length k. the
desired sum over the random walks can be achieved by rst choosing one of the (cid:0)i+j2
i1 (cid:1)

allowed sequences for the bottom and top contacts, then summing over all the random

walks having this particular sequence of contacts, and nally summing over all sequences.

alternatively, we can attach directly a global weight individually to each of the four block

types by summing over all possible intermediate congurations, i.e. over all values of the

lengths k.

if we are interested in the matrix-product t (g, a)t (g, a), we must attach a weight
ga to each ascending step in the slice 0  h  1, a weight ga to each ascending step in

31

(1)

(3)

(2)

(4)

fig. 10: the decomposition of a walk of height t + 1 = 3 into blocks. each
block is a portion of the walk between two successive contacts at the walls
h = or h = 3. the blocs are of four types according to the four possibilities
(1) bottom-bottom, (2) top-top, (3) bottom-top and (4) top-bottom for the
two contacts at their extremities.

the slice 2  h  3 and a weight (ggaa) to each ascending step in the slice 1  h  2. we
then must correct this weight by a curvature factor 1/a2 for each sequence h = 0, 1, 2 and
a factor 1/a2 for each sequence h = 1, 2, 3. gathering these factors and summing over k,
we obtain the block weights:

w(1)

2 = ga +

ga
a2

(ggaa)k =

w(2)

2 = ga +

(ggaa)k =

ga + g2(1  a2)ga

,

1  ggaa
ga + g2(1  a2)ga

1  ggaa

ga
a2





xk=1
xk=1
xk=1



(ggaa)k =

g2g2

1  ggaa

,

(ga)(ga)

a2a2

w(3)

2 =

w(4)

2 =



xk=0

(ggaa)k =

1

1  ggaa

.

,

(3.10)

note that all the weights have been gathered inside the blocks and that consecutive blocks
do not interact. in order to have the commutation t (g, a)t (g, a) = t (g, a)t (g, a), it is
sucient that the four weights above are invariant under the change (g, a)  (g, a). this

32

is readily the case for the weights w(3)
commutation condition reads therefore:

2

and w(4)

2 , while w(1)

2

and w(2)

2

are exchanged. the

w(1)
2 = w(2)

2 

1  g2(1  a2)

ga

=

1  g2(1  a2)

ga

 q +

1
q

,

(3.11)

dening for the two couples (g, a) and (g, a) a common value of q as in (2.5).

to go further and show (2.23), we must compare the product t (g, a)t (g, a) to a
single matrix say t (g, a). let us note that the same block decomposition as before can
be achieved for random walks in a strip of height two, describing one-slice triangulations
contributing to the elements of a single matrix t (g, a). in this case, the contact sequence
fully species the random walk and the four block types correspond the the four possible
two step sequences: (1) h = +1, 1, (2) h = 1, +1, (3) h = +1, +1 and (4)h =
1, 1. this leads immediately to the following block weights:

1 = ga,

w(1)
1 = w(2)
w(3)
1 = g2,
w(4)

1 = 1.

(3.12)

let us now consider the same sequence of blocks with n(i) blocks of type (i), in both
the product t (g, a)t (g, a) and t (g, a). on one hand, the weight contribution to
t (g, a)t (g, a) is:

1

gg (cid:16)w(1)

2 (cid:17)n(1)

2 (cid:17)n(2)
(cid:16)w(2)

2 (cid:17)n(3)
(cid:16)w(3)

2 (cid:17)n(4)
(cid:16)w(4)

,

(3.13)

where the pre-factor 1/gg comes from the special weight of the boundary triangles. on
the other hand, the contribution to t (g, a) is simply:

1

g (cid:16)w(1)

1 (cid:17)n(1)+n(2)

1 (cid:17)n(3)
(cid:16)w(3)

.

(3.14)

using the commutation relation (3.11) and the fact that n(3) = n(4) + 1, i.e. the number

of ascending blocks is one unit more than the number of descending blocks for the

random walks that we consider, we can rewrite (3.13) as:

1

2 (cid:16)w(1)

2 (cid:17)n(1)+n(2)

ggw(4)

2 w(4)

(cid:16)w(3)

2 (cid:17)n(3)

.

(3.15)

33

we get therefore obtain the product relation:

t (g, a)t (g, a) =

g

ggw(4)

2

t (g, a),

(3.16)

provided that (i) the commutation relation (3.11) is satised and (ii) we have the relation:

w(1)
2 = w(1)

1

g =



a =

w(3)
2 w(4)

2 = w(3)

1

gg

1  ggaa

ga + ga  ggaa(cid:18)q +

1

q(cid:19)

(3.17)

gg

with q as in (3.11) above. it is straightforward to check that the above values of g and
a obey the relation:

1  g2(1  a2)

ga

= q +

1
q

,

(3.18)

and thus the three couples (g, a),(g, a) and (g, a) correspond to the same value of q.
if we introduce the parameter  as in (2.19) for (g, a) and  for (g, a), the value of
 for (g, a) is found to be  = , while the pre-factor in (3.16) disappears since
g/ggw(4)
2 = 1. we have therefore proven the relation (2.23) in the language of random
walks. one should note that the power of this method comes from the fact that we used

only four basic objects, the four blocks, each of which corresponds to a particularly simple

family of walks, while the arbitrary sequence of the blocks plays no role. we expect that we

can take advantage of such a block decomposition to obtain commutation relations for the

transfer matrices of more involved problems of lorentzian gravity, in particular including

matter degrees of freedom.

4. other models

4.1. general construction: symmetric case

let us reconsider the expression (2.18) for the curvature transfer matrix tq() in terms
of the generating functions fm of its eigenvectors. if we now start from some arbitrary
orthonormal family v(m), m = 1, 2, ... of vectors generating some space e, and a given

non-zero function f (), we may easily construct a commuting set of symmetric transfer

matrices t () with entries

ti,j() = f () xm1

v(m)
i m1v(m)

j

,

34

(4.1)

that satisfy the multiplicativity property

t ()t () =

f ()f ()

f ()

t ().

(4.2)

we also remark that, given any set of orthonormal vectors, generated say by fm(x),

then the other set generated by gm(x) = fm(x)(x) is also orthonormal, provided we take

(x) =

k

yj=1

(x|qj)kj

,

(x|q) =

q  x
1  qx

,

(4.3)

in which q1, ..., qk are arbitrary complex numbers inside the unit disc and kj some given pos-
itive integers. indeed, the functions (x|q) satisfy the inversion relation (x|q)(1/x|q) =
1, hence the contour integralsh gmgm+p are computed exactly like those for fm, and the
norm is unchanged. note in particular that for q = 0, (x|q)  x allows us to multiply
fm(x) by any power of x. this gives us a lot of freedom in picking the model.

let us now present a simple example, with the same vector space e = ir ir ... we

have considered so far.

4.2. integrable models of discrete 2d lorentzian gravity with polygonal tiles

let q1, q2, ..., qk be generic distinct real numbers with |qi| < 1. let us introduce the

function

m(x|q1, ..., qk) = x

k

yj=1

(qj  x)m1
(1  qjx)m ,

(4.4)

for m = 1, 2, ... we claim that this generates the components of a family of orthogonal
vectors w(m) spanning e. the spanning property is clear by noticing that a triangular
change of basis maps the canonical one km(x) = xm onto the ms9. to see why they are
orthogonal, we simply have to compute the following contour integral over the unit disc

dx
2ix

i

m(x|q1, ..., qk)m+p(

1

x|q1, ..., qk) = (1)ki dx

2i

xk1

k

yj=1

(1  qjx)p1
(qj  x)p+1 ,

(4.5)

9 this is true because we assumed the qs to be generic, i.e. not related by any algebraic
relation. it is easy to see for instance in the case k = 2, q1 = q, q2 = q which is non-generic,

that m is an odd function of x, in which case only half of e is generated.

35

for p > 0, the integrand has no poles outside the unit disc, hence the integral vanishes,

and the corresponding vectors are orthogonal. when p = 0, we nd the normalizations

2i

n (q1, ..., qk)2 =i dx
xj=1

=

k

qk1
j
1  q2

xk1

k

yj=1
j yi6=j

1

(1  qj x)(x  qj )

1

,

(1  qiqj)(qj  qi)
that reproduce the one-q result n (q) =p1  q2, and give for k = 2, 3

n (q1, q2) =s (1  q2
n (q1, q2, q3) =s (1  q2

1)(1  q2
1 + q1q2
1)(1  q2

2)(1  q1q2)

,

3)(1  q1q2)(1  q1q3)(1  q2q3)
1 + q1q2 + q1q3 + q2q3  q1q2q3(q1 + q2 + q3)  (q1q2q3)2 .

2)(1  q2

(4.6)

(4.7)

the normalizations (4.6) allow us to dene orthonormal vectors v(m) = n (q1, ..., qk)w(m),
generated by fm(x|q1, ..., qk)  n (q1, ..., qk)(x|q1, ..., qk). this produces an interesting
candidate for the transfer matrix of lorentzian gravity including triangles, squares,...,up

to 2k + 2-gons, with the same xed staircase boundary conditions as before:

q1,...,qk(x, y|) =

i=1(qi  x)(qi  y)
to obtain a well-normalized generating function, we must take f of the form

fq1,...,qk()xyn 2(q1, ..., qk)

.

(4.8)

qk
i=1(1  qix)(1  qiy)  qk
g(1  (q1...qk)2)
n 2(q1, ..., qk)

fq1,...,qk() =

.

(4.9)

where g is the boltzmann weight per boundary triangle, a free parameter of the theory,
and the generating function for the transfer matrix elements nally reads

where

q1,...,qk(x, y|) =

gxy

pk
i,j=0 wi,j (q1, ..., qk|)xiyj

wi,j(q1, ..., qk|) = (1)i+j ij  kikj

2
0  2

k

,

,

(4.10)

(4.11)

where the j  j(q1, ..., qk) are the symmetric functions of the qs dened byq1jk(qj 
x) =p0ik(1)ikixi, with in particular 0 = 1 and k = q1q2...qk.

36

the weights wi,j (4.11) are easily interpreted in terms of dierent boltzmann weights
for dierent types of polygons involved in the discrete world-sheet construction. indeed,

following the result of sect 2.4 in the case of triangles and squares, the coecients wi,j are
the boltzmann weights of the following local conguration of i lower half-edges merging

into j upper ones, all attached to the same point of the time-line:

wi,j 

j

i

...

...

j

i

...

...

(4.12)

with the obvious dual interpretation as an (i + j + 2)-gonal tile with two time-like edges

and i lower- and j upper space-like ones. so the model whose transfer matrix is generated

by (4.10) is one of discrete 2d lorentzian gravity involving polygonal tiles with 3,4,... up

to 2k + 2 edges.

note that there would be a priori k(k + 3)/2 independent coecients wi,j in the most
general symmetric generating function of the form (4.10), whereas here they are expressed

in terms of only k+1 independent parameters q1, ..., qk, . hence, we are looking at a rather
small-dimensional sub-manifold of the moduli space of 2d lorentzian gravity, discretized

with triangles, squares, ... up to (2k + 2)-gons. the remarkable fact is that this manifold is

integrable, as the corresponding transfer matrices commute with one-another. the physical

meaning of the particular expression (4.11) for the wi,j weights is however not at all clear.
in particular, for more that one qi, we cannot any longer map the model (as we did in
sect. 2.4 for one q) onto a generalized curvature model with only triangles and with

additional curvature weights involving now nearest, next-nearest,...up to, say, kth-nearest

neighbour interactions. indeed, we can consider the most general model of triangles with a

curvature weight ap for any succession of p up triangles (or p down triangles) and a weight
g per triangle (and as before g for the boundary triangles). the integrable one-q case of
sect. 2 corresponded to the particular choice ap = ap1. then is easy to show that the
generating function (x, y|g, {ap}) generalizing (2.3) reads

(x, y|g, {ap}) =

1
g

a(gx)a(gy)

1  a(gx)a(gy)

,

(4.13)

where a(u) pp1 apup is the generating function for the weights ap (for the one-q case,
we simply had a(u) = u/(1  au)). the particular form (4.13) above then implies that
the quantity

g(x, y|g, {ap})

1 + g(x, y|g, {ap})
37

= a(gx)a(gy),

(4.14)

must be factorized into a function of x times the same function of y for some particular g.
it is easy to check that for more than one qi, the generating function q1,...,qk(x, y|) given
by (4.10) does not satisfy this factorization requirement.

before we conclude this section, let us slightly extend the denition (4.4) to also include

complex (and now non-generic) numbers q1, ..., qk inside the unit disc, but such that m
remains real. a typical example would be to take q1 = q, q2 = q, q3 = 2q,..., qk = k1q,
where  is a primitive k-th root of unity. then we simply have that m(x|q1, ..., qk) 
fm(xk|qk)/xk1 with fm as in (2.6). it is clear that the ms only generate a fraction
(roughly 1/k) of the innite space e, but the content of the model is exactly the same as

that of the one-q one. another more interesting and possibly generic possibility would be

to include both the qs and their complex conjugates in the list, namely take (4.4) with

the 2k qs being q1, ..., qk, q1, ..., qk. note that the number of free real parameters in that

case would still be 2k. we shall make use of this extension in the next section.

finally, we can extend the above construction so as to include other boundary condi-

tions. the case of periodic boundary conditions is discussed in detail in appendix a and

corresponds to transfer matrices which are non-symmetric. in this case, the construction

requires the use of two dierent (left and right) orthonormal bases.

4.3. continuum limits

let us now study the continuum limit of the new models (with k qs) dened in sect.

4.2. in this section, we are going to derive the rather negative result that no new scaling

behaviour can be obtained from the models of sect. 4.2, namely that the only well behaved

continuum limit leads to the same result as in the one-q case of sect. 2.6.

to show this, let us rst reexamine the case of one q. we start from the generating

function (4.8)(4.9) iterated t times:

q,t (x, y|) = (fq())t

xy(1  q2)

(1  qx)(1  qy)  t (q  x)(q  y)

,

(4.15)

with

fq() = g

1  q2
1  q2 .

(4.16)

to get a reasonable continuum limit, after taking t =  / for some small parameter ,
we need that both  = 1 +o() and fq() = 1 +o(), while g tends to some critical value
gc < 1 when   0. from (4.16) above, this is only possible if q2 = 1 + o() too. so we

38

assume that q tends to 1 as q = e = 1+o(2). then from fq() = 1 +o(),

we deduce at leading order in  that

lim
0

gc(1  q2)

1  q2

= 1   = 1  2

1  gc
gc

 + o(2).

(4.17)

once substituted back into the generating function q(x, y|) this gives

lim
0

q(x, y|) =

gcxy

1  (1  gc)(x + y) + (1  2gc)xy

,

(4.18)

where we have identied the limiting boltzmann weights (4.11) in (4.10) as

w0,0  1,

w0,1 = w1,0  1  gc,

w1,1  (1  2gc),

(4.19)

which remain all nite in this limit.

let us now use the same strategy to deal with the k-q models continuum limit. the

t times iterated generating function now reads

q1,...,qk;t (x, y|) =

with

(fq1,...,qk())t xyn 2(q1, ..., qk)

qk
i=1(1  qix)(1  qiy)  t qk
1  (q1...qk)2
n 2(q1, .., qk)

fq1,...,qk() = g

i=1(qi  x)(qi  y)

,

(4.20)

,

(4.21)

as in (4.9) and n (q1, ..., qk) as in (4.6). setting again t =  / and letting   0 (and
g  gc, some critical activity per triangle), we must again have both fq1,...,qk() = 1+o()
and  = 1+o(). let us moreover impose that when   0, all the boltzmann weights wi,j
of (4.11) remain nite. we must then take n 2(q1, ..., qk)  0 and therefore (q1...qk)2  1
to be compatible with eq. (4.21) above. but since all the qs are real and less than 1 in
absolute value, this implies the all q2
i  1 as   0. hence the natural generalization of
q = e to the k-q case reads

qi = iei ,

i = 1, 2, ..., k,

(4.22)

for some small parameters i > 0 and some signs i = 1. if we now do not impose any
longer that the qis are real, we can also choose pairs of conjugate complex numbers

qi = iei , qi = iei ,

(4.23)

with i of modulus 1 and such that 2

i 6= 1.

39

our choice is however strongly constrained if we insist in having nite boltzman

weights and it can be checked that, assuming that all the is are of the same order ,
this implies that the norm n 2(q1, ..., qk) itself must be of order . from the formula (4.7),
we see for k = 2 and k = 3 that this in practice imposes that we can have at most one
real qi tending to +1 (i.e. i = +1 in (4.22) above) and at most one real qi tending to 1
(i.e. i = 1). finally, to reach a non trivial limit by setting as usual x = 1  x and
y = 1 y , we need at least one qi tending to +1. we believe that these requirements are
generic for arbitrary k. for k = 2, these constraints limit our choice to exactly two real
qis as in (4.22) with 1 = +1 and 2 = 1. writing

i = pi,

i = 1, 2,

(4.24)

we may easily compute the scaling limit of (4.20) in this case k = 2, with x = 1  x and
y = 1  y , and we get

lim
0

q1,q2;t (x, y|) =

(x + 1)(y + 1)  (x  1)(y  1)

c

,

(4.25)

where  = lim t , and c is a pre-factor independent of x and y . this is simply propor-

tional to the one-q result (2.29), and corresponds therefore to the same critical behaviour.

as mentioned above, the choice

q1 = e,

q2 = e ,

(4.26)

with  a complex number of modulus 1 and such that 2 6= 1, leads to a trivial limit.
indeed, in this case, n 2  |1  2|2, and all the boltzmann weights remain nite,
but in the scaling limit where x = 1  x and y = 1  y , all dependence in x and y
disappears. in fact, as mentioned before, to retain a dependence on x and y in the scaling

limit, we must have at least one q tending to 1, which is not the case here.

applying now our constraints to the case k = 3, we need to choose exactly one of the

qis tending to +1 and the two others being complex conjugates, i.e.

q1 = e1 ,

q2 = e2 ,

q3 = e2 ,

(4.27)

with again || = 1 and 2 6= 1. the normalization factor now becomes

n 2(q1, q2, q3) 

2|(1  )(1  2)|212
2(1 + 2) + ( + )2

,

(4.28)

40

and we get nite limiting boltzmann factors by taking

i = pi,

i = 1, 2.

(4.29)

now the scaling limit of (4.20) only retains the factors containing q1, and wipes the others
out, so we nally get again the form (4.25), with possibly dierent constants c and .

we are now ready to treat the general case. depending on whether k is odd or even,

we must take say

k odd :

q1 = e1 , q2i = iei+1 , q2i+1 = iei+1

k even :

for i = 1, 2, ..., (k  1)/2,
q1 = e1 , q2 = e2 , q2i+1 = iei+2 , q2i+2 = iei+2
for i = 1, 2, ..., (k  2)/2,

(4.30)

for some generic complex numbers i of modulus 1, and such that 2
i 6= 1. as only one
q tends to 1, we are again led to a scaling limit of the form (4.25). note that in the end
of sect. 4.2 we have already considered the case when qj = j1q, for j = 1, .., k and
 a primitive k-th root of unity, and concluded then that the corresponding model was
equivalent to that of k = 1, q1 = q up to some minor rescalings (x  xk, y  yk, which do
not aect the scaling limit): this is in agreement with the present result, for a particular

(non-generic) choice of the is as k-th roots of unity.

to conclude, all our models have yielded the same and only non-trivial scaling limit

for the two-loop correlator as the one-q one of sect. 2.6. this is a manifestation of the

rigidity of our integrability condition, in that all these integrable models share the same

universality class.

5. conclusion

we have revealed an interesting integrability structure underlying the simpler mod-

els of two-dimensional lorentzian quantum gravity and described how one can construct

various extensions of these models while keeping them integrable. among the models con-

sidered so far, we have not found any for which the continuum properties of the lorentzian

geometries were dierent from those of the pure lorentzian gravity case. we have concen-

trated on a model of lorentzian quantum gravity involving a higher curvature term which

is equivalent to a model of lorentzian quantum gravity interacting with a simple dimer

41

eld. the fact that this model has the same continuum behaviour as pure lorentzian

quantum gravity is in contrast with the situation in euclidean quantum gravity where the

introduction of dimers changes the continuum behaviour of the geometrical system [11,19].

on the other hand our results are in compliance with the results of [15], where no inter-

action was seen when lorentzian quantum gravity was coupled to an ising spin system.

however, one should bear in mind that when considered as a model describing matter

coupled to lorentzian gravity, our model contains only a subset of the possible matter

congurations. it is our hope that our further investigations of the integrability structure

revealed will enable us to solve exactly more realistic models of lorentzian quantum grav-

ity coupled to matter. in the light of the recent results of numerical simulations [16] it

would be particularly interesting to study the case of more than two ising models coupled

to lorentzian quantum gravity. interpreted as a model involving a higher curvature term

our model is similar in spirit to the models considered in [18], where the eect of adding a

higher curvature term to usual euclidean quantum gravity was investigated. the result is

the same for euclidean as for lorentzian triangulations. adding a higher curvature term

does not change the continuum physics for the geometrical system.

we have furthermore proven the equivalence between lorentzian triangulations and a

certain type of random walks. this equivalence has allowed us to set up a dictionary con-

necting concepts in lorentzian quantum gravity to concepts in the theory of random walks.

for instance, the loop-loop correlator of pure lorentzian quantum gravity in the language

of random walks became the generating function for large excursions. furthermore, the

integrability structure underlying the triangle-square model of lorentzian quantum grav-

ity could be understood using a simple block decomposition of the corresponding random

walk. finally, the equivalence between lorentzian triangulations and random walks has

provided us with an explanation why lorentzian triangulations have fractal dimension two

and why the continuum properties of the triangle-square model are the same as those of

pure lorentzian quantum gravity. it is very likely that a further investigation of the ran-

dom walk picture will likewise tell us under which circumstances, if at all, we can expect

new continuum behaviour to occur. we are also convinced that the above mentioned block

decomposition will prove useful in revealing the integrability structure underlying the more

realistic models of quantum gravity coupled to matter.

acknowledgements:

42

p. d. f. thanks the organizers of the semester random matrices and applications

held at m.s.r.i., berkeley, for hospitality during the last stage of this work. c. k. thanks

jan ambjrn for useful discussions.

appendix a. non-symmetric transfer matrices and periodic boundary condi-

tions

it is instructive to derive the transfer matrix of the curvature model with periodic

boundary conditions. its features will allow us to enhance dramatically the construction

of sect. 4.2. the transfer matrix for the periodic model with curvature has a marked lower

edge (that we will always represent as the leftmost one), and always at least one upper edge,
to avoid degeneration into the vacuum. the transfer matrix element t per

i,j (g, a) between a

row of i lower half-edges and j upper ones reads

nmm
n

mk

nk

mr =j,m1 ,..,mk11,mk 0

t per

i,j (g, a) =xk1
=xk1
= (ga)i+jxk1

xnr =i,n1,..,nk1
xnr =i,n1,..,nk1
a2k(cid:18) i  1

mr =j,m1 ,..,mk11,mk 0

gi+ja(nr1)+(mr1)+2mk ,0

k  1(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:18)j  1

k  2(cid:19)(cid:3),
k  1(cid:19) + a2(cid:18)j  1

(a.1)

where the boundary condition is taken into account by the fact that when the rightmost

half-edge is a lower one, it receives a weight a as it is the neighbour of the leftmost one,

instead of the a1 given by the generic formula amk1 at mk = 0. the generating function

for (a.1) is readily found to be

per(x, y|g, a) = xi,j1

xiyjt per

i,j (g, a)

g2xy

=

(1  gax)(1  ga(x + y)  g2(1  a2)xy)

43

(a.2)

.

let us perform the change of parameters g, a  , q of (2.5) and (2.19). the generating
function (a.2) is transformed into

(x, y|) =

g2(1  q2)2xy

((1  qx)  q(q  x))((1  qx)(1  qy)  (q  x)(q  y))
=  xr,s1
=  xm1

(1  q2)2 qr1x(q  x)r+s2
(1  qx)r+s
pm(x|q)m1qm(y|q).

r+s2 y(q  y)s1
(1  qy)s

per
q

where

pm(x|q) =p1  q2 x(q  x)m1
(1  qx)m+1 ,
2 xr,s1
qm(y|q) = (1  q2)

r+s=m+1

3

qr1 y(q  y)s1

(1  qy)s =p1  q2 (cid:0)qm (cid:18) q  y

1  qy(cid:19)m

(a.3)

(a.4)

(cid:1).

we know already that the periodic case with curvature is solvable, as we have computed

its two-loop correlator above. the reason why is extremely simple: the functions

pm(x|q) =xi1
qm(y|q) =xj1

xi w(m)

i

,

yjw(m)

j

,

(a.5)

generate the components of two dierent left and right vectors w(m), w(m) for t per, that
turn out to be orthonormal to one another, i.e. w(m)  w(m) = m,m. it is indeed easy
to show that the contour integral over the unit circle: h pm(x|q)qm(1/x|q)dx/(2ix) =

m,m, by use of cauchys residue formula.

note however that these are not eigenvectors of t per but we have the diagonal

mapping

t per w(m) = mw(m).

(a.6)

this translates immediately into the following transfer matrix relation (as before we dene
t per

()  t per(g, a) with g, a  , q)

q

t per
q

()t per

q

() = t per

q

().

(a.7)

note that this relation is also satised by tq()  tq(), thanks to (2.23), and justies a
posteriori our previous calculation of the two-loop periodic correlator (p = 2 in (2.40)).

44

note nally that the two sets of (left and right) vectors span the same space e, as qm(y) 
y for small y, and there is a triangular change of basis from the fms to the pms or qms.
let us draw some general conclusion from this example. a score of other models can

be constructed by means of two dierent sets of left and right vectors, provided those are
mutually orthonormal. given any such pair generated by say pm(x) and qm(y), we get a
set of transfer matrices t () with spectral parameter , generated by

(x, y|) = xi,j1

ti,j()xiyj = f () xm1

pm(x)m1qm(y),

(a.8)

for some arbitrarily chosen function f (). the vector spaces spanned by the left and right

vectors need not be the same, we simply need the vectors to be mutually orthogonal:

h dx/(2ix)pm(x)qm(1/x) = m,m. this implies a multiplicativity relation

f ()f ()

t ()t () =

t ().

f ()

(a.9)

which makes the model trivially integrable.

in the light of this, it is easy to nd a non-symmetric generalization of the k qs model

of sect. 4.2. taking

k

yj=1

pm(x) = mk x

(qj  x)m1
(1  qj x)m+1 .
qm(y) = (1)k1mk(cid:18)(q1q2...qk)m 

(a.10)

k

yj=1

(qj  y)m
(1  qj y)m(cid:19).

as generating functions of the left and right vectors respectively, it is easy to prove that

these are mutually orthonormal, provided we take

1
m 2
k

k

2i

= (1)ki dx
xj=1

yi=1

=

1

k

k

1  qiqj

1

yj=1
(1  qj x)(qj  x)
yi=1

qj  qi

i6=j

1

k

.

(a.11)

by cauchys formula. for k = 1, this gives m1 = 1  q2, in agreement with (a.4), while
for k = 2, 3 we have

(1  q2

1)(1  q2
q1 + q2

2)(1  q1q2)

.

m 2

2 =

m 2

3 =

q2
1 + q2

2 + q2

1)(1  q2

(1  q2
3 + q1q2 + q2q3 + q1q3  q1q2q3(q1 + q2 + q3)  q2

3)(1  q1q2)(1  q2q3)(1  q1q3)

2)(1  q2

1q2

2  q2

2q2

3  q2

1q2
3

45

(a.12)

.

the vectors (a.10) lead to the transfer matrix generated by (a.8)

(x, y|) = xg() qk
j=1 qj (1  qjy) qk
qk
j=1(1  qjx)  qk
qk
j=1(1  qj x)(1  qjy)  qk



1

j=1(qj  y)
j=1 qj (qj  x)

j=1(qj  x)(qj  y)

(a.13)

where g() is an arbitrary function of  (in which we have absorbed various normalization

factors). we suspect the transfer matrix of (a.13) to be the periodic boundary condition

version of (4.8)(4.9). note that here the vectors generated by (a.10) both span the same

space e (they are proportional to x and y respectively).

let us nally mention the following generalization of (a.10), based on the general

property that if pm(x) and qm(y) are generating functions of mutually orthonormal
vectors, then for any function r(x), the vectors generated by m(x) = r(x)pm(x) and
m(y) = qm(y)/r(1/y) are also mutually orthonormal (we must of course assume that
both r(x) and 1/r(1/y) have convergent series expansions). we may apply this recipe to
j=1(1  qj x)pj1), for some given integers pj  1.
j=1(qj  y)pj1/ypk, where we have dened p =p pj , has no

(a.10) with the function r(x) = 1/(qk
but 1/r(1/y) = (1)pkqk

good series expansion around y = 0. in order to x this and arrange for both the left and

right vectors to generate the same space e as above, we are led to take

k

m(x) = skx

yj=1
m(y) = (1)psk

(qj  x)m1
(1  qjx)m+pj
ypk(cid:18) k
yj=1

1

(qj  y)m+pj1
(1  qjy)m 

(a.14)

pk

xl=0

lyl(cid:19) .

the coecients l are xed by requiring that m(y) = o(y), and sk is the normalization
factor ensuring orthonormality, with the result sk = mk dened in (a.11). note that for
any polynomial p , p (1/y) is automatically orthogonal to m(x), as no pole lies inside the

unit disc in the corresponding cauchy integral h m(x)p (x)dx/(2ix) = 0 for all m  1

(the x in the denominator is cancelled by the one in factor of m).

46

references

[1] h. kawai, n. kawamoto, t. mogami, and y. watabiki, phys.lett. b306 (1993) 19,

hep-th/9302133

[2] y. watabiki, nucl. phys. b441 (1995) 119, hep-th/9401096
[3] j. ambjrn, and y. watabiki, nucl.phys. b445 (1995) 129-144, hep-th/9501049
[4] j. ambjrn, j. jurkiewicz and y. watabiki, nucl. phys. b454 (1995) 313, hep-

th/9507014

[5] j. ambjrn, k.n. anagnostopoulos, u. magnea and g. thorleifsson, phys.lett. b388

(1996) 713-719, hep-lat/9606012

[6] j. ambjrn and a.n. anagnostopoulos, nucl.phys. b497 (1997) 445-478, hep-

lat/9701006

[7] j. ambjrn, p. bialas and j. jurkiewicz, jhep 9902 (1999) 005, hep-lat/9812015
[8] n. ishibashi and h. kawai, phys. lett. b322 (1994) 67, hep-th/9312047, phys. lett.

b352 (1995) 75, hep-th/9503134

[9] j. ambjrn, c. kristjansen and y. watabiki, nucl.phys. b504 (1997) 555-579, hep-

th/9705202

[10] j. ambjrn, k.n. anagnostopoulos, j. jurkiewicz and c. kristjansen, jhep 9804

(1998) 016, hep-th/9802020

[11] s. gubser and i. klebanov, nucl. phys. b416 (1994) 827, hep-th/9310098
[12] j. ambjrn and r. loll, nucl. phys. b536 (1998) 407, hep-th/9805108
[13] j. ambjrn, j. nielsen, j. rolf and r. loll, chaos solitons fractals 10 (1999) 177-195
[14] r. nakayama, phys. lett. b325 (1994) 347, hep-th/9312158
[15] j. ambjrn, k.n. anagnostopoulos and r. loll, hep-th/9904012
[16] j. ambjrn, private communication
[17] s. weinberg, ultraviolet divergences in quantum gravity, in general relativity, an
einstein centenary survey edited by s.w. hawking and w. israel, cambridge uni-
versity press 1979

[18] v. a. kazakov, m. staudacher and t. wynter, commun. math. phys. 179 (1996) 235

(hep-th/9506174), nucl. phys. b471 (1996) 309 (hep-th/9601069)

[19] m. staudacher, nucl. phys. b336 (1990) 349
[20] ya.g. sinai, theor. prob. appl. 27 (1982) 256
[21] such expressions for the sinai model were rst derived in a. o. golosov, sov. math.
dokl. 28 (1983) 18. for a more direct derivation based on a real space renormalization
group analysis, see p. le doussal, c. monthus and d.s. fisher, phys. rev. e 59 (1999)
4795, cond-mat/9811300. a derivation based on discrete random walks can be found
in j. chave and e. guitter, j. phys. a: math. gen. 32 (1999) 445, cond-mat/9809087

47

