9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

6
1

 
 

1
v
7
3
1
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the non-chiral fusion rules in rational conformal

eld theories.

a. rida

laboratoire de physique theorique, institut de physique,

unniversite des sciences et de la technologie houari-

boumediene, bp.32, bab-zouar alger. algeria.

t. sami

laboratoire subatech, ecole des mines de nantes; 4, rue

alfred kastler, la chantrerie 44070 nantes, frances.

abstract

we introduce a general method to construct the non-chiral fusion rules
in rational conformal eld theories. we are particularly interested by the
models of the complementary series or like-d series which are solutions of
modular invariant partition function. the form proposed of the non-chiral
fusion rules has a structure of zn grading.

e-mail: sami@subatech.in2p3.fr

1

1 introduction

the study of the two-dimensional conformal eld theories (cfts) has ourished in
recent years.
indeed, these theories proved to be useful for studying fundamental
states of strings, in string theories and classifying the second order phase transitions
in condensed matter physics. also the richness of its formalism gave it a mathematical
interest.

the symmetry algebra of a conformal eld theory dened on manifold without
boundary has a direct sum form : aa, where a and a are two copies of a chiral
algebra, having the virasoro algebra as sub-algebra [1]. these copies act respectively
on the holomorphic (z) and antiholomorphic (z) dependencies of the physical elds
of the theory. well-known examples of chiral algebras which are lie algebras are:
virasoro algebra, kac-moody algebra and more generally the so-called w-algebra [2].
we assume at this point that the algebra of the holomorphic and antiholomorphic
sectors of the theory are identical.

the physical hilbert space is obtained as sum of irreducible representation spaces
of chiral algebras. this is done by acting ( with the universal enveloping algebra u (a)
of the lie algebra (a)) on a lowest-weight vector, and then projecting out null states.
via the correspondence between eld and state vectors in physical hilbert space of
the theory, elds corresponding to lowest-weight vectors are referred to as primary
elds, while those corresponding to non lowest-weight vectors are called descendant
if we denote la the list of all irreducible lowest-weight representation of a,
elds.
a chiral algebra (a) is called rational if a is algebra and contains a nite set la.
a conformal eld theory underlying a rational chiral algebra is rational conformal
eld theory (rcft). rcft are particularly interesting, however these theories take
their designation from the fact that the chiral algebra has only integer dimensions
(critical exponents) and can be considered as good candidate to describe behaviors of
critical systems. on the other hand, the rcfts have an important propriety, namely
solvability.

a cft is completely solved once we have specied its central charge (the eigen-
value of the central generator of the virasoro algebra), the conformal dimensions of
its primary elds and the structure constants of the operator algebra. these three pa-
rameters represent the central problem in the classication of conformal eld theories
and the main goal of the bootstrap approach, initially developed in the seminal work of
belavin, polyakov and zamolodchikov [3]. the bootstrap idea is based on some general
requirements, among which the prominent part played by the associativity of the op-
erator product algebra or crossing symmetry of the four point amplitudes (correlation
functions) on the plane. however, upon forming radially ordered products of elds
inside correlation fonctions, the elds of the theory will constitute a closed associative

2

operator algebra, so that the operator product of primaries can be written as:

cijk (z  w)hkhihj (z  w)hkhihj [k (w, w) + . . . ] . (1)

i (z, z)  j (w, w) =xk
where i (cid:0)i, i(cid:1) indicate dierent elds with i(cid:0)i(cid:1) representing the contributions (ver-

tices) of the holomorphic (antiholomorphic) sectors to physical elds. hi and hi are
conformal dimensions of i, the ellipsis stands for terms involving descendant elds.
cijk are complex numbers, known as structure constants of the operator algebra. let
us now consider the four points function

gijkl (z, z) = hi (0)  j (z, z)  l (1)  k ()i .

(2)

of primary elds by applying the (opa), on the rst two and the last two elds. but
using associativity of the (opa), one could also form products in dierent order. these
dierent descriptions of the four point correlation g must yield the crossing symmetry
relation for the four points functions:

gkl

ij (z, z) = gjk

il (1  z, 1  z) = z2hl z2hlgjl

(3)

ik(cid:0)z1, z1(cid:1) .

equivalently, after performing the (opa), this last relation can be expressed more
explicitly as:

x(p,p)

cijpclmpf lm

ij (p | z) f

l m
i j (p | z)

cilqcjmqf im

lj (q | 1  z) f

i m
l j (q | 1  z) .

(4)

=x(q,q)

this equation is called bootstrap equation where f lm
ij (p | z) denote the conformal
blocs. the conformal blocs represent the holomorphic or antiholomorphic pieces in
correlation functions. bootstrap equation is the master equation in conformal eld
theories. this equation contains all informations required for a complete classication
of these theories. unfortunately, it is very dicult to solve it in practice and other
reformulations of classication problem have been proposed.

the most popular of these reformulations is based on modular geometry. in princi-
ple, we hope to construct a conformal eld theory consistent in various geometries, with
various boundary conditions. in particular, the consistent formulation of a conformal
theory on the torus has proved to be extremely restrictive on the operator content, i.e.
determine how chiral vertices combine to form a physical eld. consistence means,
among other things, that the periodic partition function must take the same value on
conformally equivalent tori: it must be modular invariant. the partition function takes
the form

z (,  ) =xi

(i) ( ) ni i 

(i) ( ) .

3

where (i) is the character of the lowest-weight representation (i) and ni i are positive

integers which determine how many times the two representations (i) and (cid:0)i(cid:1) of the

chiral algebra couple with each other.  is the modular parameter of the torus. modular
invariance implies that z ( ) is invariant under transformations t :    + 1 and
s :   1/ .

the program of nding the solutions of modular invariant partition fonctions was
particularly developed in the case of kac-moody algebras. it is shown that solutions
can be arranged in three broad categories [4]:

1. diagonal series. ni i = ii. they are often designed as members of the a series.

2. complementary series. they are nondiagonal series and are often designed as
members of the d series. these solutions are also called invariant currents solu-
tions.

3. exceptional series. they are nondiagonal series which occur at certain levels.

they are often designed as members of the e series.

we aim in this work to present a formulation which will permit to make a new
step in the resolution of the bootstrap equation. this formulation consists in the
construction of the so-called non-chiral fusion rules.
initially, the term fusion rules
was used to express how the chiral vertices (i) and (j) combine in the (opa) [5]. in
practice, to describe fusion rules, we associate to each primary eld i an abstract
object (i) , and introduce an abstract multiplication () by:

(i)  (j) =xk

n k

ij (k) .

(5)

where n k
ij (fusion rules coecients) give the number of distinct ways in which the
representation (k) occurs in the fusion of two elds transforming according to the rep-
resentations (i) and (j) respectively. this process of fusion corresponds to considering
only the holomorphic, or only antiholomorphic part of the operator product algebra
of two physical operators. this description is incomplete, however, because the holo-
morphic part (vertex) of the physical eld is not physical.
its correlation functions
(conformal blocs) are multivalued. so, the physical correlation is constructed when
the two pieces are combined together appropriately. this is done by considering the
requirement that the conformal blocs in the two sectors combine into single-valued
(monodromy invariant) correlation functions.

the construction of monodromy invariant correlation functions is simple in principle
for the a series models. in this case, the conformal blocs in the two sectors are complex
conjugate so that diagonal terms alone survive the monodromy constraint. this last
consideration was rst developed by dotsenko and fateev [6] for the case of correlation

4

fonctions with spinless elds. nevertheless, for the non-diagonal d (e) series models
the conformal blocs are not complex conjugate and the problem is far more complicated.

by denition the non-chiral fusion rules determine the operator content of the op-
erator algebra, i.e. they determine which elds are present in the product (fusion) of
two (physical) elds. the non-chiral fusion rules permit to avoid the monodromy prob-
lem and determine the combination of the conformal blocs present in the correlation
function.

initially, the idea of the construction of the non-chiral fusion rules was introduced
for the case of the minimal1 and unitary models [7] [8]. we nd that this idea may
be generalized to the case of d series models in general rcft. our ideas are in the
primary state, so a more rigorous and general development must be envisaged.

2 non-chiral fusion rules

2.1 basis of construction

by denition, the non-chiral fusion rules determine the operator content of the operator
algebra. thus, the fusion of the two elds i and j produces the eld k if and only
if the structure constant cijk is non-null. if we note the fusion operation by () the
fusion rules are formally given by:

(cid:0)i, i(cid:1) (cid:0)j, j(cid:1) =xk

n k

ij (cid:0)k, k(cid:1) ;

n k

ij 6= 0  cijk 6= 0.

(6)

for the determination of the non-chiral fusion rules we use some considerations, im-
posing strict constraints which we judge sucient for the determination of these rules.
the rst constraint lays on the compatibility of the non-chiral fusion rules and the
fusion rules (chiral)2. in fact, from the bootstrap equation we can see that:

in other words:

cijk 6= 0 (cid:26) (i)  (j)  (k)
(cid:0)i(cid:1) (cid:0)j(cid:1) (cid:0)k(cid:1)

n k

ij 6= 0  n k

ij 6= 0 and n k

i j 6= 0.

(7)

(8)

1the minimal models are the rational models in the case where the chiral algebra is limited to the

virasoro algebra.

2this last contraint is somewhat compatibile with the naturality theorem [13].

5

the second consideration, obvious, consists on imposing the compatibility of the non-
chiral fusion rules with the operator content determined by the modular constraint:

(cid:0)i, i(cid:1) (cid:0)j, j(cid:1)  (k, k)

if k = k.

(9)

the third important fact used in the construction of the non-chiral fusion rules, less
obvious than the precedent ones, lays on symmetry considerations. in fact, the rst two
constraints: the fusion and modular are not completely independent. the most known
link between these two constraints is expressed through verldines famous formula [9].
the best way to exploit this link and to construct the modular invariant partition
functions from the fusion rules is based on the formulation called simple currents
construction . this later formulation leads to the understanding of the particular
structure of modular solution of d series.

2.2 simple currents construction

a simple current (j) is a primary eld (chiral part) for which the fusion rules (chiral)
with (i) (ji) give just one non-vanishing fusion coecient n k
ji, so that (j)  (i) = (k)
[10]. due to the associativity of the fusion product, the fusion of two simple currents
is again a simple current. simple currents thus form an abelian group under the fusion
product, this group has been termed the center of the theory. since the number of
primary elds is nite in a rational theory, the number of simple currents is nite.
this implies that simple currents are unipotent, i.e. there must be an integer n so
that jn = 1. the smallest integer n with this property is called the order of the simple
current. furthermore and by rationality, on all other primary elds (i) of the theory,
there must be a smallest positive integer d so that (j)d  (i) = (i). by associativity,
we can show that d must be a divisor of n. if a simple current takes a eld into itself,
we call it a xed point of that current. we see that any simple current organizes the
primary elds into orbits

[(i)] =(cid:8)(i) , (j  i) ,(cid:0)j2  i(cid:1) . . .(cid:0)jd1  i(cid:1)(cid:9) .

(10)

2.2.1 monodromy charge

the presence of the simple currents in a conformal theory permits not only to organize
the elds in orbits but also to express a symmetry through a conservation of monodromy
charge. the monodromy charge q (i), denes the monodromy property of the (opa)
(1) of a primary eld (i) with a simple current (j)

(i) (z)  (j) (w)  (z  w)q(i) (i  j) (w) .

so that:

q (i)  hj + hi  h(ji) [1] .

6

(11)

(12)

this denition makes sense only modulo integers ( [1]) because, in general, one cannot
be sure about the presence of leading pole in operator product. if q is non-integer,
this means that (i) (0) creates a branch cutt in (j) (z). this last denition imposes
that the monodromy charge must be additive under the operator product, i.e.

q (i  k) = q (i) + q (k) .

(13)

it follows that all terms in the opa of two elds must have the same charge. using
these properties of monodromy charge and the fact that the only non-vanishing one
point function is the identity eld function, a correlation function hi1i2 . . . ini is non-
vanishing if

q (in) = q (1) = 0.

(14)

xn

this relation expresses the conservation charge condition (modulo integers) in all cor-
relation functions.

finally, if we denote the charge associated to a simple current j by q, then obviously
the charge associated to jd is equal to dq, as usual modulo integer. this implies that

simple currents of order n (cid:0)jn = 1(cid:1) have a charge equal to an integer, and therefore

(15)

q (j) 

[1] .

r
n

r is dened modulo n.

2.2.2 modular invariant partition functions

by conservation of monodromy charge we have just seen that the presence of simple
currents in conformal eld theory implies the existence of a discrete symmetry, whose
generator is ei2q(j). this important result can be used to nd a solution of modular
invariant partition function. the most useful way to do this is to proceed with an
orbifold-like method [10] [11]. we start with some known partition function (diagonal
solution) and mod it out by discrete group . we shall take  to be a discrete group
symmetry of a simple current. for simplicity, we restrict ourselves to a current with

an integer prime order and cyclic center (cid:8)1, j, j2, . . . , jn 1(cid:9) = zn . in this case the

modular invariant partition function is so that [10]:

z = xi(q(i)=0)(2
z = xi(q(i)=0)

1

(i) +

jp ijn pi) , q (j) 6= 0 [1] ;

n

xp=1

n (cid:12)(cid:12)i + ji + j 2i + . . . + jn 1i(cid:12)(cid:12)

2 , q (j)  0 [1]

(16)

(17)

7

the rst type of modular invariant partition function is called automorphism [12]
invariant type and the second one an integer spin invariant. this last type can be always
regarded as a diagonal invariant of larger chiral algebra than originally considered [13].
in this last case, the characters appearing in the same term as the identity (character)
have an integer spin and correspond to the extra currents (noether currents) that
extend the algebra. now, we exploit modular invariant partition functions forms to
construct the non-chiral fusion rules.

2.3 the non-chiral fusion rules

2.3.1 the automorphism invariant cases

the operator content of the automorphism invariant cases (16) can be structured in
sets:

where a0 designates the scalar elds. to construct the non-chiral fusion rules, let us

ak =(cid:8)(cid:0)j ki, j n ki(cid:1) /q (i) = 0(cid:9) .

consider two elds(cid:0)jki, jn ki(cid:1) and(cid:0)jpi, jn pi(cid:1) of ak and ap, respectively. by appli-

cation of our algorithm, we start with the fusion rules. due to the charge conservation
in fusion rules we get:

(cid:0)jki(cid:1)  (jpi) = jk+p (i  i)  jk+pk, q (k) = 0;

(cid:0)jn ki(cid:1) (cid:0)jn pi(cid:1) = jn (k+p) (i  i)  jn (k+p)k, q (k) = 0.

the compatibility with the operator content implies that:

(cid:0)jki, jn ki(cid:1) (cid:0)jpi, jn pi(cid:1) (cid:0)jp+kk, jn (p+k)k(cid:1) .

so that nally we conclude:

ak  ap = al,

l  p + k [n] .

(18)

the non-chiral fusion rules have then a structure of a zn grading where n is the order
of the simple current considered in the construction of modular invariant partition
function.

for scalar elds we have:

a0  a0 = a0.

(19)

we see that scalar elds form a closed sub-algebra in the (opa). therefore we point
out here an important fact namely that dotsenko and fateev monodromy invariant
correlation partition functions with spinless elds have been realized before modular

8

constraint development. if correlation elds are spinless, conformal blocs are complex
conjugate and therefore a minimal coupling is realized by diagonal combination blocs
(monodromy invariant). so that we can conjecture that in general cases, scalar elds
form a sub-algebra in the opa (19).

the structure of zn grading of the non-chiral fusion rules (18) obtained in the
automorphism invariant cases indicates an important fact, namely the conservation of
a charge (to be not confused with the monodromy charge) in non-chiral fusion rules.
in fact, if we assign to each eld in a set (ap) a charge e
n , we see that this charge
is conserved in non-chiral fusion rules. this observation is very important particularly
in the construction of the non-chiral fusion rules in the integer invariant cases.

2ip

2.3.2 the integer invariant cases

in these cases, the problem of the construction of the non-chiral fusion rules is less
evident than in the automorphism invariant cases. the origin of diculties arises
principally from the fact that if q (j) = 0, then the charge assigned to (jpi) with
q (i) = 0 is also zero:

q (jpi) = q (i) + pq (j) = 0.

so that for each (i) (q (i) = 0), we can nd p and (k) (q (k) = 0) such that:

jpk = i.

(20)

as a consequence, the operator content of the invariant integer cases (17) can be
structured in sets:

ak =(cid:8)(cid:0)i, jki(cid:1) /q (i) = 0(cid:9) .

(21)

from these structures and from the particularity (20), we can easily see that, if we
proceed like in automorphism cases, a0  a0 will be dierent from a0. the fusion
of two scalar elds can produce non-scalar elds which are not compatible with our
conjecture (19). this is the rst problem. the second problem is the presence of xed
point elds of a current (j): (j)  (i) = (i) is possible provided that q (j) = 0.

since the xed point of (j) is also a xed point of (cid:0)jk(cid:1), the elds (cid:0)i, jki(cid:1)  ak are

equal to (i, i). so, the existence of xed point chiral eld (i) implies the existence of
n copies of the same scalar eld (i, i) in the operator content and we are not able to
predict the behavior of the dierent copies of this eld in the (opa).

the existence of multiple copies

the same primary eld
{p, p = 0 . . . n  1} implies, by the correspondence elds-states principle, that the
corresponding lowest-weight state (ground state vector) is degenerate. as in [7] [8],

(n copies) of

9

this observation shows the existence of a discrete symmetry (zn ) of ground states such
that:

zn (p) = e

i2p

n p.

(22)

thus the symmetry (zn ) enables one to separate the contributions of degenerate eld
copies, by imposing the compatibility of non-chiral fusion rules with the action of this
symmetry. to do this, we must determine the action of (zn ) in the other elds of the
model. for this construction we use an heuristic argument, namely that the elds of
the same structure (elds of the same set ap) must have the same behavior under zn .
observing that each copy (p) of a degenerate eld comes in fact from a set ap, we
can conclude that:

zn () = e

i2p

n ,   ap.

(23)

finally, the compatibility of the non-chiral rules with the action of the zn symmetry
(22, 23) implies a zn -grading (like in the automorphism cases) of these rules. the
conservation of a charge in non-chiral fusion rules leads us to think that associating a
simple current eld interpretation would provide our construction with a more rigorous
argument.

current structure of non-chiral fusion rules

:

in the integer invariant cases, the simple current (j) is present as chiral part of

some physical elds, namely:

(jp, jp)  a0,

(1, jp)  ap.

(24)

these elds may be seen as powers of (j, j) and (1, j). their action on a eld (i, jpi)
 ap is determined by our algorithm witch leads to

(j, j)  (i, jpi) = (cid:0)k, jp+1k(cid:1)  ap, k = ji;
(1, j)  (i, jpi) = (cid:0)i, jp+1i(cid:1)  ap+1.

we see that elds (j, j) and (1, j), generated by a simple current (j), are simple currents
elds of non-chiral fusion rules. the simple current structure associated to the eld
(1, j) (26) is particularly interesting because it permits to establish a correspondence
between elds in dierent sets ap and hence can be used to show the grading structure
of non-chiral fusion rules.

(25)
(26)

however, by using our remark that each component {p}p=n 1

of a degenerate eld

comes from a set {ap}p=n 1

p=0

, we conjecture that:

p=0

(1, j)  p = p+1.

(27)

since (1, j)n = (cid:0)1, jn(cid:1) = (1, 1) , (27) is a pure reinterpretation of the zn symmetry

action (22). combining our rst conjecture namely that scalar elds form a sub-
algebra in (opa) and the simple current eld action of (1, j) (26), we can deduce the
zn grading structure of the non-chiral fusion rules law (18).

10

3 conclusion

in this work, we have developed a method to construct the non-chiral fusion rules in
general rational conformal models of d-like series. this method is based on three
considerations:

1. compatibility with fusion rules;

2. compatibility with the operator content of the models;

3. symmetry considerations.

this last point is presented through the currents construction of modular invariant d
like series. we have restricted ourselves to currents with integer prime order. the
non-chiral fusion rules proposed have a structure of zn -grading.

we have conjectured rst, by monodromy considerations, that scalar elds form
a closed sub-algebra of non-chiral fusion rules. this last conjecture is a direct con-
sequence of our construction method in automorphism invariant cases. nonetheless,
in the integer invariant cases establishing this conjecture is less evident. to overcome
diculties appearing in these last cases, we have used an heuristic argument based es-
sentially on cyclic symmetry (zn ) ground state structure. this symmetry is assigned to
simple current eld construction of non-chiral fusion rules. this current eld is nothing
else that the current of the extended algebra. the action of this current on degenerate
components eld is our second conjecture. it traduces the cyclic structure (zn ) of the
ground state. by exploiting this last statement based on currents extended algebra,
we hope to give a more rigorous approach and hence demonstrate our two conjectures.

references

[1] g. felder, j. frohlich, and g. keller; commun. math. phys. 130, (1990) 1

[2] j. fuchs; lectures on conformal eld theory and kac-moody algebras hep-

th/9702194 (1997).

[3] a.a. belavin, a.m. polyakov, a.b. zamolodchikov; nucl. phys. b 241 (1984) 333.

[4] m. r. abolhassni and f. ardalan; int. j. mod. phys. a 9, no.16 (1994) 2707.

[5] j. fuchs; fortschr. phys. 42 (1994) 1.

[6] vi. s. dotsenko et v. a. fateev, nucl. phys. b 240 [fs121] (1984) 312; ibid. nucl.

phys.b 251 [fs13] (1985) 691; phys. lett. 154 b (1985) 291.

11

[7] a. rida and t. sami, structure constants of the minimal d series models. in

preparation.

[8] j. mcabe, t. sami et t. wydro; int. j. mod. phys. a. vol.11 no.1 (1996) 111.

[9] e. verldine; nucl. phys. b300 [fs22] (1988) 360.

[10] a. n. schellekens and s. yankielowicz; int. j. mod. phys. a 5, (1990) 2903.

[11] m. kreuzer and a. n. a. n. schellekens; nucl. phys. b 411 (1994) 97.

[12] t. gannon, p.ruelle and m. a. walton, commun. math. phys. 197 (1996) 121.

[13] g. moore and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b 313 (1989) 16.

12

