1
0
0
2

 

b
e
f
9

 

 
 

2
v
1
0
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

pupt-1775 spin-1998/12 iassns-hep-98-22

hawking radiation as tunneling

maulik k. parikh

joseph henry laboratories, princeton university, princeton, new jersey 08544, usa

spinoza institute, university of utrecht, 3584 ce utrecht, the netherlands

school of natural sciences, institute for advanced study, princeton, new jersey 08540, usa

frank wilczek

abstract

we present a short and direct derivation of hawking radiation as a tunneling

process, based on particles in a dynamical geometry. the imaginary part of

the action for the classically forbidden process is related to the boltzmann fac-

tor for emission at the hawking temperature. because the derivation respects

conservation laws, the exact spectrum is not precisely thermal. we compare

and contrast the problem of spontaneous emission of charged particles from

a charged conductor.

i. introduction

several derivations of hawking radiation exist in the literature [1,2]. none of them,

however, correspond very directly to one of the heuristic pictures most commonly proposed

to visualize the source of the radiation, as tunneling. according to this picture, the radiation

arises by a process similar to electron-positron pair creation in a constant electric eld. the

idea is that the energy of a particle changes sign as it crosses the horizon, so that a pair

created just inside or just outside the horizon can materialize with zero total energy, after

1

one member of the pair has tunneled to the opposite side.

here we shall show that this schematic can be used to provide a short, direct semi-classical

derivation of black hole radiance. in what follows, energy conservation plays a fundamental

role: one must make a transition between states with the same total energy, and the mass

of the residual hole must go down as it radiates. indeed, it is precisely the possibility of

lowering the black hole mass which ultimately drives the dynamics. this supports the idea

that, in quantum gravity, black holes are properly regarded as highly excited states.

broadly speaking, there are two standard approaches to hawking radiation. in the rst,

one considers a collapse geometry. the response of external elds to this can be done

explicitly or implicitly by abstracting appropriate boundary conditions. in the second, one

treats the black hole immersed in a thermal bath.

in this approach, one shows that (in

general, metastable) equilibrium is possible. by detailed balance, this implies emission from

the hole. in both the standard calculations, the background geometry is considered xed,

and energy conservation is not enforced during the emission process.

here we will consider a hole in empty schwarzschild space, but with a dynamical geometry

so as to enforce energy conservation. (despite appearances, the geometry is not truly static,

since there is no global killing vector.) because we are treating this aspect more realistically,

we must  and do  nd corrections to the standard results. these become quantitively

signicant when the quantum of radiation carries a substantial fraction of the mass of the

hole.

ii. tunneling

to describe across-horizon phenomena, it is necessary to choose coordinates which, unlike

schwarzschild coordinates, are not singular at the horizon. a particularly suitable choice is

obtained by introducing a time coordinate,

t = ts + 22m r + 2m ln

r  2m
r + 2m

,

(1)

2

where ts is schwarzschild time. with this choice, the line element reads

ds2 = (cid:18)1 

2m

r (cid:19) dt2 + 2s2m

r

dt dr + dr2 + r2d2 .

(2)

there is now no singularity at r = 2m, and the true character of the spacetime, as being

stationary but not static, is manifest. these coordinates were rst introduced by painleve

[3] (who used them to criticize general relativity, for allowing singularities to come and go!).

their utility for studies of black hole quantum mechanics was emphasized more recently in

[4].

for our purposes, the crucial features of these coordinates are that they are stationary

and nonsingular through the horizon. thus it is possible to dene an eective vacuum

state of a quantum eld by requiring that it annihilate modes which carry negative frequency

with respect to t; such a state will look essentially empty (in any case, nonsingular) to a

freely-falling observer as he or she passes through the horizon. this vacuum diers strictly

from the standard unruh vacuum, dened by requiring positive frequency with respect to

the kruskal coordinate u = r  2m exp(cid:16) tsr

4m (cid:17) [5]. the dierence, however, shows up

only in transients, and does not aect the late-time radiation.

the radial null geodesics are given by

dr
dt

= 1 s 2m

r

,

r 

(3)

with the upper (lower) sign in eq. 3 corresponding to outgoing (ingoing) geodesics, under the

implicit assumption that t increases towards the future. these equations are modied when

the particles self-gravitation is taken into account. self-gravitating shells in hamiltonian

gravity were studied by kraus and wilczek [6]. they found that, when the black hole mass

is held xed and the total adm mass allowed to vary, a shell of energy  moves in the

geodesics of a spacetime with m replaced by m + . if instead we x the total mass and

allow the hole mass to uctuate, then the shell of energy  travels on the geodesics given

by the line element

ds2 =  1 

2(m  )

r

! dt2 + 2s 2(m  )

r

dt dr + dr2 + r2d2 ,

(4)

3

so we should use eq. 3 with m  m  .

since the typical wavelength of the radiation is of the order of the size of the black

hole, one might doubt whether a point particle description is appropriate. however, when

the outgoing wave is traced back towards the horizon, its wavelength, as measured by local

ducial observers, is ever-increasingly blue-shifted. near the horizon, the radial wavenumber

approaches innity and the point particle, or wkb, approximation is justied.

the imaginary part of the action for an s-wave outgoing positive energy particle which

crosses the horizon outwards from rin to rout can be expressed as

im s = imz rout

rin

pr dr = imz rout

rin z pr

0

dp

r dr .

(5)

remarkably, this can be evaluated without entering into the details of the solution, as follows.

we multiply and divide the integrand by the two sides of hamiltons equation r = + dh

,

dpr(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r

change variable from momentum to energy, and switch the order of integration to obtain

im s = imz m 

m z rout

rin

dr
r

dh = imz +

0 z rout

rin

dr

1 q 2(m )

r

(d ) ,

(6)

where we have used the modied eq. 3, and the minus sign appears because h = m   .
but now the integral can be done by deforming the contour, so as to ensure that positive

energy solutions decay in time (that is, into the lower half   plane). in this way we obtain

im s = +4(cid:18)m 



2(cid:19) ,

(7)

provided rin > rout. to understand this ordering  which supplies the correct sign  we

observe that when the integrals in eq. 5 are not interchanged, and with the contour evaluated

via the prescription     i, we have
rin z m 

im s = +imz rout

m

dm 

1 q 2m 

r

dr = imz rout

rin r dr .

(8)

hence rin = 2m and rout = 2 (m  ). (incidentally, comparing the above equation with
eq. 5, we also nd that im pr = r.) although this radially inward motion appears
at rst sight to be classically allowed, it is nevertheless a classically forbidden trajectory

4

because the apparent horizon is itself contracting. thus, the limits on the integral indicate

that, over the course of the classically forbidden trajectory, the outgoing particle starts from

r = 2m  , just inside the initial position of the horizon, and traverses the contracting
horizon to materialize at r = 2(m  ) + , just outside the nal position of the horizon.
alternatively, and along the same lines, hawking radiation can also be regarded as pair

creation outside the horizon, with the negative energy particle tunneling into the black

hole. since such a particle propagates backwards in time, we have to reverse time in the

equations of motion. from the line element, eq. 2, we see that time-reversal corresponds to

r  q 2m

q 2m
r . also, since the anti-particle sees a geometry of xed black hole mass, the
upshot of self-gravitation is to replace m by m + , rather than m  . thus an ingoing
negative energy particle has

im s = imz 

0 z rin

rout

1 +q 2(m +)

r

dr

d  = +4(cid:18)m 



2(cid:19) ,

(9)

where to obtain the last equation we have used feynmans hole theory deformation of the

contour:      + i.

both channels  particle or anti-particle tunneling  contribute to the rate for the hawk-

ing process so, in a more detailed calculation, one would have to add their amplitudes before

squaring in order to obtain the semi-classical tunneling rate. such considerations, however,

only concern the pre-factor. in either treatment, the exponential part of the semi-classical

emission rate, in agreement with [7], is

  e2 im s = e8(m  

2 ) = e+sbh ,

(10)

where we have expressed the result more naturally in terms of the change in the holes

bekenstein-hawking entropy, sbh. when the quadratic term is neglected, eq. 10 reduces

to a boltzmann factor for a particle with energy  at the inverse hawking temperature

8m. the 2 correction arises from the physics of energy conservation, which (roughly

speaking) self-consistently raises the eective temperature of the hole as it radiates. that

the exact result must be correct can be seen on physical grounds by considering the limit

5

in which the emitted particle carries away the entire mass and charge of the black hole

(corresponding to the transmutation of the black hole into an outgoing shell). there can

be only one such outgoing state. on the other hand, there are exp (sbh) states in total.

statistical mechanics then asserts that the probability of nding a shell containing all the

mass of the black hole is proportional to exp (sbh), as above.

following standard arguments, eq. 10 with the quadratic term neglected implies the

planck spectral ux appropriate to an inverse temperature of 8m:

 () =

d
2

| t ()|2
e+8m   1

,

(11)

where | t ()|2 is the frequency-dependent (greybody) transmission co-ecient for the out-
going particle to reach future innity without back-scattering. it arises from a more complete

treatment of the modes, whose semi-classical behavior near the turning point we have been

discussing.

the preceding techniques can also be applied to emission from a charged black hole.

however, when the outgoing radiation carries away the black holes charge, the calculations

are complicated by the fact that the trajectories are now also subject to electromagnetic

forces. here we restrict ourselves to uncharged radiation coming from a reissner-nordstrom

black hole. the derivation then proceeds in a similar fashion to that above.

the charged counterpart to the painleve line element is

ds2 =  1 

2m
r

+

q2

r2 ! dt2 + 2s 2m
r 

q2
r2

dt dr + dr2 + r2d2 ,

(12)

which is obtained from the standard reissner-nordstrom line element by the coordinate

transformation,

t = tr + 2q2m r  q2 + m ln  r  2m r  q2
r + 2m r  q2!

+

q2  m 2
m 2  q2

arctanh m 2  q22m r  q2

m r

! ,

(13)

where tr is the reissner time coordinate. the line element now manifestly displays the

stationary, nonstatic, and nonsingular nature of the spacetime.

6

the equation of motion for an outgoing massless particle is

dr
dt

= +1 s 2m
r 

q2
r2

,

r 

(14)

with m  m   when self-gravitation is included [8]. the imaginary part of the action
for a positive energy outgoing particle is

im s = imz +

0 z rout

rin

dr

1 q 2(m )

r

(d ) ,

 q2

r2

(15)

which is again evaluated by deforming the contour in accordance with feynmans w  wi
prescription. the residue at the pole can be read o by substituting u  q2 (m   ) r  q2.

this yields an emission rate of

  e2 im s = e

4(cid:16)2(m  

2 )(m )(m )2q2+mm 2q2(cid:17) = e+sbh .

(16)

to rst order in , eq. (16) is consistent with hawkings result of thermal emission at the

hawking temperature, th , for a charged black hole:

th =

1
2

m 2  q2

(cid:16)m + m 2  q2(cid:17)2 .

(17)

again, energy conservation implies that the exact result has corrections of higher order in

; these can all be collected to express the emission rate as the exponent of the change in

entropy. moreover, since the emission rate has to be real, the presence of the rst square root

in eq. (16) ensures that radiation past extremality is not possible. unlike in the traditional

formulas, the third law of black hole thermodynamics is here manifestly enforced.

note that only local physics has gone into our derivations. there was neither an appeal

to euclideanization nor any need to invoke an explicit collapse phase. the time asym-

metry leading to outgoing radiation arose instead from use of the normal local contour

deformation prescription in terms of the nonstatic coordinate t.

iii. relation to electric discharge

the calculation presented above is formally self-contained, but some additional discussion

is in order, to elucidate its physical meaning and to dispel a puzzle it poses.

7

when considered at the very broadest level, radiation of mass from a black hole resembles

tunneling of electric charge o a charged conducting sphere. upon a moments reection,

however, the dierence in the physics of the two situations appears so striking as to pose

a puzzle. for while the electric force between like charges is repulsive, the gravitational

force is always attractive. related to this, the eld energy of electric elds is positive, while

(heuristically) the eld energy of gravitational elds is negative. on this basis one might

think that the electric process should proceed spontaneously, and need not require tunneling,

while the gravitational process has no evident reason to proceed at all.

consider a conducting sphere of radius r carrying charge q. the electric eld energy

can be lowered by emitting a charge q so we expect this process to occur spontaneously. if

we neglect back-reaction of the charge q on the conducting sphere, the force is repulsive at

all distances, and there is no barrier to emission. in a more accurate treatment, however,

we must take into account the induced non-uniformity of the charge on the sphere, which is

easily done using the method of images. the eective potential is

v (r) = q(cid:18) q  q
r 

qr

r2  r2(cid:19) ,

(18)

where we consider congurations of image charge which leave the potential on the sphere

constant and the eld at innity xed. in the formal limit q  q the rst term dominates,
and the potential decreases monotonically with r, indicating no barrier. however the second

term increases monotonically with r, and always dominates for r  r, producing a barrier.
in the gravitational problem, the situation is just the reverse. with back-reaction ne-

glected, there is nothing but barrier. yet our calculation including back-reaction indicates

the possibility of redistributing mass-energy of the gravitating sphere (black hole) into ki-

netic energy of emitted radiation.

since the intrinsic energy of the gravitational eld is negative, it is disadvantageous

to reduce it, point by point. however, since in general the spacetime containing a black

hole is not globally static, there exist freely propagating negative energy modes inside the

horizon which cause the black hole to shrink. as a consequence, the black holes radius

8

decreases and the external volume of space, over which one integrates the eld, increases.

this, kinematically, is why the radiation process is allowed. were the hole geometry to be

regarded as xed, there would be no possible source for the kinetic energy of the radiation,

and a genuine tunneling interpretation of hawking radiation would appear to be precluded.

iv. conclusion

we have derived hawking radiation from the heuristically familiar perspective of tunnel-

ing. our derivation is in consonance with intuitive notions of black hole radiance but, by

taking into account global conservation laws, we are led to a modication of the emission

spectrum away from thermality. the resulting corrected formula has physically reason-

able limiting cases and, by virtue of nonthermality, suggests the possibility of information-

carrying correlations in the radiation.

acknowledgement

f.w. is supported in part by doe grant de-fg02-90er-40542.

9

references

[1] s. w. hawking, commun. math. phys. 43, 199 (1975).

[2] g. w. gibbons and s. w. hawking, phys. rev. d 15, 2752 (1977).

[3] p. painleve, c. r. acad. sci. (paris), 173, 677 (1921).

[4] p. kraus and f. wilczek, mod. phys. lett. a 9, 3713 (1994).

[5] w. g. unruh, phys. rev. d 14, 870 (1976).

[6] p. kraus and f. wilczek, nucl. phys. b433, 403 (1995).

[7] p. kraus and e. keski-vakkuri, nucl. phys. b491, 249 (1997).

[8] p. kraus and f. wilczek, nucl. phys. b437, 231 (1995).

10

