9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

5
1

 
 

1
v
9
1
1
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

topological quantum field theories 
a meeting ground for physicists and

mathematicians

romesh k. kaul

the institute of mathematical sciences,

taramani, chennai 600 113, india.

email: kaul@imsc.ernet.in

february 1, 2008

abstract

topological quantum eld theories can be used as a powerful tool to probe
geometry and topology in low dimensions. chern-simons theories, which are
examples of such eld theories, provide a eld theoretic framework for the study
of knots and links in three dimensions. these are rare examples of quantum
eld theories which can be exactly (non-perturbatively) and explicitly solved.
abelian chern-simons theory provides a eld theoretic interpretation of the
linking and self-linking numbers of a link. in non-abelian theories, vacuum ex-
pectation values of wilson link operators yield a class of polynomial link invari-
ants; the simplest of them is the famous jones polynomial. other invariants ob-
tained are more powerful than that of jones. powerful methods for completely
analytical and non-perturbative computation of these knot and link invariants
have been developed.
in the process answers to some of the open problems
in knot theory are obtained. from these invariants for unoriented and framed
links in s3, an invariant for any three-manifold can be easily constructed by
exploiting the lickorish-wallace surgery presentation of three-manifolds. this
invariant up to a normalization is the partition function of the chern-simons
eld theory. even perturbative analysis of the chern-simons theories are rich
in their mathematical structure; these provide a eld theoretic interpretation of
vassiliev knot invariants. not only in mathematics, chern-simons theories nd
important applications in three and four dimensional quantum gravity also.

1

1 introduction

many a time advances in mathematics and physics have occurred hand in hand.
newtons theory of mechanics and the development of techniques of calculus are a
classical example of this phenomenon. another example is the developments in dier-
ential geometry inspired by maxwell theory of electromagnetism and einstein theory
of general relativity. a recent glorious example is the developments of topological
quantum eld theories and their relevance to the study of geometry and topology of
low dimensional manifolds.

the application of topological quantum eld theories reects the enormous in-
terest generated both by mathematicians and eld theoreticians in building a link
between quantum physics through its path integral formulation on one hand and ge-
ometry and topology of low dimensional manifolds on the other. these are indeed
deep links which are only now getting explored. it does appear that the properties
of low dimensional manifolds can be very successfully unraveled by relating them
to innite dimensional manifolds of elds. this provides a powerful tool to study
these manifolds notwithstanding the lack of mathematical rigour in dening the
functional integrals of quantum eld theory.
indeed, an axiomatic formulation of
topological quantum eld theories has also been attempted.

toplogical quantum eld theories are independent of the metric of curved manifold
on which these are dened; the expectation value of the energy-momentum tensor is
zero, hti = 0. these possess no local propagating degrees of freedom; only degrees
of freedom are topological. operators of interest in such a theory are also metric
independent.

to illustrate how ideas of quantum eld theory can be used to study topology,
we shall focus our attention here on recent important developments in chern-simons
gauge eld theory as a topological quantum eld theory on a three-manifold. this
theory provides a eld theoretic framework for the study of knots and links in a
given three manifold[1] - [5]. it was a.s. schwarz who rst conjectured [3] that the
now famous jones polynomial [6] may be related to chern-simons theory. e. witten
in his pioneering paper about ten years ago demonstrated this connection[2].
in
addition, he set up a general eld theoretic framework to study knots and links. since
then enormous eort has gone into developing an exact and explicit non-perturbative
solution of this eld theory. many of the standard techniques of eld theory nd
applications in these developments. the interplay between quantum eld theory and
knot theory has paid rich dividends in both directions. many of the open problems
in knot theory have found answers in the process.

wilson loop operators are the topological operators of the chern-simons gauge
eld theory. their vacuum expectation values are the topological invariants for knots
and links which do not depend on the exact shape, location or form of the knots and
links but reect only their topological properties. the power of this framework is so
deep that it allows us to study these invariants not only on simple manifold such as
three-sphere but also on any arbitrary three-manifold.

2

the knot and link invariants obtained from these eld theories are also intimately
related to the integrable vertex models in two dimensions[7, 5]. these invariants
have also been approached in dierent mathematical frameworks. a quantum group
approach to these polynomial invariants has been developed[8]. last decade or so has
seen enormous activity in these directions in algebraic topology.

a mathematically important development is that these link invariants provide a
method of obtaining a specic topological invariant for three-manifolds[2, 9] in terms
of invariants for framed unoriented links in s3[10, 5, 11]. in the following, we shall
review these developments.

not only in mathematics, chern-simons theory has also played a major role in
quantum gravity. three-dimensional gravity with a negative cosmological constant,
itself a topological eld theory, can be described by two copies of su(2) chern-simons
theory. even in four dimensional gravity, chern-simons theories nd application.
for example, the boundary degrees of freedom of a black hole in four dimensions,
are described by an su(2) chern-simons eld theory. this has allowed an exact
calculation of quantum entropy of a non-rotating black hole. the formula so obtained
for a schwarzschild black hole, while agreeing with the bekenstein-hawking formula
for large areas, goes beyond the semi-classical result.

before explaining how a eld theoretic framework for knots and links can be

developed, let us start with a brief discussion of knots and links.

2 knots and links: an elementary introduction

what is knot? a smooth non-intersecting closed curve in a three-manifold is a knot.
oriented closed curves are oriented knots. a string with its ends joined in the shape of
a circle without any entanglements is a model for the simplest non-intersecting closed
curve called unknot. with a given knot, we associate a knot diagram obtained by
projecting the knot on to a plane with a minimum number of double points. in such
a diagram over-crossings and under-crossing are to be clearly marked. the number
of double points in a knot diagram is called its crossing number. a few simple knots
with low crossing numbers are:

01

31

14

knots

51

25

clearly, for a given minimum number of crossings, there can be more than one
type of topologically inequivalent knots. the number of knots increases rapidly with
the crossing number. for crossing number 9, there are 49 knots (not distinguishing
mirror reections), for 10 there are 165 and for crossing number 11 we have 552 knots.

3

for 13 crossings, there are more than 10,000 dierent knots.

what is a link? a collection of a number of oriented non-intersecting loops (knots)
is an oriented link. a knot then is single component link. links like knots can be
represented by their two dimensional projections, the link diagrams with minimum
number of double points, but with the over-crossings and under-crossings clearly
marked. examples of a few two-component links are:

01

21

links

41

51

to a topologist, length, thickness or precise shape of a knot are not of any interest.
two knots or links are to be identied if one can be made to go continuously into
other by shrinking or stretching or wiggling without snapping the string. there is a
minimal set of elementary rules which encode these qualitative notions more precisely.
these are the three reidemeister moves which do not change the topological type of
a link:

type   i   move 

type   ii   move

type  iiia   move

type   iiib   move

invariance under all these three moves is called invariance under ambient isotopy. if
a quantity is invariant under type ii and iii moves only, but not under type i moves,
it is said to be a regular isotopic invariant.

the reidemeister move iii is of particular interest. it represents a dening rela-
tion for the generators of braids. in addition, it is a graphical representation of the
yang-baxter relation of statistical mechanical models. these facts are not acciden-
tal but reect a deep connection that knots and links have with braids and exactly
solvable two-dimensional vertex models [7]. in fact this connection has been success-
fully exploited to obtain innitely many new exactly solvable statistical mechanical
models[5].

though the reidemeister rules are so simple, it is not an easy exercise in general

4

to tell whether given two knots or links are topologically distinct or not. for example,
it took nearly eighty years, since the time of knot tables of c.n. little from the end
of last century to the work of k.a. perko in 1972, to recognize that the knots in the
gure below are isotopically equivalent[12]:

perko    pair

finding mathematical methods for distinguishing knots and links is indeed an
important problem in knot theory. to this end, some denite invariants, called link
invariants, are associated with the links. these are mathematical expressions which
depend only on the isotopic type of the link and not on any of its particular repre-
sentations. some such invariants are in the form of polynomials. first polynomial
invariant was discovered in late twenties by j.w. alexander[13]. it took almost sixty
more years before the next one was discovered by v.r.f. jones[6]. the new invariant
proved to be topologically more powerful than that of alexander. for example, un-
like alexander polynomial, jones polynomial does distinguish many mirror reected
knots. soon after, a two variable generalization of jones invariant was found [14].
though two distinct jones polynomials do represent two isotopically distinct knots,
the converse is not always true. there are examples of distinct knots with same jones
polynomial. still jones work represents a leap forward in the developments of knot
theory. what is impressive about the topological eld theoretic description of knots
is that it provides a whole variety of link invariants in a straight forward manner.
of these jones one-variable polynomial and its two-variable generalization are the
simplest examples.

before starting a discussion of knots and links in terms of a quantum eld theory,

let us make a few historical remarks about knots and links in physics.

a few historical remarks: knots and links rst captured the imagination of
physicists when lord kelvin (william thomas) introduced them as early as 1857 as
uid-mechanical models of atoms [15]. reluctant to accept the prevailing notion of
an innitely rigid point-like atom, he thought of atoms as vortex-lines in a perfect ho-
mogeneous uid, the ether. dierent sorts of atoms were then to dier in accordance
with the number of intersections of these vortex rings. stability of the atoms in
this theory thus is a reection of the fact that knots do preserve their essential knot-
tedness during their movement. indeed lord kelvin would have wanted to develop
a new theory of gasses, theory of elastic solids and liquids based on the dynamics
of these vortex atoms  a programme he did not complete nor was considered by

5

later day physicists worth while in this context. however, a new area, knot theory, of
mathematics was born.

two contemporary scottish physicists, j.c. maxwell and p.g. tait did nd lord
kelvins hypothesis attractive enough. tait had hoped to explain the position of lines
in the spectrum of a chemical element from the knot type representing it. thus, it
was natural for him to attempt the formidable task of classifying knots in three-space.
for this he needed some measure of complexity of a knot. thus the concept of the
degree of knottedness was introduced. this is what we nowadays call crossing number
of a knot, a notion already dened above. tait with this notion of crossing number,
produced the rst knot tables, listing knots in order of their increasing knottedness.
if atoms had been really knots, we would have been studying these tables instead of
the periodic table of chemical elements in our schools.

since the pioneering work of these physicists, knot theory was solely investigated
by mathematicians till about ten years ago when physicists came back to it through
quantum eld theories. this brings us to modern eld theoretic interpretation of
knots in three dimensions.

3 abelian chern-simons eld theory and knots

and links

in a eld theory, the properties of a system of innitely many oscillators are repre-
sented collectively by a eld, (x) dened over all the space though the space label x.
an action functional is prescribed for these elds. for example, for a one-component
scalar eld (x), say in three dimensional at euclidean space r3, the action func-
tional may be taken to be:

s[] =

1

2 z d3x (x)(x) ,

where ,  = 1, 2, 3 are space indices and for r3, the metric is at  = dia (1, 1, 1).
for a theory dened over a general curved three-manifold endowed with a metric g
(and its inverse g), this action generalizes to:

s[] =

where g(x) = det g.

1

2 z d3xqg(x) g(x)(x)(x) ,

similarly for a vector eld a(x), the gauge eld of maxwell theory in three

dimensions, we write the action functional as:

s[a] =

1

4 z d3xqg(x) g(x)g(x)ha(x)  a(x)iha(x)  a(x)i

both these actions above are invariant under general coordinate transformations.

6

quantum eld theories normally studied, like the examples above, depend on the
metric g of the three-manifold in which the theory is dened. the metric describes
the geometric properties, such as distances, curvature etc. but, here we are interested
in attempting a eld theoretic description of knots and links in such a way that only
their topological properties are represented. their size, exact shape, location etc are
not of our concern. the topological properties, unlike these, do not depend on the
metric. thus we are seeking a eld theory which is independent of the metric. such
theories are called topological eld theories. a simple example of metric independent
eld theory is the chern-simons gauge theory. its action in the abelian version (with
convenient normalization) is given by:

ks[a] = 

k

8 zs 3

d3x a(x)a(x)

(1)

where  is a completely anti-symmetric contravariant three-tensor density whose
only nonzero component is 1 2 3 = 1. for deniteness, we shall discuss this theory
in a three-manifold s3. clearly this action is independent of the metric. also it is
invariant under general coordinate transformations. like the maxwell theory, this
theory exhibits a gauge invariance.

the quantum version of this theory is described by the functional integral repre-

senting the partition function:

z = z [da] eiks

(2)

and for metric independent gauge invariant functionals w [a] of the gauge eld
a(x), we have the functional averages (vacuum expectation values of the associated
operators):

hwi = z 1z [da] w eiks

(3)

though the action and gauge invariant functionals w do not depend on the metric,
there are potential sources which can introduce metric dependence in these functional
averages. the functional integration may be thought of to be done by discretizing
the space into a mesh. innitely many ordinary integrals over a(x) at every point
x of the mesh are to be done and nally the limit of mesh size going to zero is taken
in some well dened manner. this is the usual way we understand these innite
dimensional integrals. further, there is a gauge invariance in the theory, which like in
other gauge theories needs to be xed by a choice of gauge. both the choice of mesh
as well as gauge xing condition are generically metric dependent. thus the gauge
xed measure of integration [da(x)] in a eld theory dened on a curved space, in
general depends on the metric. however, despite these, it can be shown that various
metric dependence so conspire in this topological theory that they cancel out without
spoiling the metric independence of the functional averages [16] .

now let us give an explicit form of a topological operator w in this abelian
chern-simons theory. consider a link l made up of knots k1, k2, ....ks. wilson

7

knot operator for each these knots k is given by exp[i nhk dx a(x)] where n is

an integer measuring the charge on the loop. clearly these are independent of the
metric. then the wilson link operator is product of all such knot operators:

w [l] =

exphi nik

dxa(x)i

(4)

s

y=1

if we expand the exponential here, the expectation value hw [l]i is given by the
expectation values of the various terms in this expansion. this is a non-interacting
theory; all these expectation values are given in terms of the two-loop expectation
values only:

hik

dxa(x)ikm

dya(y)i, k 6= km;

and

hik

dxa(x)ik

dya(y)i

(5)

here in the rst expression the two loops are distinct in contrast to the second expres-
sion where both the loop integrals are along the same knot. clearly, these expressions
can be easily evaluated in terms of the two-point correlator ha(x) a(y)i. to do
this, we can locally identify the region containing our link with r3 so that we can
use the at metric g =  in this region. then x and y are the euclidean at
coordinates along the two knots k and km respectively. this allows us to do away
with the complications connected with the curved nature of the three-manifold s3;
we can do all our calculations in at euclidean space without loss of generality. ele-
mentary eld theory allows us to read o the at space two-point correlator from the
action (subject to a gauge condition, which we choose to be the covariant lorentz
gauge  a = 0 ):

ha(x) a(y)i =

i
k



(x  y)
|x  y|3

dxa(x)ikm

dya(y)i =
l(k, km) =

4i
k l(k, km)
1
4 ik
dxikm

dy

so that

hik

where

(x  y)
|x  y|3 .

(6)

this double loop integral over two distinct knots (k 6= km) is a well known topo-
logical invariant, called gauss linking number of the two closed curves. it measures
the number of times one knot k goes through the other knot km. clearly, linking
number of two knots is an integer. for example, for the right-handed hopf link h+,

right-handed    hopf   link   h+

8

its value is +1. its value for the mirror reection of this link (left-handed hopf) is
1. linking number does not depend on the exact location of the two knots, nor on
their size or shape. it depends only on their topological relationship with each other.
this invariant has a physical interpretation due to maxwell  in electrodynamics, it
represents the work done to move a magnetic monopole around one knot in three-
space while an electric current runs through the other knot.

the abelian chern-simons theory also provides a representation for yet another
simple topological quantity associated with an individual knot called its self-linking
number and also some times framing number or simply framing. this is related to
the second expectation value given in (5) where the two loop integrals are over the
same knot. this expectation value is to be evaluated through a limiting procedure:
to a knot k parametrized by x(s) (0  s  l) along the length of the knot by the
parameter s, associate another closed curve kf , called its frame, given by coordinates
y = x(s)+n(s) where  is a small parameter and n(s) is a unit vector eld normal
(principal normal) to the curve at s. that is, kf is the curve k displaced along the
normal by a small amount. then the linking number of the curve k and its frame
kf is called self-linking number sl(k) of the knot:
dy a(y)i = lim0hik

dxa(x)ikf

dxa(x)ik

dya(y)i

hik

=

4i
k l(k, kf ) =

4i
k sl(k)

(7)

this self-linking number is independent of the parameter  and can easily be shown
to obey the following important theorem, rst proven by g. calugareanu almost forty
years ago [17]:

calugareanu theorem: the self-linking number of a knot is the sum of its twist

and writhe numbers:

t (k) =

1

2 zk

ds 

dx
ds

sl(k) = t (k) + w(k)
n dn
4 zk
ds

w(k) =

1

,

(8)

dszk

dt  e de
ds

de
dt

where the vector eld e is given by

e(s, t) =

y(t)  x(s)
|y(t)  x(s)|

is a map k  k 7 s2 and n(s) is the normal vector eld along the length of the
curve k (x(s), 0  s  l). the quantities t (k) and w(k) represent well dened
geometric properties of the knot. t (k) represents the twist in the knot k with
reference to its frame kf and w(k) is the amount of writhe or coiling of the knot.
clearly, the twist number and writhe number are not necessarily integers nor are
they ambient isotopic invariants. but their sum, the self-linking number, is indeed an

9

integer and also an ambient isotopic invariant. this theorem can be easily appreciated
if we recall that stretching a coiled up telephone cord reduces its coils but increases
its twist and loosening of a twisted cord coils it up. the amount of coils lost (or
gained) is exactly the same as the amount by which the twisting is gained (or lost) so
that their sum is always unchanged. this theorem of calugareanu when applied to
circular ribbon (which can be thought of as a framed closed curve) has been put to
good use in the study of the properties of circular polymers and circular dna [18].
notice that the self-linking number does carry dependence on the frame. the
mathematical concept of framing of a knot is intimately connected to the concept
of regularization in eld theory. in order to avoid the coincidence singularity in the
two-point correlator limxyha(x) a(y)i, we need to regularize it, say by point-
splitting. evaluating, two-loop correlator of eqn.(5), where the two loops are same,
we face this same divergence, which, through framing, has been resolved by loop-
splitting. ordinarily, quantities in eld theory do depend on the regularization.
like-wise the self-linking number here depends on the framing. but all those framing
curves enveloping around the knot, which can be continuously deformed into each
other without snapping the knot, form a topological class for which the self-linking
number does not change.
in eld theory language, framing provides a topological
regularization.

now collecting all these pieces of information, the expectation value of the wilson
link operator for a link l = (k1, k2, ...ks) in the abelian chern-simons theory on
s3 can be written down in terms of the linking and self-linking (framing) numbers as:

hw [l]i = exp




s

2i

k h
x

n2
 sl(k) +

s

x6=m

nnml(k, km)i


(9)

thus, we have indicated here how this simple eld theory does indeed, through
expectation values of wilson link operators, provide a eld theoretic interpretation of
some of the topological invariants, linking number and self-linking number of knots
and links. non-abelian chern-simons theories are much richer in their structure;
these capture even more complex topological properties of knots and links.

4 non-abelian chern-simons theory as a descrip-

tion of knots and links

a non-abelian chern-simons theory, instead of being a gauge theory of one vector
eld, involves, say for gauge group su(2), three such elds, aa
 (a = 1, 2, 3). these
a
three are collectively written as a matrix valued vector eld a = aa
2i , where

anti-hermetian matrices a
2i are the generators of the group su(2). action functional
dened in a three-manifold, say s3, is given by:

ks =

k

4 zs 3

d3x  trha(x)a(x) +

2
3

a(x)a(x)a(x)i

(10)

10

like abelian chern-simons theory, this action has no metric dependence. besides a
gauge invariance, it is also invariant under general coordinate transformations.
the topological operators are the wilson loop (knot) operators dened as

wj[k] = trjp expik

dxaa

t a
j

(11)

for an oriented knot k carrying spin j representation reected by the associated
representation matrices t a
(a = 1, 2, 3). the symbol p stands for path ordering of
j
the exponential. this is done by breaking the length of the knot k into innitesimal
intervals of size dx
m along the knot.
then path ordered exponential is:

m around the points labeled by the coordinates x

p expik

dxaa

t a
j = ym

[1 + dx

maa

(xm)t a
j ]

for a link l made up of oriented component knots k1, k2, . . . ks carrying spin
j1, j2, . . . js representations respectively, we have the wilson link operator dened as

wj1j2...js[l] =

s

y=1

wj[k]

we are interested in the functional averages of these operators:

vj1j2...js[l] = z 1z [da] wj1j2...js[l] eiks ,

where z = z [da] eiks

(12)

(13)

here the integrands in the functional integrals are metric independent. so is the gauge
xed measure [16]. therefore, these expectation values depend only on the isotopy
type of the oriented link l and the set of representations j1, j2 . . . js associated with
component knots.

these expectation values can be obtained non-perturbatively. for example, for
knots and links carrying only the spin 1/2 representations, witten has shown that
the link invariants (expectation values of the associated wilson link operators) satisfy
a simple relation. this relation is given for three link diagrams which are identical
every where except for one crossing where they dier in that it is an over-crossing
(l+), or no-crossing (l0) or an under-crossing (l) as shown in the gure below:

l+

lo

l-

over-crossing

no-crossing

under-crossing

then the invariant for such links are related as:

q v1/2[l+]  q1v1/2[l] = (q1/2  q1/2) v1/2[l0]

(14)

where q is a root of unity related to the chern-simons coupling k through the relation
q = exp[2i/(k +2)]. this is precisely the well known generating skein relation for the

11

jones polynomials. indeed v1/2[l], which is the expectation value of the wilson link
operator where every component knot carries the doublet spin 1/2 representation, is
the one-variable jones polynomial.

the above skein relation is powerful enough that it recursively yields jones poly-

nomial for any arbitrary link. for example consider following three link diagrams:

l+

l-

l o

unknot   u

unknot   u

two   unknots  u      uu

we use an important factorization property of these invariant:
the link invariant
of two distant (disjoint) links (that is, with no mutual entanglement) is simply the
product of invariants for the individual links. that is, for the link l0 above, v1/2[u 
u] = (v1/2[u])2, where symbol u represents the unknot. then use of the skein relation
yields:

q v1/2[u]  q1v1/2[u] = (q1/2  q1/2) (v1/2[u])2

so that spin 1/2 invariant for an unknot is given by: v1/2[u] = q1/2 + q1/2.

next apply the skein relation to three links, where the l+ is the right-handed

hopf link, l is simply the union of two (unlinked) unknots and l0 is an unknot:

l +

l -

l o

right-handed  hopf  link h+

two   unknots

u        uu

unknot  u

this yields, the invariant for the right-handed hopf link h+ as: v1/2[h+] = 1 +
q1 + q2 + q3. now use recursion relation for the three links:

l +

l -

l o

right-handed   trefoil  t

+

unknot

u

right-handed  hopf  link  h  +

where l+ is a right-handed trefoil (t+), l is an unknot and l0 is a right-handed
hopf h+. this gives us the invariant for the trefoil knot as v1/2[t+] = q1/2 +q3/2 +
q5/2  q9/2. this way invariant for any arbitrary link can be recursively obtained.
jones polynomial is in fact the simplest of the examples of a whole host of new link
invariants that emerge naturally from this eld theory. more general invariants are the

12

expectation values of wilson link operators with arbitrary spin representations placed
on the knots. the formalism does also allow for placing dierent representations on
each of the component knots. this leads to so-called coloured polynomial invariants.
besides, instead of the gauge group su(2), chern-simons theory based on any other
semi-simple group can be used. these then yield even richer spectrum of the new
invariants.

while jones polynomial can be obtained by recursive use of the skein relation,
other more general invariants (for spin representations j = 1, 3/2...) can not be ob-
tained in this manner. of course there are generalizations of the skein relations for
an arbitrary spin invariants. but these do not possess recursively complete solutions
(except for spin 1/2 case above). therefore methods had to be developed to obtain
expectation values of wilson operators with arbitrary representations living on the
component knots of a link. one such method in its complete manifestations has been
presented in ref [4]. this allows us to present a complete and explicit solution of
the chern-simons theory. this is a non-perturbative method which, generalizing the
formalism set up by witten, makes use of two ingredients, one from quantum eld
theory and other from mathematics of braids:

(i) field theoretic input: chern-simons theory on a three-manifold with bound-
ary is essentially characterized by a corresponding two dimensional wess-zumino
conformal eld theory on that boundary[2]:



cs

m,        m = 

su(2) cs theory with coupling k on m



wz

su(2)    wz theory on

k



and chern-simons functional average for wilson lines ending at n points in the
boundary is described by the associated wess-zumino theory on the boundary with
n punctures carrying the representations of the free wilson lines:



j1
j 2

j n

.

.
.
..



j1
j 2

j n


su(2) cs theory with coupling k on the manifold m
with wilson lines ending at n points in the boundary 



su(2)    wz theory on        with n punctures carrying
primary fields in representations  j   , j   , . . . . j 

k

n

1

2

the chern-simons functional integral can be represented [2] by a vector in the hilbert
space h associated with the space of n-point correlator of the wess-zumino conformal
in fact, these correlators provide a basis for this
eld theory on the boundary .

13

boundary hilbert space. there are more than one possible basis. these dierent
bases are related by duality of the correlators of the conformal eld theory[4].

(ii) mathematical input: the second ingredient used is the close connection knots
and links have with braids. an n-braid is a collection of non-intersecting strands
connecting n points on a horizontal plane to n points on another horizontal plane
directly below the rst set of n points. the strands are not allowed to go back
upwards at any point in their travel. the braid may be projected onto a plane with
the two horizontal planes collapsing to two parallel rigid rods. the over-crossings
and under-crossings of the strands are to be clearly marked. when all the strands
are identical, we have ordinary braids. the theory of such braids, rst developed by
artin, is well studied. these braids form a group. however, we may wish to orient
the individual strands and further distinguish them by putting dierent colours on
them. these dierent colours are represented by dierent su(2) spins. these braids,
unlike braids made from unoriented identical strands, have a more general structure
than a group. these instead form a groupoid. the necessary aspects of the theory of
such braids have been presented in ref.[4]

one way of relating the braids to knots and links is through closure of braids. we
obtain the closure of a braid by connecting the ends of the rst, second, third, .....
strands from above to the ends of respective rst, second, third, ..... strands from
below as shown in (a):

.. . .

.....

(a)  closure of a braid 

. . . .

2m-braid
(b)  platting of a braid

. . . .

2m-plat

there is a theorem by alexander[19] which states that any knot or link can be obtained
as closure of a braid. this construction of a knot or link is not unique.

there is another construction associated with braids which relates them to knots
and links. this is called platting. consider a 2m-braid, with pairwise adjacent strands
carrying the same colour and opposite orientations. then connect the (2i1)th strand
with (2i)th from above as well as from below. this yields the plat of the given braid
as shown in (b) above. there is a theorem due to birman[20] which relates plats
to links. this states that a coloured-oriented link can be represented (though not
uniquely) by the plat of an oriented-coloured 2m-braid.

use of these two inputs, namely relation of chern-simons theory to the boundary
wess-zumino conformal eld theory and presentation of knots and links as closures
or plats of braids leads to an explicit, complete and non-perturbative solution of the
chern-simons theory. conformal eld theory on associated boundary gives matrix
representations for braids and platting or closing of a braid corresponds to taking a
specic matrix element of these braid representations. this then yields the expec-

14

tation value of the wilson link operator associated with that link. for example this
invariant for an unknot u carrying spin j representation turns out to be:

vj[u] = [2j + 1]

where

[x] =

qx/2  qx/2
q1/2  q1/2

the square bracket indicates a q-number. jones polynomial above corresponds to
spin j = 1/2. and for a right-handed trefoil t+, the invariant turns out to be:

vj[t+] =

m=0,1,2,..min(2j,k2j)

x

[2m + 1] ()2j+m q6cj + 3

2 cm

where cj = j(j +1) is the quadratic casimir of the spin j representation. for j = 1/2,
this expression agrees with the polynomial obtained above by using the skein relation.
the link invariants calculated from the eld theory depend on the regularization
used to dene the coincident loop correlators, that is, the framing of the knots. the
invariants above have been obtained in a specic framing called standard framing. in
particular, the skein relation for spin 1/2 invariants given above is in this framing. in
this framing, the self-linking (framing) number of every knot is zero. the invariants
so obtained are unchanged under all the three reidemeister moves. that is, this
yields ambient isotopic invariants. there is another framing choice which has been of
special interest. in this case, the frame is thought to be just vertically above the two
dimensional projection of the knot. in this framing, known as vertical framing, rei-
demeister moves ii and iii do leave the link invariants unchanged, but reidemeister
move i changes them.

the general framework developed provides a powerful method of calculating knot
and link invariants. this has in the process also provided answers to some of the open
problems of knot theory. for example, one such problem is to nd polynomial invari-
ants which would discriminate between two chiralities of a given knot. the invariants
for the mirror reected knots are give by simple complex conjugation. up to ten cross-
ing number, there are six chiral knots, 942, 1048, 1071, 1091, 10104 and 10125 (as listed in
the knot tables in rolfsens book [21]) which are not distinguished from their mirror
images by spin 1/2 (jones) polynomials. spin one (kauman/akutsu-wadati) poly-
nomials do detect the chirality of four of them, namely 1048, 1091, 10104 and 10125.
but for 942 and 1071 both jones and kauman polynomials are not changed under
chirality transformation (q  q1). however, the new spin 3/2 invariants are powerful
enough to distinguish these knots from their mirror images[22] .
another problem of knot theory that has been provided with an answer is to do
with so called mutant knots. a mutant of a knot or link is obtained in the following
way: isolate a portion of the knot in such a way that it has two strands going into
and two strands leaving from it. scoop it out and rotate it through  about any
of three orthogonal axes (rotations about only two of these are really independent).
glue it back after, if necessary, changing the orientations on the strands to match
the free ends of strands of rest of the knot to which the free ends of the rotated
portion are glued. this yields a mutant of the original knot. it has been possible to

15

prove that polynomial invariants obtained from a chern-simons theory based on any
arbitrary non-abelian gauge group do not distinguish isotopically inequivalent mutant
knots[23]. as an example consider the following sixteen crossing mutant knots:

mutation

chiral

a  16  crossing  mutant   pair

achiral

the two knots are related by a mutation of the portion indicated by dashed enclosure.
like all other mutants, the invariants obtained from any non-abelian chern-simons
theory for them are identical. what is of particular interest about this pair is that
one of them is chiral, other is not. this then yields an example of a chiral knot whose
chirality can not be detected by any of these invariants.

the general framework developed to study knots and links is also applicable to
another set of gauge invariant operators called graphs. for su(2) chern-simons
theory, these are the graphs containing vertices with three legs. the edges of the
graph between vertices carry wilson line operators. more general gauge invariant
operators which include links attached to the edges of graphs can also be evaluated
in this framework.

5 three-manifold invariants

the invariants of knots and links in s3 obtained from the chern-simons theory can
be used to construct a special three-manifold invariant[2, 9, 10, 5]. this provides an
important tool to study topological properties of three-manifolds. starting step in
this construction is a theorem due to lickorish and wallace [24, 21]:

fundamental theorem of lickorish and wallace: every closed, orientable,
connected three-manifold, m 3 can be obtained by surgery on an unoriented framed
knot or link [l, f ] in s3.

as described earlier, the framing f of a link l is dened by associating with every
component knot ks of the link an accompanying closed curve ksf parallel to the knot
and winding n(s) times in the right-handed direction. that is, the linking number
lk(ks, ksf ) of the component knot and its frame (self-linking number of the knot ks)
is n(s). for the construction of three-manifold invariants, we use vertical framing
where the frame is thought to be just vertically above the two dimensional projection
of the knot as shown below. this is some times indicated by putting n(s) writhes in
the strand making the knot or even by just simply writing the integer n(s) next to
the knot as shown below:

16

ks

ksf
1

2
.
.

ksf

ks

1

2
.
.

ks

1

2
.
.

n (s)

n (s)

n (s)

vertical framing

ks
n (s)

next the surgery on a framed link [l, f ] made of component knots k1, k2, .... kr
with framing f = (n(1), n(2), .... n(r)) in s3 is performed in the following manner.
remove a small open solid torus neighbourhood ns of each component knot ks,
disjoint from all other such open tubular neighbourhoods associated with other com-
ponent knots. in the manifold left behind s3  (n1  n2  .... nr), there are r toral
boundaries. on each such boundary, consider a simple closed curve (the frame) going
n(s) times along the meridian and once along the longitude of the associated knot
ks. now do a modular transformation on such a toral boundary such that the fram-
ing curve bounds a disc. glue back the solid tori into the gaps. this yields a new
manifold m 3. the theorem of lickorish and wallace assures us that every closed,
orientable, connected three-manifold can be constructed in this way.

this construction of three-manifolds by surgery is not unique: surgery on more
than one framed link can yield homeomorphic manifolds. but the rules of equivalence
of framed links in s3 which yield the same three-manifold on surgery are known. these
rules are known as kirby moves[25].

kirby calculus on framed links in s3: following two elementary moves (and

their inverses) generate kirby calculus:

move i. for a number of unlinked strands belonging to the component knots
ks with framing n(s) going through an unknotted circle c with framing +1, the
unknotted circle can be removed after making a complete clockwise twist from below
in the disc enclosed by the circle c:

c

+1

n(s)

l
n (s) = n(s) - ( lk(k   , c) )

s

2

in the process, in addition to introducing new crossings, the framing of the various
resultant component knots, k 
s to which the aected strands belong, change from
n(s) to n(s) = n(s)  (lk(ks, c))2.

move ii. drop a disjoint unknotted circle with framing 1 without any change

17

in the rest of the link:

c

-1

x

x

thus lickorish-wallace theorem and equivalence of surgery under kirby moves
reduces the theory of closed, orientable, connected three-manifolds to the theory of
framed unoriented links via a one-to-one correspondence:

(cid:18) f ramed links in s3 modulo
equivalence under kirby moves(cid:19)  (cid:18) closed, orientable, connected three
manif olds modulo homeomorphisms (cid:19)

this consequently allows us to characterize three-manifolds by the invariants of asso-
ciated unoriented framed knots and links obtained from the chern-simons theory in
s3. this can be done by constructing an appropriate combination of the invariants
of the framed links which is unchanged under kirby moves:

(cid:18) invariants of a f ramed unoriented link
which do not change under kirby moves(cid:19) = (cid:18) invariants of associated

three  manif old

(cid:19)

one such invariant has been constructed in ref [5]. it is given in terms of invariants
for unoriented links obtained from su(2) chern-simons theory. the link invariants
discussed in sec.4 above are obtained in standard framing. these are sensitive to
the relative orientations of the component knots. here we shall use invariants for
unoriented links in vertical framing. but, unlike the invariants in standard framing
which exhibit ambient isotopic invariance, those obtained in vertical framing have only
regular isotopic invariance. that is, in standard framing, a writhe can be stretched
(a reidemeister move i) without aecting the link invariant, in vertical framing this
is not so. a link invariant in vertical framing gets changed by a phase when a writhe
is smoothed out as:

r

j

= qcj

j

,

l

and

j

= qcj

j

where cj = j(j + 1). here we have represented the link invariant by the aected
portion of the link. thus, in vertical framing, invariant for an unknot with self-
linking (framing) number +1 or 1 is related to the invariant for an unknot with
zero self-linking number as:

vj" r
vj"

l

+1 # = qcj vj"
-1 # = qcj vj"

0 # = qcj [2j + 1],
0 # = qcj [2j + 1].

and

in this framing, each right-(left-) handed crossing in a knot introduces a self-linking
number +1 (1). for a right-handed trefoil (self-linking number = 3), the invariant

18

in this framing turns out to be:

vj[t+] =

xm=0,1,...min(2j,k2j)

[2m + 1] ()m q3cj + 3

2 cm

a three-manifold invariant is constructed from these link invariants in vertical
framing. it has been shown that[5]: for a framed link [l, f ] with component knots,
k1, k2, .....kr and their framings respectively as n(1), n(2), .....n(r), the quantity

f [l, f ] = [l, f ] x{ji}

j1j2....jr v [l; n(1), n(2), ...n(r); j1, j2, ....jr]

(15)

constructed from invariants v of the unoriented framed link in vertical framing, is an
invariant of the associated three-manifold obtained by surgery on that link. here the
coecients  are given by

 = s0 , where

sj = s 2

k + 2

sin

(2j + 1) (2 + 1)

k + 2

and  = exp 3ik/[4(k + 2)], and [l, f ] is the signature of linking matrix w [l, f ]:
[l, f ] = (no. of + ve eigenvalues of w )  (no. of  ve eigenvalues of w ). the
o diagonal elements of the linking matrix (w [l, f ])ij are given by linking number
lk(ki, kj) for the distinct knots (i 6= j) and diagonal elements (i = j) are the self-
linking number (frame number) of the knot ki: (w [l, f ])ii = sl(ki) = ni.
it can be directly veried that this three-manifold invariant (15) is unchanged
under kirby moves i and ii.

explicit examples: now computation of this invariant for various three-manifolds
is rather straight forward. we present its value for a few three-manifolds. the surgery
description of manifolds s3, s2  s1 and rp 3 are given by an unknot with framing
+1, 0 and +2 respectively. as indicated above the invariant for an unknot with zero
framing carrying spin j representation is [2j + 1] = s0j/s00, where the square bracket
represents the q-number. thus the invariant for s3 is:

f [s3] = f " +1

# = 1 x=0,1/2,1,...k/2

 qc

s0
s00

where  = s0 and the factor qc is the eect from framing +1 (one right-handed

writhe). we make use of an identity: p sj qc sm =  qcjcm sjm which is

closely related to the modular transformations of a torus. thus this invariant for s3
is simply:

f [s3] = 1

for the three-manifold s2  s1 (with surgery representation as an unknot with zero
framing):

19

f [s2  s1] = f (cid:20) 0

(cid:21) = x



s0
s00

s0s0

s00

=

1
s00

= x

where orthogonality property of the s matrix, p sj sm = jm, has been used.

next for the three-dimensional real projective space rp 3 (this is an s3 with

antipodal points identied), the invariant is:

f [rp 3] = f 


+2




= 1 xj=0, 1

2 ,1,... k

2

s0j q2cj sj0

s00

.

a slightly more complex example we take up is the poincare manifold p 3 (also
known as dodecahedral space or dehns homology sphere). it is a homology three-
sphere given by the set of points (u, v, w) in complex 3-space such that u2+v3+w5 = 0
and |u|2 + |v|2 + |w|2 = 1. its surgery presentation is given [21] by a right-handed
trefoil knot with framing +1:

r

+1

r

r

l l

notice, each of threeright-handed crossings introduces +1 linking number between the
trefoil knot and its vertical framing, and each of two left-handed writhes contributes
1 so that the total frame number of this knot is +1. now using the knot invariant
for trefoil in vertical framing given above, the invariant for this three-manifold can
easily be written down:

f [p 3] = 1

xj=0,, 1

2 ,1, ... k

2

s0jq2cj

xm=0,1,...min(2j,k2j)

()m [2m + 1]q3cj + 3cm

2

the two left-handed writhes introduce a factor of q2cj .

the invariant f for a manifold m 3 constructed above is same, up to a nor-
malization, as the partition function of an su(2) chern-simons theory on that
manifold[5, 11]:

z[m 3] = f [m 3] s00.

(16)

generally, it is rather dicult to obtain the chern-simons partition function for a
given three-manifold m 3 directly. but, the formulae above, make its computation
through f rather easy.

the three-manifold invariant presented here is given in terms of link invariants
from su(2) chern-simons theory. it is clear that a similar construction can be done
with link invariants from chern-simons gauge theories based on other semi-simple
groups. this would yield a new method of obtaining the partition function of such
chern-simons theories.

20

next question we may ask is:

is this three-manifold invariant complete? two
manifolds m and m  for which the invariants f [m] and f [m ] are dierent can not
be homeomorphic to each other. but the converse is not always true; for two arbitrary
manifolds, the invariants need not be always dierent. recall the invariants obtained
from chern-simons theory for mutant knots are not distinct. hence, manifold ob-
tained by surgery on topologically inequivalent mutant knots can not be distinguished
by this three-manifold invariant.

6 perturbative non-abelian chern-simons theory

though chern-simons theories have been solved exactly and non-perturbatively as
discussed above, perturbative analysis of these theories are also rich in their math-
ematical structure. if we expand the expectation value of the wilson loop operator
associated with a knot as a perturbative power series in the coupling constant, the
coecients of such an expansion have a deep mathematical meaning. these on their
own are topological invariants characteristic of the knot.

last decade has also witnessed enormous research activity in direct perturbative
calculations in chern-simons gauge eld theory [26]. by simple power counting this
theory is superrenormalizable. there are divergences, which need to be regularized.
the eective coupling constant k does in general depend on the regularization. in
a class of regularizations, a shift in the coupling constant takes place: k  k + 2
for su(2) theory. this shift is consistent with the eective coupling in the non-
perturbative studies of the theory.

it is very easy to see that the rst order contribution to the vacuum expectation
value of the wilson loop operator for a knot is the self-linking number of knot up
to some group theoretic factors. this is so because at this order, the theory reduces
essentially to abelian chern-simons theories. topological regularization of the coin-
cident loop integrals through framing as discussed in sec.3 earlier, leads to this result.
higher order contributions to the expectation value of a wilson loop operator in an
su(2) chern-simons theory yield the famous vassiliev invariants. these were rst
introduced by v.a. vassiliev in 1990 from a totally dierent mathematical framework
involving a study of the space of all smooth maps of s1 into s3. these maps have
dierent types of singularities. according to the type of singularities, this space of
maps divides into classes, each of which corresponds to a knot type. these classes
are characterized by the families of invariants characterizing the knot[27].

perturbative studies of chern-simons theory have provided new insights into the
theory of vassiliev invariants.
in a gauge theory, perturbative calculations are to
be performed in a denite gauge. calculations in the landau gauge [28] lead to
covariant integral representations of vassiliev invariants, also known as conguration
space integrals rst developed by bott and taubes in 1994 [29]. another integral
representation of the vassiliev invariants was introduced by m. kontsevich in 1993
[30]. this corresponds to perturbative calculation of the chern-simons theory in

21

light-cone gauge [31].
it is rather very dicult to realize that these two integrals
represent the same invariant. however, from a eld theoretic point of view, this is
simply a consequence of gauge invariance. calculations in the temporal gauge have
yielded yet another formulation of these invariants, leading to combinatorial formulae
for them [32].

7 gravity and chern-simons theory

while chern-simons theories have provided a powerful framework for theory of knots,
these eld theories are also of direct relevance in physics. for example there is an
intimate relationship between these eld theories and three dimensional gravity which
is also a topological eld theory. in fact two copies of su(2) chern-simons theories
represent gravity in euclidean three-space with a negative cosmological constant[33].
to see this, just consider the partition function of two su(2) chern-simons theories
recast in terms of an sl(2, c) chern-simons theory as:

z = z [da, d a] exp n ik

8 zm 3

d3x 

h tr (aa + 2
 tr ( a a + 2

3

3aaa)

i o
where a is an the sl(2, c) gauge eld and a its conjugate. this partition function
is square of two su(2) partition functions: zsl(2,c) = |zsu (2)|2. make a change
of variables a =  + ie/ and a =   ie/, where  and e are the gravitational
spin connection and triad respectively. writing ks[a] = k
8 r d3x tr[aa +
2
3aaa], this then relates the action of these two chern-simons theories to einstein-
hilbert action for three dimensional gravity:

a a a)

ik(cid:16)s[a]  s[ a](cid:17) =

1

16g zm 3

d3xg(cid:16)r +

2

2(cid:17)

(17)

where the cosmological constant = 1/2 is negative and the chern-simons coupling
is related to the gravitational coupling as k = /(4g).
this is closely related to another development in gravity. three-dimensional
gravity has a lattice formulation, rst introduced by g. ponzano and t. regge in
1968 [34]. here the three-manifold is decomposed into simplices. each three-simplex
is a tetrahedron. to each edge of the tetrahedron, a half-integral spin j, called its

colour, is assigned so that its length is given by qj(j + 1). the spins on the three

edges of each triangular face satisfy the triangular angular momentum inequality
relations. the gravitational partition function is constructed in terms of racah-
wigner six-j symbols for each tetrahedron in the simplicial decomposition of the
manifold. for large spins, the six-j symbols reproduce the ordinary gravitational
action. ponzano-regge partition function suers from a problem:
it diverges as
all possible spin values are allowed to live on the edges. this, therefore requires a

22

regularization. a slightly more complex generalization of this lattice gravity model,
which also provides a regularization, is related to a model rst introduced by v.g.
turaev and o.y. viro [35]. it replaces the ordinary 6-j symbols by their q-deformed
analogues (with q as a root of unity). for large spin values, the q-six-j symbol can
be shown to give regge action for a tetrahedron and represents euclidean gravity
action with a negative cosmological constant. the turaev-viro model would then be
a quantum description of this three dimensional gravity.

for a triangulation of the three-manifold in terms of tetrahedra labeled by t and
colouring je of its edges labeled by e, turaev-viro partition function for a manifold
without boundary is given by the formula:

zt v =

1

xcolourings jek/2 yvertices
 ytetrahedra t

exp(cid:16)ixi

 yedges e
ji(t)(cid:17) ( j1(t)

j4(t)

(1)2je [2je + 1]
j3(t)

j2(t)
j5(t)

j6(t) )q

(18)

the the square brackets indicate a q-numbers, and curly brackets represent a q-6j
symbol. the deformation parameter q is related to the chern-simons coupling by
q = exp[2i/(k + 2)] and  = 2(k + 2)/(q1/2  q1/2)2 = (s00)2. this partition
function is naturally regularized and nite due the restriction on the spins living on
the edges (je  k/2) introduced by the fact that the deformation parameter is a root
of unity. further this partition function can be shown to be exactly square of an
su(2) chern-simons partition function, zt v = |zsu (2)|2. this provides yet another
representation for the chern-simons partition function.
notice that the integration measure in the partition function of two chern-simons
theories above is [da, d a], whereas for the gravity partition function, it is [de, d].
since a =  +ie/ and a = ie/, the relation between the two involves 1/ factors
as the jacobian. in fact in more exact treatment, it becomes clear that the jacobian
for this change of variables introduces exactly a factor of  for every vertex of the
triangulation, so that the gravity partition function is just the turaev-viro partition
function without the 1/ factors:

zgrav =

xcolourings jek/2 yedges e
exp(cid:16)ixi
 ytetrahedra t

(1)2je [2je + 1]
ji(t)(cid:17) ( j1(t)

j4(t)

j2(t)
j5(t)

j3(t)

j6(t) )q

(19)

for a manifold with boundary,

this

expression has additional

factors of

exp (ijb) q[2jb + 1] for every boundary edge with a spin jb. this partition function

then is a functional of the boundary triangulation and spins of edges on the boundary.
there are many interesting questions which can be addressed in this framework
for three-dimensional gravity. some of these are: how does a black hole look in
this formulation? what is its entropy? analysis shows that a black hole (banados-
teitelboim-zanelli black hole) is given by a solid torus. its horizon is given by the

23

longitudinal circle at the core of this solid torus. the possible states associated with
this black hole are the states associated with dierent triangulations of the black
hole manifold, with the restriction that the longitudes have same circumference. it
can be shown that correct semi-classical behaviour of entropy is reproduced by states
corresponding to all possible triangulations of such an euclidean black hole [36]. the
dominant contribution comes from the states at the horizon.

chern-simons theories have also played an important role in non-perturbative
formulation of canonical quantum gravity in four dimensions [37]. in this approach,
the physical states are given by spin-networks with associated graphs in three-space,
where edges are labeled by su(2) spins (colours) and vertices are given by interwin-
ning operators. quantum mechanical operators corresponding to lengths, areas and
volumes all have discrete spectrum. it can be argued that the boundary degrees of
freedom of a black hole, say schwarzschild black hole, in this four dimensional theory
can be described by a chern-simons theory[38, 39]. the action embodying the appro-
priate boundary conditions on the black hole horizon consists of, in addition to the
einstein-hilbert action (in suitable variables), an su(2) chern-simons gauge theory
living on a coordinate chart of a constant nite cross-sectional area on the horizon.
the chern-simons coupling k is proportional to this constant cross-sectional area.
as the fundamental quantum excitations are polymer like, the horizon area is gen-
erated by the punctures where these spin-polymers pierce it. a bulk polymer state
that gives the horizon its area in this manner has to be compatible with the sur-
face states on the horizon itself. these boundary states are described by a quantum
su(2) chern-simons theory on the horizon. that is, the space of these boundary
degrees of freedom is given by the space of states of chern-simons theory on a three-
manifold with an s2 boundary with nitely many punctures on which spins live.
the entropy of the black hole emerges from these boundary states. for large areas,
where essentially u(1) subgroup of su(2) contributes, the entropy is calculated by
counting these states. their number grows exponentially with horizon area yielding
the semi-classical bekenstein-hawking expression for black hole entropy[39]. for -
nite areas, full su(2) counting has to be done. this has been done by exploiting
the relation between the boundary states of chern-simons theory and the space of
conformal blocks of associated wess-zumino conformal eld theory on the boundary
two-sphere, a relationship which played a crucial role in obtaining the link invariants
in sec.4. this yields an exact formula for entropy of a non-rotating black hole which
for large areas reproduces the semi-classical formula, but for nite areas goes beyond
the bekenstein-hawking result[40].

8 summary and concluding remarks

we have made an attempt here to indicate how quantum eld theories, which have
been successfully used to describe physics of fundamental interactions of nature, can
also be used to study geometry and topology of low dimensional manifolds. these

24

developments not only provide new insights into old problems of topology of these
manifolds but also have been responsible for profoundly interesting new mathemat-
ical results. these developments make use of many of the recent developments in
quantum eld theories. the interaction between quantum physics and mathematics
has enriched both.

chern-simons gauge eld theory, a topological quantum eld theory, provides a
powerful framework for modern theory of knots and links in any three-manifold.
this is one of the rare quantum eld theories which can be explicitly and non-
perturbatively solved. while abelian chern-simons theory provides a simple de-
scription of linking and self-linking numbers of a link, non-abelian theories are even
richer. for every representation of any non-abelian gauge group, there is a new link
invariant. jones polynomial associated with spin 1/2 representation in an su(2)
chern-simons theory, is the simplest example of such link invariants. even more
general invariants (coloured invariants) are obtained if we place dierent representa-
tions on the component knots. the framework is rich enough to discuss the knots
and links not only in simple manifold like r3 or s3, but any arbitrary three-manifold.
chern-simons partition function is a particularly interesting three-manifold invariant
for which a simple and ecient computational method is available now. perturbative
studies of chern-simons theory have given a new framework for describing vassiliev
invariants.

in the process of developing this framework for knot theory, new representations
of braids also have been obtained. the close connection that braids have with yang-
baxter equation, has provided methods of obtaining a variety of new exactly solvable
two-dimensional statistical mechanical models in physics[5]. these models are the
higher vertex generalizations of the six-vertex model of lieb and wu and 19-vertex
model of zamolodchikov and fateev.

chern-simons eld theories are also of direct interest in other areas of physics.
one area where these have found profound application is quantum gravity. three-
dimensional gravity with a negative cosmological constant, itself a topological eld
theory, is essentially described by two su(2) chern-simons theories. micro-states
of a black hole in the four dimensional spin-polymer gravity can also be modeled
by a chern-simons theory. this allows an exact computation of black hole entropy
going beyond the semi-classical result. these calculations so far have been done for
non-rotating black holes only. these need to be extended for charged and rotating
black holes, which requires certain amount of technical work. further, while an exact
formula for quantum entropy of a non-rotating black hole has been derived, a similar
exact formula for the expectation value of the area operator in the chern-simons
approach is not known. also, a satisfactory understanding of hawking radiation in
this picture is yet to be developed.

string theory is another interesting framework in which black hole entropy has
been analyzed in recent times. though it provides a fundamental quantum descrip-
tion, unfortunately, calculations in this theory can be done for extremal or near
extremal black holes only. these despite their mathematical interest are not astro-

25

physically realistic. in particular, black holes of interest such as a schwarzschild black
hole are not generally amenable to analysis in this approach. also supersymmetry
plays an important role in the string picture. in contrast, modeling of micro-states
of a black hole by an eective chern-simons theory is not limited by the constraint
of extremality or near extremality. this framework handles the curved geometry of
the black hole directly without invoking supersymmetry.

there are other topological quantum eld theories also. one particularly inter-
esting class is so called cohomological eld theories. these are the eld theoretical
interpretations of four-manifold invariants obtained by s. donaldson in 1983. his
work is an example of developments in mathematics which have made critical use of
some of the notions of physics [41]. his theory provides an understanding of the ge-
ometry in four dimensions through self-dual and anti-self-dual yang-mills gauge elds
known to physicists as instantons and anti-instantons. five years later, e. witten
provided a quantum eld theoretical framework for donaldsonss work in terms of
a four dimensional topological yang-mills gauge eld theory[42]. this eld theory
has certain kind of twisted supersymmetry. donaldson invariants are given as the
correlation functions in this eld theory. in recent years, this area has registered even
further boost through the work of seiberg and witten [43]. these developments use
the powerful electric-magnetic duality to relate the cohomological eld theory based
on gauge group su(2) to that based on u(1). this brings in completely new insights
into this area and makes calculation of donaldson four manifold invariants rather
easy.

references

[1] m. atiyah: the geometry and physics of knots, cambridge univ. press (1989).

[2] e. witten: commun. math. phys. 121 (1989) 351-399.

[3] a.s. schwarz: new topological invariants in the theory of quantized elds, baku

international conference (1987).

[4] r.k. kaul: complete solution of su(2) chern-simons theory, hep-th/9212129;

and commun. math. phys. 162 (1994) 289 (hep-th/930532).

[5] r.k. kaul, chern-simons theory, knot invariants, vertex models and three-
manifold invariants, hep-th/9804122, in frontiers of field theory, quantum grav-
ity and strings (volume 227 in horizons in world physics), eds. r.k. kaul et al,
nova science publishers, new york (1999).

[6] v.f.r. jones: bull. ams (1985) 103-112; ann. math. 126 (1987) 335-388.

[7] m. wadati, t. deguchi and y. akutsu: phys. rep. 180 (1989) 247 and references

therein;

26

m. jimbo: commun. math. phys. 102 (1986) 537;
v.g. turaev: inv. math. 92 (1988) 527.

[8] a.n. kirillov and n.yu. reshetikhin: representation algebra uq(sl(2)), q-
orthogonal polynomials and invariants of links, in new developments in the theory
of knots, ed. t. kohno, world scientic, singapore (1989) .
l. alvarez gaume, g. gomez and g. sierra: phys. letts. b220 (1989) 142-152.
c. kassel, m. rosso and v. turaev: quantum groups and knot invariants, panora-
mas et syntheses 5, societe mathematique de france (1997).

[9] n.y. reshtekhin and v. turaev: invent. math. 103 (1991) 547.

r. kirby and p. melvin: invent. math. 105 (1991) 473.

[10] w.b.r. lickorish: math. ann. 290 (1991) 657; and pac. j. math. 149 (1991)

337.

[11] p. ramadevi and swatee naik, computation of lickorishs three-manifold in-
variants using chern-simons theory, hep-th/9901061, to be published in comm.
math. phys.

[12] c. n. little: trans. r. soc. eddinburgh 39 (1900) 771;

k.a. perko: proc. am. math. soc. 45 (1974) 262.

[13] j.w. alexander: trans. am. math. soc. 30 (1928) 275.

[14] p. freyd, d. yetter, j. hoste, w.b.r. lickorish, k. millet and a. ocneanu: bull.

ams. 12 (1985) 239;
j.h. przytycki and k.p. traczyk: kobe j. math. 4 (1987) 115.

[15] william thomas kelvin, first baron, mathematical and physical papers, vol. iv,
hydrodynamics and general dynamics, cambridge university press, cambridge
(1910).

[16] r.k. kaul and r. rajaraman: phys. letts. b249 (1990) 433-437.

[17] g. calugareanu: rev. math. press. app. 4 (1959) 5 and czech. math. jour. 11

(1961) 5881;
w.f. pohl: j. math. mech. 17 (1968) 975.

[18] f.h. c. crick: proc. natl. acad. sciences, usa, 73 (1971) 2639;

f. kamenetskii and a.v. vologodskii: sov. phys. usp. 24 (8) (1981) 679.

[19] j.w. alexander: proc. natl. acad. 9 (1923) 93.

[20] j.s. birman: braids, links and mapping class groups, annals of mathematics

studies princeton univ. press (1975).

[21] d. rolfsen: knots and links, publish or perish, berkeley (1976).

27

[22] p. ramadevi, t.r. govindarajan and r.k. kaul: mod. phys. letts. a9 (1994)

3205.

[23] p. ramadevi, t.r. govindarajan and r.k. kaul: mod. phys. letts. a10 (1995)

1635.

[24] a.d. wallace: can. j. math. 12 (1960) 503;
b.r. lickorish: ann. of math. 76 (1962) 531.

[25] r. kirby: invent. math. 45 (1978) 35;

r. fenn and c. rourke: 18 (1979) 1.

[26] for a recent review see, j.m.f. labastida: chern-simons gauge theory: ten years

after, hep-th/9905057.

[27] v.a. vassiliev: cohomology of knot spaces, theory of singularities and its appli-
cations, advances in soviet mathematics, vol. 1, american math. soc., providence,
ri (1990) 23-69.

[28] e.guadagini, m. martellini and m. mintchev: phys. letts b227 (1989) 111 and

nucl. phys. b330 (1990) 575;
m. alvarez and j.m.f. labastida: nucl. phys. 395 (1993) 198 and nucl. phys.
b433 (1995) 555;
d. althschuler and l. friedel: commun. math. phys. 187 (1997) 261 and 170
(1995) 41.

[29] r. bott and c. taubes: jour. math. phys. 35 (1994) 5247.

[30] m kontsevich: advances in soviet math. 16, part 2 (1993) 137.

[31] a.s. cattaneo, p. cotta-ramusino, j. frohlich and m. martellini: j. math. phys.

36 (1995) 6137;
j.m.f. labastida and e. perez: j. math. phys. 39 (1998) 5183.

[32] j.m.f. labastida and e. perez: combinatorial formulae for vassiliev invariants
from chern-simons gauge theory, hep-th/9807155 and vassiliev invariants in the
context of chern-simons gauge theory, hep-th/9812105.

[33] e. witten: nucl. phys. b311 (1989) 46.

[34] g. ponzano and t. regge in spectroscopic and group theoretical methods in

physics, ed. f. block, north-holland, amsterdam 1968.

[35] v.g. turaev and o.y. viro: topology 31 (1992) 865;

h. ooguri: nucl. phys. b382 (1992) 865.

[36] v. suneeta, r.k. kaul and t.r. govindarajan: gr-qc/9811071, mod. phys.

letts. a14 (1999) 349.

28

[37] a. ashtekar: phys. rev. lett. 57 (1986) 2244;

c. rovelli and l. smolin: nucl. phys. b331 (1990) 80;
a. ashtekar and j. lewandowski:
oxford univ. press, 1994;
j. baez: lett. math. phys. 31 (1994) 213;
c. rovelli and l. smolin: phys. rev. d52 (1995) 5743.

in knots and quantum gravity, ed. j. baez,

[38] l. smolin: j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 6417;

a. balachandran, l. chandar and a. momen: nucl. phys. b461 (1996) 581;
c. rovelli: phys. rev. lett. 77 (1996) 3288.

[39] a. ashtekar, j. baez, a. corichi, k. krasnov: phys. rev. lett. 80 (1998) 904.

[40] r.k. kaul and p. majumdar: phys. letts. b439 (1998) 267;

p. majumdar: indian jour. of phys. 73b (1999) 147.

[41] s.k. donaldson: j. di. geom. 18 (1983) 269 and polynomial invariants for

smooth four-manifolds, topology 29 (1990) 257.

[42] e. witten: commun. math. phys. 117 (1988) 353.

[43] n. seiberg and e. witten: nucl. phys. b426 (1994) 19.

29

