9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

8

 
 

1
v
1
6
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

some properties of type i string theory

california institute of technology, pasadena, ca 91125, usa

john h. schwarz

the t-dual formulation of type i superstring theory, sometimes called type i
theory, has a number of interesting features. here we review some of them includ-
ing the role of d0-branes and d8-branes in controlling possible gauge symmetry
enhancement.

1 introduction

i am pleased to contribute to this volume in memory of yuri golfand. his name
will be remembered by future generations of physicists for his 1971 paper with
likhtman,1 which introduced the four-dimensional super-poincare algebra for
the rst time. recognizing that such a symmetry algebra is a consistent math-
ematical possibility was certainly a remarkable achievement. it is a curious
coincidence that this paper appeared within a few days of pierre ramonds
paper on fermionic strings.2 communications were not so good in those days,
and the golfandlikhtman work was not generally known (at least in the
west) for several years. as a result, its inuence in driving the development
of supersymmetry was not as great as it should have been. in fact, supersym-
metric theories in two dimensions were developed to describe the world-sheet
theory of rns strings,3 and this motivated wess and zumino to seek four-
dimensional analogs.4 only years later did we understand that rns strings,
properly interpreted, have local 10-dimensional spacetime supersymmetry.5

the version of the theory that received the most attention prior to 1985
was the one containing both open and closed strings, which mike green and i
called the type i theory, since it has one ten-dimensional supersymmetry. in
1984 we showed that this theory is inconsistent (due to gauge anomalies) un-
less the gauge group is chosen to be so(32).6 then the anomalies cancel, and
consistency is achieved. in this manuscript, i propose to review some of the
interesting features that appear when one of the spatial dimensions is chosen
to be a circle. in this case an alternative t dual description, known as type
i, is available. this description gives a dierent viewpoint for understanding
various phenomena, such as gauge symmetry enhancement. the material pre-
sented here is not new, though it may be organized somewhat dierently than
has been done before.

1

2 t duality

let x (,  ) denote the embedding functions of a closed string world-sheet
in ten-dimensional spacetime. in the case of a trivial at geometry, the world
sheet eld equations are simple two-dimensional wave equations. suppose that
one of the nine spatial dimensions, x 9 say, is circular with radius r. denoting
x 9 by x for simplicity, the general solution of the wave equation is

x = mr +

n
r

 + periodic terms.

(1)

the parameter  labels points along the string and is chosen to have peri-
odicity 2. thus m is an integer, called the winding number, which is the
number of times the string wraps the spatial circle. the parameter  is world-
sheet time, and correspondingly p = n/r is the momentum along the circle.
single-valuedness of eipx requires that n is an integer, called the kaluzaklein
excitation number.

the general solution of the 2d wave equation consists of arbitrary left-

moving and right-moving pieces

x(,  ) = xl( +  ) + xr(   ).

in the particular case described above we have

xl =

xr =

1

2 (cid:16)mr +
2 (cid:16)mr 

1

n

r(cid:17) ( +  ) + . . .
r(cid:17) (   ) + . . . .

n

(2)

(3)

t duality is the world-sheet eld transformation xr  xr, xl  xl (or
vice versa) together with corresponding transformations of world-sheet fermi
elds. there are two issues to consider: the transformation of the world-sheet
action and the transformation of the space-time geometry. the world-sheet
action may or may not be invariant under t duality, depending on the theory,
but the classical description of the spacetime geometry is always radically
changed. let us examine that rst:

x = xl + xr  xl  xr =

n
r

 + mr + . . . .

(4)

comparing with eq.(1), we see that this describes a closed string on a circle of
radius 1/r with winding number n and kaluzaklein excitation number m.
thus we learn the rule that under t duality r  1/r and m  n.7 in the
case of type i or type ii superstrings, world-sheet supersymmetry requires that

2

r  9

9
r at the same time. this has the consequence for type ii theories
of interchanging the iia theory (for which space-time spinors associated with
left-movers and right-movers have opposite chirality) and the iib theory (for
which they have the same chirality). thus t duality is not a symmetry in this
case  rather it amounts to the equivalence of the iia theory compactied
on a circle with radius r and the iib theory on a circle with radius 1/r. if
we compactied on a torus instead, and performed t duality transformations
along two of the cycles, then this would take iia to iia or iib to iib and
would therefore be a symmetry.

in recent years, d-branes have played a central role in our developing
understanding of string theory.8 these are dynamical objects, which can be
regarded as nonperturbative excitations of the theory. they have the property
that open strings can end on them. when they have p spatial dimensions they
are called dp-branes.
if a dp-brane is a at hypersurface, the coordinates
can be chosen so that it lls the directions x m, m = 0, 1, . . . , p and has a
specied position in the remaining transverse dimensions x i = di where
i = p + 1, . . . , 9. an open string ending on such a d-brane is required to satisfy
neumann boundary conditions in tangential directions

x m |=0 = 0

m = 0, 1, . . . , p,

and dirichlet boundary conditions in the transverse directions

x i = di

i = p + 1, . . . , 9.

(5)

(6)

a remarkable fact, which is easy to verify, is that the t duality transforma-
tion xr  xr interchanges dirichlet and neumann boundary conditions.
this implies that an unwrapped dp-brane, which is localized on the circle, is
mapped by t duality into a d(p + 1)-brane that is wrapped on the dual circle.
this rule meshes nicely with the fact that the iia theory has stable (bps)
dp-branes for even values of p and the iib theory has stable dp-branes for
odd values of p. an obvious question that arises is how the wrapped d-brane
encodes the position along the circle of the original unwrapped d-brane. the
answer is that a type ii d-brane has a u(1) gauge eld a in its world volume,

and as a result a wrapped d-brane has an associated wilson line eih a. this

gives the dual description of position on the circle.

3 type i superstrings

type iib superstrings have a world-sheet parity symmetry, denoted . this
z2 symmetry amounts to interchanging the left- and right-moving modes on

3

r, 

l  

l  x 

the world sheet: x 
r. this is a symmetry of iib and not
of iia, because only in the iib case do the left and right-moving fermions
carry the same space-time chirality. when one gauges this z2 symmetry, the
type i theory results. the projection operator 1
2 (1 + ) retains the left-right
symmetric parts of physical states, which implies that the resulting type i
closed strings are unoriented. in addition, it is necessary to add a twisted sector
 the type i open strings. these are strings whose ends are associated to the
xed points of   2  , which are at  = 0 and  = . these strings must
also respect the  symmetry, so they are also unoriented. the type i theory has
half as much supersymmetry as type iib (16 conserved supercharges instead of
32  corresponding to a single majoranaweyl spinor). this supersymmetry
corresponds to the diagonal sum of the l and r supersymmetries of the iib
theory.

this orientifold construction of the type i theory has the entire 10d
spacetime as a xed point set, since  does not act on x. correspondingly a
spacetime-lling orientifold plane (an o9-plane) results. this orientifold plane
turns out to carry 32 units of rr charge, which must be cancelled by adding
32 d9-planes. rather than proving this, we can make it plausible by recalling
that n type i d9-planes carry an so(n) gauge group. moreover, we know that
the total charge must be cancelled and that so(32) is the only orthogonal group
allowed by anomaly cancellation requirements. correspondingly, these are the
unique choices allowed by tadpole cancellation. as a remark on notation, let
me point out that instead of speaking of 32 d9-branes, we could equivalently
speak of 16 d9-branes and their mirror images. this distinction is simply one
of conventions. the important point is that when n type i d9-branes and
their n mirror images coincide with an o9-plane, the resulting system has an
unbroken so(2n) gauge symmetry.

4 the type i theory

we now wish to examine the t-dual description of the type i theory on a
spacetime of the form r9  s1, where the circle has radius r. we have seen
that iib is t dual to iia and that type i is an orientifold projection of iib.
therefore, one should not be surprised to learn that the result is a certain
orientifold projection of type iia compactied on the dual circle s1 of radius
r = 1/r. the resulting t dual version of type i has been named type ia and
type i by various authors. we shall adopt the latter usage here.

we saw that t duality for a type ii theory compactied on a circle corre-
sponds to the world-sheet symmetry xr  xr, r  r, for the compo-
nent of x and  along the circle. this implies that x = xl + xr  x  =

4

xl  xr. in the case of type ii theories, we saw that x  describes a dual
circle s1 of radius r = 1/r. in the type i theory we gauge world-sheet parity
, which corresponds to xl  xr. evidently, in the t dual formulation this
corresponds to x   x . therefore this gauging gives an orbifold projec-
tion of the dual circle: s1/z2. more precisely the z2 action is an orientifold
projection that combines x   x  with . this makes sense because 
above is not a symmetry of the iia theory, since left-moving and right-moving
fermions have opposite chirality. however, the simultaneous spatial reection
x   x  compensates for this mismatch.

the orbifold s1/z2 describes half of a circle.

in other words, it is the
interval 0  x   r. the other half of the circle should be regarded as also
present, however, as a mirror image that is also  reected. altogether the
statement of t duality is the equivalence of the compactied iib orientifold
(r9  s1)/ with the type iia orientifold (r9  s1)/  i1. the symbol i1
represents the reection x   x .

the xed-point set in the type i construction consists of a pair of orien-
tifold 8-planes located at x  = 0 and x  = r. each of these carries 16
units of rr charge. consistency of the type i theory requires adding 32 d8-
branes. of these, 16 reside in the interval 0  x   r and 16 are their mirror
images located in the interval r  x   2r. clearly, these d8-branes are
the t duals of the d9-branes of the type i description.

the positions of the d8-branes along the interval are determined in the
type i description by wilson lines in the cartan subalgebra of so(32). since
this group has rank 16, its cartan subalgebra has 16 generators. let ai denote
the component of the corresponding 16 gauge elds along the circular direction.
these correspond to compact u(1)s, so their values are characterized by angles
i . these determine the dual positions of the d8-branes to be

x 

i = i r,

i = 1, 2, . . . , 16.

(7)

the so(32) symmetry group is broken by the wilson lines to the subgroup
that commutes with the wilson line matrix. in terms of the type i description
this gives the following rules:

 when n d8-branes coincide in the interior of the interval, this corre-

sponds to an unbroken u(n) gauge group.

 when n d8-branes coincide with an o8-plane they give an unbroken

so(2n) gauge group.

in both cases the gauge bosons arise as zero modes of 8  8 open strings. in the
second case the mirror-image d8-branes also contribute. as we will explain

5

later, this is not the whole story. further symmetry enhancement can arise in
other ways.

the case of trivial wilson line (all ai = 0) corresponds to having all 16
d8-branes (and their mirror images) coincide with one of the d8-branes. this
gives so(32) gauge symmetry, of course. in addition there are two u(1) factors.
the corresponding gauge elds arise as components of the 10d metric and b
eld: g9 and b9. one combination of these belongs to the 9d supergravity
multiplet, whereas the other combination belongs to a 9d vector supermultiplet.

somewhat more generally, consider the wilson line

(cid:18) i16+2n

0

0

i162n (cid:19) .

(8)

this corresponds to having 8 + n d8-branes coincide with the o8-plane at
x  = 0 and 8  n d8-branes with the o8-plane at x  = r. generically this
gives rise to the gauge symmetry

so(16 + 2n )  so(16  2n )  u (1)2.

(9)

however, from the s-dual heterotic description of the type i theory, one knows
that for a particular value of the radius further symmetry enhancement is
possible. specically, for heterotic radius r2
h = n/8 one nds the gauge
symmetry enhancement

so(16  2n )  u (1)  e9n .

(10)

this radius, converted to type i metric, corresponds to r2 = gn/8. this
symmetry enhancement will be explained from a type i viewpoint later. there
are other interesting extended symmetries such as su(18) and so(34), which
might also be understood from a type i viewpoint, but will not be considered
here.

5 d0-branes

the type i theory is constructed as a type iia orientifold. as such, its bulk
physics  away from the orientifold planes  is essentially that of the type
iia theory. more precisely, there are number of distinct type iia vacua distin-
guished by the dierence in the number of d8-branes to the left and the right.
when these numbers match, one has the ordinary iia vacuum. when they
dont one has a massive iia vacuum of the kind rst considered by romans.9
in any case, the ordinary iia vacuum admits various even-dimensional d-
branes. here i wish to focus on d0-branes. later we will discuss what happens

6

to them when they cross a d8-brane and enter a region with a dierent iia
vacuum.

d0-branes of the type i theory correspond to type i d-strings that wrap
the compactication circle. the wilson line on the d-strings controls the
positions of the dual d0-branes. a collection of n coincident type 1 d-strings
has an o(n) world-volume gauge symmetry. unlike the case of d9-branes the
reection element is included, so that the group really is o(n) and not so(n).
this means that in the case of a single d string it is o(1) = z2. thus in this
case there are two possible values for the wilson line (1). the dual type i
description is a single d0-brane stuck to one of the orientifold planes, with the
value of the wilson line controlling which one it is.

a single d0-brane of type i stuck to an orientifold-plane cannot move o
the plane into the bulk. however, a pair of them can do so. to understand this,
let us consider a pair of wrapped d strings of type i, coincident in the other
dimensions, which carries an o(2) gauge symmetry. again, this is t dual to a
pair of type i d0-branes with positions controlled by the choice of o(2) wilson
line. the inequivalent choices of wilson line are classied by conjugacy classes
of the o(2) gauge group. so we should recall what they are. it is important
that o(2), unlike its so(2) subgroup, is non-abelian. correspondingly, there
are conjugacy classes of two types:

 the so(2) subgroup has classes labeled by an angle .

including the
eect of the reection, inequivalent classes correspond to range 0   
. such a conjugacy class describes a d0-brane at x  = r in the bulk,
together with the mirror image at x  = (2  )r. we see that to move
into the bulk a second (mirror image) d0-brane had to be provided.

 the reection elements of o(2) all belong to the same conjugacy class.

a representative is the matrix (cid:18) 1

0 1 (cid:19). this class corresponds to

0

one stuck d0-brane on each o8-plane.

6 brane creation

the solutions of massive type iia supergravity were investigated by polchinski
and witten,10 who showed that they involve a metric and dilaton that vary
in one direction. in the context of the type i theory this means they vary
in all regions for which the number of d8-branes to the left and to the right
are unequal. thus the only case for which this eect does not occur is the
so(16)  so(16) conguration with d8-branes attached to each of the o8-
planes. (this case is closely related to the m theory description of the e8  e8
theory.11)

7

we can avoid describing the x  dependence of the metric explicitly by
using proper distance s as a coordinate along the interval.
(this requires
holding the other coordinates xed.) then one has 0  s  r, r = 1/r.
we didnt address the issue earlier, but when we said the interval has length
r we really did mean its proper distance. in terms of this coordinate there
is a varying dilaton eld, and hence a varying string coupling constant ga(s).
only in regions with half of the d8-branes to the left and half to the right is
it constant.

the function ga(s) was obtained by polchinski and witten by solving
the eld equations. a more instructive way of obtaining and understanding
the result uses the brane creation process. consider an isolated d0-brane in
a region where ga(s) is constant. now suppose the d0-brane crosses a d8-
brane to enter a region where ga(s) is varying. what happens is that the d0-
brane emerges on the other side with a fundamental string stretched between
it and the d8-brane. this phenomenon, called hananywitten eect,12 has
been derived by a variety of means.13 it occurs in many dierent settings that
are related by various duality transformations.
(for example, two suitably
oriented m5-branes can cross to give rise to a stretched m2-brane.14) the
intuitive reason that string creation is required can be understood as follows.
the original d0-brane conguration preserved half the supersymmetry and was
bps. therefore a delicate balance of focus ensured that it was stable at rest.
when it crosses the d8-brane (adiabatically) the amount of supersymmetry
remains unchanged and so it should still be stable at rest. to be specic, let
us consider the d8-brane conguration discussed earlier with 8 + n d8-branes
on the x  = 0 o8-plane and 8  n d8-branes on the x  = r o8-plane. in
this case n fundamental strings should connect the d0-brane to the x  = 0
o8-plane. the bps condition implies that the mass of the d0-brane should be
independent of its position in the interval. recalling that the mass of a type
iia d0-brane is 1/ga, we therefore conclude that for this conguration

md0 =

1

ga(0)

=

1

ga(s)

+ n tf 1s.

(11)

here tf 1 = 1
2 is the tension of a fundamental type iia string (in string units).
we therefore see that ga(s) is the reciprocal of a linear function whenever
n 6= 0. thus, for n 6= 0 it necessarily develops a pole if r is too large.

the mass md0 can also be computed in the type i picture in terms of a
pair of wrapped d strings with wilson line. the mass is independent of the
o(2) wilson line, since it is independent of the x  coordinate. however, it
does depend on the so(32) wilson line. altogether the mass is a sum of two

8

contributions:

the winding term contribution is given by simple classical considerations:

md0 = mwinding + mwilson.

(12)

mwinding = 2  2r  td1 =

2r
g

.

(13)

a more careful analysis is required to obtain the wilson line contribution

mwilson =

n
4r

.

(14)

note that this contribution vanishes for large r.

we now come to the main point. there is a special value of r, the one
for which the coupling diverges at the x  = r orientifold plane. in this case

1

ga(r)

= 0,

which implies, using eq. (11), that

and hence that

md0 =

n
2r

=

2r
g

+

n
4r

,

r2 = gn/8.

(15)

(16)

(17)

this is precisely the value that we previously asserted gives the symmetry
enhancement so(162n )  u(1)  e9n . the reason that there is symmetry
enhancement is that there are additional massless vectors with appropriate
quantum numbers. they arise as the ground states of open strings connecting
the d8-branes to a stuck d0-brane.15,16 this works because the stuck d0-brane
is massless in this case, as a consequence of eq. (15). this accounts for all the
extra gauge bosons when n > 2. in the e7 and e8 cases, there are additional
states attributable to a single bulk d0-brane near x  = r.

7 conclusion

the study of supersymmetric theories has come a long way since golfands
pioneering work. i presume that he would be pleased.

acknowledgments

i am grateful to o. bergman for very helpful discussions. this work was
supported in part by the u.s. dept. of energy under grant no. de-fg03-92-
er40701.

9

references

1. yu. a. golfand and e.p. likhtman, jetp lett. 13, 323 (1971).
2. p. ramond, phys. rev. d 3, 2415 (1971).
3. j.-l. gervais and b. sakita, nucl. phys. b 34, 632 (1971); y. aharonov,

a. casher, and l. susskind, phys. rev. d 5, 988 (1972).

4. b. zumino, p. 367 in renormalization and invariance in quantum field
theory, ed. e. caianello (plenum press, 1974); j. wess and b. zumino,
nucl. phys. b 70, 39 (1974).

5. f. gliozzi, j. scherk, and d. olive, nucl. phys. b 122, 253 (1977); m.b.
green and j.h. schwarz, nucl. phys. b 181, 502 (1981) and phys. lett.
b 109, 444 (1982).

6. m.b. green and j.h. schwarz, phys. lett. b 149, 117 (1984).
7. for a review of t duality see a. giveon, m. porrati, and e. rabinovici,

phys. rept. 244, 77 (1994), hep-th/9401139.

8. j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75, 4724 (1995), hep-th/9510017; p.
293 in fields, strings, and duality (tasi 96), eds. c. efthimiou and b.
greene, world scientic 1997, hep-th/9611050.

9. l. romans, phys. lett. b 169, 374 (1986).
10. j. polchinski and e. witten, nucl. phys. b 460, 525 (1996), hep-

th/9510169.

11. p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b 460, 506 (1996), hep-

th/9510209.

12. a. hanany and e. witten, nucl. phys. b 492, 152 (1997), hep-

th/9611230.

13. c.p. bachas, m.r. douglas, and m.b. green, jhep 9707, 002 (1997),
hep-th/9705074; u.h. danielsson, g. ferretti, and i.r. klebanov, phys.
rev. lett. 79. 1984 (1997), hep-th/9705084; o. bergman, m.r. gab-
erdiel, and g. lifschytz, nucl. phys. b 509, 194 (1998), hep-th/9705130.

14. s.p. de alwis, phys. lett. b 413, 49 (1997), hep-th/9706142.
15. o. bergman, m.r. gaberdiel, and g. lifschytz, nucl. phys. b 524, 524

(1998), hep-th/9711098.

16. c.p. bachas, m.b. green, and a. schwimmer, jhep 9801, 006 (1998),

hep-th/9712086.

10

