hep-th/9907064
uuitp-3/99
june 1999

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

9

 
 

1
v
4
6
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

on the virial coecients of nonabelian anyons

alexios p. polychronakos1

theoretical physics department, uppsala university

box 803, s-751 08 uppsala, sweden

and

physics department, university of ioannina

45110 ioannina, greece

abstract

we study a system of nonabelian anyons in the lowest landau level of
a strong magnetic eld. using diagrammatic techniques, we prove that the
virial coecients do not depend on the statistics parameter. this is true for all
representations of all nonabelian groups for the statistics of the particles and
relies solely on the fact that the eective statistical interaction is a traceless
operator.

1e-mail: poly@teorfys.uu.se

in two spatial dimensions the group relevant to the quantum statistics of particles
is the braid group [1, 2], rather than the permutation group. as a result, the
possibility for non-standard statistics exists. a well-studied case is (abelian) anyons
[3, 4, 5], transforming in a unitary abelian representation of the braid group. anyons
in the lowest landau level, in particular, are relevant to the quantum hall eect [6, 7]
and constitute realizations of ideal exclusion statistics [8, 9].

a natural generalization is nonabelian anyon statistics, based on nonabelian
representations of the braid group. these would be the anyonic analogs of paras-
tatistics [10, 11]. just as abelian anyons can be thought of as ordinary (bosonic or
fermionic) particles interacting through a non-dynamical abelian gauge eld, non-
abelian anyons can be though of as particles carrying internal degrees of freedom
in some irreducible representation r of a nonabelian group su(n) and interact-
ing through an appropriate non-dynamical nonabelian gauge eld. what xes the
statistics, then, is the group su(n), the representation r and the coupling strength
g of the internal degrees of freedom to the gauge eld.

a eld-theoretic approach to achieving such statistics, in analogy to the abelian
case, is to couple the particles to a nonabelian gauge eld with a chern-simons
action [12]. such a particle-eld model was proposed by verlinde [13]. g, then,
is essentially the inverse of the coecient of the chern-simons term and, as such,
inherits the quantization condition

g =

2
n

, n integer

(1)

this condition does not seem to be crucial for the purely rst-quantized approach
and, at any rate, will not play any role in this paper.

it is of interest to derive the thermodynamics and statistical mechanical proper-
ties of nonabelian anyons in order to probe the possibility of new physics deriving
from the nonabelian nature of the system. in a recent paper, isakov, lozano and
ouvry [14] examined these questions for the simplest case of su(2) anyons in the
fundamental (spin-half) representation. they found that the virial coecients up
to the fth one do not depend on the statistics parameter g. they conjectured that
this holds for all the coecients and posed the question of a possible underlying
symmetry that explains this vanishing dependence.

the purpose of this note is to give a complete proof of the independence of all
virial coecient of this model on the statistics parameter g, valid for any group
and any representation.
it is based on a diagrammatic expression of the cluster
coecients which is useful in deriving them in a simple way and reveals their scaling
properties with the volume. it will be apparent that the only feature of the statistical
interaction which is relevant for this result is that it is a traceless operator in the
space of internal degrees of freedom of the particles.

we repeat here the main results for the system that will be used in this paper,
as presented in [14]. the model consists of n non-interacting spinless particles on
the plane with internal degrees of freedom transforming in some nite-dimensional

2

unitary irreducible representation r of su(n). (we shall refer to these degrees of
freedom as avor.) in the gauge where the hamiltonian of the particles is free, the
nontrivial statistics manifests in the wavefunction of the system, which is not single
valued. under an exchange of particles following a path belonging to an element of
the braid group the wavefunction transforms in some nonabelian representation of
the braid group parametrized by the irrep r of su(n) and a statistics parameter
g.
in principle an abelian part can also be included, parametrized by a second
coupling constant , endowing the particles with (abelian) anyonic statistics. the
contributions of the abelian and nonabelian part to the statistical mechanis decouple,
however, as will be apparent in the sequel, so we are not going to be concerned with
the abelian part. the particles are taken as bosons as far as their abelian statistics
is concerned.

in analogy with the abelian case, we can perform a singular nonabelian gauge
transformation that makes the wavefunction single-valued and bosonic, at the ex-
pense of introducing a gauge eld coupling the particles. we also introduce an
external strong constant magnetic eld b = 2c/e, as well as an external rotation-
ally invariant harmonic oscillator potential of frequency  (which serves as a box
to bound the particles). upon extracting from the wavefunction an analytic non-
abelian factor that accounts for its short-distance analytic and braiding behavior
and a gaussian factor, we are left with an eective hamiltonian reading

h = xi (cid:16)2i

 2gxi<j

t a
i t a

i  (t  c)zii  (t + c)zi

j   i  j

zi  zj



t  c

2

!

i + t(cid:17)

(2)

in the above z = x + iy is a complex coordinate on the plane,   /z is the
corresponding derivative, and 2
i are generators of the group su(n)
in the r-representation, each acting in the avor space of particle i; so t a are
dr  dr dimensional matrices and a = 1, . . . n2  1. summation over repeated
indices is always implied.

c + 2. t a

t = 2

all homogeneous analytic wavefunctions are eigenstates of the above hamilto-
nian. when b > 0 the analytic wavefunctions become degenerate in the pure
magnetic eld limit   0 and constitute the lowest landau level (lll) for the
system. for large b all higher levels will acquire a large gap and decouple. good
analytic behavior of the wavefunction near coincidence points in that case requires
g > 0. conversely, for b < 0 we can extract an anti-analytic nonabelian factor from
the wavefunction and arrive at an analogous expression for h. in that case, it is the
anti-analytic wavefunctions that constitute the lll and we must have g < 0. from
now on we will consider the case b, g > 0, the opposite one being similar. we shall
also assume that g is not too big, so that no new states descend to the lll from
the excited spectrum.

the end result is that on states in the lll the hamiltonian assumes the form

h = ho + s

3

(3)

where ho is the hamiltonian of a non-interacting bosonic system and s is the statis-
tics part coupling the internal degrees of freedom of the particles:

ho = nt + (t  c)xi

zii , s = g(t  c)xi<j

t a
i t a

j

(4)

the spectrum of the above hamiltonian can be easily obtained. ho essentially counts
the degree of homogeneity in zi of the analytic wavefunction, which can then be
chosen a homogeneous polynomial in zi. s can be expressed as

s =

g
2

(t  c)
 xi

i (cid:17)2
xi (cid:16)t a

under the total avor group with generators t a = pi t a

i , states transform in the
tensor product of n r-irreps r     r, which can be decomposed into irreducible
components. on states transforming under an irreducible representation rt of the
total avor, s becomes

t a

i !2

(5)

s =

g
2

(t  c) [c2(rt)  nc2(r)]

(6)

where c2(r), c2(rt) are the quadratic casimir of r and rt. the total wavefunction
must carry the rt representation of total avor and be symmetric under total particle
exchange (coordinate and internal degrees of freedom). this calls for some group
theory for constructing the states [14]. from this spectrum the partition function,
cluster and virial coecients can be calculated.

this approach was followed in [14] (for r the spin-half of su(2)) and the rst few
virial coecients in the thermodynamic limit were thus calculated. we shall take
here an alternative route, based on a diagrammatic expansion. the facts central to
the derivation are:
1. the cluster and virial coecients at the thermodynamic limit can be calculated
by taking the strength of the external potential to zero (corresponding to taking
the volume v of the box to innity). the correct scaling limit for the k-th cluster
coecient is [15, 16]

(7)

1

k(t  c)

 v

c


2. the statistical interaction s is of order 1/v .
3. the statistical interaction s is a sum of two-body terms, each of which is traceless
with respect to the internal space of each particle.

we now give the rules for the path-integral representation of the system. (for
a more detailed discussion see [17].) the n-body partition function zn can be
expressed as a many-body path integral in periodic euclidean time . for short,
we shall call such path-integral congurations diagrams. since the particles are
identical, the conguration at time  =  can be any permutation of the one at  = 0.
this means that the paths of particles can braid and interchange as they go round the

4

periodic time direction. such periodically connected paths of p particles constitute
one thread wrapping p times around the time circle. appropriate symmetry factors
must be included in each diagram to avoid overcounting of degrees of freedom.

further, since the particles have color degrees of freedom, each path is also
labeled by a color index a = 1, . . . dr. summation over all possible values of such
indices is assumed.

the interaction s can be taken into account perturbatively. it is two-body and
instantaneous, so each insertion corresponds to coupling two distinct particle paths
at a given time. since it acts on the avor space of the two particles, it will change
the avor index on the two paths before and after the interaction, say from a to b
on one and from c to d on the other. the strength of this interaction is given by the
matrix element

sab;cd = g(t  c)(t a)ab(t a)cd

(8)

the symmetry factors of diagrams with such insertions are modied, since the paths
connected by s are obviously singled out. a typical conguration for the path
integral in the case of ve particles and two insertions of s is depicted in g. 1.a,
where the constraints of periodicity for the paths and their avors have been taken
into account.

a

 b

c

 d

a

 b

c

  

      

 
   d

 d

=

=0

fig. 1.a: a typical diagram with five particles (solid lines) and two
              interactions (dashed lines).  it consists of two topologically 
              connected parts dynamically interconnected.

for our purposes only the topology and connectivity of these diagrams will be im-
portant, so we will depict them in the simplied fashion of g. 1b.

5

 a

sab;ca

  c

     b 

  sbc;dd

   

     d

 fig. 1.b: the same diagram as above in a simplified, topologically
                 equivalent depiction.

the grand partition function for the system z is given by the sum of the n-
body partition functions for all n weighted by fugacity factors zn = en with 
the chemical potential:



z =

zn zn

(9)

xn =0



xk=1

as such, it is the sum of all many-body diagrams. the grand potential  is the
logarithm of z and, by the standard argument, it will be given by the sum of all
connected diagrams. two parts of a diagram are disconnected if the particle paths of
each diagram do not mix with the other and if there are no interactions s coupling
the two diagrams. the coecients bk of the expansion of  in powers of z are the
cluster coecients:

 =

bkzk

(10)

therefore, the k-th cluster coecient bk is simply the sum of all connected k-particle
diagrams.

we come, now, to the question of determining bk in the thermodynamic limit. we
must isolate, in the class of k-body connected diagrams, the leading contribution in
v (or, equivalently, in (tc)1), which, for a proper extensive behavior, must be of
order v . to achieve this, note that each topologically connected part of a diagram,
consisting of a single thread looping p times, in the absence of interaction insertions
is of order v .
indeed, this is simply the p-th cluster coecient of noniteracting
bosons coming in dr avors, which is properly of order v . (alternatively, if the
infrared regulator were a at box rather than an oscillator potential, the factor
v would come from the translation invariance of the connected diagram within the
box.)

thus, if a diagram contains q topologically connected components, it will be, a
priori, of order v q. for it to be connected, there must be enough insertions of s to
connect the q components to each other. we must have a minimum number of q  1

6

insertions in order to fully connect the components in a tree-like topology (g. 2).
since each insertion s contributes a factor 1/v , such minimally connected diagrams
are of order v . any further insertion of s will give a sub-leading in v diagram. in
fact, by simple topological counting arguments, we see that the number of loops in
non-minimally connected diagrams counts the sub-leading powers of 1/v .

  h  

 a

b

  d

   f
  

   g

 c

 e

fig. 2:   a typical diagram of leading order v, consisting of five components
               minimally connected by four interactions in a tree topology. 
               each of its three endpoints carries a unique flavor index.

so far we concluded that bk will be given by the sum of all minimally connected
k-particle diagrams with any number of components q (1  q  k). now comes the
nal observation: each tree must have two or more endpoints, that is, components
where only one insertion of s connects. the entire thread of this diagram must
clearly carry the same avor index a; thus, the corresponding matrix element for the
insertion s connecting to this diagram is saa;bc, with b, c the avor indices connecting
at the other end of the insertion. upon summing over a we have

saa;bc = g(t  c)(t a)aa(t a)bc = g(t  c)(t a)bc trt a = 0

(11)

therefore, all such diagrams vanish. the only surviving diagram is the one with
a single topologically connected component and no s insertions, which reproduces
the cluster coecient of free bosons with dr avors. since virial coecients are
uniquely expressed in terms of cluster coecients, we have proved that the virial
coecients of the system are independent of their nonabelian statistics, for any r
of any su(n).

the above reasoning can also be used to show that the contribution of the abelian
part is the same as in the absence of the nonabelian part. an abelian part can be
included by appending a u(1) generator t 0 = q to the t a, proportional to the unit
matrix. the trace in the above insertion, then, would give

saa;bc = g(t  c)(t 0)aa(t 0)bc = gdrq2(t  c)bc

(12)

xa

7

this is a contribution proportional to an anyonic parameter  = gq2dr. the
eect of the insertion on the avor indices of the remaining diagrams is eectively
suppressed (since, due to bc, b = c). repeating the argument with all endpoint
graphs, we eventually reduce the whole graph to a set of components with non-
interacting avor indices and the standard abelian statistics interaction between the
components. the cluster coecients are simply dr times the single-avor anyonic
coecients.

we remark here that the above techniques can be used to easily obtain the sub-
leading in 1/v contributions to the cluster and virial coecients. to each component
of the diagram at least two s insertions are attached (else the diagram vanishes by
the previous argument). summing over the avor indices on a component where m
insertions attach gives a term proportional to

gm(t  c)m da1...am

r

where the m-index symbol dr is

da1...am

r

= tr(t a1 . . . t am)

(13)

(14)

and the total diagram involves multiplying the d-symbols of each component and
contracting the group indices ai according to the connectivity of the components
through s-insertions. a diagram with q components and q + s  1 insertions will
be of subleading order 1/v s and of order gq+s1 in the statistics parameter. since q
can range from 1 to k for a k-particle diagram we conclude that the 1/v s correction
to the cluster coecient bk will be a polynomial in g with powers ranging from gs
to gk+s1.

the task of calculating the above corrections simplies further in the special
case that r is the fundamental of su(n). in that case, a well-known completeness
relation simplies s:

sab;cd = g(t  c)xa

(t a)ab(t a)cd = g(t  c)

1
2

(adcb 

1
n

abcd)

(15)

so s is the sum of a part that simply interchanges the avor indices of the strands
that it couples plus a part proportional to the identity operator. the evaluation of
diagrams in this case becomes a simple matter with no group theory required.

having described the above, we should still point out that the 1/v corrections
obtained this way are specic to the harmonic box regularization of the system.
they are, thus, likely not universal and of little interest.

concluding, the results of this paper are somewhat disappointing, since they
indicate that no new physics are expected at the thermodynamic limit from any
nonabelian statistics of particles at the lll. the result seems completely generic
since it relies on little else than the very nonabelian nature of the statistics, that
is, the vanishing of the trace of its generators. still it is expected that nonabelian
statistics will inuence the properties of systems not in the lll. a calculation of

8

the properties of such systems along the lines presented here may be an interesting
endeavor.

i am thankful to s. isakov and to s. ouvry for discussing their results on non-
abelian anyons prior to publication, and to the les houches 1998 organizers for
hosting an exciting summer school where the ideas in this paper were initiated.

references

[1] y.s. wu, phys. rev. lett. 52 (1984) 2103.

[2] g.a. goldin, r. meniko and d.h. sharp, phys. rev. lett. 54 (1985) 603.

[3] j.m. leinaas and j. myrheim, nuovo cimento 37 (1977) 1.

[4] g.a. goldin, r. meniko and d.h. sharp, j. math.phys. 21 (1980) 650 and

22 (1981) 1664.

[5] f. wilczek, phys. rev. lett. bf 48 (1982) 1144 and 49 (1982) 957.

[6] b.i. halperin, phys. rev. lett. 52 (1984) 1583 and 2390.

[7] d. arovas, j.r. schrieer and f. wilczek, phys. rev. lett. 53 (1984) 722.

[8] f.d.m. haldane, phys. rev. lett. 67 (1991) 937.

[9] a. dasni`eres de veigy and s. ouvry, phys. rev. lett. 72 (1994) 600.

[10] h.s. green, phys. rev. 90 (1953) 270..

[11] a.m.l. messiah and o.w. greenberg, phys. rev. b136 (1964) 248 and b138

(1965) 1155.

[12] s. deser, r. jackiw and s. templeton, phys. rev. lett. 48 (1982) 975 and

ann. phys. (ny) 140 (1982) 372.

[13] e. verlinde, a note on braid statistics and the nonabelian aharonov-bohm

eect, in modern quantum field theory, world scientic, singapore 1991.

[14] s. isakov, g. lozano and s. ouvry, nucl. phys. b552 (1999) 667.

[15] a. comtet, y. georgelin and s. ouvry, j. phys. a22 (1989) 3917.

[16] k. olausen, cond-mat/9207005, trondheim univ. prepr. 13 (1992).

[17] a.p. polychronakos, phys. lett. b365 (1996) 202 and nucl. phys. b474 (1996)

529.

9

