general considerations of the cosmological constant and the stabilization of moduli in

the brane-world picture

paul j. steinhardt

department of physics
princeton university
princeton, nj 08544

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

2
1

 
 

1
v
0
8
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

we argue that the brane-world picture with matter-elds
conned to 4-d domain walls and with gravitational inter-
actions across the bulk disallows adding an arbitrary con-
stant to the low-energy, 4-d eective theory  which nesses
the usual cosmological constant problem. the analysis also
points to diculties in stabilizing moduli elds; as an alterna-
tive, we suggest scenarios in which the moduli motion is heav-
ily damped by various cosmological mechanisms and varying
ultra-slowly with time.

one of the great mysteries of fundamental physics is
to explain the value of the cosmological constant, . for
a homogeneous and isotropic universe,  appears as an
arbitrary additive constant in the friedmann equation:

h 2 =

8g

3

 +

1
3

 

k
a2

(1)

where h  a/a is the hubble parameter, a(t) is the
robertson-walker scale factor, g is newtons constant,
 is the energy density, and k is the curvature constant.
in contemporary discussions,  has been interpreted as a
vacuum energy v  /8g. dimensional arguments
p ) = o(1080) gev, whereas
suggest that v = o(m 4
current observational bounds require v < 1047 gev.
to explain the 100 orders of magnitude discrepancy, the
common point-of-view in fundamental physics has been
that  is precisely zero due to some symmetry to be de-
termined. with recent evidence that the universe may
be accelerating,1 the possibility of a tiny but non-zero 
is being considered, but there is no compelling argument
why it should be so. an alternative possibility is  = 0
and the acceleration is due to quintessence, a dynamical,
time-varying, spatially-inhomogeneous component.2

a parallel development has been the generalization of
string theory based on branes and the notion of nite
extra dimensions.39 for the purposes of this paper, it
is not important if the extra dimension is large or small,
so long as it is nite. the brane-world view suggests that
our four-dimensional universe is actually a slab bounded
by two four-dimensional 3-branes separated by a nite in-
terval in a ve-dimensional space. a particular example
is the ve-dimensional eective action for m -theory on
s1/z2 obtained by reducing the 11-dimensional theory

4

and m(2)
4 .

on a calabi-yau three-fold.3, 4, 1013 the ve-dimensional
eective theory has the structure m5 = s1/z2  m4,
with two bounding 3-branes, m(1)
(the
calabi-yau compactied dimensions, presumably small
compared to the fth dimension, will not play any im-
portant role in this paper.) ordinary matter is conned
to this surface, separated by nite intervals from one or
more other surfaces where other particle/elds may ex-
ist. in one formulation, the only interaction in the bulk is
gravitational in nature. ordinary matter is described by
elds conned to one of the branes, hidden matter is de-
scribed by elds conned to the other brane, and the two
sets of elds only interact by gravitational interactions
that are exchanged across the intervening bulk. in other
formulations, interactions are universal so other particles
and elds can be transmitted across the brane.
if the
additional elds are very massive (or order the planck
mass) and give big masses to the moduli elds (thereby
pinning the interbrane separation at some specic value),
then the setup is indistinguishable from a general 4-d the-
ory at low energies and the considerations in this paper
may not apply. otherwise, the additional elds make
only minor modications to our argument. for simplic-
ity, we will assume the rst formulation, nonuniversal
interaction with gravity only between the branes.

the expectation is that, at low energies and large dis-
tance scales compared to the compactied dimensions,
the brane-world picture should reduce to a 4-d,
low-
energy, eective eld theory. in most respects, the theory
is equivalent to a true 4-d theory with ordinary and hid-
den matter elds existing on the same 3 + 1-dimensional
space. the purpose of this paper, though, is to point
out that genuinely new eects occur by separating elds
onto two planes separated by a fth dimension. the ef-
fects depend directly only on the properties of the brane-
world setup without explicit dependence on supersym-
metry. they have an impact on our understanding of
the cosmological constant and may enable a cosmologi-
cal solution to the problem of xing the moduli elds.

we begin by posing a simple argument that the brane-
world view of the universe is incompatible with a true
cosmological constant in the projected, eective 4-d eld
theory; unlike the case of an ordinary 4-d theory, one
does not have the freedom to add an arbitrary  to the
friedmann equation (eq. (1)) or an arbitrary constant
to the action without also introducing interactions with

1

other elds in the 4-d theory. as a result, the expansion
of the universe is dependent on the expectation values
of those elds and not just the constant itself. when all
interactions are taken into account, this may behave like
quintessence and lead to negative pressure and cosmic
acceleration, but the situation is qualitatively dierent
from adding an arbitrary vacuum energy only.

the key point is that, if vacuum density is added to
one brane, this creates a repulsive gravitational eld that
acts in all ve dimensions. in particular, the equivalence
principle in 5-d demands that the gravitational eld gen-
erated by the vacuum energy on one brane act on the
matter-energy on the other brane, either attracting or re-
pelling it. projected into the 4d eective action, the 5-d
gravitational interaction with the other wall becomes a
4-d interaction depending on the moduli elds (whose ex-
pectation value determines the distance between branes
in 5-d). hence, embedding a 4-d theory in ve dimensions
means that there is no way to add an arbitrary constant
 alone to the projected 4-d theory. the same conclu-
sion would be reached if the vacuum energy resided on
the other wall or in the bulk.

planar 2-d domain walls in 3 + 1-dimensions with pos-
itive energy density (and negative pressure) induce re-
pulsive, gravitational interactions.15, 16 if the energy mo-
mentum tensor is

t 
 = diag(, p1, p2, p3) = diag(1, 0, 1, 1),
where  is the surface energy density, then the metric
outside the walls is

ds2 = (1  2gx)2dt2  dx2 

(1  2gx)2e2gt(dy2 + dz2).

(2)
(3)

the (x, t) part of the metric is the (1+1)-dimensional
rindler metric describing at space in the frame of ref-
erence of a uniformly accelerated observer. (the (y, z)
planes have de sitter metric.) a similar situation arises
if vacuum energy v resides on a 4-dimensional brane
in 5-d.17, 18 supposing that one wall contains predom-
inantly vacuum energy and the other contains matter-
elds (massive particles), the branes repel one other such
that they accelerate away from one another with accel-
eration 4v/3m 3, where  is the energy density and m
is the 5-d planck mass. as recently shown by huey,18
replacing the vacuum energy with a negative pressure
component with p + (2/3) < 0 also produces repulsion,
whereas p + (2/3) > 0 produces an attractive force on
the particles on the other wall.
if both walls contain
vacuum energy, the walls also accelerate away from one
another. (negative vacuum walls have positive pressure
and are attractive.) for other forms of energy with highly
negative pressure, the situation is more complicated.13, 18
if constant vacuum energy is added to the bulk, this also
leads to expansion of the extra dimensions and eective
repulsion between branes.

projected into the low-energy, 4-d eective theory, the
gravitational repulsion between branes in 5-d must be
reinterpreted as a direct interaction between v, the mod-
ulus eld  and the hidden sector elds in 4-d. to make
the claim precise, it is useful to choose a specic met-
ric form for the action so that it is unambiguous what
is meant by a constant vacuum energy, v. for this
purpose, the projected theory, which may include non-
minimally coupled elds similar to brans-dicke theory,
l = f ()r + . . ., should be weyl-transformed into stan-
dard einstein form, l = r + . . .. for an ordinary, 4-
d quantum eld theory, there is no symmetry to forbid
adding to l an arbitrary constant, v (and introduce
no other terms).19 this term would only add a constant
in the einstein-frame friedmann equation,  = 8gv,
and trigger exponential expansion; the freedom to add
this constant is what underlies the classic cosmological
constant problem. in the brane picture, though, adding
the constant term alone  a true cosmological constant
 is not possible since vacuum energy introduces eects
in the extra-dimensions which project into additional in-
teractions in l.20
the nature of the interactions in the 4-d eective the-
ory induced by v can be guessed from the brane-world
picture.
in ordinary eld theories, the value of  is
8g4v where g4 is the 4-d newtons constant. in the
brane-world picture, g4 is inversely proportional to the
distance between branes which, in turn, is proportional
to the orbifold modulus t = exp(). in the 4-d theory,
 reduces to a quantum eld and  is proportional to
a monotonically decreasing function of , rather than a
constant. because of the repulsive interaction between
branes, there is also a -dependent interaction between
the vacuum energy on one brane and matter-energy elds
on the other brane.21 another interaction is due to uc-
tuations in the surface of one brane which create uc-
tuations in the distance between the two branes as one
scans across the 3-brane and, hence, (4-d) spatial depen-
dence of the interaction resulting couplings between v
and gradients in t .

a related eect occurs if the brane-world view is placed
in a more general cosmological setting. a matter or ther-
mal distribution of energy on our 4-d brane induces an
attractive gravitational force between branes18 or, equiv-
alently, an interaction between the matter or radiation
density and the modulus eld. the interbrane gravita-
tional force in 5-d, proportional to  + (2/3)p,18 must re-
duce in the low-energy, 4-d theory to an interaction with
factors proportional to i + (2/3)pi, where i and pi are,
respectively, the energy density and pressure on a each
brane, i. (n.b., if the universe has recently transformed
from being matter-dominated to being -dominated, as
suggested by some recent observations, the force has
switched from attractive to repulsive. this should induce
at least some small change in the modulus and, therefore,
the gravitational constant.)

2

it is interesting to compare our conclusion to the
behavior of 4-d supergravity (sugra) eld theories.
adding a constant alone to the sugra potential energy
density is disallowed because it explicitly breaks super-
symmetry. instead, a constant can be added to the su-
perpotential from which the potential is computed. the
constant term in the superpotential induces additional in-
teractions with all elds in the potential. we have drawn
a qualitatively similar conclusion based on the brane con-
struction even though no explicit dependence on super-
symmetry is required.

the gravitational interaction between branes produced
by matter, radiation and vacuum energy suggests some
insights into the stabilization of moduli and supersym-
metry breaking. the stabilization of the t modulus eld
corresponds to xing the distance between branes in some
static ground state where t is set at the minimum of its
eective potential. however, if the force between branes
is purely gravitational, this option does not seem pos-
sible. depending on the sign of the vacuum density on
the branes, the gravitational force between branes is ei-
ther attractive, repulsive, or neutral, but always with
the same dependence on the modulus eld. the problem
of xing t , therefore, becomes acute since it does not
seem possible to combine monotonic forces of the same
type so as to produce an eective potential with a sta-
ble minimum. examples of static brane solutions can
be constructed4, 7 by having a mix of vacuum densities
with dierent signs on the branes and bulk; the solution
is achieved by carefully canceling attractive and repul-
sive forces. however, the conguration is unstable since
a slight perturbation in t will cause the repulsive or at-
tractive force to dominate and the walls to y apart or fall
towards one another. (the moduli stabilization problem
is, in this sense, reminiscent of einsteins problem of mak-
ing a static universe. the tendency of energy to attract
or repel gravitationally means that a static solution can
only be found by carefully balancing the two and, then,
even if accomplished, the solution is unstable.) when the
model is made realistic by adding matter and radiation
on the walls, then stabilization of the modulus is further
confounded by the added (attractive) gravitational force
between walls due to these time-varying energy densities
which drive the universe away from the static solution.

only a few options for stabilization seem to be avail-
able. one possibility is that there are additional charges
on the walls and additional elds besides the graviton
being exchanged across the bulk which produce a non-
gravitational force with dierent distance dependence.
(as discussed in the introduction, we only consider the
case where the additional, exchanged elds are light com-
pared to the compactication scale.) for supersymmet-
ric bps d-branes, exchanges of scalar and 3-form elds
contribute canceling interactions such that the the net
force between branes is zero, independent of distance.4
this particular example does not seem very satisfactory

since it relies on exactly supersymmetric ground states,
and the net force is zero rather than stabilizing. however,
perhaps some solution of this type can be found in the su-
persymmetry breaking case. another recent suggestion9
is that the modulus need not be stabilized at any nite
value. consistent theories might be constructed with a
semi-innite distance between walls by allowing a metric
with non-trivial dependence on the fth dimension.

we wish to suggest an alternative approach in which
the moduli elds are not absolutely stabilized but, in-
stead, change exponentially slowly with time. this ap-
proach relies on placing the model in a realistic cosmo-
logical setting where the nite matter-energy densities
on the walls can play various dynamic roles in damping
modular eld motion. in the brane picture, this means
that we accept the possibility of imbalanced forces be-
tween branes, but we also imagine various processes that
slow the brane motion.

one candidate for the frictional damping force is hub-
ble red shift, an eect which can work equally well for t
moduli, s moduli and other moduli. consider the low-
energy, eective 4-d eld theory. a canonical scalar eld
 in 3+1-dimensions satises an equation of motion:

 + 3h  = v 

(4)

where dot denotes the time derivative, prime denotes the
derivative with respect to , and h 2 = 8gtot/3 is the
hubble parameter for total energy density tot. if  is the
modulus eld, then all of the 5-d gravitational interac-
tions between energy on the walls and the modulus, as de-
scribed above, are projected into 4-d and incorporated as
eld-theoretic interactions in v . if v /  h 2, then the
hubble damping term dominates the potential term and
the eld moves exponentially slowly down the potential.
(readers will recognize this as the slow-roll phenomenon
invoked in inationary models.22) a useful gure of merit
is  = /h, which measures the percentage change in
the expectation value of  in one hubble time. for the
scalar eld in the slow-roll limit,   v /h; hence, if
this ratio is suciently small,  rolls negligibly over the
lifetime of the universe despite the fact that it lies at an
unstable point in the potential. the moduli expectation
values may be unstable but hubble damping can cause
their motion to be exponentially slow with time constant
v /h. if variations in  induce variations in coupling
constants, then this damping can be made small enough
to satisfy observational constraints on time-varying con-
stants.23 (if the modulus eld is too light, there can also
be unacceptable fth force interactions which must be
suppressed by some separate mechanism.)

hubble damping relies on the gravitational eect of
the total energy density tot. two modes of damping
the eld are possible.24 the eld may be self-damping,
a condition which occurs if the potential v at a given
value of  is so at that v /v < 8g/3. an example

3

is v  exp(/mp) for /mp  642 (i.e., small
 or large ), where m 2
p = g1 is the planck mass. in
this case, the potential energy for the eld is sucient to
overdamp the motion since we have

v 


<

8g

3

v <

8g

3

tot  h 2,

(5)

3 tot  h 2

which is the hubble damping condition. for this poten-
tial, if the eld is hubble damped for a given value of
, it continues to be damped forever as it slowly makes
its way down the potential. the second mode is where
the eld is not self-damping, (v /v > 8g/3), but
v /  8g
0 , where h0 is the present-day
value of the hubble parameter. a pertinent example is
the non-perturbative potential generated for the dilaton
and t -modulus eld, v  exp(e), for  > 10, which
is not self-damping for any  > 0. in this case, the eld
motion is hubble damped by the energy density in other
components besides . since h > h0 in the past, the
eld would have been damped in the past, as well; how-
ever, it may be that h decreases in the future such that
v /v > h 2, at which point the eld would become un-
damped and begin to roll at a signicant rate. there
remains the challenge of making the eld energy small
compared to the present-day matter density and, at the
same time, achieving a suciently large supersymmetry
breaking scale. the same challenges exist if the eld were
stabilized but, perhaps they can be more easily resolved
in the damped case. we consider some specic models in
a separate publication.25

a second approach for slowing the moduli eld and
brane motion is through non-minimal coupling, nonlin-
ear gravity or non-linear sigma model type kinetic energy.
each can recast as an added damping term that can ex-
ceed the hubble damping. for example, for a scalar eld
with action l = g()()2,  can be innitely damped
if g() has a pole at some  = 0. (here we assume that
the canonical kinetic energy has positive coecient and,
hence, g() > 0.) the pole, which can arise from various
nonlinear interactions, may only be apparent after eld
redenitions and metric transformation. for example,
consider, a scalar eld  with non-minimal coupling to
the ricci scalar (r) and canonical kinetic energy: the
action is l = f ()r + 1
2 ()2 + . . .. we can as-
sume f () to be analytic and positive for all . setting
 = f (), the action can be recast in brans-dicke like
form: l = r + (()/)()2 + . . ., where  is the
standard brans-dicke parameter, () = f ()/2[f ()]2.
the limit    corresponds to einstein gravity where
 is constant. now we see that, recast in this form, the
coecient of the kinetic energy becomes singular where
f () has an extremum, f () = 0, even though f ()
itself has no singularity. (this method of freezing non-
minimally coupled scalar elds was exploited previously
in the context of hyperextended ination.26) a simi-
lar eect occurs in nonlinear gravity models for which

the gravitational action is f (r)r, which can be recast as
standard einstein gravity with a non-minimally coupled
scalar eld. this approach can freeze the eld even when
the curvature of the eective potential (and, hence, the
mass) for the modulus is large, and, thereby, evade both
constraints on time-varying constants and fth force.

a third approach takes advantage of the non-linear
couplings of the moduli elds to the kinetic and po-
tential energies of matter elds on the boundary. al-
though the moduli potential is at (perturbatively) in
the absence of matter and radiation, a non-zero poten-
tial is induced in a cosmological setting with nite mat-
ter and radiation densities. depending on whether the
matter elds are gauge elds, fermions, or scalars, the
moduli couple in dierent ways to the kinetic and po-
tential energy densities (due to dierent dependencies
on the kahler potential).14 that is,
if  is a matter
scalar eld, f 
 is the eld strength for gauge elds on a
wall, and  is a modulus eld, the action takes the form
l = . . .+f ()()2g()v ()+h() tr f 2 +. . ., where
f , g and h are dierent functions of the modulus eld.
in particular, the moduli-dependent coecients of the
kinetic energy terms are increasing functions of the mod-
ulus for some elds and decreasing for others. see, for
example, eq. 2.3 in ref. 14. as a result, in a radiation
dominated phase, say, where there is a mixture of exci-
tations of these elds, a potential for the moduli elds is
induced which can bound the moduli. the moduli run o
to innity in the vacuum solution when non-perturbative
interactions are included, but here the radiation-induced
potential dominates the non-perturbative contribution.
as the universe and expands the energy densities change,
the shape of the potential and perhaps the minimum may
change; if so, perhaps this eect must be combined with
damping to freeze the eld enough to meet observational
constraints. we explore this possibility for a realistic
model in a separate paper.25

a nal, more speculative approach is to combine two
types of gravitational interactions between walls to con-
strain their separation. we argued that stabilization
is dicult since the gravitational force between walls
combines attractive and repulsive contributions with the
same dependence on the interwall separation. this ar-
gument assumed homogeneous distributions of stress-
energy on either wall. but, consider, for example, a case
where vacuum energy on either wall creates a repulsive
force, but the universe also contains a nite density of
mini-black holes whose schwarzschild radius exceeds the
interwall spacing. in the 5-d theory, the black holes are
not constrained to lie within one wall because their gravi-
tational eld can penetrate the bulk and stretch across to
the other wall to form a black string.27 the black holes
produce a local attractive force between branes that, in
essence, glues the walls together at certain points.
if
the dark matter, say, consists of these mini-black holes,
then the density would be rather high within our hub-

4

ble volume. as the universe expands and the density of
black holes decreases, the vacuum energy would eventu-
ally dominate the universe and the walls would recede
from one another, ultimately opening up the fth dimen-
sion. (if the universe is entering a period of accelerated
expansion in the present epoch, as suggested by some
recent observations, then this opening of the fth dimen-
sion may not be all that distant.) at present, this ap-
proach is only a conceptual picture since we do not have
a calculational scheme for computing the evolution of the
inhomogeneous setup.

stabilizing the modulus and supersymmetry breaking
are sometimes thought to be linked. to construct a su-
persymmetry breaking state which is stable, minimal en-
ergy, has small or zero cosmological constant, and which
satises the phenomenological constraint on the super-
symmetry breaking scale has proven to be very dicult.
most examples seem contrived. the damping concept
suggests that the universe need not lie at a true ground
state nor even at a metastable state. in this case, the
model need not even have a supersymmetry breaking
ground state; if the moduli lie at values away from the
ground state, supersymmetry breaking is generic. the
constraints on model-building are dierent, and perhaps
simpler to satisfy. we will report on some attempts in a
separate publication.25 another application of the brane-
world picture is ination, in which the hyperextended
mechanisms for starting and stopping ination26 appear
to have a natural reinterpretation in terms of brane in-
teractions, as well be described elsewhere.28

the author thanks b. ovrut and d. waldram for many
conversations and patient tutoring in m -theory and tom
banks, r. caldwell, l. randall and e. witten for useful
discussions. this research was supported by the us de-
partment of energy grant de-fg02-91er40671 (prince-
ton).

[1] for a recent review, see n. bahcall, j.p. ostriker, s. perl-

mutter, and p.j. steinardt, science 284, 1481 (1999).

[2] r.r. caldwell, r. dave and p.j. steinhardt, phys. rev.

lett. 80, 1582 (1998).

[3] p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460, 506 (1996);

ibid b475, 94 (1996).:w

[4] a. lukas, b.a. ovrut, k.s. stelle, and d. waldram,

phys. rev.d59, 086001 (1999).

[5] k.r. dienes, e. dudas, t. gherghetta, and a. riotto,

nucl. phys. b543, 387 (1999).

[6] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, and g. dvali, phys.

rev. d59, 086004 (1999).

[7] l. randall and r. sundrum, hep-ph/9905221.
[8] l. randall and r. sundrum, hep-ph/9810155.
[9] l. randall and r. sundrum, hep-ph/9906064.

5

[10] a. lukas, b.a. ovrut, k.s. stelle, and d. waldram, hep-

th/9803235.

[11] j. ellis, z. lalak, s. pokorski, and w. pokorski, hep-

th/9805977.

[12] j. ellis, z. lalak, s. pokorski, and w. pokorski, hep-

th/9811133.

[13] a. lukas, b.a. ovrut, and d. waldram, hep-th/9902071.
[14] a. lukas, b.a. ovrut, and d. waldram, hep-th/9806022.
[15] a. vilenkin, phys. lett. 133b, 177 (1983).
[16] j. ipser and p. sikivie, phys. rev. d30, 712 (1984).
[17] n. kaloper and a. linde, phys. rev. d59, 101303

(1999).

[18] g. huey, in preparation (1999).
[19] for non-minimally coupled elds, as in brans-dicke the-
ory, the term cosmological constant is sometimes used
to refer to a constant term added to the action where
the gravitational action is in brans-dicke (rather than
einstein) form. this constant is dierent from the true
cosmological constant (.e., a constant term that leads
to de sitter expansion) considered in this paper.

[20] our argument is that a vacuum energy density associ-
ated with matter elds on either brane necessarily in-
troduces additional interactions in the 4-d theory which
are projections of gravitational eects in the fth dimen-
sion. a perverse worry is an interaction in the 5-d theory
that projects purely into an arbitrary cosmological con-
stant. the interaction would somehow induce expansion
via gravity in the 4-dimensions and create no gravita-
tional eects in the fth. we conjecture that this pos-
sibility would require breaking general covariance in the
5-d theory (e.g., require explicit dependence on x5) and,
hence, is ruled out.

5

[21] in 5-d, the force produces a constant acceleration, g5v.
where g5 = m 3
is the 5-d newtons constant and m5
is the 5-d planck constant. the acceleration would de-
rive from an energy density proportional the acceleration
times the distance between branes, rorb (the orbifold ra-
dius). in the horava-witten model, the orbifold radius
is proportional to t s1/3 (d. waldram, private commu-
nication), where t and s are the orbifold and calabi-
yau moduli elds, respectively. since the 4-d newtons
constant g4 is proportional to g5/rorb, the interaction
between walls can be reinterpreted as an energy density
orb  t 2s2/3, where  is the
proportional to g4vr2
energy density on the opposite brane. (the minus sign is
due to the fact that the force is repulsive.)

[22] a. albrecht and p.j. steinhardt, phys. rev. lett. 48,

1220 (1982).

[23] s. m. carroll, phys. rev. lett. 81, 3067 (1998).
[24] g. huey and p. steinhardt, in preparation (1999).
[25] g. huey, b. ovrut, d. waldram, and p.j. steinhardt, in

preparation (1999).

[26] p.j. steinhardt and f. acceta, phys. rev. lett. 64, 2740

(1990).

[27] r. gregory and r. laflamme, phys. rev. d51 305,

(1995).

[28] j. khoury and p. steinhardt, in preparation (1999).

