center projection vortices in continuum yang-mills theory

m. engelhardt1 and h. reinhardt2

institut fur theoretische physik, universitat tubingen

d72076 tubingen, germany

abstract

the maximal center gauge, combined with center projection, is a
means to associate yang-mills lattice gauge congurations with closed
center vortex world-surfaces. this technique allows to study center
vortex physics in lattice gauge experiments. in the present work, the
continuum analogue of the maximal center gauge is constructed. this
sheds new light on the meaning of the procedure on the lattice and
leads to a sketch of an eective vortex theory in the continuum. fur-
thermore, the manner in which center vortex congurations generate
the pontryagin index is investigated. the pontryagin index is built up
from self-intersections of the vortex world-surfaces, where it is crucial
that the surfaces be globally non-oriented.

pacs: 11.15.-q, 12.38.aw
keywords: yang-mills theory, center vortices, maximal center gauge, pon-
tryagin index

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

6
1

 
 

1
v
9
3
1
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1supported by dfg under grant number dfg en 415/1-1
2supported in part by dfg under grant number dfg re 856/4-1

1

1 introduction

the infrared sector of strong interaction physics is characterized by nonper-
turbative phenomena such as connement, the breaking of chiral symmetry,
and the ua(1) problem. these phenomena are believed to be described by
quantum chromodynamics; however, in order to understand in more detail
how they arise, it is helpful to isolate the particular degrees of freedom of
the theory which induce these phenomena. chiral symmetry breaking and
the ua(1) problem can e.g. be successfully explained in terms of instanton
eects [1], whereas connement eludes a description via instantons [2].

viable explanations of connement can be based on magnetic degrees of
freedom such as abelian magnetic monopoles [3] or center vortices [4],[5];
considerable evidence in favor of such scenaria has accumulated in recent
years from numerical lattice studies. magnetic monopoles emerge in yang-
mills theory as gauge xing defects in the so-called abelian gauges [6], where
the cartan subgroup of the gauge group under consideration is left unxed.
in all abelian gauges considered, the vacuum behaves as a dual superconduc-
tor [7]; in particular, lattice calculations performed in the maximal abelian
gauge [8],[9] exhibit abelian and monopole dominance for the string tension.
on the other hand, lattice calculations performed in the so-called maximal
center gauge [10], which will be discussed in detail in this work, have pro-
vided evidence in favor of the notion that connement is induced by center
vortices. the vortex content of gauge eld congurations produces virtually
the full string tension; conversely, the string tension disappears in the ab-
sence of vortices [10]. this property of center dominance persists at nite
temperatures [11],[12], and the deconnement phase transition can be un-
derstood as a transition from a percolating vortex phase to a phase in which
the vortices cease to percolate.

the aforementioned magnetic degrees of freedom inducing connement can
furthermore be connected with the topological properties commonly thought
to be carried by instantons; they may therefore ultimately be suited to pro-
vide a unied picture of the dierent nonperturbative strong interaction phe-
nomena mentioned further above. the magnetic monopoles of the maximal
abelian gauge have been empirically found to be correlated with instantons
in lattice calculations [13]. in another abelian gauge, the polyakov gauge, the
pontryagin index can be entirely reconstructed from the magnetic monopole
content of gauge eld congurations [14]. on the other hand, one of the
foci of the present work is to elucidate the manner in which center vortex

2

congurations generate the pontryagin index; it will be shown that the latter
is produced by self-intersections of vortex world-surfaces, where it is crucial
that the surfaces be globally non-oriented. in a recent lattice study [15], the
orientability of the vortex surfaces was studied, with the result that these sur-
faces are non-orientable in the conning phase and have non-trivial genus.
furthermore, in an ensemble devoid of vortices, chiral symmetry breaking
disappears and all congurations belong to the trivial topological sector [16].

for the abovementioned lattice studies of vortex properties to become possi-
ble, techniques had to be developed which allow to associate a given lattice
gauge conguration with a conguration of vortex world-surfaces. such tech-
niques have only become available in relatively recent times; this has revived
interest in the vortex picture, which received rather little attention after
some early eorts following its inception [4],[5],[17]. the techniques referred
to here are the maximal center gauge and center projection [10],[18] already
mentioned further above. while not all questions concerning the numerical
stability of this procedure and its ability to faithfully represent thick center
uxes present in full gauge congurations have been settled [19], it has fa-
cilitated a number of observations concerning vortex physics in addition to
those already mentioned further above. e.g., the density of the center vor-
tices obtained via the maximal center gauge and center projection displays
the proper scaling behavior required under the renormalization group and,
consequently, these vortices can be considered as physical objects [20] (note
erratum in [11]), see also [21]. also binary correlations of vortex intersection
points found on a given space-time plane display such scaling [22]. further-
more, center vortices can account for the casimir scaling behavior of the
adjoint string tension if one associates a nite physical thickness with the
vortex world-surfaces [23],[24]. in an indirect version of the maximal center
gauge, which proceeds via an intermediate maximal abelian gauge xing,
both abelian magnetic monopoles and center vortices were detected [18];
the monopoles were found to be located on center vortices like beads on a
string.

one of the foremost aims of this work is to develop a continuum formulation
for the center gauge and center projection procedure. this will also shed some
additional light on issues concerning the procedure on the lattice. it should
be clear that the attempt to construct an analogue of the maximal center
gauge in the continuum encounters some conceptual obstacles not found in
continuum formulations of abelian gauges, which are quite straightforward.

3

these obstacles are related to the fact that the continuum theory is con-
structed in terms of a gauge potential, dened in the adjoint representation
of the gauge group, as opposed to the lattice formulation in terms of group
elements on lattice links. the continuum gauge elds are thus insensitive to
the center of the gauge group. it is a priori not clear how to extend the suc-
cessful concept of center projection to the continuum theory. nevertheless, it
will prove possible in this work to derive a continuum analogue of the lattice
procedure.

in detail, the plan of this paper is as follows. in section 2, the maximal center
gauge and the emergence of center vortices after center projection is carefully
analyzed on the lattice. the eect of this gauge on sample gauge elds of the
vortex type is studied empirically; subsequently, the gauge xing procedure
on the lattice is reformulated in a manner which explicitly separates the
z(n) center and su(n)/z(n) coset degrees of freedom. the continuum
limit of center and coset lattice congurations is considered in section 3,
along with the gauge transformations which arise in the course of maximal
center gauge xing. explicit continuum representations of center vortices are
given. this allows the construction of the continuum analogue of the maximal
center gauge, the properties of which are then discussed extensively, including
alternative formulations which allow to extract more general objects of the
vortex type; for reasons mentioned further above, vortex surfaces made up of
patches of dierent orientation are of particular interest, as well as thickened
vortices. in section 4, the implementation of the maximal center gauge in
the continuum path integral is considered, and a sketch of an eective vortex
theory is given. finally, the pontryagin index generated by center vortex
congurations is studied in section 5. the concluding section 6 discusses
some open issues to be settled in subsequent work. some mathematical
details are presented in the appendices.

4

2 maximal center gauge and center vor-

tices

2.1 the maximal center gauge

maximal center gauge is a gauge xing condition dened in the lattice for-
mulation of su(n) yang-mills theory. it prescribes that the gauge freedom

u(x)  u v

 (x) = v (x + e)u(x)v (x)

(1)

be used to transform the link variables u(x) of a given lattice conguration
as close as possible to center elements of the gauge group, in a sense still to be
specied. in fact, there exist many dierent specications, or realizations,
of the general idea formulated above. one possible explicit gauge xing
condition, rst introduced in [18] for the case of su(2) color3 as the direct
maximal center gauge, is

max

v xx,(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

tr u v

 (x)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

(2)

for arbitrary local su(2) gauge transformations v .

in order to make this more transparent, represent the su(2) link variables
as

u = c0 + i~c~

(3)

where i denotes the pauli matrices and the parameters c0, ci, i = 1, 2, 3, full
the constraint

c2
0 + ~c 2 = 1

(4)

to guarantee unitarity of the links. note that (4) denes a three-sphere in
the space of parameters c0, ci. in the following, the set of group elements
with c0 > 0 will sometimes be referred to as the northern hemisphere of
the su(2) group, and the set of group elements with c0 < 0 as the southern
hemisphere. the poles of the sphere, c0 = 1, correspond to the center
z(2) of the su(2) group. correspondingly, the gauge condition (2) reduces
to

max

v xx, (cid:16)cv

0,(x)(cid:17)2

(5)

3generalizations and applications to su (3) color were discussed in [21],[25].

5

which can be straightforwardly visualized in terms of a bias of the link vari-
ables towards the poles of the su(2) three-sphere.

an important property of the condition (2) is the fact that it leaves the
center part of the gauge freedom, i.e. (for the general case of a su(n) gauge
group) the z(n) part, unxed. there is no bias distinguishing between
dierent center elements due to the absolute value prescription in (2). this
is analogous to the so-called abelian gauges [6], which leave the abelian part
of the gauge freedom, i.e. the [u(1)]n 1 part, unxed.

the specic condition (2) is only one of many ways to bias link variables
towards the center of the gauge group. in fact, any condition of the type

max

v xx,

g(cid:16)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

tr u v

 (x)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:17)

with a monotonously rising function g implements the general idea of maxi-
mal center gauge xing.

after transforming a lattice gauge conguration to the maximal center gauge,
one can carry out a second step, called center projection, which serves to
dene the z(n) vortex content of the conguration. center projection cor-
responds to mapping every link variable u onto the center element closest to
u. in the case of the su(2) gauge group, this simply means mapping

(6)

(7)

(8)

i.e.

u  sign tr u ,

c0  sign c0 .

in other words, all link variables located on the northern hemisphere are
mapped onto the north pole of the su(2) group, all links on the southern
hemisphere onto the south pole. for general su(n) group, center projec-
tion leaves one with a z(n) lattice, which in the canonical fashion can be
associated with (d  2)-dimensional vortex surfaces (where d denotes the
space-time dimension) on the dual lattice: if any plaquette on the z(n)
lattice evaluates to a nontrivial center element, it is considered to be pierced
by a vortex carrying the appropriate (quantized) ux; if it takes the trivial
value unity, no vortex pierces the plaquette. the vortices dened in this way
represent (d  2)-dimensional surfaces in d space-time dimensions. the
center ux carried by the vortices is continuous; there are no sources or sinks
for this ux. in the case of a z(2) lattice, this corresponds to the vortex
surfaces being closed. in the general z(n) case, the surfaces may branch,

6

while respecting ux conservation, since more than one nontrivial center ux
exists. however, precisely due to ux conservation, one may think also of
such branched surfaces in the z(n) case as being composed of simple closed
surfaces which in general share whole surface patches in space-time.

2.2 center vortices on the lattice

for the purpose of illustrating the eect of the center gauge condition, con-
sider the following sample continuum su(2) gauge eld congurations on a
two-dimensional plane. let the plane be parametrized in polar coordinates
r,  and dene the gauge eld as4

a = 

1
r

t3 ,

ar = 0

(9)

this conguration, and the ones to follow below, can be regarded as slices
of congurations dened in more space-time dimensions, and which, for the
present purposes, can be considered constant in the additional dimensions.
also the lorentz components of the gauge eld associated with those addi-
tional directions should be considered to vanish. the above conguration
is a particular example of what in the following will be called a thin vor-
tex (positioned at the origin of the plane). a general representation of thin
vortices will be given in eq. (62). the dening property of a thin vortex
is that any wilson loop which encircles the vortex, i.e. in the present case,
the origin, takes a nontrivial value in the center of the gauge group. for the
case of su(2) color, this corresponds to the value (1). on the other hand,
any other wilson loop, not encircling the vortex, takes the value (+1). in
other words, the vortex contributes a nontrivial center element of the gauge
group to any wilson loop it pierces. correspondingly, the eld strength is
singular and localized at the position of the vortex. note that both choices
of sign in (9) lead to these properties. thus, one can distinguish two dif-
ferent orientations of vortices, associated with the direction of (magnetic)
ux they describe (ux which is dual to wilson loops will sometimes be re-
ferred to as magnetic in the following). on the other hand, also (odd)
integral multiples of the congurations (9) satisfy the dening properties of

4gauge elds in the following are decomposed using antisymmetric generators ta of
the gauge group satisfying [ta, tb] = fabctc, with fabc denoting the structure coecients,
and the normalization trtatb = ab/2. for su (2), ta = ia/2, where a, a = 1, 2, 3,
denotes the pauli matrices.

7

center vortices. however, such congurations will not be considered as dis-
tinct types of vortices, but simply as superpositions of vortices of the smallest
abelian magnetic ux required to induce the center element in question in a
wilson loop.

consider furthermore the more general conguration

a = 

f (r)

r

t3 , ar = 0

(10)

with f (0) = 0 and f () = 1. this conguration represents a thick vortex;
in order for a wilson loop to take the value (1), it must circumscribe the
vortex at a sucient distance, the thickness of the vortex, determined by the
form of the prole function f (r). also the eld strength or the ux associated
with a thick vortex are spread out as compared to the singular localized eld
strength of a thin vortex (9). for certain purposes, such as calculating eld
strengths, it may be necessary to specify more precisely what one means by
the singularity of the thin vortex (9) at the origin; this becomes relevant e.g.
in appendix c. in such a case, the thin vortex should always be viewed as
the limit in which f (r)  1 for r 6= 0, but still f (r = 0) = 0 in (10).
these congurations can be put on a two-dimensional lattice in the canonical
fashion by associating the path-ordered exponential

u(x) = p exp(cid:18)zp

a(z)dz(cid:19)

(11)

with a link u(x) describing a path p originating from the point x and run-
ning in the -direction. note that path-ordering p is not actually necessary
for the abelian congurations (9) and (10). this procedure of putting the
continuum congurations on the lattice preserves the values of wilson loops
taken in the corresponding congurations, as described above.

in practice, it is desirable to treat a lattice of nite extent with periodic
boundary conditions, i.e. a lattice torus. in order to full such boundary
conditions, it is necessary to have zero net ux piercing the plane under
consideration5. for this reason, in the following, linear superpositions of
pairs of (thin or thick) vortices of opposite orientation will be examined,

5consider a wilson loop running around the edge of the lattice. due to the periodic
boundary conditions and the abelian character of the congurations treated here, contri-
butions from opposite sides of the loop cancel and the wilson loop must take the value
(+1).

8

cf. fig. 1 (a). due to the abelian character of the congurations dened
above, the phases contributed to wilson loops by single vortices in a many-
vortex superposition simply add, without interference from path-ordering
eects. furthermore, in calculating the lattice links from the gauge elds,
also the contributions from periodic images of the vortices must be taken
into account6.

ooo.

u

v

v

u

v

v
o
u

u

(a)

ooo.

o

(b)

ooo.

o

(c)

figure 1: two thin su(2) vortices, cf. eq. (9), placed on a space-time lat-
tice (a), where the arrows in the lower left-hand corner specify the direction
of the line integrals dening horizontal and vertical links, respectively. the
open and lled circles denote the locations of the vortices, the dierence in
the symbols signifying that the vortices have opposite orientation. in (a), all
lattice links deviate from unity, but all plaquettes multiply to (+1), except
the plaquettes pierced by vortices, which multiply to (-1). the links mak-
ing up those latter plaquettes take the values u = exp(t3/2) and v = u 
(up to small corrections from the respectively other vortex). after maximal
center gauge xing (b), all lattice links take the value (+1), except the ones
displayed in fat print, which take the value (-1). there are alternative gauge
xing images, such as (c), for which the center gauge xing functional is
degenerate, and which are related to the conguration (b) by gauge trans-
formations purely from the center of the gauge group.

6in practice, for better convergence of this sum, the authors covered the plane with
positively and negatively oriented vortices in checkerboard fashion. therefore, the lattice
torus actually used in numerical computation contained four vortices as opposed to the
two displayed in fig. 1. this is merely a point of technical convenience.

9

having put the gauge congurations on the lattice, the question can be ad-
dressed what eect the center gauge xing procedure has on these congu-
rations. for the case of two thin vortices, xing the conguration depicted
in fig. 1 (a) to maximal center gauge can be carried out trivially without
any recourse to numerical computation. all one needs are the following two
observations: the conguration shown in fig. 1 (b) is gauge equivalent to
the one shown in fig. 1 (a) since all wilson loops take the same values in
the two congurations. at the same time, in fig. 1 (b) all links take values
in the center of the gauge group. therefore, this conguration realizes the
maximal possible value of the gauge xing functional (6). thus, the cong-
uration shown in fig. 1 (b) is precisely a center gauge xing image of the
conguration shown in fig. 1 (a). it is described by a string of links tak-
ing a value corresponding to a nontrivial center element extending from the
position of one thin vortex to the position of the other. this type of congu-
ration, i.e. strings of links associated with a nontrivial center element of the
gauge group, will in the following be termed a conguration of ideal vortices.
it is, as just seen, gauge equivalent to a conguration of thin vortices at the
positions where the strings end.

it should be noted that there exist many other degenerate maxima of the
gauge xing functional on the same gauge orbit, namely all deformations of
the string of links, cf. fig. 1 (c). these are all images of the congura-
tion shown in fig. 1 (b) under gauge transformations which are elements of
the center of the gauge group. this is not surprising; by construction, the
gauge xing condition (6) is invariant under such transformations (e.g. in the
su(2) case, it is insensitive to the sign of the link variables). in other words,
it leaves the center of the gauge group unxed. as a consequence, the precise
trajectory of the string of nontrivial links describing ideal vortices is arbi-
trary; only its two endpoints (corresponding here to the positions of the two
thin vortices) are xed, and they embody all gauge-invariant information.

note that in three-dimensional space-time, the sets of nontrivial links describ-
ing ideal vortices generically form two-dimensional sheets, whereas in four-
dimensional space-time, they form three-dimensional volumes. the bound-
aries of the sheets or volumes, respectively, describe the locations of the thin
vortices to which the ideal vortex conguration is gauge equivalent.

as a further aside, note that center projection leaves the center gauge xed
conguration (fig. 1 (b)) unchanged and thus does not truncate any phys-
ical information contained in it. by contrast, center projecting the original

10

conguration (fig. 1 (a)) before gauge xing completely removes the vortices
and yields a trivial lattice with all links at unity.

continuing to the case of a thick vortex, it is clear that this case cannot be
solved in a similarly trivial fashion. here, the latticized gauge congurations
can be brought into the maximal center gauge numerically by maximizing
the gauge functional (6) under the action of arbitrary su(2) gauge transfor-
mations on the sites of the lattice. as described above, lattice tori containing
four vortices were used. two dierent cases were examined: two thick vor-
tices of one orientation together with two thin vortices of the other orientation
(cf. fig. 2 (a)), and one thick vortex together with three thin vortices, again
such that the total ux piercing the plane vanishes (cf. fig. 2 (b)). in order
to make the new eects arising in the case of a thick vortex more visible, a
fermi distribution

f (r) = 1 

1

1 + exp(5(r  4l)/l)

(12)

where l denotes the lattice spacing, was chosen for the prole function f (r)
(cf. eq. (10)). this not only spreads out the ux of the vortex but actually
localizes it on a ring of radius 4l concentric to the core of the vortex.

.

.

.

..

(a)

(b)

figure 2: congurations containing thin vortices and thick vortices, the ux
of the latter being concentrated on the displayed rings. these congurations
can be transformed into the maximal center gauge numerically (see text).

11

the gauge equivalent congurations which maximize the center gauge xing
functional (6) will contain a certain set of links which lie in the south-
ern hemisphere of the su(2) group, i.e. nearer to the center element (1),
whereas the other links remain closer to the center element (+1). center pro-
jection then associates a collection of ideal vortices, or, gauge-equivalently,
thin vortices, with the original conguration. carrying out this procedure
numerically for the congurations depicted in fig. 2, one obtains thin vor-
tices which approximate the locations of the original thick vortices; however,
the precise location of the thin vortex within the prole of the thick vor-
tex turns out to depend on the precise realization of the center gauge via
the arbitrary function g in the gauge xing functional (6). specically, for
the conguration containing one thick vortex, fig. 2 (b), it turns out that
for the gauge xing function g(t) = t2, the thin vortex is located concen-
trically with the thick vortex, whereas for g(t) = 1  (2  t)(1  t2/4)2,
the thin vortex is located one lattice spacing away from the center of the
thick vortex. this latter eect becomes more pronounced if one uses the
conguration with two thick vortices, fig. 2 (a), again with the gauge xing
function g(t) = 1 (2 t)(1 t2/4)2. there, the thin vortex is located four
lattice spacings away from the center of the thick vortex, i.e. on the ring of
ux depicted in fig. 2 (a).

the conclusion reached from these examples is therefore that the maximal
center gauge does yield thin vortices which roughly approximate the locations
of thick vortices in gauge eld congurations. this corroborates the ndings
of [10],[25]; note however recent indications of considerable instability in the
numerical gauge-xing procedure [19]. furthermore, the precise coordinates
of the thin center projection vortices turn out to be gauge-dependent, via the
gauge xing function g. also, comparing the results obtained with the two
dierent congurations depicted in fig. 2, the precise location of a thin vortex
approximating a given thick vortex evidently also depends on the structure of
other vortices in the vicinity. therefore, it seems that the center gauge xing
procedure introduces nonlocal interactions into the center projection vortex
eective theory independent of any reference to the yang-mills dynamics
which ultimately governs the original thick vortex congurations.

2.3 separating center and coset degrees of freedom

in the attempt to formulate an analogue of the center gauge and center pro-
jection procedure in continuum yang-mills theory, one obviously encounters

12

a conceptual obstacle: continuum yang-mills theory is described in terms
of a gauge potential aa
(x) which is dened in the adjoint representation of
the gauge group. thus, in the continuum, the gauge symmetry of yang-mills
theory is only a local su(n)/z(n), i.e. a coset, symmetry. related con-
siderations concerning this issue in the schrodinger picture can be found in
[26]. the rst step in dealing with this problem is to carefully separate center
and coset degrees of freedom in the lattice gauge xing procedure discussed
above. the treatment below will for simplicity mainly concentrate on the
case of an su(2) gauge group; however, the generalization to any su(n)
group is conceptually, if not necessarily notationally, straightforward. one
only has to keep in mind that higher su(n) groups have more center ele-
ments, and that therefore there are more species of vortices, corresponding
to the dierent possible uxes. the only qualitative dierence in terms of
the topology of vortex congurations is that, for higher gauge groups (and
three or more space-time dimensions), vortices may branch into several vor-
tices with dierent center uxes, as long as ux conservation is respected at
branchings.

to have a slightly more precise terminology at hand in the discussion below,
it is useful to decompose the link variables u(x) describing a su(2) lattice
conguration into a center part

z(x) = sign tr u(x)

and a coset part u 

(x) dened by

u(x) = z(x)u 

(x) .

(13)

(14)

the lattice described by z(x) will be referred to as the center part of the
lattice conguration u(x), whereas the lattice described by u 
(x) will be
referred to as the coset part. note that the center gauge xing functional (6)
depends only on the coset part of a conguration; center projection simply
means mapping u(x) onto z(x).

furthermore, below the terminology coset transformation will be used to
characterize gauge transformations, cf. eq. (1), which change only the coset
part of a lattice conguration. note that this does not imply that the cor-
responding unitary transformation matrices acting at lattice sites are neces-
sarily from the northern hemisphere of the su(2) group. note furthermore
that the set of possible coset transformations depends on the initial gauge

13

conguration and that in general not all members of this set can be contin-
uously deformed to the identity while remaining in the set. also, smooth
gauge transformations g in the continuum formulation of yang-mills theory,

a  ag

 = g(a + )g

(15)

are by construction coset gauge transformations.

clearly, if one puts a smooth continuum gauge conguration a(x) onto
a suciently ne lattice, the associated center part is trivial, z(x) = 1.
however, even in such a case, gauge xing in general, and the center gauge
xing procedure in particular, may induce a nontrivial center part in the
gauge xed lattice; explicit examples were given in the previous section. in
other words, some links in the gauge xed lattice end up in the southern
hemisphere, i.e. closer to the nontrivial center element (1) than to the
trivial element (+1); ideal vortices are introduced.

in the su(2) lattice description of the center gauge xing procedure, one
allows arbitrary su(2) gauge transformations when maximizing the gauge
xing functional (6). this procedure can be broken down into smaller steps
as follows.

1. start from a conguration with a trivial center part, i.e. with all links
in the northern hemisphere, such as one obtains by putting any smooth
continuum gauge conguration onto a suciently ne lattice. apply a
gauge transformation which rotates a certain arbitrary, but xed, set
of links to the southern hemisphere, i.e. such that the center part of
the transformed lattice displays the nontrivial value (1) on that set
of links7.

2. maximize the gauge xing functional using only coset transformations,
i.e. keeping the center part of the conguration invariant.
in other
words, links are not allowed to switch hemispheres of the su(2)
group. note that this second step operates purely on the coset part
of the lattice conguration obtained after step 1.) above; not only are

7as long as the original links are suciently close to unity (which one can always achieve
by choosing the lattice spacing accordingly), this transformation can e.g. be eected by
applying the group element v = exp(2t3/3) to the site from which the links in question
emanate and the group element v  to the site at which they end, i.e. u  v u v , where
u denotes the original link variable associated with the link under consideration. one can
also exchange v and v , which may become necessary if two links in question share a site.

14

only coset transformations allowed, but also the gauge xing functional
(6) depends exclusively on the coset part of the link variables.

3. finally, this two step procedure must be repeated for all possible rst
step choices of the center part of the transformed lattice, in order to
cover all possible gauge transformations contained in the full su(2)
gauge group. for each of these choices, corresponding to a certain
ideal vortex conguration, one obtains in the associated second step a
constrained maximum of the gauge xing functional (6); from all these
maxima, one must choose the highest one in order to obtain the gauge-
xed conguration reached under the action of the full su(2) gauge
group.

slightly rephrased, the procedure described above splits the process of cen-
ter gauge xing under the su(2) gauge group up into the following parts:
one introduces, by a suitable gauge transformation, into an initially smooth
gauge conguration ideal vortices at xed, but arbitrary, locations. this step
transfers information from the coset part into the center part of the cong-
uration. from this point onwards, however, center and coset parts remain
strictly separated and subsequent gauge transformations operate only on the
coset part. the latter is transformed, by using purely coset transformations,
to the (constrained) maximum of the (purely coset-dependent) gauge xing
functional (6). the algorithm must be repeated for all possible choices of
ideal vortex congurations. the choice which leads to the global maximum
of the gauge xing functional determines the center gauge and center projec-
tion image of the original conguration.

formally, one can summarize this as follows. the center gauge xing condi-
tion, cf. eq. (6), corresponds to the two-fold maximization problem

max

z

max

g xx,

g(cid:18)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
tr(cid:18)(cid:16)u(x)v [z](cid:17) g(cid:19)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(cid:19)

(16)

where u(x) is the gauge conguration one starts with and z denotes the
center part of the transformed lattice chosen in step 1.) above, realized by
the gauge transformation v [z] as specied there. the prime emphasizes ex-
plicitly that only the coset part of the resulting conguration is considered
further, although this is already guaranteed by the absolute value prescrip-
tion. in other words, the congurations (u v ) are stripped of all ideal vor-
tices. finally, g denotes all coset gauge transformations considered in step
2.) above.

15

3 taking the continuum limit

3.1 continuum limit of lattice congurations

as the rst step in formulating a continuum version of the maximal center
gauge, it is necessary to dene the continuum analogues of the various lattice
congurations considered above.

3.1.1 continuum limit of the coset part

the coset part of a lattice conguration can be directly associated with a
regular continuum gauge eld constructed such as to reproduce all links of
the coset conguration if put on the lattice. one could e.g. achieve this con-
struction by giving an inverse blocking prescription, successively replacing
coarser by ner lattices while dividing up the phases carried by the coarse
links onto the ne links such as to achieve a smooth continuum limit. in this
limit, it will be possible to expand an exponential representation of the link
variables

(17)

u 
(x) = exp(la

(x))
into powers of the lattice spacing l and regard a
(x) as the continuum gauge
eld. as a side remark, note that if one wished to apply such an inverse
blocking procedure to the center part of a conguration, the corresponding
prescription would have to be radically dierent in order to preserve the
center, or ideal vortex, character of the conguration: if a nontrivial center
link of a coarse lattice is divided up into two links of a ner lattice, the
whole nontrivial center phase would have to be associated with one of the
two links, whereas the other link would be associated with unity. the phase
is not divided up among the two links, in contrast to the coset case, and
the continuum limit is singular.
in particular, expanding an exponential
representation analogous to (17) is by construction never possible for the
center part of a conguration. due to these diculties, a dierent approach
will have to be taken when discussing the continuum limit of the center part
below.

before proceeding, it is worth noting that the gauge freedom associated with
the continuum gauge eld a
 in (17) matches the one associated with the
coset lattice u 
 in step 2.) of the center gauge xing procedure as described
in section 2.3; namely, it consists of all possible coset transformations. thus,
in describing a coset lattice in the continuum limit by means of a gauge

16

eld a
 as in (17), one is not introducing any restriction on the residual
gauge freedom allowed in step 2.) of the center gauge xing procedure. the
additional gauge freedom implied by the full su(n) symmetry present in
lattice yang-mills theory has been explicitly separated o into the choice of
ideal vortex conguration in step 1.).

3.1.2 continuum limit of the center part

the center part of a conguration contains exclusively ideal vortices, de-
scribed by sets of links taking a nontrivial value from the center of the gauge
group. at this point, it is useful to give an alternative characterization of
such a conguration which does not make explicit reference to a space-time
lattice. this can be achieved via the eect the conguration has on arbitrary
wilson lines. consider therefore calculating an arbitrary wilson line; as one
travels along the line, gathering up phases from the dierent links making
up the path, the wilson line either stays constant or picks up a phase cor-
responding to a nontrivial element from the center of the gauge group on a
length of one lattice spacing l. expressed through the vortex content, this
latter change happens whenever the wilson line intersects a string, surface,
or volume of nontrivial links (depending on the space-time dimension) de-
scribing an ideal vortex conguration. as the lattice spacing is taken to
zero, these strings, surfaces, or volumes become innitely thin. therefore,
the continuum analogue of an ideal vortex conguration consists in specify-
ing strings, surfaces, or volumes  (depending on the space-time dimension)
which, when intersected by a wilson line, contribute a center element factor
to the latter.

3.2 singular gauge transformations

in the previous sections, the eect of the maximal center gauge on vortex
gauge elds originally dened in the continuum theory was investigated by
rst putting the yang-mills eld on the lattice, subsequently implementing
the maximal center gauge condition (which, so far, is dened only on the
lattice) and afterwards considering again the continuum limit. one would,
however, prefer not to use the detour via the lattice, but rather perform
the maximal center gauge xing directly in the continuum. particular care
is needed in dening the analogue of step 1.) of the maximal center gauge
xing procedure as laid out in section 2.3. it should be clear from the previous

17

discussion that this step in the continuum will introduce singularities (the
ideal vortices) into the initially smooth gauge congurations. as already
partly indicated above, these singularities are to be dened via their lattice
origin, taking care in particular that gauge invariant quantities are unaected
by gauge transformations, even when the latter have a singular continuum
limit. keeping this methodology in mind, it will be possible to paraphrase
the center gauge xing procedure, as described step by step in section 2.3,
directly in the continuum.

consider a continuum abelian gauge transformation v (k, , x) specied as
follows. let v be continuous everywhere except at hypersurfaces  of di-
mension d 1 if d is the dimension of space-time. at such hypersurfaces, v
shall have the following property. let t denote the local coordinate perpen-
dicular to , with t = 0 on , and let x denote the other local space-time
coordinates. then

v (k, , x, t = )v (k, , x, t =) = z(k)
(18)
v (, x, t =)v (, x, t =) = v (, x, t = )v (, x, t = )
where   0 and k labels the n  1 dierent nontrivial center elements z(k)
of the su(n) gauge group under consideration. in other words, v jumps
by a center phase z(k) at hypersurfaces . an explicit realization of such a
gauge transformation v will be given in the next section.

consider applying a gauge transformation such as characterized above to an
initial smooth eld conguration a,

a  av = v av  + v v 

(19)

the rst term on the right hand side still represents a smooth eld everywhere
except possibly on the edge  of , since it is quadratic in v and hence
insensitive to the center phase v picks up at hypersurfaces . more care
must be taken in properly dening the singularity in the second term. for
this purpose, consider a wilson line describing a straight-line path c from
(x, t = ) to (x, t = ), with x and t dened as above, and innitesimal
. since the wilson line transforms as

w [a](c)  w [av ](c) = v (x, t = )w [a](c)v (x, t = )

(20)

and furthermore w [a](c) = 1 + o(), one has

w [av ](c) = z(k) + o()

(21)

18

therefore, the singularities of av at the hypersurfaces  describe nothing
but an ideal vortex conguration a(). on the other hand, the term v v 
is a pure gauge. therefore, the regular part of v v  must compensate the
ideal vortex part described by the singularities at  such as to render all
(closed) wilson loops taken in the conguration v v  trivial. this means
that v v  can be decomposed as8

v ()v () = a()  a()

(22)

with the ideal vortex conguration a() localized on a hypersurface , and
a describing thin vortices localized on . the thin vortex eld a can be
dened on  as

a| =  lim
=  lim
cf. eqs. (18). away from ,

0

0

v (, x, t = )v (, x, t = )
v (, x, t = )v (, x, t = ) ,

a = v v 

(23)

(24)

since the ideal vortex conguration a() only has support on .
before applying these singular gauge transformations to implement the max-
imal center gauge in continuum yang-mills theory, a few further properties
should be noted for convenience. given a general thin vortex conguration
a, a corresponding gauge transformation v generating it can always be re-
covered via

v (y) = exp zp (y0,y)

adx!

(25)

using an arbitrary xed starting point y0. path ordering is unnecessary, since
a was constructed to be an abelian eld. besides the trivial ambiguity in the
choice of y0, which merely leaves a constant phase undetermined in v , there
is a more important ambiguity, namely how the path p (y0, y) circumvents the
locations of the thin vortices contained in a. this choice precisely determines
the hypersurfaces  at which v jumps and which therefore describe the
associated ideal vortex conguration a.
from this, it also becomes clear that the thin vortex conguration a can
be chosen independently of the precise singular surfaces  describing the

8the minus sign in front of a() is a convention introduced for later notational

transparency.

19

associated ideal vortex conguration. merely the boundary  must coin-
cide with the location of the thin vortices contained in a. indeed, given a
transformation v1(1) inducing a thin vortex eld a, one can explicitly give
another transformation v2(2), with 1 = 2, generating the same eld a
as follows. let m denote the interior of the closed hypersurface9 1  2.
in d space-time dimensions, m is d-dimensional. then dene

v2(k, 2) = ( z(k)v1(k, 1)

on m
v1(k, 1) outside m

(26)

this transformation generates the same thin vortex eld a as v1(1) and an
ideal vortex conguration described by the hypersurface 2. in particular,
using v1(1) and v2(2), one can deform the ideal vortex part of an arbitrary
gauge conguration without changing the conguration in any other respect:

(a + a(1))v 1

1 v2 = a + a(2)

(27)

this is the continuum analogue of a transformation from the center of the
gauge group. it exclusively deforms ideal vortices. furthermore, the form of
(26) shows that a homogeneous rotation of any gauge eld is independent of
the location of the singular hypersurfaces ,

v1(1)av 

1 (1) = v2(2)av 

2 (2)

(28)

as long as v1 and v2 generate the same thin vortex eld a, i.e. in particular
1 = 2.

as a simple example, consider the su(2) transformation

v = exp(t3)

(29)

in the plane described by the polar coordinates r,  with   [0, 2[. at
 = 0, one has

v (r,  = )v (r,  = 2  ) = 1 + o()

and, away from  = 0,

(30)

(31)

1
r

v v  =
a = 
ar = v rv  = 0

1
r

t3

(32)
9the notation  is introduced to specify the orientation of a hypersurface. the
hypersurface  is located on the same set of space-time points as the hypersurface ,
but is associated with the reverse orientation.

20

i.e. one observes an ideal vortex at  = 0 and a thin vortex (cf. eq. (9)) at
the origin, r = 0. by simply changing the interval on which  is dened (in
general, as a function of r), one can arbitrarily deform the ideal vortex a()
without changing a().

3.3 continuum representation of center vortices
in the continuum limit, ideal vortex congurations a(k, , x) are specied
by hypersurfaces  (strings, sheets, or volumes in d = 2, 3 and 4, respec-
tively) which, when intersected by a wilson line c, contribute a center ele-
ment z(k) to the latter.

an explicit (singular) gauge eld representation of an ideal vortex congu-
ration in d space-time dimensions is given by

a(x, ) = ez

dd1d(x  x()) .

(33)

here,  describes the innitely thin continuum limit of the string, surface, or
volume of nontrivial center element links making up the ideal vortex cong-
uration.  is d  1-dimensional and its boundary s =  gives the location
of the thin vortex a(, x) to which the ideal vortex conguration a(, x)
is gauge equivalent (see below). furthermore, x()  x(1, 2, . . . , d1)
denotes a parametrization of the (d  1)-dimensional hypersurface . also,

dd1 =

1

(d  1)!

1...d1dd11...d1

(34)

is the dual of the (d  1)-dimensional volume element

dd11...d1 = k1...kd1

 x1
k1   

 xd1
kd1

d1 . . . dd1 .

(35)

note that these volume elements also dene an orientation of the vortex.
like in the special case (9), in general two dierent orientations of vortices
can be distinguished.

on the other hand, the color structure of the vortex is encoded in e. note
that the following discussion of the color factors e applies equally to thin
vortices, to be treated in detail further below. the dierent kinds of vortex
congurations introduced in this work are distinguished from one another
only by their space-time structure, but they carry identical color structure.

21

it should furthermore be emphasized that the orientation of vortex ux is
encoded already in the space-time structure, as mentioned above; this entails
consequences regarding the set of color factors e necessary to generate all
possible distinct vortex uxes. for example, the substitution of e by e
should not be considered to lead to a new class of vortices; the congurations
generated by this substitution are already accounted for by keeping the orig-
inal color structure e, but reversing the orientation of the hypersurface 
in (33). as specied below, e should be restricted to a certain fundamental
domain.

for the gauge group su(n), ideal center vortices in the continuum are given
by eq. (33) with e(k) = ec(k)tc satisfying

ee(k) = z(k) ,

k = 1, . . . , n  1

(36)

where only generators tc from the cartan subalgebra are associated with non-
vanishing coecients ec(k), and z(k) denotes the n  1 nontrivial center el-
ements of the su(n) group. the ec(k) can be considered as the components
of vectors e(k) in the cartan subalgebra which, up to a factor 2, coincide
with the so-called co-weights (k), i.e. e(k) = 2(k). the co-weights (k)
are dual to the simple roots and dene the corners of the fundamental do-
main of the su(n) algebra. they are dened in the adjoint representation
( ta)bc = fabc by

e e = 1 ,

e = ec tc

(37)

here, mainly the gauge group su(2) will be considered, for which only one
nontrivial center element z = 1 exists, associated with the color structure
(38)

e = e3t3 , e3 = 2 .

for the gauge group su(3), there are two nontrivial center elements

z(1) = ei2/3 ,

z(2) = ei2/3

(39)

which are generated from (36) by the vectors e(1) and e(2), whose non-
vanishing components explicitly read

e8(1) =

4
3

,

e3(2) = 2 ,

e8(2) =

2
3

.

note that both vectors e(1) and e(2) satisfy the normalization

tr(e(k))2 = 

1
2

ec(k)ec(k) = 

82
3

22

(40)

(41)

while

tre(1)e(2) = 

42
3

.

(42)

with (36), one has for the wilson line along a path c in the vortex congu-
ration (33)

where

w [a](c) = z(k)i(c,)

i(c, ) = zc

dxz

dd1d(x  x())

(43)

(44)

is the intersection number between c and  in d dimensions. for closed
paths c, i.e. for wilson loops, this equals the linking number between c and
s = ,

i(c, ) = l(c, s = ) .

(45)
in particular, a therefore satises the properties characterizing an ideal
vortex conguration as formulated at the beginning of this section. as al-
ready mentioned in connection with eq. (27), the sheet  can be arbitrarily
deformed by a (singular) abelian gauge transformation, while keeping its
boundary s =  xed; this is entirely analogous to the lattice, where the
stack of links u = 1 (in the case of su(2)) forming the hypersurface 
attached to the center vortex s =  can be deformed by center gauge
transformations. a more explicit construction of this transformation is given
further below in eq. (65).

on the other hand, in order to nd a general representation of thin vortex
congurations, consider the following gauge transformation,

(46)

(47)

v (k, , x) = exp (e(k)(, x))

where

(, x) =

1

d1 z

dd1

x()  x
(x()  x)d

is the solid angle taken up by the hypersurface  when viewed from x. here,

d1 =

2d/2
(d/2)

(48)

is the area of the unit sphere sd1 in d dimensions, so that the solid angle as
dened above is normalized to unity for a point x inside a closed surface .
note that the solid angle is dened with a sign depending on the orientation
of  as rays emanating from x pierce . a deformation of  keeping its

23

boundary  xed leaves (, x) invariant unless x crosses . in the latter
case, (, x) changes by an integer.

for later convenience, note also that the solid angle (47) can be represented
as

(, x) = z

dd1x

d(x  x())

where d(x) is the greens function of the d-dimensional laplacian,

 x

x

d(x  x) = 4(x  x) .

for a closed surface  = m the solid angle agrees with the characteristic
function (m, x) of m by gau theorem,

(, x) = zm

ddd(x  x()) = (m, x)

(51)

i.e. any point inside  = m is associated with a solid angle 1, any point
outside  with a vanishing solid angle,

(m, x) = ( 1

x  m
0 otherwise

(52)

in this respect, the normalized solid angle may also be interpreted as the
linking number of the point x and the hypersurface .

consider now the gauge eld induced by the gauge transformation (46) de-
ned by the solid angle (, x),

(49)

(50)

(53)

(54)

v (k, , x)v (k, , x) = e(k)(, x) .

obviously, one has

dx (, x) = 0

ic

for any closed curve c, so that any wilson loop receives the trivial contribu-
tion

now one can show that indeed

w [v v ](c) = 1 .

v (k, , x)v (k, , x) = a(k, , x)  a(k, , x)

(55)

(56)

where a and a are the thin and the ideal vortex elds, respectively, de-
scribing the same magnetic ux localized on . while a has already been

24

dened by eq. (33), an explicit representation for the thin vortex a(k, , x)
in (56) will be derived below. for this purpose, consider

(, x) = z

d3d(x  x())

(57)

and write

 = 2  (2  )

(58)
i.e. express the longitudinal projector l = /2 as   p, where
p =   /2 is the transversal projector. inserting this relation into
eq. (57) and using the denition of the greens function (50), one obtains

(, x) = z

dd1d(x x())z

dd1(2)d(x x()) .
(59)
upon inserting this relation into (53), the rst term produces precisely the
ideal vortex eld a(k, , x) as dened in eq. (33). to show that the second
term yields the thin vortex eld, it is necessary to express the transversal
dierential operator as

2   =

1
2

 .

(60)

after straightforward calculation, using stokes theorem, one eventually ob-
tains

z

dd1(2  )d(x x()) = z

dd2 x

d(x x()) (61)

inserting this into eq. (53), one nds the thin vortex for arbitrary ,

a(k, , x) = e(k)z

dd2 x

d(x  x())

(62)

in appendix a.2, it is shown explicitly that a(k, , x) in eq. (62) indeed
represents a center vortex, namely

dxa(k, , x) = e(k)l(c, )

(63)

ic

where l(c, ) is the linking number between c and .
note that, unlike the ideal vortex a(, x), the thin vortex a(, x) depends
only on the boundary , where the magnetic ux associated with the vortex
is located.

25

it is now easy to see that a gauge transformation which deforms the singular
sheet 1, describing an ideal vortex, into another sheet 2 while keeping the
boundary  xed is given by

v (k, 1, 2, x) = v 1(k, 1, x)v (k, 2, x)

= exp [e(k)((1, x)  (2, x))]

(64)
(65)

since the boundaries of 1 and 2 match, 1 = 2, the thin vortices
arising from v (1)v (1) and v (2)v (2) cancel and one obtains

(a(k, 1, x))v (k,1,2,x) = a(k, 2, x) .

(66)

one can also easily convince oneself that the transformation (65) agrees with
the one introduced in section 3.2, eq. (26). since 1(2) = m represents
the closed orientable surface of some volume m, application of gau theorem
yields

(1, x)  (2, x) = z1

dd1 x

d(x  x())
+z2
dd1 x

d(x  x())

= z1(2)
= zm
dd ( x

dd1 x

d(x  x())

 x

)d(x  x()) .

(67)

(68)

(69)

using the denition of the greens function of the d-dimensional laplacian
(50), one obtains

(1, x)  (2, x) = zm

dd d(x  x()) = (m, x)

(70)

where (m, x) is the characteristic function of m dened in eq. (52), and
m = 1  (2). hence, the gauge transformation (65) can be expressed
as

v (k, 1, 2, x) = exp [e(k)(m, x)]

= z(k)(m,x) .

(71)
(72)

thus, one recovers precisely the transformation already introduced in (26).

26

3.4 continuum limit of the maximal center gauge

on the basis of the groundwork laid out in the previous sections, it is now
straightforward to construct the analogue of the maximal center gauge for
continuum yang-mills elds. the transformations v () characterized by
(18) allow to carry out precisely step 1.) of the maximal center gauge xing
procedure, as specied in section 2.3, in the continuum. given an initial
smooth gauge eld a, the transformed eld av () contains ideal vortices
described by hypersurfaces  of ones choice. furthermore, in analogy to the
lattice, where taking the coset part of a conguration amounts to leaving
away all ideal vortices a(k, , x), one can dene the stripped conguration
(73)

(av ) = av  a(k, ) = v av   a(k, )

with the thin vortex eld a dened in terms of v as in (23) and (24), an
explicit representation being given by eq. (62). this stripped conguration
induces the same behavior for arbitrary wilson line integrals as the cong-
uration av , except for the center element jumps at the hypersurfaces . in
fact, (av ) depends only on the thin vortex conguration a, with thin vor-
tices at , and not on the specic choice of the entire hypersurface , cf.
eq. (28). it is therefore the precise analogue of the coset part in the lattice
case. note that (av ) is still singular on .

according to step 2.) of the maximal center gauge xing procedure as speci-
ed in section 2.3, one must now consider all coset gauge transformations of
(av ) such as to maximize the gauge xing functional. as explained in the
previous section, this step can be straightforwardly translated to the contin-
uum, where gauge elds are subject to arbitrary local coset transformations.
expressing therefore the coset link conguration in the continuum limit, cf.
eq. (17),

u 
 = 1  la

 +

l2
2

(a

)2  . . .

the maximal center gauge xing condition (16) can be rewritten as

max



max

g z ddx g(cid:16)tr(cid:16)(av ()



) g(av ()



) g(cid:17)(cid:17)

where the arbitrary gauge xing function has also been redened,

g(t) =

1

ld g 2 +

l2
2

t! .

27

(74)

(75)

(76)

like g, g should be a monotonously rising function. note that in (75), the
maximization is, as written, over all hypersurfaces , and not over all possible
associated transformations v (). for every , there are many possible v ().
only one v () must be constructed and inserted in (75) for every choice of
.

inserting (73), the gauge xing condition can be written as

max



max

g z ddx g(cid:18)tr(cid:16)gv (a  a)v g + gg(cid:17)2(cid:19) .

(77)

this expression can be further simplied such as to eliminate all explicit ref-
erence to the singular transformations v . in the following calculation, there
is a slight subtlety. namely, the integrand in (77) is continuous at hyper-
surfaces ; it was precisely constructed to be so. thus, one may replace its
value on hypersurfaces  by the limit as one approaches . in the following,
the integrand in (77) will therefore be evaluated outside of  and its value
on  is then dened by continuity. in particular, this means that one may
set v v  = a, cf. eq. (24).
by writing g = v gv , the argument of the gauge function g in (77) becomes

tr(cid:16)v g(a  a) gv  + v g(v v ) gv  + v ( g g)v  + v v (cid:17)2

= tr(cid:16)v ga gv  + v ( g g)v  + v v (cid:17)2
= tr(cid:16)v a gv   a(cid:17)2
= tr(cid:16)a g  a(cid:17)2

(78)

(79)

(80)

(81)

(82)

where the fact that v and a commute was used. note that g is continuous
on , since it is quadratic in v and hence insensitive to the center phase v
picks up at hypersurfaces . thus, it can still be considered a coset gauge
transformation. vice versa, any coset transformation g is associated with a
coset transformation g. therefore, the gauge xing condition (77) can be
rewritten as

max



max

g z ddx g(cid:18)tr(cid:16)a g  a(cid:17)2(cid:19)

with the coset maximization running over all coset transformations g.

in this form, maximal center gauge xing is revealed more clearly as an
approximation problem in the mathematical sense; it corresponds to approx-
imating the gauge orbit of a given gauge conguration a as well as possible

28

by thin vortex congurations a. the precise metric dening how close a thin
vortex eld a is to the gauge orbit of a is encoded in the arbitrary function
g. thus, the continuum formulation of the maximal center gauge provides
a deeper understanding of the empirical fact drawn from lattice experiments
[10], namely that center projection vortices provide a rough localization of
thick vortex structures present in full lattice yang-mills eld congurations.
note that, in mathematical terms, the space of thin vortex elds a has no
scalar product or orthogonality properties. eq. (82) species a norm which
serves to dene an approximation problem within this space, namely maximal
center gauge xing.

note that the gauge xing functional (82) only depends on the thin vortex
conguration a, with vortices localized on , and not on the whole choice
of . this is the continuum counterpart of the lattice observation that the
maximal center gauge leaves the center of the gauge group unxed, i.e. does
not depend on the center part of a conguration.

as a last step, it is interesting to recast the coset gauge xing condition in
dierential form as follows. consider  and an associated thin vortex eld
a() as given. then a gauge eld a satises the condition of providing the
maximal value of the gauge xing functional under the action of arbitrary
coset transformations g if the value of the gauge xing functional (82) is
stationary under innitesimal transformations g = exp()  1  ,

0 =



a(y) z ddx g(cid:16)tr ([a, ] +   a)2(cid:17)

= z ddx g(cid:16)tr(a  a)2(cid:17) (ac  ac)(ac  adf dac)d(x  y) (84)
= hg(cid:16)tr(a  a)2(cid:17) (aa

)i  g(cid:16)tr(a  a)2(cid:17) f adcadac

  aa

where the prime on g denotes the derivative with respect to the argument.
by multiplying with generators ta, this reduces to

(83)

(85)

(86)

0 = f [a, a] = 2 g(cid:16)tr (a  a)2(cid:17)  tr ((a  a)(a  a))  (a  a)

+g(cid:16)tr (a  a)2(cid:17) ([ + a, a]  a)

in the simple case g(t) = t, the gauge condition simplies to

[ + a, a]  a = 0

(87)

if one in particular chooses the thin vortex conguration to satisfy the landau
gauge, a = 0, then this condition is nothing but the background gauge

29

with the background given by the thin vortex eld a. note that the thin
vortex conguration (62) satises the landau gauge, as can be inferred from
eq. (61).

furthermore, if one has picked out of the gauge orbit of a given conguration
a the element a[a] which satises (86) for xed arbitrary a (coset gauge
xing), then the remaining part of the maximal center gauge xing procedure,
i.e. nding the optimal a, reduces to solving

max

 z ddx g(cid:16)tr(a[a]  a)2(cid:17) .

(88)

as mentioned repeatedly above, all choices of  in (88) corresponding to the
same  are degenerate due to the unxed center part of the su(2) gauge
freedom. also, for every , it is only necessary to construct one particular
a(), cf. the discussion after eq. (76).

finally, having obtained an optimal hypersurface , center projection simply
means replacing the full gauge eld by the corresponding ideal vortex con-
guration a(), cf. eq. (33). this center projected conguration can then
e.g. be used to evaluate observables such as the wilson loop, cf. eq. (43).

3.5 remarks on the center gauges in continuum yang-

mills theory

3.5.1 revisiting the thick vortex

in general, the gauge xing condition (86) is not solvable by analytical means;
at this stage, the value of the continuum formulation of the maximal center
gauge lies more on a conceptual than on a practical level. however, it is
worthwhile to briey reexamine some properties of the examples presented
in section 2.2 in the lattice framework. namely, consider approximating (the
gauge orbit of) a given thick su(2) vortex conguration centered on the
origin of a two-dimensional space-time plane, cf. eq. (10),

a = t3

f (x2 + y2)

x2 + y2

(yex  xey) ,

a = 0

(89)

by a thin vortex centered at the point x0ex,

a = t3

1

(x  x0)2 + y2 (yex  (x  x0)ey)

(90)

30

where the oset x0 is still to be varied; ex, ey denote the cartesian unit
vectors in the plane. for deniteness, the following treatment was carried
out using a prole function f (r) = (r  r), i.e. a ring-shaped thick vortex
of radius r similar to the one considered in section 2.2. in the case x0 = 0,
the gauge condition (86) is satised by these congurations, for arbitrary
gauge xing function g. for x0 6= 0, the condition (86) is in general not
satised. nevertheless, in terms of the variational form (82) of the gauge
xing condition, one has the relation

z ddx g(cid:16)tr(a  a)2(cid:17)  max

g z ddx g(cid:16)tr(a g  a)2(cid:17)

(91)

where equality is guaranteed for x0 = 0. now, it is possible to nd gauge
xing functions g, e.g. g =  tanh(r4t2), for which the quantity

z ddx g(cid:16)tr(a  a)2(cid:17)

(92)

appearing on the left hand side of (91), viewed as a function of x0, exhibits
a minimum at x0 = 0. in view of (91), this implies that also the quantity on
the right hand side,

exhibits a minimum at x0 = 0 (remember that equality is guaranteed in (91)
for x0 = 0). therefore, according to the variational form of the gauge xing
condition (82), the optimal location of the approximating thin vortex con-
guration a, parametrized by x0, is achieved for x0 6= 0. this conrms the
phenomenon observed in the lattice examples in section 2.2, that the thin
vortex induced by applying the center gauge xing procedure to a radially
symmetric thick vortex conguration does not necessarily appear concentri-
cally with the original thick vortex. this property thus does not constitute
a lattice artefact, but persists also in the continuum theory.

as a nal remark, note that the simple choice of gauge xing function g(t) = t
leads to a trivial optimal thin vortex conguration a = 0 for any smooth
initial conguration a. this is due to the fact that a thin vortex eld diverges
as 1/r, where r is the distance from the vortex, and therefore tr(a  a)2
diverges as 1/r2 at the positions of the thin vortices. therefore, in the case
g(t) = t, the only choice of thin vortex eld which does not render the gauge
xing functional (88) divergent is a = 0. consequently, a = 0 trivially turns
out to be the optimal thin vortex approximation, for any smooth a(x). the

31

max

g z ddx g(cid:16)tr(a g  a)2(cid:17)

(93)

choice g(t) = t for the gauge xing function thus at rst sight does not seem
very useful, since it cannot lead to a faithful representation of the vortex
content of the original smooth gauge eld a. the same is true for any g(t)
which diverges as fast as, or faster than, g(t) = t as t  .

3.5.2 remarks on the direct maximal center gauge

the choice of gauge xing function g(t) = t is the continuum analogue of a
variety of lattice gauge xing functions g(x), cf. eq. (76) in the limit l  0.
among these is the case g(x) = x2 (after leaving away irrelevant constants).
this is the standard direct maximal center gauge [18],[21],[25]. strictly
speaking, therefore, this gauge does not have a useful continuum limit on the
level of gauge xing individual smooth continuum gauge eld congurations.
the question arises how this gauge leads to a nite center projection vortex
density in the continuum limit of the lattice formulation, as evidenced by the
renormalization group scaling behavior of this density [20] (note erratum in
[11]), see also [21]. several possible explanations come to mind.

for one, in a lattice calculation, one never takes the continuum limit of the
eld congurations at an intermediate stage.
instead, one operates with
regularized lattice congurations and only extrapolates observables at the
end of the calculation to the continuum limit. thus, on the lattice, one
always stays away a certain minimal distance from the 1/r-singularity of
the continuum thin vortex, i.e. one never probes the t   behavior of
g(t). more precisely, one cannot make a distinction between g(t) = t and a
capped version gt (t) = t(t  t) + t (t t ), with a suciently large value
of t . of course, as the lattice spacing is taken to zero, t will have to diverge if
g and gt are to remain equivalent. now, it is entirely possible that the choice
g(t) = t leads to scaling violations of the projection vortex density on very
ne lattices, such that this density ultimately tends to zero. on the other
hand, a capped version gt (t) as above, with large but xed t , allows a nite
projection vortex density for smooth continuum congurations. possibly,
present lattices are still too coarse to reveal the above scaling violations and
distinguish between g(t) = t and gt (t) with large xed t . an observation
which supports this possibility is that on present lattices, one still nds in
typical congurations an abundance of negative plaquettes, i.e. structures
indistinguishable from thin vortices on the scale of the lattice spacing. on the
other hand, the appeal of this explanation is lessened by the fact that it calls
into question the relevance of the scaling behavior observed for the projection

32

vortex density; usually, such behavior is considered a rm indication that the
continuum limit of an observable can be extrapolated with condence.

a second explanation can be based on the fact that functional integrals in
eld theory are dominated, for entropy reasons, by congurations with in-
nite action, not by smooth congurations [27]. for instance, if typical con-
gurations a contain thin vortices, despite the fact that they are associated
with a divergent yang-mills action, then in the process of maximal center
gauge xing, i.e. approximating the congurations by thin vortices, one
would indeed introduce a nontrivial thin vortex conguration a to cancel
all thin vortices in the combination a  a. this would happen also for the
choice of gauge xing function g(t) = t. however, it has been argued that
thin vortices are too singular to survive the continuum limit of lattice yang-
mills theory [17]. in this simple form, this second explanation is therefore
questionable.

however, a third explanation which is a slightly more sophisticated variant of
the second one is possible. when xing to the maximal center gauge on the
lattice, one never nds the exact maximum of the gauge xing functional,
but only an approximation of this maximum. put another way, consider
introducing the (negative) gauge xing functional as a weight into the yang-
mills partition function,

sgf = qz ddx g(cid:16)tr(a[a]  a)2(cid:17)

(94)

cf. eq. (88). then, in practice, one does not insist on the limit q  , which
would imply nding the exact minimum of sgf ; instead one may be satised
with a nite value of q. in this case, a competition between the gauge xing
term and the yang-mills action (and also a competition between dierent
gribov copies, i.e.
relative minima of sgf ) becomes possible. even in a
case such as g(t) = t, where the gauge xing term in general will diverge for
nontrivial thin vortex congurations a, these divergences may be swamped
by the innite action of typical yang-mills eld congurations. note that for
this to work, only yang-mills congurations considerably less singular than
the thin vortices invoked in the second explanation above are necessary. e.g.,
in the case of the gauge xing function g(t) = t, the gauge xing term for

a nontrivial thin vortex conguration a will diverge as r dr r(1/r2), where

r denotes the distance from the thin vortex. this is independent of the
dimension of space-time; the coordinates perpendicular to a vortex always
span two dimensions. on the other hand, in four space-time dimensions,

33

already a gauge eld conguration which behaves as 1/r in the vicinity of a
point singularity will induce an action diverging asr dr r3(1/r4); a divergence
of the same degree is induced by a 1/r line singularity or a ln(r) sheet
singularity in four space-time dimensions.

3.5.3 alternative vortex gauges

the remarks above illustrate that the continuum maximal center gauge in
the form derived in section 3.4 in a sense constitutes excessive rigor. in a dy-
namical calculation, one is forced to introduce a regularization of divergences
in the ultraviolet; this regularization in particular also smears out the thin
vortex congurations a(), used in maximal center gauge xing, into thick
vortices with a thickness related to the ultraviolet cuto. in view of this reg-
ularization, dictated by the dynamics, it is not mandated to consider at an
intermediate stage the behavior of gauge eld congurations as the cuto is
removed. instead, the cuto must be kept nite throughout the calculation,
and only the continuum limit of physical observables, as encoded in their
renormalization group behavior, is relevant.

this suggests an alternative formulation of the gauge xing procedure in
which one approximates a given gauge conguration as well as possible by
thick vortices. specically, one can generalize the gauge condition (86) and
the remaining maximization problem (88) by allowing the approximating
congurations a() to comprise thick vortices. of course, such a general-
ization clouds the original idea of the maximal center gauge, namely keeping
the center part of the gauge freedom on the lattice unxed; instead, it op-
erates purely with continuum, i.e.
coset congurations. therefore, such
gauges should be more appropriately called maximal vortex gauges rather
than center gauges.

in such vortex gauges, one has an additional freedom in the choice of the
thickness of the approximating vortex congurations a(). on the one
hand, one may choose the thickness to be related to the ultraviolet cuto
with which one regulates the theory; for example, the thickness may simply
be the lattice spacing. this form would be entirely equivalent to the maximal
center gauge in the lattice theory, since, at the level of the regularized theory,
there is no distinction between such a thick vortex and a truly thin one. on
the other hand, one may choose the thickness to be a xed physical quantity10

10some phenomenological implications of a physical vortex thickness were discussed in

[23],[24].

34

(which can be varied to optimally match the vortex prole preferred by the
yang-mills dynamics). in this form, the thick vortex prole can also take
over the role of the gauge xing function g. for example, as evidenced in
the examples given further above, the gauge xing function g can act as a
regulator for the divergences introduced into the gauge xing functional by
the singularities of the thin vortices. in a vortex gauge with thick vortices,
this is already achieved by the vortex thickness. in many respects, the vortex
prole in the vortex gauge has a similar eect as the gauge xing function g
in the maximal center gauge.

as an aside, note that in a consistently regularized theory, one should also
use regularized versions of the ideal vortex congurations a, cf. (33), which
one simply obtains by using the ultraviolet cuto of the theory to smooth
out the -functions in (33), cf. eq. (133).

lastly, a certain aspect of continuum thin (or, equivalently, ideal) vortices
has not yet been discussed in detail, namely the possibility that there may
exist distinct thin vortex uxes which contribute an identical phase to any
wilson loop they link. an example of this was given already in section 2.2;
in the su(2) thin vortex conguration, eq. (9),

a = 

1
r

t3 ,

ar = 0

(95)

both choices of sign lead to the same eect on a linked wilson loop. both
choices correspond to a cartan chromomagnetic ux described by e3 = 2,
cf. eq. (38), but they dier in the direction, or orientation, of the ux, which
is inverted when the sign is reversed.

on the other hand, on a z(2) lattice, one cannot distinguish between these
two possibilities, since one formulates the theory directly in terms of group
elements. on a z(2) lattice, there is only one type of center vortex ux,
dened by plaquettes taking the value (1). information about the orienta-
tion of the ux is lost during lattice center projection. for the purpose of
evaluating wilson loops, this is immaterial; however, there may be other ob-
servables which are sensitive to the orientation of vortex ux. an important
example of this, namely the pontryagin index, will be discussed in detail in
section 5.

thus, to obtain a comprehensive description of infrared phenomena in yang-
mills theory, it is necessary to project onto a slightly more general class of
infrared eective degrees of freedom than the essentially unoriented center

35

vortices dened by lattice center projection. namely, vortex surfaces should
additionally be associated with an orientation, and should in general consist
of patches of diering orientation. as will be shown in section 5 in detail, the
edges of these patches can be associated with abelian magnetic monopole
trajectories. the continuum center vortices introduced in the past sections do
already include information about the orientation of magnetic ux. e.g., in
the discussion after eq. (76), when maximization over all hypersurfaces  is
called for, dierent orientations of  can be used. likewise, in the discussion
after eq. (88), dierent orientations of , i.e. directions of ux in a, are
distinguishable. however, vortex surface patches of alternating orientation,
bounded by abelian monopole currents, have hitherto not been allowed. on
the contrary, the magnetic ux carried by thin vortex congurations a has
been assumed to be continuous throughout.

the purpose of the the present discussion is merely to round out the treat-
ment of maximal center gauge xing and center projection by pointing out
how it can easily be generalized to yield vortex surfaces made up of ori-
ented patches. more detailed properties of such surfaces, including how they
determine the pontryagin index, are discussed in section 5.

one way of introducing patches of dierent orientation on the vortex surfaces
is to include information on abelian monopole degrees of freedom into the
gauge xing and projection procedure. as mentioned above, the trajecto-
ries of such monopoles on vortex surfaces dene the edges of the oriented
patches. such a procedure has already been dened and implemented in
the lattice formulation, namely the indirect maximal center gauge intro-
duced in [10] and further investigated in [18]. this procedure is dened by
initially transforming a given lattice yang-mills conguration to the maxi-
mal abelian gauge and performing abelian projection, which allows to ex-
tract abelian monopole trajectories. in a subsequent step, one transforms
the residual abelian lattice conguration to the maximal center gauge and
performs center projection, allowing the extraction of vortex surfaces. this
two-step procedure, including two truncations of the theory by projection, is
easily translated into the continuum formulation; the maximal abelian gauge
corresponds to the gauge xing condition

[ + a(n)

 , a(ch)



] = 0

(96)

where a(n)
and a(ch)



 denotes the color neutral (cartan) components of the gauge eld,
denotes the color charged components. fixing to this gauge induces

36

abelian monopoles in the resulting eld congurations. after projecting the
gauge-xed congurations onto their color neutral part (abelian projection),
the maximal center gauge xing procedure, as described in the past sections,
can be implemented analogously, and the associated vortices extracted.

note that the construction does not guarantee a priori that the monopoles
are located on the vortex surfaces. however, monopoles have been found
empirically to lie on the center vortices extracted via the indirect maximal
center gauge in lattice experiments [18].

on the other hand,
it is not strictly necessary to resort to such a two-
step procedure, one of the steps being geared to extract abelian monopoles,
and the other to extract center vortices. the coset gauge transformations
g in the maximal center gauge xing functional (82) in particular include
gauge transformations which generate dirac strings11. dirac strings, which
describe open two-dimensional world-sheets in four-dimensional space-time,
carry quantized magnetic ux such that they do not inuence any wilson
loop, in accordance with the fact that they are unobservable pure gauge
artefacts. e.g., in the case of su(2) color, a dirac string carries twice the
magnetic ux of a thin vortex. before discussing the interplay between vor-
tices and dirac strings, consider the following example for illustration. the
su(2) pure gauge conguration

adirac = g g , g =  

cos(/2)

 sin(/2)ei

sin(/2)ei

cos(/2) !

(97)

where (r, , ) denotes the usual three-dimensional spherical coordinates, and
the conguration may be considered constant in the further space-time co-
ordinate, has the explicit components

adirac
r

= 0 ,

adirac


= 1

2r   0 ei

ei

0

!

 = i
adirac

r sin  sin(/2)  sin(/2)

cos(/2)ei  sin(/2) !

cos(/2)ei

(98)

(99)

11note that the description in terms of dirac strings, used in the following for conve-
nience, is equivalent to a description in terms of abelian monopoles. the two objects are
strictly coupled. monopole trajectories dene the edges of dirac string world-sheets; dirac
string world-sheets span areas circumscribed by monopole trajectories, where the specic
area associated with a monopole trajectory can be modied by gauge transformations.

37

the full nonabelian eld strength of this conguration can easily be veried
to vanish [28], except on the negative z-axis12, i.e.
for  = . there, the
dirac string is located. for   , adirac

can be approximated by



adirac
  

1

r sin   2t3 = 2athin vortex



(100)

and the ux through an innitesimal wilson loop encircling the dirac string
therefore is

 = z 2

0

d r sin  adirac

 = 4t3

(101)

leading, upon exponentiation, to the trivial value w = 1 for the wilson loop.
furthermore, by considering the abelian projection adirac of adirac,

 = 2 sin2(/2)
adirac

r sin 

t3 ,

adirac


= adirac

r

= 0 ,

(102)

one obtains in the associated abelian magnetic eld

b =   adirac = 

1
r2 ert3

(103)

a dirac magnetic monopole located at the boundary of the dirac string.
note that in the full eld strength, this eld is completely canceled by the
nonabelian part [28], as mentioned above. thus, magnetic monopoles which
become visible in abelian-projected congurations can be used as an alter-
native way of detecting, or describing, the dirac strings induced by coset
gauge xing.

the above properties imply that a dirac string world-sheet which coincides
with a (oppositely oriented) patch of a thin su(2) vortex world-sheet simply
reverses the magnetic ux associated with that patch, leaving all wilson loops
invariant. nevertheless, in this way, though representing a pure gauge on its
own, a dirac string may change what information contained in a conguration
is kept during continuum center (or vortex) projection, i.e. it can be used to
dene a dierent truncation of the theory. the physical content of the full
congurations of course is not inuenced by the dirac string.

it should be noted that for higher su(n) color groups, the superposition of
a dirac string on a vortex changes not only the sign (i.e. the orientation),

12the action of this pure gauge conguration of course must vanish in spite of the

singularity on the negative z-axis, cf. the pertinent comments in appendix a.1.

38

but in general also the type of vortex ux, i.e.
its direction in color space.
e.g. for su(3), one in general additionally exchanges the center ux labels
(k = 1)  (k = 2) in eq. (40). this happens precisely in such a way as to
leave all wilson loops invariant, as it should be.

thus, due to the possibility of vortex surfaces being partially covered by dirac
string world-sheets generated by coset transformations g in (82), vortex sur-
faces made up of patches of dierent orientation are automatically generated
during continuum center gauge xing. vortex projection must merely be gen-
eralized to include this additional information about the orientation of vortex
magnetic ux resulting from the dirac world-sheets generated by coset gauge
xing.

finally, it should be noted that thick analogues of vortex surfaces consisting
of patches of dierent orientation have been constructed in [29],[30]. using
such generalized objects as approximating congurations a in the gauge xing
condition (82) provides another, alternative, way of extracting information
about vortex orientation from gauge eld congurations.

4 sketch of an eective vortex theory

the center dominance observed for the string tension in lattice monte carlo
calculations using the maximal center gauge [18],[21],[10],[11],[12] supports
the notion that center vortices are the infrared degrees of freedom relevant for
connement in yang-mills theory. on a formal level, center or vortex dom-
inance implies that the connement properties can be adequately described
by an eective vortex theory which results by appropriately integrating out
all other yang-mills degrees of freedom. more specically, in the abovemen-
tioned lattice calculations, center dominance is obtained using the full lattice
yang-mills dynamics, i.e. the eld congurations are sampled according to
the full yang-mills action. center projection is only performed in the observ-
able, i.e. the wilson loop is evaluated using center-projected congurations
after maximal center gauge xing. thus, in principle, one could evaluate the
expectation value of the wilson loop using a z(n) eective action obtained
after integrating out all coset su(n)/z(n) degrees of freedom. in lattice
calculations, this separation of the functional integrations is impractical, and
the z(n) eective action is unknown.

adopting a continuum description does not greatly alleviate this problem,
and therefore the following considerations concerning the eective theory of

39

vortices must remain mostly on a formal level. the intention is to sketch
what types of eects may arise in the eective vortex theory particularly in
the long-wavelength domain.

to this end, it is necessary to implement a maximal center gauge in the
yang-mills functional integral. this gauge xing can be decomposed into two
steps, as shown in section 3.4, namely coset gauge xing in an arbitrary xed
thin vortex conguration a and optimization of the thin vortex conguration.
coset gauge xing can be achieved in the standard way via the fadeev-popov
procedure, i.e. the gauge xed partition function takes the form

z = z [da] f [a, a] exp(cid:16)sy m [a]  pf 2[a, a](cid:17)

(104)

where f [a, a] denotes the gauge xing condition (86), f [a, a] is the stan-
dard fadeev-popov determinant corresponding to this gauge xing condition,
and p is a gauge xing parameter which should be sent to innity in order
to implement the coset gauge xing condition (86) exactly. note that at this
point a is an arbitrary, but xed, external (thin vortex) eld conguration.
in order to optimize the choice of thin vortex eld a, it is useful to further
introduce into the functional integral the following representation of unity13,

1 = [a]z [d] exp (sgf [a, a()])
sgf = qz ddx g(cid:16)tr(a  a)2(cid:17)

(105)

(106)

cf. eq. (88). here, the integration runs over all (d  1)-dimensional hyper-
surfaces  in d space-time dimensions, and the specic realization a() of
a thin vortex on  can e.g. be given by (62). furthermore, the gauge xing
parameter q should also be sent to innity in order for esgf to be peaked
at the optimal thin vortex conguration.

note that (105), in order to be properly dened, at the very least requires
some further gauge xing due to the fact that the integrand depends only on
the boundaries  of the hypersurfaces  being integrated over. note that
it is by no means clear that the integral over hypersurfaces  can simply be
replaced by an integral over closed surfaces s; there may exist closed surfaces
s which cannot be represented as s =  in terms of some hypersurface .

13note that one could also forego separating coset gauge xing and vortex optimization,
and instead use the full continuum maximal center gauge xing functional (82) to introduce
a representation of unity into the yang-mills functional integral analogously to (105).

40

a simple example is one of the coordinate planes, e.g.
the 1-2-plane, in
a four-dimensional space-time hypercube endowed with periodic boundary
conditions, i.e. a torus. such a plane constitutes a closed surface due to the
periodic boundary conditions, but cannot be represented as the boundary
of any three-volume . in general, the number of topologically inequivalent
closed two-dimensional surfaces which are not boundaries of three-volumes is
given by the dimension of the 2nd homology group h2(m) of the space-time
manifold m under consideration; this corresponds to the 2nd betti number
b2 = dimh2(m). on the four-dimensional torus t 4, one has b2(t 4) = 6,
corresponding precisely to the six independent planes which are closed by
the periodic boundary conditions.

formally, one can e.g. modify (105) by writing

1 = [a]z [ds]z [d][  min[s]] exp (sgf [a, a(s)])

(107)

where min[s] denotes the hypersurface of minimal volume which has s as

its boundary, min = s. if no hypersurface  exists such that  = s, then
that s does not contribute in (107). note that this modication, leaving from
the original integration over hypersurfaces  only an integration over closed
(d  2)-dimensional surfaces s in d space-time dimensions, corresponds
precisely to a xing of the center part of the gauge freedom on the lattice.
note also that this further gauge xing in general leads to further measure
factors, cf. the modied measure [a] in (107) as opposed to [a] in (105).

inserting (107) into (104), and assuming functional integrations can be in-
terchanged, one arrives at

z = z [ds]esef f [s]

esef f [s] = z [d][  min[s]]

z [da] [a]f [a, a]esy m [a]pf 2[a,a]sgf [a,a]

(108)

(109)

where a  a(s), as specied e.g. by (62). the eective action given by
(109) describes a theory of (d  2)-dimensional closed vortex surfaces s in
d space-time dimensions. in the most general case, e.g. for the purpose of
evaluating the vortex-projected pontryagin index, cf. next section, one will
supplement the surfaces s with information about dirac strings contained

41

in the coset gauge-xed congurations a; this leads to patches of dierent
orientation on s as indicated in section 3.5.3. formally, the surfaces s being
integrated over in (108) will consist of oriented patches, and the integration
over a in (109) for given s will in turn be restricted to all a containing the
corresponding dirac string conguration.

of course, the previous manipulations are at this stage purely formal. even
to obtain the measure [a] in (109), one has to solve a string theory in an
arbitrary gauge background a in four space-time dimensions, namely one
has to carry out the integral over s in (107). however, in lower dimensions,
an evaluation of (107) may be feasible. e.g., in three space-time dimensions,
the s denote closed lines, and the integration over s may be converted to a
eld theory by interpreting these lines as world-lines of particles.

in order to nevertheless gain some insight into the structure of the vortex
eective action at least in the infrared limit, assume the validity of the state-
ment that the center projection vortices in yang-mills theory give a rough
localization of thick vortices present in the full yang-mills congurations.
as discussed in section 2.2, this statement is corroborated by empirical nd-
ings in lattice experiments [10] and can be understood on the basis of the
continuum formulation of the maximal center gauge developed in section 3.
however, it is a statement which can at most be considered valid on length
scales coarser than the typical thickness r of the aforementioned vortices in
the full congurations preferred by the yang-mills dynamics. at this point,
r is an undetermined scale; it should ultimately be extracted by minimizing
the eective thick vortex action, as indicated further below.

the above statement implies that the distribution of thin projection vortex
congurations in the infrared regime is simply determined by the distribu-
tion of thick vortices in yang-mills theory.
in other words, the infrared
eective action of projection vortices can be obtained by calculating the
standard yang-mills eective action of thick vortex congurations, using a
thick vortex background gauge as already briey discussed in section 3.5.3.
the ultraviolet limit of validity of this eective action is given by the cuto
 = 1/r.

furthermore, in such a long-wavelength approximation scheme, it is consis-
tent to evaluate the eective action in a gradient expansion, i.e.
in powers
of ri, where i  /i is the derivative with respect to the parameters of
the vortex surface. below, this eective action will be given in the classical
limit, i.e. to zeroth order in a loop expansion. this will already exhibit the

42

relevant terms, with higher orders in the loop expansion only renormalizing
the coecients. the calculation is carried out explicitly in appendix a.1 us-
ing, for convenience, ultraviolet-regulated ideal vortex congurations. more
precisely, the -function in the dening expression (33) for the ideal vortex
a(k, , x) is regularized by means of the cuto  = 1/r, cf. eq. (133). note
that such an object represents a bona de thick vortex; the special character
of ideal vortices as singular continuum representations of excitations on a
z(n) lattice is blurred when the ideal vortex singularities are regularized.
after regularization, there is no qualitative distinction between an initially
thin or an initially ideal vortex; these can all be viewed as continuum coset
congurations, namely, thick vortices.
inserting such a thickened ideal vortex a into the classical yang-mills action,
(110)

s[a] = 

1
2g2

0 z tr (f [a]f [a])

one obtains the gradient expansion (see appendix a.1)
d2gk a

sy m [a] = z

d2g + z

aik a

bjgabgij

+ z d2ggabab lng .

here,

g = det gab , gab = axbx

(111)

(112)

denotes the metric on the vortex sheet and k a
ab are the extrinsic curvature
coecients which are dened in appendix a.1, eq.
(138). furthermore,
the coecients in eq. (111) are given for su(2) vortices by (using tre2 =
 1
2 (2)2, cf. eq. (38) )

 =


0r2 ,
g2

 = 


2g2
0


4g2
0

,

 =

.

(113)

one thus obtains in leading and next-to-leading order the nambu-goto action
and curvature terms for the vortex surfaces14. the coecients (113) will be
renormalized through quantum eects embodied by higher orders in the loop
expansion. in particular, renormalization will generate a physical scale in the
coecients in the standard fashion, which will allow to relate the thickness
r to physically measurable quantities. this will make it possible to self-
consistently determine the preferred physical vortex thickness r through a

14the second term on the r.h.s. of eq. (111) has been discussed in [31],[32].

43

minimization of the eective action for given vortex magnetic ux; similar
considerations were already carried out in the framework of the copenhagen
vacuum [5]. such more detailed approximations, e.g. an evaluation of the
one-loop corrections, are deferred to future work.

it should however be emphasized that, though the explicit form of the coe-
cients of the various terms in the eective vortex action certainly depends on
the approximation involved, the general structure of the gradient expansion
of the vortex eective action is uniquely determined by poincare, gauge, and
reparametrization invariance. in a forthcoming paper, the authors will use
an action reminiscent of (111) with adjustable coecients as a starting point
for a phenomenological vortex model of infrared yang-mills physics.

5 topology of center vortices

in the previous section, a rough sketch of a reduction of yang-mills theory to
an eective vortex theory was given, by implementing a continuum version
of the maximal center gauge, and by subsequently integrating out the yang-
mills elds. center-projected (or, more appropriately, vortex-projected) ob-
servables can in principle now be evaluated directly in terms of the vortex
theory, which contains exclusively (d2)-dimensional vortex surface degrees
of freedom in d-dimensional space-time.

there is an essential dierence between the center vortices on the lattice and
in the continuum theory. after center projection on the lattice, the direction
of the magnetic ux of the vortex is lost, while in the continuum theory, the
center vortices are given by oriented (patches of) surfaces, where the ux
direction is dened by the orientation. this was already discussed to some
extent in section 3.5.3. the orientation of the vortices, however, is crucial
for their topological properties, as will be shown below by evaluating the
pontryagin index

[a] =

 = 
using the ideal vortex representation (33).

322 z d4x f a

1

f a

1

162 z d4x tr ff

(114)

it should be emphasized that the treatment in this section, the goal of which
is to dene the vortex-projected pontryagin index, in some ways reverses the
logic of the past sections. whereas the continuum maximal center gauge and

44

also the vortex action were dened via the corresponding lattice expressions
in the limit of vanishing lattice spacing, the pontryagin index calls for a
dierent treatment. it is initially dened for smooth continuum gauge eld
congurations, and useful lattice discretizations of the pontryagin index are
notoriously cumbersome. in fact, the maximal center gauge exacerbates the
problem, since all lattice denitions at some point must assume the links of
a lattice conguration to be reasonably close to unity. on the other hand,
the maximal center gauge precisely transforms congurations into a form
where their links strongly deviate from unity; namely, it introduces ideal
vortices even into initially smooth congurations. therefore, to properly
dene the vortex-projected pontryagin index, it is necessary to start from
the continuum expression, understanding the pontryagin index for thin (or,
gauge-equivalently, ideal) vortices to correspond to the thin limit of the pon-
tryagin index of thickened vortices, for which it is well-dened. this limit is
smooth, as is demonstrated in an example in appendix c; namely, the thick
vortex prole function manifestly cancels. note that this concept of vortex
projection is not directly connected with lattice center projection anymore,
since it is based on the thin limit of thickened (i.e. coset) congurations. in
the following, the pontryagin index will be evaluated for (thickened) ideal
vortex congurations. the aforementioned example in appendix c on the
other hand treats a particular conguration of explicitly thick vortices, con-
taining also the limiting case of thin vortices.
the eld strength of an ideal center vortex a is given by

f(k, x, s = ) = f[a] = a(k, , x)  a(k, , x)

(115)

straightforward evaluation (see appendix a.1) yields for the eld strength15
on a vortex surface s

f(k, x, s) = e(k)zs

d24(x  x()) .

(116)

one can decompose a general vortex conguration into components of dier-
ent center ux labeled by the integer k, where k = 1, . . . , n  1 for su(n)
color,
(117)

s = [k

sk , f(x, s) = xk f(x, sk) ;

inserting this, and eq. (116), into (114), one nds for the pontryagin index

[a] = 

1

82 xk,k

i(sk, sk)tr(e(k)e(k))

(118)

15in the context of superuid helium, this quantity is referred to as the vorticity tensor.

45

where

i(s1, s2) =

1

2 zs1

d2 zs2

d2

4(x()  x())

(119)

is the (oriented) intersection number between two two-dimensional surfaces
s1, s2 in d = 4 space-time dimensions. note that the intersection number
i(s1, s2) is also dened for open surfaces s1, s2, and that, in d = 4 dimen-
sions, i(s1, s2) = i(s2, s1). also, if s1 and s2 intersect in a single point,
then i(s1, s2) = 1, where the sign depends on the relative orientation of s1
and s2. note furthermore that, in the case k = k in (118), i(sk, sk) counts
each isolated self-intersection point of sk twice. this is easily seen by further
decomposing sk into two components s1
k such that neither of the two
components self-intersect at the point in question. then,

k and s2

i(sk, sk) = i(s1

k, s1

k) + i(s2

k, s2

k) + 2i(s1

k, s2
k)

(120)

where the nal term represents the contribution from the self-intersection
point of sk under consideration.

it should be remarked that this discussion of the self-intersection number
i(s, s) includes only the contributions from transversal intersection points,
i.e. points where x() = x() with  6= , but leaves out the contribution
from the coincidence points x() = x() with  = . a more thorough
discussion of the self-intersection number i(s, s), which is given in appendix
b, does, however, not alter the conclusions on the pontryagin index reached
here.

thus, the pontryagin index of a vortex surface conguration is built up from
its self-intersection points, each of which enters with a contribution 2 
tr(e(k)e(k))/82 into the pontryagin index according to (118). the integers
k, k label the center ux carried by the two patches of the vortex surface
conguration intersecting at the point in question; the sign depends on the
relative orientation of the patches. in view of eq. (38), this implies specically
for su(2) color a contribution 1/2 from each self-intersection point; on the
other hand, for su(3) color, each self-intersection point contributes 1/3 or
2/3 to the pontryagin index, cf. eqs. (41) and (42). this is consistent with
the dependence on the number of colors noted by j. m. cornwall in [29].

in view of this result, the reader might worry at this point about the integer-
valuedness of the pontryagin index on r4 (silently compactied to s4). this
property cannot go lost during vortex projection, for the very simple reason
that vortices can be explicitly represented as gauge eld congurations and

46

therefore inherit all properties known to be true for generic gauge elds.
nevertheless, it is instructive to remark how the integer-valuedness comes
about in more detail in a simple case, namely su(2) vortices on r4. it is due
to the fact well-known in topology16 that the number of intersection points of
two closed two-dimensional surfaces in r4 is even. this also implies that the
number of self-intersection points of a closed surface is even, because the self-
intersection number is dened by simply intersecting the surface with another
surface innitesimally displaced from it (i.e. one considers a framing of the
surface, cf. appendix b). thus, while each self-intersection point of an su(2)
vortex surface conguration gives a contribution 1/2 to the pontryagin
index, the number of such contributions is even, and the pontryagin index
integer-valued.

in the case of higher su(n) gauge groups, the argument becomes more
complicated, since the surfaces may branch and also due to the fact that
superimposed dirac strings in general also modify the type of vortex ux,
i.e.
its direction in color space. further complications arise on dierent
space-time manifolds. for instance, on a four-cube with periodic boundary
conditions, i.e. a torus, one might think of generating a single intersection
point between two surfaces by choosing e.g. the 1-2 plane and the 3-4 plane,
which are closed due to the periodic boundary conditions. however, this
example is invalid, since vortex surfaces must be representable as surfaces of
three-volumes, which is not the case for the aforementioned planes.

the nal point to be discussed is the fact, also well-known in topology, that
the self-intersection number of closed, globally oriented two-dimensional sur-
faces in r4 not only is a multiple of four (remember that each intersection
point is counted doubly, and there are an even number of intersection points
for closed surfaces), but actually vanishes. this implies that the pontryagin
index vanishes for globally oriented vortex surfaces; conversely, therefore,
non-orientedness of the surfaces is crucial for generating a non-vanishing
topological winding number. to illustrate this, consider the following three-
dimensional slice of two intersecting su(2) vortex surfaces in d = 4 dimen-
sions, cf. fig. 3. let the one vortex be located entirely within the three-
dimensional slice of space-time under consideration; it is therefore visible as
a closed surface, namely the sphere s in fig. 3. on the other hand, let the
other vortex extend into the space-time dimension not displayed in fig. 3;
it is then visible as a closed loop c after slicing. let c intersect s at two

16the authors thank b. leeb for a discussion on this point.

47

points, chosen in fig. 3 as the poles of s.

c

c

1/2

.s

1/2

.s

.

-1/2

(a)

.

1/2

(b)

figure 3: three-dimensional slice of two intersecting su(2) vortex surfaces
in four space-time dimensions (see text). the thin line around the equator
of the sphere s in (a) is merely to guide the eye in identifying s as a sphere.
at the intersection points of s and c, contributions to the pontryagin index
of modulus 1/2 arise. however, in the case of globally oriented surfaces (a),
these contributions cancel. on the other hand, in the case that vortex sur-
faces are not globally oriented, but consist of patches of dierent orientation
(b), the contributions may add, giving rise to a nonvanishing pontryagin in-
dex. boundaries of such patches are tagged by abelian monopoles (thick line
around the equator in (b)).

if s and c are both globally oriented, as in fig. 3 (a), their intersection
number (in d = 3)

i(s, c) = zs

d2izc

dxi3(x  x())

(121)

vanishes, since the two intersection points occur with opposite relative ori-
entation between the intersecting manifolds. thus, a non-zero intersection
number requires at least one of the two intersecting closed manifolds to be
not globally oriented. globally non-oriented hypersurfaces consist neverthe-
less of oriented patches. assume for example the sphere s in fig. 3 (b) to

48

consist of two hemispheres of opposite orientation. e.g., the southern hemi-
sphere may be covered by a dirac string world-sheet, simply reversing (in
the case of su(2) color) the orientation associated with that hemisphere.
the boundary of a dirac string world-sheet is complemented by a monopole
in the abelian-projected conguration, cf. eq. (103). thus, in fig. 3 (b),
one can associate an abelian monopole current with the equator (thick line).
further below, it will be shown more generally how boundaries of oriented
patches on vortex surfaces imply monopole currents.

now, in the presence of the monopole current at the equator in fig. 3 (b),
implying a reversal in orientation of, say, the southern hemisphere, the con-
tributions to the pontryagin index from the two intersection points no longer
cancel, but add coherently, giving a pontryagin index of modulus || = 1.
thus, the depicted conguration represents an analogue of an instanton in the
sense that it will generate a zero mode in the dirac operator according to the
index theorem. the authors speculate that standard smoothing procedures
used on the lattice to detect instantons would transmute this conguration
into an instanton, since smoothing by construction alters congurations such
as to lower the yang-mills action. after smoothing, it is impossible to dis-
cern what type of excitation precisely carried pontryagin index in the original
conguration. note that this picture of the generation of topological winding
number also correlates well with the observation [33],[34] that instantons are
encircled by monopole loops in the maximal abelian gauge. it is precisely
the monopole loop which tags the change in orientation in the vortex surface
(the sphere s in fig. 3 (b)) between the two intersection points carrying the
topological density, causing their contributions to the pontryagin index to
add up and generate the pre-instanton.

to see the emergence of the magnetic monopole loops at the boundaries of
vortex surface patches in more detail, consider an isolated patch; this now
represents an open two-dimensional surface sheet s with boundary s = c.
to this surface s, one can relate a magnetic ux sheet by associating with it
the eld strength (see above)

f(x, s) = ezs

d24(x  x()) .

(122)

for a closed surface s = , this expression agrees with the one for the
ideal vortex a(, x) given in (116). by stokes theorem, one nds that a
conserved (abelian) magnetic current

jm

 (x, c) =  f = eis=c

dy4(x  y) ,

jm

 (x, c) = 0

(123)

49

must ow at the boundary s = c of the magnetic sheet s. note that the
direction of the magnetic current on s = c denes an orientation of the
sheet s and vice versa. this monopole current is generated by a magnetic
point charge qm

eqm = zv

djm

 (x, c) = ei(v, c)

(124)

with v denoting the three-volume dual to the loop c. in view of exp(e) =
z, eq. (124) yields for qm only a fraction of the elementary magnetic charge
dictated by the dirac quantization condition. this is as it should be, since the
vortex sheet s only carries a fraction of the ux which a dirac string carries.
only when glueing the open vortex patches with their boundary monopole
loops back together, should one take care to obtain current loops of proper
magnetic point charges satisfying the dirac quantization condition. in this
way, non-oriented closed magnetic vortex sheets are constructed, consisting
of oriented surface pieces joined by magnetic monopole current loops17. such
a non-oriented closed magnetic sheet denes a center vortex which still gives
the same contribution to a wilson loop as the corresponding oriented vortex
(in the absence of a monopole loop), cf. eq. (43). thus, for the connement
properties, measured by the wilson loop, the orientation of a vortex sheet,
and hence the magnetic monopole currents, are irrelevant. the abelian
magnetic monopole currents are however necessary in order to generate a
non-vanishing pontryagin index for vortex congurations. it is in fact easy
to see that the pontryagin index of the vortices can be determined from the
abelian magnetic monopoles alone. indeed, inserting (115) into (114), after
a partial integration the pontryagin index of an ideal vortex sheet becomes

 = 
= 

1

82 zm
82 zm

1

 tr (a f) +
dtr (a f) +

1

82 zm
82 zm

1

tra f
trajm

 (x, c)

(125)

(126)

where gau law was used in the rst term and the denition of the mag-
netic current in the second term. the second term obviously vanishes in
the absence of magnetic monopoles. furthermore, the surface term van-
ishes unless the integrand contains singularities which give rise to internal
surfaces wrapping the singularities. such internal surfaces precisely arise in
the presence of magnetic charges [14] which may be magnetic monopoles or

17if one glues together two patches such that the surface orientation does not change

across the boundary, the monopole currents at the boundary precisely cancel.

50

more extended magnetic charge distributions such as line or surface charges.
thus, a non-zero pontryagin index requires the existence of magnetic charges
in abelian-projected congurations. this is consistent with the ndings in
[14].

6 outlook

in this work, the continuum analogues of the maximal center gauge and
center projection in lattice yang-mills theory were constructed. this shed
new light on the meaning of the procedure on the lattice and led to a sketch of
an eective vortex theory in the continuum. also the manner in which center
vortex congurations generate the pontryagin index was claried; the latter
is built up from self-intersections of the vortex network, where it is crucial
that the vortex surfaces be globally non-oriented. since these developments
have already been discussed at length in the corresponding sections above, it
suces here to mention some open issues which require further investigation.

with regard to the maximal center gauge, it is necessary to conduct lattice
experiments using alternative gauge xing functions g, cf. eq. (6), and to
test whether the physical conclusions reached using the direct maximal center
gauge remain unaected. if it is true that maximal center gauges provide
a rough localization of thick vortices present in full lattice congurations,
then long-distance properties should be robust with respect to a variation
of g; uctuations of the center projection vortices within the thick vortex
prole are of course gauge-dependent, as evidenced in section 2.2. an issue
which is of particular interest in this context is the occurrence of gribov
copies which do not correspond to the absolute maximum of the center gauge
xing functional. in [19], the possibility is raised that the true gauge xing
image selected in particular by the direct maximal center gauge contains
less vortices than found in previous studies, and no vortex connement. as
discussed in sections 3.5.1 and 3.5.2, the direct maximal center gauge in the
continuum limit in fact always selects a trivial gauge xing image devoid of
center vortices. the observations of [19] may be a signature of the specic
problems of this particular gauge. on the other hand, it is straightforward to
formulate alternative gauge xing functions g which prevent these problems.
it would be interesting to repeat the considerations of [19] using such a gauge.

51

concerning the issue of an eective vortex theory, it was already mentioned
in section 4 that the authors plan to report on their numerical study of a
phenomenological random surface model for vortices in a forthcoming paper.
on the other hand, from an analytical point of view, it would presumably be
helpful to start with lower-dimensional models. e.g., it would be worthwhile
to study whether the maximal center gauge allows a solution of yang-mills
theory in 1+1 space-time dimensions; there, the eective vortex theory takes
the form of a classical statistical mechanics of vortex points.

finally, it is necessary to investigate whether center vortices do in fact fully
capture the physics of the pontryagin index; i.e. one should test whether
the vortex-projected pontryagin index displays vortex dominance in analogy
to the center dominance observed for the string tension. while it has been
shown in this work how vortices generate a nontrivial topological winding
number, and the converse experiment in [16] has shown that an ensemble
devoid of center vortices is concentrated in the trivial topological sector, the
question of vortex dominance is more stringent. in this context, it is worth
mentioning the analogous result from abelian-projected theories: in the max-
imal abelian gauge, one nds monopole dominance in the string tension [9],
but not in the pontryagin index; on the other hand, in the polyakov gauge,
the monopole dominance in the string tension is much less pronounced, but
the pontryagin index can be reconstructed exactly from the monopole con-
tent of the gauge-xed congurations alone [14].

in connection with the issue of the pontryagin index, of course also a more
detailed study of chiral symmetry breaking by a vortex background is called
for. vortex congurations which give rise to a non-vanishing pontryagin
index must, by the index theorem, give rise to zero modes of the dirac
operator. it would e.g. be interesting to explicitly construct such zero modes
for some relevant simple vortex congurations. in the context of instanton
models, the zero modes induced by the instantons give in fact the dominant
contribution to the chiral condensate. the question arises whether the chiral
condensate displays vortex dominance (again, the converse experiment [16]
yields zero condensate in the absence of vortices), and, if so, how it behaves
at nite temperatures, in particular, at the deconnement transition.

acknowledgements

discussions with k. langfeld and b. leeb are gratefully acknowledged.

52

a properties of center vortices

a.1 the ideal center vortex
in the following, the eld strength f[a] of the ideal vortex eld a(k, , x)
is calculated. for this purpose, it is convenient to evaluate rst its dual,

f =

1
2

f[a] = a(k, , x)

(127)

inserting here the explicit representation for a(k, , x), cf. eq. (33), one
obtains

f(k, , x) = e(k)z

dd1x

d(x  x())

(128)

 z dd1x
d(x  x())

dd1 x

d(x  x()) (129)
(130)

1
3!

= e(k)

= e(k)z

application of stokes theorem yields

f(k, , x) = e(k)z

dd2d(x  x()) .

(131)

taking the dual of this equation yields the desired representation (116).

with the vortex eld strength eq. (131) the yang-mills action of an ideal vor-
tex in d = 4 space-time dimensions is given (up to an unimportant numerical
factor) by

s = z

d2 z

d2

4 (x()  x()) .

(132)

obviously this action is divergent and calls for regularization. regularization
will be achieved by chopping o the high frequencies using an ultraviolet
cuto ; this amounts to replacing the -function in equation (132) by the
regularized version

(x) =


2

2

2 x2

e 

.

(133)

before proceeding, a comment is in order concerning the thin limit   .
as long as  is arbitrarily large, but xed with respect to the ultraviolet
regulator of the theory, say the inverse lattice spacing, it is legitimate to
evaluate the action using the continuum yang-mills expression (132). how-
ever, if the vortex is meant to be truly thin, i.e. if its entire magnetic ux is

53

concentrated on one lattice plaquette, then one must use the lattice plaquette
expression for the action; otherwise, one loses track of the compact character
of the gauge group. e.g., if one exactly superimposes two truly thin su(2)
ideal vortices on top of each other (this corresponds to a closed dirac string),
then naive application of the continuum yang-mills expression for the action
would lead to a value diverging like four times the action of a single vortex.
on the other hand, all plaquettes encircling this dirac string take the value
(+1), and its action therefore vanishes, as it should18.

keeping this caveat in mind, the regularized action can be evaluated in a
gradient expansion. note that similar calculations have been performed in
[35],[36] for a massive propagator. since the action receives contributions
only from x()  x(), the integrand (132) can be expanded in powers of
z =   . dening s = +
2
za
2
za
2

a x(s) +   
a x(s)

and expanding (where a = /a),

x() = x(s) +

x() = x(s) 
() = (s) +

za
2
za
2

a(s) +

a(s) +

1
2
1
2

za
2
za
2

zb
2
zb
2

ab(s) +   
ab(s) +    ,

(134)

() = (s) 

one obtains

4!4
s =   


za
2

zb
2

z

d2z 



2

d2z e 

2 zagab()zb h(())2

za
2

zb
2

()ab ()# ,

a()b() +

(135)

where only terms up to order z2 in both the exponent and preexponent have
been kept. furthermore, the range of integration over z has been extended
to , since the main contribution to the integral comes from the region
z  0. carrying out the gaussian integration over z, one obtains
abg(cid:19) 

2 (cid:18)ab 

d2"2g +

s =   

2!2

g# .

z

gab

1
2

1

1

(136)

18in the case of the dirac string, these subtleties can be circumvented by dividing the

space-time manifold into coordinate patches as in the wu-yang construction.

54

here, the metric on the vortex sheet has been introduced,

gab() = a x()b x() , g = det(gab) .

(137)

furthermore, a partial integration has been performed in the last term of
equation (135). the expression obtained above can be cast into a more
standard form by using the decomposition

ab x() = c

abc x + k a

abna
 ,

(138)

where c
furthermore, na
vector of the vortex sheet

ab are the ane connections and k a

ab denotes the extrinsic curvature.
 , with a = 1, 2, are unit vectors orthogonal to the tangent

na
 c x() = 0 , na

 nb

 = ab , a = 1, 2 .

using

abgbdcd = gac  g

(139)

(140)

z

2!2

d2g"2 

one eventually obtains after straightforward evaluation
g
s =   
22 gabab lng# . (141)
the rst term, which diverges for   , is the familiar nambu-goto term.
the remaining two terms are nite for   . the second term, containing
the extrinsic curvature coecients k a
ai, has been discussed in [31],[32]. the
higher-order terms in the gradient expansion all vanish for   .

1
2 gabgikk a

aik a

bk +

a.2 the thin center vortex

in the following, it is shown that the thin center vortex as dened by eq. (62)
for arbitrary vortex shapes s =  indeed yields a center element for the
wilson loop when non-trivially linked to it. for this purpose, it is convenient
to write the thin vortex as

a(k, s, x) = e(k)(s, x)
dd2x

(s, x) = zs

d(x  x())

(142)

(143)

55

using stokes theorem, one obtains

ic

dx(s, x) = zm (c)
= zm (c)

d2x

(s, x)

d2zs

dd2x

x

d(x  x())

(144)

(145)

where c = m. by using the relation between d and its dual d, the
last expression can be rewritten as

ic

dx(s, x) = 

1

4 zm (c)

d2 zs

dd2 x

x

d(x  x())
(146)

using the properties of , this expression can be converted to

ic

dx(s, x) = 

1

2 zm (c)

dd2(x)zs
dd2zs

+zm (c)

d2(x)2

xd(x  x) (147)
d2d(x  x)(148)

the last term is seen to vanish by stokes theorem, since s = () = 0.
the rst term yields, upon using the denition of the greens function, the
intersection number between m(c) and s,

dx(s, x) =

ic

1

2 zm (c)

dd2(x)zs

= i(m(c), s)
= l(c, s)

d2(x)d(x  x)

(149)

(150)
(151)

which equals the linking number between c and s, i.e. l(c, s). with the
last relation, one indeed obtains a center element for the wilson loop from
the thin vortex (62),

exp(cid:18)ic

dxa(k, s, x)(cid:19) = exp(e(k)l(c, s)) = z(k)l(c,s)

(152)

b intersection number of two-dimensional

sheets in d = 4

this appendix summarizes essential properties of the self-intersection number
of two-dimensional surfaces in d = 4 space-time dimensions; in particular,

56

the relation of the self-intersection number to topological invariants of the
three-dimensional spaces located at the initial and nal times is presented.
assume a certain parametrization of the vortex sheet x()  x(1, 2)
(119), i.e., the
in d = 4. the self-intersection number i(s, s), cf. eq.
intersection number of s with itself, receives contributions from coincidence
points x() = x() with  =  and from (transversal) intersection
points x() = x() with  6= , which will be denoted by i1(s, s) and
i2(s, s) respectively,

i(s, s) = i1(s, s) + i2(s, s)

(153)

regularizing the delta function in eq. (119), cf. appendix a.1, eq. (133),
introduces an ultraviolet cuto , which then allows i1(s, s) to be straight-
forwardly evaluated; in the limit   , one nds polyakovs intersection
number19,

i1(s, s) = 

1

16 zs

d2
g

gijij 

where

gij = i x()j x()

denotes the metric on the surface s, g = det gij and

 = iji x()j x()

(154)

(155)

(156)

is the tensor of the surface element on the vortex sheet.
let x((k)) = x((k)), where (k) 6= (k), determine the coordinates of
isolated (self-)intersection points p (k) of s. expanding x(), x() near
 = (k),  = (k) in powers of   (k),   (k), the integrals in (119)
over d2, d2 can be straightforwardly performed, yielding

i2(s, s) = 2xk

sign (cid:16)(x((k))) (x((k)))(cid:17)

(157)

one observes that each intersection point x((k)) = x((k)), with (k) 6=
(k), contributes doubly to the self-intersection number i2(s, s) in agree-
ment with the ndings in section 5.

19i1(s, s) diers from polyakovs original denition [31] by a factor of (cid:0) 1
4(cid:1).

57

to illustrate the geometric meaning of the dierent contributions to the in-
tersection number, it is useful to consider a xed time slice of the four-
dimensional universe. in this three-dimensional space, the vortex s repre-
sents a closed loop c(t = xed). for simplicity, choose t = 2 such that this
loop is parametrized by 1, which takes values in [0, 2[.

consider the self-linking number sl(c, n) of such a closed loop c(t) in d =
3, which is dened by the linking number l(c, c ) between the original loop
c(t) and the ctitious loop c (t) resulting from c(t) by an innitesimal shift

x(1, t)  x(1, t) + n(1, t) .

(158)

here, n(1, t) is a unit vector perpendicular to the tangent vector ~x(1, t) =



1

~x(1, t) of the loop c(t),

n(1, t)  ~x(1, t) = 0 ,

n2 = 1

which is periodic in 1, n(1 + 2, t) = n(1), i.e.

sl(c, n) = lim
0

l(c, c ) .

in this last equation,

l(c, c ) =

1

4 ic ic 

d~x  d~x ~x  ~x
|~x  ~x|

is the familiar gau linking number.

(159)

(160)

(161)

the vector n(1, t) denes a framing of the loop c(t), which implies a thick-
ening of the loop into a ribbon bounded by c(t) and c (t). let c denote the
loop along the middle of this ribbon which is generated by ~x(1, t) + 
2 n(1, t)
with t xed. taking the limit   0, one nds for the self-linking number
[37]

sl(c, n) = wr(c) + tw(c, n)

here

wr(c) = l( c, c)

is the writhing number and

tw(c, n) =

1

2 i d1 [~e(1, t)  n(1, t)]  n(1, t)

58

(162)

(163)

(164)

denotes the twist, where

~e(1, t) =

~x(1, t)
|~x(1, t)|

(165)

is the unit vector tangential to the loop c(t). the twist tw(c, n) is not
a topological invariant but depends on the choice of the framing n(1, t).
a global change of n(1, t) changes tw(c, n) by some integer. the twist
tw(c, n) expresses the torsion of the ribbon bounded by c(t) and c (t) and
represents the polyakov spin factor in d = 3.
it should be emphasized
that, while the self-linking number and the twist depend on the choice of the
framing n(1, t), their dierence, i.e. the writhing number, is independent
of this arbitrariness. furthermore, it can be shown that the self-intersection
number i2(s, s) is related to the dierence in the self-linking number between
the initial and nal time t1 and t2 of the four-dimensional space-time manifold
[36]

i2(s, s) = sl(c(t), n(t))|t=t2
t=t1 .

(166)

in an analogous way, polyakovs intersection number is related to the twist
of c(t),

i1(s, s) = tw(c(t), n(t))|t=t2
t=t1 ,

so that the total intersection number is given by the writhing number

i(s, s) = wr(c(t))|t=t2
t=t1 .

a transversal self-intersection point of the vortex sheet gives rise to a self-
intersection point of the vortex string c(t) at some time t. if the loop c(t)
self-intersects at some time t = t, the writhing number changes by 2 from
the time before t until the time after the intersection. this contribution
2 corresponds to the fact that each (transversal) self-intersection point of
the vortex sheet contributes 2 units to the intersection number. since for
all closed vortex sheets, self-intersection points occur pairwise, the vortex
string c(t) must self-intersect an even number of times, so that the su(2)
pontryagin index

(167)

(168)

becomes an integer, as observed already in section 5.

[a(s)] = 

1
4

t=t2

wr(c(t))(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

t=t1

(169)

59

c topological charge of a thick su(2) vortex

intersection

consider two intersecting planar thick su(2) vortices in four space-time di-
mensions. by choice of coordinate system, the intersection region can be
centered on the origin of space-time, and one of the vortices can be centered
on the 1-2-plane,

a(1) = t3

3 + x2
f1(x2
4)
3 + x2
x2
4

(0, 0, x4,x3)

(170)

cf. eq. (10), with an arbitrary prole function f1. on the other hand, let the
other vortex be centered on the 3 4-plane of a (primed) coordinate system
related to the previous one by an arbitrary orthogonal transformation o,

a(2) = t3

1 + x2
f2(x2
2 )
1 + x2
x2
2

x
i = oijxj

(x

2,x

1, 0, 0)

(171)

(172)

this also denes the transformation of the direction of the four-vector a(2)
when going to the unprimed coordinate system, a(2) = ot a(2).
in the
unprimed coordinate system, therefore, the second thick vortex is given by

a(2)

i = t3

f2[(o1jxj)2 + (o2kxk)2]
(o1lxl)2 + (o2mxm)2

(o1io2pxp  o2io1qxq)

(173)

from this, one straightforwardly obtains the eld strengths associated with
the thick vortex elds (where the prime on the prole functions denotes
dierentiation w.r.t. the argument),

43 = 3a(1)
34 = f (1)
f (1)
f (1)
ij = 0

4  4a(1)
otherwise

3 = 2t3f 

1(x2

3 + x2
4)

and

ij = ia(2)
f (2)

j  ja(2)

i

the pontryagin index is given by

= 2t3 (o1jo2i  o2jo1i) f 

2(cid:16)(o1kxk)2 + (o2lxl)2(cid:17) .

 = 

1

322 z d4x ijkltr(fijfkl)

60

(174)

(175)

(176)

(177)

(178)

one can easily verify that the integrand vanishes for each thick vortex taken
separately,

ijkltr(f (1)

ij f (1)

kl ) = ijkltr(f (2)

ij f (2)

kl ) = 0

(179)

and therefore the only nonvanishing contribution to  results from the inter-
section region of the two thick vortices,

 = 
= 

1

12 f (1)
34 )

42 z d4x tr(f (2)
22 z d4x (o12o21  o22o11) f 

1

2(cid:16)(o1kxk)2 + (o2lxl)2(cid:17) f 

1(x2

3 + x2
4)

(180)

(181)

(182)

(183)

(184)

by the change of integration variables

(x1, x2)  (x

1, x

2) = (o1kxk, o2lxl)

this simplies (up to the sign of the jacobian) to

2dx3dx4f 

2(x2

1 + x2

2 )f 

1(x2

3 + x2
4)

2(r2)f 

1(r2)

|| =

1

1dx

22 z dx
= 2z 
drz 
f2(r2)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
0  f1(r2)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

drrrf 

1
2

0


=

0



0

due to the boundary conditions on prole functions (cf. the description after
eq. (10)), one thus nally obtains

|| =

1
2

,

(185)

generalizing the result for thin su(2) vortices derived in section 5. the spe-
cic form of the prole functions has completely canceled, and the present
treatment thus in particular also includes the case of thin su(2) vortices.
also all reference to the coordinate rotation o specifying the relative orien-
tation of the vortex planes has vanished.

references

[1] g. t hooft, phys. rev. d 14 (1976) 3432;

c. g. callan, r. dashen and d. j. gross, phys. rev. d 17 (1978) 2717.

61

[2] t. degrand, a. hasenfratz and t. kovacs, prog. theor. phys. suppl.

131 (1998) 573.

[3] y. nambu, phys. rev. d 10 (1974) 4262;

g. t hooft, in: high energy physics, ed. a. zichichi (editorice com-
positori, bologna, 1975);
s. mandelstam, phys. rep. b 23 (1976) 245.

[4] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b138 (1978) 1;

g. mack, in: recent developments in gauge theories, eds. g. t hooft
et al (plenum, new york, 1980);
p. vinciarelli, phys. lett. b78 (1978) 485;
j. m. cornwall, nucl. phys. b157 (1979) 392;
r. p. feynman, nucl. phys. b188 (1981) 479.

[5] h. b. nielsen and p. olesen, nucl. phys. b160 (1979) 380;

j. ambjrn and p. olesen, nucl. phys. b170 [fs1] (1980) 60;
j. ambjrn and p. olesen, nucl. phys. b170 [fs1] (1980) 265;
j. ambjrn, b. felsager and p. olesen, nucl. phys. b175 (1980) 349;
p. olesen, nucl. phys. b200 [fs4] (1982) 381.

[6] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b190 (1981) 455.

[7] a. di giacomo, b. lucini, l. montesi and g. pauti, hep-lat/9906024;

hep-lat/9906025.

[8] a. s. kronfeld, g. schierholz and u.-j. wiese, nucl. phys. b293 (1987)

461;
t. suzuki and i. yotsuyanagi, phys. rev. d 42 (1990) 4257;
s. hioki, s. kitahara, s. kiura, y. matsubara, o. miyamura, s. ohno
and t. suzuki, phys. lett. b272 (1991) 326.

[9] g. bali, ch. schlichter and k. schilling, prog. theor. phys. suppl. 131

(1998) 645, and references therein.

[10] l. del debbio, m. faber, j. greensite and s. olejnk, phys. rev. d 55

(1997) 2298.

[11] k. langfeld, o. tennert, m. engelhardt and h. reinhardt, phys. lett.

b452 (1999) 301.

62

[12] m. engelhardt, k. langfeld, h. reinhardt and o. tennert, hep-

lat/9904004.

[13] s. thurner, m. feuerstein, h. markum, w. sakuler, phys. rev. d 54

(1996) 3457;
h. suganuma, s. sasaki, h. ichie, f. araki and o. miyamura, nucl.
phys. proc. suppl. 53 (1997) 528;
s. sasaki and o. miyamura, phys. rev. d 59 (1999) 094507.

[14] h. reinhardt, nucl. phys. b503 (1997) 505;

c. ford, u. g. mitreuter, t. tok, a. wipf and j. m. pawlowski, hep-
th/9802191;
o. jahn and f. lenz, phys. rev. d 58 (1998) 085006;
m. quandt, h. reinhardt and a. schaefke, phys. lett. b446 (1999)
290.

[15] r. bertle, m. faber, j. greensite and s. olejnk, jhep 9903:019

(1999).

[16] p. de forcrand and m. delia, phys. rev. lett. 82 (1999) 4582.

[17] g. mack and v. b. petkova, ann. phys. (ny) 123 (1979) 442;
g. mack and v. b. petkova, ann. phys. (ny) 125 (1980) 117;
g. mack, phys. rev. lett. 45 (1980) 1378;
g. mack and e. pietarinen, nucl. phys. b205 [fs5] (1982) 141;
e. t. tomboulis, phys. rev. d 23 (1981) 2371;
e. t. tomboulis, phys. lett. b303 (1993) 103.

[18] l. del debbio, m. faber, j. greensite and s. olejnk, talk presented at
the nato advanced research workshop on theoretical physics: new
developments in quantum field theory, zakopane, poland, 14-20 june
1997, hep-lat/9708023.

[19] t. g. kovacs and e. t. tomboulis, hep-lat/9905029.

[20] k. langfeld, h. reinhardt and o. tennert, phys. lett. b419 (1998)

317.

[21] l. del debbio, m. faber, j. giedt, j. greensite and s. olejnk, phys.

rev. d 58 (1998) 094501.

63

[22] m. engelhardt, k. langfeld, h. reinhardt and o. tennert, phys. lett.

b431 (1998) 141.

[23] m. faber, j. greensite and s. olejnk, phys. rev. d 57 (1998) 2603.

[24] m. faber, j. greensite and s. olejnk, acta phys. slov. 49 (1999) 177.

[25] a. montero, hep-lat/9906010.

[26] p. e. haagensen and k. johnson, hep-th/9702204.

[27] r. j. rivers, path integral methods in quantum eld theory (cup, cam-

bridge, 1990).

[28] k. langfeld, h. reinhardt and m. quandt, hep-th/9610213.

[29] j. m. cornwall, phys. rev. d 58 (1998) 105028.

[30] j. m. cornwall, phys. rev. d 59 (1999) 125015.

[31] a. m. polyakov, nucl. phys. b268 (1986) 406.

[32] h. kleinert, phys. lett. b174 (1986) 335.

[33] a. hart and m. teper, phys. lett. b371 (1996) 261.

[34] r. c. brower, k. n. orginos and c.-i. tan, phys. rev. d 55 (1997)

6313.

[35] p. orland, nucl. phys. b428 (1994) 221.

[36] m. sato and s. yahikozawa, nucl. phys. b436 (1995) 100.

[37] h. kleinert, path integrals in quantum mechanics, statistics, and poly-

mer physics (world scientic, singapore, 1995).

64

