9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

6
2

 
 

1
v
9
8
1
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

anomalies in string theory with d-branes

daniel s. freed

edward witten

department of mathematics, university of texas at austin

school of natural sciences, institute for advanced study

july 15, 1999

for sir michael atiyah

introduction

this paper is devoted to studying global anomalies in the worldsheet path integral of type ii
superstring theory in the presence of d-branes. we will not consider orientifolds (or type i super-

strings) and so our string worldsheets will be oriented riemann surfaces, mapped to a spacetime
manifold y , which is endowed with a spin structure since the model contains fermions. the rst
case to consider is that of closed worldsheets, without boundary. in this case, global anomalies can-

cel, and the worldsheet measure is globally well-dened, given that y is spin. this is the content of
corollary 4.7 of the present paper; for y = r10 one has (theorem 4.8) the further result, related to
conformal invariance, that the global anomaly vanishes separately for left- and right-moving degrees
of freedom. by contrast, for heterotic strings, global anomaly cancellation gives a restriction that
is not evident from the point of view of the low energy eective eld theory [w2,f2].

but we will nd that type ii global worldsheet anomalies give some novel results when d-branes
are present. thus, we assume the existence of an oriented submanifold q of spacetime on which
strings can end. we then consider a string worldsheet consisting of an oriented surface  that is

mapped to y with  mapped to q. on q, there is a eld a that is conventionally regarded
as a u (1) gauge eld, though as we will explain this is not the correct interpretation globally.
another important part of the story is the neveu-schwarz b-eld, which propagates in the bulk of

spacetime. assume for simplicity that b = 0. in this case, the worldsheet measure contains two
interesting factors which we write as follows:

(1)

pfa(d)  exp(cid:18)ii

a(cid:19) .

the rst author is supported by nsf grant dms-9626698, the second by nsf grant phy-95-13835.

1

here pfa(d) is the pfaan (or square root of the determinant) of the worldsheet dirac operator d.
the second factor is, in the conventional interpretation, the holonomy of a around the boundary

of .

our main result, theorem 5.6, computes the anomaly in pfa(d). namely, pfa(d) is naturally
not a function, but rather a section of a line bundle over the space of parametersthe space of
maps of the worldsheet into spacetime and worldsheet metrics. this bundle carries a natural metric

and connection, and the anomaly is the obstruction to the existence of a global at section of unit
norm. we will show that this connection is at, but there is holonomy 1 determined by the second
stiefel-whitney class w2() of the normal bundle  to the d-brane q in spacetime.1

this means that for (1) to be well-dened (for b = 0) there must be a compensating anomaly in
the a-eld. if w3() = 0, then this is achieved by interpreting a as a spinc connection rather than
an ordinary u (1) gauge eld. when w3() 6= 0 (and b is topologically trivial) the anomaly rules
out q as a possible d-brane in the theory. this result from string perturbation theory matches the
nonperturbative description of d-brane charge as an element of k-theory [mm,w4]: the normal
bundle  must have w3() = 0 in order to dene the charge. if b 6= 0 there is another term in (1)
and a correspondingly more complicated interpretation of the a-eld, leading to a generalization of
the condition w3() = 0 which is stated in equations (1.12) and (6.9). also, when b 6= 0, d-brane
charge takes values in a twisted form of k-theory, as explained in section 5.3 of [w4]. the net

eect is always that the qs that make sense in perturbative string theory are the ones that have
thom classes in the appropriate k-group.

therefore, our major tasks are to prove the anomaly formula and to properly interpret the a-

and b-elds. since the results here are of direct interest in string theory, we begin in section 1 by
explaining the physical implications of the anomaly. here we analyze the b 6= 0 case as well as the
simpler case when b vanishes. we give examples to show that the anomaly can occur, and we also

show how it relates to d-brane charge. section 2 contains a heuristic argument for the anomaly
in terms perhaps more palatable to physicists than the proofs which follow. from a mathematical
point of view the proof, which is contained in section 5, combines ideas from topological index

theory (1960s) and geometric index theory (1980s). the pertinent background material is quickly
summarized in section 3. the analysis of anomalies for closed strings is contained in section 4;
some of those results are needed in section 5 as well. section 6 is a commentary, in mathematical

language, on some of the issues raised in the main part of the paper. first, we give a more precise
description of the a- and b-elds in terms of cech theory. (a general mathematical framework
which would apply to all occurrences of p-form elds in quantum eld theory, string theory, and
m -theory is still lacking, so we settle for the cech description.) second, we remark on some general
features of dirac operators on manifolds with boundary where the boundary conditions are local.

1this problem exemplies the dierence between the topological anomaly and the geometric anomaly: the topo-
logical isomorphism class of this line bundle is determined by the third stiefel-whitney class w3(), and this may
vanish even if the holonomy is nontrivial.

2

with great pleasure we dedicate this paper to michael atiyah. his inuence is evident in every
section. not only did he (and his collaborators) develop topological k-theory and topological index

theory, which are used here to compute a subtle sign whose denition is analytic, but he was also
a pioneer in the application of these ideas to anomalies and to other problems in quantum eld
theory. thus we hope that the mix of mathematics and theoretical physics in this paper is an

appropriate tribute to him.

1 role of the anomaly in string theory

we consider the type ii superstring theory on a spacetime y , beginning with the case that b = 0.
recall that y is an oriented spin manifold. the d-brane is an oriented submanifold q  y . (q is
oriented because in type ii superstring theory, d-brane worldvolumes, being sources of ramond-
ramond ux, must be oriented.) the string worldsheet  is endowed with spin structures  and
 for the left and right-movers. we consider maps of  into y which send the boundary  to q.

our goal is to assess the well-denedness of the worldsheet path integral. the relevant factors are

(1.1)

pfa(d)  exp(cid:18)ii

a(cid:19)

(where pfa(d) is the pfaan of the world-sheet dirac operator d and a is the u (1) gauge
eld on q). type ii global anomaly cancellation for closed surfaces (applied to the double of ,
which is closed) shows that the result does not depend on the spin structures (see theorem 4.6).

so we may as well assume that  = . once this is done, the dirac operator becomes real. so
pfa(d) is real. its absolute value is well-dened, for example by zeta function or pauli-villars
regularization. however, there is in general no natural way to dene the sign of pfa(d) as a

number. we pick a particular sign, and proceed to see if we will run into a contradiction. for this,
we consider a one-parameter family of s, parametrized by a circle c. thus, altogether we have
a map  :   c  y , with (  c)  q. the question is now whether, when one goes around
the loop c, pfa(d) comes back to itself or changes sign. our main result (theorem 5.6) is that
under going around c,

(1.2)

with

pfa(d)  (1) pfa(d).
 =(cid:0)  c, (w2(q))(cid:1).

here w2(q) is the second stiefel-whitney class of q. if  :   c  q is an embedding, we can
just write

 =zc

w2(q) = (  c, w2(q)).

3

in particular, if w2(q) is non-zero,2 pfa(d) is not well-dened by as a number.

let  be the normal bundle to q in y . because y is spin (w1(y ) = w2(y ) = 0) and q is

oriented (w1(q) = 0), the whitney sum formula

(1 + w1(y ) + w2(y ) + . . . ) = (1 + w1(q) + w2(q) + . . . )(1 + w1() + w2() + . . . )

gives w1() = 0 and w2() = w2(q). hence we can restate the above anomaly formulas, for example

 = (  c, (w2())).

this formulation turns out to be more natural in k-theory.

when pfa(d) is not well-dened, the string theory is well-dened only if the second factor in
(1.1) has precisely the same ambiguity. in other words, a must not be globally a conventional u (1)

gauge eld, for which the holonomy around a loop is well-dened as an element of u (1). rather,
the holonomy around 

exp(cid:18)ii

a(cid:19)

must be well-dened only up to multiplication by 1, and must change sign whenever pfa(d)
does.

there is another important dierential-geometric object that has the same sign ambiguity. let

 be the levi-civita connection of the manifold q.
its structure group is so(n), n being the
dimension of q. consider the trace of the holonomy of this connection in the spin representation
s of the double cover spin(n). this is customarily denoted

(1.3)

tr p exp(cid:18)i

(cid:19) .

this holonomy is well-dened only up to sign (because there are two ways to lift an element of
so(n) to spin(n)). in going around a one-parameter family of loops, parametrized by a circle c,

the holonomy (1.3) is multiplied by exactly the same sign factor that appears in (1.2). the upshot,
then, is that if a is the right kind of geometrical object to make the worldsheet string measure
well-dened, then the product

(1.4)

tr p exp(cid:18)i

(cid:19)  exp(cid:18)ii

a(cid:19)

2and can be detected by a map from   c, which is a two-torus. by analogy with many other problems
involving global anomalies, we expect, though we will not try to prove here, that if w2(q) is nonzero but can only
be detected by a map from a surface of higher genus, then the same consequences will follow upon analyzing the
factorization of the string measure when  breaks into pieces, or in other words by analyzing unitarity of string
scattering amplitudes.

4

is likewise well-dened.

what appears in (1.4) is the trace of the holonomy in going around the loop , not for ordinary

spinors on q, but for spinors of charge 1 with respect to a. such charged spinors are sections not
of s(q), the spin bundle of q, but of s(q)  l, where l is the line bundle on which a is a
connection. the meaning of the global anomaly (for topologically trivial b-eld) is thus that the
globally dened object is not in general s(q) or l, but the tensor product s(q)  l.

such a tensor product denes a so-called spinc structure of q. the global anomaly thus
implies that (again, for trivial b-eld) q must be spinc, and more specically a spinc structure
can be constructed from the physical data, namely from the levi-civita connection  and the
eld a.

since, as we have seen above, w2(q) = w2(), it is equivalent to endow q with a spinc structure
or to endow its normal bundle with such a structure. in other words, being given a bundle s(q)l
determines a bundle s()  l, where s() are the spinors of the normal bundle.
physical interpretation

the phenomenon just indicated was rst encountered by hand in a very special case [w3], but

it has a theoretical interpretation that we will now recall.

naively speaking, the conserved charges associated with wrapping of d-branes in a spacetime
manifold y take values in h (y ; z), the cohomology of y . a closer look shows, however [mm,w4],
that, when the b-eld is topologically trivial, d-brane charge takes values in k-theory, in fact in
k(y ) or k 1(y ) for type iib or type iia string theory.

however, for a d-brane wrapped on q to dene a class in k(y ) (or k 1(y )), its normal bundle
 must be endowed with a spinc structure. this results from a standard construction of atiyah,
bott, and shapiro; see [w4], section 4.3 for an explanation in the context of the application to
string theory. hence, if the k-theory interpretation of d-branes is correct, type ii d-branes (at
b = 0) must be naturally endowed with a spinc structure on the normal bundle. equivalently,
since w2(q) = w2(), the type ii d-brane world-volume q must carry a spinc structure. as we
have just explained, the global anomaly formula (1.2) has exactly this consequence; because of this
anomaly, a d-brane is endowed not with a u (1) gauge eld, as it naively appears, but with a spinc
structure.

let us now analyze the conditions under which q admits a spinc structure. consider the exact

sequence of abelian groups

(1.5)

0  z 2z rz2  0,

with the rst map being multiplication by 2 and the second reduction modulo 2. this short exact
sequence leads to a long exact cohomology sequence:

(1.6)

. . . h 2(q; z) rh 2(q; z2)


h 3(q; z)  . . .

5

the object (cid:0)w2(q)(cid:1)  h 3(q; z) is the third stiefel-whitney class w3(q).
vanishing of w3(q) is equivalent to q admitting spinc structure. indeed, exactness of (1.6) says
that w2(q) = r(x) for some x  h 2(q; z) if and only if w3(q) = 0. when there is no two-torsion
in h 2(q; z), there is precisely one spinc structure on q for every such x. in fact, given a spinc
connection  + a, if l is the line bundle on which a is a connection, then m = l2 is an honest
line bundle, and x = c1(m) obeys r(x) = w2(q). conversely, given x with r(x) = w2(q), we let
m be a complex line bundle with c1(m) = x, and we let a be a connection on the line bundle
l = m1/2. (when there is two-torsion in h 2(q; z), there are dierent square roots of m and
hence more than one spinc structure for given x.)

inclusion of b-field

now let us discuss what to do when w3(q) 6= 0, so that the anomaly cannot be cancelled by
picking a spinc structure on q. so far we have assumed that the b-eld is topologically trivial, in
which case it can simply be ignored in analyzing the anomalies. but now we must include it. the
b-eld couples to the world-sheet  in bulk, and in its presence an additional term must be added
to (1.4), which now becomes

(1.7)

pfa(d) exp(cid:18)ii

a + iz

b(cid:19) .

this expression has the gauge invariance

(1.8)

a  a  , b  b + d,

where  is any connection on an arbitrary complex line bundle m.

let us discuss, in stages, the meaning of (1.7). first we consider the b-eld in the theory of

closed oriented bosonic strings. in this theory, for a closed surface , the b-eld gives a phase

(1.9)

w (; b) = exp(cid:18)iz

b(cid:19) .

this is a complex number of modulus one, an element of u (1); we can think of it as the holonomy
of b over . on the other hand, if  has a boundary, then w (; b) is not gauge-invariant. it must
be regarded as an element of a complex line lb associated to  by b. the line lb depends on
, but we do not show this in the notation. for example, if  is a single circle, then lb varies
as  varies to give a complex line bundle over the loop space of y (or over a component of this

loop space determined by the homotopy class of ). we write ly for the loop space of y .

the interpretation of w (; b) as taking values in a complex line lb may seem slightly abstract,
but it actually reects an idea that is familiar to physicists. the two-form eld b in spacetime

6

determines (by integration over the loop) a one-form eld or abelian gauge eld on loop space; this
abelian gauge eld is a connection on a complex line bundle lb over ly .

now we introduce in the bosonic string a d-brane with world-volume q. we require   q.

in this situation, there is a completely gauge-invariant extension of (1.9), namely

(1.10)

w (; b, a) = exp(cid:18)ii

a + iz

b(cid:19) .

we interpret this expression to mean that a gives a trivialization of the restriction of lb to loops
that lie in q. in other words, a trivializes the restriction of lb to lq, the loop space of q; when
  q, w (; b, a) is a gauge-invariant version of w (; b).

now, let us consider the superstring and the problem of dening the product

(1.11)

pfa(d)  exp(cid:18)iz

b(cid:19)  exp(cid:18)ii

a(cid:19) .

for simplicity of exposition in what follows, we suppose that the boundary of  is a single circle;

the generalization is evident.
in the mathematical theory, pfa(d), though not well-dened as
a number, is dened as a section of a pfaan line bundle pfa over lq. as we have already
discussed, the second factor in (1.11) must likewise be interpreted as a section of a line bundle
lb. we also have just explained that, in the bosonic string theory, the last factor in (1.11) should
be interpreted as trivializing the restriction of lb to lq. for the superstring, since there is an
extra factor in (1.11), the interpretation is dierent. the last factor in (1.11) must in this case be
understood as giving a trivialization of pfa  lb, restricted to lq.

this means in particular that for the bosonic string, the restriction of b to q must be topolog-

ically trivial. for the superstring, the restriction of b to q is in general topologically nontrivial,
but its topological type is uniquely determined, by the fact that pfa  lb (restricted to loops in
q) must be topologically trivial.

topological classication of b-fields

to make this somewhat more explicit, we recall the topological classication of b-elds. topolog-
ically, b-elds on y are classied by a characteristic class   h 3(y ; z). at the level of dierential
forms,  is represented by h/2, where h = db is the curvature of b. by integrating  over
a loop, we get a two-dimensional characteristic class on ly , which in fact equals c1(lb). flat
b-elds, that is, b-elds whose eld strength h vanishes, are classied by the holonomy around
closed surfaces, which gives a cohomology class in h 2(y ; r/z). a at b-eld has a torsion char-
acteristic class  computed by the bockstein map  : h 2(y ; r/z)  h 3(y ; z). (a similar 
appears in (1.6).) notice by comparison the analogous classication of abelian gauge elds, where
the degree is shifted down by one.

7

pfa lb is trivial if 3

(1.12)

|q = w3(q),

and we claim that this is the right topological condition on the b-eld. the integral of the left hand
side over  is the rst chern class of lb. the holonomy of pfa was stated in (1.2), and this may
be reinterpreted to say that the class of pfa as a at line bundle in h 1(lq; r/z) is the integral
of w2(q) over . using the remark following (1.6) and the fact that the bockstein commutes with
integration, we see that the rst chern class of pfa is the integral of w3(q) over .

in particular, b restricted to q is topologically trivial if and only if w3(q) = 0, or in other

words (given what we have seen above) if and only if q is spinc.

to be explicit, we will give an example of a b-eld on q (or on any spacetime y over which
w2(q) extends) with  = w3(q). just as an abelian gauge eld is completely determined up
to isomorphism by its holonomy around closed loops, a b-eld is completely determined up to
isomorphism by its holonomy over closed surfaces. since w3(q) = (w2(q)) is a torsion class,
there exists a at b-eld, whose holonomy over a closed surface  depends only on the homology
class of , with  = w3(q). such a at b-eld is indeed described by the elegant formula

(1.13)

w (; b) = (1)(,w2(q)).

in other words, the isomorphism class of this at b-eld is the image of w2(q) under h 2(q; z2) 
h 2(q; r/z). its characteristic class  is then computed by the bockstein map to be w3(q).

examples

we will give a few concrete examples to which the discussion applies.
every oriented manifold of dimension  3 is spin. a simple example of a four-manifold that
is not spin is q = cp 2. then h 2(q; z) = z, and h 2(q; z2) = z2. the second stiefel-whitney
class w2(q) is the nonzero element of h 2(q; z2). since h 3(q; z) = 0, we have w3(q) = 0 and
q is spinc. in fact, the map r : h 2(q; z)  h 2(q; z2) is just reduction modulo 2; the elements
x  h 2(q; z) with r(x) = w2(q) correspond to the odd integers in h 2(q; z) = z.

if a d-brane has world-volume q = cp 2, then (assuming that the b-eld vanishes) the global
anomaly means that the u (1) gauge eld a does not obey standard dirac quantization. rather,
a is a connection on a line bundle whose square has an odd rst chern class x (congruent to
w2(q) mod 2). if l  q is a generator of h2(q; z), then we have (l, w2(q)) 6= 0 and hence

zl

fa
2

=

x
2

,

3in fact, (1.12) is only a sucient condition, but is the only cohomological condition that implies triviality of
pfa lb . as in footnote 2 at the beginning of section 1, we expect that factorization and unitarity will lead to the
full requirement of (1.12).

8

with x an odd integer. in particular, x cannot be zero.

every oriented manifold of dimension  4 is spinc. to give a simple example of a ve-manifold
that is not spinc, let q = q s1 be a cp 2 bundle over s1 in which, as one goes around the
s1, the ber cp 2 undergoes complex conjugation. complex conjugation acts on h 2(q; z) by
multiplication by 1. q is not a spinc manifold, for the following reason. an x  h 2(q; z)
obeying r(x) = w2(q) would have to reduce on each ber of the projection q  s1 to an odd
element x  h 2(q; z) = z. because of the monodromy, x would have to change sign in going
around the s1, which is impossible. so q is not spinc.

to illustrate the ideas of the present paper requires considering topologically non-trivial d-brane
world-volumes such as q or q. but spacetime itself can be very simple, for example y = r10.
since y is contractible, the b-eld is automatically topologically trivial and can be ignored. we
will give examples of d-brane states in r10 which are or are not allowed.

on general grounds, any manifold of dimension  5 can be embedded in r10. for completeness,
we will describe a simple embedding of q and q. identify q = cp 2 with the space of vectors  of
unit norm in c3, modulo phase rotations. let a be a suitably normalized basis of the lie algebra
of su (3), and

a = h|a|i.

a=1 2

then p8
a = 1, so using the a as coordinates, we get an embedding of cp 2 in s7, which
obviously embeds in r10. to embed q in r10, rst note that s8  s1 can be embedded in r10
(for instance as the set of points a distance  from a circle s1  r10, for suitably small ). hence
it suces to embed q in s8  s1. for this, we rst add one more coordinate y to the a, to get
a copy of s8 dened by pa 2
a + y2 = 1, and embed q in s8 as the subset with y = 0 and a as
before. now, complex conjugation of cp 2 acts on the set of eight a with determinant 1 (three
eigenvalues +1 and ve 1), so if we take it to act on y as multiplication by 1, we get an element
t  so(9). so(9) is a connected group of symmetries of s8. let r(), 0    2 be a path
in so(9) with r(0) = 1 and r(2) = t . finally, embed q in s8  s1 by mapping (p, ) (with
p  cp 2  s8 and   s1) to (r()p, )  s8  s1.

now, given a d-brane in r10 with world-volume q or q, we will explain how to construct a
family of string worldsheets that detects the global anomaly. we take  to be a disc; its boundary
is a circle . letting c be another circle, the boundary of   c is w =   c, a two-torus.
for a generator of h2(q; z) or h2(q; z) we can take a two-sphere l. we pick a degree one map
0 : w  l; then, since r10 is contractible, one can extend 0 to a map  :   c  r10. this
gives a relatively simple example of a family of worldsheets for which there is a global anomaly.
hence, the d-brane q  r10 is not allowed, and the d-brane q  r10 is allowed but must support
a u (1) gauge eld with half-integral ux.

9

conservation laws and the anomaly

by further discussion of d-branes in r10, we can show the relation of the anomaly to d-brane

charges.

we work in lorentz signature, and split r10 as r  r9, where r parametrizes time and r9 is
space. we consider a d-brane whose world-volume near time zero is approximately q = r q0,
with q0  r9. we will focus on type iia superstrings, so q0 is of even dimension. to detect the
anomaly, the dimension is at least four.

the world-volume of the d-brane will not look like r  q0 for all time. the d-brane will
oscillate, emit radiation, and contract. in the far future, it will decay to a nal state consisting
of outgoing stable particles. the only known stable particles in type iia superstring theory in
r10 are massless particles (the graviton and its superpartners) and d0-branes, together with the
familiar multi-d0-brane bound states. (there are no conserved charges for higher branes because
r10 is contractible.) if there are no additional stable particles, then our initial state will decay to
an assortment of the known ones.

if so, we can predict how many net d0-branes will be produced  that is the dierence between
the number of d0-branes and anti-d0-branes in the nal state. it must equal the d0-brane charge

of the initial state, which [ghm,cy,mm] is

n0 =zq0q a(q)

1

q a()

exp (c1(l)) ,

where a is the total a-roof class, and c1(l) is the rst chern class of the complex line bundle
l on which the u (1) gauge eld a of the d-brane is a connection. now, using the fact that the
tangent bundle of r10 is trivial, and splits as t q   (with t q the tangent bundle to q), we have
a() = a(q)1. so we rewrite the formula for the total d0-brane charge as

(1.14)

n0 =zq0

a(q0) exp (c1(l)) .

(we have written here a(q0) rather that a(q); the two are equal as t q = t q0  , where  is a
trivial real line bundle that incorporates the time direction.)

now, if l were a complex line bundle, then in general n0 would not be an integer. for example,
for q0 = cp 2 and l trivial, we would have n0 = 1/8 (depending on orientation). when n0 is
not integral, the initial d-brane state cannot decay to known stable particles.

we either must postulate the existence of new conservation laws for type iia strings in r10
or achieve integrality of n0 by some other modication of the rules. as we have seen, the global
anomaly means that a is not a u (1) connection, but rather determines a spinc structure s(q)l
on q or equivalently a spinc structure s(q0)  l on q0. with this interpretation of a and l,

10

the atiyah-singer index theorem states that the right hand side of (1.14) is the index of the dirac
operator (for spinors on q0 valued in s(q0)  l), so that n0 is always integral.

thus, the anomaly enables us to avoid having to postulate new conservation laws for d-branes

in r10.

2 qualitative explanation of anomaly

to give a qualitative explanation of the anomaly, we consider a dp-brane with oriented world-
volume q in a spacetime y . if the given d-brane is the only one in spacetime, then a consideration
of the string spectrum will not lead in an obvious way to a result involving w2(q). in fact, if there
is only one d-brane, the only open strings are the p-p open strings with both ends on q. the
ground state of the p-p open strings in the ramond sector consists of sections of s(q) s() where
s(q) is the bundle of spinors on q, and s() is the bundle of spinors on the normal bundle  to q
in y . this tensor product exists whether q is spin or not (given only that y is spin), so merely by
quantizing the p-p open strings, we get no condition involving w2(q). to obtain such a condition,
we will study global worldsheet anomalies, as explained in the introduction.

suppose, however, that an additional pair of d-branes, consisting of a space-lling 9-9 pair, is
present.4 we suppose that the gauge elds on the 9-brane and 9-brane are trivial. in the presence
of the additional branes, there are additional open strings such as the 9-p open strings. the ground
state ramond sector 9-p strings are sections of s(q)  l, where again s(q) are the spinors on q
and l is the line bundle on which the u (1) gauge eld a on q is a connection.

so the tensor product s(q)l must exist, and we learn what was promised in the introduction:

q must be spinc, and the gauge eld on q really denes a spinc structure.

in our actual problem, such additional branes are absent. we do not want to assume continuous
creation and annihilation of brane-antibrane pairs along the lines of [s], for this involves somewhat

speculative physics. if one is willing to make such assumptions, the relation of branes to k-theory
and the spinc character of q can indeed be deduced, as in [w4]. our intent here is to show that the
requirement for q to carry a spinc structure can be deduced with only conservative assumptions
about physics, by computing the global worldsheet anomaly.

nevertheless, the fact that in the presence of a 9-brane, the quantization of the 9-p open strings
would make our result obvious is a starting point for a precise mathematical computation of the

global anomaly. in essence, whether or not 9-branes can be continuously created in the physics, we
can create them in the math, at least for the purposes of computing a global anomaly. this may

be done as follows.

consider any family of open string worldsheets  with specied boundary conditions on the

4for type iib, these can be ordinary supersymmetric branes. for type iia, we could in this argument use

instead the nonsupersymmetric 9-brane considered in [h].

11

boundary components of . the change in the global anomaly under a change in the boundary
conditions is local, that is it only depends on the properties near the boundary of . such locality

is perhaps more familiar for perturbative anomalies, which are expressed as integrals of dierential
forms. global anomalies, however, also obey a suitable form of locality. they are computed
topologically as integrals in k-theory, which obey the following excision property: if two k-

theory classes agree outside an open set u , then the dierence of their integrals can be computed
on u . geometrically, global anomalies are adiabatic limits of -invariants, which also obey a
factorization relation, though a more delicate one [df]. these relations give the locality we want

for the global anomaly.

using this locality, we can reduce to a convenient set of boundary conditions. in fact, if one places
9-brane boundary conditions on all components of , there is no global anomaly. this statement

is proved in proposition 5.10, again using factorization. the statement is closely related to type ii
global anomaly cancellation for closed surfaces without d-branes, because with 9-brane boundary
conditions on all boundaries, the dirac equation on the surface-with-boundary  is equivalent to a

chiral dirac equation (acting on spinors of one chirality only) on the double of .

hence, the anomaly for the family  c of open string world-sheets, with a map  :  c  y ,
depends only on the restriction of  to   c and the boundary conditions on   c. once this
is known, the anomaly can be evaluated by the following sleight of hand. we let  be an annulus.
we select one distinguished component  of the boundary of , and we select an isomorphism
of  to  (assuming  connected, in which case both of them are circles; the generalization to
arbitrary  is clear). then we pick a map  : c  y which coincides with  in a neighborhood
of   c.

now, we will compare the global anomalies for two dierent sets of dirac operators that dier

only by changes of boundary conditions:

(1) in the rst case, we consider a dirac operator on  with p-brane boundary conditions, plus

a dirac operator on  with 9-brane boundary conditions at each boundary.

(2) in the second case, we consider a dirac operator on  with 9-brane boundary conditions, and
a dirac operator on  with p-brane boundary conditions on  and 9-brane boundary conditions
on the other boundary component.

the total global anomaly in going around the loop c, summed over the two dirac operators
that are considered in each case, is the same in case (1) and case (2), because the union of all the
boundaries and boundary maps are the same in the two cases. all we have done in going from
case (1) to case (2) is to cut out neighborhoods of boundary components of   c and   c and
exchange them.

we also observe the following:

(i) in case (1), the global anomaly comes entirely from the dirac operator on , since the dirac
operator on  has 9-brane boundary conditions on each component. hence, in case (1), the global
anomaly is equal to what we want to calculate.

12

(ii) in case (2), the global anomaly comes entirely from the dirac operator on , since the dirac

operator on  has 9-brane boundary conditions on each component.

in case (2), because  is an annulus with 9-brane boundary conditions at one end and p-brane

boundary conditions at the other, it describes the propagation of 9-p strings. as we remarked before,
the ground states of such strings are sections of s(q)  l in the ramond sector (or of s()  l in
the neveu-schwarz sector). absence of global anomalies in their propagation is equivalent (as in
the analysis of global anomalies in quantum mechanics in [w2]) to the existence of s(q)  l (or
of s()  l).

thus, absence of the global anomaly for the dirac operator on  with p-brane boundary con-
ditions is equivalent to existence of s(q)  l, as we wished to show. a rigorous argument can be
found in section 5.

3 anomalies and index theory

the path integral over a fermionic eld f is the regularized pfaan, or5 determinant, of a
dirac operator d. it depends on the bosonic elds b which couple to f , but rather than being

a complex-valued function on the space b of these bosons it is a section pfa d of a complex
line bundle pfa d  b. this section is part of the eective action we must integrate over b,
and to do so we must nd a global nonzero section 1 : b  pfa d and integrate instead the
function pfa d/1. the anomaly is the obstruction to nding the trivializing section 1. (more
precisely, we must trivialize the product of the pfaan line bundle and line bundles from other terms
in the eective action, such as the additional contributions to (1.11).) this may be interpreted

topologically, in which case the atiyah-singer index theorem is used to determine the topology
of the pfaan line bundle. more relevant to the physics is a geometric interpretation, in which
we seek a at section 1 of unit norm relative to the natural metric and connection on pfa d.

(this distinction is important in our problemcompare theorem 5.5 and theorem 5.6.) for
that we use dierential geometric index theorems involving curvature forms and -invariants. if

the anomaly vanishes then 1, and so the eective action, is determined up to a phase on each
connected component of b. see [f1], [f2] for more details. in this section we briey summarize
results from index theoryboth topological and geometricin the form we need.

suppose  : x  z is a ber bundle whose bers6 x/z are closed manifolds endowed with a spin
structure. recall that ko(x) is the group of virtual real vector bundles on x up to equivalence,

5in minkowski space all elds are real and we can write the fermionic kinetic term as 1

2 d/, so that the
path integral over  gives a real pfaan. often a pfaan may be written as a determinant of a smaller dirac
operator. since under wick rotation the fermions are usually complexied, in euclidean eld theory the pfaans
and determinants are usually complex.

6here x/z denotes the ber of x  z. as usual, a spin structure on a manifold means a spin structure on its

tangent bundle, here the tangent bundle t (x/z) along the bers.

13

and kon(x)  ko(sn  x) is the subspace of isomorphism classes of virtual bundles trivial
on sn  x. the spin structure on the bers determines a pushforward map

x/z
!

: ko(x)  kon(z),

where n = dim x/z. given a real vector bundle e  x, the family of dirac operators on x/z
coupled to e has an index in kon(z). the atiyah-singer index theorem [as2] asserts that
(cid:0)[e](cid:1), where [e]  ko(x) is the isomorphism class of e. for
this analytic index equals x/z
dirac operators coupled to complex bundles we have a similar picture with complex k-theory
replacing real ko-theory. in general there is no cohomological formula for the integral or mod 2

!

characteristic classes of the index; over the rationals we can express the chern character of the
index (in k-theory) in terms of the chern character of e:

ch x/z

!

(cid:0)[e](cid:1) = x/z



(cid:0) a(x/z) ch(e)(cid:1),

where  is the pushforward map in rational cohomology. until further notice we restrict to complex

bundles and k-theory.

the simplest invariant of an element of k(z) after the rank, which is a continuous function
z  z, is the determinant line bundle, which is a smooth complex line bundle over z. in this
topological context it is only dened up to equivalence.

a geometric family of dirac operators parametrized by z is specied by a ber bundle  : x  z,
a spin structure on x/z, a riemannian metric on x/z, and a distribution of horizontal planes on x
(transverse to the bers x/z). if we couple to a vector bundle e  x, we require that e have
a metric and compatible connection. then if the bers x/z are closed, the determinant line
bundle det dx/z (e) is well-dened as a smooth line bundle, and it carries a canonical metric and
connection [bf]. if the bers x/z are odd dimensional, so that the (complex) dirac operator is self-
adjoint, then there is a geometric invariant x/z (e) : z  r/z dened by atiyah-patodi-singer.
(it is half the sum of the -invariant and the dimension of the kernel.) multiplying by 21 and
exponentiating we obtain x/z (e) : z  t, where t  c is the unit circle.

the curvature of the determinant line bundle is the 2-form

(3.1)

det dx/z (e) =h21 zx/z

a(x/z) ch(e)i(2)  2(z),

where x/z , e are the indicated curvature forms. as for the holonomy, consider a loop  : x  s1
of manifolds in this geometric setup. endow s1 with a metric and the bounding spin structure;
then we induce a metric and spin structure on x. the holonomy of the determinant line bundle
around this loop is

(3.2)

hol det dx/s 1

(e) = a-lim  1

x (e),

14

where the adiabatic limit a-lim is the limit as the metric on s1 blows up (gs 1  gs 1/2 and   0).
if the determinant line bundle is at, then no adiabatic limit is required. equation (3.2) is the

global anomaly formula [w1]; cf. [bf].

if x is a spin manifold of odd dimension n, and f  x a at unitary bundle of rank r, then
for any complex hermitian bundle e  x with connection the ratio x(cid:0)e  (f  r)(cid:1)/x (e) is a

topological invariant independent of the geometrical quantities. the at index theorem of atiyah-
patodi-singer [aps2] gives a k-theory formula for this ratio. namely, the bundle f determines a
class [f  r]  k 1(z; r/z) and the dierence of -invariants is x

! (cid:0)[e]  [f  r](cid:1), where now

(3.3)

x
!

: k 1(z; r/z)  k n1(pt; r/z) = r/z.

if x is an odd dimensional spin manifold with boundary, one can still dene x (e), but now
it is an element of the inverse determinant line of the boundary, viewed as a z/2z-graded one
dimensional vector space [df]. here we use the global boundary conditions of atiyah-patodi-
singer [aps1]. the invariant x (e) satises a gluing law. we need the formula for x , where
x is the manifold x with the opposite orientation.7 let k be the number of components of x
on which the boundary dirac operator has odd index. then

(3.4)

x(e) = (1)(k

2)x (e).

let x d be the (spin) double of x, obtained by gluing x and x along x. then the gluing
theorem and (3.4) imply

(3.5)

x d = (1)(k
2).

turning now to real bundles and ko-theory, there is a square root which one can canonically
extract in certain dimensions (see [f1,3]). namely, if a geometric family  : x  z has dim x/z 
2 (mod 8), and if e  x is a real vector bundle, then the determinant line bundle has a natural
square root, the pfaan line bundle pfa dx/z(e). also, if x is a closed spin manifold with
dim x  3 (mod 8), and if e  x is a real vector bundle, then x (e)  t has a natural square
root  1/2
x (e)  t. the curvature of the pfaan line bundle is given by one-half times (3.1), and the
holonomy by (3.2) with the  1/2-invariant replacing the  1-invariant. formulas (3.4) and (3.5)
hold for the  1/2-invariant, but now k denotes the number of components of x with nonzero
mod 2 index. (note that the  1/2-invariant of a manifold with boundary lives in the inverse pfaan
line of the boundary. that pfaan line is z/2z-graded by the mod 2 index.) there is a version of

the at index theorem (3.3) which applies to this square root; it uses ko in place of k.

7unfortunately, the sign in (3.4) is missing from [df]; it will be corrected in a forthcoming erratum.

15

there is a special low dimensional situation in which the topological isomorphism class of the
pfaan line bundle (over the integers) is computed by a cohomological formula. suppose  : x  z
is a family of closed spin 2-manifolds, and e  x a virtual real vector bundle of rank 0 which is
endowed with a spin structure. then [f1,5]

(3.6)

c1 pfa dx/z(e) = x/z



(e),

where  is the degree four characteristic class of spin bundles with 2 = p1. as a corollary, even if
e is not spin we have a cohomological formula for the determinant line bundle, which is the square

of the pfaan bundle:

(3.7)

c1 det dx/z (e) = x/z



p1(e).

in (5.22) we compute an analogous formula for the pfaan line bundle of a family of dirac operators
on the circle.

4 closed superstrings

statement of results

in this section we study a closed superstring propagating in a curved background riemannian

manifold y . assume that y is an oriented manifold. let  be an oriented closed surface. we need
not assume that either y or  is connected. the space of bosons is the product

b = met()  map(, y )

of riemannian metrics g on  and maps  :   y . a metric g on  induces a complex structure,
since  is assumed oriented, and so a  operator g : 0,0  0,1
g . let kg denote the canonical
bundle, which is the cotangent bundle t  viewed as a complex line bundle. a spin structure 
on , which we can describe on the oriented surface independent of any metric, gives rise to a
complex line bundle h,g which satises h 2
,g . spinor
elds are sections of k 1/2
,g  k 1/2
the  operator and its conjugate:

,g = kg. it is natural to denote h,g as k 1/2

,g . the chiral dirac operators on  may be expressed in terms of

(4.1)

,g = g : 0,0(k 1/2
d+
,g = g : 0,0(k 1/2
d

,g )  0,1
,g )  0,1

g (k 1/2
,g )
g (k 1/2
,g )

16

note that d = d+. also, d+ = (d+) is a complex skew-adjoint operator. for this we
identify 0,1(k 1/2) as the dual space to 0,0(k 1/2): the duality pairing is pointwise multiplication
followed by integration. the determinant of a skew-adjoint operator has a canonical square root,
the pfaan, as explained in 3. for any vector bundle with connection e   we can form the
coupled dirac operators d(e). the coupled operator is skew-adjoint if e is real.

for a line bundle l we denote the dual by l1 and the nth tensor power ln by ln. thus k 1

g

is the holomorphic tangent bundle of  and k 3/2

,g

is the 3rd power of the dual to k 1/2
,g .

fix a spin structure . then for a pair (g, )  b dene the complex line

(4.2)

l+

 (g, ) = pfa d+

,g(t y ) (cid:2)det d+

,g(k 1

g )(cid:3)(1)

 det g(k 1
g )

and its complex conjugate

(4.3)

l

 (g, ) = pfa d

as (g, ) vary these dene smooth complex line bundles l
remark that the last operator in (4.2) may be rewritten in terms of spinors:

,g(t y ) (cid:2)det d

,g(k 1

 det g(k 1
g ).

g )(cid:3)(1)
  b with metric and connection. we

g(k 1

g ) = d+

,g(k 3/2

,g

)

for any spin structure .

in superstring theory, the spin structures on right- and left-movers are chosen independently and

 , and the path integral over the left-moving fermions is a section of l

are summed over with appropriate weighting. the path integral over the right-moving fermions
is a section of l+
 , for two
independently chosen spin structures  and . the rst factor in the denition of l
 corresponds
to the physical spinor eld, the last factor to the ghosts from gauge xing the dieomorphism group,
and the middle factor to the ghosts from gauge xing the remainder of the superdieomorphism
group. the path integral in the eective theory is carried out over the quotient of the space of

bosons by the subgroup of superdieomorphisms of  which preserve the chosen spin structure.
thus to detect possible anomalies we consider smooth ber bundles  : x  z with typical ber 
together with a map to y :

(4.4)



 y

x

y

z

furthermore, we assume that the relative tangent bundle carries a riemannian metric and spin
structure, and that there is a distribution of horizontal planes on x. this is enough to dene the

17

line bundles (4.2) and (4.3) with metric and connection. in the application to physics z maps into
the quotient of b by the subgroup of dieomorphisms xing the given spin structure. such families
of surfaces are probes which determine the structure of the line bundles l
 . it suces to take
z nite dimensional and compact. the path integral over both right- and left-moving fermions is
a section of l+
 , and it is the triviality of this line bundle over arbitrary families (4.4) which
we investigate.

  l

we now state the basic results for closed oriented surfaces; the proofs follow below. in these
theorems isomorphism means an invertible linear map which preserves the metric and connection.

a trivializable bundle is isomorphic to the trivial bundle with product metric and connection.

theorem 4.5. suppose y is spin and dim y = 10. then for any two spin structures ,  there

exists an isomorphism

 = l+
l+
 .

 is the complex conjugate of l+

 , it follows that l

 is also independent of the spin

since l
structure .

corollary 4.6. suppose y is spin and dim y = 10. then l+
structures , .

  l

 is trivializable for any spin

for  =  the hermitian metric provides the desired trivialization. the result for  6=  follows
immediately from theorem 4.5. the triviality of l+

 is the vanishing of the anomaly.

the next result is relevant to the conformal anomaly, but does not enter into the considerations

  l

of 5. we include it for completeness.
theorem 4.7. suppose y = r10. then l+
the factor of (det g)(5) comes from integrating the boson . (see [f2,2] for a discussion of
the conformal anomaly in the context of the bosonic string.)

  (det g)(5) is trivializable.

proofs

the proof 8 of theorem 4.5 is modelled on [fm], which treats a similar proposition for complex
vector bundles. the real case treated here is simpler. first, the curvature formula (3.1) does not
depend on the spin structure, so the ratio l+
 is at. thus we must show that the holonomy
of this ratio vanishes. now the holonomy of a pfaan line bundle is given by the adiabatic limit
of the exponentiated /2-invariant of the dirac operator on a 3-manifold which bers over the
circle (see (3.2)). theorem 4.5 follows from a more general statement.9

 /l+

8for an alternative proof, see [w2].
9it seems that there is no cohomological formula for this ratio of holonomies (i.e., the left hand side of (4.9))
if we relax the hypotheses w1(v ) = w2(v ) = 0, as we learned in a conversation with john morgan. our proof of
lemma 4.8 is based on the ko-theory formula (4.11).

18

lemma 4.8. suppose p is any compact oriented 3-manifold with two spin structures  and ,
and v  p is a real vector bundle with rank divisible by 8 and with w1(v ) = w2(v ) = 0. then

(4.9)

 
2 

 
2  0

(mod 1).

to prove theorem 4.5 from this lemma, note rst that the last factor in (4.2) does not depend on
for any

the spin structure. next, use the fact that d+ = d and det d(e) = (cid:0)det d+(e)(cid:1)1

complex vector bundle e to rewrite the second factor in (4.2) as a pfaan:

(4.10)

det d+

,g(k 1

g ) = pfa d+

,g(k 1

g  kg

1).

in this expression k 1
to [v ] = [t y ]  [k 1
vanishing w1 and w2.

g  kg
g  kg

1 refers to a rank two real vector bundle. now apply the lemma
1]. assuming y 10 to be oriented and spin, this has rank 8 and

proof of lemma 4.8. a ko-theory version of the index theorem for at bundles [aps2] gives a
topological formula for this dierence of /2-invariants (see (3.3)). let [v ]  ko(p ) denote the
ko-class of v . the dierence of spin structures is a at real bundle, and gives rise to a class
[  ]  ko1(p ; q/z.). let ! : ko1(p ; q/z)  q/z be the direct image map dened by the
spin structure . then the at index theorem asserts

(4.11)

in fact, we will show that

 
2 

 

2  !(cid:0)[v ]  [  ](cid:1)

(mod 1).

(4.12)

[v ]  [  ] = 0

in ko1(p ; q/z).

first, an element [v ]  ko(p ) is determined by rank([v ]), w1([v ]), and w2([v ]). (an element
of ko(p ) is a homotopy class of maps p  z bo, and if the rank and rst two stiefel-whitney
classes are trivial the map lands in bspin, which has trivial 3-skeleton.) so with our hypotheses
[v ] = 8k for some k  z. next, the dierence of spin structures is given by a homotopy class of maps
p  rp, and since p is 3-dimensional by a map p  rp4. the rational (reduced) ko groups
of rp4 vanish, and the reduced group gko(rp4) = z/8z, as was computed by adams [a]. hence
ko1(rp4; q/z) = gko(rp4) = z/8z. it follows that 8[  ] = 0, whence (4.12).
proof of theorem 4.7. we must show that for any family  : x  z of spin surfaces with the usual
geometric data, the line bundle

l = (det d+)5  (det )5  det (k 1) (cid:0)det d+(k 1)(cid:1)1

19

over z is trivial. (for readability, we omit the metric g and spin structure  from the notation
in this proof.) that l is topologically trivial follows from a cohomological computation, thanks
to (3.7). namely, we can write l as the determinant line bundle of the dirac operator d+ coupled
to the virtual complex vector bundle

[w ] = [5  5k 1/2 + k 3/2  k 1]  k(x).

let x = c1(k 1/2)  h 2(x). then

(4.13)

p1(cid:0)[w ](cid:1) = 5x2 + 9x2  4x2 = 0,

and so c1(l) = p1(w ) = 0. the curvature of the natural connection on l also vanishes, since
the curvature (3.1) is computed by a combination of dierential forms with the same coecients
as in (4.13).

it remains to show that the holonomy is trivial. for this we rewrite l (canonically) as a product
of pfaan line bundles of dirac operators coupled to real vector bundles. (for the last factor,

see (4.10)):

(4.14) l =(cid:0)pfa d+(cid:1)10

(cid:0)pfa d+(k 1/2  k 1/2)(cid:1)5

(cid:0)pfa d+(k 3/2  k 3/2)(cid:1) (cid:0)pfa d+(k 1  k 1)(cid:1)1
consider a family of surfaces p  s1 bered over the circle. the holonomy of l around s1 is
the adiabatic limit of the product of  1/2-invariants of the dirac operator dp on p coupled to
the real vector bundles indicated in (4.14). these bundles are associated to the relative tangent
bundle of the bering p  s1. we rewrite these coupled dirac operators as operators which
make sense on any spin 3-manifold. (below we write p = w for a spin 4-manifold w and we
want to extend the operators over w , which may not ber over the circle.) for example, since
t p  c = k 1  k 1  1c, the operators which appear in the rst and last factors in (4.14) may
be combined as

.

(4.15)

dp (11  t p ),

where 11 is the trivial real bundle of rank 11. (what we really compute is the 11th power of the
 1/2-invariant of dp divided by the  1/2-invariant of dp (t p ), but it is convenient to use virtual
bundles as a shorthand for this.) for the second factor in (4.14) we rewrite dp (k 1/2  k 1/2)
on the bered manifold p  s1 as the operator10

10the notation bev is taken from [aps1].

20

bev = (1)p(d  d)

acting on 0(p )2(p ), where p = 0 on 0 and p = 1 on 2. this operator is half the boundary
of the four dimensional signature operator, as explained in [aps1]. an important point for us is
that its -invariant is well-dened as a real number, since the kernel of bev has a cohomological
interpretation so has constant dimension in families. hence /2 (mod 1) is well-dened. for the
third term of (4.14) we rewrite dp (k 3/2  k 3/2) on the bered manifold as

bev(t p )  2bev.

thus the operators which appear in the second and third factors in (4.14) may be combined as

(4.16)

bev(t p  7).

now we use the fact that any spin 3-manifold p bounds a spin 4-manifold w . then by the
atiyah-patodi-singer index theorem for manifolds with boundary [aps1], the  1/2-invariant is
the exponential of a curvature integral over w . the particular curvature polynomial is determined
from (4.15) and (4.16) to be the degree four part of a form we denote schematically by

(4.17)

1
2



a(w )(cid:0)12  ch(t w )(cid:1) 

1
4

l(w )(cid:0)ch(t w )  8(cid:1).

note that t w(cid:12)(cid:12)p= t p  1, which explains the 12 and 8 in (4.17). also, l(w ) is the unstable

characteristic class based on the formal expression
tanh x/2 , as explained in [as1,p. 577]. expressed
in terms of the rst pontrjagin polynomial p1 in the curvature, the degree four part of (4.17) is the
coecient of p1 in

x

)(8  p1) 
which vanishes. thus the holonomy of l is trivial.

(1 



1
2

p1
24

1
4

(4 +

p1
3

)(p1  4),

5 open superstrings and d-branes

statement of results

fix a riemannian manifold y , which we assume to be oriented, spin, and of dimension 10. as
before, this is the background in which the string propagates; now we want to add a d-brane. thus
let q  y be an oriented submanifold, which we need not assume to be connected. the oriented (not
necessarily connected) surface  is now permitted to have a (not necessarily connected) boundary,

and we require the boundary of  to map to q. in other words, the space of bosons is

b = met()  map(cid:0)(, ), (y, q)(cid:1).

21

asking that  map to q imposes a mixture of dirichlet and neumann boundary conditions.
to dene the determinant lines (4.2) and (4.3), we need to impose boundary conditions on the

fermions; the desired boundary conditions are local boundary conditions that are determined by
supersymmetry. these boundary conditions mix right- and left-handed spinor elds, so it is only
the tensor product of the lines l+ and l which makes sense if the boundary is nonempty.

to describe precisely the desired dirac operators on , we rst recall that a spin structure  on 
induces a spin structure on . to see this, x a metric g on  and consider the principal so2-
bundle of oriented orthonormal frames so()  . its restriction to  is canonically trivialized
by the oriented orthonormal frame whose rst element is the outward pointing unit normal. a spin
structure  induces a double cover spin()  so(), and the inverse image of the trivialization
at the boundary is a spin structure on the boundary. that inverse image is a double cover of .

there are two possibilities on each component of . if the double cover is connected, then we
say that the spin structure on that component is trivial, since it bounds a spin structure on a
disk. if the double cover is not connected, then we say that the spin structure on that component

is nontrivial. the spin structure on the entire boundary  is constrained by the fact that it is
the boundary of a spin structure on . as for the complex line bundle k 1/2
,g , it follows from this
discussion that its restriction to  has a canonical real structure, i.e.,

(5.1)

,g = k 1/2
k 1/2

,g

on .

the underlying real bundle determines the spin structure on .

as for closed strings we allow dierent spin structures on the right- and left-movers. thus we

consider pairs of spin structures ,  such that the induced spin structures on  are isomorphic.
now an isomorphism of spin structures on  is only determined up to a sign on each component
of , and we need to x that sign. (the overall sign is irrelevant.) thus part of the data we need

is an isomorphism

(5.2)

 : k 1/2

 (cid:12)(cid:12) k 1/2



(cid:12)(cid:12) .

once the isomorphism is chosen for some metric it is determined for all metrics, so (5.2) is a discrete
topological choice. thus the topological data is a triple (, , ).

let d denote the total dirac operator, which is the sum of the two chiral operators (4.1).
for a map  :   y with ()  q and a metric g on , consider the total dirac operator
d,,,g(t y ), where we use the spin structure  on right-handed spinors and the spin structure 
on left-handed spinor elds. the isomorphism  does not enter into the denition of the dirac
operator, but is included in the notation since it does enter into the boundary condition (5.3)
below. a spinor eld  with values in t y decomposes as  = + +  according to the chiral

22

decomposition of spinors on . the restriction  of  to  takes values in (t y(cid:12)(cid:12)q). now

t y(cid:12)(cid:12)q= t q  ,

where  is the normal bundle to q in y . thus at the boundary we can write

 = 

q + 
 .

the boundary condition for the operator d,,,g(t y ) is then

(5.3)

d,,,g(t y ) :

(+

(+

q) = 
q
 ) = 



the operator d,,,g(t y ) with these boundary conditions is complex skew-adjoint.

there are two other operatorsacting on the ghost eldswhich enter. they appear in the

determinant line of interest:

l,,(g, ) = pfa d,,,g(t y ) (cid:2)det d,,,g(k 1

g  kg

1)(cid:3)1
 det(cid:0) g(k 1

g )  g(kg

1)(cid:1).

for each of the last two factors we ask that the two elds which appear be equal on . this bound-

ary condition makes sense, since on  there is a natural real structure on the inverse canonical
bundle k 1
g . note that in the second factor the boundary condition involves the isomorphism ,
as in (5.3). the eld in the third factor is a complexied tangent vector to the surface, and the

boundary condition is the complexication of the condition that a real tangent vector be tangent
to the boundary. thus the domain of the operator is the complexication of the group of in-

nitesimal dieomorphisms. the boundary condition in the second factor is the odd analog for
superdieomorphisms.

we study l,, as a line bundle over z for families (4.4), where now x has a boundary which

bers over z with typical ber  and (x)  q:

(5.4)



 q

x

y

z

our rst result computes the topologythat is, the rst chern classof the line bundle l,,.

23

theorem 5.5. the isomorphism class of the complex line bundle l,, equals ()()w3()
in h 2(z; z), where w3 is the third stiefel-whitney class. in fact, this line bundle is the complexi-
cation of a real line bundle, and the isomorphism class in h 1(z; z/2z) of the underlying real line
bundle equals ()()w2().

here () denotes integration along the bers of . the rst statement follows from the second

by applying the bockstein homomorphism, which commutes with pushforward and pullback.

as explained at the beginning of 3, for the application to anomalies the topological isomor-
phism class is not ne enough. one needs also to compute the isomorphism class of the canonical

connectionits curvature and holonomy. the theory of the quillen metric and canonical connection
on the determinant line bundle only exists in the literature for families of closed manifolds [bf],
or families of manifolds with boundary and global boundary conditions of atiyah-patodi-singer

type [p]. in our problem we have a family of manifolds with boundary and local boundary condi-
tions. as we will see below, by gluing we identify the index problem on surfaces with boundary
with an index problem on the double manifold, and then we can apply the usual geometric theory of
determinant line bundles on closed manifolds. in 6 we describe a general class of dirac operators
with local boundary conditions and the associated doubling.

 of (4.2). of course, the topology of l+

let x d  z be the family of doubled surfaces, and  = (, , ) the spin structure on the
double obtained by gluing ,  using . as part of the proof of theorem 5.5 we identify l,,
with a twisted version l+
 is determined by w3(), as in
theorem 5.5, but our main result asserts that the holonomy of its natural connection is given by
the second stiefel-whitney class w2().
theorem 5.6. the canonical connection on l+
 is at. consider a family of surfaces with bound-
ary  : x  s1 and the associated family of doubles d : x d  s1. then the holonomy of the
canonical connection around this loop is 1 with the sign given by ()w2()[x]. (see (5.4) for
the notation.)

proofs

the proof of theorem 5.5 proceeds in two main steps. dene an operator d

,,,g(t y ) which

diers from d,,,g(t y ) only by a sign in the boundary condition:

(5.7)

d

,,,g(t y ) :

(+

(+

q) = 
q
 ) = 


the operator d

,,,g(t y ) is also complex skew adjoint. then set

l

,,(g, ) = pfa d

,,,g(t y ) (cid:2)det d,,,g(k 1

g  kg

1)(cid:3)1
 det(cid:0) g(k 1

g )  g(kg

1)(cid:1).

we rst show the following.

24

proposition 5.8. the ratio l,,  (l
isomorphism class in h 1(z; z/2z) is ()()w2().

,,)1 is the complexication of a real line bundle whose

in the process of proving proposition 5.8 we identify l
 (see (4.2))
on the double x d, where as above  = (, , ) is the spin structure on the double obtained by
gluing ,  using . we also identify l,, with a twisted version l+
 . the rst step towards
proving theorem 5.6 is a geometric version of proposition 5.8.

,, with the line bundle l+

proposition 5.9. the canonical connection on the ratio l+
for any family of closed surfaces  : x d  s1 is 1 with the sign given by ()w2()[x ].

 )1 is at, and the holonomy

  (l+

the second step in the proofs of theorem 5.5 and theorem 5.6 is the following.

proposition 5.10. l+
doubled surfaces.

 is trivializable (as a bundle with metric and connection) over a family of

we prove proposition 5.10 directly only for the symmetric case  = ; the result for arbitrary , 
then follows from theorem 4.5.

we give three proofs of proposition 5.8. notice that the line bundle in question is

(5.11)

l,, := (pfa d,,)  (pfa d

,,)1.

first proof of proposition 5.8. a general result [bw, theorem 21.2] for elliptic boundary-value

problems (the agranovic-dynin formula) describes the dependence of the index on local boundary
conditions. the version11 we need is for families of complex skew-adjoint dirac operators.
it
computes the dierence of the ko-indices of d,, and d
,, as the index of a family of operators
on the boundary family (5.4):

(5.12)

indx/z(d,,)  indx/z(d

,,) = indx/z(rp r)  ko2(z).

we must explain the operators p, r, r on the right hand side.

first, p is a zeroth order pseudodierential operator, the calderon projector . we only need its

principal symbol. for that, recall that the spinor elds on the boundary are sections of

(5.13)

(cid:0)k 1/2
  k 1/2

 (cid:1)  ()(t q  ).

also, using (5.1) and (5.2) we identify the two spinor bundles as a single real line bundle s. for

simplicity introduce the notation

(5.14)

f := ()t q

f  := ().

11although (5.12) is undoubtedly true, we do not know of an appearance in the literature, nor have we worked
out a proof. a related theoremfor global boundary conditionsappears in [dz]. in any case the other proofs of
proposition 5.8 do not depend on this.

25

then we rewrite (5.13) as the real bundle

(5.15)

(s  s)  (f  f ) =(cid:0)s  (f  f )(cid:1)  (cid:0)s  (f  f )(cid:1).

let d/ be the standard dirac operator on the boundary circle. then the operator which acts

on (5.14)the boundary operator associated to d,, (see [bw,theorem 12.4])is (cid:16) d/

d/(cid:17)

relative to the decomposition (5.15). the principal symbol of this operator is invertible and self-

adjoint. the calderon projector p has a principal symbol (p ) which is the projection onto the
sum of the eigenspaces with positive eigenvalues. thus for a nonzero cotangent vector  on the

boundary,

(5.16)

(p )() =


(cid:16) 1
(cid:16) 0

0(cid:17) ,
1(cid:17) ,

 > 0;

 < 0,

where we use the orientation of the boundary to give meaning to the sign of .

the operators r, r in (5.12) are vector bundle maps

(5.17)

r, r : (cid:0)s  (f  f )(cid:1)  (cid:0)s  (f  f )(cid:1)  s  (f  f )

whose kernel consists of spinor elds which satisfy the local boundary conditions (5.3), (5.7). rel-
ative to the decompositions shown in (5.17), we write these operators as the matrices

(5.18)

r = ( 1  1 1  1 ) ,
r = ( 1 1 ) .

since r, r are vector bundle maps, they are equal to their principal symbols.

now the principal symbol of the operator rp r which appears in (5.12) is easily computed

from (5.16) and (5.18):

(5.19)

(rp r)() =


( 11 11 )(cid:16) 1
( 11 11 )(cid:16) 0

0(cid:17)(cid:16) 1
1(cid:17)(cid:16) 1

1(cid:17) = ( 1 ) ,
1(cid:17) = ( 11 ) ,

 > 0;

 < 0.

these matrices act on s(f f ). observe that (5.19) is also the symbol of the family of operators

idsf  d/(f )

26

on x  z. since the index only depends on the symbol, and since the index of the identity
operator is trivial, we see that (5.12) reduces to

indx/z (d,,)  indx/z (d

,,) = indx/z(cid:0)d/(f )(cid:1).

the index we are computing lies in ko2(z); it is the index of a family of complex skew-adjoint op-
erators. but d/(f ) is a family of real skew-adjoint operators, so its index lies naturally in ko1(z).
the index we seek in ko2(z) is thus the image of indx/z d/(f ) under the natural map

(5.20)

ko1(z)

[1]

 ko1(pt)  ko1(z) = ko2(z),

where   ko(s1) is the mobius bundle. we are interested in the complex pfaan line bundle,
which in this situation is the complexication of the real pfaan line bundle:

(5.21)

ko1(z)

ypfa r

h 1(z; z/2z)

(5.20)
 ko2(z)

ypfa c



 h 2(z; z)

here  is the bockstein map. so we are reduced to demonstrating a well-known result: for any
bering  : w  z of spin 1-manifolds and any oriented real vector bundle f   w ,

(5.22)

pfa r d/w/z (f ) = w2(f ).

to check (5.22) it suces to take z = s1, so w = s1  s1. endow z with the bounding spin
structure; then the left hand side of (5.22), evaluated on the fundamental class of z, is the image
of indw/z d/(f ) under

(5.23)

z
!

: ko1(s1)  ko2(pt) = z/2z.

by the multiplicative property of the direct imageessentially the thom isomorphism in ko-
theorythis is w

! (cid:0)[f ](cid:1) for

w
!

: ko(w )  ko2(pt) = z/2z

the direct image map. (by the index theorem [as2] this is the mod 2 index of the dirac operator
on w coupled to the real vector bundle f .) since w bounds a spin manifold, we have w
and so

! (cid:0)[1](cid:1) = 0,

w

! (cid:0)[f ](cid:1) = w

! (cid:0)[f   dim f ](cid:1).

27

now x = [f dim f ]  gko(w ) satises w1(x) = w1(f ) = 0, so is determined by w2(x) = w2(f ).

we can arrange the support of x to be contained in a disk in w , and by excision it follows that
! (x) = s 2
w

! (y) for y  gko(s2) with w2(y)[s2] = w2(x)[w ]. finally, the direct image map

(5.24)

s 2
!

: gko(s2)  ko2(pt) = z/2z

is an isomorphism, and the generator of gko(s2) is a bundle with w2 6= 0.
for the other proofs of proposition 5.8 we introduce the bered double x d  z, which is a
family of closed oriented surfaces obtained by gluing x  x along the boundary x. also, the
spin structure  on x/z and  on x/z glue to a spin structure  on x d/z via the isomorphism 
in (5.2). a right-handed spinor eld on x d
 /z can be identied with a pair (+, ): + is a
right-handed spinor eld on x,  is a left-handed spinor eld on x, and + =  on x
,,,g(t y ) (see (5.7)) may be identied12 with the chiral dirac
using . so the operator d
,g(t y ) on the double. note that x d/z has an orientation-reversing involution, but
operator d+
it does not lift to the spin bundle unless  =  and  is the identity.

next, we rewrite the twisted boundary conditions (5.3) on the double, for simplicity on a single
surface . then in the double d there is a collar neighborhood i    d of , where
i  (1, 1). over that neighborhood we have a splitting t y = f  f , using the notation
of (5.14). let  be the real line bundle on d obtained by identifying the trivial real line bundle
on  with the trivial real line bundle on  via the isomorphism 1 on the collar region. then
 is canonically trivial away from the collar, and there is a real vector bundle e  d which is
canonically t y away from the collar and f  (  f ) on the collar. we identify d,,,g(t y )
,g(e) on d; the line bundle  incorporates the sign in (5.3). therefore, the ratio (5.11)
on  with d+
for a family x  z of surfaces with boundary is

(5.25)

pfa c d+

(cid:0)(  1)  f (cid:1)

for the family of chiral dirac operators on the relative double x d  z. note that 1 is supported
in the collar region i  x and is pulled back from the rst factor. we identify

[  1]  ko(i, i)

as the (hopf bundle) generator. also, up to isomorphism f  is pulled back from the second
factor x:

12the identication of the indices under gluing is discussed in a similar situation in [f3,2]. the gluing indicated
here only gives continuous spinor elds on the double; it is nicer to glue along an open cylinder near the boundary,
as in [df,iv]. we generalize and give more details in the second part of section 6.

[f ] =(cid:2)()(cid:3)  ko(x).

28

second proof of proposition 5.8. by the excision property of the index, (5.25) is

where

pfa c (i,i)x/z

!

(cid:0)(  1)  [f ](cid:1),

(i,i)x/z
!

: ko(cid:0)(i, i)  x(cid:1)  ko2(z)

is the direct image map. this factors as

!

(cid:0)[  1](cid:1)  x/z

!

(5.26)

(i,i)x/z
!

(cid:0)(  1)  [f ](cid:1) = (i,i)

multiplication by [  1] is (5.20), and the computation of x/z

(cid:0)[f ](cid:1)  ko1(pt)  ko1(z).
(cid:0)[f ](cid:1) proceeds as in the rst
third proof of proposition 5.8. assume rst that rank f  is even. write x = (  1)  f . then
from the whitney sum formula we compute the stiefel-whitney classes of the virtual bundle x:

proof. (see (5.22) and the argument which follows.)

!

w1(x) = w2(x) = w3(x) = 0,
w4(x) = w1()  w3(f ).

thus x is orientable and spinable, so by (3.6) the isomorphism class of the pfaan line bundle is a
pushforward in cohomology:

where

x d/z



c1 pfa d+



 (x) = x d/z

(cid:0)(x)(cid:1),
: h 4(x d)  h 2(z)

and  is the characteristic class of a spin bundle with 2 = p1. by excision, we compute on the
tubular neighborhood (i, i)  x and extend to x d. we claim

(5.27)

(x) = (cid:0)w1()  w2(f )(cid:1)  h 4(cid:0)(i, i)  x(cid:1);

then proposition 5.8 follows from (5.21) and the fact that the bockstein  commutes with push-
forward. to prove the claim, we work in the universal situation where the bundle x = (  1)  f 
lives over s1  bso. first, since    is trivial, it follows that (x) is torsion of order two.
since all of the torsion in h (bso) has order two (see [bh,30]) it follows that (x) is deter-
mined by its image in real cohomology, which vanishes, and its image in z/2z cohomology, which
is w4(x) = w1()  w3(f ). the integral class in (5.27) is also torsion of order two and reduces
mod 2 to w1()  w3(f ).

29

if rank f  is odd, we replace f  with f  plus a trivial line bundle and apply the previous. so
 (  1) is trivial. this follows from excision and the

we are reduced to proving that pfa d+
factorization (5.26).

we now prove proposition 5.9. notice that the ratio of bundles which appears in this proposition

is (5.25).

proof of proposition 5.9. the curvature (3.1) vanishes since virtual bundle (  1)  f  has rank
zero and is at. to compute the holonomy (3.2) around a family of closed manifolds  : x  s1,
we endow the base s1 with the bounding spin structure and induce a spin structure on x ; then
the holonomy is the ratio of the  1/2-invariant of   f   x to the  1/2-invariant of f   x .
(there is no adiabatic limit necessary since the connection is at.) by a real version of the at
index theorem [aps2], the dierence of these bundles determines a class x  ko1(x ; z/2z),
! (x)  ko4(pt; z/2z) = z/2z (see (3.3)). as in previous
and the ratio of the holonomies is x
arguments we use excision to localize the computation to (i, i)  x , where we write x as the
product of [  1]  ko1(cid:0)(i, i); z/2z(cid:1) and [f ]  ko(x ). thus
(cid:0)[f ](cid:1)  z/2z.

(cid:0)[  1](cid:1)  x

!

! (x) = (i,i)
x

!

the rst factor is 1 and the second is computed in (5.23)(5.24) to be ()w2()[x ], as desired.
we proceed to the second step of the proof of theorem 5.5, which is the proof of proposi-
 is trivializable geometrically, that is, as a bundle with metric

tion 5.10. we demonstrate that l+
and connection.

proof of proposition 5.10. consider rst the case when  =  and  is the identity map. then

the orientation-reversing involution of the double manifold lifts to the spin bundle. in this case
we claim that each of the three factors in (4.2) is trivializable. first, consider a family of surfaces
with boundary  : x  z and the associated family of doubles d : x d  z. the determinant and
pfaan bundles are at since the curvature (3.1) is the integral over the bers of d of a dierential
form which is invariant under the orientation-reversing involution on the double, so vanishes. next,
we investigate the holonomy. consider a family of surfaces with boundary  : x  s1 and the
associated double d : x d  s1. we endow s1 with the bounding spin structure and lift to a spin
structure on x d. the holonomy of the rst factor of (4.2) is computed by a certain  1/2-invariant
and that of each of the last two factors by a  -invariant. since x d is the spin double of x, we
compute these invariants using (3.5). thus in each case the invariant is (1)(k
2), where k is the
number of components of x with a nontrivial index (or mod 2 index) of the appropriate boundary

dirac operator. for the last factor the operator on any component of the boundary is the boundary
of a family of operators on the disk, so the index vanishes. for the rst factor we note that the
bundle ()(t y )  x is trivializable, since it is oriented and spin, and now since the base s1

30

bounds a disk the mod 2 index vanishes. a similar argument applies to the second factor: rewrite
the determinant line bundle as a pfaan line bundle, as in (4.10).

for general , ,  the result now follows from theorem 4.5.

this completes the proofs of theorem 5.5 and theorem 5.6.

the a- and b-fields

6 additional remarks

fields which are locally dierential forms often have a nontrivial global structure. this was
explained a bit in 1; here we add a few details. mathematical foundations for the low degree case
needed here are developed in [b], though we do not use that language.13 for a related exposition,
see [def,6].

we distinguish four types of p-form elds, two types with nontrivial global structure together

with their eld strengths. for p small we can say what they are in familiar geometric language:

(6.1)

notation

1
2

z

0
1

p

1

2

0

1

global description

global p-form?

connection on principal t-bundle

curvature of connection

section of principal t-bundle with connection

covariant derivative of section

no

yes

no

yes

a principal circle (t) bundle over a manifold m is a manifold p on which t acts freely with
quotient m . the bundle p  m is classied topologically by its rst chern class in integral
degree two cohomology. equivalently, we can view p as the set of unit vectors in a hermitian line
bundle over m . a connection is an imaginary 1-form on p which satises some ane equationsit

is not a dierential form on the base m . the notion that a 1-form in eld theory is often such
a connection is quite familiar. the curvature is a closed 2-form on the base m whose periods
are integer multiples of 2i. a section, or trivialization, of p is a map m  p which splits the
projection p  m . equivalently, it is a unit norm section of the associated hermitian line bundle.
in general such sections exist locally; the chern class of p is an obstruction to global existence.
the covariant derivative of a section is the pullback of the connection form to m , a global 1-form

which is not necessarily closed.

13as remarked in the introduction, a non- cech mathematical theory adequate for all examples in string theory

and m -theory is lacking.

31

the analog of the rst two lines in lower degree may also be stated in familiar terms:

(6.2)

notation

0
1

z

p

0

1

global description

global p-form?

map to t

log derivative of map

no

yes

an object in the rst line is a map g : m  t. the corresponding eld strength d log g is a global
closed 1-form on m whose periods are integer multiples of 2i. note that (6.2) is the special case
of the last two lines of (6.1) when the circle bundle with connection is trivial and trivialized.

the b-eld on spacetime y is an element of 2(y ). in other words, it is the p = 2 analog of the
rst line of (6.1) and (6.2). topologically, it is classied by a characteristic class b  h 3(y ; z),
analogous to the chern class of a circle bundle in integral h 2. geometrically, we describe b in
terms of an open cover {ui} of y . on each open set ui there is a 2-form bi  2(yi), but on
overlaps uij = ui  uj they do not necessarily agree. rather, there is a 1-form ij  1(uij) such
that

(6.3)

bi  bj = dij

on uij.

similarly, on the triple intersection uijk = ui  uj  uk there is given a circle-valued function
gijk : uijk  t such that

(6.4)

d log gijk = exp(cid:2)1(jk  ik + ij)(cid:3)

on uijk.

the gijk satisfy the cocycle relation

(6.5)

gjk g1

ik gij g1

ijk = 1

on uijk.

the b-eld is the triple b = {bi, ij, gijk}, which may be conveniently placed in a double complex:

(6.6)

2

1

0

bi  0

ij  0

gijk  0
uijk
uijk

uij

ui

32

note dbi = dbj = h is a global 3-form which is closed with 2iz periods; it is the eld strength
of the b-eld. the boxes around the three zeros in (6.6) are shorthand for equations (6.3)(6.5).
the horizontal arrows denote the cech dierential and the vertical arrows denote plus or minus
the de rham dierential d.

in the bosonic string with a d-brane, the a-eld on the brane  : q  y is an element of 1(q),
that is, a generalization of the third line of (6.1) to p = 1. however, it is related to the restriction of
the b-eld to the brane in a specic way. namely, in terms of the restriction of the covering {ui}
to q, we write a = {ai, hij} in the diagram:

(6.7)

2

1

0

bi

ai  ij

hij  gijk
uijk
uij

ui

we impose equations at the two boxes. specically,

(6.8)

aj  ai  d log hij = ij
ik hij = gijk

hjk h1

on uij,
on uijk.

we make two remarks about these equations. first, if b = 0 so that the right hand sides of (6.8)
vanish, then {hij} are the transition functions of a circle bundle and {ai} patch to a connection
on it. in other words, if b = 0 then the a-eld is a connection on a circle bundlean element
of 1(q) as in the rst line of (6.1). this is the usual interpretation of the gauge eld on the
brane. second, for general b-elds we can say that a is a trivialization of the restriction b,
where the precise meaning of trivialization is (6.8). by analogy consider the case one degree

lower, where b is a circle bundle with connection and a a trivialization. there are two possible
meanings to trivialization in this context: topological and geometric. a topological trivialization
corresponds to the second equation of (6.8) only. a geometric trivialization corresponds to imposing
three equationsthe equations of (6.8) plus the equation dai = bi. the intermediate case of
two equations which we use has no analog one degree lower. note that in our case the dierence
dai  bi is a global 2-form which is not necessarily closed.
it is the analog of the covariant
derivative in the fourth line of (6.1). for b = 0 it is the curvature of the abelian gauge eld a.

now we make contact with the discussion in 1. for the bosonic string the term (1.10) in
the action is a well-dened number for each eld conguration. one degree down, where b is a
connection on a circle bundle and a a trivialization of b, this term corresponds to the parallel
transport along a path viewed as a number using the trivialization on the boundary. hence this part

33

of the action is well-dened as a functionnot a section of a line bundleso does not contribute
to the anomaly.

in the superstring what was explained in 1 is that since the rst factor in (1.11) is a section of
a nontrivial line bundle (over the space of metrics on  and maps   y ), we must modify the
global interpretation of the a-eld in order that the product of the last two factors be a section

of the inverse line bundle with connection. in our present context we describe the modication as
follows. first, the second stiefel-whitney class w2() of the normal bundle  to q in y determines
a at bw2()  2(q), dened in (1.13). in terms of the open covering {ui} it can be written as

3

2

1

0

0

0  0

0 

ui

uij

0

wijk 
uijk

0

uijk

where {wijk = 1} is a cech cocycle for w2(). then the a-eld is an isomorphism

a : bw2()  b,

where isomorphism is understood in the sense of equations (6.8), as explained above. in other
words, a = {ai, hij} ts into a slight modication of (6.7):

2

1

0

bi

ai  ij

hij  gijk/wijk
uij

uijk

ui

with this a-eld (1.10) is no longer a function, but rather a section of a at line bundle with

connection over the space of parameters. the holonomy of that bundle is computed by integrating
w2() = w2() over the boundary of the surface mapping in, and this precisely cancels the line
bundle with connection from the fermionic determinants (as computed in theorem 5.6). thus the
product of terms in (1.11) is a section of a trivializable line bundle with connection: there is no
anomaly.

34

the existence of an isomorphism in the sense of equations (6.8) is equivalent to the existence of

a topological isomorphism, which only exists if

(6.9)

b = w3(),

where b  h 3(y ; z) is the topological characteristic class of the b-eld and w3() is the third
stiefel-whitney class of the normal bundle. equation (6.9), which is the same as (1.12), is a

topological restriction on branes which may occur in a spacetime y with given b-eld.
it was
rst discovered in a nonperturbative setting in [w3]; the present paper derives (6.9) from the

perturbative string.

note in particular that if b = 0, then (6.9) asserts that  admits a spinc structure. in that case
the a-eld, which trivializes bw2() in the sense we described here, is a spinc connection. (the
reader should relate our cech description with other denitions of spinc connections.)

dirac operators with local boundary conditions 14

immediately following the rst proof of the index theorem on closed manifolds, atiyah, bott, and

singer [ab] proved a topological index theorem for general elliptic operators with local boundary
conditions. they observed that there is a topological obstruction to the existence of local boundary

conditions, and that local boundary conditions, when they exist, lift the symbol class of the operator
in k-theory to a relative class. it is in terms of this lifted class that one obtains a topological index
formula. later, atiyah, patodi, and singer [aps1] introduced global boundary conditions for rst-

order dirac operators, and these always exist. perhaps for that reason it is global, rather than
local, boundary conditions which appear in most of the index theory literature. in this subsection
we generalize the local boundary conditions discussed in 5 to dirac operators in arbitrary even
dimensions, and then we indicate how geometric aspects of index theory may be treated by doubling.
(doubling is a common technique in the theory of elliptic boundary-value problems in at space
as well, and it is also the main technique in the atiyah-bott paper.) we only indicate a rough

outline of the arguments; we have not carried through the details. for simplicity we deal only with
complex dirac operators, though the discussion applies to real dirac operators as well.

as an aside, we remark that generally in physics boundary conditions play at least two dierent
roles. an object (such as a d-brane or the earths ocean) may have a boundary, at which one
imposes local boundary conditions. the normal vector to such a boundary is ordinarily spacelike.

on the other hand, an important physical and mathematical technique is to cut on a spacelike
surface to reveal a quantum state. the normal vector to such a boundary is generally timelike if
we work with lorentz signature, and otherwise spacelike. on such a cut, one uses global boundary

conditions, similar to those used in index theory in factorization theorems, such as the one leading
to (3.5).

14we are indebted to xianzhe dai for discussions about the issues treated here.

35

consider an even-dimensional spinc manifold x with boundary. let s denote the spinor
bundles on x. let  be the unit outward normal vector eld at the boundary. the cliord

multiplication

(6.10)

c() : s+(cid:12)(cid:12)x s(cid:12)(cid:12)x

is an isomorphism. suppose e  x are complex vector bundles (with connection) and we are
given an isomorphism

at the boundary. then the dirac operator

 : e+(cid:12)(cid:12)x e(cid:12)(cid:12)x

(6.11)

dx : s+  e+  s  e  s  e+  s+  e

admits the local boundary condition

(6.12)

(cid:0)c()  (cid:1)(cid:0)+(cid:12)(cid:12)x(cid:1) = (cid:12)(cid:12)x

on a pair (+, ) of sections of (s+  e+, s  e). the boundary-value problems considered
in section 5 are special cases. note that dierent spin (or spinc) structures on s+, s may be
accommodated by tensoring e with a real (or complex) line bundle. we propose that this class of
dirac operators has a good geometric index theory, analogous to that of dirac operators on closed

manifolds.

it is not hard to check that (6.12) denes elliptic boundary conditions (as described in [ab], for

example). therefore, the dirac operator enjoys the same basic analytic properties as those of a
dirac operator on a closed manifold: the spectrum is discrete, there is a meromorphic -function,
etc. there is no problem carrying out geometric constructions, such as the determinant line bundle

with metric and connection, in families of such operators. from such constructions one will obtain
formulas for geometric invariants, such as curvature and holonomy of the determinant line bundle,

directly on x. in the remainder of this section we indicate how to reduce these constructions to
the closed case by doubling.

we restrict to manifolds x whose riemannian metric is a product near the boundary. let
x d denote the smooth closed riemannian manifold obtained by gluing x to x along x. we
glue s+  x and s  x using (6.10) to obtain the plus spinor bundle s+
x d  x d, and similarly
glue e+  x to e  x to form a complex vector bundle e  x d (with connection). our goal
is to precisely relate the boundary-value problem (6.11), (6.12) with the dirac operator d+
x d(e) on
the double. we adapt the gluing argument of [df,iv], which we summarize in figures 1 and 2.

36

c1

 ,
+

x

+


c
2



d
x



c3



figure 1: gluing spinor fields

fl

1

0.5

fr

-1

0

1

figure 2: cutoff functions

let  denote the space of smooth sections, regarded as an inner product space using the l2 metric.
the gures summarize a gluing map

u : x(s+  e+  s  e)  x d(s+  e)  c3(s+  e),

which for appropriate cuto functions is an isometry. the spinor elds (+, ) in the domain
satisfy the boundary condition (6.12), and the spinor eld  on c3 satises

where t is the axial coordinate on the cylinder. more explicitly, the gluing map on cylinders is

(t = 1) = (t = 1),

(t)(cid:19) =(cid:18) fl(t)
(cid:18) (t)
fr(t)

fr(t)

(t)(cid:19) ,
fl(t)(cid:19)(cid:18) +(t)

37

+,  on c1,  on c2,  on c3.

the cuto functions fl, fr : [1, 1]  [0, 1] satisfy

fl(cid:0)[1,1/2](cid:1) = fr(cid:0)[1/2, 1](cid:1) = 1

f 2
l + f 2

r = 1

fl(cid:0)[1/2, 1](cid:1) = fr(cid:0)[1,1/2](cid:1) = 0

fl(x) = fr(x).

the same gluing works in a family of operators; the result is an isometry of innite dimensional
vector bundles of spinor elds.

the claim is that the determinant line bundle for the dirac operator on c3 is canonically trivial,
and so, after some more argument, in such a family the determinant line bundle (with its metric
and connection) for the boundary-value problem on x is canonically isomorphic to the determinant
line bundle for the closed manifold x d.

so as not to rely on the details of this argument, which we may present elsewhere, in this paper
we adapted the practical point of view of dening the metric and connection directly from the
dirac operator on the double.

references

[a]
[ab]

j. f. adams, vector-elds on spheres, bull. amer. math. soc 68 (1962), 3941.
m. f. atiyah, r. bott, the index problem for manifolds with boundary, dierential

[aps1]

[aps2]

[as1]

[as2]

[b]

[bf]

[bw]

[bh]

analysis, bombay colloq., 1964, oxford univ. press, london, 1964, pp. 175186.
m. f. atiyah, v. k. patodi, i. m. singer, spectral asymmetry and riemannian geometry.
i, math. proc. cambridge philos. soc. 77 (1975), 4369.

m. f. atiyah, v. k. patodi, i. m. singer, spectral asymmetry and riemannian geometry.
iii, math. proc. cambridge philos. soc. 79 (1976), 7199.

m. f. atiyah, i. m. singer, the index of elliptic operators iii, ann. of math. 87 (1968),
546604.
m. f. atiyah, i. m. singer, the index of elliptic operators v, ann. of math. 93 (1971),

139149.
j.-l. brylinski, loop spaces, characteristic classes and geometric quantization, progr.
math., 107, birkhauser, boston, ma, 1993.

j. m. bismut, d. s. freed, the analysis of elliptic families i: metrics and connections on
determinant bundles, commun. math. phys. 106 (1986), 159176; ii: dirac operators,
eta invariants, and the holonomy theorem of witten, commun. math. phys. 107 (1986),

103163.
b. booss-bavnbek, k. p. wojciechowski, elliptic boundary problems for dirac opera-

tors, birkhauser, boston, 1993.
a. borel, f. hirzebruch, characteristic classes and homogeneous spaces. ii, amer. j.
math. 81 (1959), 315382.

38

[cy]

[df]

[dz]

[def]

[f1]

[f2]

[f3]

[fm]

[ghm]

[h]

[mm]

[p]

[s]

[w1]
[w2]

[w3]

[w4]

y.-k. e. cheung and z. yin,, anomalies, branes, and currents, nucl. phys. b517
(1998), 185-196, hep-th/9803931.

x. dai, d. s. freed, -invariants and determinant lines, j. math. phys. 35 (1994),
51555194.
x. dai, w. zhang, splitting of the family index, commun. math. phys. 182 (1996),

303317.
p. deligne, d. s. freed, classical eld theory, quantum fields and strings: a course
for mathematicians (p. deligne, p. etingof, d. s. freed, l. c. jerey, d. kazhdan,

j. w. morgan, d. r. morrison, e. witten, eds.), volume 1, american mathematical
society, providence, ri, 1999, pp. 137225.

d. s. freed, on determinant line bundles, mathematical aspects of string theory, ed.
s. t. yau, world scientic publishing, 1987.
d. s. freed, determinants, torsion, and strings, commun. math. phys 107 (1986),

483513.
d. s. freed, two index theorems in odd dimensions, commun. anal. geom. 6 (1998),
317329, dg-ga/9601005.

d. s. freed, j. w. morgan, appendix to [f2], commun. math. phys 107 (1986), 510
513.
m. green, j. a. harvey, and g. moore, i-brane inow and anomalous couplings on

d-branes, class. quant. grav. 14 (1997), 47-52, hep-th/9605033.
p. horava, type iia d-branes, k theory, and matrix theory, hep-th/9812135.

g. moore and r. minasian, k theory and ramond-ramond charge, jhep 9711:002,
1997, hep-th/9710230.
p. piazza, determinant bundles, manifolds with boundary and surgery, commun. math.

phys. 178 (1996), 597626; ii. spectral sections and surgery rules for anomalies, com-
mun. math. phys. 193 (1998), 105124.
a. sen, tachyon condensation on the brane antibrane system, jhep 9808:012, 1998,

hep-th/9805170.
e. witten, global gravitational anomalies, commun. math. phys. 100 (1985), 197229.
e. witten, global anomalies in string theory, anomalies, geometry, and topology,

edited by a. white, world scientic, 1985, pp. 6199.
e. witten, baryons and branes in anti-de sitter space, jhep 9807:006, 1998, hep-

th/9805112.
e. witten, d-branes and k-theory, jhep 9812:025, 1998, hep-th/9810188.

department of mathematics, university of texas, austin, tx 78712
e-mail address: dafr@math.utexas.edu

institute for advanced study, olden lane, princeton nj, 08540
e-mail address: witten@sns.ias.edu

39

