dynamical supersymmetry breaking

yael shadmi

department of particle physics

weizmann institute of science, rehovot 76100, israel

and

physics department

princeton university, princeton, nj 08544, usa

yuri shirman

physics department

princeton university, princeton, nj 08544, usa

supersymmetry is one of the most plausible and theoretically motivated frameworks for extending
the standard model. however, any supersymmetry in nature must be a broken symmetry. dynam-
ical supersymmetry breaking (dsb) is an attractive idea for incorporating supersymmetry into a
successful description of nature. the study of dsb has recently enjoyed dramatic progress, fueled
by advances in our understanding of the dynamics of supersymmetric eld theories. these advances
have allowed for direct analysis of dsb in strongly coupled theories, and for the discovery of new
dsb theories, some of which contradict early criteria for dsb. we review these criteria, emphasizing
recently discovered exceptions. we also describe, through many examples, various techniques for
directly establishing dsb by studying the infrared theory, including both older techniques in regions
of weak coupling, and new techniques in regions of strong coupling. finally, we present a list of
representative dsb models, their main properties, and the relations between them.

submitted to reviews of modern physics

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

0
3

 
 

1
v
5
2
2
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1

i

ii

iii

introduction

contents

generalities
a vacuum energy  the order parameter of susy breaking, and f and d atness . . . . . . . . . .
b the goldstino . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
c tree-level breaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 oraifeartaigh models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2 fayet-iliopoulos breaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

indirect criteria for dsb
a the witten index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
b global symmetries and supersymmetry breaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
c
gaugino condensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
d examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 spontaneously broken global symmetry: the su (5) model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2 gaugino condensation: the su (5) model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3 r-symmetry and susy breaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4 generalizations of the su (5) model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

iv direct analysis: calculable models

a the 32 model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
b the 41 model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

v

direct analysis: strongly-coupled theories
a supersymmetry breaking through connement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
b establishing supersymmetry breaking through a dual theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
c integrating matter in and out . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

vi violations of indirect criteria for dsb

a non-chiral models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 susy qcd with singlets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2 the intriligator-thomas-izawa-yanagida model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
b quantum removal of flat directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
c supersymmetry breaking with no r-symmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

vii dsb models and model building tools

a discarded generator models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
b supersymmetry breaking from an anomalous u (1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
c list of models and literature guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

appendixes

a

some results on susy gauge theories
1 notations and superspace lagrangian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2 d-at directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
pure supersymmetric su (nc) theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4 nf < nc: aeck-dine-seiberg superpotential
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5 nf = nc : quantum moduli space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6 nf = nc + 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7 nf > nc + 1 : dual descriptions of the infrared physics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8 other models

3

5
5
7
8
8
10

11
11
12
14
15
15
15
16
16

17
17
20

21
21
23
25

27
27
27
29
31
33

34
35
36
37

41

41
41
43
43
44
45
46
47
48

2

i. introduction

supersymmetry (susy), which rotates bosons into fermions and vice versa, is a beautiful theoretical idea. but
nature is certainly not supersymmetric. if it were, we would see a fermionic partner for each known gauge boson,
and a scalar partner for each known fermion, with degenerate masses. but experimentalists have been looking for
superpartners long and hard, and so far in vain, pushing the limits on superpartner masses to roughly above a
100 gev. thus, any discussion of supersymmetry in nature is necessarily a discussion of broken supersymmetry.

still, even broken supersymmetry is theoretically more appealing than no supersymmetry at all. first, super-
symmetry provides a solution to the gauge hierarchy problem. without supersymmetry, the scalar higgs mass is
quadratically divergent, so that the natural scale for it is the fundamental scale of the theory, e.g., the planck scale,
many orders of magnitude above the electroweak scale. in a supersymmetric theory, the mass of the scalar higgs is
tied to the mass of its fermionic superpartner. since fermion masses are protected by chiral symmetries, the higgs
mass can naturally be around the electroweak scale, and radiative corrections do not destabilize this hierarchy. this
success is not spoiled even when explicit supersymmetry-breaking terms are added to the lagrangian of the theory,
as long as these terms are soft, that is, they only introduce logarithmic divergences, but no quadratic divergences,
into scalar masses. the appearance of explicit supersymmetry-breaking terms in the low-energy eective theory can
be theoretically justied if the underlying theory is supersymmetric, yet the vacuum state breaks supersymmetry
spontaneously.

while spontaneously broken supersymmetry would explain the stability of the gauge hierarchy against radiative
corrections, it still does not explain the origin of the hierarchy, that is, the origin of the small mass ratios in the
theory. indeed if supersymmetry were broken at the classical level (tree level), the scale of the soft terms would be
determined by explicit mass parameters in the supersymmetric lagrangian, and one would still have to understand
why such parameters are so much smaller than the planck scale. however, the origin of the hierarchy can be
understood if supersymmetry is broken dynamically (witten, 1981a). by dynamical supersymmetry breaking
(dsb) we mean that supersymmetry is broken spontaneously in a theory that possesses supersymmetric vacua at the
tree level, with the breaking triggered by dynamical eects. the crucial point about dsb is that if supersymmetry
is unbroken at tree-level, supersymmetric non-renormalization theorems (wess and zumino, 1974; ferrara-iliopoulos-
zumino, 1974; grisaru-rocek-siegel, 1979) imply that it remains unbroken to all orders in perturbation theory, and
can therefore only be broken by non-perturbative eects, which are suppressed by roughly e82/g2
, where g is the
coupling. the electroweak scale is related to the size of the soft supersymmetry breaking terms, and thus it is
proportional to the supersymmetry breaking scale. the latter is suppressed by the exponential above, and can easily
be of the correct size, about 17 orders of magnitude below the planck scale.

in addition, supersymmetry, or more precisely, local supersymmetry, provides the only known framework for a
consistent description of gravity, in the context of string theory.
if indeed the underlying fundamental physics is
described by string theory, one can contemplate two qualitatively dierent scenarios. one is that susy is directly
broken by stringy eects. then, however, the susy breaking scale is generically around the string scale (barring new
and better understanding of string vacua), and thus the gauge hierarchy problem is not solved by supersymmetry.
therefore, we shall focus here on a second possible scenario, namely, that in the low-energy limit, string theory
gives rise to an eective eld theory, and supersymmetry is spontaneously broken by the dynamics of this low-energy
eective theory.

the aim of this review is then to describe the phenomenon of dynamical supersymmetry breaking in eld the-
ories with n = 1 global supersymmetry. (n counts the number of supersymmetries. for n = 1 there are four
supersymmetry charges and this is the smallest amount of supersymmetry allowed in four dimensions.)
the restriction on n comes from the fact that only n = 1 supersymmetry has chiral matter, which we need in the
low-energy theory if it is to contain the standard model. moreover, theories with n > 1 supersymmetry are believed
to have an exact moduli space and thus are not expected to exhibit dynamical supersymmetry breaking.
the restriction to global supersymmetry still allows us to answer most of the questions we would be interested
in. this situation is quite analogous to studying the breaking of a gauged bosonic symmetry in say, a theory with
scalar matter. in that case one can determine the pattern of symmetry breaking just by studying the scalar potential.
similarly, we shall be able to determine whether supersymmetry is broken, and, if the theory is weakly coupled, what
the vacuum energy and the light spectrum are. from our perspective, the most relevant consequence of gauging
supersymmetry is the analogue of the higgs mechanism by which the massless fermion accompanying supersymmetry
breaking, the goldstino, is eaten by the gravitino.

as we shall see, supersymmetry is broken if and only if the vacuum energy is non-zero. furthermore, as we mentioned
above, if supersymmetry is unbroken at tree level, it can only be broken by non-perturbative eects. thus studying
supersymmetry breaking requires understanding the non-perturbative dynamics of gauge theories in the infrared.
fortunately, in recent years, there has been tremendous progress in understanding the dynamics of supersymmetric

3

eld theories.

the potential of a supersymmetric theory is determined by two quantities, the kahler potential, which contains the
kinetic terms for the matter elds, and the superpotential, a holomorphic function of the matter elds which controls
their yukawa interactions. holomorphy, together with the symmetries of the theory, may be used to determine the
physical degrees of freedom and the superpotential of the infrared theory (seiberg, 1994; seiberg, 1995). since the
latter two are precisely the ingredients needed for studying supersymmetry breaking, this progress has fueled the
discovery of many new supersymmetry breaking theories, as well as new techniques for establishing supersymmetry
breaking.

the structure of this article is as follows. we start by describing general properties of supersymmetry breaking
and studying examples of tree level breaking in section ii. in section iii, we discuss indirect methods for nding
theories with dynamical supersymmetry breaking, and for establishing supersymmetry breaking. as we shall see,
these methods direct the search for supersymmetry breaking towards chiral theories with no at directions, preferably
possessing an anomaly free r-symmetry. these criteria do not amount to necessary conditions for supersymmetry
breaking, and we shall point out loopholes in the indirect methods which allow the possibility of supersymmetry
breaking in theories which violate all of the above requirements. recent developments have led to the discovery of
such susy breaking theories and we shall postpone the discussion of representative examples to section vi. still,
some of the indirect methods we shall describe, most notably, the breaking of a global symmetry in a theory with no
at directions, provide the most convincing evidence for supersymmetry breaking in theories that cannot be directly
analyzed.

in sections iv and v we turn to theories that can be directly analyzed in the infrared. in the early 80s, such studies
were limited to a semi-classical analysis in regions of weak coupling, and we shall describe such analyses in section iv.
the main development in recent years has been the better understanding of supersymmetric theories in regions of
strong coupling, and we shall study supersymmetry breaking in such theories in section v. in both cases, the analysis
of supersymmetry breaking involves two ingredients. the rst is identifying the correct degrees of freedom of the
theory, in terms of which the kahler potential is non-singular. in all the theories we shall study, in the interior of the
moduli space, these are either the conned variables, or the variables of a dual theory. 1 indeed, we shall see that
duality (seiberg, 1995)the fact that dierent uv theories may lead to the same infrared physicscan be a useful
tool for establishing supersymmetry breaking, as one can sometimes pick a more convenient theory in which to study
whether supersymmetry is broken or not. a second, related ingredient is nding the exact superpotential in terms of
the light, physical degrees of freedom.

having established these two ingredients, at low energies one then typically has a theory of chiral superelds, with
all gauge dynamics integrated out, with a known superpotential. the problem of establishing supersymmetry breaking
is then reduced to solving a system of equations to check whether or not the superpotential can be extremized.

although the results we shall use on the infrared degrees of freedom and the exact superpotential apply to super-
symmetric theories, they may still be used to argue for supersymmetry breaking, since the theories we shall study
in this way are obtained by perturbing a supersymmetric theory. for a suciently small perturbation, the scale of
supersymmetry breaking can be made suciently small, so that we can work above this scale and still use known
results on the infrared supersymmetric theory. if supersymmetry is indeed broken in the theory, the breaking should
persist even as the perturbation is increased. otherwise, the theory undergoes a phase transition as some coupling
is varied, being supersymmetric in some region and non-supersymmetric in another. however, one does not expect
supersymmetric theories to undergo phase transitions as couplings are varied (seiberg and witten, 1994; intriligator
and seiberg, 1994).

having learned various techniques for the analysis of dsb, we use these in section vi to study a few examples of
theories that break supersymmetry dynamically even though they violate some of the criteria described in section iii.
perhaps the most disappointing aspect of the recent progress in our understanding of supersymmetry breaking
is that it still has not yielded any organizing principle to the study and classication of supersymmetry-breaking
theories.
in section vii we shall describe one method for generating new supersymmetry-breaking theories from
known theories. however, this is far from a full, systematic classication. nor can we tell immediately, without
detailed analysis, whether a specic theory breaks supersymmetry or not. for these reasons we nd it useful to
present a rough survey of known models in section vii, pointing out their main features, the relations between
them, and where applicable, their relevant properties for model-building purposes. while we shall see many dierent
mechanisms by which supersymmetry is broken in these examples, the breaking is almost always the consequence of
the interplay between instanton eects and a tree-level superpotential.

1at the boundary of moduli space, the microscopic degrees of freedom will often be more appropriate.

4

in the body of this review we assume that the reader is familiar with the general properties of supersymmetric eld
theories and rely heavily on symmetries and a number of exact non-perturbative results obtained in recent years. the
reader who is just beginning the study of supersymmetry should rst consult the appendix, where we briey present
basic facts about supersymmetry and relevant results to make our presentation self-contained. several excellent
reviews of the recent progress in the study of strongly coupled susy gauge theories exist, see for example intriligator
and seiberg (1996), peskin (1996), and shifman (1998). for introductory material on susy see for example, bagger
and wess (1991) and nilles (1984).

another area requiring further study is the analysis of supersymmetry-breaking vacua, their symmetries and light
spectra, in strongly coupled theories. one may hope that recently discovered realizations of supersymmetric gauge
theories as extended brane congurations in string theory will lead to further progress in this direction, as well as
to some organizing principle for dsb. indeed, several dsb models have been realized as d-brane congurations in
string/m-theory, see for example (de boer et al, 1998; lykken-poppitz-trivedi, 1999). moreover, in some cases the
dynamical eects leading to supersymmetry breaking were understood in stringy language (de boer et al, 1998).
however, this approach has yet to lead to results which cannot be directly obtained in a eld theory analysis.

we limit ourselves in this review to the theoretical analysis of supersymmetry breaking in dierent models. we
do not discuss the questions of whether, and how, this breaking can feed down to the standard model. ideally, a
simple extension of the standard model would break supersymmetry by itself, generating an acceptable superpartner
spectrum. unfortunately, this is not the case. in simple supersymmetry breaking extensions of the standard model
without new gauge interactions, non-perturbative eects would probably be too small to generate soft terms of
the correct size (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985). moreover, unless some of the scalars obtained their masses either
radiatively, or from non-renormalizable operators, some superpartners would be lighter than the lightest lepton or
quark (dimopoulos and georgi, 1981). thus, supersymmetry must be broken by a new, strongly-interacting sector,
and then communicated to the sm either by supergravity eects, in which case the soft terms are generated by higher-
dimension operators or at the loop level, or by gauge-interactions, in which case the soft terms occur at the loop-level.
these dierent possibilities introduce dierent requirements on the susy breaking sector. for example, gravity
mediation often requires singlet elds which participate in the susy breaking. simple models of gauge mediation
require a large unbroken global symmetry at the minimum of the susy breaking theory, in which the standard model
gauge group can be embedded. several of the supersymmetry breaking models discovered recently have some of these
desired properties, and thus allow for improved phenomenological models for the communication of supersymmetry
breaking.

another issue which is important for phenomenological applications of dsb that we shall not address is the cos-
mological constant problem. in globally supersymmetric theories, fermionic and bosonic contributions to the vacuum
energy cancel each other and the cosmological constant vanishes. upon supersymmetry breaking this is no longer true,
and the cosmological constant is comparable to the scale of supersymmetry breaking. while in a framework of local
supersymmetry a further cancellation is possible, signicant ne tuning is required. eventually, a microscopic under-
standing of such a ne tuning is needed in any successful phenomenological application of dynamical supersymmetry
breaking.

finally, we note that the interested reader can nd several useful reviews of dynamical supersymmetry breaking
which have appeared in the past couple of years. a short introduction to recent developments can be found in
(skiba, 1997; nelson, 1998; poppitz, 1998; thomas, 1998). most notably, the review by poppitz and trivedi (1998),
although smaller in scope than the present review, emphasizes recent developments in the eld.
it also contains
a discussion of supersymmetry breaking in quantum mechanical systems. shifman and vainshtein (1999) give an
excellent introduction to instanton techniques and discuss their application for supersymmetry breaking. the review
by giudice and rattazzi (1998), focuses on applications of dsb to building models of gauge mediated supersymmetry
breaking.

ii. generalities

a. vacuum energy  the order parameter of susy breaking, and f and d atness

a positive vacuum energy is a necessary and sucient condition for spontaneous susy breaking. this follows from
the fact that the hamiltonian of the theory is related to the absolute square of the susy generators (see appendix a 1)

h =

1
4

(q1q1 + q1q1 + q2q2 + q2q2) .

(1)

5

the energy is then either positive or zero. furthermore, a state that is annihilated by q has zero energy, and
conversely, a zero-energy state is annihilated by q. thus, the vacuum energy serves as an order parameter for
supersymmetry breaking.

therefore the study of supersymmetry breaking requires the knowledge of the scalar potential of the theory. it is
convenient to formulate the theory in n = 1 superspace, where space-time (bosonic) coordinates are supplemented
by anti-commuting (fermionic) coordinates2. in this formulation elds of dierent spins related by supersymmetry
are combined in the supersymmetry multiplets, superelds. matter elds form chiral superelds, while gauge bosons
and their spin 1/2 superpartners form (real) vector superelds.
in the superspace formulation, physics, and in
particular, the scalar potential, is determined by two functions of the superelds, the superpotential and the kahler
potential. the superpotential encodes yukawa-type interactions in the theory, in particular it contributes to the
scalar potential. the superpotential is an analytic function of the superelds. this fact together with symmetries
and known (weakly coupled) limits often allows to determine the exact non-perturbative superpotential of the theory.
the kahler potential, on the other hand, is a real function of superelds, and can only be reliably calculated when
a weakly couled description of the theory exists. from our perspective, the kahler potential is important in two
respects. first, it gives rise to gauge-interaction terms in the scalar potential. second, it determines the kinetic
terms of the matter elds and thus modies scalar interactions arising from the superpotential. assuming a canonical
(quadratic in the elds) kahler potential, the scalar potential is

v =xa

(da)2 +xi

f 2
i

,

(2)

where the sum runs over all gauge indices a and all matter elds i. in (2), the d-terms and f-terms are auxiliary
components of vector and chiral superelds respectively. d-terms and f-terms are not dynamical and one should solve
their equations of motion. in particular, f-terms are given by derivatives of the superpotential (for more details, and
the analogous expressions for d-terms, see appendix (a 1).)

fi =

w
i

.

for supersymmetry to remain unbroken, there has to be some eld conguration for which both the f -terms and the
d-terms vanish.3 in fact, generically, such congurations exist not only at isolated points but on a subspace of the
eld space. this subspace is often referred to as the moduli space of the theory.

classically, one could set all superpotential couplings to zero. then the moduli space of the theory is the set of
d-at directions, along which the d-terms vanish. even when small tree-level superpotential couplings are turned
on, the vacua will lie near the d-at directions. it is convenient, therefore, to analyze susy gauge theories in two
stages. first nd the d-at directions, then analyze the f -terms along these directions. the latter have classical
contributions from the tree-level superpotential, and may lift some, or all, of the d-at directions. since a classical
superpotential is a polynomial in the elds, f -terms typically grow for large scalar vacuum expectation values (vev),
and vanish at the origin.4

as mentioned in the introduction, a key point in the study of susy breaking is the fact that, due to the super-
symmetric non-renormalization theorems (wess and zumino, 1974; ferrara-iliopoulos-zumino, 1974; grisaru-rocek-
siegel, 1979; seiberg, 1993), the moduli space remains unmodied in perturbation theory. if the classical potential
vanishes for some choice of vevs, it remains exactly zero to all orders in perturbation theory. thus, only non-
perturbative eects may generate a non-zero potential, and lift the classical zeros. indeed, non-perturbative eects
can modify the moduli space; they can lift the moduli space completely; or, nally, the quantum moduli space may
coincide with the classical one.

there are numerous possibilities then for the behavior of the theory. if a theory breaks supersymmetry, it has
some ground state of positive energy at some point in eld space (or it may, in principle, have several ground states

2for more detail see appendix a 1.
3 here we implicitly assumed that the kahler potential is a regular function of the elds and has no singularities. for example,
if the derivatives of the kahler potential vanish, the scalar potential can be non-zero even if all f and d terms vanish, see
eq. (a6).
4an important exception are superpotentials terms that are linear in the elds, which lead to potentials that are nonzero even
at the origin. such terms necessarily involve gauge-singlets, and require the introduction of some mass scale. however, linear
term can be generated dynamically. we shall encounter examples of trilinear, or higher, superpotential terms that become
linear after connement.

6

at dierent points5). alternatively, the theory may remain supersymmetric, with either one ground state of zero
energy at some point in eld space, or a few ground states, at isolated points, or with a continuum of ground states,
corresponding to completely at directions that are not lifted either classically or non-perturbatively. it is also possible
that the theory does not have a stable vacuum state. in such a case, while a supersymmetric vacuum does not exist,
the energy can become arbitrarily small along some direction on the moduli space.6 while such a theory can still be
given a cosmological interpretation (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1984a), we shall not consider it a susy breaking theory
for our purposes.7

note that supersymmetric theories are very dierent, in this respect, from other theories. in a non-supersymmetric
theory, multiple ground states are usually related by a symmetry, and are therefore physically equivalent. on the other
hand, dierent ground states of a supersymmetric theory may describe completely dierent physics. for example,
classically, one at direction of an su (3) gauge theory with two avors is (see appendix a 4 for details)

f = f =(cid:18) v 0
0 0(cid:19) ,

0 0

(3)

where f and f are the scalar components of the su (3) fundamentals and antifundamentals respectively. for any given
choice of v, the low-energy theory is an su (2) gauge theory, whose gauge coupling depends on v.8 note also that
the at directions of susy theories may extend to innity, unlike the customary compact at directions of bosonic
global symmetries. furthermore, in the case of other global symmetries, the existence of a at direction is usually
associated with spontaneous breaking of the symmetry, with the massless goldstone bosons corresponding to motions
along the at direction. this is not the case with susy. the reason, of course, is that the susy generators do not
correspond to motions in eld space. theories with unbroken susy may have degenerate vacua precisely because
susy is unbroken. and, as we shall see in the next section, theories with spontaneously broken susy have the analog
of goldstone particles even when they only have a single ground state.

b. the goldstino

the breaking of any bosonic global symmetry is accompanied by the appearance of massless goldstone bosons that
couple linearly to the symmetry current. similarly, a theory with broken supersymmetry contains a massless fermion,
which is usually referred to as a goldstone fermion, or in short, goldstino, that couples linearly to the susy
current (salam and strathdee, 1974; witten, 1981a).

the goldstino coupling to the susy current can be expressed as

 = f  
j 

 g

 + . . . ,

(4)

where g
is the goldstino, and as we shall see momentarily, f is a constant which is non-zero when susy is broken.

the ellipsis in (4) stand for terms quadratic in the elds and for potential derivative terms. conservation of the susy
current then implies that the goldstino is massless. to justify (4), note that, for broken susy (witten, 1981a),

z d4x  h0|t j 

(x) j 

(0)|0i = h0|{q , j 

(0)}|0i 6= 0 .

(5)

if indeed there is a massless fermion coupling to the current as in (4), then the lhs of (5) is equal to

5in this latter case the ground states are non-degenerate even if they appear to have the same energy in a certain approximation.
this is because the low energy physics is non-supersymmetric, and the vacuum energy receives quantum corrections (on top
of the non-perturbative eects which led to the non-vanishing energy in the rst place). since dierent non-supersymmetric
vacua are non-equivalent, these quantum corrections lift the degeneracy.
6we shall call such directions in the moduli space runaway directions, and study them carefully in sections vi avi b.
7we also note that the runaway moduli may be stabilized, and supersymmetry broken, due to kahler potential eects when
the theory is coupled to gravity (dvali and kakushadze, 1998). however, since the typical vevs in this case will be of planck
size, the vacuum will be determined by the details of the microscopic theory at mp , and the dynamical supersymmetry breaking
is not calculable in the low energy eective eld theory.
8here we consider the classical vacua of the theory. quantum mechanically, the at directions (3) are lifted, and the theory
does not have a stable vacuum. yet, in many models non-equivalent quantum vacua exist.

7

f 2  

  

z d4x h0|t g

 (x) g

 (0)|0i = f 2  

  


[ip g(p)  ]p0 = f 2  
 ,

(6)

where g(p)   is the goldstino propagator. so indeed f is nonzero. note that a fermion with derivative coupling to the
current would not contribute to the rhs of (6) because of the additional factors of the momentum in the numerator.
in fact, since from the susy algebra h0|{q , j 

 , with e the energy, we have f 2 = 2e.

(0)}|0i = 2e 

to see the appearance of the goldstino more concretely, consider the susy current

l
()

() ,

j 

 x

(7)

where the sum is over all elds, and () is the shift of the eld  under a susy transformation. because of
lorentz symmetry, the only linear terms in (7) come from vacuum expectation values of (). examining the susy
transformations of the chiral and vector multiplets of n = 1 susy (see for example bagger and wess, (1991)), we
see from lorentz invariance that the only elds whose susy transformations contain lorentz-invariant objects, which
can develop vevs, are the matter fermion i, whose susy transformation gives fi, and the gauge fermion a, whose
transformation gives da. one then nds,

g xhfii i +

2 xhdai a ,

1

(8)

so that the goldstino is a linear combination of the chiral and gauge fermions whose auxiliary elds f and d acquire
vevs. note that eq. (8) actually only holds with a canonical (quadratic) kahler potential, otherwise derivatives of
the kahler potential enter as well. we can use this to argue that a non-vanishing f -vev or d-vev is a necessary
condition for susy breaking. when susy is broken, there is a massless fermion, the goldstino, that transforms
inhomogeneously under the action of the susy generators. but the only lorentz-invariant objects that appear in the
susy variations of the n = 1 multiplets, and therefore may obtain vevs, are the auxiliary elds f and d. thus, for
susy breaking to occur, some f - or d- elds should develop vevs.
in light of the above, it would rst seem that if susy is relevant to nature, we should observe the massless
goldstino. however, we ultimately need to promote susy to a local symmetry to incorporate gravity into the
full theory. in the framework of local supersymmetry, the massless goldstino becomes the longitudinal component
of the gravitino, much like in the case of the higgs mechanism. the gravitino then has a coupling to ordinary
matter other than the gravitational interaction, by virtue of its goldstino component. it should come as no surprise
then, that the gravitino mass as well as its coupling to matter elds, are related to the susy breaking scale.
this has important phenomenological implications.
in particular, in models with low-scale susy breaking, the
gravitino is very light, and the decay of other superpartners into the gravitino may be observed in collider searches
for supersymmetry (dimopoulos et al, 1998; stump-wiest-yuan, 1996).

c. tree-level breaking

1. oraifeartaigh models

one of the simplest models of spontaneous supersymmetry breaking was proposed by oraifeartaigh (1975), and is
based on a theory of chiral superelds. supersymmetry in the model is broken at tree level: while the lagrangian of
the model is supersymmetric, even the classical potential is such that a supersymmetric vacuum state does not exist.
in addition to giving the simplest example of spontaneously broken supersymmetry, the study of oraifeartaigh
models will be useful for our later studies of dsb, as the low-energy description of many dynamical models we shall
encounter will be given by an oraifeartaigh-type model.

before writing down the simplest example of an oraifeartaigh model, let us describe the general properties of
such models. first, we shall restrict our attention to superpotentials with only positive exponents of the elds. we
shall later analyze a number of models where the low-energy description involves superpotentials containing negative
exponents of the elds. such terms, however, are generated by the non-perturbative dynamics of the underlying
(strongly coupled) microscopic theory, and are not appropriate in the tree level superpotential we consider here.

second, since the superpotential is a polynomial in the elds, at least one of the elds in this model needs to appear

linearly in the superpotential, or there will be a supersymmetric vacuum at the origin of the moduli space.

it would prove useful, for future purposes, to pay special attention to the r-symmetry of the model. (for the
if this symmetry is unbroken by the superpotential, there is

denition of an r-symmetry, see appendix (a 1)).

8

then at least one eld of r-charge 2. more generally, consider a model containing elds c
i , i = 1, . . . , k with r-
charge 2, and elds n
a , a = 1, . . . , l with r-charge 0. (for convenience, we shall call them charged and neutral
respectively, even though various components of the superelds transform dierently under r-symmetry.) the most
general superpotential respecting the r-symmetry can be written as

w =

k

xi=1

c
i fi(n

a ) ,

(9)

and, for supersymmetry to break, at least one of the fis, say f1, contains a constant term, independent of the elds.
the equations of motion for the r-charged elds w/c
a . if k > l
there are no solutions for generic functions fi, the f-term conditions can not all be satised and supersymmetry is
broken.

a ) = 0 give k equations for l unknowns n

i = fi(n

one can modify these models by adding elds with r-charges 0 < qr < 2. since such elds can not couple to the
elds c
i while preserving the r-symmetry, they will not change the above discussion, and supersymmetry remains
broken. if, on the other hand, elds with negative r-charges are added to the model, the total number of variables on
which the fis depend increases, and in general supersymmetry is unbroken. finally, we should note that adding to the
superpotential explicit r symmetry violating couplings which do not involve elds of r charge 2 will not modify the
above discussion. on the other hand, r symmetry violating terms which include elds of r charge 2 will generically
lead to the restoration of supersymmetry.

it is also useful to look at the equations of motion for the r-neutral elds. first, note that their vevs are xed
by minimizing the part of the scalar potential arising from the f-terms of the r-charged elds (the remaining terms
in the scalar potential vanish at least when hc
ii = 0 for all i). therefore, there are l f-term equations depending
on k independent variables c
i . in a susy breaking model k > l, so there are k  l linear combinations of the elds
c
i that are left undetermined. thus oraifeartaigh models necessarily posses directions of at (non-zero) potential
in the tree level approximation (zumino, 1981; einhorn and jones, 1983; polchinski, 1983). as we shall discuss later
this is not a generic situation in models of dsb.

the simplest example of an oraifeartaigh model requires two elds with r-charge 2, one eld with r-charge 0

(k = 2, l=1), and has the superpotential

it is easy to see that the f-term conditions for 1 and 2 are incompatible. we can directly minimize the scalar
potential

w = 1(m 2

1  12) + m22 .

(10)

2

+ |m2|2 + |m22  211|2 .

(11)

v =(cid:12)(cid:12)m 2

1  12(cid:12)(cid:12)

2/(1m 2

2/(1m 2

1  m2

1 ) we nd  = (m 2

the rst two terms in (11) determine the value of  at the minimum. in the limit m2
1 )  1 the minimum is
2/2)1/2/1. note that 1 and 2 only appear in the
found at  = 0, while for small m2
last term in (11). this term should be set to zero for the potential to be extremal with respect to 1 and 2. this is
achieved when 2 = 211/m2, and therefore, at tree level the linear combination m21  21hi2 is arbitrary,
as was expected from the previous discussion. equivalently, we can parameterize dierent vacua by the expectation
values of 1. note that dierent vacua are physically non-equivalent, in particular the spectrum depends on h1i.
it is easy to nd the tree level spectrum of the model. for any choice of parameters it contains a massless fermion,
the goldstino. the spectrum also contains the scalar eld associated with the at direction whose mass arises
entirely due to radiative corrections (however, there are no quadratic divergences since the action of the theory is
supersymmetric although supersymmetry is not realized linearly). all other states are massive. another important
feature of this spectrum is that the supertrace of the mass matrix squared, str m2
i , vanishes. this property of the
spectrum holds for any model with tree level supersymmetry breaking (ferrara-girardello-palumbo, 1979).

since supersymmetry is broken, the vacuum degeneracy is lifted in perturbation theory. huq (1976) calculated the

one loop corrections to the potential of this model. they are given by

v (1) =xi

(1)f
642 mi(1)4 ln(cid:18) mi(1)2
2 (cid:19) ,

(12)

where the sum is over all massive elds (and the masses depend on the 1 vev). huq (1976) found that the corrections
generate a positive mass for 1, and that the non-supersymmetric vacuum is located at 1 = 0 with unbroken r-
symmetry. he also analyzed a model with an su (3) global symmetry and a model constructed by fayet (1975)
with su (2)  u (1) symmetry, and in both cases found that the tree-level modulus acquires positive mass due to

9

one-loop corrections to the kahler potential, leading to the unique vacuum with unbroken r-symmetry. in fact, this
conclusion is not surprising. in the model discussed above, quantum corrections to the vacuum energy come from
the renormalization of the mass parameter m 2. due to the holomorphy of the superpotential, these are completely
determined by the wave function renormalization of 1 and, since the model is infrared free, necessarily generate
positive contribution to the scalar potential. it is important to note that in modications of the model that include
gauge elds, there may be a negative contribution to the potential. the balance of the two perturbative eects may
produce a stable minimum at large values of the modulus vev (witten, 1981b).

2. fayet-iliopoulos breaking

another useful example of tree level supersymmetry breaking is given by a model with u (1) gauge interactions
(fayet-iliopoulos, 1974). in this model supersymmetry breaking is driven by d-term contributions to the potential,
but depending on the parameters of the lagrangian, the non-zero vacuum energy either comes entirely from d-term
contributions, or from both d- and f-terms. to understand how d-terms can drive supersymmetry breaking, we
recall that the kahler potential can be written as a function of the gauge invariant combination of elds

k = f (ev ,w w,s),

(13)

where  represents matter elds transforming in some representation of the gauge group, v is a vector supereld
whose supersymmetric eld strength is w, and s represents gauge singlet elds. in a nonabelian theory this is the
only possible form of eld dependence in the kahler potential. in an abelian theory, however, the d-term of the vector
supereld v is invariant under the gauge and supersymmetry transformations by itself. thus, if one does not require
parity invariance, the lowest order kahler potential of a u (1) gauge theory can be written as9

k = qev q + q



ev q + f i v.

(14)

this kahler potential together with superpotential mass terms for the matter elds leads to the following scalar

potential

v =

g2
2

2

) .

(15)

2

(|q|2 (cid:12)(cid:12)q(cid:12)(cid:12)

+ )2 + m2(|q|2 +(cid:12)(cid:12)q(cid:12)(cid:12)

it is easy to see that the vacuum energy determined by this potential is necessarily positive and supersymmetry is
broken. when g2 < m2 both scalar elds have positive mass and their vevs vanish. the positive contribution
to the vacuum energy comes entirely from the d-term in the potential. the scalar mass matrix has eigenvalues
m2
 = m2  g2. the gauge symmetry is unbroken, and thus the gauge boson remains massless. the matter fermions
retain their mass m, while the gaugino remains massless and plays the role of the goldstino. (in accord with with
the fact that here hfii = 0 and hdi 6= 0, see eq. 8.)
when g2 > m2, the eld q has negative mass and acquires a vev. at the minimum of the potential q = 0 and
q = v, where v = (2 4m2/g2)1/2. we see that both the gauge symmetry and supersymmetry are broken. moreover,
both d-term and f-term are non-vanishing and supersymmetry breaking is of the mixed type. one can easily nd
that the spectrum of the model contains one vector eld and one real scalar eld of mass squared 1
2 g2v2, one complex
scalar of mass squared 2m2, two fermions of mass (m2 + 1
2 g2v2)1/2, and a massless goldstone fermion which is a linear
combination of the goldstino and the positively charged fermion

 =

1

2 g2v2 (cid:18)m +

qm2 + 1

igv
2

q(cid:19) .

(16)

9we restrict our attention to two matter multiplets with charges 1.

10

iii. indirect criteria for dsb

as we have seen in section ii a, the fact that the vacuum energy is the relevant order parameter immediately points
the way in our quest for susy breaking: we should study the zeros of the scalar potential. this, indeed, is what
we shall undertake to do in sections iv and onward. unfortunately, directly studying the zeros of the potential will
not always be possible, or easy. in this section we review several alternate indirect methods that are useful in the
search for supersymmetry breaking.

a. the witten index

supersymmetry breaking is related to the existence of zero-energy states. rather than looking at the total number
of zero energy states, it is often useful to consider the witten index (witten, 1982), which measures the dierence
between the number of bosonic and fermionic states of zero energy,

tr(1)f  n0

b  n0
f .

(17)

if the witten index is nonzero, there is at least one state of zero energy, and supersymmetry is unbroken. if the
index vanishes, supersymmetry may either be broken, with no states of zero energy, or it may be unbroken, with
identical numbers of fermionic and bosonic states of zero energy.

the witten index is a topological invariant of the theory. in this lies its usefulness. it may be calculated for some
convenient choice of the parameters of the theory, and in particular, for weak coupling, but the result is valid generally.
to see this, note that in a nite volume, fermionic and bosonic states of positive energy are paired by the action of
the susy generator:

q|bei 

e|fei q|fei 

e|bei ,

(18)

where |bei (|fei) is a bosonic (fermionic) state of energy e.10 (recall that states of zero energy are annihilated by
q, and are therefore not paired). thus, under mild variations of the parameters of the theory, states may move to
zero energy and from zero energy, but they always do so in bose-fermi pairs, leaving the witten index unchanged.

let us be a bit more precise now about what is meant by mild variations above. as long as a parameter of the
theory, which is originally nonzero, is varied to a dierent nonzero value, we do not expect the witten index to change,
since dierent states can only move between dierent energy levels in pairs. the danger lies in the appearance of
new states of zero energy. this can happen if the asymptotic (in eld space) behavior of the potential changes, which
may happen if some parameter of the theory is set to zero, or is turned on. in that case, states may come in from
innity or move out to innity.

the index of several theories was calculated by witten (1982). in particular, witten found that the index of a
pure supersymmetric yang-mills (sym) theory is non-zero. 11 thus, these theories do not break supersymmetry
spontaneously. an important corollary is that sym theories with massive matter (and no massless matter) do not
break supersymmetry either. the reason is that, at least in weak coupling, one can take all masses large, so that
there are no massless states in these theories beyond those of the pure sym theory, and so the value of the index is
the same as in the pure sym theory.

what happens when the mass of the matter elds is taken to zero? the theory with zero mass has at directions,
along which the potential is classically zero (away from these at directions the potential behaves as the fourth power
of the eld strength). in contrast, the theory with mass for all matter elds has no classical at directions, with the

10this in fact justies including only zero-energy states in (17). states of non-zero energy do not contribute.
11 for su and sp groups the index is equal to r + 1, where r is the rank of the group. this is the same as the number of
gaugino condensates for these groups. more generally, the index equals the dual coxeter number of the group, which is dierent
from r + 1 for some groups, notably some of the so groups (witten, 1997). the fact that the number of gaugino condensates
does not always equal r + 1, which was believed to be the value of the index, remained a puzzle until its resolution by witten
recently (witten, 1997). this puzzle partly motivated the conjecture that sym theories have a vacuum with no gaugino
condensate (kovner and shifman, 1997). this possibility would have far-reaching consequences for supersymmetry breaking.
the vast majority of theories that break susy do so by virtue of a superpotential generated by gaugino condensation. a
vacuum with no gaugino condensate would mean an extra ground state, or an entire branch of ground states, with zero energy
and unbroken susy.

11

potential growing at least quadratically for large elds. thus, as the mass is taken to zero, the asymptotic behavior
of the potential changes, and the witten index may change too. in fact, the index is ill-dened in the presence of at
directions, since zero modes associated with the at directions lead to a continuous spectrum of states. (indeed, to
calculate the index of any theory one needs to consider the theory in a nite volume so that the resulting spectrum
is discrete.) we therefore cannot say anything about supersymmetry breaking in massless, non-chiral theories based
on the witten index of the pure sym theory.

consider for example sqcd with n colors and f avors of mass m, which we discuss in appendix a 4a 7. as

explained there, in the presence of mass terms mi

jqi  qj, the theory has n vacua at

m j
i  qi  qj = (3n f )/n (detm)1/n m1 ,

(19)

i may be attained. the massless theory has an entire moduli space of vacua, parameterized by m j

corresponding to the n roots of unity. this is in agreement with the witten index n of pure su (n ) gauge theory.
consider now the massless limit, mi
j  0. for f < n , the vacua (19) all tend to innity. the theory has no ground
state at nite eld vevs. the potential is nonzero in any nite region of eld space and slopes to zero at innity. the
massless limit of the theory is therefore not well-dened. for f > n , by taking mi
j  0 in dierent ways, any value
of m j
i . the n = f
case is more subtle, but in this case too, the theory has a moduli space of vacua. thus, the ground states of the
massless su (n ) theory with f avors are drastically dierent from those of the massive theory. in these examples
we explicitly see how zero-energy states can disappear to innity, or come in from innity. again, this is possible
because the asymptotic behavior of the potential changes as the mass tends to zero. the theory including mass terms
has no at directions. asymptotically the potential rises at least quadratically. the massless theory has classical at
directions. quantum mechanically, they are completely lifted for f < n , and the potential asymptotes to zero as a
fractional power of the eld. for f  n at directions remain even quantum mechanically. in any case, adding mass
terms changes the asymptotic behavior of the potential.
in the examples above, the massive theory was supersymmetric (with zero energy states at nite elds vevs) and the
massless theory was either supersymmetric (with a continuum of vacua) or not well dened (with no ground state). it
is natural to ask whether there exist vectorlike (parity-conserving) theories that break susy as the relevant masses
are taken to zero. the answer to this question is armative as we shall see in an explicit example in section vi a 2. it
is useful to understand the general properties of the potential in such a theory. as before, we expect the fully massive
theory to have a non-zero witten index. the only way to obtain supersymmetry breaking as the masses are taken to
zero, is if the masses change the asymptotic behavior of the potential. suppose that for any nite value of the mass
parameter m, the theory possesses a supersymmetric vacuum at some vev v0(m), which moves away to innity as
some of the masses are taken to zero. clearly, for small nite masses, the directional derivative of the potential with
respect to the modulus is negative for large values of v < v0(m). (the theory may have various minima for nite
values of v, but we are interested in the asymptotic behavior of the potential at large v.) in the absence of a phase
transition at zero mass, such a directional derivative will remain non-positive in the limit m  0. however, there
are still two possibilities. first, it is possible that the directional derivative is negative for any nite vev, and only
vanishes in the double limit, m  0, v  . in such a case the theory does not have a stable vacuum. however, it is
also possible that the derivative vanishes in the limit m  0 for suciently large, but otherwise arbitrary v. if this
is the case, the asymptotic behavior of the potential changes, and it becomes a non-zero constant asymptotically far
along the at direction, so supersymmetry is broken. however, because the potential is at, running eects cannot
be neglected. indeed, as we shall argue in section vi a 2, such eects may lift the vacuum degeneracy and determine
the true non-supersymmetric vacuum.

to summarize, pure sym theories, as well as vectorlike theories with masses for all matter elds, have a non-zero
index, and do not break supersymmetry. when some masses are taken to zero, the resulting theories have classical
at directions, and therefore, the asymptotic behavior of the potential is dierent from that of the massive theory.
the witten index may then change discontinuously and dier, if it is well dened, from that of the massive theory.
what about chiral (parity-violating) theories? in such theories, at least some of the matter elds cannot be given
mass. thus, these theories cannot be obtained by deforming a massive vectorlike theory, and there is no a priori
reason to expect, based on existing computations of witten index, that these theories are supersymmetric. indeed,
most known examples of supersymmetry breaking are chiral.

b. global symmetries and supersymmetry breaking

in this section we shall discuss the connection between global symmetries and supersymmetry breaking, which
motivates two criteria for supersymmetry breaking. while these are useful guidelines for nding supersymmetry-
breaking theories, they are not strict rules, and we shall encounter several exceptions in the following.

12

consider rst a theory with an exact, non-anomalous global symmetry, and no at directions. if the global symmetry
is spontaneously broken, there is a massless scalar eld, the goldstone boson, with no potential. with unbroken
supersymmetry, the goldstone boson is part of a chiral supermultiplet that contains an additional massless scalar,
again with no potential. this scalar describes motions along a at direction of zero potential. but this contradicts
our initial assumption that there are no at directions. to avoid the contradiction we should drop the assumption
of unbroken supersymmetry. this gives a powerful tool for establishing supersymmetry breaking (aeck-dine-
seiberg, 1984b; aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985): if a theory has a spontaneously broken global symmetry and no at
directions, the theory breaks supersymmetry.

we have assumed here that the additional massless scalar corresponds to motions along a non-compact at direction.
this is often the case, since, in supersymmetric theories, the superpotential is invariant under the complexied global
symmetry, with the goldstone boson corresponding to the imaginary part of the relevant order parameter, and its
supersymmetric partner corresponding to the real part of the order parameter.12

in general, deciding whether a global symmetry is broken requires detailed knowledge of the potential of the theory,
and is at least as hard as determining whether the vacuum energy vanishes. however, if a theory is strongly coupled
at the scale at which supersymmetry might be broken, one cannot directly answer either of these questions.13 still, in
some cases, one may argue, based on t hooft anomaly matching conditions (t hooft, 1980), that a global symmetry
is broken.

if a global symmetry is unbroken in the ground-state, then the massless fermions of the low-energy theory should
reproduce the global triangle anomalies of the microscopic theory (t hooft, 1980). thus there should be a set of elds,
with appropriate charges under the global symmetry, that give a solution to the anomaly-matching conditions. this
fact may be used when trying to determine whether a theory connes, and how its global symmetries are realized in
the vacuum. for example, if the gauge-invariants which can be constructed out of the microscopic elds of the theory
saturate the anomaly-matching conditions for some subgroup of the global symmetry of the microscopic theory, it is
plausible that the theory connes, and that the relevant symmetry subgroup remains unbroken in the vacuum. in
contrast, if all possible solutions to the anomaly-matching conditions are very complicated, that is, they require a
large set of elds, it is plausible to conclude that the global symmetry is spontaneously broken.

in the case of an r-symmetry there is another way to determine whether it is spontaneously broken. in many
theories, the scale of supersymmetry breaking is much lower than the strong-coupling scale, so that supersymmetry
breaking can be studied in a low-energy eective theory involving chiral superelds only, with all gauge dynamics
integrated out. in fact, the low-energy theory is an oraifeartaigh-like model (with possibly negative exponents of
the elds in the superpotential arising from non-perturbative eects in the microscopic description). in some cases it
is easy to see that the origin is excluded from the moduli space, because, for example, the potential diverges there.
then typically, some terms appearing in the superpotential obtain vevs. since all terms in the superpotential have
r-charge 2 this implies that r-symmetry is broken. obviously such an argument is not applicable to other global
symmetries because the superpotential is necessarily neutral under non-r symmetries. so it is often easier to prove
that an r-symmetry is broken, than to prove that a non-r symmetry is broken. if the theory has no at directions
one can then conclude that supersymmetry is broken.

it is not surprising that r-symmetries, which do not commute with supersymmetry, should play a special role in

supersymmetry breaking. let us discuss this role further, following nelson and seiberg (1994).

in what follows we shall assume that the gauge dynamics was integrated out. suppose we have a low-energy theory
with a superpotential w ({xi}), where xi are chiral elds and i = 1 . . . n. for supersymmetry to remain unbroken,
the superpotential should be extremal with respect to all elds,

if the theory has no symmetries, the number of unknowns, xi, equals the number of equations. similarly, if the
theory has a global symmetry that commutes with supersymmetry, the number of equations equals the number of
unknowns. to see this note that in this case, the superpotential can only depend on chiral eld combinations that are

w
xi

= 0 .

12the possibility that the low-energy theory is a theory of goldstone bosons and massless chiral elds such that the super-
symmetric scalar partner of any goldstone is a goldstone too is ruled out. such theories can only be coupled to gravity for
discrete values of newtons constant (bagger-witten, 1982), and so cannot describe the low-energy behavior of renormalizable
gauge theories.
13the most obvious example is a theory which does not possess any adjustable parameters, and has only one scale, like an
su (5) model of section iii d.

13

invariant under the symmetry. therefore, if there are k symmetry generators, the superpotential depends on n  k
qi
q1
invariant quantities (for example, for a u (1) symmetry these could be xi/x
1 , where i = 2 . . . n, and qi, q1 are the
u (1) charges of xi, x1 respectively) while the remaining k elds do not appear in the superpotential. thus, for
supersymmetry to remain unbroken the superpotential should be extremal with respect to n  k variables, leading to
n  k equations in n  k unknowns. thus, generically, there is a solution and supersymmetry is unbroken.
in contrast, suppose the theory has an r symmetry that is spontaneously broken. then there is a eld, x, with r
charge q 6= 0, which gets a non-zero vev. the superpotential then can be written as

where qi is the charge of xi. for supersymmetry to be unbroken we need

w = x 2/qf (yi = x q

i /x qi) ,

and

f
yi

= 0 ,

f = 0 .

thus there is one more equation than unknowns, and generically we do not expect a solution. roughly speaking,
what we mean by generically is that the superpotential is a generic function of the elds, that is, it contains all
terms allowed by the symmetries. we shall return to this point shortly.

if the extremum of the superpotential were determined by a system of homogeneous linear equations, the above
discussion would lead us to conclude that an r-symmetry is a necessary condition for supersymmetry breaking, and
a spontaneously broken r-symmetry is a sucient condition. while this conclusion generally holds for theories in
which the superpotential is a generic function consistent with all the symmetries, there may be exceptions to this rule.
this is because the f-atness conditions are given by a system of non-linear equations which may contain negative
powers of elds (arising from the dynamical superpotential) as well as terms independent of elds (arising from linear
terms, either generated dynamically or included in the tree level superpotential). such a system of equations is not
guaranteed to have solutions. in fact, we have already argued in section ii c 1 that one can add explicit r-symmetry
breaking terms to an oraifeartaigh model without restoring supersymmetry. later we shall encounter other examples
of supersymmetry breaking models without r-symmetry.

let us make a bit more precise what we mean by a generic superpotential. the superpotential contains two parts.
one is generated dynamically, and certainly does not contain all terms allowed by the symmetries (seiberg, 1993).
in particular, such terms could involve arbitrarily large negative powers of the elds. the other part is the classical
superpotential, which is a polynomial (of some degree d) in the elds, that preserves some global symmetry. here what
we mean by generic is that no term, with dimension smaller or equal to d that is allowed by this global symmetry
was omitted from the superpotential. on the other hand, the tree-level superpotential can still be considered generic
if the operators with dimension higher than d are omitted. indeed, in a renormalizable lagrangian with a stable
vacuum we do not expect planck scale vevs. the analysis of nelson and seiberg (1994) shows that the inclusion of
non-renormalizable operators can only produce additional minima with planck scale vevs, that is in a region of eld
space where our approximation of global supersymmetry is not sucient anyway. on the other hand, in models where
a stable vacuum appears only after the inclusion of non-renormalizable terms of dimension d, the typical expectation
values will depend on the planck scale (or other large scale) but often will remain much smaller than it. as long as
the expectation values are small compared to the planck scale, these minima will remain stable local minima even if
operators of dimension higher than d are added.

we shall encounter several examples of theories that break supersymmetry even though they do not possess an
r symmetry.
in some cases, while the microscopic theory does not have an r symmetry, there is an eective,
spontaneously broken r symmetry in the low energy theory. in other cases, there is not even an eective r symmetry.
in one example, susy will be broken even though the tree-level superpotential is generic and does not preserve any
r-symmetry, and there is no eective r-symmetry.

c. gaugino condensation

let us now introduce a criterion for susy breaking which is based on gaugino condensation (meurice and veneziano,
1984; amati-rossi-veneziano, 1985). suppose that a certain chiral supereld (or a linear combination of chiral
superelds) does not appear in the superpotential, yet all the moduli are stabilized.
in such a case the konishi
anomaly (konishi, 1984; clark-piguet-sibold, 1979) implies

14

(20)
where d is a supersymmetric covariant derivative (see appendix a 1),  is a chiral supereld and v is the vector
supereld. it is instructive to consider eq. (20) in component form. it is given by an anomalous commutator with
the supersymmetry generator q,

d2( ev )  trw 2 ,

{q, }   ,

(21)

where  and  are the fermionic and scalar components of  respectively, and  is the gaugino. from this equation
we see that the vacuum energy is proportional to the lowest component of w 2, that is, to < tr >. therefore, if the
gaugino condensate forms one can conclude that supersymmetry is broken. note that if the elds  and  appear in
the superpotential, the right-hand side of eqs. (20) and (21) can be modied and the gaugino condensate may form
without violating supersymmetry. for example, if there is a superpotential mass term, eq. (21) becomes

{q, } = m  +

1
322  .

(22)

the latter equation is compatible with supersymmetry and determines the vevs of the scalar elds in terms of the
gaugino condensate.

this criterion is related to the global symmetry arguments of aeck-dine-seiberg (1985), since if a gaugino con-
densate develops in a theory possessing an r-symmetry, this symmetry is spontaneously broken. in the absence of
at directions, the aeck-dine-seiberg argument leads to the conclusion that susy is broken.

we shall now demonstrate the techniques described in iii b and iii c by a few examples.

d. examples

1. spontaneously broken global symmetry: the su (5) model

consider an su (5) gauge theory with one antisymmetric tensor (10) a, and one anti-fundamental f (aeck-dine-
seiberg, 1984b; meurice and veneziano, 1984). the global symmetry of the theory is u (1)  u (1)r, under which we
can take the charges of the elds to be a(1, 1) and f (3,9). there are no gauge invariants one can make out of a
and f . thus there are no at directions, and classically the theory has a unique vacuum at the origin. the theory
is strongly coupled near the origin, and we have no way to determine the behavior of the quantum theory. because
there are no chiral gauge invariants, the theory does not admit any superpotential. if supersymmetry is broken, the
only possible scale for its breaking is the strong coupling scale of su (5).

following aeck-dine-seiberg (1984b) we shall now use r-symmetry to argue that supersymmetry is indeed broken
(we shall consider a gaugino condensation argument due to meurice and veneziano, (1984) in the following subsection).
assuming the theory connes, the massless gauge-invariant fermions of the conned theory should reproduce the
triangle anomalies generated in the microscopic theory. aeck-dine-seiberg (1984b) showed that the minimal number
of fermions required, with u (1) and u (1)r charges under 50, is ve. this makes it quite implausible that the full global
symmetry remains unbroken. but if the global symmetry is spontaneously broken and there are no at directions,
the theory breaks supersymmetry by the arguments of iii b.

2. gaugino condensation: the su (5) model

we now would like to apply the gaugino condensate argument to the su (5) model discussed in the previous
subsection. since the gaugino condensate serves as an order parameter for supersymmetry breaking, we need to
establish that it is non-zero. to do that we follow meurice and veneziano (1984) and consider the correlation function

where

(x, y, z) =(cid:10)t (2(x), 2(y), (z))(cid:11) ,

 = abcdea

a b

a f

c

abcabcade ,

(23)

(24)

and f and a are scalar components of 5 and 10 respectively.

in the limit x, y, z  1 one can show that the condensate   13. then one can take the limit of large x, y,
and z and using cluster decomposition properties argue that <  >6= 0. as a result supersymmetry must be broken.

15

3. r-symmetry and susy breaking

in the example of the su (5) model we could not explicitly verify the spontaneous breaking of the global symmetry,
and had to rely on the use of t hooft anomaly matching conditions to establish supersymmetry breaking. now we
consider examples in which one can explicitly show that r-symmetry is spontaneously broken, and to use that to
establish supersymmetry breaking. while we shall be content to only consider models with tree level breaking, similar
arguments can be applied to a number of dynamical models discussed later.

consider rst the oraifeartaigh model of eq. (10). there is an r symmetry under which 1, 2 have r-charge
2, and  has r charge zero. there is also a discrete z2 symmetry under which 1 is neutral, while 2 and  change
sign. the superpotential is the generic one consistent with the symmetries and supersymmetry is broken. we can
add to the superpotential  to some even power so that the r-symmetry is broken. still, supersymmetry is broken.
however, the superpotential is no longer generic, and we can add the term 2
1 without breaking the remaining z2
symmetry. this term will restore supersymmetry.

if we do not wish to impose a discrete symmetry the most general superpotential is

w =

2

xi=1

m 2

i i + mii + ii2.

(25)

the model with this superpotential still breaks supersymmetry unless m1/m2 = m1/m2 = 1/2. note that if
the parameters are chosen so that this latter equality is satised the superpotential is independent of one linear
combination of the elds,  = (m21  m12)/(m2
as another example, consider the superpotential

2), and thus is not generic.

1 + m2

w = p1x1 + p2x2 + a(x1x2  2) + x1x2 .

(26)

for  = 0 the theory has a u (1)  u (1)r symmetry with a(0, 2), x1(1, 0), x2(1, 0), p1(1, 2), p2(1, 2). supersym-
metry is broken whether or not  = 0. for  6= 0 the r-symmetry is broken and the potential is no longer generic.
terms such as p1p2, a2, which respect the u (1) could restore supersymmetry. this example is a simple version of
the low energy theory of the example we shall study in section vi c.

4. generalizations of the su (5) model

to conclude our presentation of the basic examples of supersymmetry breaking we construct an innite class of
models generalizing the su (5) model discussed earlier (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985; meurice and veneziano, 1984).
these models have an su (2n + 1) gauge group, with matter transforming as an antisymmetric tensor a and 2n  3
antifundamentals f i, i = 1, . . . , 2n  3, (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985). for n > 2, all these models have d-at
directions, which are all lifted by the most general r-symmetry preserving superpotential

w = ij af if j ,

(27)

for the appropriate choice of the matrix of coupling constants.

first, note that for small superpotential coupling the model possesses almost at directions, and as a result, part
of the dynamics can be analyzed directly. yet the scale of the unbroken gauge dynamics in the low energy theory is
comparable to the scale of susy breaking and the model is not calculable. to analyze supersymmetry breaking it is
convenient to start from the theory without the tree level superpotential. in this case the models have classical at
directions along which the eective theory reduces to the su (5) theory with an antisymmetric and an antifundamental
as well as the light modulus parameterizing the at direction. we already know that in this eective theory susy is
broken with a vacuum energy  4
l. the low energy scale depends on the vev of the modulus as in eq. a21, and
thus there is a potential

v ()  4

l   4

13 (4n 8) .

(28)

when small yukawa couplings are turned on, the at directions are stabilized by the balance between the tree level
contribution of order 24 and the dynamical potential (28). the minimum of the potential then occurs for

   13

2(4n +5)  with evac  8 n 2

4n +5 4 .

(29)

16

we found that the potential is stabilized at nite value of the modulus and the eective low energy description is
given in terms of the susy breaking theory. thus supersymmetry must be broken in the full theory. we also note
that at the minimum, r-symmetry is broken, giving us additional evidence for supersymmetry breaking.

before concluding this section we comment on the analogous theories with su (2n ) gauge groups (aeck-dine-
seiberg (1985)). in this case the tree level superpotential allowed by symmetries (including r symmetry) does not
lift all the classical at directions. on the other hand, a dynamical superpotential is generated, pushing the theory
away from the origin. thus the model does not have a stable ground state. it is possible to lift all at directions by
adding r-symmetry breaking terms to the tree level superpotential. while lifting the at directions, these terms lead
to the appearance of a stable supersymmetric vacuum.

iv. direct analysis: calculable models

as we have seen, susy breaking is directly related to the zero-energy properties of the theory, namely, the ground-
state energy and the appearance of the massless goldstino. fortunately, then, to establish susy breaking, we only
need to understand the low-energy behavior of the theory in question. as we shall see, many models can be described,
in certain regions of the moduli space, by a low-energy oraifeartaigh-like eective theory. the question of whether
susy is broken simply amounts to the question of whether all f -terms can vanish simultaneously. the tricky part,
of course, is obtaining the correct low-energy theory. this involves a number of related ingredients: establishing the
correct degrees of freedom, and determining the superpotential and the kahler potential. in many cases, holomorphy
and symmetries indeed determine the superpotential, but the same is not true for the kahler potential. however, if
all we care about is whether the energy vanishes or not, it suces to know that the kahler potential is not singular
as a function of the elds that make up the low-energy theory. this, in turn, is related to whether or or not we chose
the correct degrees of freedom of our low-energy theory.

we shall divide our discussion into two parts. in this section we shall consider weakly-coupled theories. by tuning
some parameters in the superpotential to be very small, we can typically drive some of the elds to large expectation
values, with the gauge symmetry completely broken, so that all gauge bosons are very heavy. we can then neglect
gauge interactions, and write down, as advertised, a low-energy oraifeartaigh-type model. since the theory is weakly-
coupled, we shall also be able to calculate the kahler potential, and thus, completely determine the low-energy theory
including the ground-state energy, the composition of the goldstino, and the masses of low-lying states.

but we can also, in many cases, analyze the theory near the origin in eld space, where the theory is very strongly
coupled.
if the theory connes, then below the connement scale, we are again left with an oraifeartaigh-type
model. in section (v), we shall see examples of this kind. in some cases, though we shall not be able to analyze the
theory in question, we shall be able to analyze a dual theory, that, as we just described, undergoes connement. in all
these cases, however, we shall not be able to calculate the kahler potential. thus, while we shall ascertain that susy
is broken, the details of the low-energy theory, and in particular the vacuum energy, the unbroken global symmetry,
and the masses of low-lying states remain unknown.

in the examples we encounter, supersymmetry is broken due to a variety of eects. still, it is always the consequence
of the interplay between, on the one hand, a tree-level superpotential, which gives rise to a non-zero potential
everywhere except at the origin in eld space, and, on the other hand, non-perturbative eects, either in the form of
instantons or gaugino condensation, that generate a potential that is non-zero at the origin.

a. the 32 model

probably the simplest model of dynamical supersymmetry breaking is the 32 model of aeck-dine-seiberg (1985).
here we shall choose the parameters of the model so that the low-energy eective theory is weakly coupled, and thus
the model is calculable. in this weakly coupled regime, the main ingredient leading to supersymmetry breaking in
the model is an instanton generated superpotential. in section vi a 2, we shall analyze the same model in a strongly
coupled regime where susy is broken through the quantum deformation of the moduli space (which is again the
result of instanton eects). we shall also discuss numerous generalizations of the 32 model.

the model is based on an su (3)  su (2) gauge group with the following matter content (we also show charges

under the global u (1)  u (1)r symmetry of the model):

su (3) su (2) u (1) u (1)r
1
1/3
4/3 8
2/3
4
1
3

3
3
3
1

2
1
1
2

q
u
d
l

17

(30)

using methods described in appendix a 2 one can easily determine the classical moduli space of the model. in the
absence of a tree level superpotential, it is given by

qif = q

if

0 b

=(cid:18) a 0

0 0(cid:19) , l = (0,pa2  b2) ,

(31)

where q = (u, d), and i, f are su (3) color and avor indices respectively. for generic values of a and b the gauge
group is completely broken, and there are three light chiral elds. while it is not dicult to diagonalize the mass
matrix and nd the light degrees of freedom, it is convenient to use an alternative parameterization of the classical
moduli space in terms of the composite operators

x1 = qid

i

l, x2 = qiuil, y = det(qq) ,

(32)

where greek indices denote su (2) gauge indices. the most general renormalizable superpotential which preserves the
u (1)  u (1)r global symmetry is

wtree = q dl = x1 .

(33)

this superpotential lifts all classical at directions.

let us now analyze the quantum theory. to do that we choose 2  g2

3. the former inequality implies
that the minimum of the scalar potential lies very close to the d-at direction. to simplify the analysis we shall, in
fact, impose d-atness conditions. 14 the latter inequality guarantees that eects due to the su (2) non-perturbative
dynamics are exponentially suppressed compared to those due to the su (3) dynamics. in particular, at scales below
3 and much bigger that 2, the su (2) gauge theory is weakly coupled and its dynamics can be neglected. su (3)
 = q  qf , subject
on the other hand, connes, so we can write down an eective theory in terms of its mesons m f
to the non-perturbative superpotential,

2  g2

wnp =

27
3

det(qq)

,

(34)

which is generated by an su (3) instanton. the reader may now note that in this eective theory, su (2) appears
anomalous; it has three doublets, m f =1,2, l. however, this is not too surprising, because the superpotential (34)
drives the elds q, q away from the origin, so that su (2) is broken everywhere. indeed, as discussed in the appendix,
an su (3) gauge theory with two avors has no moduli space.

in fact, we can already conclude that supersymmetry is broken. since the superpotential (34) drives the elds q,
q away from the origin, the r-symmetry of the model is spontaneously broken. combining this with the fact the
model has no at directions, we see, based on the arguments of section iii b, that the theory breaks supersymmetry.
let us go on to analyze supersymmetry breaking in the theory in more detail. as we saw above, in the absence of
a tree-level superpotential, the theory has a runaway vacuum with q, q  . this is precisely what allows us to
nd a calculable minimum in this model. the tree-level superpotential lifts all classical at directions. any minimum
would result from a balance between wtree, which rises at innity, and wnp, which is singular at the origin. if we
choose  to be very small, the minimum would occur for large q, q vevs, so that the gauge symmetry is completely
broken, and gauge interactions are negligible. thus for a small   1 we can conclude that the light degrees of
freedom can still be described by the gauge invariant operators x1, x2 and y (in the following we shall see additional
arguments supporting the fact that x1, x2 and y are indeed the appropriate degrees of freedom). furthermore, the
superpotential in this limit is given by

w =

27
3
y

+ x1 .

(35)

we now see explicitly that supersymmetry is broken, since wx1 =  6= 0. note that this conclusion depends crucially
on the fact the we have the full list of massless elds. in general, one should be careful in drawing a conclusion about
supersymmetry breaking based on the presence of a linear term for a composite eld in the superpotential. if at some
special points additional elds become massless, the kahler metric is singular, and the potential v = wik 1
ijwj

14however, in this and in other calculable models it is easy to take d-term corrections to the scalar potential into account in
numerical calculations.

18

may vanish even if all wi are non-zero. moreover, if the theory has classical at directions, it is possible that the
kahler potential (written in terms of composites) has singularities at the boundaries of moduli space, with some elds
going to innity, and possibly others to the origin. as a result supersymmetry may be restored at the origin.

as we saw above, for the choice of parameters 3  2,   1, the theory is weakly coupled. the kahler
potential of the low energy theory is therefore the canonical kahler potential in terms of the elementary elds, q,
u, d and l, projected on the d-at direction. in terms of the gauge invariant operators it is given by (aeck-dine-
seiberg, 1985; bagger-poppitz-randall, 1993)

where a = 1/2(x 

1x1 + x 

2x2), b = 1/3y y , and

k = 24

a + bx

x2

,

x  4b cos(cid:18) 1

3

arccos

a

b3/2(cid:19) .

(36)

(37)

we therefore have all the ingredients of the low energy theory, including the superpotential and the kahler potential.
this allows one to explicitly minimize the scalar potential. for details of the analysis, we refer the reader to aeck-
dine-seiberg (1985) and bagger-poppitz-randall (1993). here we just give some qualitative results. it is possible
to work in terms of either the elementary elds, or the gauge invariants elds. simple dimensional analysis shows
that the minimum occurs for elementary eld vevs v  1/73, and that the vacuum energy is of order 5/143.
explicitly one nds that at the minimum x2 = 0, so that the global u (1) symmetry is unbroken (not surprising, as
points of higher symmetry are extremal). the massless spectrum contains the goldstino, a massless fermion of u (1)
charge 2, which saturates the u (1) anomaly, as well as a massless scalar which is the goldstone boson of the broken
r-symmetry (usually known as the r-axion).
this concludes our discussion of the calculable minimum of the 32 model, but let us make a few more comments.
first, the above analysis of supersymmetry breaking did not involve the strong dynamics of su (2). it is interesting
to see therefore the eect of turning o the su (2) gauge interactions. we then have an su (3) gauge theory with
two avors, plus two singlets l=1,2, and with the superpotential (33). classically, this superpotential leaves a
set of at directions. up to global symmetry transformations (which now include an su (2) global symmetry),
these at directions are parameterized by l1 and q2 u. the nonperturbative dynamics leads to runaway towards a
supersymmetric vacuum at innity along this direction. 15 this dangerous direction is no longer d-at when the
su (2) is turned on.

second, even though so far we concentrated on the limit 3  2, it is possible to derive the exact superpotential
of the 32 model for any choice of couplings, and to use it to establish supersymmetry breaking. note rst that
the complete list of independent gauge invariants is x1, x2, y and z  q3l (we suppress all indices). the latter
vanishes classically, or more precisely in the limit 2  0. in the limit 3  2,  = 0, the superpotential is given
by (34). in the limit 2  3,  = 0, the theory is an su (2) gauge theory with two avors and a quantum constraint
which can be implemented in the superpotential using a lagrange multiplier a, as a(z  4
2). 16 the most general
superpotential that respects all the symmetries of the theory is

w =

27
3
y

f (t, z) + a(z  4

2) g(t, z) ,

(38)

3, z  z/4

where t  x1y /7
2 are the only dimensionless eld combinations neutral under all symmetries. in the
limit 3,   0 (for which any value of t can be attained) we nd an su (2) theory with 4 doublets (and a set of
non-interacting singlet elds). since the exact superpotential for this theory is known we nd g(t, z)  1. similarly,
in the limit 2  0 we nd f (t, z) = 1 + t. the exact superpotential is then

w =

27
3
y

+ a(z  4

2) + x1 .

(39)

it is clear from this superpotential that z obtains a mass. to see if the mass is large one needs to know the kahler
potential for this eld. in the limit of weakly coupled su (2) and   1 both gauge groups are strongly broken, and

15we shall discuss the quantum behavior of susy qcd coupled to singlet elds in detail in section vi a 1.
16actually, with su (3) turned o, z in this superpotential should be understood as the pfaan of the su (2) mesons.

19

the kahler potential is close to the classical one. since classically z vanishes, the projection of the classical kahler
potential on it also vanishes (see eq. (36)). for small, but non-vanishing 2 the kahler potential of z is suppressed
by some function of 2/v. restoring the canonical normalization for the kinetic term we nd that the mass of z is
enhanced by the inverse of this function. we were therefore justied in keeping only x1, x2 and y as the light elds.
looking at (39), we can conclude that supersymmetry is broken for any choice of the parameters of the theory.
however, unlike in the limit 3  2, in general the theory is strongly coupled, and we have no control over the
kahler potential. therefore, while we may be able to estimate the scale of supersymmetry breaking we cannot say
anything about the vacuum, e. g. we cannot establish the pattern of symmetry breaking.

in the above, we rst showed that supersymmetry is broken in a specic limit, and later realized that it is always
broken. indeed, we do not expect a theory to break supersymmetry for some choice of parameters, and to develop
a supersymmetric minimum for other choices. the reason is that no phase transitions are expected to occur in
supersymmetric theories as their parameters are varied (seiberg and witten, 1994; intriligator and seiberg, 1994). if
a theory is supersymmetric for some choice of parameters, it remains supersymmetric for any choice. this allows us
to establish supersymmetry breaking by considering a convenient limit. in some theories, including the 32 model, we
can establish supersymmetry breaking in dierent limits. the details of supersymmetry breaking, such as the vacuum
energy and the source of the breaking, may be very dierent in the dierent limits.

finally, another interesting feature of the 32 model is the possibility of gauging the global u (1) symmetry, provided
that a new eld e+, with u (1) charge +2, is added to cancel the u (1)3 anomaly. with the addition of this eld, the
analysis of dynamical supersymmetry breaking does not change since neither new classical at directions appear nor are
new tree level superpotential terms allowed. this possibility proved to be useful in phenomenological model building
(dine-nelson-shirman, 1995). for our purposes, however, the importance of this u (1) is in the observation (dine et
al, 1996) that with the addition of e+, the matter content of the model falls into complete su (5) representations,
and in fact they are the same representations which are required for dsb in the su (5) model of section iii d. in
the following section we shall discuss another simple and calculable model of dsb based on an su (4)  u (1) gauge
group and again see that the matter elds form complete su (5) representations. in section vii a we shall introduce a
method of constructing large classes of dsb models based on this observation. this method will lead us to an innite
class of models generalizing 32 model. many other calculable and non-calculable generalizations will be discussed in
section vii.

b. the 41 model

another example of a calculable dsb model is the 41 model constructed by dine et al (1996) and poppitz and
trivedi (1995). consider an su (4)u (1) gauge group with matter transforming as an antisymmetric tensor of su (4),
a2 (where the subscript indicates u (1) charge), a fundamental, f3, an anti-fundamental, f 1, and an su (4) singlet,
s4.

for a range of parameters of the model, the scale of the gauge dynamics will be below the susy breaking scale. thus
one could analyze supersymmetry breaking in terms of the microscopic variables (dine et al, 1996). indeed, in terms
of the microscopic variables the kahler potential of the light degrees of freedom is nearly canonical and it is easy to
calculate the vacuum energy. we shall, however, analyze this model in terms of the gauge invariant polynomials. again
for convenience we shall work in a regime where the couplings are arranged hierarchically, with the superpotential
yukawa coupling the smallest, and with the u (1) coupling weak at the su (4) strong coupling scale17. the su (4)
moduli space is given by the elds m = f f , x = pfa, and s. the model possesses a non-anomalous r-symmetry,
and the unique superpotential allowed by the symmetries is

w =

5
4m x

+  s m .

(40)

the tree level term in the superpotential lifts all classical at directions (note that one more condition on the su (4)
moduli is imposed by the u (1) d-term). due to the non-perturbative superpotential the vacuum cannot lie in the
origin of the moduli space of the theory. as a result, the r-symmetry is spontaneously broken at the minimum of the
potential and supersymmetry is broken.

17since both yukawa and u (1) couplings become weaker in the infrared we can just choose them to be suciently small in
the ultraviolet.

20

let us argue that the non-perturbative term in the superpotential (40) is indeed generated. we would also like to
establish that the model is calculable, namely, that for some choices of parameters, the corrections to the classical
kahler potential are small near the minimum. to this end, neglect the tree level superpotential and consider a region
of the classical moduli space with m, s2  x. in this region the gauge group is broken down to an su (3) subgroup.
apart from the light modulus which controls the scale of the unbroken gauge group there is one su (3) avor in
the fundamental representation coming from the components of a.
in this eective theory the non-perturbative
superpotential is generated by gaugino condensation

w =

4
3q q

,

where q and q denote light su (3) elds, and 4

3 is an su (3) scale. using the scale matching condition

4

3 =

5
4m

,

(41)

(42)

we easily recognize the superpotential (40).

furthermore, we see that the eective su (3) also possesses a at direction along which q and q acquire vevs and
the gauge group is broken down to su (2). the strong scale of this su (2) tends to zero along the at direction. while
the tree level superpotential stabilizes the theory at nite vevs, the corrections to the classical scalar potential which
scale as 2/v (where v is the typical vev) are negligible for suciently small  and therefore the model is calculable.
the vacuum energy in this model was explicitly calculated by dine et al (1996).

it is worth noting that one can add an r-symmetry breaking (and non-renormalizable) term, m pfa, to the su-
perpotential (40) (poppitz and trivedi, 1995). we shall discuss dsb models without r-symmetry in more detail in
section vi c.

v. direct analysis: strongly-coupled theories

a. supersymmetry breaking through connement

in previous sections we have seen that, at the classical level, supersymmetric gauge theories without explicit mass
terms possess a zero energy minimum at least at the origin of eld space. classical tree level superpotentials may
lift the moduli space, but the supersymmetric vacuum at the origin survives.
in traditional calculable models of
dsb (such as the 32 model) the vacuum at the origin is lifted due to a dynamical superpotential generated by non-
perturbative eects. on the other hand, in the su (5) model, no superpotential can be generated, and supersymmetry
is broken by the conning dynamics. unfortunately, the low energy spectrum of the su (5) model is not known, and
thus the main arguments for dsb are based on the complexity of the solutions to the t hooft anomaly matching
conditions.
it would be very useful to investigate a model in which supersymmetry breaking is generated by the
conning dynamics, with a known low energy spectrum. in fact a very simple and instructive model of this type was
constructed by intriligator-seiberg-shenker (1995). this model clearly illustrates the fact that a crucial ingredient
in studying supersymmetry breaking is the knowledge of the correct degrees of freedom of the low-energy theory.
supersymmetry breaking in this theory hinges on whether the theory connes, or has an interacting coulomb phase
at the origin. it seems very plausible that the theory indeed connes, and that supersymmetry is broken as a result.
the model is based on an su (2) gauge theory with a single matter eld, q, in a three-index symmetric repre-
sentation. the model is chiral, since the quadratic invariant, q2, vanishes by the bose statistics of the superelds.
it also possesses an r-symmetry under which q has the charge 3/5. moreover, the model is asymptotically free, and
thus non-trivial infra-red dynamics may lift the supersymmetric vacuum at the origin of eld space. it is, therefore,
a candidate model of dsb according to traditional criteria for supersymmetry breaking.

the only non-trivial gauge invariant polynomial which can be constructed out of q is u = q4 (with appropriate
contraction of indices). this composite parametrizes the only at direction of the theory along which the gauge
group is completely broken. r-symmetry and holomorphy restrict any eective superpotential to be of the form
w = a1/3u5/6, where  is the dynamical scale of the theory. this superpotential, however, does not have a
sensible behavior as   0, since for large u/4 the moduli space should be close to the classical one with w  0.
therefore, a = 0. this means that the quantum theory also has a moduli space of degenerate vacua. the moduli
space may be lifted by the tree level non-renormalizable superpotential

w =


m

u ,

21

(43)

where  is a constant of order 1. in the presence of the nonrenormalizable term, the model can be thought of as a
low energy eective description of a more fundamental theory, which is valid below the scale m . choosing   m ,
there is a region of moduli space, with 4  u  m 4, in which the gauge dynamics is weak and we have a good
description of the physics in terms of an eective theory of chiral superelds.
in the presence of the non-renormalizable term, holomorphy and symmetries restrict the exact superpotential to be

w =


m

uf (t = 2u/m 6) ,

(44)

where the function f is given by the sum of instanton contributions. in the allowed region, |t|  1, f  1 and we can
use the classical superpotential.
naively, the linear superpotential for u leads to supersymmetry breaking since fu 6= 0. one should remember,
however, that as u is a composite eld, its kahler potential may be quite complicated. in particular, the kahler
potential may be singular at some points in the moduli space, potentially leading to supersymmetry restoration.

to determine the behavior of the kahler potential, consider rst the theory for large expectation values of u. in

this regime the description of the model should be semiclassical and thus the kahler potential scales as

k  qq  (uu)1/4 .

(45)

indeed this kahler potential is singular at u = 0. the singularity reects the fact that at u = 0 the gauge bosons
become massless and must be included in the eective description. there are two plausible alternatives for the nature
of the singularity in the quantum theory. it is possible that the theory is in a non-abelian coulomb phase. on the
other hand, it is possible that the singularity is smoothed out quantum mechanically. intriligator-seiberg-shenker
(1995) argued that this latter option is probably realized since the massless composite eld u satises the t hooft
anomaly matching conditions, which is quite non-trivial.18 we shall assume that this is indeed the case. then r-
symmetry, smooth behavior near the origin and semiclassical behavior at innity imply that the kahler potential is
a (smooth) function of uu/ ||8 satisfying

k = ||2 k(uu/ ||8) (cid:26) uu/ ||6 ,

(uu)1/4,

uu  8
uu  8 .

(46)

combining this form of the kahler potential with the superpotential of eq.(44) (with f  1) we nd that the scalar

potential

necessarily breaks supersymmetry with a vacuum energy of order

v = (kuu)1 |wu|2 = (kuu)1(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

,



m(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

e  ||6
m 2 .

(47)

(48)

at this point we should comment on several other interesting properties of the model. before adding the tree-level
superpotential (43), the eective description of the conned theory in terms of the u modulus possesses an accidental
global u (1) symmetry (as the kahler potential does not depend on the phase of u). this u (1) is anomalous in
terms of the elementary degrees of freedom. the tree level superpotential explicitly breaks the r-symmetry of the
model, as well as the accidental u (1). however in the low energy description there is an eective r-symmetry which
is a combination of the u (1)r and accidental u (1) symmetries. since r-symmetry in the macroscopic description
is explicitly broken by the tree level superpotential, higher order terms can generically correct (43). these terms
explicitly violate the eective r-symmetry of the low energy description. according to our analysis in section iii b
this leads to the appearance of supersymmetric vacua, but these vacua will lie outside the region of validity |u| < m 4
of our analysis, and the non-supersymmetric minimum will remain a (metastable) local minimum of the potential.

18see, however, (brodie-cho-intriligator, 1998), for a class of theories in which the existence of simple solutions to the anomaly
matching conditions suggests that the theories conne, yet the theories in fact do not conne.

22

b. establishing supersymmetry breaking through a dual theory

in this section we shall encounter a class of theories, with su (n )  su (n  2) gauge symmetry, that break
supersymmetry for odd n . by directly studying these theories, we can show that they have calculable, supersymmetry-
breaking minima for a certain choice of parameters. but we cannot show that there is no supersymmetric minimum,
simply because we cannot analyze the low-energy theory in all regions of the moduli space. however, we shall be able
to construct a seiberg-dual of the original theory, that can be reliably analyzed at low-energy. as we shall see, the
dual theory breaks supersymmetry. we can then conclude that the original theory breaks supersymmetry as well.
the reason is, that at least as long as supersymmetry is unbroken, the two duals should have the same physics at
zero energy. it is therefore impossible for one of them to be supersymmetric, with a vacuum at zero energy, and for
the other one to break supersymmetry, with non zero energy vacuum.

furthermore, it is possible that the two dual theories actually agree not just at zero energy, but in a small, nite
energy window. in the theories at hand, the scale of supersymmetry breaking is proportional to some superpotential
coupling, and can be tuned to be small enough so that it is within this energy window. it is important to stress
however that we only use the dual to establish that supersymmetry is broken. the details of supersymmetry breaking
may be dierent between the original theory and its dual.

while we mostly concentrate on the application of duality to establish supersymmetry breaking, one could adopt
a dierent point of view, and use duality to construct new models of dsb starting with known models. generically
new models constructed in such a way will describe completely dierent, yet non-supersymmetric infrared physics.
let us turn now to our example. the theory we start with is an su (n )  su (n  2) (n  5) gauge theory with
elds qi, transforming as (n, n  2) under the gauge groups, n  2 elds, li
i, transforming as (n , 1), and n elds,
r
a, that transform as (1, n  2). we denote the gauge indices of su (n ) and su (n  2) by i and , respectively,
while i = 1 . . . n  2 and a = 1 . . . n are avor indices. note that these theories are chiralno mass terms can be
added for any of the matter elds.
in the following, we shall only outline the main stages of the analysis. for details we refer the reader to (poppitz-

shadmi-trivedi, 1996b). in particular, we omit numerical factors and some scale factors throughout this section.

the classical moduli space of the theory is given by the gauge invariants yia = li  q  ra, bab = ( rn 2)ab and
b = qn 2  ln 2 (when appropriate, all indices are contracted with -tensors), subject to the classical constraints
yiabab = 0 and bab b  (y n 2)ab.

to lift all classical at directions, we can add the superpotential,

wtree = ia yia + ab bab ,

(49)

with ia =  ia for a  n  2, and zero otherwise. ab is an antisymmetric matrix, whose non-zero elements are
12 = . . . = (n 2) (n 1) =  for odd n , and 12 = . . . = (n 1)n =  for even n . 19 note that the second term
in (49) is non-renormalizable for n  6, but has dimension four for n = 5.
as it turns out, there is an important dierence between the theories with even and odd n . for odd n , the
superpotential (49) preserves an r symmetry, and one may expect supersymmetry to break. for even n , there is
no r symmetry that is preserved by (49), so supersymmetry is most likely unbroken . both of these statements are
indeed borne out by direct analysis, as we shall see.

it is also easy to check that if we set ab = 0 in (49), all at directions are lifted, except for the baryon directions

bab.

to analyze the quantum theory, we can start with the limit n  n 2, where n , n 2 are the strong coupling
scales of su (n ), su (n  2) respectively. su (n ) has n  2 avors, so gaugino condensation in an unbroken su (2)
subgroup generates the superpotential

w   2n +2

b !1/2

n

.

(50)

thus there is no moduli space. below n , su (n  2) appears anomalous.
it is also partially broken. this is
reminiscent of the situation we encountered in the 32 model. however, there, because of the su (3) superpotential,
the su (2) was completely broken. in contrast, here the su (n  2) is not completely broken, so there is some strong
dynamics associated with the unbroken group. it is therefore very hard (or impossible) to analyze the theory (except

19in fact, one can lift all at directions with other choices for ia and ab, see poppitz-shadmi-trivedi (1996b).

23

for a special choice of parameters, for which it has a calculable minimum, as we shall see later). fortunately, we can
turn to a dual theory, in which the low-energy dynamics is under control. 20

before we do that, one comment is in order. it is already clear from eq. (50) that the electric theory has no moduli
space. in addition, with  = 0, the theory has classical at directions. if these are not lifted quantum mechanically,
the superpotential (50) pushes some elds to large vevs along these directions. then for   1 we can nd a calculable
minimum. this indeed is the case. we shall return to this calculable minimum towards the end of the section. first,
however, we would like to show that the theory has no supersymmetric vacua. to do that, we turn to the dual theory.
we construct the dual theory in the limit n 2  n . however, it is expected to give a valid description of the
original theory in the infrared for any n 2/n (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a). the dual theory is obtained by
dualizing the su (n  2). this can be thought of as the process of rst turning o the su (n ) coupling, so that we
are left with an su (n  2) with n avors. dualizing this theory we nd an su (2) theory with n avors. finally,
we switch the su (n ) coupling back on in this dual theory.

the dual theory then has su (n )  su (2) gauge symmetry, with the following eld content:

su (n ) su (2)

qi

ra
1
 mia
i
l
i

n
1
n
n

2
2
1
1

(51)

the su (2) singlets mia correspond to the su (n  2) mesons qi  ra, and  is a mass scale that relates the strong
coupling scales of su (n  2) and su (2): 2n 6

 n .
in addition, the dual theory has a yukawa superpotential:

n 2 6n

2

w =

1


ma ra  q .

(52)

note that in this dual theory, su (2) has n avors, so naively it is in the dual regime. we shall soon see however
that the combination of the yukawa superpotential (52) and the su (n ) dynamics, drives the theory into the conning
regime.

to see that, note that su (n ) now has n avors, and therefore, a quantum modied moduli space. below the
 and

su (n ) conning scale 21, we can write down an eective theory in terms of the su (n ) mesons na  mia qi
yia  mia li

i, and the su (n ) baryons b  det(ma) and

b  q2  ln 2  qn 2  ln 2  b ,

where in the last equation we used the baryon map of sqcd, eq. (a38). here we omit various scales as well numerical
coecients.

in terms of these variables, the su (2) still has 2n doublets, na and ra, but the superpotential (52) now turns into

w  na  ra ,

(53)

which gives masses to all su (2) doublets. thus, indeed, as su (n ) connes, the yukawa couplings turn into mass
terms and drive su (2) into the conning regime.

since su (2) is now conning, with mass terms for all its doublets, we should work in terms of its mesons, all of

which obtain vevs. a convenient way of keeping track of the correct vevs is to add the superpotential

w   pfv
2l !

6n

1

n 2

.

(54)

here 2l is the su (2) scale after su (n ) connes, and v stands collectively for the su (2) mesons [n 2], [r2], [n  r].
we use brackets to indicate that these mesons should be thought of as single elds now.
in addition, recall that the su (n ) dynamics leads to a constraint that can be implemented through the superpo-

tential

20the appearance of the superpotential (50) can be seen in the dual theory as well (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996b).
21this scale is not n . rather, it is a combination of n , n 2, and  (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996b).

24

where a is a lagrange multiplier, and n l is the su (n ) scale.

a (cid:0)[n 2]  y n 2  b b  2n
n l(cid:1) ,

combining (55), (54) and (53) with the tree level superpotential, which now has the form

ia yia + ab [ra  rb] ,

(55)

(56)

we have the complete superpotential. note that in the last step we used the sqcd baryon map bab  ra  rb.
we now have a low energy eld theory with all gauge dynamics integrated out. this low energy theory consists
of the elds b, b, yia, [n 2], [r2] and [n  r], with a superpotential that is given by adding (53) through (56). we
can check then whether all f terms vanish simultaneously. this is a rather tedious task, and we refer the interested
reader to (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996b). as the analysis shows, for odd n , no solution exists, and supersymmetry
is broken. for even n a solution does exist.

it is interesting to see what happens before adding the tree-level superpotential. in that case, the f equations have
no solution for nite eld vevs. furthermore, for  = 0 and  6= 0, the dierent f-terms tend to zero as some of the
baryons bab tend to innity.
one diculty which we glossed over in the above discussion is related to the fact that after su (n ) connes, the
su (2) scale 2l is eld dependent. if this scale vanishes, additional elds may become massless, and the kahler
potential in terms of the degrees of freedom we kept so far may become singular. to resolve this issue, one can add a
heavy su (n ) avor. in this case, no scale is eld dependent, and the analysis conrms the results stated above. in
particular, one nds that supersymmetry is broken for odd n . for further details see (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996b).
to summarize, while we could not in general analyze the original su (n ) su (n  2) theory, we were able to show
to complete our discussion of this theory, we now turn to the calculable minimum we mentioned earlier. this

that it breaks supersymmetry for odd n by studying its dual su (n )  su (2) theory.
minimum can be studied in the electric theory itself, so duality plays no role in the analysis.

as we already mentioned, with  = 0, all f terms asymptote to zero along the baryonic at direction. let us
now see this in the electric theory. we choose a particular baryon direction, with ri
a. this corresponds to
b(n 1)n  vn 2, with all other bab = 0. along this direction, su (n  2) is completely broken, so for large v we
can neglect its eects. furthermore, the rst term in (49) gives masses v to all su (n ) avors (in the following
we set  = 1 for convenience). at low energies we are thus left with a pure su (n ), whose scale n l satises
n l  vn 2 2n +2
3n

. gaugino condensation in this theory then leads to a superpotential

a = v i

n

.

(57)

w (cid:0)vn 2(cid:1)1/n

(cid:16)b(n 1)n(cid:17)1/n

1
n 1

we thus have a low energy theory in terms of the baryons bab, with the superpotential (57) (for  = 0), so the f
term for b(n 1)n behaves as f  (b(n 1)n )
which goes to zero as b(n 1)n  . but whether this is a runaway
direction or not depends on the kahler potential. in fact, it can be argued (shirman, 1996) that the kahler potential
is canonical in terms of the elementary elds ra, up to small corrections. thus, if the f terms for ra tend to zero
n 1 = v2/n and
along this direction, there is a runaway minimum at innity. indeed, these f terms behave as v
asymptote to zero as v  .
adding now a small  6= 0, the potential can be stabilized as v  , with a supersymmetry-breaking minimum for
large values of v. note that for n  6, the baryon term in (49) is non-renormalizable, so  is naturally small. in fact,
as was shown in (poppitz and trivedi, 1996), this minimum can be analyzed using a simple -model approach, and
is interesting for model building purposes, as there is a large unbroken global symmetry at the minimum, in which, a
priori at least, one can embed the standard-model gauge group.

n 2

c. integrating matter in and out

in section iii d we discussed the supersymmetry breaking su (5) model with matter in the antisymmetric tensor
and in the antifundamental representations. this model does not possess any classical or dynamical superpotential
and does not have at directions. we gave two arguments establishing dsb. one was based on the complexity
of solutions to t hooft anomaly matching conditions, while the other was based on the formation of the gaugino
condensate. we also discussed generalizations of the su (5) model.

here we shall use the same class of theories to illustrate another method of analysis which is useful in non-calculable
models (murayama, 1995; poppitz and trivedi, 1995). in this method one modies the model of interest to make it
calculable through the introduction of extra vector-like matter. when these vector-like matter elds are massless, the

25

models typically posses at directions along which the gauge group is broken and the theory is in a weak coupling
regime. for small masses of these matter elds the weak coupling approximation is still reliable and the theory
remains calculable. thus, the modied theory with small masses allows a direct analysis of supersymmetry breaking.
then one considers the limit of innite vector-like matter mass. in this limit the vector-like matter decouples and
one is left with the original theory. if supersymmetry is broken in the modied theory with the additional light elds,
holomorphy arguments ensure that it is broken for any nite values of masses. moreover, since the theories that we
have in mind do not have classical at directions both for nite and innite masses, we expect that the asymptotic
behavior of the scalar potential (and therefore, the witten index) remain unchanged in the innite mass limit. thus
the assumption that no phase transition occurs when going to the innite mass limit, leads us to the conclusion that
supersymmetry is broken in the original strongly coupled model. we stress that this approach gives strong evidence
for supersymmetry breaking, yet does not help in understanding the strongly coupled susy breaking vacuum. the
reason is that as the mass of the vector-like matter becomes large, m  , control of the kahler potential is lost and
the theory becomes non-calculable.
we now discuss the application of this method to the models at hand, following poppitz and trivedi (1995). we

consider models with an su (2n + 1) gauge group, an antisymmetric tensor a, 2n  3 + nf antifundamentals q
i ,
(i = 1, . . . , 2n  3 + nf ), and nf fundamentals qa
, (a = 1, . . . , nf ). it is convenient to start with the case nf = 3,
and then to integrate out vector-like matter. the classical moduli space is described by the following gauge invariant
operators

i = q


m a
i qa
 ,

xij = aq
i q
y a = 1,...,2n +1a1,2  a2n 12n qa
z = 1,...,2n +1a12  a2n 3,2n 2qa


j ,

2n +1 ,
2n 1qb

2n qc

2n +3abc .

(58)

these moduli overcount by one the number of the massless degrees of freedom at a generic point of the moduli space,
and thus are related by a single constraint which easily follows from the bose statistics of the superelds

y  m 2  x n 1 

k
3

zpfx = 0 ,

(59)

where appropriate contraction of indices is assumed. vevs of the moduli (58) satisfying the constraint (59) describe
non-equivalent classical vacuum states. the kahler potential of the theory written in terms of the gauge invariant
composites is singular at the origin. as usual this singularity reects the fact that the gauge symmetry is restored
at the origin of the moduli space and additional massless degrees of freedom descend into the low energy theory. in
complete analogy with sqcd (see eq. (a28)) this constraint is modied by non-perturbative eects,

y  m 2  x n 1 

k
3

zpfx = 4n +2 .

(60)

as a result, the origin of eld space where the gauge symmetry is completely restored does not belong to the quantum
moduli space. the kahler potential is non-singular in any nite region of the moduli space, and we have good control
of the physics. we note in passing that the kahler potential may still become singular at the boundaries of the
(d-at) moduli space, where a subgroup of the original su (2n + 1) gauge group remains unbroken (corresponding to
the situation with some moduli vevs vanishing while other vevs tend to innity). we shall carefully consider models
in which the physics in such boundary regions is important in section vi b. for the time being we note that as long
as the classical superpotential of the theory lifts all at directions, such boundary regions are not accessible and we
do not need to worry about them.

having understood the properties of the moduli space we turn on the tree level superpotential. the full superpo-

tential of the theory with three vector-like avors can be written as

w3 = l(y  m 2  x k1 

n
3

zpfx  2(2n +1)) + mi

am a

i + ij xij ,

(61)

where mi
a is a rank three mass matrix, and the matrix of yukawa couplings  is chosen so that all classical at
directions are lifted. we can now vary the masses mi
a to move in the parameter space between the nf = 3 and
nf = 0 theories. however, it is useful to rst choose only one mass eigenvalue to be large, so that the eective
description is of two light vector-like avors. in such a case the superpotential takes the form

w2 =

4n +3

(2)

acy am c

i1 i1...i2n 1xi2i3  xi2n 2i2n 1

26

+ mi

am a

i + ij xij ,

(62)

where the low energy scale (2) is given by the usual scale matching condition, 4n +3
(2) = m4n +2 and the tree level
terms only include elds of the nf = 2 model. we note that the nonperturbative term in eq. (62) is generated by
a one instanton term in the gauge theory. by solving the equations of motion for the mesons m a
it is easy to see
i
that the f-atness conditions can not be satised. together with the regularity of the kahler potential in any nite
region of the moduli space and the absence of classical at directions, this implies supersymmetry breaking (poppitz
and trivedi (1995)). we note that for small masses m   and couplings   1 the theory is in a semiclassical
regime and the low energy theory is calculable. as the masses are increased, control of the kahler potential, and as a
result, calculability, are lost, yet supersymmetry remains broken. for large masses, m  , the eective description
is given by the nf = 0 models, so that we have given an additional argument for supersymmetry breaking in these
noncalculable theories.

vi. violations of indirect criteria for dsb

so far we have concentrated on models satisfying the aeck-dine-seiberg (1985) criteria for dynamical susy
breaking. these criteria restricted model building eorts to chiral models with r symmetries and with no at
directions. in recent years a number of non-chiral models, models with classical at directions, and models with no
r-symmetry, have been shown to break supersymmetry dynamically. in this section we shall discuss such examples
in turn.

a. non-chiral models

1. susy qcd with singlets

we shall start the discussion of non-chiral models with susy qcd coupled to gauge singlet elds. we shall vary
the number of avors in the theory and analyze the quantum behavior along the classical at directions. we should
warn the reader that generically these models do not break supersymmetry. however, this analysis will lead us to the
non-chiral itiy model of dsb (intriligator and thomas, 1996a; izawa and yanagida, 1996) discussed in the following
subsection. along the way we shall develop useful techniques for the analysis of at directions and illustrate them in
additional examples in section vi b.

consider an su (n ) gauge theory with nf avors coupled to a single gauge singlet eld through the superpotential

w = s qi  qi.

(63)

this superpotential lifts one classical at direction of susy qcd, namely, mij = vij. on the other hand, there is a
at direction along which s is non-vanishing. along this direction the vev of s plays the role of a mass for the quark
superelds 22.

for large s the eective theory is pure sym with an eective strong coupling scale 3n

sy m = snf 3n nf , where
s denotes the expectation value, and  is the original su (n ) scale. gaugino condensation in the eective theory
generates the superpotential

w = 3

sy m = snf /n 3n nf .

(64)

the superpotential (64) gives an eective description at scales much smaller than hsi, yet the uctuations of s itself
remain massless, and (64) can be considered as an eective superpotential for this modulus, leading to the scalar
potential

note that this eective description is only valid for s  . we see that for nf < n this potential slopes to zero at
innity, and the vacuum energy is arbitrarily small for large s, exactly in the region where our eective description

v = 2

3n nf

n

nf n

n

.

|s|2

(65)

22note that unlike the case with a tree level mass term the superpotential preserves a nonanomalous r-symmetry, which is
only broken spontaneously by the s vev.

27

is reliable. for nf  n the potential for s is non-vanishing at innity (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985). of course, the
stabilization of this direction in the case nf  nc does not imply supersymmetry breaking (or even the existence of
a stable vacuum) in the full model. first, the analysis performed so far is not valid near the origin of eld space. in
addition there are many unlifted mesonic and baryonic at directions. yet, this suggests a way to stabilize other at
directions. namely, one could couple the quarks to n 2

f gauge singlet elds 23

w =

k

xij

ij sij qi  qj ,

(66)

where the matrix of yukawa coupling constants has maximal rank, and in the following we shall choose it to be
ij =  ij. 24 the superpotential (66) lifts all mesonic at directions mij = qiqj.
if baryonic branches of the
moduli space exist, they can be lifted by introducing additional nonrenormalizable couplings to singlets, but we shall
leave these directions aside for the moment.

along the singlet at directions all quark superelds generically become massive, and the eective theory is pure

sym with the superpotential

w = 

nf
n s

nf
n 

3n nf

n

,

(67)

1

where s = (det s)
nf . this is just a direct generalization of eq. (64), and we see that the at direction is stabilized
quantum mechanically for nf  n . a somewhat more careful analysis would show that the stabilization happens for
all directions sij as we shall see below.
to better understand the quantum behavior of the model, we shall repeat the above analysis in more detail. we

write the scalar potential in the form 25

v =

2

nf

xi  (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

qi(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

qi(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2! +

nf

xij (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

sij(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

,

(68)

where w includes all possible nonperturbative contributions. a supersymmetric minimum in the model exists if all
three terms in (68) vanish. the rst two contributions in this potential reproduce the scalar potential of susy qcd
with nf avors and with the mass matrix mij =  sij. we can, therefore use eq. (a24) of the appendix to nd the
meson expectation values for which these terms vanish

mij =(cid:0)det(s) 3n nf(cid:1)1/n(cid:18) 1

s(cid:19)ij

.

(69)

note that analyticity requires that (69) is satised for all values of nf . we can now substitute this solution back into
(68)

v =

2

nf

xij (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

sij(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

= ||2 xij

|mij|2 = ||2

nf

n (cid:12)(cid:12)det(s) 3n nf(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

.

(70)

2/nxij (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

s(cid:19)ij(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:18) 1

it is easy to see that this term is minimized by sij = sij  (det s)1/nf ij. therefore the scalar potential for the
lightest modulus s is

v =(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

nf 3n nf snf n(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2
n

.

(71)

23in this case, the singlets transform under the global su (nf )l  su (nf )r group, and the chiral symmetry is preserved by
the superpotential. it is spontaneously broken by the sij vevs.
24recall that the only fact we need to know about the kahler potential to establish supersymmetry breaking is that it is
non-singular in the appropriate variables. as a result one can further rescale  to one by eld redenitions, but it would be
useful for us to keep it explicit.
25this potential, of course, is further modied by corrections to the kahler potential.

28

this is just the potential which could be derived from eq. (67) and we again see that the at direction is lifted if
nf  n . in fact now we can make a stronger statement. when nf = n + 1 the model is s-conning (csaki-schmaltz-
skiba, 1997c), and near the origin has a weakly coupled description in terms of composite (mesonic and baryonic)
degrees of freedom. as a result the potential (70) is reliable near the origin, and we see that supersymmetry is restored
there. when nf > n + 1 the weakly coupled description is given in terms of the dual gauge theory theory, and it is
also possible to show that a supersymmetric vacuum exists at the origin.

the most interesting case for our purposes is nf = n , where the vacuum energy is independent of the value of s
in the approximation that the kahler potential is classical. this statement is equivalent to the statement that the
energy is constant and non-vanishing everywhere on the mesonic branch of the moduli space. so far we have not
considered the baryonic at directions. in fact, in the model with nf = n avors and the superpotential (66) the
potential slopes to zero along the baryonic directions. however, it is easy to see that a simple modication leads to
dsb (intriligator and thomas, 1996a; izawa and yanagida, 1996). this modication requires the introduction of two
additional gauge singlet elds with nonrenormalizable couplings to the su (n ) baryons (in the n = 2 case the new
couplings are renormalizable).

2. the intriligator-thomas-izawa-yanagida model

let us concentrate on a particular case with su (2) gauge group with two avors of matter elds in the fundamental
representation (four doublets qi, i = 1, . . . , 4). because the matter elds are in the pseudoreal representation the
superpotential (66) with n 2
f singlets does not lift all the mesonic at directions. 26 two mesonic at directions remain
and lead to a supersymmetric minimum at innity in direct analogy with the baryonic at directions for general n .
a slight modication of the theory with n 2

f + 2 = 6 singlets lifts all mesonic at directions

sij mij ,

w =xij

(72)

where mij = qi  qj, and sij transform in the antisymmetric representation of the global su (4)f symmetry. 27
furthermore, we notice that near the origin of the moduli space, the theory has a weakly coupled description in terms
of the mesons, mij. thus our preceding discussion immediately leads us to the conclusion that supersymmetry is
broken.

let us understand qualitatively the mechanism of supersymmetry breaking. the nonperturbative dynamics gener-

ates the quantum constraint

pf(m ) = 4

2 .

(73)

this quantum constraint modies the moduli space. while the origin mij = 0 belongs to the classical moduli space,
it does not lie on the quantum moduli space. on the other hand, the s f -terms only vanish at the origin, mij = 0.
supersymmetry is therefore broken because the f-atness conditions are incompatible with the quantum moduli
space.

it is often convenient to impose the quantum constraint through a lagrange multiplier in the superpotential. then

the full superpotential is

w =  s m + a (pfm  4

2) ,

(74)

where a is the lagrange multiplier eld. for   1 the vacuum will lie close to the su (2) quantum moduli space.
thus one can consider the superpotential (72) as a small perturbation around the vacuum of the nf = nc sqcd
with masses m = hsi. 28 in this approximation the scalar potential is given again by (70) and is minimized when
(up to symmetry transformations)

s = s12 = s34 ,

s13 = s14 = s23 = s24 = 0 ,

m12 = m34 = 1

2

 s (cid:16) 4

pf(s)(cid:17) = 4

2 .

(75)

26note that the superpotential (66) does not preserve the global su (4)f symmetry of the su (2) with four doublets.
27for simplicity we choose  to respect global su (4) symmetry, but this is not necessary.
28this approximation is equivalent to satisfying the equation of of motion for the lagrange multiplier a.

29

the vacuum energy is then given by

v = ||2 4 .

(76)

thus, we have a non-chiral (left-right symmetric) model 29 which breaks supersymmetry! indeed, as we mentioned
in section iii a the witten index can change discontinuously if the asymptotic behavior of the classical potential
changes. consider modifying the itiy model by turning on a mass term for the singlet, m s2. for suciently large
mass, the low-energy eective theory is pure sym, and the witten index tr(1)f 6= 0. this is therefore true for any
non-vanishing value of m. as the limit m  0 is taken, the asymptotic behavior of the potential changes (there is
now a classical at direction with s 6= 0) and the witten index vanishes. note that, in accord with our discussion of
section iii a, the potential 76 is at along the s at direction.
at the level of the analysis we performed so far, there is a pseudo-at direction parameterized by s. since s is the
only light eld in the low energy theory and the superpotential (74) is exact, this direction would be exactly at if the
kahler potential for s were canonical. however, quantum contributions to the kahler potential lift the degeneracy.
for suciently small  and large hsi it is possible to show (arkani-hamed and murayama, 1997; dimopoulos et
al, 1998) by renormalization group arguments that the quantum correction due to the wave-function renormalization of
s are calculable and lead to a logarithmic growth of the potential at large s. it is possible to construct modications of
the itiy models with calculable (but not necessarily global) supersymmetry breaking (murayama, 1997; dimopoulos
et al, 1998). this is achieved by gauging a subgroup of the global symmetry under which s transforms. as a result,
the wave function renormalization of s as well as the vacuum energy depend on both the yukawa and gauge coupling.
for an appropriate choice of parameters, a local minimum of the potential exists for a large s vev realizing wittens
(1981b) idea of inverted hierarchy in a model with dynamical supersymmetry breaking. while generically we can
not nd the minimum of the potential we expect on dimensional grounds that the natural scales for the minima are
s = 0,o(2).
we should also mention several obvious but useful generalizations of the itiy model. consider an sp (n ) gauge
group with n + 1 avors of matter elds in the fundamental representation. this theory has an su (2n + 2) avor
symmetry. when the quarks are coupled to gauge singlet elds transforming in the antisymmetric representation of
the avor symmetry group, supersymmetry is broken in exactly the same way as in the su (2) model. a slightly
more complicated generalization is based on an su (n ) gauge group with nf = n avors. in this case the baryonic
operators b and b are required to parameterize the quantum moduli space. therefore, the superpotential (72) will not
be sucient for supersymmetry breaking. in particular there will be a supersymmetric solution mij = 0, bb = 2n
n .
supersymmetry is broken if two additional elds, x and x with superpotential couplings 1xb + 2xb are added
to the superpotential. to enforce this structure of the superpotential one can gauge baryon number. we should note
that in the case of the su (n ) models, the renormalization group argument we used to show that the potential grows
at large singlet vevs is not applicable to the x and x directions. other models with quantum modied moduli
spaces can also break supersymmetry when each invariant appearing in the constraint is coupled to a gauge singlet
csaki-schmaltz-skiba (1997b).

the 32 model revisited

before closing this section we would like to reanalyze, following intriligator and thomas (1996a), the familiar 32
model of aeck-dine-seiberg discussed in section iv a in a dierent limit, 2  3. we shall see that the description
of supersymmetry breaking is quite dierent in this limit. first, note that from the point of view of the su (2) gauge
group we have the matter content of the itiy model, namely four su (2) doublets (three qs and l) and six singlets
(u and d). the superpotential couplings of the 32 models are not sucient to lift all classical at directions, and in
addition to the singlets there is an su (2) meson which can acquire a vev. (of course all these at directions, the
including singlet ones, are lifted by su (3) d-terms as we learned in section iv a.) let us parameterize the su (2)
mesons by mij = qiqj, mi4 = qil, where the summation over su (2) indices is suppressed. in these variables the
superpotential of the model is

(77)
where a is a lagrange multiplier. extremizing the superpotential with respect to d we nd that the scalar potential
contains terms

w = a(pfm  4

2) +  dimi4 ,

29practically, what is usually meant by a non-chiral model is that all elds can be given masses. this issue is a bit subtle in
the itiy model, as quark mass terms can be absorbed by a redenition of the singlets. still, one may rst give masses to the
singlets and integrate them out, and then introduce quark masses, so that ultimately all elds become heavy.

30

v =

3

xi

|mi4|2 + . . . .

(78)

by an su (3) rotation we can set m14 = m24 = 0. thus supersymmetry is restored if it is possible that m34 = 2  0.
in turn this requirement and the quantum constraint (73) mean that

m12 =

4
2
2  .

(79)

at large expectation values the quantum moduli space approaches the classical one. thus equation (79) can only
be satised if the model possesses classical at directions. but as we already know, when the su (3) d-atness
conditions are imposed, the model does not have at directions. therefore supersymmetry must be broken. the
natural expectation values of the (canonically normalized) elds at the minimum of the potential are of order o(2),
therefore the quantum corrections to the kahler potential are signicant and one can only estimate the vacuum energy

in this limit, v (cid:12)(cid:12)24(cid:12)(cid:12).

b. quantum removal of flat directions

in the previous section we encountered the itiy model which breaks supersymmetry even though it has a classical
at direction. quantum mechanically, the potential becomes non-zero and at (up to logarithmic corrections) far along
this at direction. it is in fact possible for quantum eects to completely lift classical at directions, generating
a growing potential along these directions. thus it is possible for theories with classical at directions to break
supersymmetry, with a stable, supersymmetry-breaking minimum. we shall now build upon the insights gained in
our analysis of of sqcd of the previous section, to develop a method for determining when classical at directions
are lifted quantum mechanically. we shall also discuss some examples in which this happens.

as will become clear from our discussion, a crucial requirement for the quantum removal of at directions is that
some gauge dynamics becomes strong along the at direction. in many models, the opposite happens, that is, the
gauge group is completely broken along the at direction, and the dynamics becomes weaker as s increases. however,
it may be the case that along the at direction, some gauge group remains unbroken, and elds charged under it
obtain masses proportional to s. then the dynamics associated with this gauge group becomes strong, and may lift
the at direction.

we should stress that in this section we shall be asking two separate questions. first, we shall ask if quantum
eects can stabilize the potential along a given at direction. it is most convenient to answer this question by nding
a set of degrees of freedom which give a weakly coupled description of the theory in the region of interest on the
moduli space. however, if the quantum stabilization of the potential indeed happens, the vacuum may well lie in
the genuinely strongly coupled region. thus an armative answer to the rst question is not sucient to give an
armative answer to our second question, whether supersymmetry is broken in the model. to answer this second
question we shall need to consider the properties of the exact superpotential in the strong coupling region.

following shirman (1996), consider a model with classical at directions. assume for simplicity that there is a
single modulus s. in the approximation of a canonical kahler potential, the scalar potential of the model can be
written as

2

v = vr + vs =x(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

i(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

.

(80)

+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

s (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

the applicability of this scalar potential is restricted by the assumption that the kahler potential is canonical.
however, for large enough s vevs the description of the physics often simplies, and in fact, it may be possible to
nd a description where the theory (or a sector of the theory) is weakly coupled. in such a limit, it is convenient
to analyze the theory in two steps. first, one considers a reduced theory with the scalar potential vr, where s
plays a role of the xed parameter. one then studies the behavior of the scalar potential of the reduced theory as
a function of s as well as contributions of vs. let us consider various possibilities.

1. a susy-breaking reduced theory

suppose that the potential vr in the reduced theory along the at direction is non-zero, so that the reduced
theory breaks supersymmetry . if vr is an increasing function of s, it is clear that the at direction is stabilized.
typically, vr  0 as s  0, but even if vr tends to a nonvanishing constant one can not conclude at this stage that
supersymmetry is broken in the full theory. this is because the theory is typically in a strong coupling regime near

31

the origin of the moduli space and therefore the assumption of a canonical kahler potential as well as the separation
of the scalar potential into the sum of two terms is not justied. an example of a model with such behavior is an
su (4)  su (3)  u (1) model of csaki-randall-skiba (1996) see section vii a. classically there is a at direction
along which the gauge group is broken down to su (4)  u (1) and the matter is the same as in the 4  1 model
discussed in section iv b. the strong coupling scale of the eective su (4) gauge group grows with the modulus, and
the at direction is stabilized (shirman, 1996). additional analysis performed by csaki-randall-skiba (1996) shows
that there is no supersymmetric vacuum at the origin, thus allowing them to conclude that susy is broken. this
mechanism of quantum removal of classical at directions is quite generic for discarded generator models (see section
vii a).

another possibility is that vr is a decreasing function of the modulus leading to a run-away behavior at moderate
values of s. in this case one should include in the analysis contributions from vs. since the stable vacuum (if it
exists at all) will be found at large values of s, the separation of the scalar potential into two terms is well justied.
we can therefore conclude that as long as vs stabilizes the at direction, susy is broken. if, however, vs  0 as
s   the theory does not have a stable vacuum. a very basic example of such behavior is the antisymmetric tensor
models discussed in section iii d 4. in these models the eective theory along the classical at direction is susy
breaking su (5) with the scale vanishing at the boundary of the moduli space. the theory does not have a stable
vacuum. introducing a tree level superpotential lifts all classical at directions, stabilizes the potential and breaks
supersymmetry. note that there is no weak coupling description anywhere on the moduli space of the model. this
means that the separation of the scalar potential into vr and vs is not apriori justied. however, vr arises from
non-perturbative eects in the kahler potential while vs arises from the tree level superpotential. as a result there
is no interference eects between vr and vs and we can separate the potential into two positive denite terms.

2. a supersymmetric reduced theory

now we would like to consider models where vr = 0 has solutions for all values of s (or for a set of moduli). in
these cases we have to analyze the behavior of vs subject to the condition that vr = 0 is satised. it is instructive to
consider as examples two classes of analogous models with the gauge groups sp (n/2)  su (n  1) (intriligator and
thomas, 1996a) and su (n )  su (n  1) (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a).
we begin with the model of intriligator and thomas (1996a). the matter content is q  (n, n  1), l  (n, 1),
ra  (1, n  1), with the tree level superpotential:

wtree =  q l r2 +

1
m

n

xa,b>2

ab q2 ra rb .

(81)

this superpotential leaves classical at directions associated with the su (n  1) antibaryons ba = ( qn 1)a = vn 1
(we shall denote the r vevs by v). the exact superpotential was found in (intriligator and thomas, 1996a), and was
used to show that there is no supersymmetric vacuum in the nite region of moduli space. here we shall conne
ourselves to discussing the physics along the classical baryonic at directions.

without loss of generality, we can consider the at direction s  b1 = vn 1. along this direction, su (n 
1) is completely broken. on the other hand, all sp avors get masses proportional to v through the tree-level
superpotential, so that one is left with a pure sp (n/2) which gets stronger for larger s. gaugino condensation in
this group then produces the superpotential

leading to the potential

ws  s

2

n +2 ,

(82)

(83)

2

 s 2n

n +2 .

vs =(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

s (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(note that here vr = 0.) actually, one can obtain this result starting from the exact superpotential. however, at
scales s  1 the relevant degrees of freedom are the elementary ones, so we should consider the behavior of the
potential in terms of v,

we see that for n > 4 it increases along the classical at direction. thus the classical at direction is stabilized
quantum mechanically. the analysis of the theory in the nite region of the eld space (intriligator and thomas, 1996a)
shows that susy is broken.

vs  v2 n 4

n +2 .

(84)

32

we would like to compare these results with the behavior of the model of poppitz-shadmi-trivedi (1996a) based on
an su (n )  su (n  1) gauge group with matter in the fundamental representations: q  (n, n  1), li  ( n , 1),
and ra (1, n  1), where i = 1 . . . n  1, and a = 1 . . . n . the tree level superpotential is given by:

wtree =xia

ia q li ra + a ba ,

(85)

where ba = ( rn 1)a is an antibaryon of su (n  1). this superpotential lifts all at directions as long as the coupling
are chosen so that (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a) ia has maximal rank and

since we are interested in understanding the physics along the at directions we shall set a = 0. then there are
classical at directions parameterized by the su (n  1) antibaryons, in complete analogy with the su (n  1) 
sp (n/2) model discussed above. again, along the direction s  bn , su (n  1) is broken, and all avors of su (n )
obtain mass. su (n ) gaugino condensation generates the potential

ia a 6= 0 .

(86)

again, this potential can also be obtained from the exact superpotential of the theory, which was obtained in (poppitz-
shadmi-trivedi, 1996a). in terms of the vev of the elementary eld r we then have

vs  s2 n 1

n

(87)

2
n .

vs  v

unlike in the case of the intriligator-thomas model the runaway behavior persists and the model does not have a
stable vacuum state. turning on a according to (86), all at directions are lifted. this, together with the analysis
of (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a), which shows that there is no supersymmetric minimum in the nite region of
moduli space, allows one to conclude that supersymmetry is broken.

as we mentioned in the beginning of this subsection, the key ingredient in quantum lifting of at directions is that
the dynamics of some gauge group becomes strong along the at direction. this in fact happens in both the su  sp
and the su  su examples we saw above, as, along the relevant at direction, one group factor remains unbroken
and elds charged under it obtain masses. however, the numerical factors are such that the potential grows along the
at direction in the rst example, and slopes to zero in the second.

while general criteria for the determination of the quantum behavior along classical at directions do not exist, we
have illustrated several techniques which are useful for the analysis. we should also stress that we have concentrated
on the simplest examples with a single modulus. in more general situations it is not sucient to perform an analysis
for each at direction separately, assuming that other moduli are stabilized. one should do a complete analysis
allowing all moduli to obtain independent vevs consistent with d and f -atness conditions. in particular one should
study the moduli which do not appear in the tree level superpotential.

c. supersymmetry breaking with no r-symmetry

in section iii b we discussed the relation between susy breaking and r-symmetries. we saw that theories with
a spontaneously broken r-symmetry and no at directions break susy. we also saw that if r-breaking terms are
added to the superpotential, susy is typically restored. we emphasized that both these statements assume that the
superpotential is generic, that is, all terms allowed by the symmetries appear.

in this section we shall encounter a theory with the most general renormalizable superpotential allowed by symme-
tries, which breaks supersymmetry even though it does not have an r-symmetry. furthermore, unlike the theory of
section v a, it does not possess an eective r-symmetry in the low-energy description. as we shall see, the reason
supersymmetry is broken is that the dynamical superpotential is not generic.

the model we describe is an su (4) su (3) gauge theory studied by (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a), which is the
rst in a series of su (n ) su (n  1) models that we already discussed from a dierent perspective in section vi b.
here we only state some of the results. the matter content is q  (4, 3), li  (4, 1), and ra  (1, 3) with i = 1 . . . 3,
a = 1 . . . 4. one can add the classical superpotential

w = 

3

xi=1

q  li  ri +  q  l1  r4 + ( r3)

1

4
+ ( r3)

,

(88)

33

a
with appropriate contractions of the gauge indices (in particular, ( r3)
stands for the su (3) baryon with the
eld ra omitted). this superpotential does not preserve any r-symmetry.
it is the most general renormalizable
superpotential preserving an su (2) global symmetry that rotates l2, l3 together with r2, r3. in addition, it lifts all
the classical at directions of the model. if we add nonrenormalizable terms to this superpotential, (supersymmetric)
minima will appear at planckian eld strength. these extra minima will not destabilize the non-supersymmetric
minima we shall be discussing. 30

as was shown in (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a), the theory breaks supersymmetry. this can be established by
carefully analyzing the low energy theory. in the limit that the su (3) dynamics is stronger, su (3) connes, giving
a low energy theory in which su (4) has four avors. after su (4) connes one has an oraifeartaigh-like theory,
with the elds yia = q  li  ra, ba = ( r3)a, b = q3l3, pa = q3(q  ra), and b = det(q  r) (the last two vanish
classically). taking into account the dynamically generated superpotential we nd that the full superpotential is given
by,

w =

paba  b

5
3

+ a (cid:0)p  y 3  b b  9

4 5

3(cid:1) + 

yii +  y14 +  b1 +  b4 ,

(89)

3

xi=1

where a is a lagrange multiplier, and 4, 3, are the scales of su (4), su (3) respectively. this superpotential
does not preserve any eective r-symmetry in terms of the variables of the low-energy theory. still, as was shown
in (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a), supersymmetry is broken. the crucial point is that the lagrange multiplier a
only appears linearly in (89). if the superpotential contained terms with higher powers of a, supersymmetry would
be restored. note that the superpotential (89) is reminiscent of the superpotential (10) of the simplest oraifeartaigh
model, with a playing the role of 1. in the absence of an r-symmetry, one cannot rule out the presence of higher
powers of 1 in (10), whereas in the dynamically generated superpotential (89), a only appears linearly.

other examples have been found which break supersymmetry even though the microscopic theory does not have
an r-symmetry. these include, among others, the 431 model of (leigh-randall-rattazzi, 1997), and the 41
model with the superpotential term m pfa (poppitz and trivedi, 1995), as well as, as we mentioned already, the
iss model (intriligator-seiberg-shenker, 1995). in most of these examples, either the tree-level superpotential is not
generic, or there is an eective r-symmetry in the low energy theory.

vii. dsb models and model building tools

so far we have discussed several important models which illustrate the main methods and subtleties in the analysis
of dsb. many more models (in fact many innite classes of models) have been constructed in recent years. the
methods of analysis we have described can be used for these models. in fact often, not only the method of analysis
but the dynamics itself is analogous to one or the other models discussed in previous sections. thus it is not practical
to present a detailed investigation of every known model of dsb.

on the other hand, in many cases the dynamics is not well understood beyond the conclusion that susy must be
broken, and further investigation of the dynamics as well as the connection between dierent mechanisms and models
of susy breaking may lead to better understanding of the general conditions for dsb. therefore, in this section we
shall give a list of known models briey discussing how susy is broken. we shall emphasize the relations between
various models, and give a partial classication. in addition we shall introduce a useful model building method which
can be used to construct new models.

we shall also discuss in this section supersymmetry breaking in theories with anomalous u (1)s which give an

example of dynamical susy breaking through the fayet-iliopolous mechanism.

30other models in this class (with n > 4) are non-renormalizable, and we do not have a reason to neglect non-renormalizable
operators. for n  6 the generalization of (88) still gives the most general superpotential up to operators whose dimension
is smaller or equal to the dimension of the baryon. therefore, the expected susy breaking minimum is still a stable local
minimum. in models with n > 6, the most general superpotential with no r-symmetry and operators whose dimension does
not exceed the dimension of the baryon operator will generically preserve supersymmetry.

34

a. discarded generator models

let us recall the observation that both the 41 and the 32 models have a gauge group which is a subgroup of su (5),
while the matter content (after adding e+ in the 32 model) falls into antisymmetric tensor and antifundamental
representations  exactly as needed for dsb in su (5). based on this observation, dine et al (1996) proposed the
following method of constructing new dsb models. take a known model of dynamical supersymmetry breaking
without classical at directions and discard some of the group generators. this reduces the number of d-atness
conditions, and therefore, leads to the appearance of at directions. on the other hand, the most general tree
level superpotential allowed by the smaller symmetry may lift all the moduli. it is also possible that a unique non-
perturbative superpotential will be allowed in such a reduced model. this construction is guaranteed to yield
anomaly free chiral models which often possess a non-anomalous r-symmetry, and thus are good candidates for
dynamical supersymmetry breaking. if a model constructed using this prescription breaks supersymmetry it is often
calculable since for small superpotential couplings it typically possesses almost at directions along which the eective
description may be weakly coupled.

in fact, the 32 and 41 models are the simplest examples of two innite classes of dsb models based on su (2n 
1)  su (2)  u (1) (dine et al, 1996) and on su (2n )  u (1) (dine et al, 1996; poppitz and trivedi, 1995) gauge
groups which can be constructed by using the discarded generator method.
to construct these theories one starts with an su (2n + 1) theory with matter transforming as an antisymmetric
tensor, a, and 2n  3 anti-fundamentals, f . then one requires gauge invariance under, for example, an su (2n 
1)  su (2)  (1) subgroup, with the u (1) generator being

under this group the matter elds decompose as

t = diag(2, . . . , 2,(2n  1),(2n  1)).

a

a( , 1, 4), f ( , 2, 3  2n ), s(1, 1, 2  4n ),
f

( , 1,2) , a(1, 2, 2n  1), a = 1, . . . , 2n  3 .

the most general superpotential consistent with the symmetries is

w = abaf

b

a

f

+ absab + af f

a

a.

(90)

(91)

(92)

this superpotential lifts all classical at directions. models of this class have non-anomalous r-symmetry and super-
symmetry is broken. it is interesting to observe that the coupling ab in the superpotential above could be set to zero
without restoring supersymmetry. while for  = 0 classical at directions appear, they are lifted by quantum eects.
the construction of the su (2n )  u (1) dsb series is quite analogous. the mater elds in this class of models are
(93)

a2, f1n, f

a
1, sa

n, a = 1, . . . , 2n  3 ,

where subscripts denote u (1) charges, and superscripts are avor indices. with the most general superpotential
allowed by symmetries the models break supersymmetry .

clearly one can consider many other subgroups of su (2n + 1), and in fact, several other classes of broken generator
models were constructed: su (2n  2)  su (3)  u (1) models (csaki-randall-skiba, 1996; chou, 1996), su (2n 
3)  su (4)  u (1) and su (2n  4)  su (5)  u (1) models (csaki et al, 1996). while these models are similar
by construction to those we discussed above, the supersymmetry breaking dynamics is quite dierent, and various
models in this class can have connement, dual descriptions and quantum removal of classical at directions. since
we have already considered the simplest and illuminating examples of these phenomena in dsb models, we shall not
give a detailed discussion of all possible discarded generator models. we shall restrict ourselves to the mention of
the sp (2)  u (1) model by csaki-schmaltz-skiba (1997a). this model is interesting because it is an example of the
discarded generator model in which the rank of the gauge group is reduced compared to the parent theory. the
matter elds in this model are

sp (2) u (1)
2
3
1
2
4

1
1

a
q1
q2
s1
s2

(94)

non-renormalizable couplings are required to lift all at directions. the full superpotential is

35

w =

7(q1q2)

2(a)2(q1q2)2  (q1aq2)2 + q1q2s2 + q1aq2s1 ,

(95)

where the rst term is generated dynamically.

the existence of a general method for constructing discarded generator models suggests that there may exist a
unied description of these models. in fact, leigh-randall-rattazzi (1997) found exactly such a description. it is
based on the antisymmetric tensor models supplemented by a chiral eld  in the adjoint representation of the gauge
group. we are interested in nding an eective description of the discarded generator models, or more generally of
i=1 ni = 2n + 1) and the light matter given by
decomposing the antisymmetric tensor and antifundamentals of su (2n + 1) under the unbroken gauge group. the
adjoint  needs to be heavy in such a vacuum. this can be achieved by introducing the superpotential for the adjoint

i=1 su (ni) gauge groups (where pk

the models with u (1)k1 qk

w =

tri .

si
i

k+1

xi=2

(96)

we shall be most interested in the case k = 2. for generic coecients si there are several discrete vacua where  is
heavy and the model contains matter in desired representations. note that in the most symmetric vacuum  = 0,
the low energy physics is described by the antisymmetric tensor model, and susy is broken. for supersymmetry to
be broken in other vacua one needs to lift the classical at directions associated with the light elds which requires
the following tree level superpotential

w =

1
2

m2 +

1
3

s3tr3 + ij

1 f iaf j + ij

2 f iaf j + ij

3 f iaf j .

(97)

this superpotential is chosen so that in each vacuum of interest it exactly reproduces the superpotential needed for
supersymmetry breaking. leigh-randall-rattazzi (1997) showed that in the full model supersymmetry is broken for
any value of the adjoint mass including m = 0. this latter conclusion at rst seems quite unusual, since the one loop
beta function coecient of the model is b0 = 2n + 4. in the su (2n + 1) model this might suggest that at least in the
absence of the superpotential the theory is in a non-abelian coulomb phase. however, the analysis of leigh-randall-
rattazzi (1997) showed that indeed the superpotential is quite relevant and, when certain requirements on the yukawa
couplings are satised, susy is broken. a similar construction with k > 2 (that is models with more than two non-
abelian factors and/or more than one abelian factor in the gauge group) was shown (leigh-randall-rattazzi, 1997)
not to break supersymmetry.

b. supersymmetry breaking from an anomalous u (1)

theories with an anomalous u (1) provide a simple mechanism for supersymmetry breaking (binetruy and dudas,
1996; dvali and pomarol, 1996). such theories contain a fayet-iliopoulos (fi) term, so supersymmetry can be broken
just as in the fi model we discussed in section ii c 2. in fact, the anomalous u (1) theories discussed below are the
only known examples where the fayet-iliopoulos mechanism of supersymmetry breaking can be realized dynamically.
in the absence of any superpotential, at least one eld with appropriate u (1) charge develops a vev to cancel the
fi term. one can then introduce an (eective) superpotential mass term for this eld so that some f -term and the
d-term cannot vanish simultaneously and supersymmetry is broken.

in our discussion of the fi model in section ii c 2 we simply put in a tree-level fi term by hand. it is well known
that a u (1) d-term can be renormalized at one loop (fischler et al, 1981; witten, 1981a). such renormalization is
proportional to the sum of the charges of the matter elds, and therefore, vanishes unless the theory is anomalous.
indeed, in many string models, the low-energy eld theory contains an anomalous u (1), whose anomalies are canceled
by shifts of the dilaton-axion supereld, through the green-schwarz mechanism (green and schwarz, 1984). a fi
term is generated for this u (1) by string loops. as far as the low-energy eld theory is concerned, we can treat this
fi term as if it was put in by hand. the only subtleties associated with supersymmetry breaking involve the dilaton
supereld.

consider a theory with an anomalous u (1) gauge symmetry with

where qi denote the u (1) charges of the dierent elds of the theory. the dilaton supereld s then transforms as

gs =

1

1922 xi

qi ,

(98)

36

under the u (1) transformation a  a + , where a is the u (1) vector boson. to be gauge invariant, the
dilaton kahler potential is then of the form

s  s + i

gs
2

 ,

(99)

k = k(s + s  gsv ) ,
where v is the u (1) vector supereld. this then gives the fi term

2 = 

gs
2

k
s

.

(100)

(101)

following (arkani-hamed-dine-martin, 1998) we shall consider the model of (binetruy and dudas, 1996), which
has, in addition to the anomalous u (1), an su (n ) gauge symmetry. the model contains the eld , an su (n )
singlet with u (1) charge 1 (assuming gs > 0), and one avor of su (n ), that is, elds q and q transforming as
(n, q) and ( n , q) under su (n )  u (1). working in terms of the su (n ) meson m = q q, the superpotential is given
by

w = mm (cid:18) 

mp(cid:19)q+q

+ (n  1)(cid:18) 3n 1
m (cid:19)

1

n 1

,

(102)

where the rst term is a tree-level term, and the second term is generated dynamically by su (n ) instantons. the
potential will also contain contributions from the u (1) d-term, which is given by,

d = g2(cid:16)(q + q)|m|  ||2 + 2(cid:17) ,

(103)

where g is the u (1) gauge coupling. minimizing the potential, one nds that supersymmetry is broken.  wants to
develop a vev to cancel 2, but because of the su (n ) dynamics, the meson t develops a vev, which then generates,
through the rst term in (102), a mass term for , so that the potential does not vanish.

it is important to recall though that the su (n ) scale depends on the dilaton supereld. this dependence is most

easily xed by requiring that the second term in (102) is u (1) invariant, giving,

3n 1 = m 3n 1

p

e

2(q+ q)s

gs

.

(104)

one can then minimize the potential in terms of t,  and the dilaton, s. at the minimum, the d-term as well as the
t, , and dilaton f -terms are non-zero.

note that if the dilaton supereld is neglected in the above analysis, the theory seems to have no goldstino, as the
gaugino and matter fermions obtain masses either by the higgs mechanism or through the superpotential. in fact,
as was shown in (arkani-hamed-dine-martin, 1998), the goldstino in these theories is a combination of the gaugino,
the matter fermion and the dilatino. in this basis the goldstino wave-function is given by

  d
2g

, fi,r 2k

s2 fs! ,

(105)

where d, fi, and fs stand for the d-term, the i-th matter eld f -term, and the dilaton f term at the minimum,
respectively.

c. list of models and literature guide

finally, in this section we shall present an extensive (but certainly incomplete) list of models known to break su-
persymmetry with references to the original papers where these models were introduced. while some of the models
discussed below have been studied in great detail, frequently it is only known that a given model breaks supersym-
metry, but the low energy spectrum and the properties of the vacuum have not been studied. in addition to the
examples presented below many other models appeared in the literature. new supersymmetry breaking theories can
be constructed from the known models in a variety of ways. moreover, for phenomenological purposes it is often
sucient to nd a model with a local non-supersymmetric minimum. while establishing the existence of a local

37

non-supersymmetric minimum may sometimes be more dicult than establishing the absence of any supersymmetric
vacuum, the methods involved in the analysis are essentially the same, and we shall not discuss such models here.

 su (5) with an antisymmetric tensor and an antifundamental (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985; meurice and veneziano,
1984). the arguments of aeck-dine-seiberg (1985) were based on the diculty of satisfying t hooft anomaly
matching conditions, while the meurice and veneziano (1984) argument was based on gaugino condensation. the
model is not calculable. murayama (1995) and poppitz and trivedi (1995) have used the method of integrating in
and out vector-like matter to give additional arguments for dsb in the model. pouliot (1996) constructed a dual of
the su (5) model and showed that the dual breaks susy at tree level. for the discussion of the model in the present
review see sections iii d and v c.

 su (2n + 1) with an antisymmetric tensor a, 2n  3 antifundamentals f and the superpotential

w = ij af if j ,

(106)

where  has the maximal rank (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985). these are generalizations of the su (5) model. the
integrating in and out method was used by poppitz and trivedi (1995) to further analyze these models. see section
iii d and also section vii a.

 so(10) with a single matter multiplet in the spinor representation (16 of so(10)) (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1984c).
the analysis of supersymmetry breaking in this model is very similar to that of the non-calculable su (5) model.
indeed, the su (5) model may be constructed from the so(10) model by using the discarded generator method.
murayama (1995) discussed dsb in this model in the presence of an extra eld in the vector 10 representation of
so(10). for a small mass of the extra eld, the theory is calculable, and assuming no phase transition, susy remains
broken when the vector is integrated out. pouliot and strassler (1996) considered the same theory by adding an
arbitrary number n > 5 of vector elds and constructing the dual su (n  5) theory. they showed that the dual
breaks susy when masses for the vectors are turned on. all these arguments can only be used as additional evidence
of dsb in the so(10) model, but do not allow one to analyze the vacuum and low energy spectrum of the theory.

 the two generation su (5) model (meurice and veneziano, 1984; aec-dine-seiberg, 1984d): su (5) with two

antisymmetric tensors and two antifundamentals, with the superpotential

w = a1f 1f 2 .

(107)

aec-dine-seiberg (1984d) showed that the model is calculable.
in fact, historically, this is the rst calculable
model with supersymmetry breaking driven by an instanton-induced superpotential. the vacuum and the low energy
spectrum of the model were analyzed in detail by ter veldhuis (1996). ter veldhuis (1998) also analyzed generalizations
of this model which include extra vector-like matter with a mass term in the superpotential.

 the 3  2 model (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985): su (3)  su (2) with

q (3, 2) ,

u (3, 1) ,

d(3, 1) ,

l (1, 2) ,

with the superpotential

w =  q l d .

(108)

(109)

this model is calculable. the analysis of the vacuum and low energy spectrum can be found in (aeck-dine-
seiberg, 1985; bagger-poppitz-randall, 1993). the model posseses a global u (1) symmetry which can be gauged
without restoring susy, the relevant details of the vacuum structure in this case can be found in (dine-nelson-
shirman, 1995). see sections iv a and vi a 2.

 discarded generator models: these include su (n1)  su (n2)  u (1) and su (2n )  (1) subgroup of su (2n +
1) (with n1 + n2 = 2n + 1) with matter given by the decomposition of the antisymmetric tensor and 2n  3
antifundamentals of su (2n + 1) under the appropriate gauge group. this construction was proposed in (dine et
al, 1996). for details see section vii a. the two smallest models in this class are the 3  2 model (section iv a) and
the 4  1 model (section iv b). the su (2n )  u (1) models were rst constructed in (dine et al, 1996; poppitz and
trivedi, 1995); the su (2n1)su (2)u (1) models can be found in (dine et al, 1996); the su (2n2)su (3)u (1)
models are considered in 31 (csaki-randall-skiba, 1996); nally, the su (2n  3) su (4) u (1) models are discussed
in (csaki et al, 1996). a unied description of this class of models, as well as of the non-calculable su (2n +1) models,

31see also (chou, 1996).

38

is given in (leigh-randall-rattazzi, 1997). another example of the models in this class is sp (2)  u (1) model of
csaki-schmaltz-skiba (1997a).

 su (2n + 1)  su (2) (dine et al, 1996) with

q  ( ,

),

l  (1,

), qi  (, 1),

i = 1, 2,

(110)

and with a superpotential similar to that of the 3  2 model. these models are obvious generalizations of the 3  2
model. the dynamics in this class of models is very similar to that of the 3  2 model. for detailed analysis
see (intriligator and thomas, 1996b). the low energy physics of the su (5)  su (2) model in this class, in the limit
of a strong su (2), is described by the non-calculable su (5) model (intriligator and thomas, 1996b) to which we paid
so much attention in this review.

 su (7)  sp (1) and su (9)  sp (2) (intriligator and thomas, 1996b): these models are obtained by dualizing

the su (7)  su (2) and su (9)  su (2) models of the previous paragraph. the matter content is

and the superpotential

a ( , 1) ,

l (1,

) ,

f ( , 1) ,
) ,
u (, 1) , d ( , 1) ,

p ( ,

w = ap p + f p l .

(111)

(112)

note that these models can be constructed starting from the antisymmetric tensor models of aeck-dine-seiberg
(1985), by gauging a maximal global symmetry and adding matter to cancel all anomalies with the most general
superpotential.

 su (2n + 1)  u (1) with

a  (a, 1),

f  ( , 2),

f  ( , 1), d  (1,

),

(113)

where i = 1, . . . , n  2. (dine et al, 1996) to lift all at directions, a non-renormalizable superpotential is required

w =

2n 2

xi,j=1

ij af if j + f 2n 1f d +

1
m

2n 2

xi,j=1

ijf if jf f .

 su (2n + 1)  sp (m ), n  m  1 with
q  ( ,

), qi  (, 1),

l  (1,

)

(114)

(115)

where i = 1, . . . , 2m is a avor index (dine et al, 1996). these are generalization of the 32 model with a non-
renormalizable superpotential.

the su (2n + 1) dynamics generates a dynamical superpotential (dine et al, 1996).
constraint is generated by the sp (m ) dynamics for n = m . the tree level superpotential

in addition, a quantum

w = q2ql +

ijq2qjqj

2m

xi,j>2

(116)

lifts all at directions, and supersymmetry is broken. for details see (dine et al, 1996; intriligator and thomas, 1996a).
for n = m + 1, the tree level superpotential (116) does not lift all classical at directions, yet they are lifted
by nonperturbative eects (intriligator and thomas, 1996a; shirman, 1996) and susy is broken. we discussed this
model in section vi b. (note that in that section, we used a dierent notation for sp and refered to this theory as
su (n  1)  sp (n/2).)
it is also useful to note that for m + 1 < n , the sp (m ) dynamics can have dual description. intriligator and
thomas (1996b) argued that the dual description (with su (2n + 1)  sp (n  m  1) gauge group and matter
content which includes the symmetric tensor of su (2n + 1) as well as (anti)fundamentals and bifundamentals breaks
susy. when n > 3m + 2 it is only the dual description which is asymptotically free and can be interpreted as a
microscopic theory.

an interesting modication of these models (luty and terning, 1998) is an su (2n + 1)  sp (n + 1) theory with
(117)

) ,

q  ( ,

), qi  ( , 1),

la  (1,

39

where i = 1, . . . , 2(n + 1) and a = 1, . . . , 2n + 1. we note that this version of the model possesses an su (2n + 1) 
u (1)  u (1)r global symmetry. luty and terning (1998) considered only the renormalizable superpotential

w = qql ,

(118)

where  has maximal rank. they showed that while this model has a large number of classical at directions, all of
them are lifted quantum mechanically. one can now add mass terms for some avors of the sp (n + 1) elds la. for
an appropriately chosen mass matrix supersymmetry remains broken. choosing a mass matrix of maximal rank and
integrating out the massive matter, we recover the non-renormalizable model discussed above.

 non-renormalizable su (2n ) u (1) model (dine et al, 1996) with chiral superelds transforming under the gauge

group and a global su (2n  4) symmetry as

a  ( , 2n  4, 1),

f  (,(2n  2), ),

s  (1, 2n,

) .

the superpotential required to stabilize all at directions

w = af f s ,

(119)

(120)

explicitly breaks the global symmetry down to a subgroup. the anomaly free su (n  2) subgroup of the global
symmetry can be gauged without restoring susy.
 non-renormalizable su (n )  u (1) models (dine et al, 1996): the matter content is (we also give charges under

a maximal global su (n  3) symmetry)

a  ( , 2  n, 1), n  (m, 1, 1), n i  ( , n  1,  ),
) ,

)),

si  (1,n,

sij  (1,n,

where i, j = 1, . . . , n  3. the superpotential

w = in in si + ijan in jsij

(121)

(122)

lifts all at directions while preserving a global symmetry. note that for n = 4, sij does not exist and this is just
the 41 model of section iv b.

 su (n ) su (n  1) (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a), and su (n ) su (n  2) (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996b):
the su (n )  su (n  1) models were discussed in section vi b. we discussed susy breaking without r-symmetry
in these models in section vi c. the su (n )  su (n  2) models, which are similar by construction but have very
dierent dynamics are discussed in section v b. both classes of models have calculable minima with an unbroken
global symmetry (su (n  2) and sp (n  3) respectively) (poppitz and trivedi, 1996; arkani-hamed et al, 1998;
shadmi, 1997).
 itiy models (intriligator and thomas, 1996a; izawa and yanagida, 1996) and their modications: we discussed
the itiy models in section vi a 2. they are based on an su (n ) (sp (n )) gauge group with n (n +1) avors of matter
in the fundamental representation coupled to a set of gauge singlet elds in such a way that all d-at directions are
lifted. even after supersymmetry breaking these models posses a at direction which is only lifted by (perturbative)
corrections to the kahler potential. in (shirman, 1996; arkani-hamed and murayama, 1997; dimopoulos et al, 1998)
it was argued that the perturbative corrections generate a growing potential for large vevs along this direction. by
gauging a subgroup of the global symmetry it is possible to obtain a modication of the model with a calculable local
susy breaking minimum at large vevs (murayama, 1997; dimopoulos et al, 1998). these models can be generalized
in the following way. take any model with a quantum modied constraint and couple all gauge invariant operators to
singlet elds. since the quantum constraint becomes incompatible with the singlet f-term conditions, supersymmetry
must be broken (csaki-schmaltz-skiba, 1997b). as an example consider an so(7) gauge group with ve matter
multiplets transforming in the spinor representation. the theory possesses an su (5) global symmetry, and a u (1)r
under which all matter elds are neutral. the gauge invariant composites transform as an antisymmetric tensor a
and antifundamental f of the global symmetry. the quantum constraint is

a5 + af

4

= 10 .

(123)

coupling all gauge invariants to gauge singlets a and f and implementing the constraint through the lagrange
multiplier  one nds

w = aa + f f + (a5 + af

4

) ,

(124)

40

and obviously susy is broken. we note that the model is nonrenormalizable.

 su (2) with one i = 3/2 matter eld (intriligator-seiberg-shenker, 1995): we discussed this theory in section v a.
a non-renormalizable tree-level superpotential lifts all classical at directions. the theory connes, no superpotential
is generated dynamically, and supersymmetry is broken since the tree-level superpotential cannot be extremized in
terms of the conned eld.

 su (7) with two symmetric tensors, sa , a = 1, 2, six antifundamentals qi, i = 1, . . . , 6, and the tree level

superpotential

w =

3

xi

s1q2iq2i1 + s2q2iq2i+1 ,

(125)

where in summing over i we identify 7  1 (csaki-schmaltz-skiba, 1997b; nelson and thomas, 1996). this is another
example of susy breaking through connement, which we saw in the intriligator-seiberg-shenker (1995) model in
section v a. the superpotential lifts all classical at directions while preserving a global anomaly free u (1)  u (1)r
symmetry. su (7) dynamics leads to connement, and generates nonperturbative superpotential

wdyn =

1
13 h 2n 2 ,

(126)

where h a
of the composite elds. solving the equations of motion for h a
acquire vevs, breaking the global symmetry, and therefore, supersymmetry.

ij = saqiqj and ni = s4qi. near the origin of the moduli space the kahler potential is canonical in terms
ij one nds that at least some of the composite elds

 so(12)  u (1) and su (6)  u (1) (csaki-schmaltz-skiba, 1997b). the matter content of the so(12)  u (1)
model is (32, 1), (12,4), 1, 8), (1, 2), (1, 6). the matter content of the su (6) u (1) model is (20, 1), (6,3), (6,3),
(1, 4), (1, 2). these models are constructed by starting with a non-chiral theory with a dynamical superpotential and
gauging a global u (1) symmetry (adding the necessary elds to make the full theory anomaly free) in a way which
makes the theory chiral. supersymmetry is broken by the interplay between a dynamically-generated superpotential
and the tree-level superpotential.

acknowledgements

it is a pleasure to thank michael dine, galit eyal, jonathan feng, martin gremm, and yossi nir for useful
comments. y.shirman is grateful to the aspen center for physics for hospitality during the early stages of this work.
the work of y. shirman was supported in part by nsf grant phy-9802484. the work of y. shadmi was supported
in part by doe grants #df-fc02-94er40818 and #de-fc02-91er40671.

appendix a: some results on susy gauge theories

in this appendix we shall briey review some results in supersymmetric gauge theories. our main goal here is
to introduce notations (which will mainly follow those of (bagger and wess, 1991)), and to summarize the results
necessary to make the present review self-contained. much more detailed reviews of the progress in our understanding
of supersymmetric gauge theories exist in the literature, e.g. (intriligator and seiberg, 1996; peskin, 1996; shifman,
1998).

1. notations and superspace lagrangian

we shall consider an eective low-energy theory of light degrees of freedom well above the possible scale of super-
symmetry breaking. in this case the eective action will have linearly realized supersymmetry, and it is convenient to
write an eective supersymmetric lagrangian in n = 1 superspace, where four (bosonic) space-time coordinates are
supplemented by four anti-commuting (fermionic) coordinates , and 
,  = 1, 2. the light matter elds combine
into chiral superelds32



32 we shall usually use the same notation for a chiral supereld and its lowest scalar component.

41

 =  + 2 + 2f,

while gauge bosons and their superpartners combine into vector superelds

v = a + i2  i

2

 +

2

2

d,

1
2

(a1)

(a2)

where we have used wess-zumino gauge.

the eective supersymmetric lagrangian for a theory with gauge group g, and matter elds i transforming in

the representation r of the gauge group (with t a being a generator of this representation) can be written as

l =z d4k(, ev t ) +

1

g2 z d2w w + h.c +z d2w () + h.c.

(a3)

the rst term in (a3) is a kahler potential which contains, among others, kinetic terms for the matter elds. the
kahler potential also contributes gauge-interaction terms to the scalar potential. the second term in (a3) is the kinetic
term for the gauge elds. in particular w  =  1
4dddv , where d is a superspace derivative, is a supersymmetric
generalization of gauge eld-strength f  . the last term in (a3) is the superpotential.
the superpotential is a holomorphic function of chiral superelds and obeys powerful non-renormalization theorems.
in particular, in perturbation theory the superpotential can only be modied by eld rescalings (which can be absorbed
into renormalization of the kahler potential). using holomorphy, symmetries of the theory, and known weakly
coupled limits it is often possible to determine the superpotential exactly, including all non-perturbative eects.
similarly, the kinetic term for the gauge multiplet is a holomorphic function allowing one to obtain exact results on
the renormalization of the gauge coupling.

the kahler potential on the other hand can be a general real-valued function of  and  consistent with symmetries.

classically it is given by

k = ev t ,

(a4)

but quantum mechanically it is renormalized both perturbatively and non-perturbatively.

in studying the dynamical behavior of the supersymmetric theory it is often useful to remember that the hamiltonian

is determined by the supersymmetry generators

h =

1
4

(q1q1 + q1q1 + q2q2 + q2q2) .

(a5)

from eq. (a5) we see that a supersymmetric vacuum state (a state annihilated by the supersymmetry charges) has
vanishing energy. therefore, a particularly important role (especially in the analysis of supersymmetry breaking) is
played by the scalar potential of the theory

where gij = 2k

ij , and the auxiliary elds f , and d are given in terms of the scalar elds by

v =

1
2

g2xa

(da)2 + f 

i g1

ij fj ,

(a6)

(a7)

fi = 
i

w

da =pi itai ,

where in fi one takes the derivatives of the superpotential with respect to the dierent superelds and then keeps
only the lowest component, and in da, i stands for the scalar eld of the i supermultiplet.

typically a supersymmetric gauge theory possesses a set of directions in eld space (called d-at directions) along
which da = 0 for all a. along some or all of these d-at directions, the f -atness conditions, fi = 0, can also be
satised. the subspace of eld space where the scalar potential vanishes is called a moduli space and to a large degree
determines the low-energy dynamics.

the study of non-perturbative eects in susy gauge theories relies heavily on the use of symmetries. an important
role, especially in the applications to dynamical supersymmetry breaking, is played by an r-symmetry. we therefore
pause to introduce this symmetry. under an r-symmetry, the fermionic coordinates rotate as,

a chiral eld with r-charge q transforms under this symmetry as follows

  ei .

(a8)

42

(x, , )  eiq(x, ei, eiq ) .

(a9)

note that dierent component elds transform dierently under r-symmetry, and thus it does not commute with
supersymmetry. on the other hand vector supereld v is neutral under r-symmetry (therefore, the gaugino transforms
as   ei). clearly there always exists an assignment of r-symmetry charges to the superelds such that the
kahler potential contribution to the action is invariant under r-symmetry. on the other hand the superpotential
contributions to the action explicitly break r-symmetry unless the superpotential has charge 2 under r-symmetry.

in the following subsections we shall discuss methods for determining the classical moduli space. we shall also
describe the quantum behavior of supersymmetric qcd (sqcd) with various choices of the matter content. at the
end of this section we shall comment on analogous result for models with dierent gauge groups and matter content.
these results will provide us with tools needed to analyze supersymmetry breaking.

2. d-at directions

classically, one could set all superpotential couplings to zero. then the moduli space of the theory is determined by
d-atness conditions. even when tree level superpotential couplings are turned on but remain small, the vacua states
of the theory will lie near the solutions of d-atness conditions (still in the classical approximation). it is convenient,
therefore, to analyze susy gauge theories in two stages. first nd a submanifold in the eld space on which the
d-terms vanish, and then analyze the full theory including both tree level and non-perturbative contributions to the
superpotential.

we start by describing a useful technique for nding the d-at directions of a theory (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1984c;

aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985) with su (n ) gauge symmetry. consider the n  n matrix

di

j(cid:1)k
j = l(cid:0)ai

l

k,

(a10)

l

j(cid:1)k
where (cid:0)ai
ization of (cid:0)ai

j(cid:1)k
are the real generators of gl(n ). for  in the fundamental representation (cid:0)ai
j(cid:1) for a general multi-index representation is obvious). it is easy to see that the vanishing of all das is

j be proportional to the unit matrix, di

j. to show this it is sucient to

j (the general-

= i

l k

l

j  i

equivalent to the requirement that di
note that da = di

jaj

i

, where a are generators of su (n ) in the fundamental representation.

another way to parameterize the moduli space is by the use of gauge invariant composite operators. it has been
shown that a complete set of such operators is in one to one correspondence with the space of d-at directions (luty
and taylor, 1996). an important feature of this latter parameterization of the moduli space is that in some cases
there exist gauge invariant operators which vanish identically due to the bose statistic of the superelds. for this
reason they do not have counterparts in the elementary parameterization of the moduli space. however, due to
quantum eects these operators typically describe light (composite) degrees of freedom of the low-energy theory and
play an important role in the dynamics.

3. pure supersymmetric su (nc) theory

the lagrangian of a pure supersymmetric yang-mills (sym) theory can be written as

l =

1
4g2

w z d2w w + h. c. .

(a11)

g2

w  i 

the wilsonian coupling constant in the lagrangian can be promoted to a vev of the background chiral supereld
w  s = 1
1
82 . since the physics is independent of shifts in , the wilsonian gauge coupling in eq. (a11)
g2
receives corrections only at one loop. on the other hand, the gauge coupling constant in the 1pi action receives
contributions at all orders in perturbation theory. these two coupling constants can be related by eld redenitions
(shifman and vainshtein, 1986; shifman and vainshtein, 1991). in the following we shall always use the wilsonian
action and work with wilsonian coupling constants. we shall use functional knowledge of the exact beta functions
only to establish the scaling dimensions of the composite operators in our discussion of duality in section a 7.

sym is a strongly interacting non-abelian theory very much like qcd. in particular it is believed that it connes
and develops a mass gap. by using symmetry arguments it is possible to show that if the gaugino condensate develops
it has the form

43

hi = const  3

sy m = const  3e 82

nc g2 .

(a12)

in fact the constant can be exactly calculated (novikov et al, 1983; shifman and vainshtein, 1988). the theory has
nc supersymmetric vacuum states.

4. nf < nc: aeck-dine-seiberg superpotential

as a next step one can consider an su (nc) gauge theory with nf (< nc) avors of matter elds in the fundamental
q and antifundamental q representations. this theory possesses a large non-anomalous global symmetry under which
matter elds transform as follows:

su (nf )l  su (nf )r  u (1)b  u (1)r

nf nc

q
q

nf
1

1
n f

1
1

nc

nf nc

nc

(a13)

classically there are d-at directions along which the scalar potential vanishes. using the techniques described above
we can parametrize these at directions (up to symmetry transformations) by

v1

v2

. . .

. . .

. . .

. . .

vnf
. . .

q =





= q .

(a14)

these at directions can also be parameterized by the vevs of the gauge invariant operators mij = qiqj. these
composite degrees of freedom give a better (weakly coupled) description near the origin of moduli space where the
theory is in a conned regime.

in this model a unique nonperturbative superpotential is allowed by the symmetries (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1984a)

wdyn =(cid:18) 3ncnf
det(qq)(cid:19)

1

ncnf

,

(a15)

where  is the renormalization group invariant scale of the theory. it was shown (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1984a; cordes,
1986) that this superpotential is in fact generated by instanton eects for nf = nc  1. it is generated by gaugino
condensation in all other cases.
before proving this last statement, let us pause for a moment and discuss the relation between the renormalization
group invariant scales of the microscopic and eective theories. suppose the microscopic theory is su (nc) with
nf avors. as has been mentioned above the wilsonian coupling (shifman and vainshtein, 1986; shifman and
vainshtein, 1991) of the theory runs only at one loop

1

g2()

=

1

g2(m )

+

b0

162 ln(cid:16) 

m(cid:17) .

(a16)

suppose also that at a scale v some elds in the theory become massive, and the physics below this scale is described
by an su (n 

f avors. the wilsonian coupling of the eective theory is

c) gauge group with n 

1
g2
l()

=

1

g2
l(m )

+

m(cid:17) .

b0

162 ln(cid:16) 
c  n 

(a17)

in equations (a16) and (a17) b0 = 3nc  nf and b0 = 3n 
f are the -function coecients. but the couplings
should be equal at the scale  = v. this allows us to derive scale matching conditions. for example, take an su (nc)
theory with nf avors. its renormalization group invariant scale is given by

3ncnf = 3ncnf exp(cid:18)

82

g2 (cid:19) .

(a18)

if one of the matter elds is massive with mass m  , the eective theory has nf  1 avors and its scale is

44

3ncnf +1

l

= 3ncnf +1 exp(cid:18)

82

g2 (cid:19) .

requiring equality of couplings at the scale of the mass we nd

3ncnf +1

l

= m3ncnf .

in a general case the equation above becomes



b0
l = v

b0b0b0 ,

(a19)

(a20)

(a21)

where v represents a generic vev and/or mass in the theory.

now,

in the nf = nc  1 theory with small masses m   an instanton calculation (aeck-dine-
seiberg, 1984a; cordes, 1986) is reliable and gives (a15). due to the holomorphicity of the superpotential the
result can be extrapolated into the region of moduli space where one avor, say nf th, is heavy, mnf nf  . it
decouples from the low energy eective theory. solving the equations of motion for the heavy eld and using the scale
matching condition (a21) one nds the superpotential (a15) for the eective theory with nf = nc  2 avors. in
the low energy eective theory this superpotential can be interpreted as arising from gaugino condensation. one can
continue this procedure by induction and not only derive the superpotential for arbitrary nf < nc but also x the
numerical coecient in front of the superpotential. (this coecient can be absorbed into the denition of , and we
shall set it to 1 most of the time.)

even though the classical at directions are lifted in the massless theory by the superpotential (a15), the scalar

potential

2

v =xi  (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

qi(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

q(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2!

(a22)

tends to zero as q = q   and as a result theory does not possess a stable vacuum state. in our discussion of
dsb we discuss examples where at directions may be not only lifted but stabilized due to nonperturbative eects
(see section vi b).

one could lift classical at directions by adding a mass term to the superpotential

note that this superpotential explicitly breaks the u (1)r symmetry. in section iii b we argue that this is often a
signal of unbroken supersymmetry. it is easy to nd the supersymmetric vacua in this model. in terms of the meson
elds they are given by

wtree = mijqiqj .

(a23)

mij =(cid:0)det(m)3ncnf(cid:1)1/nc(cid:18) 1

mij(cid:19) .

(a24)

it is also worth noting that if some number of matter elds are massive they decouple from the low energy theory
and can be integrated out. solving the equations of motion for the massive elds one can nd the superpotential of
eq. (a15) and the solution (a24) for the vevs of the remaining light elds.

5. nf = nc : quantum moduli space

additional at directions exist for nf = nc. the most general expression for the at directions is

q =


subject to the condition

a1

a2

. . .

anc

. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .




b1

b2

q =


. . .

bnc

. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .




|ai|2  |bi|2 = v2 .

45

(a25)

(a26)

as was mentioned above, the at directions can be parameterized by vevs of gauge invariant polynomials. in this case
new at directions can be represented by elds with the quantum numbers of baryons33 b = qn and antibaryons
b = q
. note, however, that due to the bose statistics of the superelds, the gauge invariant polynomials obey the
constraint, classically,

n

seiberg ((1994; 1995)) showed that this constraint is modied quantum mechanically,

det m  bb = 0 .

det(m )  bb = 2n .

(a27)

(a28)

we refer the reader to (seiberg, 1994; intriligator and seiberg, 1996; peskin, 1996; shifman, 1998) for a detailed
explanation of this result.

it is often convenient to enforce this quantum mechanical constraint by introducing a lagrange multiplier term in

the superpotential

w = a(det(m )  bb  2n ) + mij mij .

(a29)

once again the validity of this superpotential can be veried in the limit that some of the matter elds are heavy and
decouple from the low energy theory. integrating them out leads to the superpotential (a15) for the light matter.

naively, the kahler potential of the nf = nc theory is singular at the origin. this corresponds to the fact that at
the origin, the full gauge group su (nc) is restored and additional degrees of freedom become massless. this singular
point, however, does not belong to the quantum moduli space. su (nc) cannot be restored because of the constraint
(a28) and the kahler potential in terms of composite degrees of freedom is non-singular. in the infrared mesons
and baryons represent a good description of the theory. one of many non-trivial tests they pass is t hooft anomaly
matching conditions (t hooft, 1980). far from the origin the quantum moduli space is very close to classical one and
the elementary degrees of freedom should represent a good (weakly coupled) description of the theory.

6. nf = nc + 1

in this case there are nf baryons and antibaryons transforming under the global su (nf )l  su (nf )r as (nf , 1)

and (1, nf ) respectively. classically, the gauge invariants obey the constraints

det(m )  bimijbj = 0 ,
bimij = mijbj = 0 .

(a30)

these constraints are not modied quantum mechanically. one can easily see this by adding a tree level superpotential

wtree =pij mij mij. holomorphy guarantees that meson vevs are given by eq. (a24). taking various limits of the

mass matrix one can see that the mesons mij can have any values on the moduli space. this can also be shown for
the baryons.

in terms of the elementary elds the kahler potential is singular at the origin reecting the fact that su (nc) is
restored there and additional degrees of freedom become massless. in terms of composite degrees of freedom the
kahler potential is regular, and they represent a suitable infrared description of the theory. as in the case nf = nc,
t hooft anomaly matching conditions are satised by the eective description. in this model, the constraints can be
implemented by the superpotential

adding mass for one avor correctly leads to the nf = nc model.

2nc1 (cid:0)bimijbj  det m(cid:1) .

1

w =

(a31)

33summation over both color and avor indices is implied.

46

7. nf > nc + 1 : dual descriptions of the infrared physics

we shall start from the case 3

2 nc < nf < 3nc. this theory ows to an infrared xed point (seiberg, 1995). seiberg
(1995) suggested that in the vicinity of the infrared xed point the theory admits a dual, magnetic, description with
the same global symmetries but in terms of a theory with a dierent gauge group. this theory is based on the gauge
group su (nf  nc) with nf avors of q and q transforming as fundamentals and antifundamentals respectively, as
well as gauge-singlet elds m , corresponding to the mesons of the original (electric) theory. the global-symmetry
charges are given by

su (nf )l  su (nf )r  u (1)b  u (1)r

nc

q
q

m

n f
1
nf

1
nf
n f

nf nc

nf nc

 nc
0

nc
nf
nc
nf

2 nf nc

nc

the magnetic theory also ows to a xed point. however, in the magnetic theory a tree level superpotential is allowed
by symmetries

w = m qq.

(a33)

in the presence of this superpotential the theory ows to a new xed point which is identical to the xed point of the
electric theory.

at the xed point the superconformal symmetry can be used to understand the behavior of the theory. for example
the scaling dimensions of the gauge invariant operators are known. the exact beta function for the coupling in 1pi
action (in the electric description) is given by (novikov et al, 1983; shifman and vainshtein, 1986; shifman and
vainshtein, 1991)

(g) =

g2
162

g2
162

= 

(g)

3nc  nf + nf (g2)

g2
82

1  nc
n 2
c  1
nc

+ o(g4) .

at the zero of the -function the anomalous dimension is  = 3nc/nf + 1, and one nds

d(qq) = 2 +  = 3

nf  nc

.

nf

the dimension of the baryon operators can be determined by exploiting the r symmetry (seiberg, 1995)

d(b) = d(b) =

3nc(nf  nc)

2nf

.

this allows one to determine the scaling of the kahler potential near the xed point both in the electric and in the
magnetic description

(a32)

(a34)

(a35)

(a36)

(a37)

(a38)

let us summarize the correspondence between the electric and magnetic theories:

2nf

3(nf nc) ,

ke  (qq)
km  (qq)

2nf
3nc .

mij = qiqj  mij ,
w = mijmij  w = mijmij + mijqiqj ,
b, b  b, b .

by performing a second duality transformation one can verify that in fact the magnetic meson is identied with the
composite electric meson through the equations of motion.

the scales of the electric and the magnetic theories are related by

3ncnf 3(nf nc)nf = (1)nf ncnf ,

(a39)

where the scale  is needed to map the composite electric meson qq into an elementary magnetic meson m . these
elds have the same dimension at the infrared xed point, but dierent dimensions in the ultraviolet.

if the number of avors is nc + 1 < nf < 3

2 nc one could construct a dual description in a similar way. in that case

only the electric description is asymptotically free and makes sense in the ultraviolet.

47

8. other models

there are numerous generalizations of the results presented in previous subsections to theories with dierent gauge
groups and matter elds. here we mention some of the generalizations which will be useful for our discussion of
supersymmetry breaking.

results analogous to those for sqcd can be found for sp (n ) theories with nf avors of matter elds transforming

in the fundamental representation34 (pouliot, 1995). the one loop -function coecient is given by

b0 = 3(nc + 1)  nf .

(a40)

this can be compared to the one loop -function of the su (n ) models given in eq. (a16) in fact, one can nd
many of the results for sp (n ) theories by making the substitution nc  nc + 1 in the expressions for su (n )
models (and rewriting determinants as pfaans). the theory does not have baryons for any number of avors. the
supersymmetric vacuum is given by

mij = qiqj =(cid:16)p f (m)3(nc+1)(cid:17)

1

nc+1 (cid:18) 1

mij(cid:19) .

we can easily see that for nf = nc + 1, the quantum constraint is dierent from the classical one,

p f (m ) = 2(nc+1) .

(a41)

(a42)

if the number of avors is nf > nc + 2 there is a dual description analogous to the one for the su (n ) theories.

we conclude this section by mentioning several other classes of models which are useful in the study of the super-
symmetry breaking. poppitz and trivedi (1995) studied quantum moduli space and exact superpotentials in su (n )
gauge theories with matter in the antisymmetric tensor, fundamental, and antifundamental representations. in the
case without fundamental elds pouliot (1996) has constructed a dual by using berkoozs (1996) deconning trick.
in (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a) duality was studied in the product group theories and it was shown that dual
models can be constructed by using single group duality.

i. aeck, m. dine, and n. seiberg, dynamical supersymmetry breaking in supersymmetric qcd, nucl. phys. b 241 (1984)
493 a.
i. aeck, m. dine, and n. seiberg, dynamical supersymmetry breaking in chiral theories, phys. lett. b 137 (1984) 187 b.
i. aeck, m. dine, and n. seiberg, exponential hierarchy from dynamical supersymmetry breaking, phys. lett. b 140 (1984c)
59 c.
i. aeck, m. dine, and n. seiberg, calculable nonperturbative supersymmetry breaking, phys. rev. lett. 52 (1984) 1677 d.
i. aeck, m. dine, and n. seiberg, dynamical supersymmetry breaking in four dimensions and its phenomenological impli-
cations, nucl. phys. b 256 (1985) 557.
d. amati, g. rossi, g.veneziano, instanton eects in supersymmetric gauge theories, nucl. phys. b 249 (1985) 1.
n. arkani-hamed, m. dine and s.p. martin, dynamical supersymmetry breaking in models with a green-schwarz mechanism,
phys. lett. b 431 (1998) 329.
h. murayama and n. arkani-hamed, holomorphy, rescaling anomalies and exact beta functions in supersymmetric gauge
theories, phys. rev. d 57 (1998) 6638.
h. murayama, n. arkani-hamed and j. march-russell, building models of gauge mediated supersymmetry breaking without
a messenger sector, nucl. phys. b 509 (1998) 3.
j. bagger, e. poppitz, and l. randall, r-axion from dynamical supersymmetry breaking, nucl. phys. b 426 (1994) 3.
j. bagger and j. wess, supersymmetry and supergravity, princeton university press, 2nd edition, 1991.
j. bagger and e. witten, quantization of newtons constant in certain supergravity theories, phys. lett. b 115 (1982) 202.
m. berkooz, the dual of supersymmetric su (2k) with an antisymmetric tensor and composite dualities, nucl. phys. b 466
(1996) 75.

34in our notation sp (1) = su (2), and nf avors correspond to 2nf elds.

48

p. binetruy and e. dudas, gaugino condensation and the anomalous u(1), phys. lett. b 389 (1996) 503.
j. de boer, k. hori, h. ooguri, y. oz, branes and dynamical supersymmetry breaking, nucl. phys. b 522 (1998) 20.
john brodie, peter cho, and kenneth intriligator, misleading anomaly matchings?, phys. lett. b 429 (1998) 319.
c.-h. cheng and y. shadmi, duality in the presence of supersymmetry breaking, nucl. phys. b 531 (1998) 125.
c.-l. chou, models of dynamical supersymmetry breaking from a su (2k + 3) gauge model, phys. lett. b 391 (1997) 329.
t. e. clark, o. piguet, k. sibold, the absence of radiative corrections to the axial current anomaly in supersymmetric
qed, nucl. phys. b 159 (1979) 1.
s. cordes, the instanton-induced superpotential in supersymmetric qcd, nucl. phys. b 273 (1986) 629.
c. csaki, r. leigh, l. randall, and w. skiba, supersymmetry breaking through conning and dual theory gauge dynamics,
phys. lett. b 387 (1996) 791.
c. csaki, l. randall, and w. skiba, more dynamical supersymmetry breaking, nucl. phys. b 479 (1996) 791.
c. csaki, m. schmaltz, and w. skiba, exact results and duality for sp (2n ) susy gauge theories with an antisymmetric
tensor, nucl. phys. b 487 (1997) 128 a.
c. csaki, m. schmaltz, and w. skiba, connement in n = 1 susy gauge theories and model building tools, phys. rev. d
55 (1997) 7840 b.
c. csaki, m. schmaltz, and w. skiba, a systematic approach to connement in n=1 supersymmetric gauge theories, phys.
rev. lett. 78 (1997) 799.
s. dimopoulos, m. dine, s. raby, and s. thomas, experimental signatures of low-energy gauge mediated supersymmetry
breaking, phys. rev. lett. 76 (1996) 3494.
s. dimopoulos, g. dvali, r. rattazzi, and g. giudice, dynamical soft terms with unbroken supersymmetry, nucl. phys. b
510 (1998) 12.
s. dimopoulos and h. georgi, softly broken supersymmetry and su(5), nucl. phys. b 193 (1981) 150.
m. dine, a. nelson, y. nir, and y. shirman, new tools for low-energy dynamical supersymmetry breaking, phys. rev. d
53 (1996) 2658.
m. dine, a. nelson, and y. shirman, dynamical supersymmetry breaking simplied, phys. rev. d 51 (1995) 1362.
g. dvali and z. kakushadze, dynamical flavor hierarchy and heavy top, phys. lett. b 426 (1998) 78.
g. dvali and a. pomarol, anomalous u(1) as a mediator of supersymmetry breaking, phys. rev. lett. 77 (1996) 3728.
m. b. einhorn and d. t. r. jones, absence of goldstino decoupling in hierarchical superunied models, phys. lett. b 128
(1983) 174.
p. fayet, spontaneous supersymmetry breaking without gauge invariance, phys. lett. b 58 (1975) 67.
p. fayet and j. iliopoulos, spontaneously broken supergauge symmetries and goldstone spinors, phys. lett. b 51 (1974) 461.
s. ferrara, j. iliopoulos and b. zumino, supergauge invariance and the gell-mann - low eigenvalue, nucl. phys. b 77 (1974)
413.
s. ferrara, l. girardello, f. palumbo, a general mass formula in broken supersymmetry phys. rev. d 20 (1979) 403.
w. fischler, h. p. nilles, j. polchinski, s. raby, l. susskind, vanishing renormalization of the d-term in supersymmetric
u (1) theories, phys. rev. lett. 47 (1981) 757.
g.f. giudice and r. rattazzi, theories with gauge mediated supersymmetry breaking, hep-ph/9801271.
m. green and j. schwarz, anomaly cancellations in supersymmetric d = 10 gauge theory require so(32), phys. lett. b
149 (1984) 117.
m.t. grisaru, m. rocek, and w. siegel, improved methods for supergraphs, nucl. phys. b 159 (1979) 429.
g. t hooft, in recent developments in gauge theories, eds. g. t hooft et al., plenum press, new york, 1980.
m. huq, spontaneous breakdown of fermion number conservation and supersymmetry, phys. rev. d 14 (1976) 3548.
k. intriligator and n.seiberg, phases of n=1 supersymmetric gauge theories in four dimensions, nucl. phys. b 431 (1994)
551.
k. intriligator and n. seiberg, lectures on supersymmetric gauge theories and electric-magnetic duality, nucl. phys. proc.
suppl. bc45, 1996, 1.
k. intriligator, n. seiberg, and s. shenker, proposal for a simple model of dynamical susy breaking, phys. lett. b 342
(1995) 152.
k. intriligator and s. thomas, dynamical supersymmetry breaking on quantum moduli spaces, nucl. phys. b 473 (1996) 121
a.
k. intriligator and s. thomas, dual descriptions of supersymmetry breaking, hep-th/9608046 b.
k.-i. izawa and t. yanagida, dynamical supersymmetry breaking in vector-like gauge theories, prog. theor. phys. 95 (1996)
949.
k. konishi, anomalous supersymmetry transformation of some composite operators in sqcd, phys. lett. b 135 (1984) 439.
a. kovner and m. shifman, chirally symmetric phase of supersymmetric gluodynamics, phys. rev. d 56 (1997) 2396,
hep-th/9702174.
r. leigh, l. randall, and r. rattazzi, unity of supersymmetry breaking models, nucl. phys. b 501 (1997) 375.
m. luty and w. taylor, varieties of vacua in classical supersymmetric gauge theories, phys. rev. d 53 (1996) 5399.
m. luty and j. terning, new mechanisms of dynamical supersymmetry breaking and direct gauge mediation,phys. rev. d
57 (1998) 6799.

49

j. lykken, e. poppitz, s. trivedi, branes with guts and supersymmetry breaking, nucl. phys. b 543 (1999) 105.
y. meurice and g. veneziano, susy vacua versus chiral fermions, phys. lett. b 141 (1984) 69.
h. murayama, studying non-calculable models of dynamical supersymmetry breaking, phys. lett. b 355 (1995) 187.
h. murayama, a model of direct gauge mediation, phys. rev. lett. 79 (1997) 18.
a. nelson, dynamical supersymmetry breaking, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 62, 1998, 261.
a. nelson and n. seiberg, r-symmetry breaking versus supersymmetry breaking, nucl. phys. b 416 (1994) 46.
a. nelson and s. thomas, unpublished.
h.p. nilles, supersymmetry, supergravity and particle physics, phys. rep. 110 (1984) 1.
v. novikov, m. shifman, a. vainshtein, and v. zakharov, exact gell-mann-low function of supersymmetric theories from
instanton calculus, nucl. phys. b 229 (1983) 381.
l. oraifeartaigh, spontaneous symmetry breaking for chiral scalar superelds, nucl. phys. b 96 (1975) 331.
m. peskin, duality in supersymmetric yang mills theory, in fields, strings and duality, eds. c. efthimiou and b. greene,
world scientic, 1996.
j. polchinski, eective potentials for supersymmetric three-scale hierarchies, phys. rev. d 27 (1983) 1320.
e. poppitz, dynamical supersymmetry breaking: why and how, int. j. mod. phys. a 13(1998) 3051.
e. poppitz and l. randall, low-energy kahler potentials in supersymmetric gauge theories with (almost) flat directions,
phys. lett. b 336 (1996) 402.
e. poppitz, y. shadmi, and s. trivedi, duality and exact results in product group theories, nucl. phys. b 480 (1996) 125
a.
e. poppitz, y. shadmi, and s. trivedi, supersymmetry breaking and duality in su (n )  su (n  m ) gauge theories, phys.
lett. b 388 (1996) 561 b.
e. poppitz and s. trivedi, some examples of chiral moduli spaces and dynamical supersymmetry breaking, phys. lett. b
365 (1996) 125.
e. poppitz and s. trivedi, new models of gauge and gravity mediated supersymmetry breaking, phys. rev. d 55 (1997) 5508.
e. poppitz and s.p. trivedi, dynamical supersymmetry breaking, hep-th/9803107.
p. pouliot, exact superpotentials, quantum vacua and duality in sp (nc) gauge theories, phys. lett. b 353 (1995) 471.
p. pouliot, duality in susy su (n ) with an antisymmetric tensor, phys. lett. b 367 (1996) 151.
p. pouliot and m. strassler, duality and dynamical supersymmetry breaking in spin(10) with a spinor, phys. lett. b 375
(1996) 175.
a. salam and j. strathdee, on goldstone fermions, phys. lett. b 49 (1974) 465.
n. seiberg, naturalness versus supersymmetric non-renormalization theorems, phys. lett. b 318 (1993) 469.
n. seiberg, exact results on the space of vacua of four-dimensional susy gauge theories, phys. rev. d 49 (1994) 6857.
n. seiberg, electric-magnetic duality in supersymmetric nonabelian gauge theories, nucl. phys. b 435 (1995) 129.
n. seiberg and e. witten, monopole condensation, and connement in n = 2 supersymmetric yang-mills theory, nucl.
phys. b 426 (1994) 19; monopoles, duality and chiral symmetry breaking in n=2 supersymmetric qcd, nucl. phys. b 431
(1994) 484.
y. shadmi, gauge mediated supersymmetry breaking without fundamental singlets, phys. lett. b 405 (1997) 99.
m. shifman, nonperturbative dynamics in supersymmetric theories: a primer, in connement, duality and nonperturbative
aspects of qcd, ed. p. van baal, plenum press, 1998.
m. shifman and a. vainshtein, solution of the anomaly puzzle in susy gauge theories and the wilson operator expansion,
nucl. phys. b 277 (1986) 456.
m. shifman and a. vainshtein, on gluino condensation in supersymmetric gauge theories. su (n ) and o(n ) groups, nucl.
phys. b 296 (1988) 445.
m. shifman and a. vainshtein, on holomorphic dependence and infrared eects in supersymmetric gauge theories, nucl.
phys. b 359 (1991) 571.
m. shifman and a. vainshtein, instantons versus supersymmetry: fifteen years later, hep-th/9902018.
y. shirman, dynamical supersymmetry breaking versus run-away behavior in supersymmetric gauge theories, phys. lett.
b 389 (1996) 287.
w. skiba, dynamical supersymmetry breaking, mod. phys. lett. a 12 (1997) 1997.
d.r. stump, m. wiest and c.p. yuan, detecting a light gravitino at linear collider to probe the susy breaking scale, phys.
rev. d 54 (1996) 1936.
s. thomas, recent developments in dynamical supersymmetry breaking, hep-th/9801007.
t. ter veldhuis, the mass spectrum in a model with calculable dynamical supersymmetry breaking, phys. lett. b 367 (1996)
157.
t. ter veldhuis, low energy behavior of some models with dynamical supersymmetry breaking, phys. rev. d 58 (1998)
015010.
j. wess and b. zumino, a lagrangian model invariant under supergauge transformations, phys. lett. b 49 (1974) 52.
e. witten, dynamical breaking of supersymmetry, nucl. phys. b 188 (1981) 513 a.
e. witten, mass hierarchies in supersymmetric theories, phys. lett. b 105 (1981) 267 b.
e. witten, constraints on supersymmetry breaking, nucl. phys. b 202 (1982) 253.

50

e. witten, toroidal compactications without vector structure, j. high ener. phys. 02 (1998) 006, hep-th/9712028.
b. zumino, spontaneous breaking of supersymmetry, preprint lbl-13691, heisenberg simp. (1981) 137.

51

