sissa/92/99/fm
hep-th/9908009

projective resolutions of coherent sheaves

and descent relations between branes.

a.tomasiello

international school for advanced studies

via beirut 2-4, 34014 trieste, italy

e-mail: tomasiel@sissa.it

abstract

we notice that, for branes wrapped on complex analytic subvarieties,
the algebraic-geometric version of k-theory makes the identication be-
tween brane-antibrane pairs and lower-dimensional branes automatic.
this is because coherent sheaves on the ambient variety represent gauge
bundles on subvarieties, and they can be put in exact sequences (pro-
jective resolutions) with sheaves corresponding to vector bundles on
the pair; this automatically gives a d(p  2) as a formal dierence
of bundles on the dp  d p pair, both belonging to the grothendieck
group of coherent sheaves of the ambient.

0
0
0
2

 

v
o
n
0
1

 

 
 

2
v
9
0
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1

introduction.

there has been recently a major shift of perspective as to the interpretation
of tachyons in brane-antibrane pairs [1]. it has been long since suspected
that they signal instabilities, but one could not forecast whether this led to
inconsistency of the theory or could have instead a more constructive role. it
is now believed that the latter is the case, and that tachyons can be viewed
simply as higgs elds, whose condensation can lead to interesting eects. in
particular, it can lead to remnants whose stability is in turn simply dictated
by the topological stability of the condensation. here we will be interested
only in type ii theories and in stable products of decay.
if on the brane
and on the antibrane there are gauge bundles e and f respectively, what
we need is something that classies the topological content of the pair. the
key is to note that [2], if the two bundles are topologically the same, they
will annihilate leaving no stable remnant: there is in this case no stable
pattern of condensation for the tachyon. moreover, if such a trivial pair
is added to non trivial ones, it will disappear, giving no contribution. we
can write this symbolically as (e, f )  (e  h, f  h). since this is the
denition of topological k-theory, we can interpret physics by identifying a
brane-antibrane system as an element of this group (hints in this direction
were explicitly given before in [3]).

we have now to identify physically the result of the decay, which in
general is not the vacuum (as there exist non-trivial elements of k-theory).
the locus in which the tachyon vanishes is the place around which energy
is located, and is a source for lower rr elds. so it is natural to identify
it with a brane supported on its zero locus; this can be viewed as a section
of t  e  f . this second point makes it possible that k-theory also
classies all lower-dimensional d-branes.

let us stress that the classication of pairs by k-theory and the identi-
cation of the remnant are, so far, two dierent steps. note, indeed, that a
k-theory class does not dene the bundle t : if we change the representative,
the latter changes as well.

here we will argue that, if we deal with complex analytic subvarieties,
the identication of the remnant is a natural consequence of the rst step, in
a way that puts a new light on the incorporation of lower charges. this is be-
cause in that case we can choose, instead of k-theory, an analytic (algebraic-
geometric) version of it, the grothendieck group of coherent sheaves [4, 5],
hereafter referred to simply as grothendieck group (as it is commonly meant
in algebraic geometry; in general this name simply denotes the procedure to
get a group from a monoid). in this setting, bundles over subvarieties are
expressible - through projective resolutions - as formal dierences of bundles
over the ambient variety. this allows us to see the identication between
brane-antibrane and k-theory on the same footing as that between brane-
antibrane and lower-dimensional brane; in a way, this becomes automatic,

1

or natural.

on the one hand, this seems to conrm the physical analysis already
done; on the other, it allows us to interpret descent relations, and tachyon
condensation between stable d-branes, in terms of projective resolutions.
in turn, the physical identication between dp  d p and d(p  2) can be
viewed now as a purely topological counterpart of an algebraic-geometric
procedure.

one should stress the dierence between what we said above and the
already known mathematical counterpart of tachyon condensation: the iso-
morphism between the k-theory of a submanifold and that of the ambient.
while that is an isomorphism between dierent groups, what we propose
here is that the descent relation can be viewed as natural in one single
group. even better, while that isomorphism is natural, it does not justify
in itself the identication of the d(p  2) with the pair.
in our case, on
the contrary, we treat complex analytic subvarieties and so we can choose
to use grothendieck groups: if we do that, the identication of the product
of tachyon condensation is a logical consequence of the existence of projec-
tive resolutions of coherent sheaves. a related issue is the following. one
often says that k-theory of the ambient space classies branes:
if so, not
only should there be representatives in the group for all lower-dimensional
branes, but also dierent classes for branes of dierent dimensions. while
the rst feature has been demonstrated to be there, the second would lack if
we did not choose dierent boundary conditions (and thus compactications
of the ambient space, by adding points at innity; for instance usually one
takes spheres to classify branes on at space), for example by considering
higher k-theory groups. these groups together then form a ring which one
considers as classifying branes. our attitude here will be dierent: we will
have everything in the same group, by taking, as compactication, complex
projective space, which has the virtue of giving us a z for every codimension.
we will return to this later.

the following discussion can be tted to any case in which we want
to express a brane wrapped on a submanifold in terms of a pair wrapped
on a manifold; just compactify the latter to a complex projective variety.
the main case we have in mind is iib theory, with space lling branes
and antibranes; so in this case we take, as we said, projective space p5,
of real dimension 10, as ambient variety. the examples that we will be
talking about in the following, however, are chosen to be easier. we do not
make any claim of mathematical originality; these examples are here just to
clarify and illustrate the general discussion, which also relies on well-known
mathematical facts.

issues about the role of grothendieck groups were already considered in

[6], with a dierent point of view and aim from the one we take here.

2

2 coherent sheaves and their projective resolu-

tions.

the key concept we have to introduce, before discussing grothendieck groups,
is that of coherent sheaf. sheaves generalize the concept of bre bundles on
a manifold, which can be viewed as a particular class of sheaves, the locally
free ones. fibre bundles on a submanifold will then be described precisely
by coherent sheaves. on a projective smooth variety x, the case to which
for simplicity we will now restrict, they are sheaves of nitely generated ox
-modules, and thus (using, for example, regularity and the presence of an
ample invertible sheaf) admit a nite projective free resolution, that is, they
can be put in an exact sequence:

0  fn1  . . .  f1  f0  c  0

(1)

where c is our coherent sheaf and the fk are locally free. fibre bundles on
a closed subvariety are coherent sheaves (closed immersions are proper, and
so take coherent sheaves in the subvariety  in particular, locally free ones
 to coherent sheaves), and so admit such resolutions; we will see how this
works in examples. note that our conclusions are untouched by possible
singularities of the subvarieties.

there are in general two denitions of grothendieck groups. take z[l]
(respectively z[c]) the free abelian group generated by locally free (respec-
tively coherent) sheaves. then

k  z[l]/i,

k  z[c]/i ,

where i (i ) is the ideal generated in both cases by elements of the form
f  f   f  if there is an exact sequence 0  f   f  f   0. in
the case of smooth projective varieties, these two denitions are the same
(the two groups are isomorphic). in particular we can immediately see that
every coherent sheaf can be expressed as an element of k, by their dening
sequence (1), and so as the dierence e  f of two locally free sheaves.
this simply means that in this setting we can express a bre bundle on
a subvariety as the dierence of two bre bundles on the variety. this is
just the identication given by tachyon condensation! so we see that, if
we use grothendieck group instead of topological k-theory, the rst step we
described above (the fact that we can cancel the same bundle if it appears on
both sides) implies the second (tachyon condensation and identication with
lower-dimensional branes). of course we have not shown the isomorphism
between grothendieck groups here: but this point is also essential, because
otherwise the class which we found would depend on the projective resolution
we chose. although we will not prove that here [5], we will check it explicitly
in an example at the end of the paper.

3

this group k = k is dierent from k-theory in various respects. first,
of course, we are working with holomorphic subvarieties, and choosing holo-
morphic structures for the bundles involved. second, what we identify with
zero are extensions instead of direct sums. but all extensions are topologi-
cally trivial (direct sums), so this is not a problem. so this group does not
contain in general all of what is contained in k-theory (the non-complex
bundles); this gives us a means to understand which brane-antibrane cong-
urations represent lower dimensional branes wrapped on holomorphic cycles.
at the same time this group distinguishes objects which in k-theory are the
same.

we have still to verify that the isomorphism between the grothendieck
groups is really consistent with the tachyon condensation we already know.
we will do this in several examples, using as a basic tool the sequence

0  f  f(d)  f(d)|d

 0,

(2)

with f locally free (alternatively, we can derive it from (3) tensoring). start
from a brane wrapped on a holomorphic cycle with its bundle - that is, a
coherent sheaf. we have to express it in terms of locally free sheaves (brane-
antibrane) and then do tachyon condensation to see whether we retrieve the
initial conguration. let us start with the case of one brane, with the
structure sheaf as bundle on it (we think of the u (1)-bundle as the circle
bundle inside it), and suppose that we work in x = pn. the resolution
depends on whether the subvariety y is a complete intersection or not; in
the former case it is easy. in the case of (real) codimension 2 it reads

0  ox (y )  ox  oy  0;

(3)

the rst term is the ideal sheaf, that we can think as the sheaf of holomorphic
functions having a zero along y . from this we get that oy = ox ox (y ),
and so the tachyon is a section of e f  = ox(y ), hence it has a simple zero
on y (recall there is a duality between functions having poles and sections
having zeroes). this exactly parallels the already known construction of a
brane-antibrane pair which reproduces a codimension 2 brane. we already
remarked that the bundle of which the tachyon is a section is not dened by
the class in k-theory; instead, it is guessed in some way by thinking about
a minimal couple (e, f ). with this procedure, this minimality is just the
concept of minimal resolution of a coherent sheaf, well-known to algebraic
geometers.

higher codimension.

let us describe what to do if the codimension is higher, sticking with
the case of complex projective spaces. exploiting the fact that line bundles,
in this case, are classied by z, we only write degrees. let d1, . . . , dl be the

4

degrees of the equations f1, . . . , fl dening the subvariety, and suppose it to
be a complete intersection,

0  ox (d1  . . .  dl)  . . .  m

ox(di1  di2)

(4)

i1,i2

 m

ox(di)


 ox  oy  0.

i

the origin of this resolution can be understood as follows: the v  io(di)
term is the generalization of the rst (from the left) term of (3) due to the
fact that we have more than one equation, and may be thought as the sheaf
of l-uples of functions (f1h1, . . . , flhl);  takes such an l-uple to p fihi,
and the next term on the left is its kernel, i.e. relations between the fi.
we always nd the obvious relations fi  fj  fj  fi = 0, which generate
the term i,j o(d1  dj); in the case of non complete intersections, the
number of equations necessary to dene the variety would be higher than
the codimension, and we would have extra terms. in fact in the complete
intersection case one may make (4) more transparent in the form

0  lv  . . .  2v  v  ox  oy  0,

also known as the koszul complex. note that we do not have to proceed
step by step: this is an all at once procedure, as the one already known
and involving k-theory thom isomorphism and abs construction ([2]; see
also [7] for a more extensive description). to see better the correspondence,
rst remember that for any complex

e0

d0 e1

d1 . . .

dn1
 en

one may construct a smaller complex (a map)

m

ei

d

 m

ei,

i=even

i=odd

1e2, d2e2 + d

where d(e0, e2, . . .) = (d0e0 + d
3e4, . . .); moreover the latter
complex is exact if the former is. if we apply this to the sequence (4), then
we have a pair of bundles which just correspond to the cliord bundles
(s+, s) associated to the conormal of our variety; for example cliord
multiplication (which can be viewed as a sum of an exterior product and a
contraction) arises from the sum in the denition of d.

projective resolutions like this are also known, when thought in terms of

the corresponding algebraic objects (rings and modules) as syzygies [8].

lower charges.

we will now give more concrete examples for the case of a non trivial line
bundle on the (p  2)-brane. since we will do this again in projective spaces,

5

let us return for a moment to the point we anticipated in the introduction.
one would imagine, from the descriptions we gave so far of the identications
of the dpd p system with lower dimensional branes, that, xed our ambient
space, k-theory or its grothendieck group already provides a classication
of all branes of all dimensions. to check this we have to choose the space;
even if we have xed the dimension p, we still have to choose the boundary
conditions. this amounts to choosing a type of compactication. we can
choose, as usual, a sphere; but the k-theory of a sphere is at most z. this
means that the construction, by itself, would confuse branes of dierent
dimensions: two dimensionally dierent branes can be realized as the same
dp  d p system. we have, so to say, to avoid this by hand, treating each
codimension separately and imposing that our bundles depend just on the
transversal dimensions. if we do not do that, we nd that in a given brane-
antibrane system, a (p  2) brane is given by a certain couple (e, f ), which
is anyway also topologically the same as a couple which gives a (p 4) brane.
we point out that it could be that dierent choices of boundary condi-
tions (that is, of compactication) can give a better result. for instance,
choosing the complex projective space pn, both k-theory and the grothendieck
group are isomorphic to [5, 9]

r  z[t]/(t  1)n+1,

(5)

which gives a z for each even codimensional brane (the isomorphism from
k or k-theory to r is given by sending the hyperplane h to t). the fact
that the topological and algebraic geometrical k-theory are equal here is
reasonable, since we know that pn has no jacobian. in a way the trick is that,
choosing pn as compactication space, we allowed all possible boundary
conditions, so distinguishing between branes of dierent dimensions. of
course in this way we are not predicting the allowed codimensions of the
branes: we cannot because we chose the complex analytic setting, forcing
them to be even.

now we return to the examples we wanted to give: non trivial line bun-
dles on the (p  2) brane. this is easier if we can extend the line bundle
to one on the ambient space, whose divisor let us call d: indeed, applying
again (2), we obtain

0  ox (d  y )  ox(d)  o(d)|y

 0;

the last term is just our original bundle on the subvariety. note that again
e  f  = ox(y ), as it should. to x ideas, consider the case of a conic in
p2, which is birationally equivalent to p1. if the line bundle is op1(2), it can
be extended on p2 as o(1) (henceforth o  op2); the sequence so reads

0  o(1)  o(1)  op1(2)  0.

life is harder if we consider instead the bundle op1(1), which is not
extendable to p2, since there is no divisor on it which intersects the conic

6

once. we can circumvent this diculty in two ways. first, we can start
the projective resolution from o  o, instead of from o. doing this care-
fully involves looking at the rings of functions over the varieties, and maps
between them; we will not delve into details, but the result turns out to be

0  2o(1)  2o  op1(1)  0

(we denote now n
1 o(k) as no(k)). as a check, let us do it in another way,
which only involves sequences that we have already seen. write rst the two
sequences

0  op1(1)  op1  op  0

(6)

0  o(2)  2o(1)  o  op  0

where p is a point in p1 at which a section of our line bundle op1(1) vanish.
now, tensor both with an hyperplane line bundle in p2: we get

op1(1) = op1(2)op(1) = o(1)o(1)(o(1)2o+o(1)) = 2o2o(1)

as above. still another method would have been tensoring the rst sequence
in (6) by an hyperplane line bundle of p1, and then reexpressing o(1) as
3o 3o(1)+o(2): this gives an illustration of the relation (t1)n+1 = 0
in (5). the result is in any case reasonable because a conic can be deformed
to two hyperplanes touching in a point.

if nally we want to consider stacked branes, u (1)-bundles become u (r)-
bundles. so the generalization is to represent u (r) on cr; we get in this
way a complex vector bundle of rank r on the lower-dimensional brane. the
coherent sheaf is now again a sheaf of o-modules, but with more generators;
and so the resolution starts with rox instead of with ox . this is right,
since to get stacked branes we expect to have to start from stacked brane-
antibrane pair. the procedure works the same way, but to verify that we
get the desired subvariety we have to look at the locus where the tachyon is
non invertible, rather than zero.

we thank l. bonora, a. sen, a. zampa for useful discussions and advice.

references

[1] a. sen, so(32) spinors of type

i and other solitons on
brane-antibrane pair, j. high energy phys. 9809 (1998) 023,
hep-th/9808141; tachyon condensation on the brane-antibrane sys-
tem, j. high energy phys. 9808 (1998) 012, hep-th/9805170.

[2] e. witten, d-branes and k-theory, j. high energy phys. 9812 (1998)

019, hep-th/9810188.

7

[3] r. minasian and g. moore, k-theory and ramond-ramond charge, j.

high energy phys. 9711 (1997) 002, hep-th/9710230.

[4] r. hartshorne, algebraic geometry, springer-verlag, new york, 1977.

[5] yu. i. manin, lectures on the k-functor in algebraic geometry, russ.

math. surveys 24 (1969) 1-89.

[6] e. sharpe, d-branes, derived categories and grothendieck groups,

hep-th/9902116.

[7] k. olsen and r. j. szabo, constructing d-branes from k-theory,

hep-th/9907140.

[8] j.harris, algebraic geometry: a rst course, springer-verlag, new

york, 1992.

[9] m.f. atiyah, k-theory (benjamin, 1964).

8

