0
0
0
2

 

n
u
j
 

2
1

 
 

5
v
1
2
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

new concepts in particle physics from solution

of an old problem

bert schroer

institut fur theoretische physik

fu-berlin, arnimallee 14, 14195 berlin, germany

presently: cbpf, rua dr. xavier sigaud, 22290-180 rio de janeiro, brazil

schroer@cbpf.br

july 1999, revised march 2000, to be published in jpa

abstract

recent ideas on modular localization in local quantum physics are
used to clarify the relation between on- and o-shell quantities in parti-
cle physics; in particular the relation between on-shell crossing symme-
try and o-shell einstein causality. among the collateral results of this
new nonperturbative approach are profound relations between crossing
symmetry of particle physics and hawking-unruh like thermal aspects
(kms property, entropy attached to horizons) of quantum matter be-
hind causal horizons, aspects which hitherto were exclusively related with
killing horizons in curved spacetime rather than with localization aspects
in minkowski space particle physics. the scope of this modular frame-
work is amazingly wide and ranges from providing a conceptual basis for
the d=1+1 bootstrap-formfactor program for factorizable d=1+1 mod-
els to a decomposition theory of qfts in terms of a nite collection of
unitarily equivalent chiral conformal theories placed a specied relative
position within a common hilbert space (in d=1+1 a holographic relation
and in higher dimensions more like a scanning). the new framework gives
a spacetime interpretation to the zamolodchikov algebra and explains its
thermal aspects.

1 introduction

theoretical physicists, contrary to mathematicians, rarely return to their old
unsolved problems; often they replace them by new inventions. the content
of the present article on some new concepts in particle physics does not follow
this pattern. the old problems it addresses and partially solves are those of the
relation between o-shell and on-shell quantities (or between elds-particles)

1

and in particular of crossing symmetry in local quantum physics (lqp)1. a
more restricted form of on-shell crossing symmetry also led to the invention of
the dual model and string theory, a line of development which we will not follow
except some remarks in the last section.

the most prominent of on-shell quantities is the s-matrix of a local qft,
whereas elds and more general operators are o-shell. the derivation of
on-shell quantities from lqp through the use of the rigorous lsz scattering
theory was one of the high points of the qft of the 60ies. in the opposite
direction the problem (the inverse problem of qft) lay dormant for a long
time. recently the adaptation of the tomita-takesaki modular theory to wedge-
localized algebras suggested new methods to construct unique o-shell local
operator algebras from the scattering data in a quite interesting and novel way
[22][51]. thus the inverse problem of qft has a much better status than in qm.
to bring this into the open requires the introduction of a wealth of new concepts
relevant to particle physics, while maintaining all the principles of qft.

in this paper we will have to study a new kind of operators which, as a
result of their weak semiinnite (wedge-like) localization and their close relation
to the s-matrix, are to be considered as on-shell. this on-shell operators are
essential for our new approach which avoids pointlike elds at the beginning and
rather starts with on-shell generators of wedge-localized algebra which encode
the structure of the s-matrix. o-shell compactly localized operators and local
eld generators are then obtained via intersections of wedge algebras. here and
in the sequel the word localization region always stand for the causal completion
of a spacetime region; these are typically the regions which one obtains by
intersecting wedges.

besides these two extremes there are intermediate possibilities where on-
shell and o-shell aspects appear together. the most prominent and useful
mixed objects are bilinear forms on scattering vector states i.e. matrix elements
of local operators a (either pointlike elds or bounded operators localized in
smaller than wedge regions) taken between incoming and outgoing multiparticle
scattering states (in terms of feynman graphs, one leg is o-shell).

out hq1, ...qn1, qn |a| pn, pn1, ...p1iin

(1)

which we will call (generalized) formfactors, following the standard terminol-
ogy of d=1+1 factorizing models. these objects full the important crossing
symmetry which acts on the on-shell momenta.

out hq1, ...qn1, qn |a| pn, pn1, ...p1iin

= out hp1,q1, ...qn1, qn |a| pn, pn1, ...p2iin

(2)

1we will often use the name local quantum physics (lqp) instead of qft [1], if we
have in mind the physical principles of qft implemented by dierent concepts than those of
the various quantization formalisms (canonical, quantization via path integrals etc.) which
most of the readers are familiar with from the various textbooks. to the extend that the
reader does not automatically identify qft with those formalisms, he may without danger of
misunderstandings continue to use the good old name qft.

2

where the analytic continuation p  p is carried out in the rapidity parametriza-
tion by an i-shift:   +i, and the bar denotes the antiparticle. the dicul-
ties in physical interpretation of this relation (about which rigorous information
outside of perturbation theory of sucient generality is scarce) reects the lack
of its conceptual understanding. it is in a way deeper than the tcp-symmetry,
a symmetry derived from causality which among other things requires the exis-
tence of an antiparticle to each particle. in fact the crossing transformation is a
kind of individual tcp-transformation which eects only one particle at a time
within the multiparticle incoming ket conguration and carries it to the outgo-
ing bra conguration as an antiparticle. in spite of its name it is not a quantum
theoretical (wigner) symmetry, since that crossing process involves an on-shell
analytic continuation p  p. together with vacuum polarization it belongs to
the most characteristic aspects of qft. although its physical meaning in terms
of the basic principles of lqp remained vague, most physicists liked to view it
as a kind of on-shell imprint of einstein causality, the latter being an o-shell
concept. one of the results of the new conceptual framework presented here
is an interpretation of the crossing property in terms of wedge localization
and the ensuing thermal hawking-unruh properties. they are usually associ-
ated exclusively with black hole quantum physics, but in fact turn out to be
general properties of any local quantum description including particle physics
in minkowski space. although in constructive terms the control in passing from
the on-shell s-matrix-dominated aspects to the o-shell local quantum physics
remains a formidable problem, it is easy to see that a local theory is (if it exists
at all) uniquely determined in terms of its on-shell shadow.

the s-matrix whose matrix elements result from the previous formula for a
= 1, is the observable of particle physics par excellence; it is totally intrinsic
and independent of any eld coordinatizations, although in the lsz theory
it is calculated from specic elds. strictly speaking in high energy physics
only (inclusive) cross sections and not amplitudes are directly measured; a fact
which is especially important if interactions between zero mass particles leads
to infrared problems.

the reason why most theoretical methods in particle physics do not aim
directly at the s-matrix is that most of our physical intuition about causality
and charge ows in spacetime is based on (o-shell) local elds or local observ-
ables. the new on-shell wedge-algebra generators introduced in this paper are
somewhat hidden and in particular are not obtainable by lagrangian or more
generally by any kind of quantization approach2. although their role in general
qft is only at the beginning of being understood, there is already a very good
spacetime comprehension in the class of factorizing d=1+1 models [22].

the old problems on which there has been signicant recent progress can be

compressed in terms of the following questions

 does a physically admissable s-matrix fullling unitarity, crossing sym-
2any approach which leads to explicite solution and not just to formal representations as
e.g. euclidean functional integral representations would of cause present all properties. but
the lagrangian approach only achieves the latter.

3

metry and certain analytic properties (needed in its formulation), have
an underlying unique local qft? this one may call the inverse problem
of qft associated with scattering. it is a problem of principle interest to
take notice not only of the well-known fact that elds and local observable
lead to scattering, but that also local equivalence classes of elds3 or nets
of local observables are in turn determined by particle scattering data.

 is there a constructive procedure in which, similar to the d=1+1 bootstrap-
formfactor program for factorizing d=1+1 models (which in fact reappears
as a special case), the s-matrix and the generalized formfactors enter as im-
portant constructive elements in order to obtain o-shell objects as elds
or local observables? in particular can one formulate such a constructive
approach in a conceptually intrinsic manner i.e. without any quantization
parallelism to classical eld theory and without the use of eld coordi-
natizations and short-distance divergence problems? this could be of
tremendous practical importance.

the progress obtained on both questions by the modular method be pre-

sented in the sequel.

in order to understand better what is meant by the word old in the title
of this paper, it is very instructive to pause and take stock of some past achieve-
ments and failures in an s-matrix approach to particle physics. already as far
back as 1946 heisenberg [8] proposed to do particle physics in a pure s-matrix
setting in order to avoid the at that time nonsensical aspects of short distance di-
vergencies in qft. his requirements of unitarity, poincare invariance and some
aspects of cluster decomposition properties turned out to be much too general
in order to be useful. a second attempt with the full backing of renormalized
perturbation theory was launched in the early 60ies [9]. part of the motivation
was similar to the previous one. although renormalization theory meanwhile
allowed to extract a class of perturbatively nite qfts, the formally innite
intermediate steps and the not entirely natural but rather technical looking di-
vision into renormalizable/nonrenormalizable models nourished the hope that
those discomforting features would disappear in a pure s-matrix approach [12].
the second more pragmatic motivation was the idea that the dispersion theo-
retical research of the 50ies could be extended into a computational scheme for
strong interactions within an s-matrix setting. since the physical principles of
the s-matrix approach as any physical principles cannot be dealt with directly
but rather require an operator or functional formalism, several ideas which could
not be motivated through qft (in fact they are not true in perturbative qft)
had to be added. the most prominent ones were on-shell spectral represen-
tations as the mandelstam representation and a strengthened form of crossing
called duality. the rst one served to specify analyticity domains and the second
implemented the purely phenomenological idea of saturating the coexistence of
charges in the dierent crossed channels already by disregarding cuts and only
taking one-particle poles into account (nuclear democracy, reggeization).

3that an s-matrix cannot determine individual elds had been known since the late 50ies.

4

i believe that these added requirements which made heavy use of analyticity
contributed to the failure of the program. it did not even achieve to reproduce
those perturbative s-matrices which via lsz scattering theory were obtained
from the feynman perturbation theory of time-ordered functions. what was
left over from this program got swept aside by the ascending gauge theory at
the beginning of the 70ies.

for the purpose of a good understanding of the content of this paper it
is very helpful to localize the cause of the failure of the s-matrix bootstrap
program. i think i will be in agreement with most of my colleagues who fol-
lowed these developments or later red about them that free-oating (and often
ill-dened) analyticity requirements are too ne instruments in order to harmo-
nize with physical intuition. only analytic properties which appear directly in
the formulation of physical concepts are useful for the construction of theories.
this is best illustrated by two examples. the x-space analyticity of correla-
tion functions in qft which was discovered by wightman [5] is equivalent to
the spectral-, covariance- and locality- properties of the operator theory. on
the other hand the dispersion relations, even if restricted to the simplest case
of forward scattering, involve analyticity properties which arise from a quite
complicated interplay between the o-shell causality of retarded functions with
on-shell spectrum properties [6]. such non-constructive analytic properties are
still useful for experimentally verifying particular consequences of causality and
they also have their merits in the study of possible nonperturbative high energy
bounds on cross sections, but they have no natural role in an actual construction.
only a very few people took notice of the fact that the bootstrap program
nally worked in the more limited context of d=1=1 integrable models; it was
too far away from a theory of everything which was on the minds of the
ambitious protagonists of the 4-dim. bootstrap which nally ended in failure.
the modest 2-dim. program led to a nice classication of families of factorizing
elastic s-matrices (thus showing that the idea of the bootstrap being a toe was
incorrect ) and it also set the path for the construction of associated qft models
via a formfactor program. a side result of the s-matrix research in d=1+1 was
the discovery of an on-shell perturbation theory which, if specialized to on-shell
tree graphs without particle creation4 allowed to show the absence of creation
for on-shell one-loop approximation [10]. apparently the extension to multi-
loops was never elaborated in sucient generality; some partial results can be
found in [11]. the very existence of these formulae shows that a nite on-shell
approach which avoids the characteristic o-shell short distance problems of
qft is more than just a nice dream.

the present line of research directly takes o where the original program
it removes the unfortunate toe ideology5 from the s-matrix boot-

failed.

4the absense of particle creation is not an issue which is evident on the level of tree graphs
since it only happens happens on-shell. properties which are only valid on-shell are too subtle
to be seen by inspection of feynman diagrams.

5theories of everything seem to be also the favorite pass time of post s-matrix physicist.
the underlying idea that certain principles allow for only one solution usually originate in
connection with nonlinear structures for which initially no solution is known.

5

strap and incorporates the latter with the help of modular theory into the qft
structure of wedge algebras. this return into qft is based on the fact that
the s-matrix has in addition to the large time scattering interpretation (well-
known from the lsz theory) another little known aspect namely it is the relative
modular invariant between the wedge algebra of incoming free elds and that
of the actual interacting heisenberg operators. whereas the scattering aspect
also applies to qm, the modular role is totally characteristic for local quantum
physics. having established a direct modular relation between the s-matrix
and the wedge algebra, the old s-matrix formalism becomes enriched with new
physical concepts and mathematical tools. in particular the thermal aspects of
the wedge algebra (the hawking-unruh temperature of matter behind a rindler
horizon) gets inexorably tied up with the crossing symmetry of particle physics.
a pivotal role in the linkage of the s-matrix with the wedge algebras is played
by special wedge-localized operators which applied to the vacuum create one-
particle states without the usually associated cloud of particle-antiparticles well
known from the vacuum polarization phenomenon. these pfgs (polarization-
free generators) cannot exist for spacetime localization regions whose causal
completion is smaller than a wedge, unless the theory has no interactions, in
other words the wedge region is the smallest causally complete region for which
pfgs are compatible with the presence of interactions.

the new framework shares with the old s-matrix bootstrap program (and
with string theory) the absence of any ultraviolet problems since it uses no
coordinatizations in terms of pointlike elds. whether a theory exists or not
is not decided by the short distance singularities of some eld coordinates in
terms of which the lagrangian quantization happened to be done, but rather
depends on the nontriviality of the intersection structure of wedge algebras. if
intersections representing double cone algebras contain more operators than just
multiples of the identity, the theory is nontrivial in the sense that possesses a
nontrivial net for small localization regions and not just for wedge regions. this
avoidance of particular pointlike elds and their short-distance problems was the
main dream and the raison detre of the s-matrix bootstrap. it is fully realized
in the new approach by the use of the eld-coordinate independent algebraic
formulation of qft (aqft). the intention of the s-matrix protagonists to
abandon elds was reasonable, but unfortunately they thought that they also
should abandon the principle of locality.

the philosophy that the s-matrix has nothing to do with localization and
locality was also not quite right, as the relation to wedge-localized algebras
shows. since from the net of wedge algebras one can get the algebras of compact
regions by intersections, all of local quantum physics is determined by the s-
matrix. an aqft for a given s-matrix turns out to be uniquely determined
and it is believed that if s is admissable in the old sense (unitary, crossing
symmetric+associated analyticity), the net of wedge algebras also exist and
leads to the required nontrivial intersections. for d=1+1 factorizing s-matrices
the formfactor program goes a long way towards proving this conjecture.

after having outlined our physical motivation and the position of the new
concepts with respect to older ideas, we now briey mention our main mathe-

6

matical tool which will be used for problems of (quantum) localization: (tomitas)
modular theory of von neumann algebras6. these concepts, which for the rst
time claried the on/o-shell relation and in particular the spacetime inter-
pretation of on-shell crossing symmetry, were not available at the time of the
s-matrix bootstrap of the 60ies. in a seminal paper [13] the connection of wedge
localized algebras with modular theory was for the rst time established. the
present approach may be considered as the inverse of the bisognano-wichmann
theorem. instead of extracting a deep mathematical property from the qft
of wedge algebras, we are using this property together with the modular role of
the s-matrix for the construction of qfts via wedge algebras. the main new
mathematical tool is briey described in an appendix, a more detailed account
can be found in [2].

the ideas of aqft used in this paper are not as much known as their
importance would suggest. perhaps this is due to the fact that most particle
physicist consider qft as a basically settled issue with only some nasty technical
problems remaining. we will demonstrate in this paper that such a view is quite
premature and unrealistic.

we have organized this paper as follows. the next section reviews and illus-
trates the eld-coordinate-free approach for theories without interactions and
for interacting d=1+1 factorizing model. in the latter case the zamolodchikov-
faddeev algebra emerges in a natural way without having been put in [22], and
the hitherto formal z-f operators for the rst time acquire a spacetime inter-
pretation in connection with the new pfg generators of wedge algebras. the
presentation of these polarization-free wedge generators is extended to systems
which are not factorizing (i.e.
to theories with on-shell particle creation) in
section 3.

after a brief introduction to the aqft framework in section 4, the fth
section treats the light ray/front restriction and algebraic holography in terms
of associated chiral conformal eld theories. this connection is again a deep
result of modular theory, more specically of modular inclusions and intersec-
tions. there we also discuss the problem of inverting such maps (the blow up
property) in such a way that the original theory becomes reconstructed from
a nite number of copies of one abstract chiral theory whose relative position
in one hilbert space has to be carefully chosen. in colloquial terms this is like
scanning a higher dimensional massive theory by one chiral theory in dierent
positions and we will refer to it as chiral scanning. since a nite number
of relatively positioned chiral theories seems to be easier understandable than
one higher dimensional massive theory, the chiral scanning is in addition to the
wedge algebra method and the use of pfgs explained before a second potential
constructive idea based on modular theory. the mathematical technology used
in this section 5 is one of the most powerful which aqft presently is able to
oer namely the theory of modular inclusions and intersections [14][2].

6special aspects (the thermal kms characterization) of tomitas mathematical modular
theory were discoverd by physicists in connection with quantum statistics of fermi/bose
systems formulated directly in the innite volume limit when the gibbs formulation breaks
down [1].

7

in the same section 5 we also take up the problem of associating entropy for
localized matter. in view of the fact that modular localization leads to thermal
aspects which show up in the appearance of a hawking-unruh temperature it
is natural to ask for a concept of localization entropy and in case it exists
whether it gives a quantum version of the bekenstein area law for the area of
the causal horizon of the localization region.

the last section nally tries to compare our approach with string theory.
this is on the one hand natural since both have similar historical roots, but
dicult from a conceptual viewpoint because string theory despite all its math-
ematical formalism has never developed beyond a collection of recipes towards
formulating underlying principles. whereas our approach has strong ties with
the older s-matrix bootstrap program (minus the wrong toe philosophy) which
only used properties abstracted from qft, string theory via the dual model
has added many ad hoc inventions which did not originate through the intrinsic
logic of s-matrix theory and qft and are not asked for by any known principle
of particle physics. this is in my view the reason why string theory despite
all its semantic changes has remained a collection of computational prescrip-
tions without the guidance of a conceptual framework. since basic physical
issues as locality and localizations, algebras versus states etc. should be dis-
cussed on the level of physical principles and not by looking at formalism and
computational recipes, our compression in the last section unavoidably remains
somewhat vague and supercial.

this presentation is in part a survey of published material [22][24][7] [51][44][31]

as well as of new results, in particular the presentation of localization-entropy in
section 4. for the convenience of the reader we attached an two part appendix
the rst part containing standard facts about modular theory and the second
proving that in interacting theories there are no polarization-free generators for
subwedge spacetime regions.

2 systems without interactions and factorizing

models

in trying to bring readers with a good knowledge of standard qft in contact
with some new (and old) concepts in algebraic qft (aqft) without sending
him back with a load of homework, i face a tricky problem. let us for the time-
being put aside the intrinsic logic which would ask for a systematic presentation
of the general framework, and let us instead try to maneuver in a more less ad
hoc (occasionally even muddled) way.

in a pedestrian approach the problem of constructing nets of interaction free
systems from wigners one particle theory may serve as a nice pedagogical ex-
ercise for the new ideas. the reader who is not familiar with wigners represen-
tation theoretical method to describe particle spaces is referred to [21][1]. since
wigners representation theory restricted to positive energy representations was
the rst totally intrinsic relativistic quantum theory without any quantization

8

parallelism to classical particle theory, it is reasonable to expect in general that
if we nd the right concepts, we should be able to avoid covariant pointlike elds
altogether in favor of a more intrinsic way to implement the causality/locality
principle.
in that case the local elds should be similar to coordinatizations
of local observables in analogy to the use of coordinates in modern dieren-
tial geometry. this viewpoint is indeed consistent and essential in the present
context[22][23].

let us rst understand how the free eld algebras are directly abstracted
from the wigner theory. by using a spatial variant of tomitas theory for the
wedge situation i.e. by dening a kind of antilinear involutive pre-tomita
operator s on the wigner representation space (without a von neumann al-
gebra), one obtains a real closed subspace hr(w ) of the wigner space h of
complex multi-component momentum space wave functions as a +1 eigenspace
of the tomita-like quantum mechanical operator s in h. here w denotes the
x-t wedge x > |t| and s is dened to be the product of the i-continued x-t
lorentz boost 
2 (obtained by the functional calculus associated with the spec-
tral theory of the boost operator i := u (x,t( )),  =rapidity) multiplied
with the one-particle version of the (antiunitary) j-reection7 in the x-t plane

1

1
2

s = j
s = ,   hr(w )

(3)

for the denition of the antiunitary tomita involution j which represents the
x-t reection in case of antiparticles 6= particles) one needs to extend the wigner
representation to the direct sum of particle/antiparticle spaces; a process well-
known in the wigner theory if one wants to include the disconnected poincare
transformations. since the x-t reection commutes with the x-t boost it and is
antiunitary, it formally inverts the unbounded  i.e. j = 1j which is formally
the analytically continuing boost at the imaginary value t = i. as a result of
this commutation relation the unbounded antilinear operator s is involutive on
its domain of denition s2  1. these unusual properties, which are not met
anywhere else in qm, encodes geometric localization properties within abstract
operator domains [22] [23]. they also preempt the relativistic locality proper-
ties of qft which wigner looked for in vain [15]. the opposite localization
i.e. hr(w opp) turns out to correspond to the symplectic (or real orthogonal)
complement of hr(w ) in h i.e. im(, hr(w )) = 0 y   hr(w opp). one
furthermore nds the following properties for the subspaces called standard-
ness

hr(w ) + ihr(w ) is dense in h
hr(w )  ihr(w ) = {0}

(4)

having arrived at the wedge localization spaces, one may construct localization
spaces for smaller spacetime regions by forming intersections over all wedges

7apart from a rotation around the x-axis by an angle , this is the famous tcp operator

restricted to the one-particle/antiparticle subspace.

9

which contain this region

hr(o) = \w o

hr(w )

(5)

these spaces are again standard and have their own premodular objects , j and
s, but this time their action cannot be described in terms of spacetime dieo-
morphism. note also that the modular formalism characterizes the localization
of subspaces, but is not able to distinguish individual elements in that subspace.
there is a good physical reason for that, because as soon as one tries to do that,
one is forced to leave the unique wigner (m, s) representation framework and
pick a particular covariant representation by selecting one specic intertwiner
among the innite set of u and v intertwiners which link the unique wigner
(m,s) representation to the countably innite many covariant possibilities [22].
in this way one would then pass to the framework of covariant elds explained
and presented in the rst volume of weinbergs book [21]. the description of a
concrete element in hr(w ) or hr(o) then depends on the choice of covariant
formalism. a selection by e.g. invoking euler equations and the existence of a
lagrangian formalism may be convenient for doing particular perturbative com-
putations or as a mnemotechnical device for classifying polynomial interaction
densities8, but is not demanded as an intrinsic attribute of physics.

the way to avoid nonunique covariant elds is to pass from wigner subspaces
directly to von neumann subalgebras of the algebra of all operators in fock space
b(hf ock), i.e. the transition from real subspaces to von neumann subalgebras
in fock space is well known. with the help of the weyl (or car in case of
fermions) functor w eyl() one denes the local von neumann algebras [22][23]
generated from the weyl operators

a(w ) := alg {w eyl(f )|f  hr(w )}

(6)

a process which is sometimes misleadingly called second quantization. these
weyl generators have the formal appearance

w eyl(f ) = eia(f )

(7)

a(f ) =

s

xs3=sz (a(p, s3)fs3 (p) + h.c.)

d3p
2

i.e. unlike the covariant elds they are independent of the nonunique inter-
twiners and depend solely on the unique wigner data. an analogue statement
holds for the halnteger spin case for which the car functor maps the wigner
wave function into the fermionic generators of von neumann subalgebras. the
statistics is already preempted by the premodular theory on wigner space [22].
the local net a(o) may be obtained in two ways, either one rst constructs the
8the causal approach permits the transformation of a polynomial interaction from one
coordinatization to any other whereas a formalism using classical actions involving free eld
lagrangians l0 is restricted to the use of euler-lagrange eld coordinatizations.

10

spaces hr(o) via (5) and then applies the weyl functor, or one rst constructs
the net of wedge algebras (6) and then intersects the algebras.
if we would have taken the conventional route via interwiners and local elds
as in [21], then we would have been forced to use borchers construction of equiv-
alence classes9 in order to see that the dierent free elds associated with the
(m, s) representation with the same momentum space creation and annihila-
tion operators in fock space are just dierent generators of the same coherent
families of local algebras i.e. yield the same net. this would be analogous to
working with particular coordinates in dierential geometry and then proving
at the end that the objects of interests are invariant and therefore independent
of coordinates.

the implementation of interactions in the framework of nets requires a rad-
ical re-thinking of the formalism, even if we are only interested in perturbative
aspects. the use of the above method for the wigner one-particle representa-
tion and the subsequent introduction of interactions will inevitably force us to
reintroduce eld coordinates in order to dene what we mean by perturbative
interactions. in order to avoid the standard approach we therefore have to nd a
way to introduce interactions directly into wedge-localized multiparticle spaces
or wedge algebras.

in order to get a clue of how we can avoid the use of pointlike elds in
interacting situations, let us rst ask this question in a more limited context.
it is well-known that there exists a special class of theories in d=1+1 in which
the s-matrix commutes with the incoming particle number

[ssc, nin] = 0

(8)

and factorizes on multi-particle in-states [16][17][18]. for this reason these the-
ories are often referred to as factorizing or integrable (since this leads to an
innite number of conservation laws) models. for those one nds that not
only the old bootstrap program can be carried through, but the application
of the so-called formfactor-program allows to compute even the elds in the
sense of bilinear forms between in and out states [26][29]. let us ignore those
bootstrap-formfactor recipes and try nd a modular access to these models by
implementing the idea of a relativistic particle pair interaction with a most naive
ansatz (assuming for simplicity a situation of selfconjugate particles) which for-
mally generalizes the standard creation/annihilation operators. using rapidities
instead of momenta we require

z()z() = s(  )z()z()
z()z () = s1(  )z ()z() + (  )

(9)

with the star-structure determining the remaining commutation relations and
the unitarity of s with s1() = s() = s() etc. together with z() = 0

9the class of covariant free elds belonging to the same (m,s) is a linear subclass of the
full equivalence class which comprises all wick-polynomials. in the analogy with coordinates
in dierential geometry this subclass corresponds to linear coordinate transformations.

11

we can express all z correlation functions in terms of ss and the computation
of correlation functions proceeds as for free elds namely by commuting the
annihilation operators z to the right vacuum e.g.

(, z(4)z(3)z (2)z (1)) = s(2  3)(3  1)(4  2) (10)

+(3  2)(4  1)

although we use the preemptive notation z which refers to the zamolodchikov-
faddeev algebra10, there are for the time being no requirements on the coef-
cients which go beyond those following from the structure of a distributive
-algebra, i.e. crossing symmetry is not required but will be result from wedge
localization.

one easily sees that instead of postulating commutation relations we could
also have started from the following formula which represents z z  state
vectors in terms of corresponding free eld terms

z (2)z (1) =

1
2

(21a(2)a(1) + 12s(2  1)a(1)a(2)) (11)

here the symbol p (1)...p (n) denotes the characteristic function of the region
p (1) > ... > p (n). it is easy to see that the inner product agrees with (10);
one only has to use the identity

(cid:8)12s(2  1) + 21

s(3  4)(cid:9) (3  1)(4  2)

= s(2  1)(3  1)(4  2)

(12)

in fact if we had started with a more general two-particle interaction ansatz by
allowing the structure of the second equation in (9) to be dierent say s1  t,
the consistency with (11) would immediately force us to return to t = s1.
the formula for the 4-point function suggests the possibility to replace the

algebraic ansatz by the following formula for multi-z  state vectors

z (n)...z (1)

= xperm

p (n)...p (1)( ytransp

s)a(p (n))...a(p (1))

(13)

where the product of s-factors in the bracket contains one s for each transposi-
tion which expresses the two-body nature of the interaction. the associativity
of the z s i.e. the yang-baxter relation for matrix-valued ss insures the con-
sistency of the formula. we call p (1) > ... > p (n) the natural order of the
multi-z  state vector. from the state characterization (13) one can derive the
algebraic denition (9).

with these algebraic prerequisites out of the way, let us now return to physics
and investigate spacetime localization properties of the following hermitian op-

10the missing delta-function contribution in zamolodchikovs original proposal [27] was later

added by faddeev.

12

erators

f ( f ) = z f (x) f (x)d2x, supp f  w

= zc

z() f (), z(  i) := z ()

f (x) =

1

2 z (f ()eipx + c.c.)d, f (i  ) = f ()

(14)

where c is a path consisting of the upper/lower rim of a i-strip with the real
-axis being the upper boundary. whereas the on-shell value of the fourier
transform f () of f is analytic in this strip, the last relation is a notation (since
operators by themselves are never analytic in spacetime labels!) which however
inside expectation values becomes coherent with meromorphic properties.
if
we take instead of z # free creation/annihilation operators, the corresponding

formula rc a() f () represents wedge-localized smeared free elds. formally we

may write in analogy to free elds

f (x) =

1

2 z (eipxz() + h.c.)d

p = m(cosh, sinh)

(15)

but we should be aware that the argument x is not related to a pointlike localiza-
tion in the sense of causality since on-shell elds are local i they are bona de
free elds i.e. i the z s reduce to the standard creation/annihilation operators
(see appendix).

in the following we will prove that the operators f ( f ) with z # fullling (9)
are localized in the wedge x > |t| if and only if the -algebra can be extended to
a zamolodchikov-faddeev algebra i.e. i the coecients s are crossing symmet-
ric including the crossing symmetric bootstrap pole structure. following our
previously introduced terminology [22], we will use the name polarization-f ree
generators (pfg) for localized operators in interacting qft whose one time
application to the vacuum vector results in a one particle state vector. it is
well-known [19] that pfgs with smaller than wedge localization regions (e.g.
double cones, spacelike cones) can only exist in theories without interactions i.e.
in
f1...fn. for the convenience of the reader we present the argument
in an appendix. pfgs however always exist in regions in interacting theories
if the localization region is a wedge or bigger [32]. the argument is based on
modular theory and will be recollected in the next section.

f1...fn = out

we want to show that the above f can be converted indeed into bona de
pfgs and a for a proof we have to check the kms property for the f-correlation
functions with the modular generator being the innitesimal boost k. this prop-
erty is a prerequisite for any wedge-localized algebra in a wightman qft [13].
the kms property is well-known from statistical mechanics and is the substi-
tute for gibbs formula which for many quantum systems becomes meaningless
in the thermodynamic limit. in the present context its thermal aspects has been

13

discussed in [22]. the desired kms-property for the wedge reads

df ( fn)...f ( f1)e = df ( fn1)...f ( f2)f ( f 2i
n )e

(16)

where the superscript 2i indicates the imaginary rapidity translation from the
lower to the upper rim of the kms strip.

a rather straightforward calculation based on the previously explained rules

for the zs yields the following result

theorem 1 ([22][51]) the kms-thermal aspect of the wedge algebra generated
by the pfgs is equivalent to the crossing symmetry of the s-matrix

a(w ) := algnf ( f ); supp f  wo  s() = s(i  )

furthermore the possible crossing symmetric poles in the physical strip of s will
be converted into intermediate composite particle states in the gns hilbert space
associated with the state dened by the correlations on the a(w )-algebra. the
latter commutes with its geometric opposite a(w opp) in case of a(w opp) =
a(w ) = adja(w ). a sucient condition for this is the existence of a parity
transformation whose action on a(w ) equals the commutant a(w ).

since the fs are unbounded operators with (particle number) n-bounds
which are the same as for free elds, the algebra generated by them is to be
understood in the sense that they are aliated with that von neumann algebra
which they generate.

we recall the proof for the 4-point function of f s which may be obtained as
the scalar product of two-particle state vectors (c.t. denotes the f-contraction
terms)

f ( f2)f ( f1) = z z f2(2  i) f1(1  i)z (1)z (2) + c.t.(17)

= z z f2(2  i) f1(1  i){12a(1)a(2) +

+21s(2  1)a(2)a(1)} + c

(18)

and the analogous formula for the bra-vector. the formula needs some expla-
nation. the symbol  with the permutation subscript denotes as before the
characteristic function associated with the permuted rapidity order. the or-
der for the free creation operators a is governed by particle statistics. for
each transposition starting from the natural order (13), one obtains an s fac-
tor11. the yang-baxter relation assures that the various ways of doing this

11the notation has used the statistics in order to bring the product of incoming elds ain
into the natural order say 1...n. the ordering of the z s encodes the -ordering and not
the particle statistics.
it is connected with the dierent boundary values of state vectors
and expectation values in - space in approaching the physical boundary from the analytic
region. this is analogous to the association of the n! n-point x-space correlation functions
with dierent boundary values of one analytic master function in the wightman theory.

14

are consistent. for the inner product the s-dependent terms are. finally the
terms proportional to the vacuum are contraction terms corresponding to the
-function in (9). for the s-dependent terms in the inner product we obtain

z z f4(2)f3(1){21s(2  1) + 12

= z z f4(2)f4(1)s(2  1) f2(2  i) f1(1  i)d1d2

s(1  2)} f2(2  i) f1(1  i)d1d2
(19)

the analogous computation for kms crossed term in (24) gives

z z f2(1)f2(2)s(1  2)f1(1  i)f1 (2  i + 2i)d1d2

(20)

this formula makes only sense if the f (f ) operators are restricted in such a way
that the 2i translation on them is well-dened, i.e. for wave functions f which
are analytic in a strip of size 2i. it is well-known that the kms condition does
not hold on all operators of the algebra but rather on a dense set of suitably
dened analytic elements [25]. the s-independent terms which we have not
written down are identical to terms in the 4-point function of free elds they
separately satisfy the kms property. what remains is to show the identity of
(19) and (20). this is done by 2  2i contour-shift in (20) without picking
up terms from innity. using the denseness of the wave functions one nally
obtains

s(2  1) = s(1  2 + i)

(21)

which is the famous crossing symmetry or the z  z reection symmetry
around the point z0 = 1
2 i. for non self-conjugate situation the crossed particles
are antiparticles and the s on the right hand side has to be modied accordingly.
in physical terms we may say that the wedge structure of factorizing models
is that of a kind of relativistic quantum mechanic. this continues to be true
if the crossing symmetric s-matrix has poles in the physical strip. in that case
the above contour shift would violate the kms property unless one modies the
multi-z  state vector formula (13) by the inclusion of bound states. for the
case n=2 (11) this means

z (2)z (1) = (z (2)z (1))scat +
+ |, bih, b|z (  ib)z ( + ib)| i

(22)

the bracket with the superscript scat denotes the previous contribution (11),
whereas the second line denotes the bound state contribution. the validity
of the kms property demands the presence of this term and determines the
coecient; here b is the imaginary rapidity related to the bound state mass.
for a detailed treatment which includes the bound state problem, we refer to a
forthcoming paper. we emphasize again that it is the representation of the f -
correlations in terms of the s-matrix and the kms property of these correlation

15

functions, which via the gns construction converts the poles in the (possibly
matrix-valued) function s into the extension of the fock space of the as by
additional free eld operators. in this way the poles in numerical functions are
converted into the enlargement of fock space in such a way that a few z s can
describe many more particles. one may call the z to be fundamental and
the introduce new zb and f 
bs; the latter will however be operators which are
already associated with the original f-algebra. what needs an extension is the
wedge algebra of incoming elds. it is very important to note that this apparent
quantum mechanical picture is converted into lqp with vacuum polarization as
soon as we e.g. go to double cone localization; this will be shown in the sequel.
the extension of the above proof beyond 4-point functions is left to the reader.
with this theorem relating wedge localization via the thermal kms property
to crossing symmetry, we have achieved the main goal of this section: to show
that the zamolodchikov-faddeev algebra which consists of (9) together with the
crossing symmetry of its structure function has a deep spacetime interpretation
and an associated thermal kms aspect. in fact the simplest pfgs which fulll
conservation of real particle number and have only elastic scattering (possible
in d=1+1) are precisely the z-f algebra operators! in a moment we will see
that these models have the full interacting vacuum structure (virtual particle
nonconservation) with respect to operators from smaller localization regions (e.g.
double cones), i.e. we are dealing with a genuine interacting eld theory (and
not some relativistic quantum mechanics).

the kms computation can be immediately extended to formfactors i.e.
mixed correlation functions containing in addition to fs one generic operator
a  a(w ) so that the previous calculation results from the specialization a = 1.
this is so because the connected parts of the mixed correlation function is
related to the various (n, m) formfactors (1) obtained by the dierent ways of
distributing n+m particles in and out states. these formfactors are described
by dierent boundary values of one analytic master function which is in turn
related to the various forward/backward on shell values which appear in one
mixed a-f correlation function. we may start from the correlation function
with one a to the left and say n fs to the right and write the kms condition
as

daf ( fn)...f ( f2)f ( f1)e = df ( f 2i

1

)af ( fn)...f ( f2)e

(23)

the n-fold application of the fs to the vacuum on the left hand side creates
besides an n-particle term involving n operators z  to the vacuum (or kms
reference state vector)  also contributions from a lower number of z s together
with z-z  contractions. as with free elds, the n-particle contribution can be
isolated by wick-ordering12

da : f ( fn)...f ( f2)f ( f1) :e = df ( f 2i

1

)a : f ( fn)...f ( f2) :e

(24)

12note that as a result of the commutation relation (9), the change of order within the

wick-ordered products will produce rapidity dependent factors

16

rewritten in terms of a-formfactors the n-particle scattering contribution (us-
ing the denseness of the f ()) reads as

h, az (n)...z (2)z (1  2i)i
= h, z(1 + i)az (n)...z (2)i
= hz (1  i), az (n)...z (2)z ()i

(25)

here the notation suers from the usual sloppiness of physicists notation: the
analytic continuation by 2i refers to the correlation function and not to the
operators. for the natural order of rapidities n > .. > 1 this yields the
following crossing relation

h, aa
in(n)...a
out(1), aa

in(2)a
in(n)...a

in(1  i)i
in(2)i

= ha

(26)

the out scattering notation on the bra-vectors becomes only relevant upon
iteration of the kms condition since the bra z s have the opposite natural or-
der. the above kms relation (24) contains additional information about bound
states and scattering states with a lower number of particles. the generalization
to the case of antiparticles6=particles is straightforward. more generally we see
that the connected part of the mixed matrix elements

out(1), aa

in(n)...a

out(k)...a
ha

(27)
is related to h, az (n)...z (2)z (1)i by analytic continuation which a
posteriori justies the use of the name formfactors in connection with the mixed
a-f correlation functions.

in(k1)i

the upshot of this is that such an a must be of the form

a = x 1

n! zc

...zc

an(1, ...n) : z(1)...z(n) :

(28)

where the an have a simple relation to the various formfactors of a (including
bound states) whose dierent in-out distributions of momenta correspond to
the dierent contributions to the integral from the upper/lower rim of the strip
bounded by c, which are related by crossing. the transcription of the an coe-
cient functions into physical formfactors (27) complicates the notation, since in
the presence of bound states there is a larger number of fock space particle cre-
ation operators than pfg wedge generators f. it is comforting to know that the
wedge generators, despite their lack of vacuum polarization clouds, nevertheless
contain the full (bound state) particle content. the wedge algebra structure
for factorizing models is like a relativistic qm, but as soon as one sharpens the
localization beyond wedge localization, the eld theoretic vacuum structure will
destroy this simple picture and replace it with the appearance of the charac-
teristic virtual particle structure which separates local quantum physics from
quantum mechanics.

in order to see by what mechanism the quantum mechanical picture is lost
in the next step of localization, let us consider the construction of the double

17

cone algebras as a relative commutants of shifted wedge (shifted by a inside the
standard wedge)

a(ca)

: = a(wa)  a(w )

ca = w opp

a  w

(29)

for a  a(ca)  a(w ) and fa( fi)  a(wa)  a(w ) the kms condi-
tion for the w-localization reads as before, except that whenever a fa( fi) is
crossed to the left side of a, we may commute it back to the right side since
ha(ca), fa( fi)i = 0. the resulting relations are e.g.

dafa( f1) : fa( fn)...fa( f2) :e
) :e
= da : fa( fn)...fa( f2)fa( f 2i

1

(30)

note that the fa( f1) in the rst line is outside the wick-ordering. since it
does neither act on the bra nor the ket vacuum, it contains both frequency
parts. the creation part can be combined with the other fs under one common
wick-ordering whereas the annihilation part via contraction with one of the
wick-ordered fs will give an expectation value of one a with (n 2) f s. using
the density of the fs and going to rapidity space we obtain ([24]) the so-called
kinematical pole relation

res12=i haz (n)...z (2)z (1)i = 2ic12 haz (n)...z (3)i (1  s1n...s13)
(31)

here the product of two-particle s-matrices results from commuting the z(1) to
the right so that it stands to the left of z (2), whereas the charge congugation
matrix c only appears if we relax our assumption of self-congugacy.

i believe that the general issue of the shape of polarization clouds in terms
of their asymptoptotic (say incoming) particle content is intimately related to
the structure of the yet unknown modular automorphisms which exist for each
spacetime region.

this relation appears for the rst time in smirnovs axiomatic approach [29]
as one of his recipes; more recently it was derived as a consequence of the lsz
formalism adapted to the factorizing model situation [30]. in the present ap-
proach it has an apparently very dierent origin:
it is together with the z-f
algebra structure a consequence of the wedge localization of the generators f ( f )
and the sharpened double cone locality (29) of a. the existence problem for
the qft associated with an admissable s-matrix (unitary, crossing symmetric,
correct physical residua at one-particle poles) of a factorizing theory is the non-
triviality of the relative commutant algebra i.e. a(ca) 6= c  1. intuitively the
operators in double cone algebras are expected to behave similar to pointlike
elds applied to the vacuum; namely one expects the full interacting polariza-
tion cloud structure. for the case at hand this is in fact a consequence of the

18

above kinematical pole formula since this leads to a recursion which for non-
trivial two-particle s-matrices is inconsistent with a nite number of terms in
(28). only if the bracket containing the s-products vanishes, the operator a is
a composite of a free eld.

the determination of a relative commutant or an intersection of wedge alge-
bras even in the context of factorizing models is not an easy matter. we expect
that the use of the following holographic structure signicantly simplies this
problem. we rst perform a lightlike translation of the wedge into itself by let-
ting it slide along the upper light ray by the amount given by the lightlike vector
a+. we obtain an inclusion of algebras and an associated relative commutant

a(wa )  a(w )
a(wa )  a(w )

(32)

the intuitive picture is that the relative commutant lives on the a interval
of the upper/lower light ray, since this is the only region inside w which is
spacelike to the interior of the respective shifted wedges. this relative commu-
tant subalgebra is a light ray part of the above double cone algebra, and it has
an easier mathematical structure. one only has to take a generic operator in
the wedge algebra which formally can be written as a power series (28) in the
generators and [22] [51] nd those operators which commute with the shifted fs

[a, u (e+)f (f )u (e+)] = 0

(33)

since the shifted fs are linear expressions in the zs, the nth order polyno-
mial contribution to the commutator comes from only two adjacent terms in a
namely from an+1 and an1 which correspond to the annihilation/creation term
in f. the size of the shift gives rise to a paley-wiener behavior in imaginary
direction, whereas the relation between an+1 and an1 is identical to (31), so
we do not learn anything new beyond what was already observed with the kms
technique (30). however as will be explained in section 5, the net obtained from
the algebra

a := a a(ca)

(34)

is a chiral conformal net on the respective subspace h = a. if our initial
algebra were d=1+1 conformal, the total space would factorize h = h+ h =
(a+ a) , and we would recover the well-known fact that two-dimensional
local theories factorize into the two light ray theories. if the theory is massive,
we expect h = a+ i.e. the hilbert space obtained from one horizon already
contains all state vectors. this would correspond to the dierence in classical
propagation of characteristic massless versus massive data in d=1+1. there it
is known that although for the massless case one needs the characteristic data
on the two light rays, the massive case requires only one light ray. in fact there
exists a rigorous proof that this classical behavior carries over to free quantum
elds: with the exception of m=0 massless theories, in all other cases (including
light-front data for higher dimensional m=0 situations) the vacuum is cyclic

19

with respect to one light front h = a [31]. the proof is representation
theoretic and holds for all cases except the d=1+1 massless case. hence in the
case of interaction free algebras the holographic light front reduction which, has
d-1 dimensions, always fullls for d>2 the reeh-schlieder property, where for
d=1+1 only massive theories obey holographic cyclicity. in order to recover the
wedge algebra with its net structure from the holographic restriction, one needs
the opposite light ray translation with u (a) i.e. a(w ) = a<0adu (a)a+.
for the nontriviality of the net associated with a(w ) it is sucient to show
that the associated chiral conformal theory is nontrivial. in order to achieve
this, one has to convert the bilinear forms (28) in the z-basis which full the
recursion relation into genuine operators on the one-dimensional light ray. this
is outside the scope of this paper.

hence the modular approach leads to a dichotomy of real particle creation
(absent in factorizing models) in the pfgs and in the aspect of wedge local-
ization, versus the full qft virtual particle structure of the vacuum13 for the
more sharply localized operators. in some sense the wedge is the best compro-
mise between the particle/eld point of view. in this and only in this sense
the particle-eld dualism (as a generalization of the particle-wave dualism of
qm) applies to qft. since it is left invariant by an appropriate l-boost, the
algebra contains enough operators in order to resolve at least the vacuum and
one-particle states (which cannot be resolved from the remaining states in any
algebra with a smaller localization).

in the next section we will argue that these properties are not freaks of
factorizing models, whereas in a later section we will reveal the less pedestrian
aspects of light cone subalgebras and holography. as we have argued on the basis
of the previous pedestrian approach, the holography aspect will be important
in the modular construction of qfts, because it delegates certain properties
of a rather complicated theory to those of (in general several) simpler theories.
it is worthwhile to highlight two aspects which already are visible from this
pedestrian considerations. one is the notion of quantum localization in terms
of algebraic intersections as compared to the more classical localization in terms
of test function smearing of pointlike elds. as mentioned already, the wedge
localization of the pfgs cannot be improved by choosing smaller supports of
test functions inside the wedge; the only possibility is to intersect algebras. in
that case the old generators become useless e.g. in the description of the double
cone algebras; the latter has new generators. related to this is that the short
distance behavior looses its dominating (and somewhat threatening) role.

if one does not use eld-coordinatizations, it is not even clear what one
means by the (good or bad) short distance behavior of a theory. short dis-
tance behavior of what object? there is no short distance problem of pfgs,
since they have some natural cuto (to the extend that the use of such words
which are lled with preassigned old meaning are reasonable in the new con-
text). intersection of algebras does not give rise to short distance problems in

13the deeper understanding of the virtual vacuum structure (or the particle content of say
state vectors obtained by application of a double cone localized operator to the vacuum) is
presumably hidden in the modular groups of double cone algebras.

20

the standard sense of this word. an explicit construction of pointlike eld co-
ordinates from algebraic nets is presently only available for chiral conformal
theories [34]. it produces elds of arbitrary high operator dimension, and as
a result of its group theoretical techniques it also does not suer from short
distance problems. the absence of short distance problems in the modular lo-
calization approach seems to be of an entirely dierent nature than statements
about the absence of ultraviolet problems in string theory.

the results in this section should be viewed as an extension of the wigner

theory into the realm of interactions for a special class of models.

3 pfgs in presence of real particle creation

for models with real particle creation it is not immediately clear how to con-
struct pfgs. in order to get some clue we rst look at d=1+1 theories which
do not have any transversal extension to wedges. furthermore we assume that
there is only one kind of particle which corresponds to the previous assump-
tion concerning the absence of poles in the two-particle s-matrix for factorizing
models. modular theory always assures the existence of pfgs [32]. in fact for
every modular localized state vector

s = 

s = j

1
2

(35)

there exists a (generally unbounded) operator g associated with the von neu-
mann a algebra in standard position such that

g = 
g = s

(36)

(37)

for the case at hand a = a(w ),  = |0i =vacuum, there exists a dense subspace
of explicitly constructible (see below) wedge-localized state vectors hf ock
+
ihf ock
there exists an
algebra aliated operator f (f ) for each vector f in hr(w ) + ihr(w ) with

which possess aliates gs. since hr(w )  hf ock

r

r

r

f (f ) = |fi = 1  particle state
f (f ) = s |fi

(38)

although the existence of pfgs outside of factorizing models poses no prob-
lems, the presence of particle creation prevents them to have amenable algebraic
properties. the interpretation in the form of

f (f ) = z f (x) f (x)d2x
f (x) = z (cid:0)z()eipx + z ()eipx(cid:1) d

(39)

(40)

21

where f (x) is a tempered operator-valued distribution on a dense translation
invariant domain which holds in the factorizing case is not compatible with
particle creation [32] because it leads to relative commutation relations of f
with the incoming/outgoing free eld

hz #(), a#
hz #(), a#

in()i = 0,  < 
out()i = 0,  > 

(41)

and similarly for the antiparticle operators z #. therefore we will rst try to
see how far we can get with localized states.

again we specialize to the self-conjugate case z = z and the absence of
bound states. from the previous discussion we take the idea that we should look
for a relation between the ordering of rapidities and the action of the scattering
operator. we x the state vector (n, ..., 1) for the natural -order to be an
incoming n-particle state as we did for the previous particle conserving situation.
the totally mirrored order should then be a vector obtained by applying the
full s-matrix to the incoming n-particle vector.

but what should we do for the remaining permutations? we should end
up with a prescription which for factorizing systems agrees with the previous
formalism. for two f s there is no problem; the formula looks as before (11),
except that the application of the s-operator to the two-particle in-vector has
components to all n-particle multiparticle vectors for n  2, i.e. the rapidities
are labels which are not related to the incoming particle content of the state
vector

2(f2, f1)  zz c
h0|a(n)...a(3)sa(1)a(2)|0i 6= 0, n  4

(21a(2)a(1) + 21sa(1)a(2))|0i f2(2) f1(1)d2d1
(42)

the check of the localization equation j
2 2 = 2 with j = j0s (again
we omitted the subscript scat from the s-matrix and we used the previous
notation where the integration path c includes creation as well as annihilation
contributions there will be also a contraction term. the inner product between
two 2 comes out to be

1







z f
1(
+z f



1) f

2(

1(

1) f

1)a(

2)(cid:10)0|a(
2(
2)h0| a(

2)a(2)a(1)|0(cid:11) f2(2)f1(1) + c.t.
2)a(
1)(s21 + s12)a(2)a(1 |0i f2(2)f1(1)
where c.t. denote the contraction term contributions coming from an annihila-
tion part in c and we have disregarded problems of overall normalizations and
the integration is done over all  and . using the unitarity property of s and

(43)

22

the boundary property f (i  ) = f (), the last term can be written without
the ordering s as





f
1(

1) f

2(

2)h0| a(

2)a(

1)sa(2)a(1 |0i f2(2)f1(1)

(44)

and has the same form as for the previous factorizing case if one replaces (20).
in order to establish the kms property we have to write this inner product as

(

2, 2) = (

1, 3)

(45)

where 1 is a one-particle vector. so we have to gure out how permutations
beyond the natural order and its mirror image are represented on tensor product
factors of incoming state vectors. some thinking reveals that subsequent appli-
cations of s-matrices on tensor factors of the n-particle tensor product vectors
only makes sense for nonoverlapping situations. the action of the s-matrix on
one tensor factor is associated with the mirror perturbation of that tensor fac-
tor 12...k  k...21 since intuitively speaking one only obtains the full k-particle
scattering if the incoming velocities (or rapidities) are such that all particles
meet kinematically which only happens if the order of incoming velocities is
the mirrored natural order. mathematically we should write each permutation
as the nonoverlapping product of mirror permutations the smallest mirror
permutations are transpositions of adjacent factors. an example for an overlap-
ping product is the product of two such transpositions which have one element
in common e.g. 123  132  312; there is no meaning in terms of a sub-
sequent tensor s-matrix action. however the composition 123  213  312
has a meaningful s-matrix counterpart: namely s  s12a(1)a(2)a(3)
is the fock space vec-
where s12 leaves the third tensor factor unchanged i.e.
tor (sa(1)a(2))  a(3) on which the subsequent action of s (which
corresponds to the mirror permutation of all 3 objects) is well dened. in gen-
eral if one mirror permutation is completely inside a larger one the scattering
correspondence which is consistent with the tensor product structure of fock
space. on the other hand for overlapping products of mirror permutations the
association to scattering data becomes meaningless, where overlapping means
that part of each mirror permutation is outside of the other. fortunately, as it
is easy to see, there is precisely one representation in terms of nonoverlapping
mirror permutations. this leads to a unique representation of multi f labeled
state vectors in terms of scattering data. on the other hand if we were to write
each mirror permutation as a product of (necessarily overlapping) transposi-
tions, we loose the uniqueness and we then need the yang-baxter structure in
order to maintain consistency; in this case we return to the modular setting of
factorizing models in the previous section.

let us elaborate this in a pedestrian fashion by writing explicit formulas for

n=3. the state vector is a sum of 3!=6 terms

23

3(f3, f2, f1)  z z zc{321a(3)a(2)a(1) + 312s21a(3)a(2)a(1)

+132s321s

+ 231s32a(3)a(2)a(1) + 123s321a(3)a(2)a(1)
23a(3)a(2)a(1)+213s321s

12a(3)a(2)a(1)} |0i f3(3) f2(2) f1(1)

1

here  denotes again the characteristic function of the respective -orders
and s.. acts on the respective tensor factor with the remaining particle being a
spectator. as before one checks that this vector fullls the modular localization
2 3 = 3; the tomita operator acting on 3 just re-shues the
equation sj0
six terms. as in the two-particle case, this action creates a vector with a com-
plicated incoming particle content having components to all particle numbers.
the last two terms correspond to nested mirror permutations and, as will be
seen below, results in the appearance of nondiagonal inclusive processes terms
in the (
3, 3) inner product which generalize the diagonal inclusive processes
[7] which result from the summation over nal states in cross sections.

as an example we write down the integrand of one of those nondiagonal

inclusive terms

(cid:10)0(cid:12)(cid:12)a(

1)a(

2)a(

3)s  s

12a(3)a(2)a(1)(cid:12)(cid:12) 0(cid:11)

(46)

in a graphical scattering representation particle 1 and 2 would scatter rst
and produce arbitrarily many (subject to the conservation laws for the total
energy-momentum) particles which together with the third incoming particle
(which hitherto was only a spectator) enter an additional scattering process of
which only the 3-particle outgoing component is separated out by the matrix
element in (46). the dot means summation over all admissable intermediate
states and could be represented by e.g. a heavy line in the graphical represen-
tation in order to distinguish it from the one-particle lines. we will not write
down the 6 contribution to the inner product coming from the creation part and
the remaining ones involving the annihilation parts from the path c.

our main interest is the study of (

1, 3)

(

1, 3)

(47)

= zc (cid:10)0(cid:12)(cid:12)a(
= z (cid:10)0(cid:12)(cid:12)a(
= z (cid:10)0(cid:12)(cid:12)a(

1){1321 + s123 + s  s12213}a(3)a(2)a(1)(cid:12)(cid:12) 0(cid:11) f 
1){1321 + s + s  s12213}a(3)a(2)a(1)(cid:12)(cid:12) 0(cid:11) f 
1)a(3){1 + s}a(2)a(1)(cid:12)(cid:12) 0(cid:11) f 

1) f3(3)f2(2)f1(1)

1(

1(

the last line is (apart from a a(2)-a(1) contraction term) the only nonvan-
ishing contribution. here the s-factor in front of the s12 has been transferred
as s onto the left hand one-particle vector whereupon it acts as the identity.

1(

1) f3(3) f2(2) f1(1)

1) f3(3)f2(2)f1(1)

24

renaming f3(3)  f (
property for inner products of modular subspaces

2) we obtain the result (43). we now apply the kms

(48)

(cid:0), (cid:1) = (cid:0), (cid:1)
,   hr(w )  hf ock
for the case at hand  = 
1,  = 3 the particle interpretation of this kms
relation for modular vectors is precisely the crossing symmetry relation. for the
more general case antiparticles6=particles one has to work in the dense complex
subspace hr(w ) + ihr(w ) (which is a complete hilbert space in its own right
in the thermal topology [22]. the conversion of the kms property for the
inner product of the modular localized state vectors with n-1 f labels with
a one-particles vector containing one f contains the crossing information for
scattering of nin + nout = n particles.

the crucial question is whether these inner products can also be used in

order to dene correlation functions of pfg n-point functions

h0 |f (f1)...f (fn)| 0i

(49)

for the lowest nontrivial case of 4-point function we already checked one such
condition (45). i have carried out other consistency checks and do not think
that the prerequisites of [32] leading back to particle conservation can be de-
rived from these correlation functions. the question if and how these would
be correlation functions are related to the perturbative on-shell s-matrix rep-
resentations mentioned in the introduction is particularly interesting i hope to
return to the issue of the form of pfg-correlation functions in a more complete
and systematic way in a future paper.

for non-factorizing theories the interest in the modular localization approach
is (besides the improvement in the understanding the structure of interacting
qft) the possible existence of an on-shell perturbation theory of local nets
avoiding the use of the non-intrinsic eld coordinatizations. this is a the revival
of the perturbative version of the old dream to construct s-matrices just using
crossing symmetry in addition to unitarity and no pointlike elds. the old s-
matrix bootstrap program admittedly did not get far, but now we perhaps can
formulate a similar but structurally richer problem as a perturbative approach
to correlation functions of the on-shell pfgs. modular theory has given us a
lot of insight and nobody nowadays would try to cleanse the einstein causality
and locality concepts from the stage as it was done in the 60ies. to the contrary,
the local o-shell observable algebras would be in the center of interest and the
avoidance of quantization would have entirely pragmatic reasons. in particular
the sharpening of localization beyond wedges is done by algebraic intersections
of wedge algebras rather than by cut-o or test function manipulations on eld
coordinates.

the successful d=1+1 bootstrap-formfactor program of the previous section
for factorizing models yields s-matrices and formfactors which for models with
a continuous coupling are analytic around g=0. a good illustration is the sine-
gordon theory [30]. the more local o-shell quantities however (i.e. pointlike

25

eld operators or operators from algebras belonging to bounded regions) are
radically dierent since they involve virtual particle polarization clouds which
formally may be represented by innite series in the on shell fs similar to the
factorizing d=1+1 case of the previous section. the analytic status of these
quantities (i.e. localized operators and their correlation functions) is presently
not known; it may well turn out that they are only borel summable or (in
the general non-factorizable case) worse. the on-shell/o-shell dichotomy of
the modular approach for the rst time allows to determine more precisely if
the cause of the possible breakdown of analyticity at g=0 are the polarization
clouds.

a solution of these problems, even if limited to some new kind of perturbation
theory (perturbation theory of wedge algebras and their intersections) should
also shed some light on the question of how to handle theories involving higher
spin particles, which in the standard o-shell causal perturbation theory lead to
short distance non-renormalizability. a very good illustration of what i mean
is the causal perturbation of massive spin=1 vectormesons. here the coupling
of covariant elds obtained by covariantizing the wigner particle representation
theory in the sense of the previous section will not be renormalizable in the
sense of short distance power counting. in the standard perturbative approach
the indenite metric ghosts are used to lower the operator dimension of the
interaction densities (free eld polynomials) w (x), which as a result of the free
vectormeson dimension dima = 2, are at least 5, down to the value 4 permitted
by the renormalization requirements in a d=1+3 causal perturbative approach
[39]. since the ghosts are removed at the end, the situation is akin to a catalyzer
in chemistry: they do not appear in the original question and are absent in the
nal result (without leaving any intrinsic trace behind). in theoretical physics
the presence of such catalyzers should be understood as indicating that the
theory wants to be analyzed on a deeper level of local quantum physics i.e.
further away from quantization and quasiclassics. indeed in the present on-shell
modular approach the short distance operator reason for introducing such ghosts
would not be there and the remaining question is again whether the modular
program allows for a perturbative analytically managable formulation.

4 the aqft framework

after our pedestrian presentation of the wedge algebra approach, it is time to
be more systematic and precise. for noninteracting free system the conversion
of the rather simple spatial nets of real subspaces of the wigner space of mo-
mentum space (m.,s) wave functions into a interaction-free net in fock space
produces with the following three properties which continue to hold in the pres-
ence of interactions. they have been explained in many articles [41] and in a
textbook [1], and my main task here is to adapt them to the problems of this
paper.

26

1. a net of local (c- or von neumann) operator algebras indexed by classical

spacetime regions o

o  a(o)



without loss of generality the regions o maybe restricted to the poincare
covariant family of general double cones and the range of this map may be
described in terms of concrete operator algebras in hilbert space for which
the vacuum representation 0 may be taken i.e. a(o)  0(a(o)). the
geometrical and physical coherence properties as isotony: a(o1)  a(o2)
)  a(o) are then evident co-
for o1  o2 and einstein causality: a(o
herence requirements. here we use the standard notation of aqft: the
dash superscript on the region denotes the causal disjoint and on the von
neumann algebra it stands for the commutant within b(h) where h is
the ambient hilbert space (here the representation space of the vacuum
representation). einstein causality can be interpreted as an a priori knowl-
edge about some with a(o) commensurable observables in the sense of
von neumann. this causality property suggests the question if complete
knowledge about commensurability a(o) = a(o) is possible. it turns
out that this is indeed the generic behavior of vacuum nets called haag
duality. the cases of violation of this duality are of particular interest
since they can be related to a very fundamental intrinsic characterization
of spontaneous symmetry breaking, thus vastly generalizing the nambu-
goldstone mechanism which was abstracted from quantization [1].

2. poincare covariance and spectral properties.

g  p  g automorphism

g(a(o)) = a(o)

is unitarily implements in the vacuum representation

u (g)au (g) = g(a)
a  a(o)

the unitaries for the translations have energy-momentum generators which
full the relativistic spectrum (positive energy) condition, symbolically
specu (a)  v  (the closed forward light cone)

3. the phase space structure of local quantum physics or the nuclearity

property.

remark 2 the precise fomulation of the third property is somewhat involved
and will be presented after the following remarks on the rst two structural
properties. since in the formulation of the net one may work without loss of
generality with von neumann algebras [1], the rst question is what type in the
murray-von neumann-connes-haagerup classication occurs. there is a very

27

precise answer for wedges (which may be considered as double cones at inn-
ity). as a result of the existence of a one-sided translation into a wedge as
well as of the split property below, the wedge algebras a(w ) turn out to be a
hypernite factor of type iii1. this implies in particular that the algebra has
properties which take it far away from the structure of qm (factors of type i).
such algebras do not have pure states or minimal projectors, rather all faithful
states on such algebras are thermal i.e. obey the kms condition. this makes
them similar to states appearing in cst with bifurcated horizons as in hawking-
unruh situations however with modular ows instead of killing ows.(but more
quantum.i.e. without the classical geometric killing vector aspects of hori-
zons). the modular ow near the boundary of e.g. double cone regions become
asymptotically geometric and killing-like.

the nuclearity requirement results from the idea that there should be a local
quantum physical counterpart of the phase space properties of qm in a box.
the famous nite number of degrees of freedom law per unit cell of qm phase
space results from limiting the discrete box spectrum by a cut-o in energy.
as rst suggested by haag and swieca [1], the corresponding lqp counter-
part, based on the causally closed double cone analogue of the quantization box
in schrodinger qm, points into the direction of a weakly innite number;
according to their estimates this set of state vectors was compact in hilbert
space. subsequent renements of techniques revealed that this set is slightly
smaller namely nuclear [1], and exact calculations with interaction-free the-
ories demonstrated that the phase space situation also cannot be better than
nuclear.

the best way to understand this issue is to follow the motivating footsteps
of haag and swieca. they, as many other physicists at that time (and as some
contemporary philosophers [38]), were attracted by the intriguing consequences
of the of the so-called reeh-schlieder property of qft

p(o) = h, cyclicity of 

a  p(o), a = 0 = a = 0 i.e.  separating

(50)

which either holds for the polynomial algebras of elds (which are aliated to
the von neumann algebras which they generate) or for operator algebras a(o).
the rst property, namely the denseness of states created from the vacuum
by operators from arbitrarily small localization regions (e.g. a state describing
a particle behind the moon14 and a charge compensating antiparticle in some
other far away region can be approximated inside a laboratory of arbitrary small
size and duration) is totally unexpected from the global viewpoint of general
qt. in the algebraic formulation this can be shown to be dual to the second
one (in the sense of passing to the commutant), in which case the cyclicity

14this weird aspect should not be held against qft but rather be taken as indicating that
localization by a piece of hardware in a laboratory is also limited by an arbitrary large but
nite energy, i.e.
in qm one
obtains genuine localized subspaces without energy limitations.

is a phase space localization (see subsequent discussion).

28

passes to the separating property of  with respect to a(o). referring to
its use, the separating property is often called the eld - state relation. the
mathematical terminology is to say that the pair ( a(o),) is standard.
the large enough commutant required by the latter property is guarantied by
causality (the existence of a nontrivial causal disjoint o) and thus shows that
causality is again responsible for this unexpected denseness property.
of course the claim that somebody causally separated from us may provide
us nevertheless with a dense set of states is somewhat perplexing especially if
one compares it with the tensor factorization properties of good old schrodinger
qm with respect to an inside/outside separation via a quantization box.

if the naive interpretation of cyclicity/separability in the reeh-schlieder the-
orem leaves us with a feeling of science ction (and for this reason as already
mentioned justiably also has attracted attention in philosophical quarters), the
challenge for a theoretical physicist is to nd an argument why, for all practical
purposes, the situation nevertheless remains similar to qm. this amounts to
the fruitful question which vectors among the dense set of state vectors can
be really produced with a controllable expenditure (of energy); a problem from
which haag and swieca started their investigation. in qm this question was not
that interesting, since the localization at a given time via support properties of
wave functions leads to a tensor product factorization of inside/outside so that
the inside state vectors are evidently never dense in the whole space and the
particle behind the moon paradox does not occur.

later we will see that most of the very important physical and geometrical
informations are encoded into features of dense domains, in fact the aforemen-
tioned modular theory is explaining this deep relation between operator domains
of the tomita s and spacetime geometry. as mentioned before the individuality
of the various s-operators is only the dierence in domains, since all of them
act as sa = a, a  a(o)
for the case at hand the reconciliation of the paradoxical aspect [35] of
the reeh-schlieder theorem with common sense has led to the discovery of
the physical relevance of localization with respect to phase space in lqp, i.e.
the understanding of the size of degrees of freedom in the set: (notation h =

r edpe)

pea(o) is compact

pea(o) or eha(o) is nuclear

(51)
(52)

the rst property was introduced way back by haag and swieca [1] whereas
the second more rened statement (and similar nuclearity statements involving
modular operators of local regions instead of the global hamiltonian) which is
saturated by qft (i.e. cannot be improved) and easier to be used, is a later
result of buchholz and wichmann [40]. it should be emphasized that the lqp
degrees of freedom counting of haag-swieca, which gives an innite but still
compact (and even nuclear) set of phase-space localized states, is dierent from
the qm niteness of degrees of freedom per phase used in some contemporary
entropy calculations.

29

the map a(o)  eha(o) is only nuclear if the mass spectrum of lqp
is not too accumulative in nite mass intervals; in particular innite towers of
equal mass particles are excluded (which then would cause the strange appear-
ance of a maximal hagedorn temperature). the nuclearity assures that a
qft, which was given in terms of its vacuum representation, also exists in a
thermal state. an associated nuclearity index turns out to be the counterpart
of the quantum mechanical gibbs partition function [41] [1] and behaves in an
entirely analogous way.

the peculiarities of the above degrees-of freedom-counting are very much
related to one of the oldest exotic and at the same time characteristic aspects
of qft, namely vacuum polarization. as rst observed by heisenberg, the
partial charge:

qv = zv

j0(x)d3x = 

(53)

diverges as a result of uncontrolled vacuum particle/antiparticle uctuations
near the boundary. for the free eld current it is easy to see that a better de-
nition involving test functions, which smoothens the behavior near the boundary
and takes into account the fact that the current is a 4-dim. distribution which
has no restriction to equal times, leads to a nite expression.

qr = z j0(x)f (x0)g(

x
r

)dsx

(54)

where f and g are test functions of compact support with r f (x0)dx0 = 1 and
g(~x) = 1 for |~x| < 1 and g(~x) = 0 |~x| > 1 + . the vectors qr only converge
weakly for r   on a dense domain. their norms however diverge as [33]

(qr, qr)  const  rs1

 area

(55)

the surface-layer character of this vacuum polarization is reected in this area
behavior together with the original divergence (53) for xed r and   0.
the algebraic counterpart is the so called split property, namely the state-
ment [1] that if one leaves between say the double cone (the inside of a relativis-
tic box) observable algebra a(o) and its causal disjoint (its relativistic outside)
a(o) a collar (geometrical picture of the relative commutant) o
1  o, i.e.
(56)

a(o)  a(o1), o  o1 , properly

then it is possible to construct in a canonical way a type i tensor factor n which
extends in a fuzzy manner into the collar a(o)  a(o1) i.e. a(o)  n 
a(o1). with respect to n the hilbert space factorizes i.e. as in qm; there are
states with no uctuations (or no entanglement) for the smoothened operators
in n . whereas the original vacuum will be entangled from the box point of view,
there also exists a disentangled product vacuum on n . the algebraic analogue

30

of a smoothening of the boundary by a test function is the construction of a
factorization of the vacuum with respect to a suitably constructed type i factor
algebra which uses the above collar extension of a(o). it turns out that there is
a canonical, i.e. mathematically distinguished factorization, which lends itself
to dene a natural localizing map  and which has given valuable insight into
an intrinsic lqp version of noethers theorem [1], i.e. one which does not rely
on quantizing classical noether currents. it is this split inclusion which allows
to bring back the familiar structure of pure states, tensor product factorization,
entanglement and all the other properties at the heart of standard quantum
theory and the measurement process. however despite all the eorts to return
to structures known from qm, the original vacuum retains its thermal (entan-
glement) properties with respect to all localized algebras, even with respect to
the fuzzy-localized n .
formulas for standard split inclusions [42]

let us collect in the following some useful mathematical denitions and

denition 3 an inclusion  = (a,b, ) of factors is called standard split if
the collar a  b as well as a,b together with  are standard in the previous
sense, and if in addition it is possible to place a type i factor n between a
and b.

in this situation there exists a canonical isomorphism of ab to the tensor
product a b which is implemented by a unitary u () : h  h1 h2 (the
localizing map) with

u ()(ab)u () = a b
a  a, b  b

(57)

this map permits to dene a canonical intermediate type i factor n (which
may dier from the n in the denition)

n := u ()(b(h1)  1)u ()  b  b(h)

(58)

it is possible to give an explicit formula for this canonical intermediate algebra in
terms of the modular conjugation j = u ()ja  jbu () of the collar algebra
(a  b, ) [42]

n = a  jaj = b  jbj

(59)

the tensor product representation gives the following equivalent tensor prod-

uct representation formulae for the various algebras

(60)

a  a  1
b  1  b
n  b(h)  1

31

as explained in [42], the uniqueness of u () and n is achieved with the help
of the natural cones p(ab) and p(ab). these are cones in hilbert
space whose position in h together with their facial subcone structures pre-
empt the full algebra structure on a spatial level. the corresponding marvelous
theorem of connes [47] goes far beyond the previously mentioned state vec-
tor/eld relation.

returning to our physical problem, we have succeeded to nd the right ana-
logue of the qm box. contrary to the causally closed local type iii algebras
with their sharp light cone boundaries (quantum horizons), the fuzzy box
type i factor n permits all the structures we know from qm: pure states,
inside/outside tensor factorization, (dis)entanglement etc. with one exception:
the vacuum is highly entangled in the tensor product description; the modu-
the state  |a b represented in the tensor product natural cone
lar group of
p(a b) is not the tensorproduct of the modular groups of a and b,
whereas the modular conjugation j acts on the tensor product cone as ja jb
(since the restriction  |a b is faithful). note also that the restriction of the
product state    to b or b is not faithful resp. cyclic on the correspond-
ing vectors and therefore the application of those algebras to the representative
vectors  yields nontrivial projectors (e.g. p = u ()b(h1) 1u ()).
since the fuzzy box algebra n is of quantum mechanical type i, we are
allowed to use the usual trace formalism based on the density matrix description,
i.e. the vacuum state can be written as a density matrix  on n which leads
to a well-dened von neumann entropy

(, a) = tra, a  a
s() = trlog

(61)

(62)

but this is not sucient to determine  which is needed for the von neumann
entropy of the fuzzy box s(). if we would be able to compute the unitary
representer it
n of the modular group of the pair (n, ) then we know also
 since the modular operator of a type i factor is known to be related to an
unnormalized density matrix  with  = 1
 through the tensor product
tr
formula on h1 h2

 =  1



(63)

actually there are several intuitively equivalent denitions of localization en-
tropy [48] among those the most convenient one seems to be the relative entropy
of the vacuum  with respect to the split vacuum   . the relative entropy
of a von neumann algebra m of one faithful state 1 with respect to 2 uses
the relative modular operator [1] 1,2

s(1|2)m =  hlog1,2i

(64)

32

kosaki [49] was able to convert this (in the most general setting) into a varia-
tional formula

s(1|2)m = supz 1

0 (cid:20) (1)

1 + t  1(y(t)y(t)) 

1
t

2(x(t)x(t))

dt

t (cid:21)

(65)

x(t) = 1  y(t), x(t)  m

where in our case 1 =   , 2 = , m = a  b.
despite the very clear conceptual setting of this split entropy, it is dicult
to obtain good estimates for this entropy, not to mention exact calculations. as
for the above partial charges (55) one expects a surface behavior, the quantum
version of the bekenstein-hawking area law. an existing estimate shows that
its increase for e.g. double cones is weaker than the spatial volume [48]. the
most accessible situation for entropy calculations seems to be conformal qft

it seems that for double cones in conformal theories one cane use the geo-
metric aspects of the situation and do an explicit calculation. this still needs
to be carried out, but an outline of the strategy can be found in [7].

ideas about localization entropy are quite inaccessible in perturbation the-
ory because they require an intrinsic description in terms of a net of alge-
bras, whereas for perturbation theory no description without the use of eld-
coordinatizations is known. this has led to speculative remarks in the literature
claiming the necessity of new degrees of freedom for the understanding of the
area law.

5 modular inclusions and intersections, holog-

raphy

one of the oldest alternative proposals for canonical (equal time) quantizations
is the so called light ray or light front (or p   frame) quantization. the
trouble with it is that it apparently inherits some the short distance diseases
from the canonical quantization. the latter is known to only makes sense for
superrenormalizable interactions but not for strictly renormalizable ones, which
lead to innite multiplicative renormalizations. let us ignore this for a moment
and look at some additional problems of light cone quantization which canonical
equal time quantization does not have. this is the apparent loss of the connec-
tion with local qft; in fact in none of the papers on light cone quantization
it is spelled out how to return to a local qft. the problem of light front re-
stricted free elds was rigorously studied in [43], but in the interacting case the
reconstruction of the local theory from that on the light cone (which may be
called the holographic reconstruction) is a serious problem indeed.

our modular inclusion techniques in section 2 suggested that for massive
(and massless for d 6= 1 + 1) theories the wedge algebra and the chiral light
front algebra are identical

a(w ) = a(r>)

(66)

33

since this is a consistent property which is fullled by all known quantum eld
theoretic models, we will be focus our interests on theories which obey this char-
acteristic shadow property and leave open the question whether this property
is a consequence of the standard physical requirements of aqft. we already
mentioned in the same section that the chiral algebra really should be thought
of as the transversally unresolved light front algebra. but since the use of a
light front notation like a(rd1
> ) could suggest the wrong idea that one deals
with a full light front net, we prefer the light ray notation since it does not
count any localizationwise unresolved dimensions. if we just refer to the global
algebras and not to their local (sub)net structure, then all three objects are
equal and there could be no confusion.

the rigorous construction of a chiral net for a(r>) indicated in the third
section will now be presented in more detail within its natural setting of modular
inclusions [36].

one rst denes an abstract modular inclusion in the setting of von neumann
algebras. there are several types of inclusions which have received mathematical
attention15. an inclusion of two factors n  m is called (+ halfsided) modular
if the modular group it
m for t < 0 transforms n into itself (compression of n )
(67)

adit

mn  n

mn is dense in m (or that tit
m and it

we assume that tadit
mn =c1). this means
in particular that the two modular groups it
n generate a two para-
metric group of (translations, dilations) in which the translations have positive
energy [14]. let us now look at the relative commutant as done e.g.
in the
appendix of [44].

let (n  m, ) be modular with nontrivial relative commutant. then look
at the subspace generated by relative commutant hred  (n   m)  h. the
modular groups to n and m leave invariant this subspace: it
m, t < 0 maps
n   m into itself by the inclusion being modular. look at the orthogonal
complement of hred in h. this orthogonal complement is mapped into itself by
it
m for positive t. let  be in that subspace, then

(cid:10), it

m(n   m)(cid:11) = 0 f or t > 0.

(68)

analyticity in t then gives the vanishing for all t.
due to takesakis theorem [3], we can restrict m to hred using a conditional
expectation to this subspace dened in terms of the projector p onto hred. then

e(n   m)  m|(n m) = e(m)

e() = p  p

(69)

(70)

is a modular inclusion on the subspace hred. n also restricts to that sub-
space and this restriction is obviously in the relative commutant of e(n  

15in addition to the split inclusion used in the previous section, there are the famous v.
jones inclusions whose charateristic property is the existence of conditional expectations.
their domain in particle physics is in the area of charge fusion and internal symmetry.

34

m) e(m). moreover using arguments as above it is easy to see that the re-
striction is cyclic with respect to  on this subspace. therefore we arrive at a
reduced modular standard inclusion

(e(n )  e(m), )

(71)

standard modular inclusions are known to be isomorphic to chiral conformal
eld theories [36].

this theorem and its extension to modular intersections leads to a wealth of
physical applications in qft, in particular in connection with hidden symme-
tries symmetries which are of purely modular origin and have no interpretation
in terms of quantized noether currents [24][44]. the modular techniques un-
ravel new structures which are not visible in terms of eld coordinatizations.
holography and problems of degrees of freedom counting (phase space in lqp)
as well as the issue of localization entropy are other examples.

let us briey return to applications for d=1+1 massive theories. it is clear
that in this case we should use the two modular inclusions which are obtained
by sliding the (right hand) wedge into itself along the upper/lower light ray
horizon. hence we chose m = a(w ) and n = a(wa+ ) or n = a(wa ) where
wa denote the two upper/lower light like translated wedges wa  w. as
explained in section 2 following ([31]) and mentioned above, we do not expect
the appearance of a nontrivial subspace (i.e. we expect p = 1) in the action of
the relative commutants onto the vacuum

a(i(0, a))  a(wa )  a(w )
a(i(0, a) = h

(72)

where the notation indicates that the localization of a(i(0, a)) is thought of
as the piece of the upper/lower light ray interval between the origin and the
endpoint a.

from the standardness of the inclusion one obtains according to the previous
discussion an associated conformal net on the line, with the following formula
for the chiral conformal algebra on the half line

a(r>)  [t0

adit

w (a(i(0, a)))  a(w ),

we expect the equality sign to hold

a(r>) = a(w )

(73)

(74)

but our argument was tied to the existence of pfgs since as a result of their
mass-shell structure

f ( f ) = z z()f ()d = fres( fres)

(75)

where the notation res indicates the corresponding generators in light ray theory
which are identical in rapidity space and only dier in their x-space appearance.

35

this is a signicant strengthening of the cyclicity property a(r>) = a(w )
for the characteristic data on one light ray. the argument is word for word
the same in higher spacetime dimensions, since the appearance of transversal
components (which have no inuence on the localization) in addition to  do not
modify the argument. one would think that the inference of pfg generators
can even be disposed of and the equality should follow from the standard causal
shadow property of qft in the form

a(w ) = a(r()
> )

(76)

where r()
> is a spacelike positive haline with inclination  with respect to the
x-axis. the idea is that if this relation would remain continuous for r()
> ap-
proaching the light ray ( = 45 ) which then leads to the desired equality. we
believe that the relation (76) for massive theories, which will be called char-
acteristic shadow property, is a general consequence of the standard causal

shadow property (the identity of a(o) = a(o) where o is the causal com-
pletion of the convex spacelike region o) in any spacetime dimension.
theories with the characteristic shadow property are the objects of the light
ray folklore. the present conceptually more concise approach explains why
the light ray quantization in the presence of interactions is basically nonlocal
which signicantly restricts its unqualied physical use. the reason is that
although the haline algebra is equal to the wedge algebra (since all rays of
forward light cone propagation which pass through the upper/lower half light
ray r> have passes or will pass through w ), the locality on the light ray cannot
be propagated into the wedge (the strips inside the wedge subtended from an
interval i on the light ray by the action of the opposite light ray translation
are for massive theories not outside the propagation region of the complement
of i). only for the haline itself one obtains a 2-dimensional shadow region
namely the wedge region.
if one uses both light cones then it is possible to
reconstruct a causal d=1+1 net by intersections. this construction uses the
two-dimensional translation group on the wedge and the ensuing double cone
relative commutants. note that in order to achieve this with parity reected
halines of light rays, one needs the relative position of the two haline light ray
algebras relative to each other in the common space h. in fact one shifted right
light ray chiral algebra together with its parity reected image is equal to the
union of two opposite spacelike separated wedge algebras. the reected light
ray algebra may also be replaced by the algebra on the left hand extension of
the original light ray since both create the same left wedge algebra. however the
natural net structure of that algebra is very nonlocal with respect to that of the
parity reected one. this prevents its use in the construction of the 2-dim. net
from shifts and geometric intersections on one light ray. an algebra localized
in an interval on one light ray corresponds to a completely spread out algebra
on the other ray. the modular group of each light ray interval is geometric.
this agrees with the qualitative behavior one expects for the modular group of
the double cone in a massive theory [24] near the causal horizon. note that the
relative nonlocality of the chiral conformal theories is also necessary in order

36

to be consistent with a massive situation. the chiral conformal eld theory
contains the standard light ray translation with a gapless spectrum. however
this spectrum is not the physical one since in that chiral theory there exists yet
another nonlocally acting translation and it is the spectrum of the product of
the two generators p+p which gives the physical mass. hence chiral conformal
theories constitute a multipurpose tool in lqp. this is why they can serve
as holographic pieces for the construction of massive d=1+1 theories. so
with just one light ray and two translations, one acting locally and the other
nonlocally, one ray one can already reconstruct the full d=1+1 net. later we will
see that this is enough to understand the localization entropy which turns out
to have the surface behavior rst observed in the context of classical localization
behind black hole horizons by bekenstein.

because of the transversal extension, the holography in terms of one-dimensional

chiral conformal theories is more complicated for higher dimension. there one
needs a family of chiral conformal theories which is obtained from modular
intersections. rather than associating the chiral conformal theory with a light
ray, it is more appropriate to associate it with the transverse space of the wedge
which contains the light ray i.e. with the light front. a family is of light front
algebras is obtained by applying l-boosts to the standard wedge w which tilts
w around one of its dening light rays, so that the transversal degeneracy of
the modular inclusion is partially destroyed (in d=1+2 it would be completely
destroyed). in this way one obtains a fan-like ordered family of wedges corre-
sponding to a family of chiral conformal theories whose relative position within
the original hilbert space contains all the informations which are necessary in
order to reconstruct the original (massive) theory. a detailed and rigorous ac-
count of this construction will be given in a future paper. here we will only
mention some analogies to the above light ray situation. the process of tilting
by applying a family of boost transformations which leave the common light ray
invariant is described by unitary transformations of one chiral conformal theory
into another. each single one, according to the higher dimensional character-
istic shadow property, is equal to a wedge algebra. knowing the position of a
nite number of such chiral conformal theories with respect to each other (the
number increases with increasing spacetime dimensions), determines the rela-
tive position of a nite number of wedge algebras ( chiral conformal qfts)
which accoding to the previous remarks is sucient to reconstruct the original
net (the blow-up property in [44]). as previously mentioned, in the d=1+1
case the second light ray can be thought of as obtained from the rst one by a
unitary parity reection (assuming that the theory is parity invariant). all the
nitely many chiral conformal eld theories are unitarily equivalent (either by
parity or by l-boosts); the important physical information is contained in their
relative position within the same hilbert space. the terminology scanning by
a nite family of chiral conformal theories is perhaps more appropriate for this
construction of higher dimensional theories [51][44].

it has been shown elsewhere [51] that the modular inclusion for two wedges

gives rise to two reected eight-parametric subgroups of the 10-parametric poincare
group which contain a two parametric transversal galilean subgroup of the type

37

found by formal light front quantization arguments [50]. all these considera-
tions show the primordial role of the chiral conformal qft as a building block
for the higher dimensional qfts.

there is another much more special kind of holography in which an iso-
morphism of a massive qft in d+1 dimensions to a conformal d-dimensional
theory is in the focus of interest. this isomorphism appears in rehrens solu-
tion [20] of maldacenas conjecture about the existence of a holographic relation
of quantum matter in a (d+1)-dimensional anti de sitter spacetime with that
in a d-dimensional conformal qft. this type of holography has not been ob-
served outside the anti de sitter spacetime and since it is an isomorphism to
a conformal theory, the degrees of freedom are not really reduced in the sense
of t hooft [45], as it was the case in the previous holography via light ray re-
duction. the maldacena-witten holography is apparently of importance within
the development of string theory, in fact the protagonists believe that it con-
tains information about a possible message about quantum gravity of string
theory. within the present aqft setting its main interest is that it requires
the eld-coordinatization free point of view in its strongest form: whereas in
most problems of qft there exist appropriate eld coordinatizations which of-
ten facilitate calculations, the m-w isomorphism dened in rigorous terms by
rehren is not pointlike and has no description in terms of elds outside its al-
gebraic version. in contradistinction to the light ray holography which happens
at the causality horizon (light front boundary) of modular localization (or its
classical killing counterpart in case of black holes) the ads holography takes
place at the boundary at innity.

a very simple presentation in the spirit of rehrens approach which takes

into account the covering of the relevant spaces can be found in [52].

6 comparison with string theory

as mentioned in the introduction, historically string theory originated from the
attempt to understand and implement the issue of crossing symmetry of the
s-matrix. without the intervention of qft it was dicult to combine unitar-
ity and crossing symmetry into a manageable formalism. it came as somewhat
of a surprise that by assuming an additional stronger form of crossing called
duality one actually could obtain the dual model formalism. duality was an
idea of entirely phenomenological origin which consisted in the hypothesis that
crossing can already hold if one only restricts ones attention to (reggeized) one-
particle states (particle democracy). there was no theoretical support from
qft, nevertheless the very appealing form of duality by veneziano led eventu-
ally into string theory. but whereas the content of qft can be separated from
the perturbative formalism and cast into totally intrinsic form which is stronly
related with its underlying principles, string theory leaves a lot to be desired
on conceptual aspects and remained a collection of prescriptions. in particular
string theorists have not been able to successfully address the issue of locality
of operators and localization of states which are absolutely crucial propertie on

38

which any particle physics theory stands and falls and which are even indispens-
able for the physical interpretation of its formalism [35]. the formal basis of
string theory is a kind of momentum space engineering rather than a concep-
tual spacetime analysis. the latter remained within the realm of quasiclassical
physics using geometrical pictures with some uctuation caused fuzziness i.e.
pictures which in the setting of quantum theory fall behind heisenbergs dictum
that positions and momenta are not properties of the electron but are characeris-
tica of the events involving interactions with a measurement apparatus which
causes the factualization of potentialities. related to this is the fact that the
word scattering theory has an entirely dierent meaning in both areas. whereas
in qft it is an asymptotic relation to free elds for whose derivation spacelike
locality is absolutely essential, in string theory its use in the sense of the 0/
behavior of the analytically continued source space conformal eld theory in the
complex plane has nothing to do with any standard scattering concept of phys-
ical particles. whereas all important ideas in qft have been tested outside
quasiclassical or perturbative settings at least in d=1+1 interacting theories,
this is not the case in string theory. for example the klein-kaluza mechanism
for the conversion of spacetime into inner symmetry which is a (semi)classical
idea has never been tested in a full qft. since the physical origin of internal
symmetries is closely related to particle/eld statistics16, there is some subtle
problem with the klein-kaluza mechanism in qft away from the quasiclassical
pictures of functional integrals.

another problematic point is the intrinsic meaning of stringyness in form
of an innite tower of particles with an oscillator-like mass spectrum. as long
as mass spectra do not accumulate (by increase of multiplicities) too densely,
they are compatible with the phase space structure of qft and lead to rea-
sonable thermal behavior, i.e. the pathological situation of a nite hagedorn-
temperature can presumably also be avoided in string theory. but it is not
known to me how one can distinguish an innite collection of resonances i.e.
poles in the second riemann sheet (since presumably in string theory most of
the particles in the tower are unstable through higher order (gereri) interactions
as it would be the case in feynman theory). i do not know of any theorem in
qft which forbids such a resonance situation and therefore i do not understand
the meaning of stringyness. extended objects can also exist in qft build on
perfect local observables; in fact the superselection theory even demands in some
cases the existence of noncompactly localized objects which intertwine between
inequivalent representations of perfectly local observable algebras, examples are
the carriers of braid group statistics in d=1+2 dimensions are necessarily ex-
tended along semiinnite spacelike strings. so it is very questionable if there
exists an intrinsic meaning of stringyness.

the relation of string theory with the wedge-localization approach to qft
presented in this paper goes only via the common historical root of the s-matrix

16the analysis of statistics from rst principles leads rather directly to parastatistics in the
sense of [1]. it is one of the great achievements of particle physics in the 80ies to show that
this may be always converted into fermion/boson statistics + internal group symmetry where
the latter can be computed from the structure of the structure of the causal observables.

39

theory of the 60ies and basically consists in the claim that both theories are ul-
trviolet nite.. in fact the on-shell nature of wedge algebras as exemplied by
the modular wedge-localization equation (35) provides a eld theoretic link for
the s-matrix bootstrap and transports the ultraviolet niteness of the latter
into qft. although this niteness is shared with string theory, the cause of
it is very dierent. wheras in string theory this niteness results from the
extension17 of a string as an indecomposable state of matter, the modular ap-
proach to qft is ultraviolet-nite in a much more radical and at the same
time much more conservative way. the radical aspect is that by not using the
inevitably light-cone singular eld coordinatizations in the actual construction
but rather a net of algebras, the objects to which the the bad short distance
behaviour and the ultraviolet divergencies is attached have disappeared from
the scene. they may be constructed at the end as local generators of the al-
ready constructed spacetime-indexed nets of algebras, but there they cannot
do no harm anymore. the conservative aspect is that by taking this approach
which requires a radically changed formalism, one remains in total harmony
with the causality-, spectral-, and degrees of freedom principles which under-
lie qft. the short distance behavior of the eld approach is substituted by
the nontriviality of intersections of algebras. this approach has already been
tested in the bootstrap-formfactor constructions of d=1+1 factorizable models.
in d=1+3 one expects that its perturbative version reproduces the renormaliz-
able eld theories and in addition reveals whether the frontiers of the standard
approach (renormalizable/nonrenormalizable) which appear in a purely formal
way (power counting in auxiliary objects) are really the the intrinsic formalism-
independent frontiers dened by the physical principles of qft. massive gauge
theories analyzed from the slightly physical point of view [39] of selnteracting
massive vectormesons nourish the suspicion that the intrinsic frontiers may be
wider than those set by the standard perturbative power counting for interaction
polynomials.

both the modular wedge localization approach as well as string theory at-
tribute a basic signicance to chiral conformal theory, and both know the notion
of holography. but the use and the physical interpretation of these concepts is
quite dierent. whereas in aqft chiral conformal theories are the building
blocks of holographic images of higher dimensional theories and therefore are
positioned in the same minkowski space, string theory places the chiral confor-
mal data into an auxiliary source space and identies the physical space as the
target space of the elds in which they take their values. related to this is in
fact the notorious diculty of dening a string eld theory, a problem which
is presumably related to the diculty in separating the intrinsic conceptual
content of string theory from its procedural prescriptions.

on the other hand the modular approach has all the hallmarks of a con-
ceptually based intrinsic formulation of local particle physics which makes it
a candidate for an extension into the realm of interactions of the wigners

17this means that the string of string theory is not an extended object in an otherwise local

theory as. e.g. a mandelstam string in gauge theory.

40

representation theory of free particles which was the rst totally intrinsic (in-
dependent of quantization) approach to relativistic quantum theory.

note added: meanwhile there has been substancial progress on an issue,
which although dating back to the qft of the 70ies, received new attention
through the string theorists observation about a correspondence of qft in
anti de sitter space and conformal qft. the methods of aqft have turned
out to be very powerful in unravelling some real time quantum physical aspect
of this isomorphism and have led to substancial progress on higher dimensional
conformal qft (b. schroer hep-th/0005010 and 0005134). the role of string
theory as a search machine of such unexpected connections versus the conceptual
power of aqft to analyse and understand such observations on a profound and
useful level for particle physics makes an interesting continuation of the theme
of the last section in which the reader may be interested in.

acknowledgement 4 a correspondence with k.-h. rehren, and discussions
with j. roberts and r. longo during a short visit of rome university led to var-
ious improvements of the paper. i am particularly indebted to j. roberts for the
invitation which made these discussions possible. finally i would like to thank
my colleagues at the fu andreas fring, michael karowski, hradch babujian
and robert schrader for some good questions and constructive suggestions.

a appendices on modular theory

a.1 some facts about modular theory
denition 5 a von neumann algebra a (weakly closed operator sub-algebra
of the full algebra b(h) on a hilbert space h) is in standard position with
respect to a vector   h, denoted as (a, ), if  is a cyclic (a = h) and
separating (a = 0, a  a i a = 0) vector for a. in this situation tomita
denes the following involutive antilinear but unbounded operator (the tomita
involution s)

sa := a

(77)

its
where the star operation is the hermitian conjugate in operator algebras.
closability property (as physicists we will use the same notation for the closure)
is the prerequisite for the polar decomposition

s = j

1
2

(78)

where the angular part j (the modular involution) is antiunitary with j 2 = 1
and  is unbounded positive and therefore leads to a unitary group it.

theorem 6 (tomita 1965, with signicant improvements from takesaki): the
modular involution maps a onto its von neumann commutant a in h:

adj  a = a

41

(79)

the unitary it denes a modular automorphism group by

adit  a = a
(analogy to a dynamical law for the algebra).

(80)

more details and references to the proof can be found in [1]. actually physi-
cists have independently discovered some important properties of modular the-
ory which later were incorporated by mathematicians into the tomita-takesaki
theory. in fact haag, hugenholtz and winnink[1] observed that the kms prop-
erty which kubo, martin and schwinger just used as a computational trick in
order to avoid the calculation of traces in quantum statistical mechanics took
on a fundamental conceptual role if one works directly in the thermodynamic
limit of innitely extended systems. a closely related independent discovery in
their pursuit of physical-conceptual problems in quantum statistical mechanics
which arise if one works directly in the thermodynamic limit [1]. as it is well
known, the gibbs representation formula

hav i(v )



=

trehv av

trehv

av  algebra of box  quantization

(81)

ceases to make sense18 for innite volume open systems and the algebra changes
its murray von neumann type. whereas in the quantization box it was type i,
the open system algebra becomes type iii1 and the gibbs formula passes to the
kms condition which is a cyclic relation for thermal correlation functions [1]. in
the 70ies haag and collaborators were able to derive the kms condition directly
from stability properties under local deformations and pusz and woronowicz
found a direct link to the second law of thermodynamics [1]. these profound
results were recently used for the derivation of thermal properties of quantum
matter in an anti-de sitter spacetime [4].

the relation of modular theory with the einstein causality of observables
and locality of elds in qft was made around 1975 in a series of papers by
bisognano and wichmann [1]. specializing to wedge algebras a(w ) generated
by wightman elds, they proved the following theorem

theorem 7 the tomita modular theory for the wedge algebra and the vacuum
state vector (a(w ), ) yields the following physical identications

it = u (w (2t))
j = t cp  u (rx())

(82)

here w () denotes the boost ( is the x-space rapidity) which leaves the
if we choose the standard t-x wedge, then the rotation

wedge w invariant.

18in a box the bounded below hamiltonian aquires a discrete spectrum and eh is of trace

class ( = e 1

2

h is h.s.), a property which is lost in the innite volume limit.

42

which aligns the tcp with tomitas j is a rotation around the x-axis by an
angle .

now i come to my own contributions which are of a more recent vintage
[22]. they result from the desire to invert the bisognano-wichmann theorem
i.e. to use tomitas modular theory for the actual construction (and classica-
tion) of (a net of) wedge algebras belonging to interacting theories with the nal
goal to intersect wedge algebras in order to obtain a net of compactly localized
double cone algebras. for the arguments which show that the particle physics
properties, in particular the scattering matrix and formfactors of distinguished
elds (conserved currents) can be abstracted from the net observables, i refer
to [1][41][37]. if desired. the nets can also be coordinatized by more traditional
pointlike elds and a rigorous derivation for chiral nets can be found in [34].
for the derivation of lsz scattering theory one makes the assumption of the
existence of a mass gap. with this one immediately realizes that, whereas the
connected part of the poincare group is the same as that of the free incom-
ing theory, the disconnected part containing time reversals, in particular the
modular involution j for the wedge carry the full interaction

it
w = it
jw = sscjw,in

w,in =: eikt

(83)

here jw,in refers to the tomita involution (or tcp reection) of the wedge
algebra generated by the incoming free eld. if the theory is not asymptotically
complete (i.e. the vacuum is not cyclic with respect to the incoming elds) these
relations have to be modied, but here we discard such pathologies for which
no physical illustration exists. since we do not want to temper with historically
grown notations, we have added a subscript to the s-matrix ssc in order to
distinguish it where necessary from tomitas s. the modular hamiltonian k
dened in the rst equation (the boost generator= hamiltonian of a particular
uniformly accelerated unruh observer) has always symmetric instead of one-
sided spectrum.

the last relation (83) is nothing but the tcp-transformation law of the s-
matrix rewritten in terms of modular objects associated to the wedge algebra.
the above role of the s-matrix as a kind of relative modular invariant of the
wedge algebra (relative to the free one) is totally characteristic for local quantum
physics and has no counterpart in quantum mechanics.

a.2 absence of pfgs for sub-wedge regions in theories

with interactions

theorem 8 in interacting theories there exist no pfgs localized in subwedge
regions. the wedge region is the smallest spacetime region for which pfgs in
the presence of interactions are possible.

for the proof19 let us rst assume that the spacetime localization region o
of the would be pfgs is compact, e.g. a double cone. let  be an operator

19the proof is similar to that of the jost-schroer theorem in [5] and to that in [19].

43

which is aliated with a(o) which means that on the domain of denition it
commutes with all operators from the commutant a(o). the pfg property of
 means (# stands for either  or )

#(x) = one  particle vector
#(x) = u (x)#u (x)

(84)

without any admicture of additional polarization contribution from higher par-
ticle congurations. as a result the vector satises the free eld equation in

x. on the other hand we have that h#(x), #(y)i = 0 for suciently large

spacelike separations. let us now look at matrix-elements

d2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

#(x)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

1e

(85)

with say 2  domain(#) and choose 1 from the dense set of state vectors
which are localized in some region spacelike relative to loc(#(x)). this is done
by applying spacelike separated operators onto the vacuum |1i = a|0i. since
#(x) commute with such operators we obtain

d2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

#(x)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

1e = d2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
= d2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

#(x)a(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
a#(x)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(86)

e
e

i.e. #(x) fullls the free eld equation on a dense set of states in its domain.
since all aliated operators are closable, the operator itself fullls the free eld
equation. if we succeed to prove in addition that the commutator with itself is
a c-number

[(x), (y)] = c(x  y)1

(87)

then we would have achieved our goal since it would follow that #(x) is a
linear expression in terms of the particle creation and annihilation operator
which contradicts the presence of an interaction. but this last step follows
almost literally the argument in the derivation of the jost-schroer theorem [5],
the fact that the present  has no well denes l-covariance does not matter. in
the rst step one shows that

[(x), (y)]|i = c(x  y)|i

(88)

which requires the creationcreation contribution to vanish i.e. h(+)(x), (+)(y)i|i =

0. for this one uses causality and the separate analyticity in x and y which fol-
lows from the forward mass-shell support property. the generalization from a
relation on the vacuum to a relation on a dense set of states is as before.

44

references

[1] r. haag, local quantum physics, springer 1992

[2] h.-j. borchers, on the revolutionization of quantum field theory by
tomitas modular theory, university of goettingen preprint, april 1999,
invited contribution to the issue 2000 of jmp

[3] m. takesaki, tomitas theory of modular hilbert algebras and its appli-
cations, lecture notes in mathematics, vol. 128, springer-verlag berlin,
heidelberg, new york (1970), s. stratila, modular theory in operator
algebras, abacus press turnbridge wells, kent, england (1981)

[4] d. buchholz, m. florig and s.j. summers, hawking-unruh temperature

and einstein causality in anti-de sitter space-time, hep-th/9905178

[5] r.f. streater and a.s. wightman, pct, spin and statistics and all that,

benjamin 1964

[6] n.n. bogoliubov, a.a. logunov, a.a.oksak and i:t. todorov, introduction

to axiomatic quantum eld theory, dodrecht, kluwer 1990

[7] b. schroer, particle physics and qft at the turn of the century: old
principles with new concepts, (an essay on local quantum physics), invited
contribution to the issue 2000 of jmp, to appear in june 2000

[8] w. heisenberg, zeitschrift fuer naturforschung 1, (1946) 608

[9] g. chew, the s-matrix theory of strong interactions, w. a. benjamin

inc., new york 1961

[10] b. berg, nuovo cim. 41 a, (1977) 58

[11] p. weisz, nuovo cim. (1979)

[12] a. r.white, the past and future of s-matrix theory, hep-ph/0002303

[13] j.j. bisognano and e.h. wichmann, j. math. phys. 16, (1975) 985 and

17, (1979) 303

[14] h.-w. wiesbrock, comm. math. phys. 157 p 83 (1993) erratum comm.

math. phys. 184, 683 (1997), lett. math. phys. 39, 203 (1997)

[15] t.d. newton and e.p. wigner, rev. mod. phys. 21, (1949) 400

[16] b. schroer, t.t. truong and p. weisz, phys. lett. b63 (1976) 422

[17] m. karowski, h. j. thun, t. t. truong and p. weisz, phys. lett. b67

(1977) 321

[18] a. b. zamolodchikov, jetp lett. 25 (1977) 468

45

[19] j.mund, math. phys. 43, (1998) 319

[20] k.-h. rehren, algebraic holography, hep-th/9905179

[21] s. weinberg, the quantum theory of fields, i, cambridge university press

1995

[22] b. schroer, annals of physics 275, no2 (1999) 190

[23] r. brunetti, d. guido and r. longo, first quantization via bw property,

in preparation

[24] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, rev. math. phys. 12, no.1 (2000) 139

[25] o. bratteli and d. w. robinson, operator algebras and quantum statisti-
cal mechanics i, ii, springer verlag, new york, heidelberg, berlin (1979)

[26] m. karowski and p. weisz, nucl. phys. b 139, (1978) 455

[27] a. b. zamolodchikov, int. j. of mod. phys. a1, (1989) 1235

[28] a. fring, int.j.mod.phys. a11 (1996) 1337

[29] f. a. smirnov, int.j. mod. phys. a4, (1989) 156. our operator notation
is more close to m. yu lashkevich, sectors of mutually local fields in
integrable models of quantum field theory, hep-th/9406118

[30] h. babujian, a. fring, m. karowski and a. zapletal, nucl. phys. b 538,

(1999) 53

[31] d. guido, r. longo, j.e. roberts and r. verch, charged sectors, spin
and statistics in quantum field theory on curved spacetimes, math-
ph/9906019, and referces therein.

[32] h-j borchers, d. buchholz and b. schroer, polarization-free generators

and the s-matrix, hep-th/0003243

[33] d. buchholz, s. doplicher, r. longo and j.h. roberts, rev. math. phys.

special issue (1992)

[34] k. fredenhagen and joerss, comm. math. phys. 176, (1996), 541

[35] b. schroer, jpa 32, (1999) 5937

[36] d. guido, r. longo and h.-w. wiesbrock, comm. math. phys. 192, (1998)

217

[37] d. buchholz and r. haag, the quest for understanding in relativistic
quantum physics, university of goettingen preprint october 1999, invited
contribution to the issue 2000 of jmp

[38] rob clifton and hans halvorson, entanglement and open systems in al-
gebraic quantum field theory, university of pittsburgh preprint jan.2000

46

[39] duetsch and b. schroer; massive vectormesons and gauge theory, hep-

th/9906089 in print in jpa

[40] d. buchholz and e. h. wichmann, commun. math. phys. 106, (1986) 321

[41] d. buchholz, current trends in axiomatic quantum eld theory, hep-

th/9811233

[42] s. doplicher and r. longo, invent. math. 75, (1984) 493

[43] j. dimock, locality in free string theory, mp-arc 98-311

[44] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, rev. math. phys.12, no.3 (march 2000)

[45] g. t hooft, in salam-festschrift, a. ali et al. eds., world scientic 1993,

284

[46] s. doplicher and j. e. roberts, commun. math. phys. 131, (1990) 51

[47] a. connes, ann. inst. fourier 126, (1974) 121

[48] h. narnhofer, in the state of matter, ed. by m. aizenman and h. araki

(wold-scientic, singapore) 1994

[49] h. kosaki, j. operator theory 16, (1986) 335

[50] l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36, (1995) 6377

[51] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, rev. in math. phys.12, no.2 (february

2000)

[52] b. schroer, facts and fictions about anti de sitter spacetimes with quan-

tum matter, hep-th/9911100

47

