3
0
0
2

 

g
u
a
3
1

 

 
 

3
v
2
1
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields:

ii. classically positive hamiltonians

adam d. helfer

department of mathematics

university of missouri

columbia, mo 65211, u.s.a.

february 1, 2008

abstract

for linear bose eld theories, i show that if a classical hamiltonian function
is strictly positive in a suitable sense, the classical evolution must be conjugate,
by a symplectic motion, to a strongly continuous one-parameter orthogonal group.
this can be viewed as an innite-dimensional analog of the existence of action-angle
coordinates.

this result is used to show that there is an intimate connection between unitarity
of the quantum evolution and boundedness-below of the quantum hamiltonians.
(recent work has shown that generically, the hamiltonian operators of quantum elds
in curved spacetime are not bounded below and do not generate unitary evolutions.)
precisely, whenever the quantum hamiltonians exist as self-adjoint operators, they
are bounded below. lower bounds on the normalordered quantum hamiltonian
operators are computed.

finally, it is shown that there is a broad class of quantum inequalities: it f ab
is a smooth compactly-supported future-directed test function, then the operator

r f abbtab dvol is bounded below.

1

introduction

this is the second of a three-part series analyzing the hamiltonians of linear quantum
elds. a general introduction will be found in the rst paper, helfer (1999), hereafter
called part i.

when the evolution of the eld operators in a linear quantum eld theory does not
preserve their decomposition into creation and annihilation parts, the analysis of the
theory can be dicult and is not yet wholly understood. this situation can arise for
several reasons:

 it occurs naturally in the presence of time-dependent external potentials; in partic-

ular, it is the generic situation for quantum elds in curved spacetime.

 it occurs when several linear elds are linearly coupled, for instance, in models of

the quantum electromagnetic eld in dispersive media.

1

 it occurs when the evolution is not a perfect symmetry. this happens, for example,
when the corresponding operator is an inhomogeneous spatial or temporal average of
the stressenergy. such operators are the subject of the quantum inequalities, which
bound the persistence of negative energy densities, and are important in quantum
measurement issues.

in such situations, phenomena which are at least navely very pathological can occur.
in the case of quantum elds in curved spacetime, it has been shown that the quantum
hamiltonian operators have only a restricted existence, being dened only as quadratic

forms. (that is, there is a dense family of states for which the expectations h|bh|i are
dened, but there are no known non-zero states for which bh|i exists as an element in the

physical hilbert space.) the quantum hamiltonians expectations are unbounded below,
and the corresponding evolutions are not unitarily implementable. this means that the
algebra of eld operators does not evolve by unitary motions. this is distinct from the
evolution of the state vectors, which is unitary (and, in the usual relativistic heisenberg
picture, trivial except for reductions). any sort of non-unitarity in quantum theory should
be taken seriously, and the physical signicance of that discovered recently is not yet clear.
one of the main aims of these papers is to get a rm enough mathematical control on the
phenomenon that progress on a physical understanding will be possible.

it may be helpful to comment on how these issues are related to the abstract algebraic
approach. in general, algebraic approaches seek to formulate quantum eld theory, as
much as possible, in terms of the algebras of observables. they seek to avoid, or treat as
derived concepts, the realization of those observables as operators on hilbert spaces.

while such approaches have demonstrable power, the construction of a physical repre-
sentation is necessary to fully dene the quantum theory, at least in a conventional sense.
for example, the set of allowable n-point functions (with the correct asymptotics) depends
on the physical choice of representation, not just on the algebra of observables. in general,
while some of the physical content is specied in the algebraic structure alone, the full
physical content depends on knowing the representation. for instance, hawkings (1974,
1975) prediction of black-hole evaporation relies strongly on the choice of representation.
(see helfer 2003 for a critique of this prediction.)

the unboundedness-below and failure of unitary implementability are problems which
are much more apparent in an approach based on the construction of representations than
in an abstract algebraic approach. since the aim of these papers is to develop a framework
in which the signicances of these issues can be assessed, the approach here is very much
based on the study of representations.

which sort of approach will ultimately  when the signicances of these issues are
understood  be most appropriate remains to be seen. should the apparent pathologies
turn out to be simply mathematical ne points not of real physical consequence, an alge-
braic approach might well be the most suitable. on the other hand, unitarity is such a
basic concept of quantum theory, and boundedness-below of energy such a fundamental
concern in any physical theory, that it may well turn out that these issues are important
and are best understood within a representation.

in part i of this series, i determined under what conditions an innitesimal symmetry
of the classical phase space gave rise to a self-adjoint quantum operator. in that paper,
no special properties of the symmetry were used. in the present paper, i specialize to
those symmetries corresponding to positive classical hamiltonian functions. these arise
in particular for those which are energy operators, in the sense that they correspond to

2

evolution forward in time.

structure theory the rst aim of this paper is to classify the dierent possible struc-
tures such classical hamiltonians might have. this will then be used to analyze their
quantizations.

theorem 1, then, is a classication of the possible classical hamiltonians. essentially, it
states that a classically positive hamiltonian function generates a family of motions which
is similar, by a canonical transformation, to a one-parameter orthogonal group. (however,
the theorem as stated and proved here requires an additional technical hypothesis, which is
believed not to be necessary. see the discussion preceding the theorem.) this comes about
because even in this innite-dimensional context there is something like a compactness of
the constant-energy surfaces in the classical phase space. this is a delicate and remarkable
result, which is presumably of interest in the theory of innite-dimensional dynamical
systems. it implies an innite-dimensional analog of the existence of action-angle variables,
for example. it also implies that the classical evolution remains uniformly bounded in
time. this extends the structure theory for classical hamiltonian eld theories that was
developed earlier (see cherno and marsden 1974).

self-adjointness and boundedness-below using the classical structure theorem to
get a handle on the quantum theory, we nd (theorem 2) that a classically positive hamil-
tonian is self-adjointly implementable i the similarity eecting its transformation to a
generator of orthogonal motions corresponds to a restricted bogoliubov transformation,
and, in this case, the quantum hamiltonian must be bounded below.1 thus one has a
very strong connection between self-adjointness and boundedness-below, for energy op-
erators. it should be emphasized that these results make no presupposition about what
renormalization prescription is to be used.

there is an old folk-theorem in quantum eld theory: a hamiltonian determines its
quantization, meaning that a formal expression for a hamiltonian should have a unique
(modulo c-numbers) implementation as an operator. theorem 2 can be viewed as allowing
one to make this statement precise, for linear eld theories.
it shows that classically
positive hamiltonians have certain mathematically allowed quantizations, which may or
may not be physically acceptable, according to whether the bogoliubov transformation is
restricted. one might think that the correct interpretation of the present results is simply
that, when the bogoliubov transformations turn out not to be restricted, one picked the
wrong original set of canonical variables, and one should choose another, leading to an
allowed quantization. however, at least for the case of quantum elds in curved space
time, this does not seem to be the correct interpretation. there, the acceptable choices
of canonical variables for quantization are determined by the hadamard condition, and
in general the hamiltonians are not compatible with this.

in other words, the physical considerations leading to a choice of canonical variables,
and those leading to the choice of hamiltonian, conict in that the hamiltonian cannot be
self-adjointly realized. it should also be mentioned that even if one chooses a mathemati-
cally allowed quantization giving rise to a self-adjoint hamiltonian on one hypersurface in
spacetime, one would need inequivalent representations for the hamiltonians at nearby
hypersurfaces.

1recall that the restricted bogoliubov transformations are those which lead to unitarily equivalent

quantizations.

3

normal-ordering and lower bounds the results described so far are general state-
ments about when a classical hamiltonian is self-adjointly implementable at the quantum
level, without presupposing a specic renormalization scheme. one would like to know
what relation these results bear to standard renormalization theory. a choice of renormal-
ization prescription is necessary, too, to move beyond the statement that the hamiltonians
are bounded below and be able to speak of their lower bounds (since renormalization in
particular determines the c-number contribution to the hamiltonians).

almost universally for linear elds, normal-ordering (or an equivalent prescription, like
point-splitting) is used as the prescription. we show that, for classically positive operators,
normal ordering may not suce to renormalize the hamiltonian, and that niteness of
the normally-ordered ground-state energy is equivalent to the existence of the normally-
ordered hamiltonian as a self-adjoint operator (theorems 3 ands 4). we also compute
some lower bounds for the normally-ordered ground state energy (theorem 5).

quantum inequalities for some time now, it has been conjectured that suitably tem-
porally averaged measures of the energy density operator for quantum elds in curved
spacetime should be bounded below. such bounds are known as quantum inequalities,
following pioneering work of ford (1978). we establish the existence (but not the precise
numerical bounds) of a wide class of these:
for any smooth, compactly-supported test
function f ab which is future-directed in the sense that it is at each point a symmetrized
product taub + uatb of future-directed vectors, the operator

z btabf ab dvol

(1)

is bounded below (theorem 7). the signicance of this result is discussed more fully at
the beginning of section 6.

unfortunately, in order to establish these inequalities, we cannot make direct use of
the earlier structure results. this is because the hamiltonians corresponding to averages
of components of the stressenergy over compact regions of spacetime, do not satisfy the
strong form of classical positivity needed for those theorems. the quantum inequalities are
proved from a partial result on the structure theory for these weakly positive classical
hamiltonians, theorem 6.

the organization of the paper is this. section 2 contains some preliminaries. section
3 goes over the main structure of classically positive hamiltonians; in section 4, these
results are applied to quantum eld theory. section 5 works out the connection with
normal ordering, and section 6 the structure necessary to establish the existence of the
quantum inequalities. the last section contains some discussion.

summary of notation. here is a summary of the notation used. unfortunately, there

are quite a few things denoted conventionally by similar symbols.

h is the space of solutions of the classical eld equations, a real separable hilbertable

space equipped with a symplectic form .

hc is the space h equipped with the complex structure dened by j, and so made

into a complex hilbert space.

h is the hilbert space on which the representation acts.
k  kop is the operator norm.
k  khs is the hilbertschmidt norm.
a is the eld algebra.
a is the hamiltonian vector eld on the space of classical solutions.

4

a is the lie adjoint of a, that is, the derivative of conjugation by g(t) = eta.
note. since h is not canonically a hilbert space, i will generally emphasize the
dependence of properties on the choice of norm, that is, of j. thus one has j-linear, rather
than complex-linear, transformations. similarly, there are j-symmetric, j-orthogonal,
etc., transformations.

2 preliminaries

throughout, we shall let hc be a complex innite-dimensional separable hilbert space.
the complex inner product on hc will be denoted h,i. we shall let h be the underlying
real hilbert space. then we write j : h  h for the real-linear map given by v 7 iv,
and

(v, w) = hv, wi
(v, w) = hv, wi

(2)

(3)

then (,) is the canonical real inner product on h and  is a symplectic form on h which
is non-degenerate in that it denes isomorphisms from h to its dual. note that

(v, w) = (v, jw) .

(4)

thus any two of , j and (,) determine the third.
throughout, the real adjoint of a real-linear operator (perhaps only densely dened)
l will be denoted l. thus the dening relation is (v, lw) = (lv, w) with domain
d(l) = {w  h | (v, lw) = (lv, w) for some lw for all v  d(l)}.
denition 1. the symplectic group of h is

sp(h) = {g : h  h | g is linear, continuous, and preserves } .

its elements are the symplectomorphisms.

the symplectic group does not depend on the real inner product on h (or on the
complex structure); it depends only on  and the structure of h as a hilbertable space.
it has naturally the structure of a banach group, using the operator norm to dene the
topology.

denition 2. the restricted symplectic group of hc is

sprest(hc) = {g  sp(h) | g1jg  g is hilbertschmidt} .

we recall that a strongly continuous one-parameter subgroup of sp(h) is a one-
parameter subgroup t 7 g(t) such that, for each v  h, the map t 7 g(t)v is continuous.
(in general, one can also consider semigroups, dened for t  0, but as every symplecto-
morphism is invertible, in our case every semigroup extends to a group, which is strongly
continuous i the semigroup is.) according to the hilleyoshidaphillips theorem, such
groups have the form g(t) = eta, where a is a denselydened operator on h (with cer-
tain spectral properties), and kg(t)kop  m e|t| for some m,   0. the spectrum of a
is conned to the strip ||  .

5

3 classically positive hamiltonians

the analysis so far has been concerned with general symmetries of the phase space. in the
case of time evolution, there are important additional properties. the most fundamental
of these is that, in the classical context, the energy cannot be negative. indeed, this fact
plays a key role in establishing the existence and stability of temporal evolution from
initial data. in this section, we shall investigate this extra structure.

a key result is that when the energy function is positive, the evolution must be con-
jugate to a unitary group. this is quite remarkable, even in the case of nite dimensions,
since the eigenvalues of a general hamiltonian vector may be complex. on the other hand,
the result is (in nite dimensions) essentially an extension of the proof of the existence of
actionangle variables.

the argument in nite dimensions is this. let a be the generator of a one-parameter
group of symplectic transformations, and suppose its energy function (1/2)(v, av) is a
positive-denite quadratic form. since evolution by g(t) = eta preserves this form, we
see that g(t)v remains bounded for all t, for any v. this means that the eigenvalues of a
must be purely imaginary, and that its jordan form (over the complex) must be purely
diagonal. thus a must be conjugate to an anti-hermitian matrix.

in innite dimensions, the result is made more dicult for several reasons. in the rst
place, since the operator a is unbounded, the form (v, av) is not dened everywhere.
this means that for a dense family of vs, the form has the value +, and the fact that
this value remains constant in t does not allow us to conclude that the orbits g(t)v remain
bounded. also, it is not known a priori that a (or even g(t)) has anything like a jordan
normal form. (indeed, the required property, known as spectrality, is in general a very
delicate thing to establish. an example of a hamiltonian with a nonspectral was given in
paper i.) in fact, our argument turns on a recently established hyperfunctional analog of
a theorem of bochner, and it is possible that the lack of adequate analytic tools prevented
an earlier proof.

denition 3. the generator a of a strongly-continuous one-parameter subgroup of the
symplectic group is called classically positive if the form (1/2)(v, av)  ckvk2 for some
c > 0.

the requirement that c be strictly positive will be used essentially in what follows. its
eect is to rule out certain potential infrared problems. (the analysis could be modied
to accommodate a nite number of zero modes of a, however.)

the next theorem is one of our main results. it asserts that (with one technical proviso)
classically positive hamiltonians are in fact similar, by bounded symplectomorphisms, to
the generators of orthogonal motions on phase space. thus this is a general structure
theorem, which can be thought of as an analog of the statement that actionangle variables
exist for linear systems with positive hamiltonians and nitely many degrees of freedom.
as mentioned above, the theorem contains a technical proviso, which is that a, the
j-antilinear part of a, be bounded. (so the theorem would apply to any a such that
an some positive complex structure j could be found for which a is bounded.) this
condition is veried in all examples known to me, and holds in particular for quantum
elds in curved spacetime (helfer 1996). still, it would be be more satisfying to remove
this hypothesis, and i believe this can be done. however, the arguments if unbounded a
are allowed are much more technically complicated, will be pursued elsewhere.

6

proposition 1. let a be classically positive. then its spectrum lies on the imaginary
axis.
proof. let d(a) be the domain of a. the spectrum of a is the set of points  at which
the map   a : d(a)  h is not invertible. more precisely, since h is not canonically a
complex vector space, we work with the complexication. this will be done in the usual
way, without introducing unnecessary notations for complexications. then (v, av) is a
hermitian form bounded away from zero (as a form).

suppose  a is not one-to-one. then a has an eigenvector v with eigenvalue . then

ketvk2 = kg(t)vk2

 (2c)1(cid:0)g(t)v, ag(t)v(cid:1)

= (2c)1(v, av) .

this can hold for all t only if  is purely imaginary (or zero).

now suppose that   a is not onto, and its image lies in some hyperplane {x |
(v, x) = 0}. this means that v is an eigenvector of at with eigenvalues . now at is
the generator of gt (t) = jg(t)j. the domain of at is jd(a), and the energy func-
tion is (1/2)(y, at y) = (1/2)(y, jajy) = (1/2)(cid:0)(jy), a(jy)(cid:1). as in the previous
paragraph, we nd

ketvk2  (2c)1(v, at v) ,

forcing the real part of  to vanish.

we now take up the more delicate case, where   a is one-to-one but not onto, but
its image is dense. in this case, we may nd a sequence vn of unit vectors in h which are
elements of d(a) such that kvnk + kavnk = 1 + kavnk is bounded and (  a)vn tends
to zero. we have

(cid:0)g(t)  et(cid:1)v = etz t

0

g(u)eudu (a  )v

for any v  d(a). thus

k(cid:0)g(t)  et(cid:1)vk  m(cid:0)et  et(cid:1)(  )1k(a  )vk

where we have taken t  0 for simplicity (and we have used the hilleyoshidaphillips
bound kg(t)kop  m e|t|).
now, suppose  > 0. we may choose t > 0 so that et is as large as desired. for
such a t , and any  > 0, we may choose n large enough so that k(cid:0)g(t)  et(cid:1)vnk <  for
all 0  t  t . in this case we will have

ketvnk2 (cid:0)kg(t)vnk + (cid:1)2

(cid:0)p(2c)1(vn, avn) + (cid:1)2

.

however, this is a contradiction, for the right-hand side is uniformly bounded, and ketvnk
= et can be made as large as desired. thus  6 >0.
consideration of t < 0 similarly rules out the case  < 0, and so we must have
 = 0.

theorem 1. let a be classically positive, and suppose its j-antilinear part a is bounded.
then there is a positive-denite bounded j-symmetric symplectomorphism , and a j-real-
anti-self-adjoint j-linear closed (possibly unbounded) operator , such that

g(t) = 1et .

7

there is a j-orthogonal j-invariant projection-valued measure df () supported on [0,)
for some 0 > 0 such that

et =zr

etj df () .

proof. the idea will be to dene a positive complex structure ja relative to which g(t) is
orthogonal. the conclusions will follow almost directly from this. at a formal level, one
has

ja = 1z 



(  a)1d .

however, the sense in which this integral converges as    needs to be made precise.
even if a were known to be bounded, the existence of this integral would be a bit delicate.
in the present case, there are a number of technicalities, which arise because we need to
gradually establish enough properties of ja to show that it exists as a bounded operator.
once this is done, the remainder of the proof will be routine algebraic computations.

we begin by showing that ja exists (as a potentially unbounded operator) on the

dense domain d(a).

thr integral for ja converges strongly on d(a) in the sense of a cauchy principal
value. to see this, rst note that since 1 converges near innity as a cauchy principal
value, it is enough to show that

p z||0(cid:2)(  a)11(cid:3) vd

converges, where p indicates the principal value and v  d(a). the integrand can be
re-written:

(cid:0)(  a)1  1(cid:1) v = 1(  a)1av .

on the other hand, the hilleyoshidaphillips estimate kg(t)kop  m e|t| implies

k(  a)1kop  m (  )1

for suciently large  (and similarly for negative ). from this estimate, we have, for
v  d(a),

(cid:0)(  a)1  1(cid:1) v = 1(  a)1av

it is straightforward to verify that j 2

of order o(2) as   . this is integrable at innity, and so jav exists for v  d(a).
a = 1 in a suitable sense, namely on d(a2).
this is a singular-integral computation using the denition of ja. we rst re-write the
principal-value integral:

ja = 1z 

0

(cid:2)(  a)1 + (  a)1(cid:3) d

(understood strongly on d(a)). now we have

a = 2z 

0

j 2

dz 

0

d(cid:2)(  a)1 + (  a)1(cid:3)(cid:2)(  a)1 + (  a)1(cid:3)

(understood strongly on d(a2)). after some algebra, this can be re-written as

a = 2z 

0

j 2

dz 

0

d(cid:2)(2 + a2)1  (2  a2)1(cid:3) a2

2  2 .

8

while the existence of this as a riemann integral requires the cancellation of (2 +a2)1
against (2+a2)1 in order to compensate for the singularity in the denominator 22
at  = , we may break the integral into two if each is interpreted as a principal value:

j 2

a =2 p z 
 2 p z 

dz 
dz 

0

0

0

0

d(2 + a2)1 a2
2  2
d(2  a2)1 a2

2  2 .

(this will of course be compatible with denition of the riemann integral, since it simply
corresponds to a particular way of forming the limit which is the integral.) if we do this,
then we can use the distributional identity

z 

0

(2  2)1d = (2/2)()

on the rst integral, and its counterpart for integration over  on the second, to obtain

j 2
a = 1

immediately, strongly on d(a2).

in the next stage of the analysis, we shall want to consider the j-linear and antilinear
portions of ja. formally, these are given by (ja) = (1/2)(ja  jjaj). however, in
order to make sense of this, we must show that ja and jjaj have a common dense
domain.

we shall show that the j-invariant dense set d(a2) + jd(a2)  d(a); then (ja)
(here d(a2) = {v  h | v = a2w for some
are naturally dened on this domain.
w  h}.) it is clear that d(a2)  d(a); we must show that jd(a2)  d(a). so let
v = ja2w  jd(a2). then

v = a1(aj)a2w

= a1(ja  2ja)a2w
= a1(ja1  2jaa2)w ,

which is an element of d(a). the same sort of argument shows d(an) + jd(an) 
d(an1) for n  1.
now in fact (ja) exists as a bounded operator. to see this, we will show that the
j-antilinear part (cid:0)(  a)1(cid:1) of the resolvent is o(2) in operator norm. this will be

accomplished by estimating

(cid:0)(  a)1(cid:1) =z 

0

g(t)et dt .

(using the symmetry t 7 t, a 7 a, it is enough to consider the case of positive .)
in section 4 of paper i, we considered a quantity l(t) = 2g(t)jg(t) and showed

where

l(t) =z t

0

g(u)(2aj) du

g(u)q = g(u)qg(u) .

9

using this, we nd that for  suciently large

l(t)g(t)et dt
l(t)(  a)1 d
(g(t)(2aj)) (  a)1g(t)et dt .

g(t)et dt

dt

0

z 

0

g(t)et dt = (1/2)z 
= (1/2)z 
= (1/2)z 

0

0

this hilleyoshidaphillips estimates, and the boundedness of a, now imply this is
o(2) at innity in operator norm.

we next note that (, ja) is a positive-denite symmetric form on d(a).

we remark that the boundedness of (ja) implies that ja extends naturally to exist
on d(a) + jd(a), for we can dene jaj = j(ja)+  j(ja). however, we shall see
shortly that in fact ja is itself bounded.
(this
follows easily from the fact that a is a generator of symplectomorphisms and that it
is classically positive.) similarly, conjugating by j, we have (,jjaj) a positive-
denite symmetric form on jd(a) (or d(a)). thus (ja)+ also denes a positive-denite
symmetric form, and hence j(ja)+ is a j-symmetric operator dening a positive-denite
form (,j(ja)+) = (, (ja)+) on d(a). thus j(ja)+ has a canonical extension to
a positive self-adjoint operator on a dense domain in h. (we shall continue to denote this
operator by j(ja)+.)
we have

a = 1 in terms of the self-adjoint operators j(ja).

we now re-write the equation j 2

((ja)+ + (ja))2 = ((ja)+)2 + ((ja))2 + (ja)+(ja) + (ja)(ja)+ = 1 ,

and the j-linear and j-antilinear parts of this are

((ja)+)2 + ((ja))2 = 1

and

(ja)+(ja) + (ja)(ja)+ = 0 .

multiplying through by (j)2, we get
(j(ja)+)2  (j(ja))2 = 1 and (j(ja)+)(j(ja))  (j(ja))(j(ja)+) = 0 .
from the rst equation and the boundedness of j(ja), we see that j(ja)+ (and hence
ja) is bounded. according to the second, the operators j(ja)+, j(ja) commute.
thus, again using the rst equation, we may nd a j-symmetric, j-antilinear operator 
such that

j(ja) = sinh 2

and

 j(ja)+ = cosh 2 .

(the factor of two is for later convenience.) it will be useful to rewrite these. note that

(ja) = j sinh 2 = sinh(2j)

and

(ja)+ = j cosh 2 = j cosh(2j) ,

where the j-antilinearity of  has been used (note that (j)2 = +()2).

we now let

since

 = cosh   j sinh  = exp(j) .

(v, jw) = (v, jw) = (jv, w) ,

10

the operator j is a generator of symplectomorphisms and  is a symplectomorphism.
we also have

1j = ejjej

= jejej
= j (cosh(2)  j sinh(2))
= ja .

now we shall show that g(t)1 is j-orthogonal:

(g(t)1v, jg(t)1w) = (v, g(t)1jg(t)1w)

= (v, g(t)jag(t)1w)
= (v, ja1w)
= (v, jw) .

(here we have used the fact that, by construction, the operator ja is invariant under
conjugation by g(t).) since g(t)1 is j-orthogonal and a symplectomorphism, it is
j-linear. we may thus set

 = 1a .

4 application to quantum field theory

we now apply the structure theorems of the previous section to quantum eld theory.

theorem 2. in order that a classically positive operator a with bounded antilinear part
generate a one-parameter group of restricted symplectic motions, it is necessary and su-
cient that the operator  be a restricted symplectomorphism. in this case the corresponding
hamiltonian operator is bounded below.

proof. the j-antilinear part of g(t) is

j sinh et cosh  + cosh et(j sinh )

= j(cid:0)sinh et cosh   cosh et sinh (cid:1) .

multiplying on the left by j sech  and on the right by sech  (both bounded operators
with bounded inverses), we see that the antilinear part of g(t) is hilbertschmidt i

is, or equivalently if

is.

tanh et  et tanh 

tanh   et tanh et

the idea now will be to think of tanh  as a vector in the space of symmetric bounded
operators, and consider the action of et on this space by conjugation. however, this space
is not a hilbert space, and in order to take advantage of the spectral theory of operators
on hilbert space, it is more convenient to regard tanh  as a sort of unbounded form on
the hilbertschmidt operators.

11

let v be the space of hilbertschmidt j-antilinear, j-symmetric endomorphisms of
h. this space is naturally a complex hilbert space, with complex structure given by
l 7 jl and inner product

hhm, lii = tr(m l) + i tr(ljm ) .

conjugation by exp t is a strongly continuous unitary map on this space. we may apply
the usual spectral theory of one-parameter unitary groups on hilbert space to this.

in fact, we can work out the spectral resolution explicitly in terms of that for exp t.

for we have

etlet = z etjdf ()letj df ()
= z e(+)tjdf ()ldf ()
= z etj de()l

where we have dened de()l = r(,)|+= df ()ldf (). one can check that de is a
projection-valued measure on v , and the equation above provides the spectral resolution
of conjugation by et. note that since df () is supported for   0 > 0, the measure
de() is supported for   20 > 0.
(this may be counterintuitive, as one thinks of
the generator of a one-parameter group of conjugations as having eigenvalues which are
dierences of the eigenvalues of the generator of the original group. however, in the
present case there is a very curious interaction between the fact that the spectrum is
imaginary and the antilinearity of the elements of v . this is in some sense the central
point of the proof.)

the above analysis does not quite apply directly to tanh  or , since  may not be
hilbertschmidt. however, the operator  is bounded, and so can be regarded as a linear
functional on the space v0 of trace-class elements of v . the space v0 is dense in v and
invariant under conjugation by et, and so the spectral resolution derived above for this
conjugation can be applied, by duality, to , and similarly to tanh .

that g(t) be hilbertschmidt is thus equivalent to requiring

z[20,)(cid:0)etj  1(cid:1) de() tanh 

to be so. since de() resolves v into the orthogonal direct integral of hilbertschmidt
operators, the integral above, restricted to any compact interval of -values, must be
hilbertschmidt. this may be seen to be equivalent to the requirement tanh  be hilbert
schmidt by elementary arguments. and since  is j-symmetric, this is equivalent to 
being hilbertschmidt.

we now take up the boundedness-below. if  is hilbertschmidt, then exp j provides
a restricted symplectomorphism taking a to . the image of the restricted symplecto-
morphism is unitarily implementable, and the quantum hamiltonian induced by exp t is
(j)a

bz ab, which is bounded below.

this results also implies that the self-adjoint implementation of the hamiltonian is

essentially unique.

12

corollary 1. if a classically positive operator a with bounded antilinear part is self-
adjointly implementable in the representations determined by j1 and j2, then its imple-
mentations are unitarily equivalent (modulo an additive constant).

corollary 2. a classically positive operator a with bounded antilinear part xes a dis-
tinguished complex structure ja, relative to which a is ja-linear and ja-anti-self-adjoint.
the operator a is self-adjointly implementable in the representation determined by a sec-
ond complex structure j  if and only if ja  j  is hilbertschmidt.

5 connection with normal ordering

as is well-known, even the simplest linear quantum eld theories in minkowski space

contain divergent terms. for example, the vacuum energy in a region is (1/2)p ,

where  runs over all the independent modes. the standard prescription for dealing
with these divergences is normal ordering, that is, writing all creation operators before
annihilation operators, thus eliminating the innite c-number terms. of course, normal
ordering will not distinguish between two operators diering by a nite c-number, but
will reduce them to the same operator. for this reason, normal ordering operators may
lose certain important physical information, for example, casimir-type eects.

in this section, though, we are concerned with a more severe question: supposing that
one knows that a self-adjoint hamiltonian exists, can it necessarily be given by normal-
ordering the classical hamiltonian (modulo a nite c-number term)? we shall nd that
the answer may be no. in other words, there are at least in principle linear quantum eld
theories which require more than normal ordering to be successfully renormalized. this
points up the delicacy of the issues involved in analyzing the quantum hamiltonian.

while in elementary examples, there is no ambiguity in what is meant by normal
ordering an operator, in the present, very general, context, some care is needed to make
this precise. this will now be explained.

let a be a classically positive hamiltonian, and let  and  be as in the previous
section:  is a j-skew, j-linear, j-self-adjoint map and  is a j-antilinear, j-symmetric
bounded operator with  = ejaej. we put d = j. then, using the representation
by creation operators z  and destruction operators  as described in the previous paper,
z  under conjugation
the quantum hamiltonian corresponding to a is the image of d
by the bogoliubov transformation induced by exp j. notice that with this denition,
z , and in particular has zero as its
the hamiltonian has the same spectrum as d
minimum.

at a formal level, the normal ordering is accomplished in the usual way, and one nds

where the normal-ordered hamiltonian is

bh = bhnormal + e0

with

bhnormal = cz z  + b

z  + c ,

c = j cosh d sinh 

b = cosh d cosh  + sinh d sinh 
e0 = tr sinh d sinh 

13

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)
(9)

in matrix form.

the diculty in making the relations (6)(9) precise is not merely in the fact that it
is hard to analyze the individual quantities b, c, e0. one has to decide what sort of
properties are required of these in order to say that one has successfully renormalized the
hamiltonian by normal ordering. in the simplest case, one could require that e0 is nite,

and that bhnormal be well-dened by term-by-term action on (at least) a dense family

of polynomials. however, one could also imagine a more general situation, where the
domain consisted of functions (z) such that, while the actions of the individual terms
in (6) did not give elements in the hilbert space, there were nevertheless cancellations so
that the net result was indeed an element of the hilbert space. indeed, there are even
more extreme possibilities. one could envisage situations in which e0 = , but the
elements in the domain are chosen so that, with a proper limiting procedure, the quantity
bh|i is well-dened even though bhnormal|i is not separately!2 thus at some point one

must decide what sort of regularity the notion of normal ordering requires; otherwise,
saying that normal ordering suces to renormalize the hamiltonian becomes a statement
with no force. at present, we shall assume it requires e0 to be nite. this is very weak.

theorem 3. let a be classically positive with bounded antilinear part. the minimum of
the normal-ordered hamiltonian is

e0 =  tr sinh d sinh 

if this is nite. if it is nite, it is negative. if this is innite, normal ordering does not
suce to renormalize the hamiltonian.

proof. we have mentioned everything except the negativity. but sinh d sinh  is a
positive symmetric form.

since one can arrange for  to be hilbertschmidt but e0 divergent, this implies that
in principle at least that there are linear quantum eld theories for which self-adjoint
hamiltonians exist, but they cannot be realized by normal-ordered operators: some more
sophisticated renormalization is required. there would be no general reason for rejecting
such hamiltonians as unphysical, although in a particular system one might have physical
arguments that normal ordering should suce to regularize the theory.

for classically positive hamiltonians, niteness of the normal-ordered ground-state

energy implies existence of the classical hamiltonian as a self-adjoint operator:

theorem 4. let a be classically positive with bounded antilinear part, and suppose the
normal-ordered ground state energy e0 is nite. then the hamiltonian is a self-adjoint
operator.

proof. let vj be a j-orthonormal basis, and let d =r[0,) de(), where 0 > 0. then

we are given that

xj (cid:0)vj, sinh z[0,)

de() sinh vj(cid:1)

2just this sort of thing would occur if one dened bh|i by a sequence of formal operations which

amounted to conjugation by the bogoliubov transformation exp j .

14

converges. the sum and integration are of non-negative terms, so the convergence is
absolute. this quantity dominates tr sinh 0i sinh  (where i is the identity). since
0 > 0, this implies sinh  is hilbertschmidt, which implies  is.

in general, it is hard to work out  from the normal-ordered hamiltonian. in principle,

one can work out the ground-state energy exactly as (1/4) trr(cid:0)|a|  b(cid:1), where |a| =
a2; this expression does not require a knowledge of . however, this quantity is

usually too awkward to work with directly in applications.
it is useful to have some
approximate formulas in terms of b and c, which can be worked out directly from a and
j.

theorem 5. if the hamiltonian is classically positive with bounded antilinear part and
the normal-ordered ground-state energy is nite, it is bounded by

and also by

e0   tr cb1c
e0   trqc

t

c .

if a is classically positive with bounded antilinear part and either of the quantities on the
right is nite, then the hamiltonian is self-adjoint and can be renormalized by normal
ordering.
proof. we have b  cosh d cosh  as (densely-dened) symmetric forms. thus b1 
(cosh d cosh )1 as symmetric forms. thus

tr cb1c  tr j sinh d cosh (cosh d cosh )1 cosh d sinh j

= e0 .

we have

t

c

c = sinh d cosh2 d sinh 

= sinh d2 sinh  + (sinh d sinh )2 .

however, since the rst form is positive and symmetric we have

as forms, and so

t

qc
c  sinh d sinh 
e0  trqc

c .

t

6 quantum inequalities

in this section, i show how to adapt the previous arguments to a certain important family
of situations where (v, av) is a positive indenite form. i will begin by discussing the
class of operators to be considered and its signicance. then i shall give the results.

15

the proofs of the theorems in this section are fairly lengthy. this is ultimately bound
up with technical problems at the boundary of the spacetime region whose energy
momentum content is to be measured. a brief discussion of this is given at the end of this
section, after theorem 7, but some readers may want to look at this before the proofs of
theorems 6 and 7.

6.1 the sorts of results sought

ford (1978) was the rst to show that temporal averaging could bound some of the local
negative energies encountered in quantum eld theory. in the case of the kleingordon
eld on minkowski space, he and roman (1997) proved that

where

h|z 

 bt00(t, 0, 0, 0)b(t) dt|i/h|i  

3

322

c
(ct0)4 ,

b(t) =

t0/
t2 + t2
0

(10)

(11)

is a sampling function of area unity and characteristic scale  t0. following ford, lower
bounds on energy operators for relativistic quantum eld theories are known as quantum
inequalities.

in the past years, quantum inequalities of increasing generality have been established.

 for the massless eld in two-dimensional minkowski space, there is a broad class of
elegant results (flanagan 1997). however, the divergences of this theory are signi-
cantly softer than in four dimensions. it is especially problematic to draw conclusions
about the boundedness of four-dimensional energies from two-dimensional results.

 for the energy density measured by static observers in static spacetimes, pfenning
and ford (1997, 1998) established quantum inequalities for lorentzian sampling
functions, and fewster and teo (1999) for more general sampling functions.

 the results contained in the present papers were released (helfer 1999a,b).
 a general (applicable to a kleingordon eld in a globally hyperbolic spacetime)
quantum inequality for the energy density was given by fewster (2000). similar
results were established for the dirac eld in curved spacetime (fewster 2002) and
for the spin-one eld in curved spacetime (fewster and pfenning 2003).

 very little is known about bounds on the four-momentum density of the quantum

eld. there is one result, in minkowski space (helfer 1998).

 it was shown by fewster and roman (2003) that null energy inequalities do not
exist, that is, that averages of the component tablalb of the stressenergy operator
along a null geodesic with tangent la are unbounded below, even in minkowski space.

one would like to generalize these results to apply not just to the energy density, but to
other components of the stressenergy tensor. this is because classical matter elds satisfy
not only the weak energy condition (which requires the energy density to be positive)
but also the dominant energy condition (which requires the four-momentum density to

16

be future-pointing). one would like to know what bounds there are on violations of the
dominant energy condition.

i think that the approach used by fewster and co-workers can be extended to give such
results. i also believe that that approach gives a very useful hands-on understanding
of the quantum inequalities in terms of the geometry of spacetime as reected in the
ultraviolet hadamard asymptotics. on the other hand, the present paper gives a rather
dierent perspective.

the previous two sections can be interpreted as showing that classical positivity en-
forces boundedness-below of the quantum hamiltonian. this is very close to saying that
classically positive measures of energy (including classically positive averages of the stress
energy) should have quantum-inequality counterparts; the dierence lies in technicalities
associated with the nite extent in spacetime of the regions over which the averages
are taken. leaving aside these technicalities for the moment, then, we have a suggestive
argument for a very broad class of quantum inequalities which emphasizes the general
algebraic properties of the classical measures of energy rather than the ultraviolet asymp-
totics of the quantum eld theory. (the ultraviolet asymptotics do play an important if
brief role in showing that a is bounded.)

for generic spacetimes, there is no preferred vacuum state and no preferred associated
quantization. rather, one has a family of unitarily equivalent (modulo infrared issues)
hadamard quantizations. dierent choices of such quantization lead to dierent normal-
ordering prescriptions and normal-ordered hamiltonians which dier by c-numbers. this
is bound up with the well-known ambiguities in xing the c-number part of the stress
energy operator in generic spacetimes. thus, a specic numerical lower bound on the
hamiltonian is only meaningful given choices which resolve these ambiguities. given our
current lack of understanding of how to eect these resolutions, such numerical values
would be data of no clear signicance.

there are, however, two sorts of results which would be of immediate signicance. one
of these would be asymptotic formula for lower bounds, as the sampling function becomes
more and more localized. (for example, as t0  0 in (10).) in such cases, because the
energy densities diverge, the c-number ambiguities in the stressenergy become insigni-
cant. while i believe that such results can be derived using the techniques of this paper,
they require lengthy computations which are too far out of the main line of argument. i
shall give such results elsewhere.

the second sort of presently-useful result would be a general proof that temporally-
averaged hamiltonians are bounded below. this is a statement which is meaningful even
in the face of the c-number ambiguities, and it is this result which will be proved in the
remainder of this section.

in order to treat such very general cases, it is probably necessary to pass to compactly
supported sampling functions. (for otherwise, with no assumptions about the spacetime,
one has no control about how small data from initially spatially distant regions propagate
inwards and are amplied by the spacetime geometry.) i shall not use the stressenergy
localized to a world-line, but rather to a compact four-volume. probably one can obtain
parallel results for world-lines, but the proofs would be longer. for four-volumes, we can
appeal to very general results in distribution theory (cf. the proof of proposition 2, below).

17

6.2 structure of the hamiltonians; boundedness-below

let (m, gab) be an oriented, time-oriented spacetime, globally hyperbolic with compact
cauchy surfaces. (the restriction to compact cauchy surfaces is a technical device to
simplify the analysis and remove infrared ambiguities.
it is not physically signicant.
the analysis is all local, and the spatial dimensions can be arbitrarily large.) consider
the quantum theory of a real scalar eld governed by the equation

(aa + m2) = 0 ,
where m2  0. the associated classical stressenergy is

tab = ab  (1/2)gab(cc  m22) .

(12)

(13)

we shall say a smooth symmetric compactly-supported tensor eld f ab is future-directed
if it is at any point a sum of terms taub + uatb with ta, ua future-pointing. the content
of the classical dominant energy condition (which holds for this classical eld) is that

r f abtabdvol  0 for any future-directed f ab.

letting a be the generator corresponding to this hamiltonian, we have

(1/2)(, a) =z f abtabdvol .

(14)

the operator a is not in general classically positive. in the rst place, the test function
may be supported in an arbitrarily small volume, and so a may have a large kernel. a
more severe problem is that the smooth fall-o of the test function generally leads to
a spectrum including points arbitrarily close to zero. however, a good fraction of the
structure deduced for classically positive hamiltonians still applies.

it is appropriate to review what the correspondence between the rather general ap-

proach adopted so far in this paper and the specics of the present scalar eld are.

the space h consists of classical solutions to the eld equation whose restrictions to
any cauchy surface have sobolev regularity 1/2.
(this choice of regularity makes all
integrals for the symplectic form and the inner product converge as they should.) the
symplectic form is given by

(, ) =z

(d  d)

(15)

where  is any cauchy surface. it is independent of the surface chosen by virtue of the
eld equation.

it should be emphasized that, while our ultimate interest is in quantum elds, the
formulas given so far in this subsection are entirely classical. (thus a is an operator on
the classical space of solutions  a hamiltonian vector eld , not a quantum operator.)
the connection with quantum eld theory is made through the specication of a complex
structure j, or equivalently, a two-point function. let us review how this comes about.

as mentioned above, there is in general no canonical vacuum state. however, there
is a class of states which is preferred, the hadamard states, those whose highest-order
ultraviolet asymptotics agree with those of the fock representation in minkowski space.
any one of these can be used as a vacuum for the construction of the eld theory, by
following the usual mathematical pattern of the fock construction. to see this, note that

h0| (x) (y)|0i = h0| +(x) (y)|0i

(16)

18

in the usual construction. on the other hand, if one is given the two-point function, one
can take this equation as dening the positive- and negative-frequency projections of
the eld, and hence the annihilation and creation operators. (the term frequency is
used here only to bring out the correspondence with the usual fock construction. fre-
quency here is not the fourier transform with respect to any obvious time variable.)
representations constructed from dierent hadamard states will be unitarily equivalent.
thus specication of a hadamard state allows one to determine a mathematical struc-
ture analogous to the usual fock one, the key portion being a mathematical analog of
the decomposition into positive and negative frequencies, which allows the denition
of annihilation and creation operators. contrariwise, such a positive-/negative-frequency
decomposition of the eld operators would determine a fock-type quantization.

the decomposition into positive and negative frequencies is naturally encoded in a
complex structure j, setting j = i(+  ). thus the quantization is specied by the
complex structure j. in the case of hadamard states, it turns our that j can be expressed
as a pseudodierential operator (cf. section 6 of paper i).

proposition 2. let a be the generator associated to a smooth compactly-supported test
eld (not necessarily future-directed). then a, the j-antilinear part of a, is represented
on initial data by an operator with smooth kernel.
in particular, the operator a is
compact.

proof. we make use of the microlocal properties of the two-point functions, discovered
by radzikowski (1992) and junker (1995). a summary adequate for understanding this
proof is in the paper of brunetti et al. (1996). for the general theory of wave-front sets,
see hormander (1983).

the antilinear part of a is got by projecting its positive-to-negative and negative-to-
positive frequency parts using the two point function; it corresponds to the two-point
kernel

a(y, z) =z f ab(x)(cid:0)(xak(x, y))(xb k(x, z))

(1/2)gab(xck(x, y))(xc
+(1/2)gabk(x, y)k(x, z) dvol(z) .

k(x, z))

here k(x, y) is the twopoint function. the wavefront set of k(x, y) is

wf(k) = {(x, k; y, l) | (x, k)  (y, l) , k is future-pointing}.

here and in what follows, it is understood that (x, k), (y, l)  t m{0}; and (x, k)  (y, l)
i there is a null geodesic from x to y with covector k at x and l at y. thus

wf(k(x, y)k(x, z))  {(x, k, y, l, z, m) | (x, k)  (y, l) or (x, k)  (z, m)}

 {(x, k, y, l, z, m) | (x, k1)  (y, l) and (x, k2)  (z, m)

for some k1, k2 with k = k1 + k2} .
when this is integrated against f ab(x) to form a(y, z), the result has

wf (a(y, z))  {(y, l, z, m) | (x, 0, y, l, z, m)  wf(k(x, y)k(x, z)) for some x} ,

which is empty. since the two-point function has a smooth kernel, so does its restriction
to act on initial data.

19

proposition 3. let a be the generator associated to smooth compactly-supported future
directed test eld. then the spectrum of a lies on the imaginary axis.

proof. consider a = a+ + a as a perturbation of its j-linear part. the term a+ is
j-real anti-self-adjoint and so has purely imaginary spectrum. on the other hand, the
compactness of a means that any element of spec a  spec a+ must be an eigenvalue.
(to see this, suppose one has   speca  speca+ and a sequence vn of unit vectors
in the domain of a with (  a)vn  0. multiplying by (  a+)1 we have vn 
(  a+)1avn  0. since (  a+)1a is compact, this implies (  a+)1a
has an eigenvalue unity. however, this implies  is an eigenvalue of a.) however, then
the positivity of a implies, as in the proof of proposition 1, that any such eigenvalue is
imaginary.

proposition 4. let a be the generator associated to smooth compactly-supported future-
directed test eld. then for any t  r, the spectrum of g(t) = exp ta lies on the unit
circle.

proof. we consider g(t) as a perturbation of exp ta+; the latter is junitary and so has
spectrum on the unit circle. it follows from standard perturbation theory (dunford and
schwartz 1988, theorem viii.1.19) that g(t)exp ta+ is compact. applying the argument
of the previous proof, we see that any element of the spectrum of g(t) not already in the
spectrum of exp ta+ must be an eigenvalue; but then that g(t) be a symplectomorphism
implies that eigenvalue lies on the unit circle.

theorem 6. let a be the generator associated to smooth compactly-supported future-
directed test eld. then there is a (strong) projection-valued distribution de(l) which
provides a spectral resolution of a in the sense of fourier transforms:

z 
a =r ilde(l) strongly on d(a).



(l) de(l) =z 



g(t) (t) dt

strongly, for suitable test functions . as (l) approaches l in a suitable sense, we have

the distribution de(l) is locally a measure, and this measure is locally integrable except
possibly at zero; the quantity lde(l) is integrable at zero. (here and throughout, these
statements are to be understood strongly, that is, the operators applied to elements of h.)

proof. this proof is somewhat technical, and makes use of the theory of fourier hyper-
functions. this is the class of generalized functions f  dual to f = { |  ,  are both
smooth of exponential decay }. (here  denotes the fourier transform of .) the results
we use are contained in the papers of chung and kim (1995) and chung et al. (1994). the
topology on f is given by the family of seminorms kkk,h = supx,n |(n)(x)|ek|x|/(hnn!).
a sequence j  0 in f if for some k, h > 0 one has kjkk,h  0 as j  .
put  = il, where l is a real parameter (which may acquire a small imaginary part).
let [(il  a)1] denote the jump in (il  a)1 from above the real l-axis to below; this
jump is by denition a hyperfunction. (one denes its pairing with a test function by
integrating slightly above and slightly below the axis; cf. cerezo et al. 1975.) we shall
interpret this hyperfunction in the strong sense, that is, as applied to any vector in h.
all integrals of operators in what follows are also to be interpreted in the strong sense.

20

we now show that [(il  a)1] is not just a hyperfunction, but in fact a fourier
hyperfunction. this means that for any   f = { |  ,  are both smooth of exponential
decay }, the integralr 
[(il  a)1] (l) dl is dened and varies continuously with . we
have

z 



[(il  a)1] (l) dl = z 
= z 

0

g(t)et(+il)dt

(cid:2)(il +   a)1  (il    a)1(cid:3) (l) dl
(cid:20)z 
+z 0
z 

g(t)et(il)dt(cid:21) (l) dl

g(t)e|t|iltdt (l) dl





= z 
= z 
= z 





g(t)e|t| (t) dt

g(t) (t) dt ,

the limit   0 being understood. this is well-dened, since the class f is invariant under
fourier transform. to see that it depends continuously on , we note that if j is a
sequence tending to zero in f , then there exists h > 0 such that sup j(t) exp h|t| tends to
zero as j  . however, since kg(t)kop  m exp h|t|/2 (say  using the hilleyoshida
phillips estimate and the fact that the spectrum of a is purely imaginary), the integrals
tend to zero as j  .
some comments are in order at this point: (a) we have just shown that the jump
in the resolvent is the fourier transform of g(t). (b) the integral displayed above must
lie in the domain of a (since the class f is invariant under dierentiation). (c) these
results are independent of positivity properties of a.
in general, then, groups of type
zero (in the semigroup sense) have generators which can be analyzed in terms of fourier
hyperfunctions. these generalized functions admit a useful microlocalization.

a direct argument to establish positivity is probably possible, but partly for technical
reasons and partly for its future utility, i shall give another. every fourier hyperfunction
can be viewed as an initial datum for the heat equation. if the corresponding solution for
t > 0 is everywhere non-negative, then the hyperfunction is a measure. this result is due
to chung et al. (1995), and can be thought of as an extension of the bochnerschwartz
theorem. (in this context, the initial datum is called an aronszajn trace.)

the solution to the heat equation with initial value [(il  a)1] is
e(xl)2/(4t)[(il  a)1] dl

u (x, t) = (4t)1/2z 



= 21/2z 



g(s)eixsts2

ds .

for t > 0, this maps to the domain of a. we also note the identities

and

u (x, t)u (x, t) = (/4t)1/2u (x, t/2)

u (x, t) = 21/2z 



g(s)eixsts2

ds ,

21

where the overline indicates the complex conjugate. using these, we have

(cid:0)v, au (x, t)v(cid:1) = (4t/)1/2 (cid:0)v, au (x, 2t)u (x, 2t)v(cid:1)
= (4t/)1/2 (cid:0)u (x, 2t)v, au (x, 2t)v(cid:1) ,

and this is positive.

for any test function (l)  f, write (l) = (0)el2

we know at this point that for any v, the quantity (v, a[(il  a)1]v) is an exponen-
tially tempered measure. it is easily veried that the form (, a[(ila)1]) is hermitian,
so by polarization a[(il a)1] is an operator-valued exponentially tempered measure (in
the strong sense). if we could divide this by il, we could conclude that [(il  a)1] is a
measure. however, this is not obviously possible.
). then
((l)  (0)el2
) is l times a smooth function. using this decomposition, it is easy to see
that [(il  a)1] extends to a linear form on those continuous functions of exponential
decay which are c1 at the origin. in particular, the fourier hyperfunction [(il  a)1] is
a distribution. since l[(il  a)1] is a measure, we must have [(il  a)1] = (l) + 
for some  and some measure . (we are following the convention where distributions
are represented by generalized functions under the integral sign, and so the measure
is represented as  or dl. this is only a symbolic representation, and is not meant
to assert any regularity of the measure with respect to lebesgue measure. the prime is
present so as to have the formal correspondence d = dl, but we we are not interested
in trying to construct  or giving  meaning oas a derivative. we should more carefully
absorb the dls into [(il  a)1] and (l) and write simply d(l).) we caution that dl
is known to be locally nite only on r  {0}.

+ ((l)  (0)el2

the coecient  must vanish. to see this, note that we have (strongly)

a0z 



 =  lim

[(il  a)1]lel2/(2a2)dl

and hence

a0z 
a = a lim
a0z 

=  lim
= 0 .





[(il  a)1]lel2/(2a2)dl
i[(il  a)1]l2el2/(2a2)dl

passage from the rst to the second line is justied by use of the fourier transform for
[(il  a)1], or by the identity a(il  a)1 = 1 + il(il  a)1; passage from the second
to the last by the fact that l[(il a)1] is a measure. now let v  h and let w = v. it is
easy to see that as a distribution in spacetime, the quantity w vanishes on m  supp f ab.
on the other hand, since aw = 0, the local positivity of the form tabf ab implies that w
vanishes on the interior of supp f ab. (to see this, note that we may replace [(il  a)1]l
in the integrand with [(i a)1](ia), which will annihilate anything supported outside of
the support of f ab.) thus if w were known to be smooth, we would have w = 0. however,
it is easy to check that for any u  h we have (u, w) = (u, v). by the arguments
just given, this vanishes for smooth u; since the smooth us are dense in h, it vanishes
always and w = 0. hence  = 0.

22

we shall now write de(l) = [(il  a)1]dl. it is a projection-valued distribution which
is locally a projection-valued measure. to see that it is projection-valued, note that for
any test function (l) we have

(cid:18)z 



[(il  a)1] (l) dl(cid:19)2



= z 
= z 
= z 





g(t)g(s) (t) (s) dt ds

g(u) (u  s) (s)du ds
[(il  a)1] (l)2 dl .

to establish the compatibility of the decompositions with the symplectic structure,

notice that

(z (l)de(l)v,z (k)de(k)w) = (v,z (l)de(l)z (k)de(k)w)

= (v,z (l)(l)de(l)w) .

for a subspace hs =rs de(l)h to be real, the set s must be symmetric (up to terms of
de-measure zero). for symmetric sets, the equation above shows that hs  hs  = {0}
if s  s = . thus the spectral decomposition by de respects the symplectic structure.
that  must be strongly non-degenerate on each hs follows.
to establish a =r ilde(l) strongly on d(a), we consider

z 



[(il  a)1](l) dl =z 



g(t) (t) dt .

take, for instance, the function  = l expl2/2 and v  d(a). then

 = (2)1/2 d

dt

et2/(2) du .

substituting this into the previously displayed equation and integrating by parts, we get

z 



[(il  a)1]el2/2 dlv = (2)1/2z 



ag(t)et2/(2) dt .

taking   0 gives the required result.

it is natural to wonder about the integrability of de(l) at innity. this is a delicate
issue, on account of the non-scalar nature of the measure. i believe it is possible to get
fairly general results, but i shall not attempt these here. we saw above that we can get
useful specic results by exploiting the fourier transform relation

z 



[(il  a)1](l) dl =z 



g(t) (t) dt

(17)

for specic suitable functions (l).
in particular, if  is a constant (or exponential of
pure frequency), then  is a delta-function and the above equation denes the left-hand

23

side strongly. similarly, for (l) = leikl the fourier transform exists as the derivative
of a delta-function, and the equation denes the left-hand side strongly on d(a). thus

the class of s for which r[(il  a)1](l) dl exists strongly may be extend to include

(for example) those which are sums of constants plus continuous compactly supported
functions; and the integral may be dened strongly on d(a) for sums of linear functions
plus continuous compactly supported functions.

the delicate issues involved in developing a very general theory of this have to do with
clarifying precisely the set of admissible s and its topology. however, the observations
we have made will be enough for this paper.

while we are not guaranteed the sort of canonical form we had for classically positive

operators, we may still draw some conclusions by considering h as a limit of spaces.

proposition 5. let a be the generator associated to smooth compactly-supported future
directed test eld. then the associated normally-ordered hamiltonian operator is bounded
below if a is trace-class; in this case, there is a bound

e0  trqc

t

c .

proof. in order to make use of the results of previous sections on classically positive
hamiltonians, we shall introduce a modied family of operators a which are classically
positive and tend to a as   0.
let b(l) be a continuous bump function, supported on [1, 1], identically unity in a
neighborhood of the origin, and symmetric. let a = rr il(1  b(l/)) de(l). we may
regard a either as an operator on h, or, when convenient, on the subspace h()rr(1 
b(l/)) de(l)h. the discussion of the compatibility between de(l) and  at the end of the
last proof shows that  restricts to be non-degenerate on h(), and then a is classically
positive on (h(), ). we have av  av as   0 for v  d(a), since lde(l)v is a measure
(and the mass of {0}, that is, the coecient  in the previous proof, is zero).
now let |i be any hadamard state of norm unity. this means that in the holomorphic
representation (z) is a polynomial whose coecients are represented by smooth elds
on spacetime; in particular, these coecients lie in (tensor products of) d(a). thus we
may compute

h|bh|i = lim

0h|bh|i ,

where bh is the hamiltonian dened from a by normal ordering. (brunetti et al. 1996
showed that bh may be dened by normal ordering.) but we know a lower bound of bh
is  tr |(a)|. now in fact the lower bounds are monotonically decreasing with . this
follows from the fact that for any xed 0 > 0, a xed  can be found which simultaneously
provides a similarity of all a with  > 0 to generators of orthogonal groups. it follows
that

0

inf bh  lim

similarly, it follows from the formula for c

inf bh ,
where inf bh denotes the inmum of the spectrum.
t
 c is a family of
symmetric positive forms, which are (as forms) increasing as   0. but as we know that
c  c strongly, we have
 c  trqc

c in theorem 5 that c

t

c .

trqc

t

lim
0

t

24

we are now in a position to establish the existence of a very large class of quantum

inequalities.

theorem 7. let a be the generator associated to smooth compactly-supported future
directed test eld. then the associated quantum hamiltonian is bounded below.

proof. it only remains to note that since a has a smooth kernel, it is trace-class. (see
e.g. treves 1980.)

the argument for this result has been very technical, and i wish to comment here on

why this is.

first, it must be emphasized that because in general the operators we are dealing with
are not self-adjoint (nor unitary), merely having some control over their spectrum tells us
very little. for example, suppose we have an operator with a discrete set of eigenvalues:

xj

j ej ,

(18)

where the ejs are projections. if the operator is self-adjoint, then the ej s are orthogonal
projections, and in particular, uniformly bounded as operators. however, in the more
general case, the ejs may have diverging bounds. (that is, we may be able to nd a unit
vector vj so that kejvjk  .) thus it is quite possible to have j  0 but still have
the sum above represent an unbounded operator, or to have the bounds of j ej not tend
to zero.

just these sorts of concerns are present in the regime l  0 for the operator a. this
can be understood by considering its interpretation in spacetime, as follows. since l
is the fourier transform variable to t, we may expect that the behavior of a near the
spectral parameter l = 0 is related to the t   asymptotics of g(t). in spacetime,
this corresponds to owing along the hamiltonian vector eld determined byr f abtabdvol
for very long times. now, if we start with some general solution  and ow along this
vector eld, whatever oscillations  has within the region f ab 6= 0 will tend to pile up on
the future and past boundaries of that region. thus as t  , the quantity g(t) will
be approximately some average value in the interior of f ab 6= 0, but quite scrunched up
near the boundary. it is very possible that this results in de(l) not being integrable at
l = 0.

a second diculty is that we do not have very good control over the quantization of a,
compared to that for classically positive operators. we know, from the work of brunetti
et al., that a is self-adjointly implementable by normal ordering, but we do not have the
sorts of explicit control over its lower bound that we had in the previous section. this is
related to the rst diculty, in that what prevents us from having this control is the fact
that the operator  may not be bounded, which is again due to the l  0 behavior of a.
to get around this lack of control of the quantization, we approximated the operator
a by operators a. this approximation, though, was rather weak, necessitating some
further, indirect steps.

from a physical point of view, the dierences between a and the limit of the as, and

0, which one would hope are unimportant. after all, the point of having f ab approach
zero smoothly at the boundaries was precisely to try to minimize edge eects. however,

bh and the bhs, are measures of the importance of eects the boundary of the region f ab 6=
at least the present argument does not show, for example, that lim0 inf bh = inf bh.

25

7 summary and conclusions

these papers were motivated by the desire to understand some surprising and at least
apparently pathological results for quantum elds in curved spacetime. the worst of
these is that, in generic circumstances, the hamiltonians are unbounded below. this is
absolutely counter to ones expectations. if in fact these eld theories do describe the real
world, then one must explain why these pervasive arbitrarily negative energies do not lead
to instabilities.

as emphasized in the introduction to paper i, the present analysis is only a step to
understanding these properties. we have aimed here to get a clear statement of what the
mathematical structure of the theory actually is. we have seen that the assumption that
the classical energy function of a hamiltonian system is strictly positive provides a very
strong restriction on its structure, somewhat analogous to the compactness of the energy
surfaces in the nite-dimensional case. this gives one good mathematical control, and
one can say under what conditions a self-adjoint quantum hamiltonian exists. we have
seen that there is an intimate connection between self-adjointness (or, at the level of nite
evolutions, unitarity), and boundedness below. all self-adjoint quantizations are unitarily
equivalent (modulo additive constants), and all are bounded below.

these positive mathematical results throw the pathological features into stronger re-
lief. in generic circumstances, the hamiltonians for temporal evolution of quantum eld
theories are neither
self-adjoint nor bounded below. typically, it is only temporally-
averaged energy operators which are bounded below (and are self-adjoint): this is the
force of the quantum inequalities, proved in the previous section.

the resolution of the pathologies will require physical input. i have shown earlier that,
at least in many circumstances, there are limits from quantum measurement theory on
the detection of negative energy densities (helfer 1998). however, this is at present far
from an explanation of why the predictedly generic arbitrarily negative energy densities
seem to have no role in the world.

it is a pleasure to thank members of the university of missouri
acknowledgments
columbia mathematics department, especially peter casazza, nigel kalton, yuri la-
tushkin and stephen montgomerysmith, for helpful conversations.

references

[1] brunetti r., fredenhagen, k. and kohler, m.: commun. math. phys. 180, 633 (1996).

[2] cerezo, a., chazarain, j. and piriou, a.: introduction aux hyperfonctions, in hy-
perfunctions and theoretical physics, ed. p. pham, lecture notes in mathematics 449
(berlin et al.: springer), 1975.

[3] cherno, p. and marsden, j.: properties of innite dimensional hamiltonian systems,

lecture notes in mathematics 425 (berlin: springer 1974).

[4] chung, jaeyoung; chung, soonyeong and kim, dohan: nagoya math. j. 140, 139

149 (1995).

[5] chung, soonyeong and kim, dohan: pub. rims, kyoto univ. 31, 829845 (1995).

26

[6] dunford, n. and schwartz, j. t.: linear operators, part i. (new york et al: wiley

1988).

[7] fewster, c. j.: class. quant. grav. 17, 18971911 (2000).

[8] fewster, c. j.: commun. math. phys. 225, 331359 (2002)

[9] fewster, c. j. and pfenning, m. j.: gr-qc/0303106 (2003).

[10] fewster, c. j. and roman, t. a.: phys. rev. d67, 044003 (2003).

[11] fewster, c. j. and teo, e.: phys. rev. d59, 104016 (1999).

[12] flanagan, e. e.: phys. rev. d56, 4922 (1997).

[13] ford, l. h.: proc. r. soc. lond. a364, 227 (1978).

[14] ford, l. h. and roman, t. a.: phys. rev. d55, 2082 (1997).

[15] hawking, s. w.: nature 248, 30 (1974).

[16] hawking, s. w.: communs. math. phys. 43, 199 (1975)

[17] helfer, a. d.: class. quant. grav. 13, l129l134 (1996).

[18] helfer, a. d.: class. quant. grav. 15, 116983 (1998).

[19] helfer, a. d.: the hamiltonians of linear quantum elds. i: existence theory,

gr-qc/9908011 (1999a).

[20] helfer, a. d.: the hamiltonians of linear quantum elds. ii: classically positive

hamiltonians, gr-qc/9908012 (1999b).

[21] helfer, a. d.: rep. progr. phys. 66, 9431008 (2003).

[22] honegger, r. and rieckers, a.: j. math. phys. 37, 42924309 (1996).

[23] hormander, l.: the analysis of linear partial dierential operators i. (berlin:

springer 1983).

[24] junker, w.: adiabatic vacua and hadamard states for scalar elds on curved space-

times. ph. d. thesis, university of hamburg (1995).

[25] pfenning, m. j. and ford, l. h.: phys. rev. d55, 4813 (1997).

[26] pfenning, m. j. and ford, l. h.: phys. rev. d57, 3489 (1998).

[27] radzikowski, m. j.: the hadamard condition and kays conjecture in (axiomatic)

quantum eld theory on curved spacetime. ph. d. thesis, princeton (1992).

[28] treves, f.: introduction to pseudodierential and fourier integral operators (two

volumes). new york: plenum 1980.

27

