hawking radiation on a falling lattice

ted jacobsona,b and david mattinglya

adepartment of physics, university of maryland, college park, md 20742-4111, usa

binstitute for theoretical physics, ucsb, santa barbara, ca 93106

9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
3
1

 

 
 

1
v
9
9
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

scalar eld theory on a lattice falling freely into a 1+1 di-
mensional black hole is studied using both wkb and numer-
ical approaches. the outgoing modes are shown to arise from
incoming modes by a process analogous to a bloch oscillation,
with an admixture of negative frequency modes corresponding
to the hawking radiation. numerical calculations show that
the hawking eect is reproduced to within 0.5% on a lattice
whose proper spacing where the wavepacket turns around at
the horizon is  0.08 in units where the surface gravity is 1.

i. introduction

if nothing can emerge from a black hole then where
does the hawking radiation come from? relativistic eld
theory tells us that it comes from a trans-planckian reser-
voir of outgoing modes at the horizon [1]. the existence
of such a trans-planckian reservoir is doubtful on general
physical grounds.
it is the cause of the divergences in
quantum eld theory which are expected to be removed
in a quantum theory of gravity, and in particular it would
seem to imply an innite black hole entropy unless can-
celed by an innite negative bare entropy.

string theory has produced an account of the hawk-
ing radiation and black hole entropy which requires no
trans-planckian reservoir, however in that picture instead
of a black hole one has a stringy object in at spacetime
that arises from a black hole as the string coupling con-
stant tends to zero [2]. thus gravitational redshift plays
no role in the string calculations and nothing is learned
about the origin of the outgoing modes in a black hole
spacetime.1 if we could follow the theory as the string
coupling becomes strong we would presumably learn how
it is that string theory produces the outgoing black hole
modes.

absent a quantum gravity description of the hawking
process, unruh invented a uid analog of a black hole [3]
in which an inhomogeneous ow exceeds the long wave-
length speed of sound creating a sonic horizon (see also

[4,5]). quantizing the sound eld unruh argued that the
horizon would radiate thermal phonons, in analogy with
the hawking eect, at a temperature given by h/2 times
the gradient of the ow velocity at the horizon. since
the sound eld has an atomic cuto, and the physics of
the uid is completely understood in principle, the uid
model may provide a source of insight into the hawking
process.

the atomic cuto produces dispersion of sound waves
leading to subsonic propagation at high frequencies. it
turns out that this dispersion is all that is needed to ob-
viate the need for a trans-bohrian reservoir. in the lin-
earized theory, an outgoing short wavelength mode can
be dragged in by the uid ow and redshifted enough
so that its increased group velocity overcomes the ow
and it escapes to innity. investigations of a number of
linear eld theory models [68,10,11] and lattice models
[12] incorporating such high frequency dispersion have
demonstrated this mechanism of mode conversion and
have shown that the hawking radiation is recovered.2
the dispersion in these models is not locally lorentz-
invariant since a frame is picked out in which to specify
which frequencies are high. in the uid model this is
the local rest frame of the uid. a real black hole also
denes a preferred frame but it does so in a non-local
way. perhaps quantum gravity produces a dispersion ef-
fect related to this non-local notion of a preferred frame,
or perhaps microphysics is just not locally lorentz in-
variant. in any case, it seems worthwhile to understand
the mechanism of the outgoing modes and hawking radi-
ation in these models for the hints it may provide about
a correct quantum gravity account.

in [12] a falling lattice model was introduced to ad-
dress the stationarity puzzle [17,8]: how can a low fre-
quency outgoing mode arise from a high frequency ingo-
ing mode when it propagates only in a stationary back-
ground spacetime and hence has a conserved killing fre-
quency? in the continuum based dispersive models there
is no satisfactory resolution of this puzzle. as the outgo-
ing modes are traced backwards in time their incoming
progenitors are squeezed into the short distance regime

jacobson@physics.umd.edu
davemm@physics.umd.edu
1the fact that redshifting plays no role in producing the
stringy hawking radiation is presumably tied to the fact that
the string calculations apply in the near-extremal limit that
the surface gravity tends to zero.

2 dispersion can also produce superluminal propagation,
which allows outgoing modes to emerge from behind the hori-
zon. the superluminal case does not seem very healthy from a
fundamental point of view, though it is surely relevant in some
condensed matter analogues of black hole horizons [1315] and
is capable of producing the usual hawking spectrum [16].

1

of the model which is not physically sensible. this is in-
evitable since, if the preferred frame is at rest at innity,
no would-be outgoing modes can be dragged in with the
ow.

a lattice provides a simple model for imposing a phys-
ically sensible short distance cuto.
it might seem at
rst that the most natural choice would be to preserve
the time translation symmetry of the spacetime with a
static lattice whose points follow accelerated worldlines.
on a static lattice, however, the killing frequency is con-
served, so outgoing modes arise from ingoing modes with
the same frequency, and there is no hawking radiation.
the in-vacuum therefore evolves to a singular state at the
horizon. if the lattice points are instead freely falling, a
discrete remnant of time translation symmetry can still
be preserved. on such a lattice there is still a frequency
conservation law, and the unsatisfactory resolution of the
stationarity puzzle is that the lattice spacing in this case
goes to zero at innity (if the lattice points are asymp-
totically at rest) [12].

if we insist that the lattice spacing asymptotically ap-
proaches a xed constant and that the lattice points are
at rest at innity, we nd a fascinating resolution of the
stationarity puzzle [12]: the lattice cannot have even a
discrete time translation symmetry, since there is a grad-
ual spreading of the lattice points as they fall toward the
horizon. the timescale of this spreading is of order 1/
where  is the surface gravity. this time dependence of
the lattice is invisible to long wavelength modes which
sense only the stationary background metric of the black
hole, but it is quite apparent to modes with wavelengths
of order the lattice spacing. on such a lattice the long
wavelength outgoing modes come from short wavelength
ingoing modes which start out with a high (lattice scale)
killing frequency which is exponentially redshifted as the
wavepacket propagates to the horizon and turns around.
this behavior of wavepackets in the (time-dependent)
falling lattice model was determined in [12] with the help
of the wkb approximation in which the frequency is
used as a hamiltonian to solve for the wavepacket trajec-
tory. it was also argued that, since the time dependence
of the lattice is adiabatic for those modes with wave-
length short enough to know they are on a lattice, these
modes will remain unexcited on their way to the horizon
and the ground state condition for the hawking eect
will be met. however, since the wavelength is of order
the lattice spacing and the wavepacket can vary wildly
on the lattice near the horizon, it is not obvious that the
wkb approximation is reliable nor that the adiabatic
argument really applies.

the primary motivation for the work reported here
was to check the wkb and adiabatic assumptions by
carrying out the exact calculation numerically using the
lattice wave equation. we found that indeed the eld be-
haves this way, and the hawking radiation is recovered
to within half a percent for a lattice spacing  = 0.002/
which corresponds to a proper spacing  0.8/ where the
wavepacket turns around at the horizon. we also stud-

2

ied the deviations from the hawking eect that arise as
 is increased, and our simulations reveal an interest-
ing picture of how the wavepackets turn around at the
horizon.

the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. in
section ii the falling lattice model is set up, in section
iii some results of the wkb method are shown, illustrat-
ing the frequency shift and the mode conversion at the
horizon, and the role of the negative frequency branch is
explained. in section iv the results of the full numer-
ical evolution are presented, and section v contains a
discussion or the results and directions for further work.
the appendix describes the nite dierencing of the time
derivates used in the numerical calculations.

we use units with h = c =  = 1, where  is the

surface gravity.

ii. falling lattice model

in this section we set up the eld theory on a lattice

falling into a black hole in two spacetime dimensions.

a. the black hole spacetime

we assume the spacetime metric is static, so [18] co-
ordinates can be chosen (at least locally) such that the
line element takes the form

ds2 = dt2 (cid:0)dx  v(x)dt(cid:1)2

.

(2.1)

in these coordinates the killing vector is given by

 = t,

with squared norm

2 = 1  v2(x).

for v(x) we choose

v(x) = 

vmax

cosh(x)

,

(2.2)

(2.3)

(2.4)

where vmax and  are positive constants. as |x| 
+, v(x) vanishes, so the line element becomes that of
minkowski spacetime. provided vmax > 1 there is an er-
goregion centered on x = 0 in which the killing vector
is spacelike, and the boundaries of this region are black
and white hole horizons at

(2.5)

(2.6)

the surface gravity of the horizons is given by

xh = 1 cosh1(vmax).
 = v(xh ) = p1  v2

max.

the surface gravity sets the length scale for our space-
time, and we will keep it xed. hence it will be useful to
employ units for which  = 1.

range from 0.002 to 0.128. to give a feeling for the lattice
we plot in fig. 1 the (t, x) coordinates of lattice point
worldlines at intervals of 50 lattice points.

30

20

10

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

fig. 1. every 50th lattice point, t vs. x, for the case
 = 0.004 and vmax = 2.
in the black region of the plot
the points are too close to resolve. the horizon is at x  0.6.
since dx = a(z, t)dz at constant t, the separation x
of the lattice points in fig. 1 gives a direct representation
of the scale factor. the proper lattice spacing is given by
a(z, t) which, according to (2.12), grows approximately
linearly with time at the horizon.

note that there is a region where the lattice spacing
becomes very small. this happens because we chose the
spacing to be uniform at t = 0.
if the points did not
bunch up outside the black hole before t = 0, they could
not wind up equally spaced at t = 0, since they are all
on unit energy free-fall trajectories. (the line element is
symmetric under (t, x)  (t,x), so the points bunch
up also outside the white hole horizon after t = 0.)
to get a better idea of how sparse the lattice is near
the horizon at the turning point of a typical wavepacket,
we plot in fig. 2 the velocity function v (2.4) for every
lattice point near the horizon at time t = 27, for the
case vmax = 2 and  = 0.004.
in this case there
are only 6 points in the region between v(x) = 0.5 and
the horizon, and the proper spacing at the horizon is

 2t  0.15/.

we now introduce a freely falling gaussian coordi-
nate z which will be discretized to dene a falling lattice.
the worldlines with dx = v(x)dt are geodesics of the
metric (2.1) with proper time t, at rest as |x|  ,
and they are orthogonal to the surfaces of constant
t. on these curves the quantity t  r dx/v is con-
w (z(x, t)) = tr dx/v for some function w . we choose
w (z) = r z dx/v = sinh(z)/vmax, hence

stant, so if z is constant on these curves we must have

this function so that z = x at t = 0, which implies that

sinh(z) = sinh(x) + vmaxt.

(2.7)

in terms of z, the line element (2.1) takes the form

ds2 = dt2  a2(z, t) dz2,

(2.8)

with

a(z, t) =

cosh(z)

p1 + (sinh(z)  vmaxt)2

.

(2.9)

we call a(z, t) the scale factor, even though it depends
on z as well as t. it can also be expressed as

a(z, t) =

v(x(z, t))

v(z)

.

(2.10)

in (t, z) coordinates the killing vector (2.2) is given by

 = t  v(z)z = t 

v(x(z, t))

a(z, t)

z.

(2.11)

the scale factor is unity at t = 0, and outside the black
hole it grows towards the future. it is important to know
how rapidly the scale factor is changing in time, since in
the lattice theory that time dependence is not merely a
coordinate eect and can therefore excite the quantum
eld. at the horizon the scale factor takes the value

a(zh , t) =q1 + 2t + 2t2/(1  v2

max),

(2.12)

so a(zh , t)  t for t >
change ta/a is of order . in general, we have

 1. thus the fractional rate of

ta/a =

vmax sinh(x)

cosh2(x)

(2.13)

is  (at the horizon) if vmax  2 and v2
if vmax  2. thus |ta/a| <

whose maximum outside the horizon (cosh(x) > vmax)
max  1
 o() everywhere outside
the horizon as long as vmax > 1 is not too close to unity.

max/2pv2

b. the lattice

the lattice is dened by discretizing the z coordinate
with spacing z = . that is, we have only the discrete
values zm = m. we will consider values of  which

3

-2

-1

1

2

3

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-0.8

-1

-1.2

-1.4

fig. 2. v(x) for every lattice point at t = 27, for the case

vmax = 2 and  = 0.004.

c. the scalar eld

we consider a massless, minimally coupled scalar eld

on the lattice. in the continuum the action would be

scont =

1

2z d2xgg 
=z dt dz (cid:18)(a(z, t)(t)2 

1

a(z, t)

(z)2(cid:19) . (2.14)

where we substituted the metric (2.8) in the second line.
on the lattice we adopt the same action except that the
partial derivative z is replaced by the nite dierence
dm := (m+1  m)/ and am(t) is replaced by its
average over the relevant lattice sites:
am+1(t) + am(t)(cid:19)

(cid:18)am(t)(tm(t))2 

2(dm(t))2

2z dtxm

s =

1

(2.15)

varying the action (2.15) gives the equation of motion
for m(t),

t(am(t)tm(t))  d(cid:18) 2dm1(t)

am+1(t) + am(t)(cid:19) = 0. (2.16)

there is a conserved (not positive denite) inner product
between complex solutions:

(, ) = ixm

am(t)(

m(t)tm(t)  m(t)t

m(t)).

(2.17)

in two dimensions the continuum action (2.14) is con-
formally invariant, and all metrics are conformally at,
hence there is no wave scattering. the discretization
breaks this conformal invariance, however there is still
essentially no scattering on the lattice providing the lat-
tice spacing is much smaller than the radius of curvature.
the reason is that modes with wavelength long compared

to the lattice spacing cannot tell they are not in the con-
tinuum, while modes with wavelength comparable to the
lattice spacing cannot tell that the spacetime is curved.
thus, when we compute the hawking occupation num-
bers, there is no greybody factor.

d. quantization and the hawking eect

the eld is quantized as a collection of self-adjoint op-
erators m(t) satisfying the equation of motion (2.16)
and canonical commutation relations. for each complex
solution to the equations of motion we dene the oper-
ator a(f ) = (f, ) using the inner product (2.17). the
commutation relations are equivalent to the relations

[a(f ), a(g)] = (f, g)

(2.18)

for all f and g.

for a positive norm solution p, a(p) acts like a lowering
operator, while for a negative norm solution n, the con-
jugate n has positive norm, so a(n) = a(n) acts like
a raising operator. the hilbert space of ingoing modes
is just the fock space built from solutions with positive
frequency with respect to t (hence positive norm), and
similarly for the outgoing hilbert space. we assume the
boundary condition that the ingoing positive frequency
eld modes are all in their ground state,

a(pin)|0i = 0.

(2.19)

the occupation number h0|a(p)a(p)|0i of an outgo-
ing normalized positive frequency wavepacket p in the
in-vacuum |0i is is just minus the norm of the negative
frequency part of the ingoing wavepacket that gives rise
to p. to see this, suppose the ingoing wavepacket q+ +q
evolves to p according to the eld equation (2.16), where
q+ has positive frequency and q has negative frequency.
then a(p) = a(q+) + a(q) = a(q+)  a(q

), hence

h0|a(p)a(p)|0i = (q, q),

(2.20)

where we used the in-vacuum condition (2.19) and the
commutation relations (2.18). if p is not normalized then
to obtain the occupation number we must divide by (p, p).
hawkings result [19] in standard eld theory yields, for a

wavepacket p =r d c exp(i(k)t + ikz), the thermal

occupation number

nhawking =z d

|c|2
e/th  1

,

(2.21)

where th = /2 is the hawking temperature.

iii. wkb analysis

the motion of wavepackets in the falling lattice model
can be studied using the wkb approximation [12]. this

4

amounts to using hamiltons equations for the position
z and momentum k with a hamiltonian determined by
the dispersion relation

h(z, k, t) =  = 

2/

a(z, t)

sin(k/2)

(3.1)

which is obtained by inserting a mode of the form
exp(it + ikz) into the eld equation and keeping only
the terms with the highest derivatives or nite dierences
of the eld [20]. a plot of this dispersion relation is shown
in fig. 3 for a(z, t) = 1. wavevectors diering by 2/
are equivalent, so only the range (/, /) (the bril-
louin zone) is plotted.

2

1

-3

-2

-1

1

2

3

-1

-2

fig. 3. dispersion relation  = 2 sin(k/2) plotted vs.

k.

the frequency  is not conserved, even when k  1,
simply because it is not the killing frequency. using
(2.11) we see that in the continuum the killing frequency
would be given by

k =  +

v(x(z, t))

a(z, t)

k,

(3.2)

with which the dispersion relation can be expressed as

a(z, t)k  v(x)k = (2/) sin(k/2).

(3.3)

note however that this relation is only valid when k
is not too large, otherwise the fact that the killing fre-
quency involves a partial derivative in a direction that is
not along a lattice point worldline renders the relation
meaningless.

it was shown in [12] that the wkb trajectory of an in-
going positive frequency wavepacket bounces o the hori-
zon and comes back out provided the ingoing wavevec-
tor is greater in magnitude than some critical value |kc|.
(this critical value depends on the time and place from
which the packet is launched.) the wavevector evolves
from negative values to positive values by decreasing un-
til it is less than /, at which point the group velocity
(in the free fall frame) changes sign and the wavevector is
equivalent to +/. from there it continues to decrease,
winding up small and positive. this reversal of group
velocity by a monotonic change of the wavevector on a

lattice is analogous to the bloch oscillation of an electron
in a crystal acted on by a uniform electric eld.

thus the interval (/,|kc|) is mapped onto the in-
terval (0, /). the map is onto since every outgoing
wavevector arises from some ingoing wavevector. this
dynamical stretching of the k-space interval of length
/  |kc| to one of length / is not problematic in a
particle phase ow, but if we think about the wavepack-
ets that are being approximated by this wkb analysis it
is disturbing since there really are more outgoing modes
than ingoing modes which produced them. it seems the
wave evolution is somehow not conserving the number of
wave degrees of freedom.

the resolution of this puzzle is the essence of the hawk-
ing eect. the wave evolution mixes positive and nega-
tive frequency modes, so a purely positive frequency out-
going wavepacket arises from a mixture of positive and
negative frequency ingoing wavepackets. wkb evolu-
tion breaks down at the turing point, hence it misses this
mode mixing.

an example of a positive frequency wkb trajectory
is shown in fig. 4. the graph shows several dierent
quantities as functions of t (in units with  = 1): the
static position coordinate of the wavepacket x and the
horizon xh (solid lines), the free-fall frequency  (3.1)
(dashed line), the killing frequency k (3.2) (dot-dashed
line), and 50 sin(k/2) (sparse-dashed line). the posi-
tions are scaled up by a factor of 10 so they can be seen
on the same graph. in this example the lattice spacing is
 = 0.004, vmax = 2, and the trajectory has z(34) = 6
and k(34) = 1.

50

40

30

20

10

sin(kd /2)

free-fall frequency

killing frequency

packet trajectory

horizon

20

22.5

25
time

27.5

30

32.5

fig. 4. wkb evolution.

notice rst the behavior of sin(k/2). backwards in
time this starts out very small, rises to the maximum,
and comes back down but not to zero. the group veloc-
ity in the frame falling with the lattice vanishes at the
top, when k/2 = /2, corresponding to a wavelength
equal to two lattice units. this rise and fall happens
via a monotonic change of k, and is the bloch oscillation
mentioned above.

the wavepacket that ends up with  = k = 1 at
late times starts out at early times with  = k  43.
the maximum possible lattice frequency is 2/ = 500

5

in this case, so the ingoing frequency is certainly high.
whereas the free-fall frequency continues to redshift (for-
ward in time) as the wavepacket climbs away from the
horizon, the redshifting of the killing frequency is essen-
tially complete by the time the wavepacket reaches the
turning point. thus, past the turning point, each killing
frequency component propagates autonomously, more or
less as it would in the continuum. as described in the
introduction, this, together with the fact that the evolu-
tion of  at the lattice scale is adiabatic, is the reason
why the usual hawking eect is reproduced.

b. wavepackets and parameters

if the killing frequency were conserved as it is in
the dispersive continuum models the entire hawking
spectrum could be probed just by propagating one
wavepacket and decomposing it into is fourier compo-
nents, each of which would pick up a negative frequency
part appropriate for the corresponding frequency. this
is how unruh checked the spectrum in his model [6].
since the killing frequency is not conserved on our lattice
we cannot avail ourselves of this option.3 thus instead
we compute the occupation numbers for a sequence of

iv. lattice wave equation analysis

in this section we discuss the results of our numerical
calculations. the basic method is to take an outgoing
positive frequency wavepacket and evolve it backwards
in time. after it has bounced from the horizon and
propagated back into the at region of the spacetime we
decompose it into positive and negative frequency parts.
since it is a purely left moving wavepacket at this stage
the negative frequency part is just the part composed
of positive wavevectors. the occupation number (2.20)
of the original outgoing packet is then given by minus
the norm of this negative frequency part divided by the
total norm. we typically computed the total norm in
position space using (2.17). since the negative frequency
part () was projected out in the wavevector space we
used an alternate expression for its norm, ((), ()) =

2pk>0 |(k)||e()(k)|2, where the frequency (k) is

given by (3.1).

a. numerical issues

our system of equations (2.16) is a coupled set of or-
dinary dierential equations, which is to be solved in the
limit that time is continuous but the spatial lattice is
xed. in order to satisfy the courant stability criterion
the time step t must satisfy t < a(z, t).
(in this
1+1 dimensional setting the courant condition coincides
with the condition that causality be respected by the dif-
ferencing scheme.) in the asymptotic region a(z, t) = 1
so the stability condition there is t < . for a xed
t/ the general condition would be violated wherever
a(z, t) < t/. since this only happens deep behind the
horizon (for t > 0) we just modied a(z, t) inside the
black hole so that it is never less than t/. we used a
time discretization scheme (written out in the appendix)
with errors of order (t)2, and found that t = 0.4 was
adequately small to obtain very good accuracy.

s = 1, . . . , 9

(4.1)

wavepackets es(k) with dierent proles:
es(k) = k exp[(k  0.05s)2],

(in units with  = 1, as usual). the form of these
wavepackets was dictated by the need to have them well
enough localized to be contained in the at region of
the spacetime (so we could construct the correspond-
ing positive frequency initial data) while at the same
time containing enough power at low frequencies of or-
der  to have a measurable hawking occupation num-
ber. to shift the wavepacket to the desired starting po-
sition the fourier transform (4.1) was multiplied by a
phase factor exp(ikzinitial). the positive frequency ini-
tial data was constructed by evolving each fourier com-
ponent one time step t by multiplying with the phase
factor exp(i(k)t) and fourier transforming the re-
sult back into position space.
the time dependence of the lattice (illustrated in fig.
1) means that the results will not be independent of
the launch time of the wavepacket from a given lo-
cation.
if we start our backwards evolution too far in
the future then when the wavepacket nears the horizon
the lattice points will be pathologically sparse. on the
other hand if we launch backwards at too early a time
then the wavepacket can become partially trapped in the
region where the lattice spacing gets very small. this
happens because a suciently high frequency wave is
turned around when it tries to propagate into a region
of larger lattice spacing. we encountered this chan-
neling phenomenon in our simulations, and avoided it
just by launching later. the runs reported here were all
done with wavepackets that reached the horizon around
t = 27, and were launched from far enough away to be
contained in the at region of the spacetime. typically,

3we studied the possibility that the wkb evolution could
be used to establish a mapping between in and out frequen-
cies, thus allowing us to check the entire spectrum of particle
creation just by propagating a single wavepacket. this turns
out to be a awed idea however since the modes are mixed
by the evolution and, moreover, such a map misses the role
of the negative frequency piece.

6

the launch time was around t = 56 when the wavepacket
was centered at x = 28.
all of the calculations reported here were done using
the line element (2.1), with vmax (2.4) ranging from 2
to 30.

c. results

1. generalities

the behavior of a typical wavepacket throughout the
process of bouncing o the horizon is illustrated in fig.
6. the real part of the wavepacket is plotted vs.
the
static coordinate x at several dierent times. following
backwards in time, the wave starts to squeeze up against
the horizon and then a trailing dip freezes and develops
oscillations that grow until they balloon out, forming into
a compact high frequency wavepacket that propagates
neatly away from the horizon backwards in time.

this ingoing wavepacket contains both positive and
negative frequency components, in just the right combi-
nation to produce only an outgoing wave when sent in
towards the black hole, with no wave propagating across
the horizon. to illustrate this we have taken one of these
ingoing wavepackets, decomposed it into its positive and
negative frequency parts, and sent them separately back
toward the horizon forward in time (fig. 7). the nega-
tive frequency part (which is the smaller of the two since
the surface gravity is fairly low compared to the typical
frequencies in the outgoing wavepacket), mostly crosses
the horizon, with just a bit bouncing back out. the pos-
itive frequency part mostly bounces, with just a little bit
going into the black hole.

2. spectrum

the observed occupation numbers for the wavepack-
ets (4.1) all agree well with the integrated thermal pre-
dictions (2.21) of the hawking eect provided the lattice
spacing is not too large.

table i. comparison of the black hole radiation on the
lattice to the thermal hawking occupation numbers (2.21) for
the wavepackets (4.1) for the case vmax = 2 and  = 0.002.
s
rel. di.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

thermal
0.01563
0.01409
0.01266
0.01135
0.01014
0.00903
0.00801
0.00709
0.00625

lattice
0.01557
0.01404
0.01262
0.01130
0.01009
0.00899
0.00797
0.00705
0.00622

0.0038
0.0035
0.0034
0.0041
0.0045
0.0039
0.0051
0.0052
0.0046

a sample of the comparisons for  = 0.002 is listed
in table i. the typical relative dierence in this case is
of order half a percent.

3. lattice dependence

to study the dependence on the lattice we ran the
s = 1 wavepacket backward at several dierent values of
the lattice spacing and for several values of vmax (2.4)
from 2 to 30. the change of vmax produces only a
rather small change in the shape of the function v(x)
outside the horizon, however it produces a shift of the
position of the horizon (2.5). for large vmax the horizon
is given approximately by xh  ln(2vmax). the horizon
position ranges from about 0.6 for vmax = 2 to about 4
for vmax = 30. thus a wavepacket launched backward in
time from a given position at a given time will reach the
horizon later in time for larger vmax, so that the proper
lattice spacing at the horizon will be larger, though not
by a very large amount for the wavepackets considered
here.

in fig. 5 we plot the occupation numbers for lattice
spacings  ranging from 0.002 to 0.128, and for several
values of vmax (2.4), vmax = 2, 2, 2.5, 3, 4, 5, 10, 20, 30.
in all cases the late time wavepacket was launched from
the same position and time. all wavepackets had the
same envelope for their fourier transform, however for
dierent lattice spacings the wavepacket is necessarily
dierent.

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

 

#
n
o
i
t
a
p
u
c
c
o

0

0

thermal value

0.05

delta

0.1

0.15

fig. 5. occupation numbers for s = 1 wavepacket for var-
ious values of  and vmax. higher occupation numbers corre-
spond to larger values of vmax.

for all values of vmax, the occupation number con-
verges to the hawking prediction as the lattice spacing 
decreases.

the pattern of deviations from the thermal prediction
appears to depend quite strongly on the value of vmax, a
result which we do not understand at present. the best
we can do is to list various eects which would contribute
to the deviations: (i) the wkb turning point is mov-
ing away from the horizon as  grows, so one might ex-

7

in others, which requires at least two dimensions to be
possible. at the atomic level such a volume-preserving
ow involves erratic motions of individual atoms. one
possible improvement of the lattice model is to make a
lattice that mimics this sort of volume preserving ow. it
is not clear whether the motions of the lattice points can
be slow enough to be adiabatic on the timescale of the
high frequency lattice modes. if they cannot, then the
time dependence of this erratic lattice background will
excite the quantum vacuum.

in a uid the lattice is a part of the system, not just
a xed background. the average ow could be adiabatic
for the fully coupled ground state of the system but not
for the eld theory of the perturbations on the back-
ground lattice. similar comments apply in quantum
gravity: surely if in-out mode conversion is at play the
incoming high frequency modes are strongly coupled to
the quantum gravitational vacuum. ideally, therefore, we
should try to nd a model in which the background is not
decoupled from the perturbations.

as a rst step in this direction one could study a one
dimensional model in which the lattice points are non-
relativistic point masses, coupled to each other by near-
est neighbor interactions, and falling or propagating in
a background potential (with or without periodic bound-
ary conditions). the perturbations of such a lattice are
the phonon eld, and the back reaction to the hawking
radiation is included (although the background potential
is xed). in a model like this one could presumably follow
in detail the nonlinear origin of the outgoing modes and
the transfer of energy from the mean ow to the thermal
radiation.

acknowledgements

we are grateful to matt choptuik and david garnkle
for advice on numerical matters and to steve corley for
many helpful discussions. this work was supported in
part by the national science foundation under grants
no. phy98-00967 at the university of maryland and
phy94-07194 at the institute for theoretical physics.

pect that the eective surface gravity v(xt.p.) and hence
the eective hawking temperature felt by the wavepacket
would decrease; (ii) at larger vmax the proper lattice spac-
ing at the horizon is larger at the time this particular
wavepacket reaches the horizon; (iii) the lattice points
are rather sparse near the horizon for the larger values
of , and their precise positions will be signicantly dif-
ferent for dierent values of vmax. eect (i) would lead
to a decrease in the occupation number, while one might
expect that eect (ii) would lead to a relative increase
due to the extra particle creation associated with time
dependence of the lattice. perhaps what we are seeing is
just a delicate balance between these two eects.

v. discussion

we have shown that linear eld theory on a falling lat-
tice reproduces the continuum hawking eect with high
delity, thus verifying earlier expections [12]. for the
smallest lattice spacing we studied,  = 0.002/, the de-
viations from the thermal particle creation in wavepack-
ets composed of frequencies  <
half a percent. this is remarkable, particularly since the
proper lattice spacing encountered by the wavepacket at
the horizon was  0.08/. when  is pushed to higher
values eventually we see signicant deviations from the
hawking prediction.

 o() were of order

there are several directions in which this work could
be developed. one idea is to include self-interactions for
the quantum eld theory. there are general arguments
[21,22] that the thermal hawking eect holds also for in-
teracting elds. there are also perturbative calculations
[23] and calculations exploiting exact conformal invari-
ance of certain 1+1 dimensional eld theories [24]. also
the hadronization of hawking radiation from primor-
dial black holes has been analyzed by matching to high
energy collision data [25], but the physics of how the ther-
mal hawking radiation is dressed by interactions as it
redshifts away from the horizon has not been studied. in
a 1+1 dimensional model it should not be prohibitively
dicult to numerically study hawking radiation of inter-
acting elds, now that we see it can be done on a lattice.
the falling lattice model has provided a satisfactory
mechanismthe bloch oscillationfor how to get an
outgoing mode from an ingoing mode in a stationary
background, but there is a serious aw in the picture:
the lattice is constantly expanding. in the uid model by
contrast the lattice of atoms maintains a uniform average
density. in a fundamental theory we might also expect
the scale of graininess of spacetime to remain xed at,
say, the planck scale or the string scale (since presum-
ably the graininess would dene this scale) rather than
expand. can the falling lattice model be improved to
share this feature?

a uid maintains uniform density in an inhomogeneous
ow by compressing in some directions and expanding

8

appendix: finite differencing scheme

the equation of motion (2.16) for m(t) is

t(cid:16)am(t)tm(t)(cid:17) = d(cid:18) 2dm1(t)

am+1(t) + am(t)(cid:19) .

we used a time discretization scheme for the left hand side arising from the replacement of

f by

hf (t + t/2)  f (t  t/2)i/t = f + (1/24)f (3)(t)2 + o((t)4),

which yields

t(am(t)tm(t)) ha(n + 1/2)(cid:16)(n + 1)  (n)(cid:17)  a(n  1/2)(cid:16)(n)  (n  1)(cid:17)i/(t)2,

(a1)

(a2)

(a3)

where the spatial index is omitted and the argument n stands for nt. we could have used this replacement, since
a(z, t) is a prescribed function that can be calculated at any t, but for some reason we substituted a(n  1/2) by
(cid:16)a(n) + a(n  1)(cid:17)/2. this yields the approximation

(a4)

(a5)

h(cid:16)a(n) + a(n + 1)(cid:17)(cid:16)(n + 1)  (n)(cid:17) (cid:16)a(n) + a(n  1)(cid:17)(cid:16)(n)  (n  1)(cid:17)i/2(t)2
a(3) (cid:17)(n)(t)2 + o((t)4).

= t(at)(n) +(cid:16) 1

a  +

1
4

1
4

a(4) +

a(3) +

12

1
6

with (a4) in place of the left hand side of (a1) we solve for (n  1) in terms of (n) and (n + 1) to obtain an
equation for evolving  backwards in time by one time step given the following two steps.

[1] t. jacobson, phys. rev. d44, 1731 (1991).
[2] for a review see a.w. peet, class. quant. grav. 15, 3291 (1998).
[3] w.g. unruh, phys. rev. lett. 46, 1351 (1981).
[4] v. moncrief, astrophys. j, 235, 1038 (1980).
[5] m. visser, class. quantum grav. 15, 1767 (1998).
[6] w.g. unruh, phys. rev. d 51, 2827 (1995).
[7] r. brout, s. massar, r. parentani and ph. spindel, phys. rev. d 52, 4559 (1995).
[8] s. corley and t. jacobson, phys. rev. d 54,1568 (1996).
[9] s. corley, phys. rev. d 57, 6280 (1998).

[10] y. himemoto and t. tanaka, a generalization of the model of hawking radiation with modied high frequency dispersion

relation, gr-qc/9904076.

[11] h. saida and m. sakagami, black hole radiation with high frequency dispersion, gr-qc/9905034.
[12] s. corley and t. jacobson, phys. rev. d 57, 6269 (1998).
[13] t.a. jacobson and g.e. volovik, phys. rev. d 58, 064021 (1998); jetp lett. 68, 874 (1998).
[14] n.b. kopnin and g.e. volovik, phys. rev. b 57, 8526 (1998); phys. rev. lett. 79, 1377 (1997).
[15] g.e. volovik, pisma zhetf 69, 662 (1999) [gr-qc/9901077].
[16] s. corley, phys. rev. d 57, 6280 (1998).
[17] t. jacobson, phys. rev. d 53 (1996) 7082.
[18] see e.g. appendix a of ref. [12].
[19] s.w. hawking, nature (london) 248 (1974) 30; commun. math. phys. 43 (1975) 199.
[20] the hamiltonian technique was rst applied to dispersive models of the hawking eect in ref. [7].
[21] g.w. gibbons and m.j. perry, proc. roy. soc. lond., series a 358, 467-94 (1977).
[22] w.g. unruh and n. weiss, phys. rev. d 29, 1656 (1984).
[23] d.a. leahy and w.g. unruh, phys. rev. d 28, 694 (1983).
[24] n.d. birrell and p.c.w. davies, phys. rev. d 18, 4408 (1978).
[25] j.h. macgibbon and b.r. webber, phys. rev. d 41, 3052 (1990); j.h. macgibbon, phys. rev. d 44, 376 (1991); f.

halzen, e. zas, j.h. macgibbon, and t.c. weekes, nature 353, 807 (1991).

9

fig. 6. a typical wavepacket evolution. here vmax = 2,  = 0.004, and the wavepacket (4.1) has s = 1. the ocsillations

of the incoming wavepacket are too dense to resolve in the plots.

10

fig. 7. the positive (top row) and negative (bottom row) frequency parts of the ancestor of an outgoing positive frequency
wavepacket, sent back towards the black hole. note the vertical scale is dierent in the two plots. the wavepackets crossing the
horizon in the two cases are negatives of each other since they must cancel to produce only the outgoing wavepacket we started
with. the parts that go through the horizon appear on the right due to periodic boundary conditions. the high frequency
ocsillations are too dense to resolve in the plots.

11

