cu-tp-946

hep-th/9908095

9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
3
1

 

 
 

1
v
5
9
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

massive and massless monopoles and duality1

erick j. weinberg

department of physics, columbia university

new york, ny 10027, usa

abstract

i review some aspects of bps magnetic monopoles and of electric-magnetic duality
in theories with arbitrary gauge groups. when the symmetry is maximally broken
to a u(1)r subgroup, all magnetically charged congurations can be understood in
terms of r species of massive fundamental monopoles. when the unbroken group has
a non-abelian factor, some of these fundamental monopoles become massless and
can be viewed as the duals to the massless gauge bosons. rather than appearing as
distinct solitons, these massless monopoles are manifested as clouds of non-abelian
eld surrounding one or more massive monopoles. i describe in detail some examples
of solutions with such clouds.

1 introduction

elementary treatments of quantum eld theory usually introduce particles as the quanta of the

small oscillation of a weakly coupled eld about the vacuum. there is one particle species for

each elementary eld, with the masses of the particles entering as parameters in the lagrangian.

however, it turns out that particles can also arise in a very dierent fashion. in many cases, the

classical eld equations of the theory possess nite energy solutions that are localized in space.

these solitons also give rise to one-particle states in the quantum theory. to lowest approximation,

the mass of the soliton is equal to the energy of the classical solution and is typically of the form
msoliton  m/, where m is an elementary particle mass and  is some small coupling.

at rst sight, these two types of particles seem radically dierent. the elementary excitations

appear to be point particles with no substructure and no internal degrees of freedom. the solitons,

on the other hand, are extended objects characterized by a classical eld prole (x) that is
meaningful in the quantum theory because its spatial extent ( 1/m) is much greater than the
compton wavelength ( /m) of the soliton.

1talks delivered at the asia pacic center for theoretical physics third winter school on duality in fields and

strings, seogwipo, cheju, korea, january 1999

1

on closer inspection, however, this distinction is less clearcut. on the one hand, in the presence

of interactions the elementary particles turn out to be not entirely structureless; instead, they

have a partonic substructure that evolves with momentum scale. on the other hand, the internal

structure of the soliton appears somewhat simpler when it is analyzed in terms of normal modes

rather than directly in terms of the classical solution. most of the small uctuation modes are non-

normalizable modes, with continuum eigenvalues, that are most naturally understood as scattering

states of the elementary quanta in the presence of the soliton. there may also be normalizable

modes with nonzero eigenvalues; if so, these correspond to states with elementary quanta bound

to the soliton. this leaves only a small number of normalizable zero eigenvalue modes, whose

quantization requires the introduction of collective coordinates. it is only these that correspond to

fundamental degrees of freedom of the soliton.

these observations suggest that the one-particle states built from solitons and those based on

the elementary quanta might not dier in any essential way, and that the apparent dierences

between the two may be simply artifacts of the weak coupling regime. if so, then what happens

as the coupling is increased? for small coupling, where the semiclassical treatment of the soliton

is still valid, we know that the ratio of the soliton mass to the elementary particle mass decreases,

as indicated in fig. 1. however, such perturbative results are no longer reliable by the time the

couplings have become of order unity, the region indicated by the question mark. nevertheless,

s
s
a

m

sol.

e.p.

"e.p"

"sol."

?

coupling

figure 1: possible evolution of elementary (e.p.) and soliton (sol.) masses with increasing

coupling strength.

one can speculate. for example, it might happen, as indicated in the gure, that the soliton

mass continues to decrease until, at some large coupling, the soliton is much lighter than the

elementary particle. of course, as suggested by the quotation marks, in this large coupling regime

2

there is no reason to expect the corresponding states to have any of the characteristics that they

had at small coupling.

the symmetry between the left and right sides of this gure suggests a particularly intriguing

possibility. could the theory be reformulated so that the roles of the soliton and the elementary

particle are interchanged? in some cases, the answer is positive: there is a dual formulation of

the theory in terms of a new set of elds whose elementary excitations give rise to the soliton states

of the original formulation, while the former elementary particles correspond either to solitons or

to bound states. weak coupling for this new formulation corresponds to strong coupling for the

original. this duality can by summarized by

strong coupling l1()  weak coupling l2()

elementary   soliton

soliton  elementary 

note that there is no reason for the dual lagrangian l2 to have the same form as the original
lagrangian l1. for example, in the classic illustration of eld theory duality, that between the
sine-gordon and the massive thirring models [1], there seems to be no resemblance at all between
it could happen that l1 and l2 have the same functional form. as i
will describe in more detail below, it is believed that certain supersymmetric yang-mills theories

the two theories. however.

have a self-duality of this kind that interchanges electric and magnetic charges and that can be

seen as a generalization of the duality symmetry of maxwells equations [2].

whether or not there is a dual formulation of the theory, these correspondences between the

elementary particle and the soliton states of the quantum theory have implications for the structure

and properties of the classical soliton solutions. quite often, these solutions are associated with

a conserved topological charge. in many such cases, one nds not only a solution with unit topo-

logical charge, but also families of multiply-charged classical solutions. if the soliton one-particle

states of the quantum theory are not fundamentally dierent from those built from the elementary

excitations, then one might expect that the multiply-charged solutions would correspond to multi-

particle states. this expectation is clearly borne out in a number of examples, including, as i will

describe in these lectures, the magnetic monopole solutions in many spontaneously broken gauge

theories. however, we will also see that in some cases  those where the unbroken gauge group

has a non-abelian component  where this correspondence is less clearcut. in these theories the

elementary particle sector includes massless particles carrying electric-type charges. the duals of

these should be massless magnetically charged objects. such massless monopoles do not appear

3

as isolated classical solutions. instead, they lose their individual identity and are manifested as

clouds of non-abelian elds that surround the massive monopoles [3]. understanding the nature

of these clouds may well provide insight into the properties of non-abelian gauge theories.

the remainder of these lectures is organized as follows. in sec. 2, i describe the classic example of

eld theory duality, that between the sine-gordon and massive thirring models in two spacetime

dimensions.

i then move on to four dimensions and the conjectured duality between magnetic

monopoles and electrically charged fundamental excitations.

i begin in sec. 3 by reviewing the

essential properties of the t hooft-polyakov [4] monopole of su(2) gauge theory. in sec. 4, i describe

the bogomolny-prasad-sommereld [5], or bps, limit and its relevance for electric-magnetic duality.

next, in sec. 5, i discuss the solutions with higher magnetic charge in an su(2) theory and show

how these can be understood as corresponding to multiparticle states. section 6 describes how

these methods can be extended to theories with larger gauge groups, concentrating initially on

cases where the symmetry is maximally broken to an abelian subgroup. a very important tool for

carrying this out is the moduli space approximation [6], described in sec. 7. in sec. 8, i describe

the special issues that arise when the symmetry breaking is nonmaximal and the unbroken group

is non-abelian. it is here that one nds the massless monopoles clouds. i describe in detail two

examples of this, a relatively simple one in an so(5) theory [3, 7] in sec. 9, and a more complex

family of solutions [8] in sec. 10. section 11 contains some concluding remarks and discussion.

2 the sine-gordon  massive thirring model duality

the classic example of duality between two quantum eld theories is the famous equivalence [1]

between the sine-gordon and massive thirring models. the sine-gordon model is a theory of a

single scalar eld in (1 + 1)-dimensional spacetime, with lagrangian density

l =

1
2

()2 +

m2
2 cos  .

(2.1)

there are an innite number of degenerate vacua corresponding to the minima of the scalar eld

potential at  = 2n/. expanding about one of these (say  = 0), we obtain

l =

1
2

()2 +

m2
2 

m2
2

2 +

m22

24

4 + 

(2.2)

from which we see that  is a dimensionless coupling constant, while m is the lowest-order approx-

imation to the mass of the elementary  boson.

the existence of discrete degenerate vacua gives rise to a conserved topological charge

qtop =


2

[()  ()]

4

(2.3)

that takes on integer values. there is a classical static soliton solution  the kink  that
approaches two adjacent vacua as x  , and thus carries qtop = 1; there is also an antikink,
with qtop = 1. the corresponding one-particle states of the quantum theory have masses

mkink =

8m

2  1 

2

8! .

(2.4)

(the prefactor is the classical energy, while the quantity in brackets is the result of quantum

corrections2.)

in addition, there are periodic time-dependent classical solutions, known as breathers. these

resemble a kink and an antikink bound together and oscillating back and forth. using wkb

methods, dashen, hasslacher and neveu [9] showed that in the quantum theory these breathers

give rise to a series of states with masses

mn = 2mkink sin" n

2

2/8

1  2/8#

where n is a positive integer obeying

n <

8
2  1 .

(2.5)

(2.6)

at this point, it might seem as if there are three classes of states  the elementary , the

kink and antikink, and the breather states. actually, the elementary  is the same as the lowest

breather state, as is suggested by the small- expansion

mn = nm"1 

n24
1536

+ o(6)# .

(2.7)

thus, for small  the particle spectrum includes an elementary boson with mass m = m1 and
qtop = 0, two solitons with mass mkink  m and qtop = 1, and a series of qtop = 0 states
with masses m < mn < 2mkink. as  is increased, the soliton mass decreases, while those of

the elementary  and of the higher breather states all increase. the breather states disappear in

succession as their masses become greater that twice the soliton mass. finally, the elementary 

disappears when  = 4, leaving only the qtop = 1 states.

it is instructive to examine the behavior of the  mass as   4. if we write

the  mass is

2
4

=

1

1 + /

m1 = mkink"2  2 +

43


+ o(4)# .

(2.8)

(2.9)

2i am neglecting here technical points associated with the renormalization of parameters and the denitions of

composite operators. for a more rigorous treatment of these, see [1].

5

this formula suggests that in this large- regime it might be more natural to regard the kink and

antikink  which are now the lightest particles in the theory  as elementary objects, and the 

as being a kink and an antikink bound together by a weak interaction with a strength characterized

by . (note that in this regime the terms kink and antikink are somewhat misleading, since

the semiclassical correspondence between eld prole and quantum state is no longer valid at such

strong coupling.)

let us turn now to the massive thirring model. this is a theory of a fermion eld , also in

(1 + 1)-dimensional spacetime, with lagrangian density

l = (i  m ) 

g
2

( )2 .

(2.10)

the particle spectrum includes an elementary fermion and its antiparticle, each with mass m . if

g is positive, so that the four-fermion interaction is attractive, there are also fermion-antifermion

bound states. the lowest (and, for suciently weak coupling, the only) one of these has a mass

mbound = m "2  g2 +

4g3


+ o(g4)# .

(2.11)

the similarity between eqs. (2.9) and (2.11) suggests that the massive thirring model might

indeed be a dual theory in which the interpretation of the  as a kink-antikink bound state is

realized. let us therefore identify g and , so that

2
4

=

1

1 + g/

.

(2.12)

weak coupling (  0) for the sine-gordon theory thus corresponds to strong coupling (g  )
for the massive thirring model, while g  0 in the latter corresponds to the strong coupling limit
  4 of the former. we would then have the equivalences
kink  elementary 
antikink  elementary 

elementary    bound state

between the particle states. these, in turn, imply the identication

topological charge  fermion number

between the conserved charges.

6

the remarkable fact is that one can beyond these correspondences between the mass spectra and

rigorously establish an equivalence between the two theories. making the operator identications [1]


  =  
2
m2
2 cos  = m 

(2.13)

(with appropriate renormalization and normal ordering of the composite operators), one nds that

the matrix elements of the two theories agree to all orders of perturbation theory. furthermore,

the fermion eld operator (x) of the massive thirring model can be written [10] as a nonlocal

function of the sine-gordon boson eld (x).

3 magnetic monopoles

let us now go on to four spacetime dimensions, where the most important examples of solitons

arise in spontaneously broken gauge theories. if the vacuum expectation value of the higgs eld

breaks a gauge group g down to a subgroup h, there are topologically stable solitons if the second

homotopy group 2(g/h) is nonzero. these are generally referred to as magnetic monopoles

although, strictly speaking, the term is only appropriate when the unbroken group h is the u(1)

of electromagnetism.

the archetypical example [4] of these occurs in an su(2) theory with a triplet higgs eld 

whose expectation value hi = v breaks the symmetry to u(1). if the scalar potential is

v () =


4

(2  v2)2

(3.1)

the elementary excitations of the theory are a massless photon, two vector mesons w  with mass
mw = ev and electric charges e (where e is the gauge coupling), and a neutral scalar with mass
mh = 2 v.

because 2[su(2)/u(1)] = z, there is a single additive topological charge n that can take on

any integer value. it is related to the magnetic charge by3

qm =

4n

e

.

(3.2)

3in these units, the dirac quantization condition would require that n be either integer or half-integer. the more
restrictive condition here follows from requiring that the higgs eld be smooth at spatial innity. it is ultimately
related to the fact that one could add isospinor elds to the theory. after symmetry breaking, these would have
electric charges e/2. the existence of such charges would modify the dirac condition so as to require integer n.

7

the classical solution corresponding to the unit monopole, with qm = 4/e, is most often written

in the spherically symmetric form

i = iak rk(cid:18) 1  u(r)

aa
a = rah(r) .

er

(cid:19)

(3.3)

(here superscripts are su(2) indices.) requiring that the solution be nonsingular at the origin

imposes the boundary conditions u(0) = 1 and h(0) = 0, while niteness of the energy requires
that u() = 0 and h() = v. substituting this ansatz into the eld equations leads to a pair of
second order equations that can be solved numerically. the solution has a core region, of radius
rcore  1/ev. outside of this core u and v  h fall exponentially fast and the eld strength is, up
to exponentially small terms, given by

f a

ij = ijk rari

1
er2 .

(3.4)

the factor of ra indicates that in internal su(2) space this is parallel to , and thus purely elec-

tromagnetic. from the remaining factors we see that this is just the coulomb magnetic eld of a

magnetic monopole with qm = 4/e. the classical energy of the solution, which gives the leading

approximation to the monopole mass, can be written as

m =

4v

e

f (/e2)

(3.5)

where f (s) increases monotonically between from 0 to 1.787 [11] as s varies from 0 to .

although the nontrivial topology of the higgs eld is most apparent when the solution is writ-

ten in the radial gauge form of eq. (3.3), a number of other aspects of the solution are claried by

applying a singular gauge transformation that makes the su(2) orientation of the higgs eld uni-

form. choosing a = a3h(r), we may identify the third isospin component with electromagnetism

and write

aem

i

1

 a3
a1

wi 

er (cid:18) 1  cos 
sin  (cid:19)
i =
i + ia2
i2

= ni(, )

u(r)
er

ei .

(3.6)

the rst of these is just the u(1) vector potential for a point monopole of magnetic charge 4/e,

with the dirac string singularity lying along the negative z-axis. in the second equation, ni is a

complex unit vector whose precise form is not needed for the present discussion. this gives u(r)/er

a simple interpretation as the magnitude of the massive w eld. thus, the t hooft-polyakov

monopole is essentially a point dirac monopole surrounded by a core of massive vector eld, with

8

the components of the latter arranged to give a singular magnetic dipole density that cancels the

singularity in the coulomb magnetic energy density. finally, note the arbitrary overall phase  that

appears in the expression for wi. this reects the unbroken global u(1) symmetry that survives

even after the gauge has been xed.

this monopole conguration is not an isolated solution, but rather one of a many-parameter

family of congurations, all with the same energy.

innitesimal variations of these parameters

correspond to zero-eigenvalue modes in the spectrum of small uctuations about the monopole so-

lution. three of these modes correspond to spatial translations of the monopole; the corresponding

parameters are most naturally chosen to be the spatial coordinates of the center of the monopole.

because this is a gauge theory, there are also an innite number of zero modes that simply reect

the freedom to make local gauge transformations. to eliminate these, we must impose a gauge

condition. however, this still leaves one zero mode, corresponding to gauge transformations that

do not vanish at innity; roughly speaking, this should be understood as a global gauge transforma-

tion in the unbroken subgroup. for example, if we impose the gauge conditions that 1 = 2 = 0
and that aem = a3 satisfy the coulomb gauge condition   aem = 0, the surviving gauge zero
mode corresponds simply to shift of the u(1) phase  in eq. (3.6).

when the system is quantized, a collective coordinate and a conjugate momentum must be

introduced for each of the zero modes. for the translation zero modes, the conjugate momentum

is just the linear momentum p of the monopole. for the global gauge zero mode, the collective

coordinate is a u(1) phase variable, and the conjugate momentum is the u(1) electric charge qe,

which is proportional to the time derivative of this phase; the quantization of qe follows from the

periodicity of the u(1) phase. thus, allowing the collective coordinates to vary linearly in time

gives solutions with nonzero momentum and electric charge and an energy of the form

e = m +

p2
2m

+

q2
e
2i

+ o(p4, q4

e)

(3.7)

where the quantity i can be expressed as a spatial integral involving the square of the w eld. the

fact that the coecient of p2 turns out to be 1/2m is a nontrivial consequence of the underlying

lorentz invariance of the theory.

4 the bps limit and electric-magnetic duality

in general, the classical eld equations governing the monopole can only be solved numerically.

matters are dierent, however, if one works in the bogomolny-prasad-sommereld, or bps, limit

9

[5]. although initially introduced as a means of simplifying the classical equations, it turns out to

have a much deeper signicance.

at the simplest level, the bps limit is obtained by taking  and mh to zero with v held xed.

since the eld equations now depend only on a single dimensionless constant that can be absorbed

by a rescaling of elds and distances, one might hope that they would become analytically tractable.

indeed, simply by guesswork one can nd the solution

u(r) =

v

sinh(evr)

h(r) = v coth(evr) 

1
er

.

(4.1)

the 1/er tail of h(r) reects the fact that the scalar eld become massless in the bps limit. such

a massless eld can mediate a long-range attractive force, a fact that is of great importance.

deeper insight is gained by examining the energy functional. to simplify the algebra, let us

restrict ourselves to congurations with vanishing electric charge and a0 identically zero. the
energy for a static conguration can then be written as4

2

e = z d3x(cid:20) 1
= z d3x(cid:20) 1

2

tr b2

i +

1
2

tr (di)2 + v ()(cid:21)

tr (bi  di)2  tr (di)bi + v ()(cid:21)

(4.2)

where bi  1
with the bianchi identity, gives

2 ijkfjk. the potential term vanishes in the bps limit. a partial integration, together

z d3xtr (di)bi = z d3x [itr (bi)  tr dib] = z d2sitr bi = qm v

(4.3)

where the surface integral after the second equality is over a sphere at spatial innity. substituting

this result back into eq. (4.2) and using the upper (lower) sign for positive (negative) magnetic

charge gives the bound

e  v|qm| = |n|(cid:18) 4v

e (cid:19) .

this bound is achieved by congurations that satisfy the rst-order equations

bi = di .

(4.4)

(4.5)

because any static conguration that minimizes the energy is a stationary point of the theory, solu-

tions of eq. (4.5) are guaranteed to also be solutions of the full set of second-order eld equations;

4here, and henceforth, i write the gauge and higgs elds as elements of the lie algebra of the group. for the case
i  a/2i, where the  a are

of su(2), these are related to the component elds used in the previous section by ai = aa
the pauli matrices.

10

such solutions are referred to as bps solutions. for the remainder of these lectures i will assume

that the magnetic charge is positive, and so will always use eq. (4.5) with the positive sign.

this argument is easily modied to include the possibility of dyons, carrying nonzero electric

charge qe in addition to their magnetic charge. the bps equations become

bi = cos  di
ei  f0i = sin  di

d0 = 0

where  = tan1(qe/qm ). the solutions of these have energy

e = vqq2

m + q2

e .

(4.6)

(4.7)

although classically all values of qe are possible, semiclassical quantization about the monopole

shows that the electric charge must be an integral multiple of e. hence, for weak coupling the
lowest dyonic states have qe  qm  1/e, and eq. (4.7) can be expanded to give

e = vqm  1 +

q2
e
2q2
m

+ !

(4.8)

which is in agreement with eq. (3.7).

the fact that the energy is strictly proportional to the magnetic charge suggests that static

multimonopole solutions might exist, since the energy of such a solution would be just the sum

of the masses of the component monopoles and would be independent of their relative positions.

from another point of view, this possibility, which is actually realized, occurs because the magnetic

repulsion between a pair of static monopoles is exactly balanced by their mutual attraction via the

long-range scalar force.

a similar reduction of second-order eld equations to a set of rst-order equations, with the

energy of the solutions being determined by the conserved charges, is found in a number of other

systems. these include the abelian higgs model with parameters chosen so that the scalar and

vector masses are equal (corresponding to the type i-type ii boundary in superconductivity)

[12], chern-simons-higgs theory with a specially chosen scalar potential [13], and the yang-mills

instantons; all of these admit static multisoliton solutions.

in all of these cases the theory can be trivially generalized to be not only supersymmetric, but

to also have extended supersymmetry. extended supersymmetry algebras include central charges.

these turn out to be related to the charges carried by the solitons, so that the bps mass relations

11

can be rewritten in terms of the generators of the superalgebra. for example, eq. (4.7) is equivalent

to

h = qz 2

1 + z 2
2

(4.9)

where h is the hamiltonian and z1 and z2 are central charges. the theory of supersymmetry

representations shows that states obeying such relations lie in short supermultiplets with fewer

components than otherwise. (this generalizes the distinction between massless and massive super-

multiplets in n = 1 supersymmetry.) since small quantum corrections cannot change the size of

a multiplet, these mass relations must be exact and hold even when one passes from the classical

limit to the full quantum theory [14]. furthermore, states obeying relations such as eq. (4.9) are

invariant under a subset of the supersymmetry algebra. at the classical level, the vanishing of the

corresponding supercharges reduces to rst-order equations such as eq. (4.5).

in particular, the bps monopole solutions arise naturally in the context of n = 2 or n = 4

supersymmetric yang-mills theory. in addition to the gauge eld, these contain n/2 dirac fermion
elds and 2n  2 real scalar elds p, all in the adjoint representation. the lagrangian is

l =

1
2

trf 2

 +

1
2

tr(dp)2 

e2
4

tr ([p, q])2 + fermion terms .

(4.10)

if the p with p > 1 are set identically to zero, the bosonic parts of the classical eld equations

reduce to the bps equations for a and 1.

photon



w 

monopole

mass

qe

qm

0

0

ev

4v

e

0

0

e

0

0

0

0

4v

e



table 1: the particle masses and charges in the bps limit of the su(2) theory.

table 1 summarizes the masses and charges of particles of the nonsupersymmetric su(2) the-

ory in the bps limit. montonen and olive [2] noted that this spectrum is invariant under the

transformation

e 

4
e

qe  qm .

this led them to conjecture that the theory might be self-dual, with the role of the solitons and of

the elementary excitations being interchanged under this transformation.

12

an obvious diculty with this conjecture is the fact that the massive w s have spin one, whereas

the classical monopole and antimonopole solutions are spherically symmetric and therefore lead to

spinless particles after quantization. a resolution to this puzzle is found when fermion elds are

added to make the theory supersymmetric. each adjoint representation dirac fermion eld has

two normalizable zero modes in the presence of the singly charged monopole [15]. these lead

to a degenerate multiplet of monopole states that dier only in the occupation numbers of these

modes. the theory with n -extended supersymmetry has n/2 dirac fermions, hence n zero modes

and 2n degenerate states. for n = 2 these form a spin-1/2 doublet and two spin-0 states, but

not the spin-1 states that are needed to match the w bosons. for n = 4, there are 16 states,

including a spin-1 triplet, four spin-1/2 doublets, and ve spin-0 states. this not only gives the

desired spin-1 states, but also exactly matches [16] the complete supermultiplet structure of the

electrically-charged elementary excitations.5

further support for the duality conjecture is obtained by considering the low-energy scattering

of electrically charged particles [2]. the existence of classical static multimonopoles solutions in the

bps limit was noted above. the obvious dual to these would be states containing several electrically

charged elementary particles at rest. since we cannot construct a semiclassical approximation to

these states in the weak coupling limit, it is hard to study them directly. instead, we can examine

the behavior of scattering states containing two like-charged particles as their relative momentum

goes to zero, and look for the cancelation between the higgs and electromagnetic forces in the static

limit. as an example, consider the scattering of the massive positively charged fermions that are

the superpartners of the massive gauge bosons. there are two graphs that contribute at tree level,

one with a massless scalar exchanged between the fermions and one where they exchange a photon.

(note that the tree level scattering amplitude is the same in the n = 2 and n = 4 theories.) let

us work in the center of mass frame, with initial momenta

and nal momenta

p = (e, p)

k = (e,p)

p = (e, p)

k = (e,p) .

(4.11)

(4.12)

5supersymmetry is also essential for ensuring that the spectrum of dyonic states is consistent with duality. for
example, semiclassical quantization of the u(1) zero mode about the unit monopole leads to a tower of states with
unit magnetic charge but multiple electric charge. duality then requires a tower of states with unit electric charge and
multiple magnetic charge. sen [17] has shown how these can arise as zero energy bound states in the supersymmetric
theory; in sec. 7 i will describe how similar methods resolve some duality puzzles in a theory with a large gauge
group.

13

the contribution to the scattering amplitude from scalar exchange is

ie2

ms = 

q2 (cid:2)u(p)u(p)(cid:3)(cid:2)u(k)u(k)(cid:3)

where q  p  p = k  k = (0, p  p), while that from photon exchange is

now use the fact that

mv =

ie2

q2 g(cid:2)u(p)u(p)(cid:3)(cid:2)u(k) u(k)(cid:3) .

u(p)u(p) = u(p)(cid:20) (p + p)

2m

+

i q

2m (cid:21) u(p) .

(4.13)

(4.14)

(4.15)

for  = 1, 2, or 3, the quantity sandwiched between the spinors is manifestly of order p . for
 = 0, if we write e = m + p2/2m +  and recall that u(p)0iu(p) vanishes if p = 0, we nd
that

u(p)0u(p) = u(p)[m + o(p2)]u(p) .

(4.16)

after substituting this into eq. (4.14) and then combining the result with eq. (4.13), we see that
the scattering amplitude does indeed vanish in the static limit p  0.

5 su(2) multimonopole solutions and index theorems

let us return now to the classical su(2) monopole solutions, focusing in particular on those with
higher magnetic charge, n  2. it was argued previously that one might expect to nd solutions
corresponding to several unit monopoles at rest. one could also imagine that there might be

additional solutions, corresponding to new species of monopoles with larger magnetic charges, that

do not have multiparticle interpretations. a useful tool for exploring this possibility is the use of

index theory methods to count the normalizable zero modes, and thus determine the number of

collective coordinates needed to characterize a solution [18].

consider an arbitrary charge n solution with gauge and higgs elds ai and . we are interested

in small perturbations ai and  that preserve the bps equation.

if we write ai and  as

antihermitian matrices in the adjoint representation of su (2) and ai and  as three-component

column vectors, the equations resulting from the variation of eq. (4.5) take the form

0 = (bj  dj)

= dj   e aj  jkldk al

(5.1)

where dj is the covariant derivative with respect to the unperturbed gauge eld. we are not

interested in zero modes that simply correspond to local gauge transformations, although we do

14

want to keep those due to global gauge transformations, since excitations of these give rise to

electric charges. to eliminate the unwanted modes, we require that the perturbation be orthogonal

to all local gauge transformations, and hence satisfy

z d3xh(aj )tdj + ie()ti

(5.2)

for any gauge function (x) that vanishes at spatial innity. by an integration by parts (valid only

because  vanishes at large distance), this is equivalent to the background gauge condition

our task is to determine the number of linearly independent normalizable solutions of eqs. (5.1)

0 = dj aj + e  .

(5.3)

and (5.3).

it is convenient to begin by dening [19]

 = i + ijaj .

this allows eqs. (5.1) and (5.3) to be combined into a single dirac equation

0 = (ijdj + ie)  d .

(5.4)

(5.5)

it should be kept in mind that solutions of eq. (5.5) that dier by multiplication by i correspond

to linearly independent solutions for a and , so the number of bosonic zero modes is equal to

twice the number of normalizable fermionic solutions this equation. note also that eq. (5.5) is

preserved by transformations of the form

  eiv .

(5.6)

given one bosonic zero mode, one can construct three more by means of such transformations.

this relation among zero modes will be of signicance later.

now dene

i = lim

m 20

tr

m 2

m 2

dd + m 2  tr

dd + m 2 .

(5.7)

this counts the dierence between the numbers of zeroes of the operators dd and dd or,
equivalently, the dierence between the numbers of zeros of d and d. because

dd = d2 + 2

(5.8)

is positive denite and has no normalizable zero modes, 2i would seem to be precisely the quantity
we want, with the factor of 2 taking into account the dierence between the counting of bosonic

15

and fermionic modes. however, the presence of massless particles in the theory means that there

will be a continuum spectrum with eigenvalues extending down to zero. if the continuum density
of states were to be suciently singular near zero, it could give a nonzero contribution to i. a
careful examination of the large distance behavior of the various operators shows that this is not
the case.6 one can evaluate i by showing that it can be written as the integral over all space of
the divergence of a current ji. gausss theorem converts this to a surface integral at spatial innity

that is determined by the long-range behavior of the higgs and magnetic elds. evaluating this
integral and taking the limit m 2  0 yields

2i = 4n .

(5.9)

thus, any su(2) bps solution carrying n-units of magnetic charge belongs to a 4n-dimensional

space of solutions, or moduli space. the corresponding collective coordinates are just what would

be expected for a conguration of n independent unit monopoles, each with three position variables

and one u(1) phase. allowing these to become time-dependent would yield independent nonzero

linear momenta and electric charges for each of the individual monopoles. together with the simple
additive nature of the bps mass formula, this strongly suggests that all n  2 classical solutions
should be interpreted as multimonopole solutions and that the corresponding states in the quantum

theory are multiparticle states.

6 fundamental monopoles in larger gauge groups

let us now see what happens in the case of a larger simple gauge group g, of rank r > 1, with an

adjoint higgs eld . recall that the generators of a lie algebra can be taken to be r commuting

quantities hi that generate the cartan subalgebra, together with a raising or lowering operator

e for each of the r-component root vectors . by making an appropriate choice of basis, any

element of the lie algebra can be brought into the cartan subalgebra. in particular, we can choose

to write the asymptotic higgs eld in some reference direction to be of the form

0 = h  h .

(6.1)

the r-component vector h determines the nature of the symmetry breaking. if it has nonzero inner

product with all of the , then g is broken maximally, to u(1)r. if instead there are some roots

6although the presence of the continuum spectrum does not aect the correspondence between i and the counting
of normalizable zero modes, it does manifest itself by making the trace in eq. (5.7) m -dependent; had the spectra
of dd and dd been purely discrete, this trace would have been independent of m and no limit would have been
needed.

16

orthogonal to h, then these form the root diagram for some subgroup k of rank k and the unbroken
gauge group is k  u(1)rk.

because the long-range part of the magnetic eld must commute with the asymptotic higgs

eld, it too can be brought into the cartan subalgebra. this allows us to dene a second vector g,

characterizing the magnetic charge, by requiring that the asymptotic magnetic eld in the direction

used to dene 0 be of the form

bk =

rk
4r2 g  h + o(r3) .

the topological quantization condition on the magnetic charge can then be written as [20]

eigh = 1 .

(6.2)

(6.3)

let us now concentrate on the case of maximal symmetry breaking, returning later to the case

where the unbroken symmetry contains a non-abelian factor. to start, recall that a basis for the

root diagram of g is given by r simple roots a with the property that any other root can be written

as a linear combination of the a with coecients that are either all positive or all negative. the

relative angles and lengths of the simple roots characterize the lie algebra (and are encoded in

the dynkin diagram), but the choice of the simple roots is not unique, with the various allowed

choices being related by elements of the weyl group. however, the vector h uniquely determines a

preferred set of simple roots that satisfy the condition

for all a. the solution to the quantization condition can be written in terms of these as

h  a  0

g =

4
e

r

xa=1

na
a

(6.4)

(6.5)

where the dual of a root is dened by  = /2. the coecients na are integers and are the
r topological charges corresponding to the homotopy group 2[su(2)/u(1)r ] = z r. for a bps

solution these must all be of the same sign; without loss of generality, we can take these to be

positive, corresponding to the upper sign in eq. (4.5).

the bps mass formula becomes

m = (cid:18) 4

e (cid:19) r
xa=1

nah  a 

r

xa=1

nama .

(6.6)

an index calculation [21] similar to that for the su(2) theory shows that the number of normalizable

zero modes is

2i = 4

r

xa=1

na .

17

(6.7)

(again, a detailed analysis shows that the continuum spectrum has no eect on this result.) these

results suggest that any higher-charged arbitrary solution should be viewed as a multimonopole

solution containing appropriate numbers of r dierent species of fundamental monopoles, with

the ath species of fundamental monopole having topological charges nb = ab, mass ma, and four

collective coordinates, three of which are position variables while the fourth is a phase in the ath

u(1). in fact, one can easily construct the classical solutions corresponding to these fundamental

monopoles. to do this, note that each simple root a denes an su(2) subgroup of g with

generators

t1 =

1

+ ea(cid:17)
a (cid:16)ea
a (cid:16)ea  e a(cid:17)

i

q22
q22
a  h .

t2 = 
t3 = 

(6.8)

the corresponding fundamental monopole solution is obtained by embedding the su(2) unit mono-

so that the asymptotic  has the required eigenvalues. if as

pole solution, appropriately rescaled, in this subgroup, and adding constant terms to the higgs eld
i (r; v) and s(r; v) (s = 1, 2, 3) are the
elds for the su(2) solution corresponding to a higgs expectation value v, then the embedded

solution is

ai(r) =

(r) =

3

3

xs=1
xs=1

as
i (r; h  a)ts

s(r; h  a)ts + (h  h  

a a)  h .

(6.9)

it is easily veried that this has mass ma and that there are precisely four normalizable zero modes.
to make this more concrete, let us consider the case of su(3) broken to u(1)  u(1). if the
asymptotic higgs eld is taken to be diagonal with its eigenvalues decreasing along the diagonal,

the su(2) subgroups generated by the simple roots 1 and 2 lie in the upper left and lower right
2  2 blocks, respectively. embedding the su(2) monopole in these subgroups gives a pair of
fundamental monopoles, each with four normalizable zero modes. the rst has topological charges

n1 = 1 and n2 = 0 and mass m1, while the second has n1 = 0, n2 = 1, and mass m2. there

is also a third su(2) subgroup, corresponding to the composite root 1 + 2, lying in the four
corner elements of the 3 3 su(3) matrix. using this subgroup to embed the su(2) unit monopole
it has topological
gives a third solution which, like the previous two, is spherically symmetric.

charges n1 = n2 = 1 and mass m1 + m2. unlike the two other embedding solutions, it has not

18

four, but instead eight, zero modes. the extra modes correspond to the fact that this solution can

be continuously deformed into one containing two widely separated fundamental monopoles, one

of each type. despite its spherical symmetry, it is just one of a family of two-monopole solutions.

after quantization, these give rise to a set of two-particle states, not to a new type of one-particle

state.

let us now consider these results in light of the montonen-olive conjecture. table 2 lists the

elementary vector particles, together with the masses and the values of their electric-type charges

under the two unbroken u(1) factors. (the remaining elementary excitations are related to these

by supersymmetry and follow the same pattern.) the two massless excitations, which carry no
charge, should be self-dual in the same sense as the photon of the su(2)  u(1) case. the duals
to the w -bosons corresponding to 1 are clearly the states built upon the 1-embedding of the

su(2) monopole and antimonopole, and similarly for the 2-w boson. what are the duals to the

w s corresponding to 1 + 2? one might have thought that these would be obtained from the

(1 + 2)-embedding of the su(2) solution. however, we have just seen that this corresponds

to a two-particle state and so cannot give the dual to an electrically charged single-particle state.

instead the dual state must be some kind of zero-energy bound state involving the two fundamental

monopoles. to explore this possibility, we need to know more about the dynamics of the monopoles.

a very useful tool for doing this is the moduli space approximation.

mass

qe1

qe2

1

2

1-w

2-w

0

0

m1

m2

(1 + 2)-w

m1 + m2

0

0

e
0

e

0

0

0

e
e

table 2: the particle masses and electric charges of the elementary vector particles in the

maximally broken su(3) theory. the two gauge bosons corresponding to the unbroken genera-

tors are denoted by 1 and 2; qe1 and qe2 are the electric charges in the corresponding u(1)

subgroups.

19

7 the moduli space approximation

the essential assumption of the moduli space approximation [6] is that if the monopoles are moving

suciently slowly7, the evolution of the eld congurations can be approximated as motion on the

moduli space of bps solutions. thus, let abps

a

(r, z) be a complete family of gauge-inequivalent

bps solutions for a given magnetic charge, with a = 1, 2, 3 referring to the spatial components of
the gauge potential and a4  , while z denotes the various collective coordinates. in the a0 = 0
gauge, the moduli space approximation amounts to assuming that the eld conguration at any

time t is of the form

aa(r, t) = u 1(r, t) abps

a

(r, z(t)) u (r, t) 

i
e

u 1(r, t) au (r, t) .

(7.1)

(here 4 = 0.) dierentiating with respect to time gives

aa = zj" aa

zj

+ daj#  zj jaa

(7.2)

where the innitesimal gauge transformations generated by the j arise from dierentiation of the

factors of u . because they correspond to variations on the space of bps solutions, the jaa are

zero modes about the monopole solution at a given time. the gauge functions j are xed by

gausss law, which much be imposed as a constraint when working in a0 = 0 gauge. this gives

0 = daf a0 = zj dajaa

(7.3)

which implies that the jaa must obey the background gauge condition, eq. (5.3).

if we now substitute these results into the a0 = 0 gauge eld theory lagrangian, we obtain

l =

1

2 z d3rtrh a2

i + 2 + b2

i + (di)2i .

(7.4)

with the elds given by eq. (7.1), the integral of the last two terms is just the energy of the static

bps solution. this is completely determined by the magnetic charge and is independent of the zj;

i.e., it is a constant term having no eect on the dynamics. the remaining terms are a quadratic

form in the zj, giving the moduli space lagrangian

where

lms =

1
2

gij(z) zi zj + constant

gij(z) = z d3r [iak jak + i j]

(7.5)

(7.6)

7in this context, slowly moving means not only that the spatial velocities must be small, but also that the

electric charges, which are proportional to the time derivatives of the u(1) phases, must also be small.

20

can be interpreted as a metric on the moduli space. with this interpretation, the solutions of the

equations of motion are simply geodesic motions on the moduli space.

we have thus reduced the eld theory lagrangian to one involving only a nite number of

degrees of freedom. to make use of this reduced lagrangian, we need to determine the moduli

space metric. there are at least three methods for doing this:

1. if a complete family of bps solutions abps

a

(r, z) is known explicitly, then one can solve for

the background gauge zero modes and then substitute these into eq. (7.6) to obtain the metric.

2. in some cases, the mathematical conditions that the moduli space metric must obey are so

constraining as to essentially determine the metric.

3. the original reason for introducing the moduli space approximation was to obtain information

about the low-energy interactions between monopoles. in some cases, this can be turned the other

way around, and knowledge of low-energy monopole dynamics can be used to infer the moduli

space metric.

the last of these strategies can be used to obtain the metric for the portion of an n -monopole

moduli space that corresponds to widely-separated monopoles [22]. consider rst two bps mono-

poles (or rather dyons) in the su(2) theory, with positions xi, spatial velocities vi = xi, u(1)

electric charges qi, and u(1) magnetic charges gi = 4/e (i = 1, 2).

in order that the moduli

space approximation be valid, the vi and qi should be small. when the separation between these
is large (i.e., |x1  x2|  m1
w ), the only nonnegligible interactions between them are their mutual
electromagnetic forces and the long-range force scalar force mediated by the higgs eld. the eect

of these on monopole 1 are described by the lagrangian

l(1)

su(2) = qg2

1 + q2

1 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

0 + (2)(x1)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)q1  v2

+ g1hv1  a(2)(x1)  a(2)

0 (x1)i .

1 + q1hv1  a(2)(x1)  a(2)

0 (x1)i

(7.7)

the rst term includes the eect of the higgs eld, which is manifested through the eective

reduction in the mass of monopole 1 due to the 1/r tail of the higgs eld of monopole 2, denoted

here by (2). the next term describes the eect on the electric charge q1 of moving in the vector
potential a(2) and scalar potential a(2)

0 of monopole 2, while the last term describes the eect on

the magnetic charge g1 of moving in the dual potentials generated by monopole 2. expanding up

to terms quadratic in the vi and qi gives

l(1)

su(2) = m1 1 

1
2

v2

1 +

q2
1
2g2

1! 

g1g2

8r12 "(v1  v2)2 (cid:18) q1
g1 

q2

g2(cid:19)2#

1
4



(g1q2  g2q1)(v2  v1)  w12

21

(7.8)

where w12 denotes the dirac vector potential at x1 due to a unit magnetic charge at x2.

generalizing this to the case of many particles, but still in the su(2) theory, gives the many-

particle lagrangian

lsu(2) =

where

and

mij =

1
2

g2

,

m  xk6=i

mij(cid:18)vi  vj 


wij = 


4rij

xk6=i

wij ,

qiqj

g2 (cid:19) +

g
4

qiwij  vj

g2

4rik

,

i = j

i 6= j

wik ,

i = j

(7.9)

(7.10)

(7.11)

i 6= j

with wij being the value at xi of the dirac potential due to the jth monopole. this is almost,

but not quite, what we need. the moduli space lagrangian is written in terms of the generalized

velocities zj. however, the qj are momenta, not velocities. we must therefore introduce u(1) phase

variables j conjugate to the qj and perform a legendre transformation

lsu(2)(xj, j) = lsu(2)(xj, qj) +xj

jqj/e

1
2

=

mijvi  vj +

g4

2(4)2 (m 1)ij(cid:16) i + wik  vk(cid:17)(cid:16) j + wjl  vl(cid:17)

(7.12)

to obtain a new lagrangian that is of the form of eq. (7.5). from this we can immediately read

o the asymptotic metric describing widely-separated monopoles:

ds2

asym =

1
2

mijdxi  dxj +

g4
2(4)2 (m 1)ij(di + wik  dxk)(dj + wjl  dxl) .

(7.13)

the extension of this analysis to the case of many widely-separated fundamental monopoles in

an arbitrary maximally broken gauge group is surprisingly simple [23]. each monopole is associated

with a fundamental root i, and has an electric charge qi and a phase i corresponding to the u(1)
generated by i  h. the long-range forces between a pair of monopoles are all proportional to
the inner products of the corresponding simple roots. since the inner product of any two simple

roots is always less than or equal to zero, this means that the long-range interactions between two

dierent fundamental monopoles are either vanishing (if the monopoles correspond to orthogonal

simple roots), or else of the opposite sign from those between two monopoles of the same species.

22

the only eect on the metric is to insert factors of i  j, replacing eqs. (7.10) and (7.11) by

mij =



wij = 


g2

i  
4rik

k

,

i = j

m  xk6=i
i  
4rij

g2

j

,

i 6= j

xk6=i
i  



i  

kwik ,

j wij ,

i 6= j .

(7.14)

(7.15)

i = j

and

could this asymptotic form for the metric be in fact exact? for the case of two monopoles in

the su(2) theory, the answer is clearly no. the matrix m that appears in the asymptotic metric is

g2
4r

m 
g2
4r

g2
4r

g2
4r

m 

m = 





(7.16)

where m is the mass of a single monopole. the determinant of m vanishes, implying a singularity

in the metric, at r = g2/(2m) = 1/(2mw ). it seems quite unlikely that the interactions of two

monopoles at such a distance would lead to such singular behavior. indeed, there are short-range

interactions, due to the massive elds in the monopole cores, that were not taken into account in

the asymptotic analysis. if one works in the singular gauge of eq. (3.6), these interactions can be

characterized by the gauge-invariant quantity8 re [w

(1)  w(2)].

neither of these two objections applies in the case of a larger gauge group, provided that

the monopoles correspond to dierent fundamental roots. there are no interactions at all, and the
moduli space is at, if the roots are orthogonal, so we need only consider the case where 1 2 < 0.
the presence of this negative inner product leads to a sign change in m and removes the singularity.
furthermore, the obvious generalization of the bilinear interaction term, tr w
(1)  w(2), vanishes
identically. (the vanishing of this bilinear is a consequence of the two unbroken u(1) symmetries.)

while it thus seems possible that the asymptotic metric might be exact in this case, further

analysis is required to show that this is actually so. to begin, we need several properties of the

moduli space that hold whether or not the monopoles are of distinct species. from the counting

of zero modes, we know that an n -monopole moduli space is a 4n -dimensional manifold. three

of the coordinates can be taken to be the position of the center-of-mass. because the center-of-

mass motion is constant and independent of the behavior of the other variables, the moduli space

8it is the deformations due to these interactions that prevent solutions with two separated su(2) monopoles from

being axial symmetric.

23

can be factored as the product of a at three-dimensional space spanned by the center-of-mass
coordinates and a (4n  5)-dimensional manifold. the latter can itself be factored, at least locally,
into the product of a at r1, corresponding to an overall phase in the unbroken u(1) generated by
h  h, and a (4n  4)-dimensional manifold depending only on relative coordinates and phases.9
furthermore, the relation between the zero modes expressed in eq. (5.6) implies a relationship

between innitesimal motions on the moduli space that induces a quaternionic structure that makes

it a hyper-kahler manifold. (the hyper-kahler property can also be inferred from the extended

supersymmetry that underlies the bps structure.) finally, the moduli space must have a rotational

isometry that reects the rotational symmetry of physical space.

taken together, these properties are rather restrictive. this is particularly the case for the

two-monopole case, where the relative moduli space is four-dimensional. any four-dimensional

hyper-kahler manifold must be a self-dual einstein space. when combined with the requirement

of a rotational isometry, this leaves only four possibilities:

1. four-dimensional euclidean space

2. the eguchi-hanson gravitational instanton [24]

3. the atiyah-hitchin geometry [25]

4. taub-nut space

the rst of these can be ruled out, since it is at and would imply that there were no interactions

between the monopoles. the asymptotic behavior of the second does not match that inferred

from the long-range monopole interactions, and so it too must be discarded. the atiyah-hitchin

manifold asymptotically approaches the behavior described by eq. (7.13), although it diers at

short distance and thus avoids the singularity at r = g2/(2m); it is the relative moduli space for

two su(2) monopoles [25] or, more generally, for two identical monopoles with an gauge group.

the only remaining possibility for the case of distinct fundamental monopoles is taub-nut space.

not only does this turn out to agree asymptotically with the metric found above, but it is actually

identical to it for all values of the monopole separation [26, 27, 28].

the exact moduli space metric for than two su(2) monopoles is not known, although it is

clear that it must deviate from the asymptotic metric. on the other hand, the asymptotic metric

for many fundamental monopoles, all corresponding to dierent simple roots of a large group g,

remains nonsingular for all values of the intermonopole separations. this fact led to the conjecture

[23] that the asymptotic metric might also be exact for this case, a result that has since been proven

9globally, the moduli space can be written as the product of an r1 times the (4n  4)-dimensional relative

manifold divided by a discrete normal subgroup.

24

[29, 30].

this discussion of the moduli space approximation was motivated by the need to nd a zero

energy bound state that would provide the missing state required by the montonen-olive duality

conjecture. let us now briey return to this point. as we have seen, the natural context for

this duality is n = 4 extended supersymmetry. this supersymmetry must be taken into account

when deriving a low-energy approximation to the theory. this leads to a generalized moduli space

lagrangian that involves not only the bosonic coordinates zi that span the moduli space, but

fermionic coordinates j as well. for the n = 4 case, one obtains [31]

l =

1
2

gij(z)h zi zj + i i0dtji +

1
6

rijkl( ij)( kl)

(7.17)

where rijkl is the riemannian curvature on the moduli space and dt is a covariant derivative.

when this theory is quantized, the bosonic coordinates are treated as usual. the fermionic

coordinates give rise to a number of discrete modes whose occupation numbers are either 0 or 1.

a state can be described by a multicomponent wave function of the form

f (0)(z)|i + f (1)

i

(z)|ii + f (2)

ij (z)|iji + 

(7.18)

where the labeling of the kets indicates the occupied fermionic modes. the antisymmetry of the

fermionic variables implies that f (n)(z) is antisymmetric in its indices and so can be viewed as an

n-form on the moduli space; a bound state corresponds to a normalizable form. the requirement

that a state have zero energy turns out to be equivalent to requiring that the forms in its wave

function be harmonic [31]. the duality conjecture predicts a single supermultiplet of zero energy

bound states, and hence a single normalizable harmonic form; since the dual of a harmonic form

is also harmonic, this form must be either self-dual or anti-self-dual. once the explicit form of the

two-monopole moduli space metric has been determined, it turns out to be fairly straightforward

to identify the normalizable form required for self-duality in the maximally broken su(3) theory,

and to show that this form is unique [26, 27].

8 nonmaximal symmetry breaking

let us now return to the case of a nonmaximally broken symmetry, with the unbroken subgroup
being of the form ku(1)rk, where k is a semisimple group of rank k. as in the maximally broken
case, we choose a set of simple roots a whose inner products with h are nonnegative. however,
we now must distinguish between the r  k roots i for which h  i > 0 and the remaining k roots
i that are orthogonal to h; the latter form a set of simple roots for k. furthermore, this set of

25

simple roots is not uniquely determined. instead, there are several possible choices, all related by

weyl reections that correspond to gauge transformations of k. consider, for example, the case of
su(3) broken to su(2)  u(1), with the roots labeled as in fig. 2 and the unbroken su(2) having
roots 2 = . the simple roots can be chosen as in the maximally broken case discussed in
sec. 6, with  = 1 and  = 2, or they can instead be chosen to be 
= 1 + 2 and   = 2.
the two choices are related by an su (2) gauge transformation.



h


 /






=

1

 /

= 


2

figure 2: the root diagram of su(3), with the higgs vector h oriented to give symmetry

breaking to su(2)  u(1).

the quantization condition on the magnetic charge gives

(8.1)

4

g =

rk

e 
xa=1


na 


a +

k

xj=1

qkj
 .

the r  k integers na are the conserved topological charges corresponding to the homotopy group
2[g/(k  u(1)rk)]. they are gauge-invariant, and hence independent of the choice of simple
roots. the qi are also integers, but are neither gauge invariant nor conserved. as before, the energy

of a bps solution is determined by the magnetic charge, with

m = (cid:18) 4

e (cid:19) rk
xa=1

nah  a 

rk

xa=1

nama .

(8.2)

note that only the topological charges na, and not the gauge-variant qi, appear in this formula.

in the maximally broken case we were able to identify r species of fundamental monopoles, each

carrying one unit of a single topological charge, that could be obtained by simple embeddings of

the su(2) unit monopole. both the mass formula and the counting of zero modes suggested that all

bps solutions should be interpreted as being composed of an appropriate number of fundamental

monopoles. can these ideas be extended to the case with nonmaximal breaking? before addressing

26

this question, and indeed even before discussing the counting of zero modes, it may be helpful to

return to the su(3) example discussed in sec. 6.

recall that in the maximally broken case there were three spherically symmetric solutions

that could be obtained by su(2) embeddings. the two fundamental monopoles, corresponding

to the simple roots 1 and 2, each had four zero modes. the third embedding solution, which

corresponded to the composite root 1 + 2, had a mass equal to the sum of the other two masses,

had eight zero modes, and was most naturally interpreted as a particularly symmetric member of

a family of two-monopole solutions.

now let us consider these embedding solutions for the case of su(3) broken to su(2) u(1),
with the unbroken su(2) corresponding to 2 (i.e., lying in the lower left block). as before, the

1-embedding gives a massive monopole solution. explicit solution of the zero mode equations

shows that there are precisely four normalizable zero modes. the 2-embedding, on the other
hand, does not give a monopole solution. instead, eq. (6.9), together with the fact that h 2 = 0,
shows that this embedding simple gives the vacuum. finally, the third embedding, using 1 + 2,

gives a solution that is gauge-equivalent to the 1-embedding, and hence also has four zero modes.

this last result is particularly puzzling if we think of the nonmaximal breaking as a limiting

case of maximal symmetry breaking. how are eight zero modes suddenly converted into four? one

way to understand this is to follow the behavior of the three embedding solutions for the maximally
broken case as h  2 approaches zero. the 1-solution is independent of h  2, and neither it
not its normalizable zero modes are aected. the 2-solution exists (with four normalizable zero
modes) for any nite value of h  2, but its core radius steadily increases, while the elds at
any xed point tend toward their vacuum values, as h  2  0. although the mass and core
radius of the (1 + 2)-solution approach the values for the 1-monopole, nothing particularly

dramatic happens to the solution itself. the zero modes are another matter. four of them [the

three translation modes and an overall u(1) mode] lie entirely within the su(2) subgroup dened

by 1 + 2 and remain normalizable. the other four modes correspond to spatial separations of

the two component monopoles and hence grow in spatial extent as the radius of the 2-monopole

increases; it is this growth, with the consequent divergence at spatial innity, that makes these

modes nonnormalizable in the limit of nonmaximal breaking.

how many zero modes would symmetry considerations have led us to expect? usually, there

is one zero mode for each symmetry of the vacuum that is not a symmetry of the soliton. since

the 1-monopole is not invariant under the unbroken su(2), one might at rst expect to nd three

su(2) modes in addition to the three translational and one u(1) mode of the maximally broken

27

fundamental monopole, for a total of seven. because there is a u(1) subgroup, generated by a

linear combination of one su(2) generator and the original u(1) generator [i.e., by the 8 of the

su(3)], that leaves the monopole invariant, this should be reduced to six. however, it is clear that

these su(2) modes cannot be normalizable, since an su(2) rotation aects the 1/r tail of the vector

potential.10

we can also use try to use index theory methods to count zero modes. a generalization of
the su(2) calculation gives 2i = 6 for either the 1- or the (1 + 2)-monopole, in agreement
with the naive symmetry arguments. however, 2i is equal to the number of normalizable zero
modes only if the contribution of the continuum spectrum to eq. (5.7) vanishes. in the maximally

broken case, analysis of the large-distance behavior of the zero mode equations showed that the

continuum contribution vanished. these arguments break down here, essentially because of terms

involving the 1/r tail of the vector potential, thus allowing for a nonzero continuum contribution
that accounts for the discrepancy between 2i and the actual number of normalizable modes.

the absence of normalizable zero modes associated with su(2) transformations means that there

is no need to introduce collective coordinates that specify the su(2) orientation of the solution.

as a result, the chromodyons  solutions carrying su(2) charges associated with time-varying

su(2) collective coordinates  that one might have expected to nd do not exist [32]. at a deeper

level, the absence of the chromodyons can be traced to the fact that one cannot dene global

color; i.e., there is a topological obstruction to smoothly choosing a triplet of su(2) generators

over the sphere at spatial innity [33].

thus, from many dierent approaches, we see anomalous aspects to these solutions, always

associated with the slow fallo of the non-abelian gauge elds at large distance. this long-range tail

is a direct consequence of the fact that the su(3) solutions that we have considered all have magnetic

charges with non-abelian components; i.e., their coulomb magnetic elds are not invariant under

the unbroken su(2). this suggests that solutions whose magnetic charges commute with the

unbroken subgroup might be better behaved.

for an arbitrary gauge group broken to k  u(1)rk, requiring that the magnetic charge
commute with the unbroken subgroup is equivalent to requiring that g be orthogonal to all the

roots of k,

g  i = 0 .

(8.3)

many of the anomalies described above are absent when this condition holds. the zero modes

associated with the action of k are normalizable, and there is no obstruction to a global denition

10transforming the modes into background gauge makes the long-range behavior even worse [32].

28

of k-color. the continuum contribution to 2i vanishes, and so index methods can be used to
count the normalizable zero modes [34]. one nds that there are

such modes.11

2i = 4


rk

xa=1

na +

k

xj=1

qk


(8.4)

all this suggests that in studying the case of nonmaximal symmetry breaking we should con-

centrate on congurations that obey eq. (8.3) and thus have purely abelian long-range magnetic

elds. imposing this constraint should not cause any essential loss of generality, since any addi-

tional monopoles needed to satisfy this condition can be placed arbitrarily far from the monopoles

of interest.

it also turns out to be helpful to treat this problem as a limiting case of maximal

symmetry breaking; i.e., to start with maximal symmetry breaking and then consider the limit as
some of the h  a tend toward zero. we will see that the moduli space for the maximal broken
case appears to behave smoothly in this limit, and that the limiting value of the metric is indeed

the metric for the case of nonmaximal symmetry breaking. further, we will see that even though

some fundamental monopoles may become massless, their degrees of freedom are not lost.

9 an so(5) example

it is instructive to illustrate the case of nonmaximal symmetry breaking with an example. the

simplest examples with unbroken non-abelian subgroups occur when a rank-two group g is broken
to su(2)  u(1). the choice g = su(3) is perhaps the rst that comes to mind. with this choice,
eq. (8.3) requires that n1 = 2q1. the simplest possibility, n1 = 2, q1 = 1, would thus involve two

massive monopoles and have 12 zero modes.

a somewhat simpler example [3] is obtained by taking the gauge group to be so(5), whose root

diagram is shown in fig. 3. if h is oriented as in fig. 3a, the symmetry is maximally broken to
u(1)  u(1), while if it is orthogonal to , as in fig. 3b, the unbroken subgroup is su(2)  u(1).
now consider the family of congurations with

g =

4
e

( +  ) .

(9.1)

for nonmaximal symmetry breaking with h as in fig. 3b, these have g   = 0, and thus satisfy
eq. (8.3). according to eq. (8.4), there is an 8-parameter family of solutions. as i will describe

11as was noted above, the qi are gauge-variant, and so the sum appearing in this equation is in general gauge-
invariant. however, one can show that for magnetic charges satisfying eq. (8.3) this sum, and hence the expression
for 2i, is gauge-invariant. if the magnetic charge does not obey eq. (8.3), this expression for 2i  which in any case
is no longer equal to the number of normalizable zero modes  is not valid.

29





h





h









(a)

(b)

figure 3: the root diagram of so(5). with the higgs vector h oriented as in (a) the gauge
symmetry is broken to u(1)  u(1), while with the orientation as in (b) the breaking is to
su(2)  u(1).

shortly, these solutions can be found explicitly, and these solutions can be used to directly obtain

the moduli space metric.

if instead the symmetry breaking is maximal, these solutions form a

family of two-monopole solutions. since the two component monopoles are distinct fundamental
monopoles, the moduli space metric is given by the results of sec. 7. by taking the limit h   0,
we will be able to compare the limit of the maximally broken metric with the metric obtained

directly from the solutions with nonmaximal breaking.

i will begin by describing the solutions for the case where so(5) is broken to su(2)  u(1).
of the eight parameters entering these solutions, three clearly correspond to spatial translation

and just specify the position of the center of the solution. four more must correspond to global
su(2)  u(1) transformations. this leaves only a single parameter whose interpretation is not
immediately obvious. however, the solutions must be spherically symmetric, since otherwise there

would be at least two rotational zero modes and hence two more parameters. this spherical

symmetry can be used to reduce the eld equations to a set of ordinary dierential equations that

can be solved explicitly [7]. the extra parameter then appears as an integration constant in this

solution.

to write down the result, recall that the gauge eld ai and the higgs eld  are both elements of

the 10-dimensional lie algebra of so(5). any element p of this lie algebra can be decomposed into
a pair of three-component vectors p(1) and p(2) and a 2  2 matrix p(3) obeying p 
(3) = 2p(3)2

30

according to

where t() and t() are dened by eq. (6.8) and

p = p(1)  t() + p(2)  t() + tr p(3)m

m =

i

q2 (cid:18) e e
e (cid:19) .

e

(9.2)

(9.3)

under the unbroken su(2) corresponding to , p(1), p(2), and p(3) transform as three singlets, a

triplet, and a complex doublet, respectively.

using this notation, the solution can be written as

aa

i(1) = aimrma(r)

a
(1) = rah(r)

aa

i(2) = aimrmg(r, b)

a
(2) = rag(r, b)

ai(3) = if (r, b)

(3) = iif (r, b) .

(9.4)

the su(2) singlet components aa
a(r) = [1  u(r)]/er and v = h  , while

i(1) and a

(1) are equal to the monopole elds of eq. 4.1, with

f (r) =

v

8 cosh(evr/2)

l(r, b)1/2

g(r) = a(r)l(r, b)

l(r, b) = [1 + (r/b) coth(evr/2)]1 .

(9.5)

(9.6)

(9.7)

with

the quantity b that enters through the function l is the new parameter; it can take on any

positive real value. its signicance can be seen by examining the large-distance behavior of the
solution. as with the su(2) monopole, there is a core of radius  1/ev. outside this core, a(r)
falls as 1/r, producing a 1/r2 coulomb magnetic eld in the unbroken u(1), while f (r) falls

exponentially. the behavior of g(r) depends on the relative size of r and b. because

1 ,
b
r

,

1/ev < r < b
r > b

(9.8)

l  


g(r) falls as 1/r when 1/ev < r < b. this corresponds to a 1/r2 magnetic eld in the unbroken

su(2), so in this region the solution appears to carry both u(1) and su(2) magnetic charge.

however, the 1/r fallo of l for r > b implies that the su(2) component of the magnetic eld must
fall at least as fast as 1/r3 at large distance, so in actuality there is only a u(1) magnetic charge.

31

thus, one can think of these solutions as being composed of a massive -monopole, with a core of
radius  1/ev, surrounded by a cloud of non-abelian elds of radius b. the eighth, nonsymmetry-
related, zero mode corresponds to the fact that the energy of these solutions is independent of the

value of the cloud parameter b.

the metric for the eight-dimensional moduli space of these solutions is easily obtained. first,

the terms corresponding to the translation and u(1) coordinates follow immediately from the mass

formula for a dyon. next, the b-zero mode can be obtained by variation of the explicit solutions.

because this zero mode turns out to already satisfy the background gauge condition, it can be

immediately substituted into eq. (7.6) to give gbb. finally, by proceeding as described below

eq. (5.6), one can obtain three more modes from this zero mode. these correspond to global

su(2) transformations and, after conversion to the standard normalization, give the remaining

components of the metric. the result is that

ds2

su (2)u (1) = m dx2 +

162
m

d2 + k" db2

b

+ b(cid:16)d2 + sin2  d2 + (d + cos  d)2(cid:17)#

(9.9)

where m is the total mass of the solution, , , and  are su(2) euler angles,  is a u(1) phase

angle, and k is a normalization constant whose value is not important for our purposes.

this should be compared with the metric for moduli space of solutions with one massive -

monopole and one massive -monopole in the maximally broken case. equations (7.137.15) lead

to

ds2

u (1)u (1) = m dx2

cm +

162
m

d2

tot +(cid:18) +
r(cid:19)1

k

+k2(cid:18) +

k

r(cid:19)hdr2 + r2(d2 + sin2  d2)i

(d + cos  d)2 .

(9.10)

here m is the sum of the two monopole masses,  is the reduced mass, and r, , and  specify
the relative position vector r = r1  r2. the overall u(1) phase (corresponding to the subgroup
generated by h  h) is , while the relative u(1) phase is . finally, k is the same constant as in
eq. (9.9).

nonmaximal breaking corresponds to the limit h    0 in which the -monopole becomes

massless and the reduced mass  vanishes. setting  = 0 in eq. (9.10) gives

ds2

u (1)u (1) = m dx2

cm +

162
m

d2

tot + k" dr2

r

+ r(cid:16)d2 + sin2  d2 + (d + cos  d)2(cid:17)# .

(9.11)

this is exactly the same as eq. (9.9), except for the change in notation

32

r  b
  
  
  

thus, at the level of the moduli space lagrangian, the degrees of freedom of the -monopole
survive even as the monopole becomes massless in the h    0 limit. however, the relation of
these degrees of freedom to the classical solution changes. first, as its mass m decreases, the

core of the -monopole spreads out until it becomes a cloud surrounding the -monopole, with

the intermonopole separation becoming the cloud size. second, the directional angles of the -

monopole combine with the relative phase to give the euler angles specifying the su(2) orientation

of the cloud. a consequence of the latter fact is a certain ambiguity in the position of the massless

monopole: initial congurations of massive monopoles that dier only in the relative direction of
the two monopoles become gauge-equivalent in the m  0 limit,

10 more complex examples with massless monopoles

we can gain further insight into the meaning of these massless monopoles by considering some
more complicated examples.
in particular, let us consider the case of su(n ) broken to u(1) 
su(n  2)  u(1), with the unbroken su(n  2) corresponding to the middle n  3 roots of the
dynkin diagram in fig. 4. as before, we are interested in solutions that satisfy eq. (8.3), so that

their asymptotic magnetic elds are purely abelian. all solutions of this equation can be written

as sums of the following irreducible solutions:

1) n  2 massive and (n  2)(n  3)/2 massless monopoles, with

n1 = 0
n2 = n  2
qj = j ,

j = 1, 2, . . . , n  3

(10.1)

2) n  2 massive and (n  2)(n  3)/2 massless monopoles, with

n1 = n  2
n2 = 0
qj = n  2  j ,

33

j = 1, 2, . . . , n  3

(10.2)

3) two massive and n  3 massless monopoles, with

n1 = 1

n2 = 1

qj = 1 ,

j = 1, 2, . . . , n  3

(10.3)



1



1



2



n-3



2

figure 4: the dynkin diagram of su(n), with the labeling of the simple roots corresponding

to symmetry breaking to u(1)  su(n  2)  u(1).

in each of the rst two cases eq. (8.4) gives a total of 2(n  2)(n  1) zero modes. the
positions and u(1) phases of the massive monopoles account for 4(n  2) of these, while global
su(n  2) transformations give (n  2)2  1 more. this leaves (n  3)2 modes that presumably
correspond to parameters describing gauge-invariant aspects of the non-abelian cloud, showing

that the structure of these clouds can be much more complex than in the simple so(5) example

of the previous section. it would be enormously instructive to examine these solutions in detail.

unfortunately, these solutions are not yet known explicitly, although there has been considerable
progress [36] for the simplest case (n = 4), which can be viewed as su(3)  su(2)  u(1).

the third case turns out to be more tractable [8]. here there are 4(n  1) parameters, of
which eight specify the positions and u(1) phases of the two massive monopoles. the number of
remaining parameters is clearly less than the dimension of su(n  2). this is explained by the
fact that any solution with this magnetic charge can be written as an embedding of an su(4) 
u(1)  su(2)  u(1) solution. hence, there is a u(n  4) subgroup of the unbroken group that
leaves any given solution invariant, so the number of global gauge zero modes is 4n  13, which
is the dimension of su(n  2)/u(n  4). the one remaining zero mode corresponds to the single
cloud parameter, which i will again denote by b.

even in this last case, the solutions are too complicated to be found by a direct attack on the

eld equations. however, they can be obtained by making use of a construction due to nahm

[35]. in this construction, one begins with a triplet of matrices ti(s) (where s is a real variable

associated with the eigenvalues of the asymptotic higgs elds) that obey a nonlinear dierential

equation. these are then use to construct a linear equation that is obeyed by a quantity v(r, s).

34

finally, the gauge and higgs elds for the monopole solution are obtained from integrals involving

v and its rst derivative.

to be explicit, consider an su(n ) theory where the asymptotic higgs eld is of the form

 = diag (s1, s2, . . . , sn )

with s1  s2   , sn , while the magnetic charge is

qm =

4
e

diag (n1, n2  n1, n3  n2, . . . ,nn 1) .

(10.4)

(10.5)

dene the stepwise continuous function k(s) to be equal to nj on the interval nj < s < nj+1. the
ti are required to have dimension k(s)  k(s), and to satisfy12

dti
ds

=

i
2

ijk[tj, tk] +xp

(p )i(s  sp ) .

(10.6)

here sp denotes any of the points sj such that nj1 = nj, and the (p )i are constant matrices of
dimension k(sp )  k(sp ).

the matrix v(r, s) is of dimension 2k(s)  n , and obeys
+ (ti + rii)  i(cid:21) v(r, s) +xp

0 = (cid:20)

d
ds

a
p sp (r)(s  sp )

together with the normalization condition

i = z ds v(r, s)v(r, s) +xp

s
p (r)sp (r) .

(10.7)

(10.8)

here sp (r) is an n -component row vector, while a
the property that a

p ap = (p )ii  i(p )0i has rank one.13

p is a 2k(sp )-component column vector with

finally, the gauge and higgs elds for the monopole solution are obtained from

a(r) = iz ds v(r, s)v(r, s) +xp
(r) = z ds s v(r, s)v(r, s) +xp

s
p (r)sp (r)

sp s

p (r)sp (r) .

(10.9)

in our case, the nj are all equal to unity and so the ti(s) are all 1  1. equation (10.6) reduces

to a trivial equation whose solution is that the ti(s) form a piecewise constant vector

t(s) = xa ,
12for the remainder of this section, i will set e = 1.
13these two equations are preserved if v and the sp are multiplied on the right by n  n unitary matrices; such

sa < s < sa+1 .

(10.10)

transformations correspond to gauge transformations of the spacetime elds.

35

with the sj all dierent, so that the symmetry breaking is maximal, it is clear that the xa should
be interpreted as the positions of the n  1 massive monopoles.

with the so(5) example in mind, one might expect to nd some ambiguity in the positions
of the massless monopoles when the middle n  2 eigenvalues of  are set equal to give an
unbroken u(1)  su(n  2)  u(1). tracing through the steps that lead from the ti to the space-
time elds a and , one nds that this is indeed the case. the space-time elds are unaected by

any transformation of the massless monopoles positions x2, x3, . . . , xn 2 that leaves invariant the

sum of distances

n 2

xa=1 |xa+1  xa|  2b + |xn 1  x1| = 2b + r .

(10.11)

just as in the so(5) example, all but one of the massless monopole coordinates are transformed

into gauge-orientation parameters, leaving only a single gauge-invariant cloud parameter b.

because of the particularly simple form of the ti here, eq. (10.7) can be solved in closed

form. after rescaling the solution so that the normalization condition eq. (10.8) is satised, it is

straightforward, although perhaps a bit tedious, to substitute the result into eq. (10.9) and then

integrate to obtain explicit expressions for a and ; these involve only rational and hyperbolic

functions. because of the lack of spherical symmetry, these expressions are naturally more complex

than in the so(5) case. nevertheless, they have some simplifying features that are reminiscent

of the so(5) solution. the elds can be decomposed into three pieces that correspond (at least

at large distances) to terms transforming under the singlet, the fundamental, and the adjoint
representations of the unbroken su(n  2). only the latter two depend on b, and in both cases
this dependence is through a single function l, which is now a matrix. in addition, the higgs elds

for the fundamental and adjoint pieces are given in terms of the same spacetime functions as the

gauge elds.

in fact, it is possible to choose the gauge so that, apart from a constant contribution to , all
nonzero terms in these elds lie in a 4  4 block. this shows that the solution is essentially an
embedded su(4) solution, and thus invariant under a u(n  4) subgroup, as was claimed above.
the details of these solutions inside the massive monopole cores are not very illuminating. on

the other hand, insight into the nature of the non-abelian cloud can be obtained by examining the

asymptotic behavior of the elds well outside the cores. i will display the form that these take for

the su(4) case; the extension to n > 4 is straightforward.

consider rst the case b  r. if the distances yl and yr from a point r to the two massive

36

monopoles are both much less than b, the higgs eld and magnetic eld can be written in the form

t4 

1
2yr

0

t2 +

1
2yr

(r) = u 1

1 (r)





0

0

0

0

0

t2 

1
2yl

0

0

0

0

t1 +

1
2yl





u1(r) + 

(10.12)

b(r) = u 1

1 (r)

u1(r) + 

(10.13)

0

0

yr
2y2
r

0

0

0





0

yr
2y2
r



0

0

0

0

yl
2y2
l

0

0

0

0

yl
2y2
l







1
2y

t4 
0

0

0

y
2y2

0

0

0





0

t2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0 

y
2y2





where u1(r) is an element of su(4) and the dots represent terms that are suppressed by powers of

r/b, yl/b, or yr/b. these are the elds that one would expect for two massive monopoles, each of

whose magnetic charges has both a u(1) component and a component in the unbroken su(2) that
corresponds to the middle 2  2 block. if instead y  (yl + yr)/2  b,

(r) = u 1

2 (r)





0

0

t2

0

0

0

0

t1 +

1
2y

u2(r) + o(b/y2)

(10.14)





b(r) = u 1

2 (r)

u2(r) + o(b/y3) .

(10.15)

thus, at distances large compared to b the non-abelian part of the coulomb magnetic eld is

cancelled by the cloud in a manner similar to that which we saw for the so(5) case.

37

in the opposite limit, b = 0, the solutions are essentially embeddings of su(3)  u(1)  u(1)

solutions. at large distances, one nds that

t4 

1
2yr

0

t2 

1
2yl

+

1
2yr

(r) = u 1

3 (r)





0

0

0

0

0

t2

0

0

0

0

t1 +

1
2yl





u3(r) + 

(10.16)

0

0

0

yr
2y2
r

yl
l 
2y2
0

0

0

0

0

0

0





0

0 

yl
2y2
l

yr
2y2
r

0

0

0





b(r) = u 1

3 (r)

u3(r) +  .

(10.17)

viewed as su(3) solutions, the long-range elds are purely abelian. viewed as su(4) solutions, the

long-range part is non-abelian in the sense that the unbroken su(2) acts nontrivially on the elds.

however, because of the alignment of the elds of the two massive monopoles, the non-abelian

part of the eld is a purely dipole eld that falls as r/y3 at large distances.

11 concluding remarks

i began these lectures by arguing that the one-particle states built from solitons should not dier in

any essential way from those based on the elementary quanta. the massless monopoles that arise

when there is nonmaximal symmetry breaking appear to present a challenge to this point of view.

when viewed in terms of classical solutions, they do not seem very particle-like: they do not exist

as isolated classical solutions, and in multimonopole congurations they coalesce into clouds of

arbitrary size rather than appearing as localized objects with well-dened positions. furthermore,

while their degrees of freedom are preserved in the moduli space lagrangian as one goes over from

the massive to the massless case, the natural interpretation of these in terms of particle properties

are lost.

of course, the presumed duals to these massless monopoles are the massless elementary gauge

bosons (gluons) carrying non-abelian charges. these also dier signcantly from their massive

counterparts, especially in the low-energy regime. like the massless monopoles, these can never

38

be at rest, so it is perhaps not so strange that there are no are no static solutions corresponding

to a single isolated massless monopole. further, the gluon eld surrounding a massive particle

carrying non-abelian charge can be seen as somewhat analogous to the massless monopole clouds.

it would be very desirable to be able to make these correspondences more precise, perhaps including

scattering calculations along the lines of those described in sec. 4.

much remains to be learned about the properties and dynamics of these massless monopoles.

further investigation of these oers the promise of deeper insight into the nature of non-abelian

gauge theories.

this work was supported in part by the u.s. department of energy.

references

[1] s. coleman, phys. rev. d 11, 2088 (1975).

[2] c. montonen and d. olive, phys. lett. 72b, 117 (1977).

[3] k. lee, e.j. weinberg and p. yi, phys. rev. d 54, 6351 (1996).

[4] g t hooft, nucl. phys. b79, 276 (1974); a. m. polyakov, jept lett. 20, 194 (1974).

[5] e.b. bogomolnyi, sov. j. nucl. phys. 24, 449 (1976); m.k. prasad and c.m. sommereld,

phys. rev. lett. 35, 760 (1975); s. coleman, s. parke, a. neveu and c.m. sommereld, phys.

rev. d 15, 544 (1977).

[6] n.s. manton, phys. lett. 110b, 54 (1982).

[7] e.j. weinberg, phys. lett. b119, 151 (1982).

[8] e.j. weinberg and p. yi, phys. rev. d 58, 046001 (1998).

[9] r.f. dashen, b. hasslacher, and a. neveu, phys. rev. d 12, 3424 (1975).

[10] s. mandelstam, phys. rev. d 11, 3026 (1975).

[11] t.w. kirkman and c.k. zachos, phys. rev. d 24, 999 (1981).

[12] e.j. weinberg, phys. rev. d 19, 3008 (1979); c.h. taubes, commun. math. phys. 75, 207

(1980).

39

[13] j. hong, y. kim, and p.y. pac, phys. rev. lett. 64, 2230 (1990); r. jackiw and e.j. weinberg,

phys. rev. lett. 64, 2234 (1990).

[14] e. witten and d. olive, phys. lett. 78b, 97 (1978 ).

[15] r. jackiw and c. rebbi, phys. rev. d 13, 3398 (1976); c. callias, commun. math. phys. 62,

213 (1978).

[16] h. osborn, phys. lett. 83b, 321 (1979).

[17] a. sen, phys. lett. b329, 217 (1994).

[18] e.j. weinberg, phys. rev. d 20, 936 (1979).

[19] l.s. brown, r.d. carlitz, and c. lee, phys. rev. d 16, 417 (1977).

[20] p. goddard, j. nuyts and d. olive, nucl. phys. b125, 1 (1977); f. englert and p. windey,

phys. rev. d 14, 2728 (1976).

[21] e.j. weinberg, nucl. phys. b167, 500 (1980).

[22] g.w. gibbons and n.s. manton, phys. lett. b356, 32 (1995).

[23] k. lee, e.j. weinberg and p. yi, phys. rev. d 54, 1633 (1996).

[24] t. eguchi and a.j. hanson, ann. phys. 120 (1979) 82.

[25] m.f. atiyah and n.j. hitchin, the geometry and dynamics of magnetic monopoles, princeton

univ. press, princeton (1988); phys. lett. 107a, 21 (1985); phil. trans. r. soc. lon. a315,

459 (1985).

[26] k. lee, e.j. weinberg and p. yi, phys. lett. b 376, 97 (1996).

[27] j.p. gauntlett and d.a. lowe, nucl. phys. b472, 194 (1996).

[28] s.a. connell, the dynamics of the su (3) charge (1,1) magnetic monopoles, university of

south australia preprint.

[29] m.k. murray, j. geom. phys. 23, 31 (1997).

[30] g. chalmers, multi-monopole moduli spaces for su (n ) gauge group, itp-sb-96-12, hep-

th/9605182.

40

[31] e. witten, nucl. phys. b202, 253 (1982); j.p. gauntlett, nucl. phys. b400, 103 (1993).

[32] a. abouelsaood, nucl. phys. b226, 309 (1983).

[33] p. nelson and a. manohar, phys. rev. lett. 50, 943 (1983); a. balachandran, g. marmo,

m. mukunda, j. nilsson, e. sudarshan and f. zaccaria, phys. rev. lett. 50, 1553 (1983); p.

nelson and s. coleman, nucl. phys. b237, 1 (1984).

[34] e.j. weinberg, nucl. phys. b203, 445 (1982).

[35] w. nahm, phys. lett. 90b, 413 (1980); w. nahm, in monopoles in quantum eld theory, n.

craigie et al. eds. (world scientic, singapore, 1982); w. nahm, in group theoretical methods

in physics, g. denardo et al. eds. (springer-verlag, 1984).

[36] p. irwin, phys. rev. d 56, 5200 (1997).

41

