hep-th/9908077
tifr-th-99-41
august 1999

9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
0
1

 

 
 

1
v
7
7
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

discrete flux as quantum hair

atish dabholkar and sandip p. trivedi

department of theoretical physics

tata institute of fundamental research

homi bhabha road, mumbai, india, 400005

abstract

we investigate yang-mills theory on a spatial torus at nite temperature in
the presence of discrete electric and magnetic uxes using the ads/cft corre-
spondence. we calculate the leading dependence of the partition function on the
uxes using the dual supergravity theory and comment upon the interpretation
of these uxes as discrete quantum hair for black holes in ads spacetime.

1 introduction

in this paper we calculate the nite temperature partition function of the yang-mills theory
with sixteen supercharges on a torus as a function of discrete electric and magnetic uxes.
we perform this calculation in the large n limit using the dual supergravity description in
four and ve dimensions [10, 1]. in this description, the thermal state of the gauge theory
maps to a black hole [17] and we will show that the discrete ux in the gauge theory maps to
a kind of quantum hair for the black hole. thus, our calculation will reduce to determining
how the partition function of a black hole depends on its quantum hair.

the study of discrete uxes in nonabelian gauge theories was initiated by t hooft [15]
following the analogies between connement and superconductivity. magnetic lines of force
are expelled from the superconducting ground state and can penetrate the medium only
in the form of thin ux tubes. magnetic ux tubes exist as nielsen-olsen vortices and are
locally stable. if a pair of magnetic monopole and antimonopole is introduced in the medium
then the total ux between them is localized in a ux tube that connects the two charges
giving rise to a linear conning potential between the two. qualitatively, connement in
nonabelian gauge theories is the electric analog of superconductivity where the electric ux
tubes are locally stable and can then be interpreted as qcd strings. to put this idea on
a more quantitative basis, t hooft considered the gauge theory on a torus. this allows
for the introduction of topological discrete uxes in the pure gauge theory without quarks
which are the analogues of electric and magnetic uxes in the u(1) theory. by examining
the dependence of the free energy on these uxes, one can investigate the stability of the
ux tubes to gain insight about the phases of the theory. in this paper we investigate some
of these questions using the correspondence with supergravity which provides an explicit
realization of these ideas.

by now a fair amount is known about the nite temperature sym theory we will consider
here. for example, the spatial wilson loop has been calculated in the theory and shows area
law behavior thereby indicating that the theory has locally stable ux tubes [11, 13].
in
this paper we will follow the general framework discussed in [2, 18] for including discrete
ux in supergravity. our calculation will be done in an approximation where the string
tension of these ux tubes is much bigger than the size of the torus. as we will see, in
this approximation, the dominant congurations contributing to the partition function have
a simple interpretation in the gauge theory: they correspond to the worldsheets of ux
tubes wrapping appropriate two cycles of the torus. we will do the calculation in both
the four-dimensional and the ve-dimensional theory. the latter, at energies low compared
to the temperature, should ow to the four-dimensional pure glue gauge theory without
supersymmetry. unfortunately, as is well known, in the supergravity regime we use here,
there are extra kaluza-klein states in the theory which do not decouple [17, 7]. thus,
from the point of view of the non-supersymmetric gauge theory, our calculation is at best an
approximation, somewhat analogous to the strong coupling expansion in lattice gauge theory.
in fact, as we will show, the dual supergravity yields an answer which, in its important
quantitative features, agrees with the strong coupling expansion. these features are in

1

accord with the expectation about conning theories and are likely to be universal.

it is also useful to consider the discussion in this paper from the perspective of the
supergravity theory. as was mentioned above, a black hole in the bulk is represented as a
thermal state in the boundary gauge theory. the classical no-hair theorems of black hole
physics then turn into a familiar statement in the gauge theory: a thermal state is only
characterized by its mass, angular momentum, and various conserved global charges. but
as is well known [3, 5], black holes can also possess quantum hair. one might wonder what
their description is in the boundary theory. for the quantum hair considered in this paper
they turn out to be related to the the discrete electric and magnetic uxes of the gauge
theory.

this paper is organized as follows. the four-dimensional theory with n = 4 super-
symmetric is discussed in 2. the ads/cft correspondence for the blackhole geometry is
reviewed in 2.1, discrete uxes from the gauge theory and supergravity points of view are
described in 2.2 and 2.3 respectively, and the calculation of the partition function is dis-
cussed in 2.4. nonsupersymmetric gauge theories in three and four dimensions are discussed
in 3 and 4 respectively starting with a supersymmetric theory in one extra dimension com-
pactied on a circle with thermal boundary conditions that break supersymmetry.

2

discrete fluxes in the ads/cft correspondence

2.1 the black hole geometry

in this section we consider the n = 4 supersymmetric su(n) yang-mills theory on a
spatial torus t3 at nite temperature t . the boundary spacetime m in this case has
topology t3  s1. by the ads/cft correspondence [10, 17], this boundary theory is dual
to a bulk supergravity theory on b  s5 where b is an einstein manifold that has m as the
boundary at innity. the relevant manifold b is well studied and corresponds to a euclidean
schwarzschild black hole in ads space[8]. in poincare coordinates, the metric is

ds2 = (

r2
r2 

cg5m

r2

)dx2

0 +

dr2

( r2
r2  cg5m

r2

)

+

r2
r2 (dx2

1 + dx2

2 + dx2

3),

(1)

where r = (4gsn)1/4 is the radius of curvature of ads space, g5 = g10/(r53) is the
ve-dimensional newtons constant, m is the mass of the black hole, and c = 32
3 . the black
hole horizon is at

and the temperature is

rh = (c g5m r2)1/4

t =

1


rh/r2.

(2)

(3)

since we are working in a situation where the spatial boundary is t3 as opposed to s3, the relevant

solution is obtained by taking the large mass limit of the metric in [17].

2

the coordinates xi (i = 1, 2, 3) parametrize a 3-torus. for simplicity we consider a cubic
torus of size l so that xi are identied with xi + l. note that the physical size of the
torus at the radial position r in the bulk is rl/r. in the black hole geometry, r is bounded
from below by the radius of black hole horizon rh. as long as rh l/r is large compared to
the string scale, we expect that the dual supergravity description will be well-dened. by
contrast, at zero temperature (m = 0 in the above formulae), the size of the torus becomes
vanishingly small as r goes to zero. the supergravity description then becomes inadequate
at small r because the string modes that wind around the torus become massless near r = 0
and have to be included in the low energy description.

2.2 fluxes in the boundary gauge theory

the nite temperature partition function of the yang-mills theory on the boundary is ob-
tained by computing the euclidean path integral on the 4-torus t3  s1. in the n = 4
supersymmetric theory, the center zn of su(n) acts trivially because all elds transform in
the adjoint representation. therefore, one is really dealing with an su(n)/zn gauge bun-
dle on a 4-torus. such gauge bundles are labeled by six topological invariants n = n
(,  = 0, . . . , 3) which are all integers modulo n. we would like to calculate the dependence
of the partition function on these integers.

let us briey review the origin of these integers and their physical interpretation [15, 12].
in the path integral, one sums over eld congurations that are periodic up to a gauge
transformation. this allows for twisted gauge elds. for example, in the x1  x2 plane with
x0 and x3 xed, a eld  satises the boundary condition

(l, x2) = 1(x2)(0, x2)
(x1, l) = 2(x1)(x1, 0).

(4)

here  denotes schematically the appropriate gauge transformation of  by : a 
a1  i1 for the gauge elds,   1 for the gauginoes, and similarly for the
scalars. for consistency, the gauge transformations must satisfy the cocycle condition

(l, l) = 1(l)(0, l) = 1(l)2(0)(0, 0)
= 2(l)(l, 0) = 2(l)1(0)(0, 0).

(5)

therefore, 1(l)2(0) and 2(l)1(0) must be equal up to an element of the center zn ,

1(l)2(0) = exp (

2in12

n

)2(l)1(0).

(6)

the integer n12 is dened modulo n and is a topological invariant because it cannot be
changed by a periodic gauge transformation or by smooth deformations of the eld. there

 the fermions are actually periodic on t3 and antiperiodic on s1 but we will ignore this distinction in

this subsection

3

are altogether six independent integers n corresponding to the six 2-cycles of the 4-torus
that completely specify the topological class of the gauge elds.

the integers {nij} (i, j = 1, 2, 3) are related to the magnetic ux on the torus. for
example, consider the contractible wilson loop 1(l)2(0)1
2 (l) that measures the
total magnetic ux passing through the x1  x2 plane. we immediately see from the cocycle
condition eq.(6) that there is n12 units of magnetic ux in the x3 direction for the twisted
gauge elds considered above. in general, one can dene the integer mi  1
2ijknjk as the
magnetic ux in the ith direction.

1 (0)1

the physical interpretation of n0i is clearest in the hamiltonian formalism. in the gauge
a0 = 0, the theory has a residual invariance under time-independent gauge transformations.
states in the physical hilbert space must furnish a representation of this invariance group.
for a gauge transformation (x) that is continuously connected to the identity, one must
choose the trivial representation for the corresponding operator consistent with gauss law:

(x)|i = |i

(7)

however, for the su(n)/zn theory on t3 there are quasiperiodic gauge transformations
that are is not continuously connected to the identity. a quasiperiodic gauge transformation
is periodic modulo an element of the center. for example, consider a gauge transformation
that is quasiperiodic in the x3 direction

[k3](x1, x2, l) = [k3](x1, x2, 0) exp (

2ik3

n

)

(8)

and periodic in the x1, x2 directions. two such gauge transformations that are labeled by the
same integer k3 have the same action on physical states because they dier by a homotopi-
cally trivial gauge transformation that leaves such states invariant as in eq.(7). such gauge
transformations obviously generate a zn group and moreover commute with the hamilto-
nian. one can choose the physical states to be eigenstates of this gauge transformation

[k3]|i = exp (

2ik3e3

n

)|i,

(9)

for some integer e3 modulo n. to see that the integer e3 can be interpreted as the electric
ux in the x3 direction, consider the action of [k3] on a wilson loop

a(c3) = trp exp(izc3

dxa)

that runs along a curve c3 in the x3 direction at x1 = x2 = 0. it is clear that

[k3]a(c3) = a(c3) [k3] exp (

2ik3

n

).

(10)

(11)

thus a(c3) acting on a state increases the value of e3 by one unit. since the wilson loop
creates a line of electric ux, it is natural to regard e3 as the discrete electric ux.

4

one can project onto states with a well dened electric ux e3 by using the projection

operator

p(e3) =

1

n xk3

exp (2ik3e3

n

) [k3].

(12)

the nite temperature partition sum over states with a specied value of e3 is then given by

z(e3)  tr[p (e3) exp (h/t )] =

1

n xk3

exp (2ik3e3

n

) tr [ [k3] exp (h/t )].

(13)

it is easy to see that each term tr[ [k3] exp (h/t )] in the sum can be expressed as a
euclidean functional integral over gauge elds that are twisted in the x0  x3 plane as in
eq.(4)with n03 = k3. the partition function z(e3) is then obtained as a discrete fourier
transform using eq.(13). thus, the integer k3 is conjugate to the electric ux e3.

more generally, the electric uxes {ei} are the quantum numbers of the z3

n electric
in addition, we also have z3
symmetry and are conjugate to the integers {ki  n0i}.
n
magnetic symmetry. the integers mi that we dened earlier can equivalently be regarded as
the quantum numbers of the this magnetic symmetry in the dual description.

2.3 fluxes in the bulk supergravity

we would like to identify the topological z6
n symmetry and the quantum numbers that
correspond to the discrete electric and magnetic uxes in the dual supergravity theory. we
will follow the general framework described in [18, 2] although the specic context here is
somewhat dierent.

consider, for example, the electric ux e3 which is the quantum number of the zn
symmetry that is generated by [k3]. a dening property of [k3] is the commutation
relation eq.(11) with the wilson loop a(c3). in the ads/cft correspondence, a wilson
loop a(c) that runs along a curve c in the yang-mills theory is identied with the boundary
of a fundamental string worldsheet d that extends in the bulk geometry [11, 13]. for a(c3),
the corresponding string worldsheet d3r extends, at a xed euclidean time x0, in the x3  r
plane such that d3r = c3. the worldsheet couples to the ns-ns 2-form eld bn s through
the coupling

(14)

(15)

exp (izd3r

bn s)

in particular, if we have a nonzero expectation value

a = zd3r

bn s

in the bulk then the worldsheet would pick up a phase eia. it follows from the commutation
relations eq.(11) that the operator that corresponds to [k3] would shift this expectation
value

a  a + 2k3/n.

5

(16)

we will see that in the supergravity theory, there is a natural candidate for this zn shift
symmetry. obviously, the generator of this symmetry would be the momentum conjugate
to a which we can nd from the classical action and the corresponding translation operator
can then be identied with [k3].

the relevant part of the supergravity lagrangian on the euclidean ads space is

l =

1
2g2

s (cid:16)|dbn s|2 + |dbr|2(cid:17) +

in
4 (cid:16)bn s  dbr  br  dbn s(cid:17) .

(17)

the rst two terms are the usual kinetic terms restricted to the ads part. the last two
terms are topological and arise from the chern-simons coupling in ten dimensions of the
two b-elds to the 5-form eld strength g5. the factor of n arises from the integration of
g5 over the sphere s5 and corresponds to the total 5-form ux of n d3-branes.

since we are interested in spatially constant modes of the b elds, we can integrate over

space for the relevant modes and reduce this problem to particle mechanics. let us dene

b = z12

br,

(18)

for a nontrivial cycle 12 along x1x2 directions. then the lagrangian after an integratiioin
by parts reduces to

1

l =

ab .

(19)

2 (cid:16)1 a2 + 2 b2(cid:17) +

in
2

here the dot indicates a derivative with respect to the euclidean time. the regularized
eective masses 1, 2 arise from integrating the r dependence of the metric in the origi-
nal lagrangian but their precise form will not be important in what follows. this is the
lagrangian of a particle moving on a plane in the presence of a constant magnetic eld of
magnitude n/2 perpendicular to the plane. we also know that the 2-form b elds are
both compact gauge elds because both the d-string and the f-string charge is quantized.
consequently, their zero modes a and b are compact coordinates with period 2.

now, without the coupling to the magnetic eld, the lagrangian clearly has a u(1) shift
symmetry a  a + c for an arbitrary periodic constant c. the coupling to the magnetic
eld breaks this u(1) to a zn subgroup. this follows from the the fact that er l would
it will suce
be invariant under the shift of a  a + 2/n because b has period 2.
for our purposes to consider the limit of large magnetic eld and drop the kinetic terms.
the remaining lagrangian is automatically rst order and we can readily identify b as the
momentum conjugate to a. they would satisfy the heisenberg commutation relation

[a, b] = 2i/n.

(20)

using this commutator it then follows that in our original problem we have the operator
relation

exp (ik3 z12

br) exp (izd3r

bn s) = exp (ik3 z12

br) exp (izd3r

bn s) exp (

2ik3

n

)

(21)

6

which is identical to the relation eq.(11) that we were seeking.
identication

[k3]  exp (ik3 z12

br).

it implies the operator

(22)

a state in supergravity with a well dened ux e3 is an eigenstate of this operator with

z12

br =

2e3
n

.

(23)

by an analogous reasoning one can see that turning on m3 units of magnetic ux in the

x3 direction then corresponds to turning on an expectation value

z12

bn s =

2m3

n

.

(24)

this also follows from the sl(2, z) duality symmetry which in the type-iib theory inter-
changes br and bn s and in the yang-mills theory on the d3-brane worldvolume exchanges
electric and magnetic uxes. under this duality the wilson loop a(c) that creates electric
ux tube gets interchanged with the t hooft loop b(c) which creates a magnetic ux tube.
in the supergravity theory, b(c) is thus a boundary of a d-string worldsheet. in general,
turning on the uxes ei and mi in the yang-mills theory corresponds in the supergravity to
turning on the expectation values

zij

br =

2ijkek

n

,

zij

bn s =

2ijkmk

n

.

(25)

2.4 finite temperature partition function

having identied the discrete uxes in the supergravity description we now turn to calcu-
lating the nite temperature partition function. when the 2-form gauge potentials are zero,
we saw in section 2.1 that the relevant conguration in the supergravity theory is a black
hole. what happens when the gauge potentials are turned on? a careful quantization of
the zero modes as in [2] shows that, when the gauge potentials are constant and take the
quantized values, there is no extra cost in energy. in turn this means that the metric, the
5-form eld strength, and the dilaton stay unchanged from their values in the black hole
background. thus the discrete uxes do not change the classical behavior of the black hole
and the related thermodynamic quantities.

once quantum uctuations around the black holes background are included though a
dependence on the uxes does arise. these quantum uctuations include euclidean fun-
damental string worldsheets that wrap around non-trivial 2-cycles in the bulk geometry.
these can be viewed as f-string instantons and in this instanton sector the partition func-
tion depends on the expectation value of the 2-form gauge potential bn s. one can also
have d-string instantons that are sensitive to br and more generally (p, q)-string instantons
[14, 19]. the discrete uxes thus manifest themselves in the dual supergravity theory as
quantum hair [3, 5].

7

let us rst consider the case where a single component of magnetic ux m3 is turned on.
from eq.(24), we see that the quantum uctuations of relevance then will involve fundamental
string euclidean worldsheets that wrap around 12. we can organize the partition function
as a sum over congurations that wrap n times around the 2-cycles:

z = zsugra + xn

z(sugra+n strings)

(26)

the leading term zsugra is the contribution of the pure supergravity theory without any
extra strings. it is determined by the black hole solution, eq.(1), to be :

zsugra = e(c2n 2t 3l3),

(27)

where c2 = 2
8 . to precisely calculate the next term z(sugra+1string) we would really need to
know type-iib string theory on the black hole background or at least the sigma model in the
green-schwarz formalism. we will estimate here the cost of including the string instanton
using the nambu-goto action:

z(sugra+1string) = e(c2n 2t 3l3) z dxesng+ir bns

.

(28)

the dominant contribution that is sensitive to the magnetic ux eq.(24) is obtained by the
minimum area surface 12 that extremizes the nambu-goto action. from eq.(1) we see that
this surface arises from a string world sheet located at the horizon in the radial direction
which spans the x1  x2 plane at some denite value of x3.

the area of this minimal surface in units of the fundamental string tension is,

ah/(2) =

1
2

hl2
r2
r2

.

(29)

including the eects of an anti-string (or equivalently a string oppositely wound in the

x1  x2 plane) gives:

z(sugra+1string) = e(c2n 2t 3l3) 2cf eah /(2) cos(

2m3

n

).

(30)

the coecient cf arises in the string path integral from uctuations around the minimal
area surface.
it includes a contribution, lt , due to the zero mode associated with the
location of the surface in the x3 direction, and the contribution due to non-zero modes as
well. we also need to include the uctuation of the fermionic modes. in particular, we need
to worry if there are fermionic zero modes that might make the contribution vanish as a
consequence of spacetime supersymmetry. we expect however that the zero modes of the
spacetime green schwarz fermions will be lifted because the thermal boundary condition
breaks supersymmetry completely.

using eq.(3), eq.(29), the minimum area can be re-expressed as:

eah /(2) = e3/2gsn t 2l2

.

(31)

8

not surprisingly the coecient 3/2gsnt 2 is identical to the string tension of the electric
ux tube in the nite temperature n = 4 theory. from the supergravity point of view, the
theory has stable ux tubes because at nite temperature the classical geometry is given by
the black hole geometry, eq(1), in which the value of the metric parallel to the brane goes to
a minimum non-zero value at the horizon [17, 4]. thus the behavior of large wilson loops
is determined by the geometry at the horizon which also determines the exponential factor,
eq.(31), above.

the contributions to the partition function from the single string instanton in the case of
a general electric and magnetic ux can now be written down by including the contributions
of f and d strings wrapping the corresponding two-cycle:

z(sugra+1string)[mj, ei] = e(c2n 2t 3l3)[2cf e3/2gsn t 2l2 xj

cos(

2mj

n

)

+2cde3/2n/gst 2l2 xi

cos(

2ei
n

)].

(32)

there are subleading contributions to eq.(32) which arise from string-worldsheets that either
wrap multiply or wrap more than one two-cycle simultaneously. however, these contributions
are exponentially suppressed compared to those included in eq.(32) as long as

qngs t 2 l2  1, qn/gs t 2 l2  1.

(33)

for small gs the rst condition is more restrictive. physically, eq.(33) means that the torus
has a size much bigger than the electric and magnetic string tensions. when this is true
the contributions to the partition function from multi-string sectors are also suppressed. in
addition, there are subleading contributions from (p, q) string worldsheets which we discuss
shortly in eq.(34). eq.(32) thus gives the leading dependence of the partition function on
the discrete uxes. it is the main result of this section.

some comments are now in order. first, it is worth noting that the minimum area surface
which gave the dominant contribution to eq.(32) above has a simple interpretation in the
gauge theory as well. it corresponds to an electric or magnetic ux tube, which is small at
rst but grows with time to span the full 2-cycle. second, we have neglected terms which
are down in the  and gs expansions here. thus our result pertains to the gauge theory at
large n and strong t hooft coupling. third, the result above does not apply to the zero
temperature case. in this limit the condition, eq.(33), is no longer met and the contributions
from multiply-wound and multi-string states cannot be neglected.

finally, to understand the sl(2, z) transformation properties of eq.(32) one needs to

include the eects of general (p, q) strings as well. doing so gives a partition function:

z[mi, ej]( ) = xi,j xp,q

cp,q( ) exp (atp,q( )) cos[

2
n

(p  m + q  e)].

(34)

here,  =  + ie is the axion-dilaton eld and cp,q( ) is the determinant of small uctu-
ations which can in general depend on  . the string tension tp,q( ) of the (p, q) string and

9

the area of the two-cycle a = 25/2n t 2l2 are both measured in the einstein metric.
both (ei, mi) and (pi, qj) transform as vectors under the sl(2, z) transformation, and 
transforms as usual by fractional linear transformation. keeping this in mind we see that
the last two terms of eq.(34) are invariant. determining the full transformation properties
of z[mi, ej] requires additional information about cp,q though which is beyond the scope of
this paper.

3 non-supersymmetric gauge theory in three dimensions

at energies smaller than the temperature, the four dimensional theory reduces to a non-
supersymmetric theory in three dimensions. the fermions and scalars of the n = 4 theory
acquire temperature dependent masses leaving the pure glue degrees of freedom at low en-
ergies. the results of the previous section can be reinterpreted to tell us about the behavior
of this theory. before proceeding though it is important to emphasize that the resulting
theory is quite dierent from the usual denition of three-dimensional qcd. from the three-
dimensional point of view the temperature acts like a cuto. we mentioned in the previous
section that the conning scale in the theory is of order (gsn)1/4t . thus, in the limit of
strong t hooft coupling considered here, the theory is already strongly coupled at the cuto
scale. despite these dierences it is interesting to ask how the three-dimensional theory
behaves as a function of the discrete uxes. the resulting answers are analogous to those
obtained in the strong coupling expansion of lattice gauge theory which, despite dierences
with the continuum theory, are often illuminating.

we denote the two spatial directions of the three-dimensional theory as x1, x2 and the
time direction as x3. there is one integer m3 which characterizes the magnetic ux in the
x1 x2 plane. there are two electric uxes in the x1, x2 directions respectively, characterized
by the integers, e1, e2. we are interested in the partition function of this theory when
both the spatial directions and the time direction are taken to be circles of length l, and
periodic boundary conditions are imposed in all three directions. as was discussed in 2 the
dependence on the electric ux ei is related by a fourier transform to the partition function
obtained by introducing twisted boundary conditions in the x1  x3 and x2  x3 directions.
in the supergravity theory the background geometry describing the theory is of course
still described by the black hole, eq.(1). however,
in the three-dimensional setting the
coordinate axis have a somewhat dierent interpretation. x0 can be regarded as the extra
spatial direction along which supersymmetry breaking boundary conditions are imposed,
while x3 is the euclidean continuation of the time direction.

the leading dependence of the partition function on the uxes is therefore obtained by

keeping the rst term in eq.(32) above:

z[m3, n1, n2] = e(c2n 2t 3l3) 2cf e3/2gsn t 2l2
) + cos(

) + cos(

2m3

[cos(

n

2n1

n

2n2

n

)].

(35)

10

turning on the twists in the x1x2, x1x3 and x2x3 planes, corresponds in the supergravity
theory to turning on expectations values for the bn s eld along the appropriate two-cycle,
eq.(24).

note that in eq.(35) there is no dependence on br because turning on an expectation
value for br eld corresponds in the gauge theory to twisted boundary conditions in a plane
involving x0, the extra compactied direction, which has no intrinsic signicance from the
point of view of the three-dimensional theory.

4 non-supersymmetric gauge theory in four dimensions

we turn next to discussing a non-supersymmetric four-dimensional theory. in analogy with
our discussion of the previous section we will start with a ve-dimensional theory realized
by considering the world volume theory of d4 branes and break supersymmetry by com-
pactifying one of the brane directions on a circle with supersymmetry breaking boundary
conditions [17, 7]. we compute the partition function of this theory as a function of the
various electric and magnetic uxes.

the supergravity solution is given by the near-horizon geometry of a conguration of n

near-extremal d4 branes [9]. the metric is

ds2 = (

r3/2
r3/2 ) (1

r3
h
r3 )dx2

0+(

r3/2
r3/2 )

dr2
(1  r3
r3 )

h

+

r3/2
r3/2 (dx2

1+dx2

2+dx2

3+dx2

4) + rr3d2

4, (36)

and the dilaton is

exp () = gs (cid:18) r
r(cid:19)

3

4

,

(37)

with r3 = gsn()3/2. from the point of view of the four-dimensional theory, x0 is the extra
spatial direction along which supersymmetry breaking boundary conditions are imposed,
x1, x2, x3 are the three spatial directions and x4 is the euclidean continuation of the time
direction of the four-dimensional theory.

we are interested in the partition function of the gauge theory when the the three spatial
and euclidean time directions are each compactied on a circle of length l. there are
six independent two cycles in this case and correspondingly six integers, modulo n, which
characterize the twisted boundary conditions that can be introduced. three of these directly
correspond to the magnetic ux, while the remaining three, which correspond to twisted
boundary conditions involving x4, can be related to the electric ux by a fourier transform.
by reasoning similar to that in 2 we nd that turning on twisted boundary conditions
along any of these six two-cycles corresponds to turning on an expectation value for r bn s,

with the integral being evaluated along the two-cycle:

2nij

n

= zij

bn s,

11

(38)

where i, j go from 1, . . . , 4. the supergravity lagrangian contains a coupling of the form:

l = z bn s  dc 3  dc 3,

(39)

where c 3 denotes the 3 form rr eld under which the d4 brane is magnetically charged.
this coupling is analogous to the chern-simons term in eq.(17) and ensures that the r bn s

can take only n distinct values.

the leading dependence of the partition function on the discrete uxes can now be

determined. it is

z[nij ] = esbh [1 + c e2l2 xij

cos(

2nij

n

)].

(40)

the overall exponential factor arises from the free energy of the black hole geometry; an

explicit calculation yields that sbh  n 2(gsnt )t 4l4. the second term arises from

the one fundamental string instanton sector, the corresponding exponential factor comes
from the minimal area of the world sheet which sweeps out the appropriate two-cycle. by
considering large wilson loops one can easily show that the theory connes. reasoning
entirely analogous to that in section 2.3 shows that the constant, 2, is the string tension of
the electric ux tube in the theory. numerically,

2 =

32
27

3 (gsnt )t 2.

(41)

finally, c is the contribution of the determinant for uctuations about the minimal area
surface in the string path integral, it includes a factor proportional to l2t 2 which arises
from zero modes which correspond to moving the two-cycle in the two directions transverse
to it. the equation eq.(40), is the analogue of eq.(35) in the three-dimensional case. the
dependence on the electric uxes can be obtained by doing a fourier transform in the ni4
variables.

a few comments are now in order. first, as in the nite temperature four-dimensional
theory, the answer we obtain here has a simple interpretation in the gauge theory. the
leading dependence on the discrete uxes arises from electric ux tubes whose world volume
sweeps out the relevant two-cycle of the torus. second, eq.(40) is the leading contribution
for a big torus, i.e., when l  1. subleading terms arise from multiply wrapped and
multi string congurations. third, we have neglected both  corrections and gs corrections
here. it is important to emphasize that neglecting the  corrections in particular requires
us to work in a region of coupling constant space where the four-dimensional theory is much
dierent from ordinary qcd. extra kaluza-klein states in the theory have a mass of order
the temperature t . the t hooft coupling of the four- dimensional theory at the cuto scale,

t , is 2 = gsnt . keeping the curvature small in string units requires, 2  1. thus
the four-dimensional theory is already strongly coupled at the cuto scale . finally, from
 alternatively, we see from eq.(41) that when 2  1, the string tension is bigger than the cuto scale

t .

12

the point of view of the ve-dimensional theory there can be additional twists along planes
involving the temperature direction. the dependence on such twists arises due to d-2 branes
whose world volume is a three cycle dual to the two-cycle along which the twisted boundary
conditions are turned on. these twists do not have any intrinsic signicance from the point
of view of the four-dimensional theory.

the 4-torus has a geometric sl(4, z) duality symmetry and it is easy to verify that
the answer obtained here, eq.(40), has that symmetry too once the discrete uxes nij are
appropriately transformed. the signicance of this duality symmetry was rst realized by
t hooft who formulated the conditions for invariance under it in terms of various duality
relations. of particular interest are 90 rotations in the euclidean theory, involving the time
and one space directions, which exchange some of the electric and magnetic uxes. the
corresponding t hooft duality relations place strong constraints on the partition function
which in turn constrain the phase structure of the gauge theory.
it is worth sketching
out how these general considerations apply in the present context. let z[~e, ~m] denote the
partition function as a function of the electric and magnetic uxes ( this is a discrete fourier
transform of eq.(40)) and let us consider it in the the innite volume limit, l  . one
can show that the duality relations allow for a solution which in this limit has the behavior:
z[0, ~m]/z[0, 0]  1, while z[~e, ~m]/z[0, 0]  0. this implies that the free energy of a purely
magnetic ux tube goes to zero in this limit whereas that of an electric ux tube diverges.
therefore, only electric ux tubes are stable and the theory is conning. in the large n
limit under discussion here, we know beforehand from a direct computation of the wilson
loop that the theory connes. even so, it is revealing to explicitly compute the limiting
behavior of z[0, ~m]/z[0, 0] and z[~e, ~m]/z[0, 0]. one nds that it is of the form mentioned
above, consistent with connement.

we end with a brief discussion of another approximation to qcd, the strong coupling
expansion in lattice gauge theory. the partition function as a function of the discrete uxes
can be easily computed in this approximation and goes as z[nij ]  e2a cos( 2nij
n ), where
 is the string tension. this is in agreement with eq.(40). let us briey review how this result
is obtained. the fundamental degrees of freedom in lattice gauge theory are link variables.
the action in terms of these is dened by taking the product of all the links around a
plaquette. the leading contribution to the partition function which depends on the twisted
boundary conditions then arises from tiling a two cycle of the torus minimally. this gives rise
to the exponential dependence on the area. once the two cycle is tiled the integrals over the
j. finally,
the integrals over the edge link variables can be done after taking into account the twisted
boundary conditions. summing over both orientations for tiling gives the cosine dependence.
in fact, intuitively, one would expect any conning theory to give rise to a dependence on
the twisted boundary conditions of the form, eq.(40). such a dependence can only arise
from a non-local operator, the wilson loop. this operator costs exponentially in the area in
the conning theory and gives rise to the cosine term simply because it measure the ux by

interior link variables can be done simply using the fact that r duu i

j (u)l

k = i

k l

here we restrict ourselves to the large n limit, in general there is a nite n correction to this.

13

stokes theorem. it is reassuring that our calculation above agrees with this expectation and
with the strong coupling expansion.

acknowledgements

we thank bill bardeen, sumit das, sunil mukhi, ashoke sen, and spenta wadia for
useful discussions. a. d. would like to acknowledge the hospitality of the ictp, the organizers
of the extended workshop in string theory, the enrico fermi institute and the particle
theory group at the university of chicago where some of this work was completed. s. p. t.
would like to thank the theoretical physics group at fermilab for hospitality during his visit.

references

[1] o. aharony, s. s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri, and y. oz, large n field theories,

string theory, and gravity, hep-th/9905111.

[2] o. aharony and e. witten, anti-de sitter space and the center of the gauge group,

hep-th/9611230, jhep 9811:018,1998.

[3] m. j. bowick, s. b. giddings, j. a. harvey, g. t. horowitz and a. strominger,

phys. rev. lett. 61 (1988) 2823.

[4] a. brandhuber, n. itzhaki, j. sonnenschein, and s. yankielowicz, wilson loops in the
large-n limit at finite temperature, phys. lett. b434 (1998) 36, hep-th/9803137.

[5] s. coleman, j. preskill, f. wilczek, nucl. phys. b378 (1992) 175.

[6] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov, a. m. polykov, gauge theory correlators from non-

crititcal string theory, hep-th/9802109.

[7] d. j. gross and h. ooguri,  aspects of large n gauge theory dynamics as seen by

string theory, hep-th/9805129.

[8] s. w. hawking and d. page, thermodynamics of black holes in anti-de sitter space,

comm. math. phys., 87 (1988) 577.

[9] n. itzhaki, j. maldacena, j. sonnenschein, and s. yankielowicz, supergravity and the
large-n limit of theories with sixteen supercharges, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 6004,
hep-th/9802042.

[10] j. maldacena, hep-th/9711200, adv.theor.math.phys.2:231-252,1998.

[11] j. maldacena, wilson loops in large n field theories, hep/th9803002.

[12] j. preskill, unpublished notes on quantum eld theory.

14

[13] s. j. rey and j. yee, macroscopic strings as heavy quarks in large n gauge theory

and anti-de sitter supergravity, hep-th/9803077.

[14] j. schwarz,  an sl(2, z) multiplet of type-iib superstrings,

phys. lett. b360 (1995) 13, hep-th/9508143.

[15] g. t hooft, on the phase transition towards permanent quark connement, nucl.
phys. b138 (1978) 1; a property of electric and magnetic flux in nonabelian gauge
theories, nucl. phys. b153 (1979) 141.

[16] e. witten, anti-de sitter space and holography, hep-th/9803002.

[17] e. witten, anti-de sitter space, thermal phase transition, and connement in gauge

theories, hep-th/9803131, adv.theor.math.phys.2:505-532,1998.

[18] e. witten, ads/cft correspondence and topological field theory,

hep-th/9812012, jhep 9812:012,1998.

[19] e. witten, bound states of strings and p-branes, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 335,

hep-th/9510135.

15

