sissa/92/99/fm
hep-th/9908009

projective resolutions of coherent sheaves

and descent relations between branes.

a.tomasiello

international school for advanced studies

via beirut 2-4, 34014 trieste, italy

e-mail: tomasiel@sissa.it

abstract

we notice that, for branes wrapped on complex analytic subvarieties,
the algebraic-geometric version of k-theory makes the identication be-
tween brane-antibrane pairs and lower-dimensional branes automatic.
this is because coherent sheaves on the ambient variety represent gauge
bundles on subvarieties, and they can be put in exact sequences (pro-
jective resolutions) with sheaves corresponding to vector bundles on
the pair; this automatically gives a d(p  2) as a formal dierence
of bundles on the dp  d p pair, both belonging to the grothendieck
group of coherent sheaves of the ambient.

9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
2

 

 
 

1
v
9
0
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1

introduction.

there has been recently a major shift of perspective as to the interpretation
of tachyon in brane-antibrane pair [1].
it has been long since suspected
that it signals instabilities, but one couldnt forecast whether this led to
inconsistency of the theory or could have instead a more constructive role.
it is now believed that the latter is the case, and that tachyons can be viewed
simply as higgs elds, whose condensation can lead to interesting eects. in
particular, it can lead to remnants whose stability is in turn simply dictated
by the topological stability of the condensation. here we will be interested
only in type ii theories and in stable products of decay.
if on the brane
and on the antibrane there is a gauge bundle e and f respectively, what
we need is something that classies the topological content of the pair. the
key is to note that [2], if the two bundles are topologically the same, they
will annihilate leaving no stable remnant: there is in this case no stable
pattern of condensation for the tachyon. moreover, if such a trivial pair
is added to non trivial ones, it will disappear, giving no contribute. we
can write this symbolically as (e, f )  (e  h, f  h). since this is the
denition of topological k-theory, we can interpret physics by identifying a
brane-antibrane system as an element of this group (hints in this direction
were explicitly given before in [3]).

we have now to identify physically the result of the decay, which gen-
erally (as there are non-trivial elements of k-theory) is not the vacuum.
the locus in which the tachyon vanishes is the place around which energy
is located, and is source for lower rr elds. so it is natural to identify it
with a brane supported on the zeroes of the tachyon; this can be viewed as
a section of t  e  f . this second step makes possible that k-theory
also classify all lower-dimensional d-branes.

just let us stress that these (the classication of pairs by k-theory and
the identication of the remnant) are, so far, two dierent processes, just
note that the bundle t is not well-dened on a k-theory class; if we change
representative, it changes as well.

we will argue here that, if we deal with complex analytic subvarieties, the
identication of the remnant is a natural consequence of the rst step, in a
way that puts in another light the incorporation of lower charges. this is be-
cause in that case we can choose, instead of k-theory, an analytic (algebraic-
geometric) version of it, the grothendieck group of coherent sheaves [4, 5],
hereafter referred to simply as grothendieck group (in general this name
simply denotes the procedure to get a group from a monoid, but often in
algebraic geometry it means tout court what we said). in this setting, bun-
dles over subvarieties are expressable - through projective resolutions - as
formal dierences of bundles over the ambient variety. this allows to see the
identication between brane-antibrane and k-theory on the same footing of
that between brane-antibrane and lower-dimensional brane; in a way, this is

1

automatic, or natural, in this setting.

on the one hand, this seems to conrm the physical analysis already
done; on the other, it allows to interpret descent relations, and tachyon
condensation between stable d-branes in terms of projective resolutions. in
turn, the physical identication between dp  d p and d(p  2) can be
now viewed as a purely topological counterpart of an algebraic-geometric
procedure.

it should be stressed the dierence betweeen what we said above and
the already known mathematical counterpart of tachyon condensation: the
isomorphism between k-theories of a submanifold and that of the ambient.
while that is an isomorphism between dierent groups, what we propose
here is that the descent relation can be viewed as natural in one single
group. even better, while that isomorphism is natural, it doesnt justify
in itself the identication of the d(p  2) with the pair.
in our case, on
the contrary, we treat with complex analytic subvarieties and so we can
choose to use grothendieck groups: if we do that, the identication of the
product of tachyon condensation is a logical consequence of the existence of
projective resolutions of coherent sheaves. a related issue is the following.
one often says that k-theory of the ambient space classies branes: if so, not
only there should be in the group representatives for all lower-dimensional
branes, but also dierent classes for branes of dierent dimensions. while
the rst feature has been demonstrated to be there, the second would lack if
we didnt choose dierent boundary conditions (and thus compactications
of the ambient space, by adding points at innity; for instance usually one
takes spheres to classify branes on at space), i.e. by considering higher k-
theory groups. these groups together then form a ring which one considers
classifying branes. our attitude here will be dierent: we will have all in
the same group, by taking, as compactication, complex projective space,
which has the virtue of giving us a z for every codimension. we will return
on this later.

the following discussion can be tted to every case in which we want
to express a brane wrapped on a submanifold in terms of pair wrapped on
a manifold; just compactify the latter to a complex projective variety. the
main case we have in mind is iib theory, with space lling branes and an-
tibranes; in this case so we take, as we said, projective space p5, of dimension
10, as ambient variety. the examples that we will be talking about in the
following, however, are chosen to be easier. we dont make any claim of
mathematical originality; these examples are here just to clarify and illus-
trate the general discussion, which also relies on well-known mathematical
facts.

issues about the role of grothendieck groups were already considered in
[6], with a point of view and with an aim dierent from the one we take
here.

2

2 coherent sheaves and their projective resolu-

tions.

before dening grothendieck groups, we will dene coherent sheaves, the
key concept of what we anticipated so far. sheaves generalize the concept
of bre bundles on a manifold, which can be viewed as a particular class
of sheaves, the locally free ones. fibre bundles on a submanifold will then
be described precisely by coherent sheaves. on a projective smooth variety
x, to which for simplicity we will now restrict, they are sheaves of nitely
generated ox -modules, and thus (using e.g. regularity and the presence of
an ample invertible sheaf) admit a nite projective free resolution, i.e. they
can be put in an exact sequence:

0  fn1  . . .  f1  f0  c  0

where c is our coherent sheaf and fk are locally free. fibre bundles on a
closed subvariety are coherent sheaves (closed immersions are proper, and
so take coherent sheaves in the subvariety - in particular, locally free ones
- to coherent sheaves), and so admit such resolutions; we will see how this
works in examples. note that our conclusions are untouched by possible
singularities of the subvarieties.

there are in general two denitions of grothendieck groups. take z[l]
(resp. z[c] ) the free abelian group generated by locally free (resp. coherent)
sheaves. then

k   z[l]/i,

k  z[c]/i ,

where i (i ) is the ideal generated in both cases by elements of the form
f  f   f  if there is an exact sequence 0  f   f  f   0. in
the case of smooth projective varieties, these two denitions are the same
(the two groups are isomorphic).
in particular we can immediately see
that every coherent sheaf can be expressed as an element of k, by their
dening sequence, and so as the dierence e  f of two locally free ones.
this simply means that in this setting we can express a bre bundle on a
subvariety as the dierence of two bre bundles on the variety. this is just
the identication given by the tachyon condensation! so we see that, if we
use grothendieck group instead of topological k-theory, the rst step we
described above (the fact that we can cancel the same bundle if it appers on
both sides) implies the second (tachyon condensation and identication with
lower-dimensional branes). of course we have not shown the isomorphism
between grothendieck groups here: but this point is also essential, because
otherwise the class which we found would depend on the projective resolution
we did. whereas we wont prove that here [5], we will check it explicitly in
an example at the end of the paper.

this group is dierent from k-theory in various respects. first, of course,
we are working with holomorphic subvarieties, and choosing holomorphic

3

structures for the bundles involved. second, what we identify with zero are
extensions instead of direct sums. but all extensions are topologically trivial
(i.e. direct sum), so this is not a problem. so this group doesnt contain in
general all that is contained in k-theory (the non-complex ones); this gives
us a means to understand which brane-antibrane congurations represent
lower dimensional brane wrapped on holomorphic cycles. at the same time
this group distinguishes objects which in k-theory are the same.

we have still to verify that the isomorphism between the grothendieck
groups is really consistent with the tachyon condensation we already know.
we will do this in several examples, using as a basic tool the sequence

0  f  f(d)  f(d)|d

 0.

(1)

for f locally free (alternatively, we can derive it from (2) tensoring). start
from a brane wrapped on a holomorphic cycle with its bundle - that is, a
coherent sheaf. we have to express it in terms of locally free sheaves (brane-
antibrane) and then do tachyon condensation to see whether we retrieve the
initial conguration. let us start with the case of one brane, with the
structure sheaf as bundle on it (we think of the u (1)-bundle as the circle
bundle inside it), and suppose that we work in x = pn. the resolution
depends on whether the subvariety y is complete intersection or not; in the
former case it is easy. in the case of (real) codimension 2 it reads

0  ox (y )  ox  oy  0;

(2)

the rst term is the ideal sheaf, that we can think as the sheaf of holomorphic
functions having a zero along y . from this we get that oy = ox ox (y ),
and so the tachyon is a section of e f  = ox(y ), hence it has a simple zero
in y (recall there is a duality between functions having poles and sections
having zeroes). this exactly parallels the already known construction of a
brane-antibrane pair which reproduces a codimension 2 brane. we already
remarked that the bundle of which the tachyon is a section is not dened
by the class in k-theory; instead, it is guessed in some way thinking about
a minimal couple (e, f ). with this procedure, this minimality is just the
concept of minimal resolution of a coherent sheaf, well-known to algebraic
geometers.

higher codimension.

let us describe how to do if the codimension is higher, sticking with
the case of complex projective spaces. exploiting the fact that, there, line
bundles are classied by z, we only write degrees.
if d1, . . . , dl are the
degrees of the equations, and if the subvariety is complete intersection,

0  ox (d1  . . .  dl)  . . .  m

ox(di1  di2)

(3)

ox(di)  ox  oy  0.

i1,i2

 m

i

4

the origin of this resolution can be understood as follows: the v  io(di)
term is the generalization of the rst (from left) term of (2) due to the fact
that we have more than one equation; to continue on the left we have to nd
the kernel of the subsequent arrow, which sends each equation fi in 1. we
nd relations fi  fj  fj  fi = 0, which generate the term i,j o(d1  dj);
in the case of non complete intersections, the number of equations necessary
to cut the variety is higher than the codimension, and we would have extra
terms.
in fact in the complete intersection case one may make (4) more
transparent in the form

0  lv  . . .  2v  v  ox  oy  0,

a.k.a. the koszul complex. note that we dont have to proceed step by step:
this is a all at once procedure as that already known and involving k-
theory thom isomorphism and abs construction ([2]; see also [7] for a more
extensive description). to see better the correspondence, rst remember
that for any complex

e0

d0 e1

d1 . . .

dn1
 en

one may construct a smaller complex (a map)

m

ei

d

 m

ei,

i=even

i=odd

1e2, d2e2 + d

where d(e0, e2, . . .) = (d0e0 + d
3e4, . . .); moreover this complex
is exact if the former is. if we apply this to the sequence (4), then we have
a pair of bundles which just correspond to the cliord bundles (s+, s)
associated to the conormal of our variety, with even the right map (cliord
multiplication, which can be viewed as a sum of an exterior product and a
contraction).

projective resolutions like this are also known, when thought in terms of

the corresponding algebraic objects (rings and modules) as syzygies.

lower charges.

we would now treat with more concrete examples the case of a non triv-
ial line bundle on the (p  2)-brane. since well do that again in projective
spaces, let us return for a moment on the point we anticipated in the in-
troduction. one would imagine, from the descriptions we did so far of the
identications of e.g. the dp  d p system with lower dimensional branes,
that k-theory or its grothendieck group give already a classication of all
branes of all dimensions, given our space. to check this we have to choose
the space; even if we have decided p, we still have to decide the bound-
ary conditions we want to give them. this amounts to choosing a type of
compactication. we can choose, as usual, a sphere; but the k-theory of
a sphere is at most z. this means that the construction by itself would

5

confuse branes of dierent dimensions: two dimensionally dierent branes
can be realized as the same dp  d p system. we have, so to say, to avoid
this by hand, treating each codimension separately and imposing that our
bundles depend just on the transversal dimensions.
if we dont do that,
we get that in a given brane-antibrane system, a (p  2) brane is given by
a certain couple (e, f ), which is anyway also topologically the same as a
couple which gives a (p  4) brane.

we point out that it could be that dierent choices of boundary con-
ditions (i.e. of compactication) can give a better result. for instance,
choosing the complex projective space pn, both k-theory and grothendieck
group result isomorphic to [5, 8]

r  z[t]/(t  1)n+1,

(4)

which gives a z for each even codimensional brane (the isomorphism from
k or k-theory to r is given by sending the hyperplane h to t). the fact
that the topological and algebraic geometrical k-theory are equal here is
reasonable, since we know that pn has no jacobian. in a way the trick is that,
choosing pn as compactication space, we allowed all possible boundary
conditions, so distinguishing between branes of dierent dimensions. of
course in this way we are not predicting the allowed codimensions of the
branes: we cannot because we chose the complex analytic setting, forcing
them to be even.

now we return on the examples we wanted to give: non trivial line
bundles on the (p  2) brane. this is easier if we can extend the line bundle
to the ambient space: indeed, applying again (1), in that case we obtain

0  ox (d  y )  ox(d)  o(d)|y

 0,

where d is the divisor in the ambient space; the last term is just our original
bundle on the subvariety. note that again e  f  = ox(y ), as it should. to
x ideas, consider the case of a conic in p2, which is birationally equivalent to
p1. if the line bundle is op1(2), it can be extended on p2 as o(1) (henceforth
o  op2); the sequence so reads

0  o(1)  o(1)  op1(2)  0.

life is harder if we consider instead the bundle op1(1), which is not
extendable to p2, since there is no divisor on it which intersects the conic
once. we can circumvent this diculty in two ways. first, we can start
the projective resolution, instead that from o, from o  o. doing this
carefully involves looking at the rings of functions over the varieties, and
maps between them; we wont delve into details (even if it doesnt take too
long), but the result turns out to be

0  2o(1)  2o  op1(1)  0

6

(we denote now n
1 o(k) as no(k)). as a check, let us do it in another way,
which only involves sequences that we have already seen. write rst the two
sequences

0  op1(1)  op1  op  0

(5)

0  o(2)  2o(1)  o  op  0

where p is a point in p1 in which a section of our line bundle op1(1) vanish.
now, tensor both with an hyperplane line bundle in p2: we get

op1(1) = op1(2)op(1) = o(1)o(1)(o(1)2o+o(1)) = 2o2o(1)

as above. still another method would have been tensoring the rst sequence
in (5) by an hyperplane line bundle of p1, and reexpress then o(1) as 3o 
3o(1) + o(2): this gives an illustration of the relation (t  1)n+1 = 0 in
(4). the result is in any case reasonable because a conic can be deformed
to two hyperplanes touching in a point.

if nally we want to consider stacked branes, u (1)-bundles become now
u (r)-bundles. the generalization is so to represent u (r) on cr; we get in
this way a complex vector bundle of rank r on the lower-dimensional brane.
the coherent sheaf is now again a sheaf of o- modules, but with more
generators - and so the sequence starts with rox instead that with ox.
this is right, since to get stacked branes we expect to have to start from
stacked brane-antibrane pair. the procedure works the same way, but to
verify that we get the desired subvariety we have to look at the locus where
the tachyon is non invertible, rather than zero.

we thank l. bonora, a. sen, a. zampa for useful discussions and advises.

references

[1] a. sen, so(32) spinors of type

i and other solitons on
brane-antibrane pair, j. high energy phys. 9809 (1998) 023,
hep-th/9808141; tachyon condensation on the brane-antibrane sys-
tem, j. high energy phys. 9808 (1998) 012, hep-th/9805170.

[2] e. witten, d-branes and k-theory, j. high energy phys. 9812 (1998)

019, hep-th/9810188.

[3] r. minasian and g. moore, k-theory and ramond-ramond charge, j.

high energy phys. 9711 (1997) 002, hep-th/9710230.

[4] r. hartshorne, algebraic geometry, springer-verlag, new york, 1977.

[5] yu. i. manin, lectures on the k-functor in algebraic geometry, russ.

math. surveys 24 (1969) 1-89.

7

[6] e. sharpe, d-branes, derived categories and grothendieck groups,

hep-th/9902116.

[7] k. olsen and r. j. szabo, constructing d-branes from k-theory,

hep-th/9907140.

[8] m.f. atiyah, k-theory (benjamin, 1964).

8

