9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
8
1

 

 
 

1
v
9
1
1
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

infra-red asymptotic dynamics of gauge invariant

charged fields: qed versus qcd

dipartimento di fisica, universit`a di pisa and i.n.f.n., sezione di pisa, i

e. demilio

e-mail: demilio@difi.unipi.it

s. miccich`e

department of mathematical sciences, loughborough university, gb

e-mail: s.micciche@lboro.ac.uk

abstract

the freedom one has in constructing locally gauge invariant charged elds in

gauge theories is analyzed in full detail and exploited to construct, in qed,

an electron eld whose two-point function w (p), up to the fourth order in

the coupling constant, is normalized with on-shell normalization conditions

and is, nonetheless, infra-red nite; as a consequence the radiative corrections

vanish on the mass shell p2 = 2 and the free eld singularity is dominant,

although, in contrast to quantum eld theories with mass gap, the eigenvalue

2 of the mass operator is not isolated. the same construction, carried out for

the quark in qcd, is not sucient for cancellation of infra-red divergences

to take place in the fourth order. the latter divergences, however, satisfy

a simple factorization equation. we speculate on the scenario that could be

drawn about infra-red asymptotic dynamics of qcd, should this factorization

equation be true in any order of perturbation theory.

11.15.-q; 11.15.bt; 12.38.-t; 12.38.bx

typeset using revtex

1

i. introduction and main results

in ordinary quantum field theory (qft) with mass gap the notion of particle is re-
covered from that of interacting local eld as a consequence of infra-red (ir) asymptotic
dynamics: a near-mass-shell pole singularity in each of the momenta incoming any green
function (guaranteed in lagrangian qfts by the possibility of imposing on-shell normaliza-
tion conditions on both mass and wave function renormalizations) ensures the existence of
the lehmann-symanzik-zimmerman asymptotic limit of the eld [1]. one is thus provided
with a ordinary free fock eld, by means of which an irreducible representation `a l`a wigner
of poincare group, sitting on an isolated mass hyperboloid, is in turn constructed. in this
context the fact that the eld/particle may or may not carry quantum numbers associated
with some unbroken global internal symmetry is irrelevant.

in gauge theories (we will always have in mind qed and qcd in continuum minkowski
4-dimensional space-time with unbroken electric and colour charges) things go in a dierent
way. indeed, the issue is one about which, as yet, there is no general consensus.

on the one side qed  with the exception of its zero charge sector  still is only a
theory of inclusive cross sections, in which all the theoretical set-up of quantum mechanics
(states, observables, representation of symmetries and the like) has no satisfactory explicit
representation, in spite of the general model-independent investigations
[2, 3] that have
delimitated, so to speak, a possible battleeld: the battle is not yet won and one could, in a
provocative way, summarize the situation by saying that the question: what is an electron
in qed is still open.

on the other side there is, in qcd, the problem of connement of coloured gluons
and quarks, about which there is even less to say. many mechanisms and criteria have
been proposed over the years: some (as e.g. the wilson loop area behaviour
[4], or the
fundamental role of topology leading to the dual meissner eect [5]) are so suggestive that
have become common language; others (the 1/(k2)2 ir behavior of the full gluon propagator
[6, 7],
[8, 9], the quartet mechanism [10] and the metric connement [11] both based on the
existence of lsz asymptotic limits for colour elds, violation of asymptotic completeness
[12], the obstruction in the ir dressing due to gribov ambiguities [13], and so many others
that it would be impossible - and nonsensical - to quote them all here) do not share the same
popularity, but time and again are reconsidered and revived. however, so far none of these
criteria has led to a systematic and generally accepted description of what connement is.
prudentially we regard connement as a delicate, multi-faceted subject one can look at
from dierent standpoints. we try here just to oer a further standpoint, not necessarily in
conict with others, but endowed with the possibility of a sound mathematical verication
based on the only input of implementing in qcd the symmetries that we believe relevant:
local gauge invariance and poincare.

it is convenient to state the terms of the problem of the particle content of charged sectors
in gauge theories within the framework of the lagrangian approach. we shall also assume
that all the elds entering the lagrangian are local elds. these will be referred to as the
basic elds of the model. ref.
[14] gives in detail the local covariant formulation of the
theory we shall rely on in the sequel. in particular the adjective physical will be referred
to the elds that commute with  or to states that are annihilated by  the becchirouet
storatyutin generator (the choice of the local covariant formulation deserves a further
comment: the fact that manifest covariance is necessary to implement the renormalization
procedure may be regarded upon as a technical complication; to our knowledge, however, a
proof of renormalizability is given only in this context [15]: that is why we stick to it).

in this context it is convenient to distinguish four steps, all relevant in designing the
relationship between eld and particle. we will try to keep these steps as non-overlapping

2

as possible:

(i) form of physical (composite) charged elds;
(ii) ir asymptotic dynamics;
(iii) existence of asymptotic limits and particle content;
(iv) s matrix.
in this paper we will be mainly concerned with only (i) and (ii).
as for (i), it is well known that physical elds that are localized functions of the basic
elds transform trivially (i.e. have zero charge) under any charge operator associated to a
current obeying a gauss law: j =  f. indeed, in intuitive terms, thanks to the latter,
the action of the charge on any eld  takes the form

 = lim

r (cid:20)zsr

dsi f0i , (cid:21)

(1.1)

where sr is the surface of the sphere of radius r in 3-space. therefore, if  is (or the elds
in terms of which it is constructed are) smeared with functions of compact support, thanks
to locality,  vanishes for r large enough. to avoid this the eld  must have a tail
through the sphere at innity in minkowski space (whether only in space-like or even in
time-like directions is a subject to be taken up in the next section). in this sense, as long
as one is interested in physical nontrivially charged elds, only nonlocalized functions of the
basic elds ought to be considered.

since the above statement has been given the status of a theorem [16], there is little to

add and there is general agreement about it.

the theorem gives no hint, however, about the explicit form of such elds. according to
the terminology also recently used in ref.
[13], such nonlocalized functions will be shortly
referred to as dressed elds: a physical, interacting electron should be dressed with a cloud
of photons, as well as with its own coulomb eld.

dirac [17] was the rst to show, in an explicit way, how the dressing could be done in
order to endow an electron with its own coulomb eld. his aim was a quantization of qed
that would involve only those degrees of freedom that actually contribute to the dynamic
evolution of the system. in retrospective, it does not sound as a surprise that he gave up
the manifest covariance properties of the physical elds under lorentz transformations: it
was well known, after the gupta-bleuler formulation, that, even when restricting to the zero
charge sector, such manifestly covariant formulations do involve indenite metric, i.e extra
degrees of freedom irrelevant to the dynamic evolution.

after dirac other authors have investigated dierent ways of dressing the basic elds,
with dierent motivations and with dierent aims. the list given by [19]  [27] only gives
some references that are closer in spirit to the present article and, in any event, has no
pretension to completeness. ref.
[13] provides a much more comprehensive bibliography,
whereas [27] provides its updating.

on the same footing as dirac, covariance is given up also in the model investigations of
steinmann [21], who has the same aim as dirac, and of ref.
[13] and other works by the
same group, who instead think of the dressed elds as composite operators within the usual
formulation of the gauge theory.

the non-implementability of lorentz boosts in the charged sectors of qed is indeed,
after the model independent investigations of
[2, 3], taken for granted to the point that,
once the symmetry is broken by hand from the very beginning of the construction, no
attempt is made to restore it. the only exception is provided, to our knowledge, by the
attempts of one of the present authors and collaborators [20, 23]. needless to say, the eort
of restoring lorentz symmetry at some stage in our construction of dressed elds will be
made also in the present paper. we have to state clearly that situating our results about

3

[2, 3] is a non trivial subject, particularly because
qed within the general framework of
our results only concern some two-point functions and admittedly are, for now, incomplete.
it is true, on the other hand, that the results of the present and the following papers [28]
open the possibility of performing systematic model calculations that could help an explicit
and exhaustive comparison: this is one of the several open, possibly not insurmountable,
questions to be discussed in the conclusions.

among the references we have cited, the work by steinmann deserves a special mention,
for not only it has been close in spirit to ours along the years, but it has been constantly
inspiring. we feel it is not by chance that another part of steinmanns and collaborators
work, not immediately connected with the problems specic to gauge theories, is invaluable
to the approach presented here. indeed, it turns out that the usual dyson expansion for-
mula for the calculations of vacuum expectation values (vev) of the type ht (  )i is not
sucient for our purposes. the composite elds we will introduce, will themselves be t -
ordered formal power series. so the calculation of their correlation functions will demand
the ability at computing  in perturbation theory (pt)  both wightman functions and,
more in general, multi-time-ordered vevs of the type ht (  )    t (  )i. ref.s [2931]
exactly provide the algorithm for doing all this.
our attitude in the present paper is that we do not want to make any a priori assumption
about ir asymptotic dynamics, with the exception of enforcing symmetries:
local gauge,
translations and lorentz in particular. ir asymptotic dynamics should, hopefully, emerge
by itself, i.e. only by our ability at calculating the near-mass-shell behaviour of correla-
tion functions, once a particular gauge invariant charged eld has been selected within the
framework of step (i) above. in other words the main point is that (i) leaves a remarkable
freedom and evidently any choice made in selecting the form of physical charged elds may,
and indeed does, aect the outcomes of (ii)-(iv). our work will, as a consequence, consist in
exploiting all the freedom (i) leaves to see whether there exists a eld with a near-mass-shell
behaviour mild enough to enable one to eventually face point (iii) and (iv).
in the case
the motivations about the necessity of having elds with a mild near-mass-shell behaviour
should be recapitulated in more intuitive and physical terms, we have found the discussion
given in [25] particularly sound.

our expectation is that, playing, as we will do, twice the same game, one should have
dierent results in qed and qcd respectively. there is infact no point about the statement
that the electron is not conned whereas, the quark should be so. now, while in qed it
is more or less generally accepted that the non-connement of the electron should result in
the existence of some kind of asymptotic (possibly not lsz) limit, the way the connement
of quarks and gluons should show up is less generally agreed upon: we have already recalled
some among the many, sometime conicting, mechanisms that have been proposed in the
literature: needless to say, we will come out with a mechanism dierent from all the others!
so, in order to directly compare qed and qcd, we will construct dressed electron
e(x) and quark q(x) elds (we could also construct the gluon [23], but the investigation
of its behaviour in higher orders is better postponed to future work, for a comparison with its
qed analogue would be less stringent: the photon has no charge) whose two-point functions
up the fourth order in the coupling constant - the simplest place where a dierence between
qed and qcd may emerge - have the following properties:
(1) they are independent of the gauge-xing parameter;
(2) ultraviolet divergences brought about by the compositeness of the dressing are cured

by a single renormalization constant introduced in the denition;

(3) on-shell normalization conditions can be imposed, in the ir regularized theory, on

the single ir divergent graphs with two dierent outcomes.

(3a) in qed a complete cancellation of ir divergences takes place, and the two-point

4

function is given by

where

w (p) = z d4xei p(xy)he(x)e(y)i
(cid:19)2
w1 +(cid:18)

w (p) = w0(p) +




,

w2 +   

w0(p) = ( /p +) (2) (p0) (p2  2)

,

(1.2)

(1.3)

(1.4)

is the wightman function of the free spinor eld, whereas the higher order terms, described
by the two invariant functions ai(p2/2) and bi(p2/2):

wi(p) = (p0) (p2  2)

1
2 (ai /p +bi )

,

i  1 ,

are given, to the rst order, by

a1 =

2

2 p2  1 

2

p2! ,

b1 = 0 ,

(1.5)

(1.6)

and, to the second order (whose full form is given in section v) have the near-mass-shell,
asymptotic form

a2 

5
9

r +

1
6

r2 ln r 

7
4

r2 +    ,

b2  

7
36

r 

1
6

r2 ln r +

5
24

r2 +    ,

(1.7)

with r = p2/2  1  0.
4 + 2  [32, 33]  the latter do not cancel, but obey the factorization equation

(3b) in qcd, assuming dimensional regularization for ir divergences  i.e. d = 4 






w2(p, ) = +(cid:18) 1

2 (cid:19) 11

6

ca w1(p, )

,

where w = p(/)n wn is dened by the amputation of the interacting part

wij(p, ) = z d4xei p(xy)hqi(x)qj(y)i
/p  + i 0

wij(p, ) = ij w0(p) +

i

,

ij w(p, )

i

/p   i 0

.

(1.8)

(1.9)

(1.10)

the rst evident comment about the above results is that the game, played twice with the
same rules, gives two qualitatively dierent results.
it is sucient, per se, to state that
the ir asymptotic dynamics of the two models is dierent (this was expected), even in
perturbation theory (possibly, this is a less widespread belief).

concerning (1.3), although the result is that the singularity of the free eld theory is
not altered by the radiative corrections that vanish on the mass-shell, it is true that the
mass hyperboloid p2 = 2 is not isolated as in the mass gap case. this result, expected
on the basis of simple physical intuition, is in agreement with the observation made in ref.
[34], where it has been pointed out that, in the case of gauge theories, the particle content
might be recovered at the cost of abandoning wigner notion of an irreducible representation

5

of poincare group sitting on an isolated mass hyperboloid. the investigation of this point
pertains the step (iii) above. we will not pursue it in this article.

concerning the second result (1.8), we nd it intriguing for two reasons. the rst is
that it is simple - we mean the factorization. the second is the occurrence of the celebrated
11
6 ca factor, with the plus sign.

we cannot therefore resist the temptation of commenting on the consequences (1.8)

would have, were it true in any order of pt. in the latter case its integration would yield

w(p, ) = e 

() =

11
6

 () w(p) 0 0 ,
1
ca
2 

,

(1.11)

(1.12)

with w(p) ir nite.

this hints at a dierent scenario, in which the heisenberg quark eld, as a result of

ir asymptotic dynamics, is a free eld not asymptotically, but at any momentum p.

it may be useful to recall the example of the faddeev-popov (fp) ghost in qed: in
that case the eld is free by construction and there is a factorization of correlation functions
involving the ghost into a bunch of free ghost two-point-functions times a connected corre-
lation function only involving elds with zero ghost number. could one say that the ghost
number is conned?

in qcd, even if (1.11) were true, one could not immediately conclude, as in the case
of local elds [35] (we remind that dressed elds do not share the locality property), that
the qi(x) is a free eld. nonetheless a working hypothesis could be to check whether, as a
consequence of ir asymptotic dynamics, the factorization of quark and gluon free two-point
functions, out of connected correlation functions only involving colour singlets, does indeed
take place. the existence of asymptotic limit would, in the latter case, be by far simpler
then in qed  it would be trivial.

of course, it is not necessary for the above scenario to take really place that the function
() preserves, on possibly going from (1.8) to an exact result, the specic form given by
equation (1.12) suggested by our fourth order calculation. it might dress up even as a full
series in , provided that   + for   0+ carried on holding.
we are aware that, on extrapolating our result (1.8) to (1.11), we have raised more
questions (all orders, gluon, ir asymptotics of many-point-functions) than we will answer
in this article. but, in the framework we will set up, these questions do not seem to us
prohibitively out of the range of traditional and well established tools of qft.

the paper is organized as follows.

in section ii the freedom one has in dressing the
basic elds is analyzed in detail on the level of classical elds. section iii sets the stage
for the calculation of quantum correlation functions:
it is argued that an algorithm for
computing vev with several time orderings, i.e. of the type ht (  )    t (  )i, is needed
and the exhaustive work of ostendor and steinmann [2931], giving such an algorithm,
is summarized. section iv systematically explores in pt the lowest order of the two-point
functions relative to the elds constructed in section ii, and the full form of w1, equation
(1.6), is established. section v gives a concise outlook of the fourth order calculations: the
full form of w2, equation (1.7), is given together with a description of the way we follow to
calculate it and to obtain equation (1.8). the full derivation of the latter results, as well as
the proofs of their properties (1)-(3) above, are left for forthcoming papers. in section vi
we give a retrospective of the construction we have done and pinpoint the open problems
that, in our opinion, most urgently should be faced in order to give the further, necessary
support to such a construction.

6

ii. classical fields

il ta

let (x) denote a multiplet of dirac elds transforming as the fundamental represen-
tation r of the colour group su(n) (the extension to whatever compact semi-simple lie
group being trivial). we shall denote by a(x) = taaa
(x) the yang-mills potentials. here
ta, a = 1,   , n 2  1, are the hermitian generators in r, satisfying the commutation rela-
tions [ta, tb] = i f abc tc, ta
lj = cf ij, cf = (n 2  1)/(2n); whereas the structure constants
f abc are real, completely antisymmetric and obey f acdf bcd = caab, ca = n. the scalar and
wedge products in r are accordingly dened by a  b = 2 tr(ab), a  b = i [a , b].
it will be understood that the dynamics of the above elds is dened by the lagrangian l
given, e.g., in [14], in which the gauge-xing term /2 (a) (a) as well as the faddeev
popov ghosts have been introduced and the becchirouetstoratyutin symmetry is at
work. all the elds in l are assumed to be local elds.

let c(x) = ta c a(x)  r be the fp ghost eld, satisfying

we shall call local gauge transformations of ,  and a the following:

c(t, x)  0 ,

for |x|   .

a = c + g a  c ,

 = +ig c  ,

 = ig  c .

consider now the formal power series [22]:

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

v (y; f ) =

v (x; f ) =

+

(+ig)nz d41  z d4n f 1n
xn =0
(ig)mz d41  z d4m f 1m
xm =0

+

n

m

(y  1,  , y  n )a1(1)  an (n ) ,

(x  1,  , x  m )am (m )  a1(1)

(2.4)

where the terms m, n = 0 are by denition 1.

we claim that one can choose real kernel functions f s such that v and v  transform

under (2.2) according to

v = +i g c v ,

v  = i g v  c .

(2.5)

before we proceed to enforce the transformation properties (2.5), two comments are in order
about the multiple convolutions displayed in (2.3) and (2.4).

(i) the rst is that they are mandatory if one is interested, as we are, in obtaining

translation covariant solutions to (2.5).

(ii) the second is that the convolutions extending to the whole minkowski space explicitly
expose the fact that v and v  may be non-localized functions of the basic local elds a,
provided the support of the f s is suitably chosen. in view of the discussion about (1.1),
this is quite welcome because we are aiming at constructing locally gauge invariant elds
that carry nontrivial global colour numbers: indeed, concerning local gauge transformations,
once (2.5) are satised, the spinor elds:

f (x) = v (x; f )(x)

, f (y) = (y)v (y; f )

(2.6)

7

let us go back to enforcing (2.5). steinmann has faced this problem in ref.

are obviously invariant under (2.2) while they transform as r and r when c is not chosen
according to (2.1), but is constant with respect to x.
[22]. he
assumes that, on introducing (2.2) into (2.3) and (2.4), the derivatives can be reversed by
parts. while this can be justied for space derivatives, thanks to the boundary conditions
(2.1) on the ghost, the thing is less justiable for the time derivatives, as one has no a priori
control on asymptotic behaviour in time. in electrodynamics there is a way out: since the
ghost is free, one can choose suitable solutions of the dalambert equation [20] that justify
the neglect of boundary terms. in the non-abelian case the problem is there: we shall, as in
[22], just ignore it, recalling however the statement (1) of the introduction that, in the case
of quantum elds, we will be able to prove the -independence of correlation functions.

with this proviso, steinmann has shown that the requirement that (2.5) be satised by
(2.3) and (2.4) order by order in g leads to a linear inhomogeneous recursive system for the
f s. the fourier transforms of the rst of the equations he gives is:

k f 

1 (k) = i ,

(2.7)

whereas the f with n > 1 arguments is determined in terms of the f with n  1 arguments
by




(k1)1

1n
f
n

(k1,   , kn ) = i [ f

2n
n 1

(k2,   , kn )  f

2n
n 1

(k1 + k2, k3,   , kn )] ,

(k)

1n
f
n

(k1,   , k,   , kn ) =

+i [ f

11+1n
n 1

(k1,   , k2, k1 + k, k+1,   , kn ) +

(2.8)

11+1n
n 1

 f

(k1,   , k1, k + k+1, k+2,   , kn )] ,

(kn )n

1n
f
n

(k1,   , kn ) = i f

1n 1
n 1

(k1,   , kn 2, kn 1 + kn ) .

with 2    n  1. we also take from [22] that the solutions of (2.7) and (2.8), that for
any integer n satisfy:

(k1,   , kj ) f

n j +1

n j

n

n

xj =0
xj =0

j

(1)j f 1j
(1)n j f j 1

j

(kn ,   , kj +1) = 0 ,

(kj ,   , k1) f

j +1 n

n j

(kj +1,   , kn ) = 0 ,

(2.9)

(2.10)

give rise to unitary series v (x; f ) v (x; f ) = v (x; f ) v (x; f ) = 1.

let us rst focus on (2.7). a family of solutions to this equation that also satises (2.9)

and (2.10) isa

1 (k; c) = i n 1
f 

2 (cid:18) 1 + c
n  k  i 0
8

+

1  c
n  k + i 0(cid:19) ,

(2.11)

where c is a real parameter and n is a 4-vector that we leave, for the moment, unspecied.
two particular solutions from (2.11) are

f 
+ 1(k; n) =

f 
 1(k; n) =

i n

i n

n  k  i 0
n  k + i 0

,

.

it can be veried that the two following sets of functions f+n and fn , given by

f 1n

n

(k1,   , kn ; n) =

i n1

n  (k1 +    + kn )  i 0   

i nn

n  kn  i 0

(2.12)

(2.13)

(2.14)

separately satisfy all equations (2.8)-(2.10). these solutions also full the factorization
property

f 1n

n

(k1,   , kn ; n) =

1
n!

f 1
1 (k1; n)    f

n
1 (kn ; n)

xperm

well known as eikonal identity, as well as the nreection exchange relation

f 1n

n

(k1,   , kn ; n) = f 1n

n

(k1,   , kn ;n)

.

(2.15)

(2.16)

we will also need a third set of solutions, that extend to higher orders the lowest order

solution obtained by setting c = 0 in (2.11):

f 
0 1(k; n) =

i n

2 (cid:18)

1

n  k  i 0

+

1

n  k + i 0(cid:19)

(2.17)

with principal value prescription (pv) for the nk denominator. this is evidently connected
with the problem of exposing a family of solutions that interpolates between f+n and fn .
we have found that, with n kept xed and even after imposing the unitarity constraints
(2.9) and (2.10), the higher the n the higher the number of complex parameters due to
the occurrence of poincare-bertrand terms. however, if also the eikonal identity (2.15) is
enforced, the interpolating family only depends on the real parameter c appearing in (2.11).
just to give a avour of the thing, it is found that

f 12
2

(k1, k2; c) = f 1

1 (k1 + k2; c) f 2

1 (k2; c) +

2
2

(1  c2) n1 n2(n  k1) (n  k2)

.

(2.18)

we have explicitly found up to f4(k1,   , k4; c) and we also have a guess about
fn (k1,   , kn ; c) for generic n. but, for the sake of conciseness we will no longer elaborate
on this topic, also because higher orders will not be needed in the perturbative calculations
we will perform in later sections. the important for the sequel is that there exists a solu-
tion, denoted by f 1n
(k1,   , kn ; n), that extends (2.17) to any order n. in connection
with (2.16), note that the solution f0, in addition to satisfying the eikonal identity, is also
invariant under nreection

0n

f 1n
0n

(k1,   , kn ; n) = f 1n

0n

(k1,   , kn ;n)

.

(2.19)

the relationship between the present approach and other ones [13, 18, 21, 22], can now

be claried.

9

consider, to this purpose, v(y; n),

i.e the v obtained by inserting the solution
fn (i.e (2.13) and (2.14) with the  sign) into (2.3).
it is useful to represent
all the denominators in fn by means of the one-parameter integral representation
(b + i 0)1 = ir +
in this way it is possible to explicitly perform
the d4kj integrations in the anti-fourier transform of the f s. these integrations give rise
to 4(x j +pi i) that allow, in turn, for the elimination of the d4j integrations in (2.3).

some further obvious manipulations convert (2.3) into

d exp [i (b + i 0)].

0

v(y; n)=

dn n  a(y  n 1)    n  a(y  n n ) =

d1   z +

n 1



(i g)nz +
xn =0
= p + exp(cid:20)i gz +

0

0

d n  a(y  n )(cid:21)

.

(2.20)

the r.h.s. of the above formula is the usual denition of the path-ordering symbol p +. if
n is chosen to be a space-like vector, the above representation claries that v is nothing
but a rectilinear string operator a l a mandelstam [18] extending to space-like innity. the
case of n space-like may serve also to accommodate buchholz case [36]. for this reason we
will generically refer to all the v and v  operators as to the string operators, regardless of
whether n is space-like or time-like.
in the same way one nds that

v 

+(x; n) = p + exp(cid:20)i gz +

0

d n  a(x + n)(cid:21)

(2.21)

(again a p + for the order of the n  a factors in v  is reversed with respect to v ).
the future and past light cones, and their complement:

it is now convenient to introduce the decomposition of the minkowski 4-space m4 into

m4 = c+  c0  c

(2.22)

and in the sequel, referring to the above decomposition, the indices  and  will always take
the values , 0.
the statement that respectively n0
i
cal ordering symbols

in the future/past light-cone. then
< 0 is lorentz invariant, whence also x0  i n0 =
in view of this, (2.20) can be written using the t  chronologi-

suppose now that, we choose n  c,
> i1

>  0 = x0.

i.e.

>

<

<

>    <
v(x; n) = t  exp(cid:20)+i gz +

0

d n  a(x  n )(cid:21)

, n  c ,

and likewise for (2.21)

v 

+(x; n) = t  exp(cid:20)i gz +

0

d n  a(x + n )(cid:21)

, n  c .

so far this is no big dierence: the ordering operators, either p  or t , only order the colour
matrices ta1,   , tan in the n-th term of the above series, whereas the elds aa1
1 ,   , aan
n ,
inasmuch as classical elds, are not sensitive to this ordering. in the case of classical elec-
trodynamics  ta  1  such operators are simply useless. the role of the t  ordering will
instead become crucial when we will keep it in the denition of the quantum heisenberg
operators.

10

(2.23)

(2.24)

we have also to consider string operators in which the string vector n is chosen space-like.
in this case the dierence between the arguments of two neighbouring as is space-like, so
only the colour matrices are sensitive to the ordering, whereas even the heisenberg elds of
the quantum case commute with one another, due to locality. the solution we will consider
0 (x; n), i.e. the ones corresponding to the solution f0n that
for n  c0 are v0(x; n) and v 
extends (2.17) and fulls the n-reection invariance property (2.19).

let us now introduce the characteristic functions

(n) = 


and correspondingly the elds

1 if n  c
0

otherwise

,

 = 1, 0

(x; n) = (n) t [v 

(x; n) (x)]

,

0(x; n) = 0(n) v 

0 (x; n) (x)

,

(x; n) = (n) t [ (x) v(x; n)]

,

0(x; n) = 0(n) (x) v0(x; n)

.

these elds full the dirac conjugation properties

(x; n) = (x;n)
0(x; n) = 0(x,n)

,

,

(2.25)

(2.26)

(2.27)

(2.28)

that follow from the n-reection properties (2.16) and (2.19). as a consequence the com-
posite elds

(x; n) = z+ + + z  + z0 0,

(x; n) = z + + z+  + z0 0

(2.29)

(with the complex constants zs satisfying z = z, z0 = z0, and to be specied later, for
the quantum elds, when eecting renormalization) satisfy the dirac conjugation relation

that, in fourier transform, takes the form

(x; n) = (x;n) 0

(p; n) = (p;n)

.

(2.30)

(2.31)

all the constructions done so far, to go from  to , can be crudely summarized in this
way: one has traded the gauge-variance of  for the dependence of  on the string vector
n. we will refer to this fact as a breaking, put in by hand, of the original lorentz symmetry
 an unpleasant feature one would like to get rid of. we dedicate the rest of this section to
give a heuristic description of how we will try to accomplish this task.

11

the dirac equation for the ordinary  in linear covariant gauges is rst converted into

the equation of motion for (x; n). we write it in momentum representation:

( /p ) (p; n) = g  taz d4kx

= g  ta qa(p; n)

z t 

 (k; n) aa

(k) (p  k; n) =

,

(2.32)

where the index  refers to the decomposition of  with respect to the light-cone of n,
equation (2.26). accordingly, the projectors t are given by

t 
 (k; n) = g 

kn
n  k  i 0

,

t 
0 (k; n) = g  pv

kn
n  k

and satisfy

(2.33)

n t 

 (k; n) = 0 ,

t 
 (k; n) k = 0 .

(2.34)

 that satises n  aa = 0.

thanks to the second of equations (2.34), the longitudinal degrees of freedom of aa
 are
expected to decouple. thanks to the rst of equations (2.34), the vector eld to which  is
coupled is aa = t  aa
were it not for the subtleties due to the i 0 prescriptions (i.e. to the light cone decom-
position of the eld with respect to n), this formally is the equation satised by the dirac
eld in the axial gauge. one could try to take this as a substitute of the ordinary dirac
equation in linear covariant gauges and (x; n) (with n, as in a gauge-xing, chosen once
for all) as the variable substituting  and in terms of which to attempt a gauge-invariant
formulation of the theory  much in the spirit of

[17, 18, 21].

we will not take this attitude. we will continue to think of (x; n) as a composite eld

in a theory where  and aa

 play the role of basic dynamic variables.

this point of view leaves open the possibility of choosing dierent ns for dierent s.
more clearly, we want to leave open the possibility of computing quantum correlation func-
tions of the type h(x; m)(y; n)i, in which any eld has its own string and with no restric-
tion on whether both m and n are taken either time-like or space-like.
this also is the point where we can explain how we will recover the lost lorentz symmetry.

we will discuss about the possibility of taking the limit

n  p

(2.35)

in equation (2.32).

a serious warning about this limit is that its very existence is far from being trivial: we
will give some positive evidence in favour of it only in the case of quantum elds in section
iv.

for now we will just forget about any mathematical rigor and assume its existence: this
enables us to draw some conclusions and formulate some expectations about quantum elds.
the rst consideration about (2.35) is that it does not mess up the dirac conjugation

properties of , as evident from equation (2.31).

let us then call

q(p) = (p; p)

.

12

(2.36)

then, by setting n = p in (2.32), one obtains:

( /p ) q(p) = g  taz d4kx

z t 

 (k; p) aa

(k) (p  k; p)

(2.37)

that makes evident why we have kept our point of view: dierently from (p; n), the eld q
may exist only as a composite eld: in the r.h.s. of the above equation the  appears with
two dierent values of its arguments, so the eld q does not satisfy a closed equation. for q,
as already for (p; n), it is expected that the unphysical degrees of freedom of aa
 decouple:
the second of equations (2.34) still applies.

but this is not the end of the story. if, according to a well known argument, the near-
mass-shell behaviour of the eld is driven by the classical currents responsible for the inter-
action with soft gluons/photons, we can make a guess about it by operating the replacement
   p/p  k within the integration in the r.h.s. of (2.37). it is then seen that, thanks
now to the rst of equations (2.34) with n = p, also the classical currents decouple and no
longer drive the asymptotic ir dynamics of q. as a result, the near-mass-shell behaviour of
the eld q we have dened should be at least milder than that of both the gauge-variant 
and the n-dependent .

the observation above, nally, claries why we have constructed strings allowing for the
choice of a time-like vector: in the classical currents the momentum is close to the mass-shell:
p2  2 > 0.
sections. this means that we will give meaning, to some extent, to the heuristic formula

all these expectations for the quantum elds will nd conrmation in the following

q(x) = z

d4p

(2)4 ei px (cid:20)z d4y ei py (y; n)(cid:21)n=p

(2.38)

with (y; n) given by (2.29). the utility of this formula is to clarify that the kind of delo-
calization involved in q(x) is by far more complicated than that, recalled in connection with
(1.1), of a eld with a tail going to innity along a string that is rectilinear in coordinate
representation, as is the case for (y; n). in pictorial terms the strings contributing to q(x)
are spread out all over x-space: this happens when a string, rectilinear in p-space, is inte-
grated upon with exp(i p  x) as weighting factor. the eld q(x) thus rather resembles a
kind of space-time candy-sugar cloud centered at x.

iii. perturbation theory for quantum fields

the present section is devoted to set up diagrammatic rules for the calculation, in per-
turbation theory, of the correlation functions of the quantum gauge invariant charged elds
we have sketched in section ii.

we dene the quantum eld corresponding to (2.29) in the following way:

(x; m) = z d4p
 x=,0

(2)4 ei px( 
xm =0
i1 f 1m
hv 

(m)  1/2

m

m

yj=1z d4kj
(ig)m tam    ta1
(k1,   , km ; m) t h aam



(2)4 

m (km )    aa1

1(k1) (cid:16)p 

(3.1)

m

xj=1

kj(cid:17)i).

13

in the above formula the time-ordering operators t  and the identity operator t 0 = 1 act
on the heisenberg elds in the square bracket. moreover + =  and 0 will play the role
of real renormalization constants, introduced to take care of the compositeness of .
in
i1 are constants whose values will be xed later, when their
addition, also the factors hv 
necessity to avert some ill-dened one particle reducible graphs will be realized. for now,
i1 have the right conjugation properties
what is needed to know is that the  and the hv 
i1 can be identied with the z of equation (2.29): in this way (x; m) is,
such that  hv 
in turn, obtained by taking the straightforward dirac conjugate of (3.1).
it should be nally noted that the structure of formula (3.1) is slightly dierent from
(2.29). in fact, in the latter case one can recognize the time-ordering of the elds only after
performing, as we have done in section ii, the d4j integrations of (2.4). here, instead, the
d4kj integration involving the f s, that are in turn responsible for this ordering, are indicated
but not yet performed: the t ,0 are there simply by denition.

the light-cone decomposition of the eld with respect to m  the second line of the above
formula  makes it evident that, depending on the choice of the string vector m relative to
any single eld, one must be able to compute vevs of the type ht n(  )    t 1(  )i, with
i = , 0. this observation entails that the usual dyson perturbation theory formula for
the development of one single t -ordered product is not sucient to our purposes.
an extension of dyson algorithm is therefore needed and, fortunately for us, such an
extension is already available, thanks to the work of ostendor [29] and steinmann [30].
we recapitulate their results for the readers convenience (reporting more or less verbatim

the content of the appendix of ref.

[31]).

let us denote by x = {x1,   , xr} a set of 4-vectors and  stand for any basic eld
,  etc.) of interest for us. let also t (x) denote the corresponding product of the

(aa
elds (x1)    (xr). in the multi-time-ordered vacuum expectation value

w (xn, n| ... |x2, 2|x1, 1) = ht n(xn)    t 1(x1)i

(3.2)

suitable to match the order n in pt are drawn.

any i may take the value  only (the case t 0 = 1 of no ordering will be included later).
the perturbative contribution to order gn to w is obtained as follows.
 graphs: all the graphs with p ri external points and a number of internal points
 partitions: each of the above graphs is partitioned in non overlapping subgraphs 
the sectors  such that all the external points of xi belong to the same sector, called an
external sector. in general, there exist sectors not containing external points, called internal
sectors. internal points may belong to external as well as to internal sectors, depending on
the partition considered.

rules.

 sector numbers: to any sector s, a number s(s) is assigned according to the following
(i) for the sector containing the external points xi: s = i.
(ii) for an internal sector s, s(s) is a non-integer number between the maximum and
the minimum sector numbers relative to the neighbouring sectors (i.e. the sectors connected
to s by at least by one line of the graph).

(iii) if i 6= i+1 there is no internal sector with i < s(s) < i + 1.
 equivalence: if two partitions only dier in the numbering of the sectors  not in their
topology  they are inequivalent if for at least one pair of neighbouring sectors s, s one
has s(s) > s(s) in the rst partition, s(s) < s(s) in the second.

 type: the sectors are either t + or t  sectors in the following way: the external sector
with number i is a t i sector; the internal sector with i < s(s) < i + 1 and i = i+1 is a
t i sector as well.

14

to the following.

 diagrammatic rules: any partition is converted into an analytical expression according
(i) inside a t + sector ordinary feynman rules for propagator and vertices apply.
(ii) inside a t  sector the complex conjugate of feynman rules hold.
(iii) any internal sector contributes a (1) factor.
(iv) finally, a line connecting two dierent sectors s and s corresponds, in momentum

space, to a factor

ij ( /p +) 2 (p0) (p2  2)

quarks

,

ab(cid:16)g 2 (k0) (k2) + kk   (cid:17) gluons

,

(3.3)

(3.4)

where the dots in the second stand for gauge terms that decouple in all the w functions we
> s(s).
will calculate and the  applies according to whether the number sectors satisfy s(s) <
 sum: the contribution of order gn to w is obtained by summing the contribution
of all inequivalent partitions so obtained and multiplying the result for the appropriate
combinatorial factor.

the inclusion of the case t 0 = 1 of no ordering is taken into account by the following
observation. single elds (x) are included in the above scheme by allowing external sectors
with only one eld as argument: (x) = t ((x)). in this way the single partitions of a
graph do depend on the choice of the sign, but the sum, expectedly, does not. this, in
particular, provides the algorithm for computing wightman functions in pt.

some comments about the above steinmann rules are in order. the iterative derivation

of the above rules is based on the following inputs:

(i) the equations of motion of the model;
(ii) wightman axioms for the wightman functions (including locality, but excluding

positivity);

(iii) on-shell normalization conditions.
within these assumptions the solution provided by the above rules is shown to be unique.
concerning the last point we emphasize that, whenever needed, an ir regulator must be

at work (which one is suitable for the models considered here will be discussed later).

moreover steinmann himself emphasizes that no use of the asymptotic condition is ever
made. this is quite welcome for us for, in the contrary case, this would imply some assump-
tion on the ir asymptotic dynamics: this is exactly what we do not want to do.

the above rules provide the tool necessary for computing in pt, at least in principle,
all the correlation functions of the gauge invariant charged elds, as the quark (3.1): this
algorithm provides us immediately with the quantum part of the calculation, i.e. that
part that only involves the quantum elds in the r.h.s of (3.1). about this part one should
also observe that all the degrees of freedom, physical as well as unphysical, are associated
to local elds that propagate in causal way.

however, there remains the classical part of the calculation, consisting in checking
whether the d4kj integrations involving both the vevs and the fs we have chosen (that
should provide the decoupling of the unphysical degrees of freedom) are well dened.

we face this problem in the next section where we only consider two-point functions,
because the rules we have reported above are somewhat unusual and more complicated than
the feynman rules everybody is used to: we better start learning the new game in the
simplest case.

15

iv. two-point functions

our aim is to see how the algorithm given in the preceding section works in the case of

the two-point function

m

=





z d4x ei px z d4y ei qy h(x; m)(y; n)i = (2)44(p + q) w (p, m; q, n) =
xm,n =0 x, =,0
  1/2
 ht [ am (km )    a1(k1) (p x ki)] t  [(q x j) a1(1)    an (n )]i

yi=1z d4ki
(2)4
 m (k1    , km ; m)

(ig)m (ig)n
i1 (m) f 1km
hv 

(2)4 
hvi1  (n) f 1n

 n

n

yj=1z d4j

 1/2


(4.1)

(1    , n ; n) 

.

due to the presence of the string vectors m and n, this two-point function extends equation
(1.9) that will be recovered in the end of this section. in analogy to (1.10) we will denote
the amputation of (4.1) by

(2)44(p + q) w(p, m; q, n) =  ta hqa(p, m) q b(q, n)i  tb

,

(4.2)

where the qs are the currents dened in (2.32).

consistently with steinmann assumptions, we assume that the qcd lagrangian [14]

has been ir regulated and renormalized with on-shell normalization conditions.

up to order g2 the calculation is essentially abelian: the colour matrices in the two ver-
tices contract to cf ( 1 for qed) and there is no three-gluon vertex. to this order, there-
fore, one can think of regularizing ir divergences by giving a mass  to the photon/gluon
and uv divergences by dimensional regularization: 4  4  2 ,  > 0.
as a matter of fact, on going to order g4 it will be seen in [28] that the mass regularization
is not adequate and we shall use dimensional regularization 4  4 + 2 ,  > 0 for the
ir [32, 33] (this ir  should not be confused with the uv , anyway they will never
be simultaneously used) and non-lagrangian pauli-villars
[38] for uv. details about the
problems connected with the choice of the regularizations are given in section v.

it is convenient to group the graphs contributing to the vev in (4.1) in the following

way:

(1) usual or local graphs: those with the m = n = 0 in the above double series, i.e. the

graphs contributing to the wightman function h(x)(y)i.

(2l) left graphs: m > 0, n = 0.
(2r) right graphs: m = 0, n > 0, specular to the left graphs.
(3) left/right graphs: both m > 0 and n > 0.
this is exemplied by the four graphs in fig. 1, that gives the graphs contributing to

order g2.

the sector partitions of the above graphs depend on whether either m or n are chosen
in c or in the complement c0 of the light cone. to cover all the nine possibilities, it would
be sucient to consider only ve cases, thanks to the dirac conjugation properties of the
fermion eld, equation (2.30). however, we will furtherly restrict ourselves only to the three
cases that are more interesting for our purposes:

(a) m  c+, n  c;
(b) m  c+, n  c0;
(c) m, n  c0.
the discussion of the remaining cases is, after these, a simple exercise.
in any event, the lowest order graph, common to all cases, contributes the free two-point

wightman function of the spinor eld, equation (1.4).

16

a. m  c+, n  c

only the term of (4.1) with  = +,  =  contributes, there are only two external
sectors, sector 1 in the right that is a t  sector, and sector 2 in the left, that is a t + sector.
since the two sectors are of dierent type, there can be no internal sectors. the partitions
of the above six graphs are thus obtained by drawing a cutting vertical line in all possible
positions. in the cut lines we convene that momentum always ows from right to left, i.e.
from sector 1 to sector 2 so that the replacement rules (3.3) and (3.4) are always taken with
the plus sign.

all this resembles, and is nothing else but, the familiar cutkosky-veltman cutting rules.
it should be noted that this regards only the vev in the last line of (4.1). the f -vertices
contributed by the string operators, not even drawn in fig. 1, are not touched upon by
steinmann rules: their denominators are instead prescribed by our denition (3.1).

in addition, this identication of steinmann rules with cutkosky-veltman rules happens
only thanks to the choice made for m and n. dierent choices, as well as vevs with more
than two external sectors, are covered only by steinmann rules.

the partitions drawn in fig. 2-4 refer to (4.1), i.e. to the whole hi, not only to the
vev in (3.1): the vertical lines represent the string denominators of the fs, whereas each
vertex on a vertical line  an empty circle  contributes a factor proportional to either g m
or g n; there also is a 4-dimensional integration for the loop.

concerning graph a, its partitions are given in fig. 2. only the one marked (a) is non-
zero, the other two vanish thanks to both mass and wave function on-shell normalization
conditions.

graph bl has the two partitions given in fig. 3 and named (bl) and ( l). there are

the two specular and complex conjugate partitions (br) and ( r) from br.

graph c has the only partition (c) given in fig. 4.
graph tl too has only the partition (tl) given in fig. 5. there also is the partition

(tr) complex conjugate of the above.

we start with discussing the last graph.
w1(p, m; q, n) is proportional to the integral

it is ill-dened because its contribution to

z d4k

g m

g m

m  k  i 0

m  (k  k)  i 0

i g +   
k2  2 + i 0

(4.3)

that is not dened. even in qed, where, due to absence of colour matrices, one could take
for f2 the symmetrized form

f 
+2(k1, k2; m) =

1
2!

i m

i m

m  k1  i 0

m  k2  i 0

,

the momentum conservation k1 = k2 from the photon propagator would yield the integral

z d4k

1

1

1

k2  2 + i 0

m  k  i 0

m  k + i 0

i1 in (4.1), as we now explain.

plagued with a pinch singularity. so one has to get rid of it. this is exactly the task of the
factors hv 
the initial observation is that, thanks to translation invariance, the vev of v (x; m)
cannot depend on x. so it may only be a (ill-dened) constant times the identity matrix
in colour space. imagine now that the theory has been provisionally regularized by dening
it on a space-time of nite volume : translation invariance is temporarily broken and

17

momentum conservation does not hold, so that (4.3) is now well dened: all the graphs
depend on  and tend to the expression that the above rules provide for them in the limit
  . however, before the limit is taken and up to order g2, the factor hv 
+i1 times
w0(p) provides exactly the partition (tl), but with opposite sign.
i1 are the instruction for the
neglect of all the graphs including self interaction of the strings, as that given in fig. 6, i.e.
of the graphs that can be disconnected with one only cut in the string associated with the
eld (x; m)  one could call them one string reducible graphs.

independently of any heuristic explanation, the factors hv 

of the eld (y; n).

likewise, hvi1 operates on the one string reducible graphs associated with the string
we thus arrive to the conclusion that to order g2 only the six partitions (a), (bl),
(br), (c) and ( l), ( r) survive, as well as the counterterms coming from the expansion
of + =   1 + / 1. for example the partition ( l) can be parameterized in the form:

( l) =




cf "((m, p); uv, ir) + ((m, p))

/m 

m  p# w0(p)

(4.4)

where, in terms of the ultraviolet and infra-red cutos

uv =

ir = ln

1
  e + ln



42
2

dimensional regularization ,

(4.5)

mass term for the vector meson ,

(4.6)

and of the functions

(m, p) = vuut1 
ln (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

() = " 1

b() =

1
2 



li2() +

m2 p2

1 + 

(m  p)2 , m, p  c  0 <  < 1 , m  p    0 ,
1  (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

1 + 

,

,

1
2

li2 

1  !# + [  ]

the calculation of the invariant functions  and  gives the result:

(; uv, ir) =

1

2

2 ( 1
+ 1

uv + 1 + b()  2 ir + ln
  1!  1
7
4 

uv + ir +

4

() = 

1
2

b()

.

4
ln 

+ 1!  () +

1  2
1  !) w0(p) ,

1
2

(4.7)

(4.8)

(4.9)

(4.10)

(4.11)

in (4.10) the contribution of the g and of the longitudinal terms of the vector meson

propagator are the rst and the second line, respectively.

likewise, the calculation of ( r) is obtained by (4.4) with the replacement:

( r) =




cf w0(p)hm  ni

.

18

(4.12)

obviously, the choice of 1 can only modify the invariant function .
the rst thing to note about the above graphs is that the coecient of uv in  does
not depend either on p or on m, n. therefore, this dependence (as well as the dependence
on ) can be renormalized away.

the second thing to note is that the coecient of ir  proportional to b((m, p)) +
b((n, p))  does depend on p: the infra-red divergence cannot be eliminated by renormal-
ization.

we choose




1 =




cf (

1
2

uv  2 ir + 1 +  1

  1!  1

4

uv + ir +

7
4 

1
2

ln 

1  !) ,

(4.13)

in which the nite part of 1 has been chosen in such a way that when both the limits
m  p, n  p are taken in (4.4) and (4.12) respectively, one obtains

( l) + ( r) +




1 w0(p)

m,n  p

 0 .

(4.14)

we have now to discuss the sector partitions (a), (bl), (br), (c). they have in common

the 2-body phase-space

2(p)= z d2 = z d4k (k0) (k2) (p0  k0) ((p  k)2  2) =


2

(p0) (p2  2)  1 

=

2

p2!

and their contribution to the amputated two-point function (1.10) is

w1(p, m;p, n) =

g2

(2)2 cf z d2 n(p; m, n)

where from

n(p; m, n) = (cid:20)  ( /p )

m

m  k(cid:21) ( /p  /k +)(cid:20)  ( /p )

n

n  k(cid:21) (g)

the contribution of each sector partition is clearly identiable.

(4.15)

(4.16)

(4.17)

the following comments should help.
(a) the factors ( /p ) in the square brackets of (4.17) are due to the amputation.
(b) the contribution of the spurious degrees of freedom in the gluon propagator is ob-

tained by the replacements

in the two-body phase-space (4.15) and

(k2)  (k2  2)  (k2  2/)

g  kk/2

in (4.17). the latter converts each of the square brackets into ( /p  /k ) that in turn, on
multiplying the factor ( /p  /k +), gives zero  thanks to the delta function in the fermion
phase-space.

19

(c) the prescriptions i 0 in the string vertex denominators have been omitted inasmuch
as irrelevant to (4.17): indeed, m, n and also k, thanks to (4.15), belong to c+, so that
both m  k and n  k are strictly positive on the two-body phase-space.

(d) for the same reason there is no need of ir regularization in (4.16).
use of covariance shows that w1(p, m;p, n) can be expressed in terms of three integrals:

one is 2(p), equation (4.15). as for the others, it is convenient for later use to dene

i(p; m) = z d2

(m)
(m  k)

,

where (m) is a prescription:

(m) = 


1 if m  c
pv if m  c0

,

and likewise

(m)
(m  k)
the results of the calculations, for any m and n, are

j(p; m, n) = z d2

(n)
(n  k)

.

i(p, m) = 2(p)

b((m, p)) ,

2

p2

p2  2

|p  m|
4

(p2  2)2

|m  n|

j(p; m, n) = 2(p)

p2

b((m, n)) ,

(4.18)

(4.19)

(4.20)

(4.21)

(4.22)

with b given by (4.8).

only one observation is relevant about the above integrals, namely that the limits m 
n, m  p, n  p exist, commute with one another and commute with the phase-space
integration to give

i(p; p) = 2(p)

2

p2  2 ,

j(p; m,m) = j(p; p,p) = 2(p)

4

(p2  2)2 .

(4.23)

(4.24)

as long as the contribution of sector partitions (a), (bl), (br) and (c) is infra-red
nite, the lesson to be learned from adding this to the contribution of partitions ( l) and
( r) (given by (4.4), (4.12)) is that the perturbative theory for the eld (x; m), m  c+,
and its dirac conjugate is plagued with the same ir pathology as for the gauge dependent
(x).

should one stop here, nothing would have been gained.
the only way to get rid of the ir divergence given by sector partitions ( l) and ( r)
is to take both the limits m  p and n  p. in this case, due to the last two formulae,
the contribution of sector partitions (a), (bl), (br), (c) simplies to

w1(p) = cf (p0) (1  ) (1  )(cid:18) /p

1 + 

2  (cid:19)

(4.25)

20

where

 = 2/p2

,

(4.26)

whence, on reinserting the external propagators omitted for the amputation, taking into
account (4.14) and setting cf = 1, one obtains the w1(p) appearing in (1.3) and given by
equations (1.5), (1.6).

this is the piece of evidence that we can give in this paper, working to order g2, about
the existence  and, to some extent, the necessity  of taking the limit (2.35), discussed in
the section ii.

the extension of (4.25) to the region 0 < p2 < 2 is legitimate and trivial.
also the extension of (4.25) to the region p2 < 0 is trivial  it also gives zero. but in
this case there is a problem of consistency between this extension, on the one side, and
the steinmann rules and the limits m, n  p on the other side. in this region infact the
taking of the limits requires that m and/or n be space-like from the outset and this, in turn,
changes the sector partitions contributing to w1. it is however plausible to expect that the
naive extrapolation of (4.25) to p2 < 0 is correct: indeed all the sector partitions, even when
calculated with the steinmann rules suited for m and/or n space-like, should display either
a 2(p) or a w0(p) factor, as encountered in the present section. if really so, setting p2 < 0
gives zero, due to the support properties of these factors, and the limits m, n  p are
quite safe.
we feel however that, in order to check the above mentioned consistency, the exposing
of the results of the explicit calculation is more convincing. also because, should one be
interested in the perturbative theory of the elds with m 6= p, there arise some diculties
connected with renormalizability that are better explicitly inspected.

this is dealt with in the next subsections.

b. m  c0, n  c

there is again the contribution of local graphs, namely those contributing to the ordinary
wightman function h(x)(y)i, i.e. graph a of fig. 1. this is expected to be the same as
in the previous section, as independent of the string vectors m and n. indeed, as commented
after the last steinmann rule in section iii, we have the freedom to assign a time-ordering
label to each eld, being sure that the nal result does not depend on the assignment. we
choose to write h(x)(y)i = ht +[(x)] t [(y)]i, that takes us back to the case discussed in
the previous section: only sector partition (a) of fig. 2 gives a non-vanishing contribution.
let us now discuss the sector partitions of graph bl of fig. 1. now the three external
vertices must be given sector numbers as in fig. 7 and the number s can be given values
1  s  3. so in principle there are ve inequivalent partitions.
vertex, so their contribution is zero.

the two partitions in which s is non-integer have three on-shell lines joining in the same

there remain the three sector partition labelled by s = 1, 2, 3.
the rst  s = 1  is again (bl) in fig. 3, so its contribution is easily recovered from
(4.16) and (4.17), provided the integral (4.18) is taken, according to (4.1) and (2.17), with
the pv prescription. in fact, in this case the denominator m  k is no longer positive on the
two-body phase-space. the result is still given by (4.21).
it is now convenient to consider the sector partitions of graph c in fig. 1, postponing
to later the sector partitions of fig. 7 labelled by s = 2, 3. the sector numbers can only
be assigned as in fig. 8. therefore this is again partition (c) of fig. 4, easily recovered

21

from (4.16) and (4.17), provided that in the integral (4.20) the m  k denominator is pv
prescribed. again the result is provided by (4.22).
finally, the only sector partition of the one string reducible graph tl in fig. 1 (sector
0 i1 instruction
going back to the other two sector partitions s = 2, 3 of fig. 7, they both have a w0(p)
factor (the fermion line in the right) and so take the place of ( l) of the previous section.

numbers 1 to 4 clockwise from right vertex) is again disposed of, thanks to hv 
in (4.1).

the contribution of these partitions is parameterized, in analogy with (4.4), by

(zl) =




cf "c((m, p); uv, ir) + d((m, p); uv)

/m 

m  p# w0(p)

(4.27)

where, the invariant functions c and d depend on m and p through the variable (m, p)
(dened in (4.7) and now, with m  c0, satisfying  > 1) and on the cutos (4.5), (4.6): the
result of the calculation gives

1
8

(1  2) b()(cid:19) + ir b() +

2 2  1

4

3
4

2 +

  1! (uv  2 ir + 1) +

b() 
1
4 

+

16

3
8

+

2 +

() +

c(; uv, ir)= uv(cid:18)1
2
5  2
4   1
1
3
d(; uv) = uv(cid:18)
2 
8
1
2 
b() 
4



1
4

1
8

+

(1  2) b()(cid:19) +
1  2

()

,

16

ln 

,

(4.28)

(4.29)

(4.30)

in which, we remind, b() is given by (4.8) and

() = " 1

2 

ln2 1 + 
2 

+

1


li2 1 + 

2  !# + [  ]

.

comparison of the above formulae with the corresponding (4.10), (4.11) shows that 
contrary to   the invariant function d does depend on uv: this means that no choice of the
renormalization constant 0 introduced in (3.1) (and giving rise to counterterms proportional
to w0(p), not to /m w0(p)) can cure the divergence. in addition there also are the coecients
of uv and ir in c that both depend on p through . as for the ir divergence associated
with a space-like string, the result is not new [21].

there is a way out of this problem: choosing m0 = 0 in the rest frame, in which only
p0 =  6= 0. in this case in fact (zl)  cf / w0(p)  (uv /2 + last line of (4.28)), so that
a suitable choice of 0 to order g2 removes the divergence.
unfortunately, the choice m0 = 0 spoils lorentz invariance and we will not stick to it.
to summarize: the perturbative theory involving a charged eld, dressed with a string
in space-like direction, is non-renormalizable  at least at nite orders  due to the m-string.
there survive, in addition, ir divergences carried by both the m- and the n-string.

the discussion of local graphs as well as of the sector partitions with only one string
vertex (fig. 2; fig. 7 and its analogue giving rise to a partition (br) and to a contribution

c. m  c0, n  c0

22

(zr) obtained by (4.27), with a replacement analogue to (4.12)) presents no novelty with
respect to the preceding subsection.

the only novel feature is given by graph c of fig. 1, where the only partition is given
by assigning sector numbers from 1 to 4 with clockwise movement, starting from the top
right vertex.

this is again recovered from (4.16) and (4.17), provided the integral (4.20) is now taken
with both m and n space-like, i.e with both denominators prescribed by pv. the result is
once more (4.22).

in this case also, thanks to the (zl) and (zr) contributions, there are uv as well ir

divergences due to each string.

choosing both m0 = n0 = 0 in the rest frame would eliminate the two problems.
however, once more we refrain from breaking lorentz symmetry, also because there is
another way out of this empasse. this is provided exactly by the double limit m = n  p.
the latter has to be eected rst by dragging p in c0: this makes the whole two-point
function vanish, due to the support of the (p2  2) in the (zl) and (zr) contributions,
and to the support of the 2(p) two-body phase-space in all the other ones. at this point
taking the limit is safe and gives zero, in agreement with the naive extrapolation of (4.25)
discussed in the end of subsection iv a.

v. outlook of fourth order calculations

the calculations of section iv should make it evident that the only two-point function
free from both uv and ir problems is that relative to the eld (2.36): they provide evidence
for the necessity, rather than the possibility, of taking the limit n  p, whose meaning and
implications we have discussed in the nal part of section ii.
it is also clear that, in order to obtain the result (4.25), commuting the limit n  p
with the loop integration makes the calculation by far simpler and that, consistently, only
the diagrammatic rules of subsection iv a have to be used in order to get a non-vanishing
two-point function.

exactly in this way, we have performed the two-loop calculation of w2, equation (1.3),
in qed. this receives contribution from 12 graphs for a total of 19 non-vanishing partitions,
10 of which involve two-body phase-space, the other 9 involve three-body phase-space. the
graphs with only one external fermion line on shell  as the partitions ( l) or ( r) of section
iv a  have not been included in the counting, because, much as in the case of (4.14), they
can be renormalized away with a suitable choice of the fourth order contribution 2 to the
renormalization constant .

several graphs exhibit an ir divergences proportional to ln . in this qed calculation,
the photon mass regularization has been adopted, for it is well known not to interfere with
either brst symmetry or unitarity. indeed, we have a diagrammatic (i.e. without the need
of analytic calculations) proof of the decoupling of unphysical degrees of freedom, in the
form of gauge-xing parameter independence:






w2 = 0

(5.1)

furthermore, we have found that the grammer-yennie [39] method of control of ir
divergences can be extended, in a straightforward way, to the graphs that include the eikonal
string vertices. this results in a diagrammatic proof (analogue to that of [40]) of a complete

23

cancellation between the ir divergences coming from the three-body cut graphs and the two-
body cut graphs.

what is left is the explicit result of the calculation that we report below to give concrete-
ness to what we have said, although in its full form it is not illuminating. for p2 < 9 2 (i.e.
omitting graphs involving closed fermion loops, that are irrelevant for the near-mass-shell
asymptotics) the two structure functions, dened by (1.5) with i = 2, are given by

 (39  82  + 37 2)

3

+

2

ln(1 q1  ) ln(1 +q1  ) +

2 (1  )

16 (1  )
2 1  
ln
 (2 + 5   5 2 + 3 3  4 + (7  2   2 + 2 3) ln )

 (3  31  + 2 2  2 3 + 2 4)

1 + 1  
1  1  

8 (1  )2

+

ln  +

a2 =

b2 =

+

+

+

ln(1  ) +

(5.2)

 (5  6  + 3 2)

4 (1  )2
(li2()  li2(1))
4 (1  )2
ln(1 q1  ) ln(1 +q1  ) +
 (2  13  + 6 2  5 3 + 4)

2

ln  +

 (3   7 2 + 5 3  4 + (13 + 4  + 2) ln )

4 (1  )2
4 (1  )2

2 (1 + 2 )

8 (1  )

ln2  +

 (5 + ) (9 + 2 )



2 (1  )
+



ln

1 + 1  
1  1  

8 (1  )
2 1  
8 (1  )
 (13 + 2  + 3 2)

ln2  +

2





+

4 (1  )2

(li2()  li2(1))

ln(1  ) +

(5.3)

whose asymptotic form for  = 2/p2  1 is equation (1.7). it should be also noted that in
the ultraviolet regime p2  +, i.e. for   0, a2 and b2 vanish respectively as (ln p2)/p2
and 1/p2. so, when dispersed in p2, they need no subtraction.
concerning the qcd counterpart of the above calculation, stated in equation (1.8) of
section i, apart from the contribution of the non-planar qed graphs (those where the colour
matrices occur in the sequence tatbtatb = c 2
2 cacf ), there are 15 more graphs giving
rise to 23 partitions, 8 of them involving two-body phase-space, the other 15 the three-body
phase-space.

f  1

a due remark concerns the ir regularization: giving a mass to the gluon, even according
to [37], preserves brst symmetry, but only formally preserves unitarity in the limit   0.
as a matter of fact we have veried that, in this limit, the r.h.s. of (5.1) does not vanish. we
have therefore abandoned this regularization adopting dimensional regularization for the ir
[32, 33] and changed dimensional regularization for the uv with non-lagrangian pauli-villars
[38]. with these regularizations, equation (5.1) indeed holds also in the nonabelian case.

in writing equation (1.8), we have recalculated the abelian part (proportional to c 2
f )
with the new ir and uv regularizations, with the expected result that the cancellation
of ir divergences holds also in the new scheme. these details, however, will be part of a
forthcoming paper giving the details of the above described two-loop calculation [28].

concerning instead the non-abelian part, we can say, referring to the factor 11

6 appearing
in (1.8), that 5
6 comes from the sum of all the graphs that include gluon self-energy cor-
rections; a further 1 comes from the cacf part of the non-planar abelian graphs. for the
other graphs (whose sector partitions are, in some cases, ir divergent even as 1/2, not just

24

as 1/) there is a complete cancellation between the two-body cut and the three-body cut
contributions to each of them.

vi. conclusions

we have shown how to construct brst invariant composite fermion elds that carry
the global quantum numbers of the electron and of the quark in qed and qcd. the
construction consists in dressing the ordinary dirac eld with a rectilinear string whose
space-time direction is characterized by a 4-vector that, provisionally, breaks the lorentz
covariance properties of the eld. in perturbation theory the string generates new graphs
characterized by the occurrence of eikonal vertices. these new vertices require prescriptions
(either i 0 or pv) whose choice is uniquely dictated by the dirac conjugation properties of
the eld. furthermore, after going in momentum representation, the 4-vector characterizing
the string must be chosen proportional to the 4-momentum of the eld. this choice: (i)
restores lorentz, (ii) averts some ir as well as some nonrenormalizable uv divergences. the
second point indicates that, as a matter of fact, there is little choice.

the whole construction survives the check of a fourth order calculation of the two-point

function in pt, performed both in qed and qcd.

if these elds are to survive further and more stringent verications, one can conclude
that global charges associated to a gauss law imply, for the elds carrying such charges,
delocalization properties considerably more involved than the single 1-dimensional string in
3-space, somewhat popular in the literature: since the string is rectilinear in 4-momentum
space, in coordinate representation the elds rather appear spread out all over minkowski
space, exhibiting a kind of candy-sugar structure.

the construction gives  as an extra bonus  dierent results for the ir asymptotic
dynamics of qed and qcd respectively. in particular, it hints at a mechanism of conne-
ment according to which the quark so constructed seems to behave as a free eld at any
momentum scale.

the construction presented raises several problems; but the algorithm we have given in
this paper also provides the possibility to face them. among others, a few of them still
involve two-point functions:

 extending to any order in pt the above results about: (i) ir cancellation in qed and

(ii) ir non-cancellation and factorization in qcd.

 the verication that any gauge invariant coloured eld, rst of all the gluon, has the

same behaviour as the quark.

other problems pertain instead a study of correlation functions with more than two

points:

 the verication that such elds do indeed carry the expected global charges, e.g. that

they satisfy in pt at least the weak commutation relations

h e(x) [q , e(y)]i = h e(x) e(y) i ,

etc., where q = z d3x :  0  : (x) is the electric charge (and the analogue in qcd).

25

 a study of the vev of the algebra of lorentz generators (the boosts in particular), in
order to represent, in explicit way, the mechanism that prevents a unitary implementa-
tion of lorentz symmetry in the charged superselection sector generated by e(x)  or,
in alternative, to show how this mechanism is evaded by the elds we have proposed.

 a comparison of the present approach with the well established results of qed such
as those about inclusive cross section or the electron g  2 and, in general, the impact
of this construction  if any  on the s matrix.

 for qcd, the proof of the scenario we have hinted at in section i, namely that am-
plitudes involving gauge invariant coloured elds either vanish or disconnect into the
product of free two-point functions relative to coloured elds times an amplitude that
only involves colour singlet elds.

these problems are already under our investigation and we will report about them in

the near future.

acknowledgments

the authors are greatly indebted to dr. m. mintchev, dr. g. morchio and dr. d.
mcmullan for extensive discussions on these topics. dr. mintchev is also acknowledged for
having carefully and thoroughly read the manuscript. e.de. is grateful to dr. b.r. webber
and prof. j.b. griths for the warm hospitality at the cavendish laboratory, university of
cambridge (gb), and at the department of mathematical sciences, loughborough univer-
sity (gb) respectively, where great part of this work was done. s.m. also wishes to thank
prof. j.b. griths for the encouragement and patient support during the preparation of
this work.

26

references

[1] for an introduction to this subject see e.g. n.n. bogoliubov, a. logunov, i.t. todorov,
introduction to axiomatic quantum field theory, (benjamin, reading (mass.), 1975)

[2] j. frohlich, g. morchio, f. strocchi, ann. phys. 119, 241, (1979); phys. lett. b 89,

61, (1979)

[3] d. buchholz, phys. lett. b 174, 331, (1986)

[4] k. wilson, phys. rev. d 10, 2445, (1974)

[5] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 138, 1, (1978)

[6] j.s. ball, f. zachariasen, nucl. phys. b 143, 148,(1978)

[7] j.s. ball, m. baker, n. brambilla, g.m. prosperi, f. zachariasen, phys. rev. d 54,

2829, (1996)

[8] d. atkinson, j.k. drohm, p.w. johnson, k. stam, j. math. phys 22, 2704, (1981)

[9] d. atkinson, j.c.r. bloch, mod. phys. lett. a 22, 1055, (1998)

[10] t. kugo, i. ojima, suppl. progr. theor. phys. 66, 1, (1979)

[11] k. nishijima, czech. j. phys. 46, 1, (1996); k. nishijima, n. takase, int. j. mod. phys.

a 11, 2292, (1996)

[12] e. demilio, m. mintchev, phys. rev. d 27, 1840, (1983)

[13] m. lavelle, d. mcmullan, phys. rep. 279, 1, (1997)

[14] n. nakanishi, i. ojima, covariant operator formalism of gauge theories and quantum

gravity, (world scientic, singapore, 1990)

[15] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 74, 413, (1999) for a vivid retrospective historical

account and references.

[16] r. ferrari, l. e. picasso, f. strocchi, comm. math. phys. 35, 25, (1974); nuovo ci-

mento a 39, 1, (1977)

[17] p.a.m. dirac, canad. j. phys. 33, 650, (1955)

[18] s. mandelstam, ann. phys. 19, 1, (1962)

[19] i. bialinickibirula, bull. acad. polon. sci. xi, 1335, (1963)

[20] e. demilio, m. mintchev, fortschr. phys. 32, 473, (1984)

[21] o. steinmann, ann. phys. 157, 232, (1984)

[22] o. steinmann, helv. phys. acta 58, 995, (1985)

[23] s. catani, e. demilio, fortschr. phys. 41, 261, (1993)

[24] h. stapp, t. kawai, phys. rev. d 52, 2484, 2505, 2517, (1995)

[25] h. stapp, ann. inst. h. poincare 64, 479, (1996)

[26] e. bagan, m. lavelle, d. mcmullan, phys. rev. d 56, 3732, (1997)

27

[27] r. horan, m. lavelle, d. mcmullan, charges in gauge theories, hep-th/9810089

[28] e. demilio, s. miccich`e, in preparation

[29] a. ostendorf, ann. inst. h. poincare 40, 273, (1984)

[30] o. steinmann, comm. math. phys. 152, 627, (1993)

[31] o. steinmann, ann. inst. h. poincare 51, 299, (1989)

[32] r. gastmans, r. meuldermans, nucl. phys. b 63, 277, (1973)

[33] w.j. marciano, a. sirlin, nucl. phys. b 88, 86, (1975)

[34] d. buchholz, m. porrmann, u. stein, phys. lett. b 267, 377, (1991)

[35] r.f. streater, a.s. wightman , pct, spin, statistics and all that, (addison wesley,

reading (mass.), 1989)

[36] d. buchholz, commun. math. phys. 85, 49, (1982)

[37] g. curci, r. ferrari, nuovo cimento a 32, 151, (1976)

[38] a book where radiative corrections are dealt with by this method is d. bjorken, s.d.

drell, relativistic quantum fields, (mcgrawhill, new york, 1964)

[39] g. grammer, d. r. yennie, phys. rev. d 8, 4332, (1973)

[40] c. p. korthals-altes, e. de rafael, nucl. phys. b 106, 237, (1976)

28

figures

a 

c 

bl 

br 

tl 
fig. 1.

tr 

+

+

+

(a)

+

fig. 2.

+

(bl)

(  l)

fig. 3.

+

(c)

fig. 4.

29

+

(tl)
fig. 5.

      

      

      

      

      


+ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

          


              

              

              

              


3

2

3

2

fig. 6.

s

fig. 7.

fig. 8.

30

1

1

1

