statistical gauge theory for relativistic finite density problems

physics department, fudan university, shanghai 200433, peoples republic of china

s. ying

a relativistic quantum eld theory is presented for nite density problems based on the principle
of locality. it is found that, in addition to the conventional ones, a local approach to the relativistic
quantum eld theories at both zero and nite density consistent with the violation of bell like
inequalities should contain, and provide solutions to at least three additional problems, namely, 1)
the statistical gauge invariance 2) the dark components of the local observables and 3) the fermion
statistical blocking eects, base upon an asymptotic non-thermo ensemble. an application to models
are presented to show the importance of the discussions.

9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
2
1

 

 
 

1
v
7
8
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

i. introduction

besides its relevance to domestic processes like in heavy ion collisions, in nuclear matter, a consistent theory for
relativistic nite density systems is neither less interesting fundamentally due to its relevance to profound cosmological
questions like the mechanism for baryogenesis, the nature of dark matter, etc., nor can it be expected to be trivially
derivable from the theoretical framework at zero density.

although such kind of theory, which adopts the basic framework of the eld theoretical representation of non-
relativistic many body systems exists and is widely used in literature, at least two important qualities that a correct
theory for high energy physics should possess is lacking. the rst one is that the essential ingredient of the relativistic
spacetime, namely the principle of locality, has not been properly addressed. this is because in the grand canonical
ensemble base on which such a theory is built, the chemical potential is a global quantity in spacetime. as it is well
known in the studies of few and many body relativistic systems that it is not enough to simply adopt the relativistic
kinematics for each particles in the system when the interaction is present. the less well understood relative time
between particles inside the system exists due to the lack of a frame independent denition of simultaneity in the
relativistic spacetime which constitutes another fundamental dierence between non-relativistic systems based upon
newtonian spacetime and the relativistic ones. the second one is related to the fact that unlike in the non-relativistic
condensed matter systems, the relativistic extended theory has not been systematically tested since nuclear matter
at equilibrium to which this theory should be applied is hard to prepare domestically to allow such tests. in addition,
question posed for hadronic system are most likely dierent from the ones posed for a non-relativistic condensed
matter system.

this situation leaves room for new theoretical possibilities to propose a theoretical framework that can cover not
only the non-relativistic situations, which is a specially limit of the theory when resolution of observation or energy
is low, but also the relativistic ones based on the principle of locality. while the rst above mentioned quality can
be implemented theoretically, as it is done in the following, the full implementation of the second one is beyond the
scope of a theoretical exploration. but at least a theoretical exploration can improve the situation by try to answer
questions mostly likely to be experimentally studied in a hadronic system from domestic to astronomical scale and
from zero to nite density. here again, as it is shown in the sequel, the principle of locality plays a key role.

the global and local measurements in quantum systems is compared in section ii. the limitation of a global
measurement in study relativistic quantum systems is discussed. a 4-vector eld, called the primary statistical gauge
eld, is introduced. an asymptotic grand canonical ensemble is introduced in section iii. the consequence of the
statistical gauge invariance is studied and a semi-quantitative non-perturbative method for study some qualitative
aspects of the problem is introduced. the instability of the asymptotic grand canonical ensemble is revealed in section
iv where the asymptotic non-thermo ensemble is shown to be necessary. section v presents the low energy eective
action for the primary statistical gauge eld and its dynamical characteristics. it is shown that the statistical blocking
eects result in the absence of a long range force that couples to baryon or nucleon number in the normal phase of
the hadronic matter. a brief summary is given in section vi.

ii. global and local measurements

1

the non-relativistic many body theory for a system with variable particle number is based upon the grand canonical

a. global measurements

ensemble (gce) [1]. the partition function for the system in the gce is related to its hamiltonian bh and its particle
number bn in the following way

(1)

z = lim


t re(bhbn ),

where  is the volume of the system,  = 1/t with t the temperature and  is the chemical potential. the limit
   is the thermodynamical limit in which the equilibrium statistical mechanics describes physical many body
system at equilibrium. a measurement of the ground state fermion number density in gce which is given by

n = lim
t 0



(cid:18) t



ln z(cid:19)

(2)

corresponds to a global measurement. global measurements are most frequently carried out in condensed matter
systems with a size smaller than or comparable to our human body (of order 1 meter) which permit us to study the
system as a whole. the gce is highly successful in describing these situations. questions posed by high-energy
physics, astrophysics and cosmology are somewhat dierent. the size of the systems compared to that of the resolution
of the measuring apparatus are normally much larger, therefore one actually is capable of study either more details
of the probed systems due to the reduction of the wave length of the probing system or only small fraction of the
probed system due to the impossibility of covering the whole probed system by the probing system at the same time.
one is in eect doing local measurements in these later situations.

b. local measurements

global measurements are in principle not directly denable since simultaneity of two events separated from each
other by a space-like distance depends on reference frame in special relativity. measurements in relativistic space-time
are in principle local ones in space-time. the value of a global quantity is obtained from an integration over the results
of a complete set of local measurements carried out at the same time. in addition, the property of asymptotic freedom
in strong interaction makes the local measurements relevant to the study of the properties of fundamental current
quarks at short distances where they are point like and almost free particles.

local measurements in quantum eld theory are realized by exerting an external local eld to the system at the
space-time point interested, and, the measured quantity are deduced from the response of the system to the external
eld. for nite density systems, a lorentz 4-vector local eld (x), called the primary statistical gauge eld,
is introduced. the ground state expectation value of fermion number density can be expressed as the functional
derivative

(x) =

 ln z
0(x)

(3)

with z a functional of . it corresponds to a local measurement in the ground state at the space-time point x.

c. the dark component of local observables

that   n is not mathematically warranted. the gce expression for n in eq. 2 suers from an ambiguity related
to the thermodynamical limit of    which is taken ahead of the partial derivative over the chemical potential 

in eq. 2. since the contributing eigenvalues of the number operator bn to eq. 2 are proportional to , the partial

derivation over  is not well dened in eq. 2 due to the fact that  is multiplied by an innite number in eq. 1.
eq. 3 does not contain such an ambiguity since the modication of the system due to a local change in the primary
statistical gauge eld (x) does not modify the system by an innite amount. so eq. 3 is an exact expression for
the particle number density for an uniform system.

the dierence

d =   n

2

(4)

is called the dark component of the local observable in the ground state.
it is known that  equals to n for a
system made of non-interacting fermions and bosons which has a hamiltonian (or lagrangian) quadratic in the elds
corresponding to the particles. this equality is also expected to hold for weakly interacting systems. as the strength
of the interaction or the non-linearity of the system increases, the dark component d is expected to develop non-
vanishing value. for a system whose behavior can be approximately described by an ensemble of quasi-particles, as it
is demonstrated in the following, n contains contributions from spatially extensive quasi-particles of the system that
can propagate indenitely in time. so d contains all other contributions to  due to localized and transient quantum
uctuations of the elds.

iii. the asymptotic grand canonical ensemble

a. the evaluation of conserved local observables

unlike in a weakly interacting theory in which the spectra of the system are not modied in some essential way
from the corresponding free system, the number (density) of the particle can be found by a counting of the particles
inside the system. the particle number density in a strongly interacting theory is obscured by the fact that in certain
phases of a strongly interacting system the original particles are either conned or altered in a fundamental way due
to phase transitions in the system. it makes a straightforward counting of these particles dicult since some type
of them do not appear in the set of initial and nal physical states at all. in these more general case, one should
start from the evaluation of the original eld theoretic denition of the particle number density operator. for any
conserved particle numbers, like the baryon number, the evaluation can be simplied by counting the particle number
of the system when the strength of the interaction is adiabatically switched o in the remote past. these conserved
numbers are not going to be changed as the interaction strength is fully switched on long before the measurement
time in the near past and near future. these conserved numbers are selected using the asymptotic grand canonical
ensemble (agce). it is dened as the grand canonical ensemble of the corresponding free system in the remote past
(or future) when the interaction eects are adiabatically switched o.

so  follows from the asymptotic grand canonical ensemble (agce), which is dened above, with the lagrangian

density that underlies z given by

l =

1
2

(i/ + /o3  m) + lb + lint

(5)

and m the fermion mass, lb the lagrangian density of boson elds of the system and lint the interaction between
the boson and fermion elds. an 8 component real fermion eld  is used for the discussion [3] with o3 the third
pauli matrices acting on the upper and lower 4-component of . in most of the cases, lint = ((f )  m) with
 a function(al) of the boson elds represented by f so that the fermion degrees of freedom can be integrated out
leading to an eective euclidean action for the boson elds

se[f, ] =

1
2

spln

[i/ + /o3  (f )]

[i/ + /o3  m]

+z d4x [lb(f ) +   e]

(6)

with sp the functional trace, e the average energy density of the corresponding free system of fermions ( = 0) and
 is the ground state expectation value of fermion number density to be discussed in the following at the chemical

potential  p, where  is the ground state value of  normally provided by the external conditions. the

partition functional

z =z d[f ]exp(se)

(7)

is then a functional of  and ln z its eective action.

b. the super-selection sector

the rst term in eq. 6 is invariant under the u (1) statistical gauge transformation (x)  (x)  (x), which
corresponds to the conservation of the fermion number. since  is a local eld, its excitation represents certain
collective excitations of the system. such a view introduces innite many extra degrees of freedom since there is

3

no such a eld in the original theory. these extra degrees of freedom are eliminated by restricting the representing
hilbert space.

superselection-sector in the representing hilbert space (sirhs) containing physical states correspond to the primary
statistical gauge eld exists and can be selected using a gauss law constraint. for the statistical gauge invariant
system, it can be imposed dierently on the physical eigenstates of the hamiltonian without causing contradictions.
states in a sirhs that is identied by a coordinate dependent complex function  satisfy

hi

 |(b +  bu)| j

 i = eiej nij

(8)

 i a physical state that has energy ek, ee taking zero or unity value if
e 6= e or e = e (assuming that e is discrete before length of the time interval in in which the system is conned

with bu the statistical electric eld, | k
is let to go to innity) and nij independent of space-time. b +   bu is the generator of local statistical gauge

transformations, so the physical states in a sirhs change a common (coordinate dependent) phase under a specic
gauge transformation rather than remains invariant the special condition   0 is hitherto been used for any gauge
eld in literature. this is true for dynamical gauge elds but not necessarily for statistical gauge elds. clearly, the
later condition is a special case of the former.

due to the conservation of the fermion number, the sirhs of the system with xed fermion number selected [1] by
the agce is invariant during the time evolution. in the agce, the dependence of  upon the space-time independent
 remains the same whether there is interaction in the system or not. it is given by

 = ng3/32

(9)

for a massless system, with ng the total internal degrees of freedom besides the spin of the fermion. n does not has
a simple dependence on , which can be identied with the chemical potential in uniform case, especially when there
is certain kind of phase transition that modies the excitation spectra of the system.

in some sense, the agce is a gce for the initial state of the system under the time evolution, it is a canonical
ensemble for the interaction eects since the invariant sirhs (under the time evolution) is xed in the remote past
(or future). the time component of the local primary statistical gauge eld  does not necessarily correspond to
the chemical potential, which is a global parameter. for example, in a system of baryons in thermo equilibrium, the
primary statistical gauge eld 0 is mainly non-vanishing around nucleons and nuclei; the chemical potential, on the
other hand, is a constant throughout the system.

c. relevant results from lattice simulations

there are interesting lattice monte-carlo studies of the nite density problems [4,5] based upon gce for a nite
lattice using glasgow method. it is shown using the chiral gross-neveu model that for a given chemical potential,
the fermion number density of the system has two stable values, which are reached by generating the monte-carlo
ensemble at either nite or zero density. the rst stable one correspond to the one given by the agce    relation
and the second one correspond to the gce prediction for a massive system of quasi-particles. the exact results for
the global treatment of the problem crossover from the later    curve to the former one near the chiral symmetry
restoration  = c. this behavior can be interpreted as that before the chiral symmetry restoration, the rst   
curve for the agce is a local minimum of the (euclidean) action of the various congurations in the monte-carlo
ensemble with the gce curve for the massive system of quasiparticles the absolute one. near the chiral symmetry
restoration point, their role exchanges. the existence of a stable local minimum for the agce    curve is a direct
consequence of the conservation of the fermion number in the model used. it is expected that some of the puzzles
encountered in the lattice gauge theory studies at nite density, like the early on set of the baryon number before the
chiral symmetry restoration, can be understood in the light of the agce since the nite size eects of the lattice
gauge theory study based upon gce corresponds to, to some degree, a low resolution local measurement of an innite
system [2,3].

d. semi-quantitative discussions

this above interpretation for the origin of the dark component of  can be substantiated by using a cluster decompo-
sition approximation of the partition functional z[] [2] which is expected to provide a non-perturbative picture for the
 dependence of the fermion number density at suciently low space-time resolutions. in the crudest approximation,
the ground state fermion number density can be written as [2]

4

(, ) =r 

 z 



de 2

( + , ),

where  is the ground state expectation value of ,

(, ) =

ng

32 (cid:0)2  2(cid:1)3/2

(10)

(11)

is the ground state fermion number density in the gce with fermion mass . here  is the space-time volume that
can be resolved in the observation.  is proportional to  for large enough ; it approaches a constant value for
small  which scales with the inverse mass gap of the  excitation of the system. clearly,

(, )  (, ) = n

(12)

as   . this qualitative picture shows that the result of a local measurement of the fermion number density
approaches that of the global one as the resolution gets lowered; in the limit of the zero resolution, the result approaches
that of the global measurement as expected.

the properties of the fermion propagator can also be discussed using the cluster decomposition of the partition
functional. following the same line of reasoning, it can be shown that the fermion propagator sf (x1, x2) has the
following qualitative properties for a space-like separation between x1 and x2: 1) when the distance between x1 and
x2 is large, sf (x1, x2) behaves much like that of a genuine particle with mass  2) when the distance between x1
and x2 is comparable to the dimension of  for which  turns into a constant, sf (x1, x2) is a superposition of
the free fermion propagator with a mass  +  weighted by a gaussian weight peaked at . in the rst case, the
propagation of the fermions inside the system can be well approximated by that of a quasi-particle. in the second
case, the quasi-particle picture for a fermion is not sucient due to the uctuation of the mass term can not be
suppressed. for a time-like separation, the qualitative picture discussed above is expected to be still true.

the results of non-relativistic statistical mechanics and its relativistic extension based on gce are approached by
the ones derived from the local theory under two extreme conditions: 1) vanishing energy or zero resolution limit and
2) spatial uniformity limit. while the rst limit can be achieved in hadronic processes, the second one can only be
possibly realized in quark-gluon plasma or weak coupling limit since the conning phase of qcd is not a uniform
situation for the quark degrees of freedom in the view of the local theory even at equilibrium. this is discussed above.
in principle, a constant chemical potential can only be coupled to the hadronic degrees of freedom in the conning
phase of qcd but not the quark degrees of freedom. in practice, when the quasi-particle provides a satisfying set
of degrees of freedom in describing the physical problem, an eective chemical potential for the quasi-particle or
constituent quarks can be used only in an approximate sense in the local theory.

e. the implications

the existence of the dark component for local fermion number density has interesting implications. take the
vacuum state of a massless strongly interacting system in which the chiral symmetry is spontaneously broken down
for example. the originally gapless vacuum state acquires an excitation gap. if only the massive quasi-particles are
taken into account, the baryon number density are expected to be non-vanishing only when  is larger than the mass
of the quasi-particles. the local fermion number density is however nite as long as  is not zero. a natural question
arises as to what this dark component of fermion number corresponding to? it is reasonable to conjecture that this
dark component of fermion number corresponds to those fermion states that are localized and non-propagating [6]
similar to the anderson localization in a condensed matter system. the random potential here is self-generated
within the system by the transient and localized random quantum uctuations of the  and other boson elds. such
a conjecture is amenable to future studies.

at the fundamental level, the dark component of local observables is of pure quantum in origin related to the space-
like correlations between local measurements in the relativistic quantum world that are shown to exist in experimental
observations [79], which are what reality manifests itself [10]. this is because the size of the correlated cluster used
in studying the vacuum state (in the euclidean space-time) tends to zero in the classical limit (h  0) as a result of
the classical relativistic causality, which suppresses the dark component for any nite resolution observation [2].

iv. the instability of agce and the asymptotic non-thermo ensemble

5

the euclidean eective action for the boson eld given by eq. 6 can be evaluated in the usual way [3]. since the
eective action given by eq. 6 is a canonical functional of , we can make a legendre transformation of it, namely

a. the instability of agce

ese = se z d4xj



(13)



with j
in order to study the the stability of the vacuum state against uctuations in fermion number.

the ground state current of fermion number density, to make it a canonical functional of the fermion density

the vacuum state is dened as the special ground state that has the lowest possible energy density amongst all other

ground states, each one of which has the lowest energy density under a set of corresponding external constraints.

the eective potential characterizing the above mentioned energy density can be dened using ese for space-time

independent background f elds:

ve = ese/v4

(14)

with v4 the volume of the space-time box that contains the system. the stability of the vacuum state against the
uctuations in fermion number density around  = 0 can be studied using ve, which is a canonical function of .
minimization of ve with respect to  gives the vacuum value vac of the system since the vacuum  is a known
function of the vacuum  in agce.

the local nite density theory based upon the agce developed after considering the above ingredients is examined
by applying it to the chiral symmetry breaking phase of the half bosonized nambu jona-lasinio model for the 3+1
dimension and the chiral gross-neveu model for 2+1 dimensions with its eective potential given by

ve = ngz

ddp

(2)d (cid:20)ln(cid:18)1 +

+(cid:19) + ln(cid:18)1 +

2
p2

(cid:19)(cid:21)

2
p2

+

1

4g0

2 + e,

(15)

 = (p0  i)2 + p2. it can be shown that
where d is the space-time dimension, g0 is the coupling constant and p2
2ve/2|=0 < 0 as long as  6= 0 and d  2, which implies that the  6= 0 state with  = 0 is not stable against
fermion number uctuations. such a conclusion is both theoretically and physically unacceptable.

b. the asymptotic non-thermo ensemble

it appears that the agce is not sucient for the local nite density theory, a more general ensemble, called the
asymptotic non-thermo ensemble (ante) is introduced to cure this pathology. the ante in the remote past of the
system is not necessarily a strict thermal one. this is because the  6= 0 phase, which is called the -phase of the
massless quark system, is known to be condensed with macroscopic number of bare fermion-antifermion pairs. these
pairs occupy the low energy states of the system; they block other fermions from further lling of these states. this
kind of statistical blocking eect is not encoded into eq. 15, which starts the time evolution of the system from a
set of initial states having zero number of fermion-antifermion pairs. the later initial states do not overlap with the
states having a nite density of such pairs in the thermodynamic limit. its eects can however be included in the
boundary condition for the system like what has been done for the nite density cases. therefore, it is proposed that
the initial ensemble of quantum states in the ante for the system at zero temperature and density are those ones
with negative energy states lled up to e =  rather than e = 0 and with positive energy states lled up to e = 
rather than empty. it is expected that such a state can has sucient overlap with the true vacuum state of the system
for properly determined . in the ante [3], the eective potential corresponding to eq. 15 is expressed as

ve = ngzc

ddp

(2)d (cid:20)ln(cid:18)1 +

+(cid:19) + ln(cid:18)1 +

2
p2

(cid:19)(cid:21)

2
p2

+

1

4g0

2 + e(+) + e()  e,

(16)

where

6

e() = 2ngz  dd1p
(2)d1 p.

here the upper boundary of the radial p integration in the d-1 dimensional momentum space is denoted as

    .

(17)

(18)

the contour c for the (complex) p0 integration is shown in fig. 1 in which both the original minkowski contour and
its euclidean distorted contour are drawn. the eective potential for the  6= 0 case in ante given by the above
equation has two sets of minima, the rst set contains  = vac and  = 0 points, the second one includes  = 0
and  = vac ones with nite vac and vac. the second solutions correspond to the absolute minima, namely, the
vacuum state. thus there is no instability against quantum uctuation over .

c. model studies

the vacuum and ground states of the strong interaction could have dierent phases from the -phase [1216]. they
are characterized by a condensation of diquarks. such a possibility is interesting because it may be realized in the
early universe, in astronomical objects and events, in heavy ion collisions, inside nucleons [15,17] and nuclei, etc..
for the possible scalar diquark condensation in the vacuum, a half bosonized model lagrangian is introduced [18,3],
which reads

li =

1
2

(cid:2)i/    i~  ~ 5o3  5acco(+)  5acco()(cid:3)  

1

4g0

(2 + ~2) +

1

2g3

cc,

(19)

where , ~, c and c are auxiliary elds with (c) = c and g0, g3 are coupling constants of the model. ac and
c1c2 = cc1c2 ac,c1c2 = cc1c2 with abc (a, b = 1, 2, 3)
ac (c = 1, 2, 3) act on the color space of the quark; they are ac
the total antisymmetric levicivita tensor. here o() are raising and lowering operators respectively in the upper
and lowering 4 components of .

this model has two non-trivial phases. the vacuum expectation of  is non-vanishing with vanishing 2  cc
in the -phase. the vacuum state in the -phase is condensed with quark-antiquark pairs. the vacuum expectation
of  is zero with nite 2 that spontaneously breaks the u (1) statistical gauge symmetry in the second phase, which
is called the -phase. there is a condensation of correlated scalar diquarks and antidiquarks in the color 3 and 3
states in the -phase of the vacuum state.

since diquarks and antidiquarks are condensed in the -phase, it is expected that an exchange of the role of  and
 occurs. it is found to be indeed true: there are also two sets of minima for the eective potential, the rst set is
the one with nite  = vac and  = 0 and the second set corresponds to  = 0 and nite  = vac in the -phase
of the model. but here the absolute minima of the system in the -phase correspond to the rst set of solutions,
in which the cp/t invariance and baryon number conservation are spontaneously violated due to the presence of a
nite vacuum 
vac. this conclusion is also applicable to the -phase of models [12,13] with vector fermion pair and
antifermion pair condensation, in which the chiral symmetry su (2)l  su (2)r is also spontaneously broken down.

d. the implications

although it is found that vac < vac in all cases that were studied, the eects of a nite vacuum  can still
have dynamical consequences [3,2,11] since at short distances (between x1 and x2), the propagation of the fermion
is not described by the quasi-particle propagator which has a denite mass (vac in the half-bosonized four fermion
interaction model). the uctuation in the eective quasi-particle mass are nite at short distances so that there will
be a nite tail of the mass term that goes below vac which causes real dynamical eects some of which are discussed
in refs. [11].

quasi-particles in an interacting system can not propagate indenitely so that the uctuation in their eective mass
term can be ignored. the quasi-particles in the system are scattered constantly when they propagate inside the system
with a nite time to go as a free particle before being scattered. therefore the presence of the statistical blocking
eects characterized by a nite  has observable eects in principle. one of them are discussed in the following related

7

to the absence of additional long range force [19] to the gravity in the -phase, which is believed to be the phase in
which the strong interaction vacuum state is at at the present day conditions 1.

v. the dynamics of the primary statistical gauge field

the equilibrium conguration of the primary statistical gauge eld  can has non-trivial topology [3] which will be
studied in other works. the vibration of the primary statistical gauge eld (x) around its equilibrium conguration
represents certain collective excitations of the system.

the dynamics of the primary statistical gauge eld are generated by s()

invariance, the leading order in the derivative expansion of s()
in the normal phase, the eective action for slow varying 

 =    is

e [] = ln z. due to the statistical gauge
e [] in terms of  can be expressed as the following:

e =z d4x(cid:20)

s()

z ()

4

ff  +

ng

2 2  (cid:21) + . . .

(20)

with f  =    and  the ground state value of ; in the phase where local statistical u (1) gauge symmetry
is spontaneously broken down and before considering electromagnetic interaction,

s()
e =

1

2z d4xhij





j

+ g()i 



 + . . . .

(21)

in both of the situations with slow varying 
current correlator < tj(x)j (x) >, are approximately constants.

, z () and (), which can be extracted from the time-ordered current

the excitation corresponds to  is massive for the vacuum state in the -phase due to the statistical blocking
eects. there is no long range force associated with  in the -phase. this conclusion is important for the current
theory to be consistant with empirical facts [19] related to the absence of long range force between charge neutral
objects besides the gravity. this is because the primary statistical gauge eld  is massless due to the statistical
gauge invariance before considering the eects of the statistical blocking. the exchange of massless objects generates
long range force between the interacting objects.

it can be shown [3] that after including the electromagnetic interaction, the spatial component of  excitation is

massless for the vacuum state in the - and - phases in the rest frame of matter.

vi. summary

in summary, it is found that general local relativistic quantum eld theory (in the sense of including both the zero
and the nite density situations) contains dark components for local observables, statistical gauge invariance and
ferminic blocking eects. the proper boundary condition for a consistent theory is that of an optimal ante. the
rich implications of the nding presented here remain to be explored.

this work is supported by the national natural science foundation of china and department of education of

china.

acknowledgement

[1] see, e.g., k. huang, statistical mechanics, willy, new york, 1963.

1so far, the search for the fth force has been turning out null results.

8

[2] s. ying, report no. hep-ph/9704216.
[3] s. ying, ann. phys. (ny) 266 (1998) 295.
[4] i. m. barbour, s. e. morrison, e. g. klepsh, j. b. kogut and m. p. lombardo, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. a60 (1998)

220; report no. hep-lat/9705042.

[5] i. m. barbour, s. hands,j. b. kogut, m. p. lombardo, s. morrison, report no. hep-lat/9902033.
[6] j. stern, report no. hep-ph/9801282.
[7] a. aspect, j. dalibard, and g. roger, phys. rev. lett. 49 (1982) 1804.
[8] p. r. tapster, j. g. rarity and p. c. m. owens, phys. rev. lett. 73 (1994) 1923.
[9] w. tittel, j. brendel, b. gisin, t. herzog, h. zbinden and n. gisin, phys. rev. lett. 81 (1998) 3563.
[10] g. weihs, t. jennewein, c. simon, h. weinfurter, and a. zeilinger, phys. rev. lett. 23 (1998) 5039.
[11] s. ying, work in progress.
[12] s. ying, phys. lett. b283 (1992) 341.
[13] s. ying, ann. phys. (ny) 250 (1996) 69.
[14] t. schafer, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 950.
[15] m. alford, k. rajagopal, and f. wilczek, phys. lett. b422 (1998) 247.
[16] r. rapp, t. schafer, e. v. shuryak, and m. velkovsky, phys. rev. lett. 81 (1998) 53.
[17] s. ying, j. phys. g22 (1996) 293; s. ying, commun. theor. phys. 28 (1997) 301.
[18] s. ying, report no. hep-ph/9604255.
[19] e. fischbach, c. talmadge, report no. hep-ph/9606249.

6
imp0

?

6
xxxxz

6




-
s

r

-



i)
-
r




s

-

-

rep0





6

?

6
zz} :




ii

fig. 1. the p

0 integration contour c for the eective potential. the thick lines extending to positive and negative innity
represent the branch cuts of the logarithmic function. curve i is the original p0 integration contour for the theory in the
minkowski space-time. curve ii corresponds to the p0 integration contour for the theory in the euclidean space-time.

9

