9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
2

 

 
 

1
v
1
1
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

i. existence theory for scalar fields

adam d. helfer

department of mathematics, university of missouri, columbia, mo 65211, u.s.a.

received: date / revised version: date

abstract for linear scalar eld theories, i characterize those classical
hamiltonian vector elds which have selfadjoint operators as their quan-
tum counterparts. as an application, it is shown that for a scalar eld in
curved spacetime, a selfadjoint hamiltonian for evolution along the unit
timelike normal to a cauchy surface exists only if the second fundamental
form of the surface vanishes identically.

1 introduction

when does a symmetry of a classical eld theory pass over to the corre-
sponding quantum theory?

even for linear theories, the answer to this question is not known in the
generality one would like. for nite motions, indeed, the answer is well
known: a canonical transformation of the classical phase space induces a
bogoliubov transformation on the eld operators, and this transformation
is unitarily implementable if and only if the bogoliubov coecients satisfy
a certain squaresummability condition (shale 1962). however, the most
important canonical transformations are those corresponding to evolution
in time. for these, one almost never has an explicit knowledge of the nite
transformations  getting these would involve solving the equations of mo-
tion. what one has is knowledge of the generator of the transformations 
the equation of motion, or equivalently the classical hamiltonian function
or vector eld. one would like to be able to read o from this whether or not
the quantum evolution will be unitarily implementable. it is this problem
which is solved, for scalar elds, in this paper. the analysis of other bose
elds is parallel. subsequent papers in this series will explore the structure
of the hamiltonians more fully, and treat fermions.

2

adam d. helfer

in the past few years, it has become apparent that this issue is important,
because evidence has accumulated which strongly suggests that in generic
circumstances the hamiltonians are not selfadjointly implementable. in-
deed, this appears to be one of a family of related phemomena, which at
least supercially are severely pathological. they are all local, and can be
expressed as certain ultraviolet divergences.

the most extreme of these phenomena is that, generically, the expecta-
tions of the energy and of the energy density are unbounded below. schemat-
ically,

(1)

lower bound of bh = (nite term) + (geometric term)() ,

where the geometric term vanishes in minkowski space but is generically
nonzero. what this means is that, at least as far as the mathematical
structure of the theory is concerned, the case of evolution along a covariantly
constant timelike vector eld in minkowski space is a highly unstable point.
it would be hard to overstate the potential signicance of this issue.
it raises fundamental questions of stability and interpretation. for exam-
ple, why do not perturbations send the quantum eld cascading through
more and more negatively energetic states, with a corresponding release
of positiveenergy radiation? too, the expectation of the energy density is
used as a source term in semiclassical gravity, which is perhaps the most
important application of quantum eld theory in curved spacetime. (it is
this theory, for example, which predicts the loss of energy from black holes
via the hawking mechanism.) semiclassical gravity has never been justied
by more than formal arguments (wald 1994). these new results must be
considered to raise questions about the credibility of the theory.

the link between selfadjoint implementability and boundedness below
will be made in the next paper. the present paper considers the selfadjoint
implementability of general linear symmetries, not just evolution in time.
no semiboundedness results will hold in this generality, as for example the
theory applies to the construction of momentum as well as energy operators.
to a large extent, it is unclear how much physical progress can be made
on these problems until one has a rm understanding of what the mathe-
matical structure is. the main aim of the present series of papers is to lay
the foundations of the general theory of these hamiltonians.

formal structures to explain the foregoing more quantitatively, let us
begin by writing down the formal expression for a hamiltonian operator for
a linear theory:

bh = cbaba + b

baba + cbaba + cnumber term .

, c are co-
ecients (selfadjoint and symmetric, respectively).1 if c = 0 and b


hereba, ba are annihilation and creation operators, and b
1 the modes annihilated and created by ba, ba

 need not be particle modes;
this will be discussed further, below. also, the formal hamiltonian (2) has been

(2)

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

3

is selfadjoint, then the denition of the hamiltonian is unproblematic;
one has a structure much like that of the hamiltonian for a free klein
gordon eld in minkowski space. however, if this situation is perturbed
even slightly, diculties may appear. for example, it is easy to see that

condition can very well be violated, even if the c are uniformly small.

more severe problems may occur. it may be impossible to nd any nor-

the vacuum |0i cannot be in the domain of bh unless cc < . this
malizable states on which bh is welldened. this means that bh can have

only a very limited existence, and certainly cannot be the selfadjoint op-
erator that quantum theory requires an observable to be. these sorts of
diculties are potentially very serious, as they raise the question of what
the operator character of the hamiltonian, and hence of the dynamics, is.
this should be contrasted with somwehat ner issues of renormalization
which go to the kinematic question of what the cnumber contribution to

those ner issues presumably cannot even be addressed until the operator
character is properly understood.

bh is, for example, the computation of casimir or groundstate energies.
we have seen that diculties are potentially present when c 6= 0.
physically, this indicates that evolution by the hamiltonian does not pre-
serve the decomposition of the eld into creation and annihilation parts.
this situation occurs naturally in many settings. most obviously, it is the
situation in timedependent external potential problems. in particular, it is
the generic case for quantum elds in curved spacetime. however, it can
also occur when there is no explicit time dependence in the theory. if one
has several linearly coupled elds, for example, in general one has c 6= 0;
cases of of current interest are the models for the quantum electromagnetic
eld in dispersive dielectric media (see, e.g., barnett 1997). and the theory
of squeezing revolves precisely around hamiltonians with c 6= 0 (loudon
and knight 1987).

nature of the present paper the main theorems to be given here have
characters similar to some basic results in quantum theory, in that their
general physical content can be appreciated without pursuing the analytic
technicalities of their proofs. (thus for example, physicists use daily spec-
tral resolutions of selfadjoint operators without worrying about how the
existence of such resolutions is proved; and one can appreciate the sense of
the stonevon neumann theorem, that canonical quantizations of mechan-
ical systems with nitely many degrees of freedom are unitarily equivalent,
without examining its proof.) i have written these papers so as to conne
the analytic technicalities to the proofs. i hope that the statements of the
theorems will be accessible to general workers in quantum eld theory.

written in normalordered form. this is for purposes of orientation only. in the
analysis that follows, criteria are developed for determining whether the quantum
hamiltonian exists without prior assumptions about what renormalization scheme
is to be used. the second paper in this series will contain some further results,
about when normalordering is adequate to dene the theory.

4

adam d. helfer

there has been some previous work in this area. as mentioned earlier,
shale (1962) found the condition for a nite evolution to be unitarily im-
plementable. analyses parallel to shales are central to the theory of loop
groups, and it is possible that the present results may have analogs of inter-
est there. klein (1973) investigated the case of hamiltonians, and provided
a host of counterexamples to natural conjectures. more recently, honegger
& rieckers (1996) established some results under fairly strong hypotheses
on c .

the plan of the paper is this. the next section contains a brief discussion
of the concept of unitary implementability. this can be skipped by those
who understand the distinction between this sort of unitarity and that gov-
erning the state vector. section 3 contains preliminaries, mainly the basic
denitions needed to state the problem mathematically. section 4 proves
one of the two main theorems (theorem 2), characterizing which classical
hamiltonian vector elds give rise to oneparameter unitary groups on the
physical hilbert space. in section 5 (theorem 3), it is shown that each group
that arises in this way is automatically strongly continuous, and so possesses
a selfadjoint generator, that is, a quantum hamiltonian. section 6 gives as
an example the case of quantum elds in curved spacetime; it is shown
(theorem 4) that evolution along the timelike unit normal to a cauchy
surface is not selfadjointly implementable unless the second fundamental
form of the surface vanishes identically. section 7 contains some comments.
the assumptions of the present paper are very general. in the next
paper, i specialize to the case where the classical hamiltonian functions are
positive. then one can say much more about the structure of the theory,
and take up the question of whether the quantum hamiltonians are bounded
below. the third paper in the series will treat fermions.

background. a good summary of the necessary quantum eld theory,
from the point of view of this paper, will be found in walds (1994) book.
the functional analysis can be found in dunford and schwartz (1958). in
section 5, i have made use of the theories of pseudodierential and fourier
integral operators, for which see treves (1980).

summary of notation. here is a summary of the notation used. un-
fortunately, there are quite a few things denoted conventionally by similar
symbols.

h is the space of solutions of the classical eld equations, a real hilbert-

able space equipped with a symplectic form .

hc is the space h equipped with the complex structure dened by j,

and so made into a complex hilbert space.

space on which the representation of the eld algebra acts.

h is the physical hilbert space of the quantum eld theory, that is, the
k  kop is the operator norm.
k  khs is the hilbertschmidt norm.
a is the eld algebra.
a is the hamiltonian vector eld on the space of classical solutions.

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

5

eta.

a is the lie adjoint of a, that is, the derivative of conjugation by g(t) =
notes. since h has no preferred inner product, i have usually been
careful to emphasize the dependence of properties on j. thus one has j
symmetric transformations, etc. the hilbertable and hilbert spaces used
here are always assumed to be separable, that is, to have countable bases.

2 unitary implementability

the central question in this paper is, when does a group of motions on
classical phase space have a unitary counterpart on hilbert space? since
most of the quantum eldtheoretic literature does not distinguish explicitly
between this sort of unitarity and that governing the evolution of the state
vector, it seems worthwhile to spell this out.

let us consider a linear quantum eld theory in the presence of a perhaps
timedependent external potential. this is constructed in two steps. first,
one denes an algebra of elds a. these are not yet eld operators, as they
do not as yet operate on anything. rather, the algebra a is a mathematically
precise way of expressing the canonical commutation relations which any
such operators will be required to have. the second stage of the construction
is the identication of the elds with specic operators on a hilbert space,
that is, the specication of a representation of the algebra a. (one can think
of the steps as analogous to rst dening a group by a multiplication table,
and then giving a realization of it as a set of matrices acting on column
vectors.) in a linear eld theory, the algebra a is essentially determined
by the classical phase space of the theory, since the canonical quantization
species the commutation relations in terms of the poisson brackets. there
are in general many inequivalent representations one might choose for this
algebra, and the question of which one is physically correct may be subtle.
we shall not need to explore this here, however. for us, it is enough that
the physics leads one to some denite choice of representation.

in brief, then, besides the canonical commutation relations and the eld
equations, one needs an extra input to construct a quantum eld theory:
the choice of representation. in minkowski space, in the absence of xed
external elds or boundary conditions which might break the relativistic
invariance, one can nd an essentially unique poincareinvariant represen-
tation, the fock representation. however, in more general circumstances
it can be a subtle issue to determine the physically correct representation.
while we shall not need this here, it may be remarked that the choice of rep-
resentation is encoded in the (infrared and ultraviolet) asymptotics of the
twopoint functions.2 thus dierent representations may lead to dierent
local quantum uctuations, dierent vacuum polarizabilities, etc.

2 and in any additional singularities the twopoint functions may have, for

example on account of boundary conditions.

6

adam d. helfer

all representations considered here will have the same abstract mathe-
matical form as the fock representation in that they will be determined by a
decomposition of the eld operator into creation and annihilation parts,
with a corresponding vacuum state. however, the modes created and an-
nihilated may not correspond to particles, and may have no simple physical
interpretations. likewise, the vacuum state need not be interpretable as
a physical vacuum. such representations are adequate for almost all pur-
poses, and more general ones can be constructed as direct sums or integrals
of these.

by the evolution of the elds, we mean their change when the classical
phase space is evolved along some hamiltonian vector eld, which in our case
shall always respect the linear structure of the phase space. this evidently
will determine an automorphism of the algebra a, and one would like to
identify the generator of that automorphism with the quantum hamiltonian.
however, it may happen that the automorphism is not induced by any
unitary motions of the physical hilbert space. for a oneparameter group
of motions, this means that the hamiltonian cannot be realized as a self
adjoint operator.

two points should be emphasized about this sort of nonunitarity:

 the evolution in question is that of the algebra of elds, and not that
of the state vectors. the state vectors do evolve unitarily (except when
reduction occurs).

 the possibility of nonunitarily implementable evolution occurs only in
quantum eld theory. in quantum mechanics, when there are only nitely
many degrees of freedom, the stonevon neumann theorem guarantees
that any two representations of the canonical commutation relations
are unitarily equivalent. a corollary of this is that the hamiltonians
in the case of elds must always be formally selfadjoint, in a suitable
sense. for any coarse graining of a quantum eld theory to nitely
many degrees of freedom will result in evolutions which are unitarily
implementable. this means that the failure of unitary implementablility,
or of selfadjointness, must occur in the passage to the limit of innitely
many degrees of freedom. this point will be discussed in detail elsewhere.

3 preliminaries

i shall begin by indicating, for the nonexperts, the meanings of the objects
in the symplectic treatment of the quantization of linear bose elds. those
familiar with this can skip to section 2.2 to identify the terminology and
symbols used in this paper.

3.1 orientation

the usual fock construction of free eld theories in minkowski space can
be generalized to apply to linear elds responding to external potentials, in

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

7

particular to elds in curved spacetime. i shall summarize here how this is
done.

let h be a real hilbertable3 space, which in applications is the space of
solutions (of a certain sobolev regularity) to the classical eld equations for
a bose eld.4 this may be either in at or curved spacetime, and external
elds may be present. we shall not explicitly discuss charged elds, but these
can be treated with straightforward modications of the present techniques.
we require that there be given a symplectic form  on h. then  determines
an abstract algebra a of elds, obeying the canonical commutation relations.
the term abstract is used here to emphasize that there has been as yet no
construction of the quantum hilbert space and representation of the algebra
as operators on the space.

a particular representation (of the sort usually considered) of the eld
algebra is determined by choosing a positive complex structure, that is a
map j : h  h which preserves , satises j 2 = 1, and such that
(v, jv) is positivedenite. for free elds in minkowski space, one chooses
j = i(+  ), where  are the positive and negativefrequency
parts of . in minkowski space, then, the positivefrequency elds are the
+i eigenspace of j, and from these the fock representation is constructed
in the usual way. the same mathematical prescription for constructing a
representation of a works, however, for any positive complex structure j
on any hilbertable symplectic space.

the choice of j is physically important. dierent choices of j will gen-

erally lead to inequivalent representations of a:

theorem (shale 1962) two positive complex structures, j1 and j2, lead
to unitarily equivalent representations of a i j1  j2 is hilbertschmidt.
(recall that an operator l is hilbertschmidt if tr ll < . note that in
nite dimensions, all operators are hilbertschmidt.) it turns out that, at
least for linear scalar elds in curved spacetime, there is a natural choice
of j, or more properly, an equivalence class of natural choices, in the above
sense. these are characterized by having twopoint functions whose leading
shortdistance behavior is the same as in minkowski space (wald 1994).5
probably similar results are true for other eld equations. in this paper,
though, it will be unnecessary to examine how j is determined; it will be a
datum.

since the representation will have the same mathematical structure as
fock space, we may speak of creation and annihilation operators. in general,

3 a hilbertable space is a topological vector space whose topological structure
can be determined by an inner product, but without a preferred choice of inner
product. the restriction to hilbertable spaces is made to streamline some of the
analysis, and could be weakened.

4 in the case of a gauge eld, the following treatment applies to gauge equiva-

lence classes of solutions.

5 this is a little bit of an oversimplication, as there may also be infrared eects.

8

adam d. helfer

these will have no simple interpretation in terms of particles, but refer to
some other fundamental modes (whichever physical modes constitute the
+i eigenspace of j). we may also speak of a vacuum in this sense. in
general this vacuum state has only mathematical interest, and does not
have a physical interpretation as the vacuum. it will not be invariant under
a change from one representation to a unitarily equivalent one.

now if g : h  h is a continuous linear map preserving , then g

induces a change j 7 gjg1, and so
corollary a symmetry g of (h, ) is unitarily implementable on the rep-
resentation determined by j i j  gjg1 is hilbertschmidt.
this is simply the restatement, in the present formalism, of the wellknown
criterion for bogoliubov transformations to be unitarily implementable.

suppose now one has a oneparameter group g(t) of motions of h pre-
serving . in most physical applications, this group is strongly continuous,
meaning that for any xed v  h, the function t 7 g(t)v is continuous. un-
der these circumstances, there is a generator a so that g(t) = eta. in applica-
tions, this generator is typically a partial dierential operator. for example,
for evolution in time for the kleingordon eld, one has h = {( , )} and

0

  m2 0(cid:21) ,

1

a =(cid:20)

(3)

where  is the spatial laplacian.

3.2 denitions and notation

throughout, we shall let hc be a complex innitedimensional separable
hilbert space. the complex inner product on hc will be denoted h,i. we
shall let h be the unerlying real hilbert space. then we write j : h  h
for the reallinear map given by v 7 iv, and
(v, w) = hv, wi
(v, w) = hv, wi

(4)

(5)

then (,) is the canonical real inner product on h and  is a symplectic
form on h which is nondegenerate in that it denes isomorphisms from h
to its dual. note that

(v, w) = (v, jw) .

(6)

thus any two of , j and (,) determine the third.
throughout, the real adjoint of a reallinear operator (perhaps only
densely dened) l will be denoted l. thus the dening relation is (v, lw) =
(lv, w) with domain d(l) = {w  h | (v, lw) = (lv, w) for some lw
for all v  d(l)}. a useful result is the

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

9

proposition 1 if g : h  h is a continuous linear map preserving ,
then g is invertible and g1 = jgj. conversely, the adjoint of g is g =
jg1j.
proof one has

(v,jgjgw) = (v, gjgw) = (gv, jgw) = (gv, gw) = (v, w)

for all v, w  h, and similarly

(v, gw) = (gv, w) = (gv, jw) = (v, g1jw) = (v, jg1jw) .

denition 1 the symplectic group of h is

sp(h) = {g : h  h | g is linear, continuous and preserves } .

its elements are the symplectomorphisms.

the symplectic group does not depend on the real inner product on h
(or on the complex structure); it depends only on  and the structure of
h as a hilbertable space. it has naturally the structure of a banach group,
using the operator norm to dene the topology.

denition 2 the restricted symplectic group of hc is

sprest(hc) = {g  sp(h) | g1jg  g is hilbertschmidt} .

that this set is closed under composition and inversion is a consequence
of the fact that the hilbertschmidt operators form an ideal. there is
a natural topology on sprest(hc); see shale (1962). (we shall not need
this topology here, since we shall be concerned exclusively with strong
continuity.) note that the complexlinear and antilinear parts of g are

g = (1/2)(cid:0)g  jgj(cid:1). thus g1jg  g is hilbertschmidt i g is.

we recall that a strongly continuous oneparameter subgroup of sp(h)
is a oneparameter subgroup t 7 g(t) such that, for each v  h, the map
t 7 g(t)v is continuous. (in general, one can also consider semigroups,
dened for t  0, but as every symplectomorphism is invertible, in our
case every semigroup extends to a group, which is strongly continuous i
the semigroup is.) according to the hillyoshidaphillips theorem, such
groups have the form g(t) = eta, where a is a denselydened operator
on h (with certain spectral properties), and kg(t)kop  m ect for some
m, c  0. the spectrum of a is conned to the strip ||  c.
we now wish to consider the action of g(t) by conjugation on certain
operators. it is not hard to see that, for any operator l of nite rank,
the function t 7 g(t)lg(t) is continuous in hilbertschmidt norm. now
suppose l is a hilbertschmidt operator. then for any  > 0, we may write
l = lf + l, where lf has nite rank and klkhs < . we then have

kg(t)lg(t)  lkhs  kg(t)lfg(t)  lfkhs + kg(t)lg(t)  lkhs

 kg(t)lfg(t)  lfkhs

+(cid:0)kg(t)kopkg(t)kop + 1(cid:1)

(7)
(8)

10

adam d. helfer

we may make this less than any given  > 0, as follows. assume rst |t| < 1.
then the hillyoshidaphillips theorem bounds kg(t)kopkg(t)kop, and
hence choosing  we may make the second term as small as desired. then
the rst term may be made small by restricting |t| < . thus conjugation
by g(t) is continuous at the identity on the hilbertschmidt operators. but
since conjugation is a group action, we have proved

proposition 2 let g(t) be a strongly continuous oneparameter subgroup
of sp(h). conjugation by g(t) induces a stronglycontinuous oneparameter
group g(t) = eta on the space of hilbertschmidt operators on h.

(the same proof would apply for the compact operators, or those of

trace class.)

4 characterization of generators of sprest(hc)

in this section, we shall prove the main theorem. we shall do this in two
main stages. our rst goal is to nd out what restrictions must be made
on a in order that exp ta be unitarily implementable for each t. we shall
then show that no additional hypotheses need be made to ensure that these
unitary maps can be chosen to form a stronglycontinuous oneparameter
group. thus we shall be able to conclude that, when exp ta is implementable
for each t, a hamiltonian operator exists. this nal argument is delicate,
and i do not know of any reason a priori to expect the conclusion.

we begin by introducing a function measuring the change in complex

structure: let

the group law for g(t) implies a twisted law

l(t) = g(t)jg(t)  j .

l(s + t) = g(s)l(t)g(s) + l(s) .

(9)

(10)

if we formally dierentiate this at s = 0, we nd the dierential equation

l(t) = al(t)  l(t)a + l(0) .

here

l(0) = aj  ja .
the dierential equation has the formal solution
l(t) =z t

g(u)l(0) du ,

0

where

for any operator q.

g(t)q = g(t)qg(t)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

we shall now show how these equations can be interpreted rigorously.

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

11

proposition 3 ja, aj are selfadjoint operators with domains d(a),
jd(a) = d(aj), respectively.

proof we have

d((ja)) = {v  h | (jaw, v) = (w, (ja)v) for all w  d(ja)} .

now, if w  d(a) = d(ja), we have

(jaw, v) = t,0(jg(t)w, jv)
= t,0(w, g(t)v)
= t,0(w, jg(t)v)
= t,0(w, jg(t)v)

the proof for aj is similar. 

the condition d(aj) = d(ja) is the condition that d(a) be invariant
under j, that is, that the domain of a be a complex space with complex
structure j. this holds for all physical systems that have so far been studied,
but there are at least mathematical examples for which it fails.

corollary 1 the commutator [a, j] = aj  ja is naturally dened as a
form

(v, [a, j]w) = (ajv, w)  (v, jaw)

on d(aj)  d(a) (or on d(a)  d(aj)). we have

(v, [a, j]w) = t,0(v, g(t)jg(t)w) = t,0(v, l(t)w)

(15)

(16)

in this case.

proof we have

(v, g(t)jg(t)w) = (v, jg(t)jg(t)w)

= (g(t)jv, jg(t)w)
= (g(t)jv, g(t)w)

for w  d(a), we may write g(t)w = w  taw + o(t); similarly, this
becomes

(jvtajv+o(t), wtaw+o(t)) = (jv, w)+t(ajv, w)t(jv, aw )+o(t) ,
which has the desired derivative. 
and similarly:

12

adam d. helfer

corollary 2 the jantilinear part of a,

exists as a jsymmetric form with domain d(a), and also with domain
jd(a). the jlinear part of a,

a = (1/2)(cid:0)a + jaj(cid:1) ,
a+ = (1/2)(cid:0)a  jaj(cid:1) ,

exists as a jskew form on both of these domains.

we can now make sense of the integral formula for l(t).

proposition 4 the formal expression (13) for l(t) is valid in the sense of
forms on jd(a)  d(a). that is, for any v  jd(a) and w  d(a), one
has

(v, l(t)w) =z t

0 (cid:8)(v, g(u)ajw)  (v, g(u)jaw)(cid:9)du .

proof this follows by integration by parts; one has only to note that the
terms can be arranged so that this is sensible. 

4.1 regularity of the complex structure

we show here that the function l(t), measuring the change in the complex
structure, is continuous and of at most exponential growth.

theorem 1 if g(t) is a strongly continuous oneparameter family of re-
stricted symplectic transformations, then the function t 7 l(t) is continu-
ous (in the hilbertschmidt norm).

proof we shall rst show that the function is measurable. let  be a positive
real number and l0 a xed hilbertschmidt operator. the inverse image of
the ball of radius  at l0 is

{t |xk(cid:0)l(t)  l0(cid:1)ejk2

h < 2} ,

where ej form an orthonormal basis for h. but the sum is a pointwise
convergent sum of nonnegative continuous functions, hence lower semicon-
tinuous, and hence measurable.

now for positive integers n, consider the sets {t  (1, 1) | kl(t)khs >
n}. these form a decreasing sequence of sets of nite measure, with inter-
section . thus for large enough n the set s = {t  (1, 1) | kl(t)khs < n}
has positive measure. we may similarly nd a set t  (1, 1), symmetric
about the origin, of positive measure, and with kl(t)khs bounded on t .
however then the set {t1 + t2 | t1, t2  t} will contain an interval about
the origin, and from the twisted group law and the hillyoshidaphillips
theorem we have

kl(t1 + t2)khs  kg(t2)kopkl(t1)khskg(t2)kop + kl(t2)khs

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

13

is bounded on this interval. thus there exists an interval containing the
origin on which kl(t)khs is bounded.

we integrate the twisted group law in the form

(for t close enough to zero) over a closed interval [s0, s1] near the origin:

g(t)jg(t) j = g(s + t)jg(s t) j + g(t)(cid:0)g(s)jg(s) j(cid:1)g(t) (17)
(s1  s0)(cid:0)g(t)jg(t)  j(cid:1) =z s1
s0 (cid:2)g(s + t)jg(s  t)  j(cid:3) ds
g(t)z s1
=z s1+t
s0+t (cid:2)g(u)jg(u)  j(cid:3) du
g(t)z s1
the rst term of the last line tends to r s1

s0 (cid:2)g(s)jg(s)  j(cid:3) ds g(t)
s0(cid:2)g(s)jg(s)  j(cid:3) ds as t 

0. the second term does, too, since we have shown that conjugation by
g(t) is strongly continuous on the hilbertschmidt operators. thus l(t) is
continuous at the origin.

s0 (cid:2)g(s)jg(s)  j(cid:3) ds g(t)

finally, at any value of t, for small enough s, we have

kl(t + s)  l(t)khs = kg(t)l(s)g(t)khs  kg(t)kopkl(s)khskg(t)kop
which tends to zero as s does. 
proposition 5 for strongly continuous oneparameter families of restricted
symplectic motions, one has

kl(t)khs  e|t|

for some ,   0. (if kg(t)kop  m ec|t|, then one may choose any  > 2c.)
proof a little algebra shows

l(nt) =(cid:2)g((n  1)t + g((n  2)t) +  + 1(cid:3)l(t) .

from the hillyoshidaphillips theorem, we know kg(t)kop  m ec|t| for
some m  1, c  0. thus

kl(nt)khs  nm 2e2c|nt|kl(t)khs .

for any u with |u|  1, write u = n + r where n is an integer and |r| < 1,
where r has the same sign as n. then we have
kl(u)khs = kl(n(1 + r/n))khs

 nm 2e2c|u|kl(1 + r/n)khs
 |u|m 2e2c|u|

t(2,1][1,2)kl(t)khs

sup

for |u|  1. the result now follows from elementary considerations. 

14

adam d. helfer

we are now in a position to establish a useful property of unitarily

implementable evolutions.

proposition 6 let a be the generator of a strongly continuous onepar-
ameter subgroup of the restricted symplectic group. then the jantilinear
part of its resolvent is hilbertschmidt for the real part of  sucently
positive, and is o() in the hilbertschmidt topolgy as   +.
proof using a subscript minus to denote jantilinear parts, we have

(cid:0)(  a)1(cid:1) =z 

0

g(t)et dt .

a priori, this integral is known to exist only in the strong sense. however,
it follows from the previous two results that g(t) = (1/2)l(t)g(t)j is
a locally integrable hilbert schmidtvalued function and that the integral
converges for the real part of  suciently positive. multiplying by , one
easily shows that the resulting integral tends to g(0) = 0 as   +. 
the converse of this fails; one can easily create counterexamples by con-
sidering direct sums of countably many twodimensional symplectic spaces.
we close this subsection with some further properties of l and of oper-

ators derived from it, which will be useful in what follows.

proposition 7 jl is a jsymmetric operator with spectrum strictly below
unity.

proof we have

jl = jgjg1 + 1 = (g1)g1 + 1

where the asterisk denotes the real adjoint. 

now let us put

(18)
for the jlinear and jantilinear parts of g. we have jl = 2gg1, and
hence gg1 is a jsymmetric operator varying continuously in hilbert
schmidt norm, with spectrum bounded strictly below 1/2.

g = (1/2)(cid:0)g  jgj(cid:1)

proposition 8 for strongly continuous oneparamter families of restricted
symplectic motions, the quantity gg1
+ 1 is a jsymmetric hilbertschmidt
operator, varying continuously with t in hilbertschmidt norm.

proof we have

gg1

+  1 = (gg1)(cid:2)1  gg1(cid:3)1

.

since the rst factor varies continuously in hilbertschmidt norm and the
second continuously in operator norm, the product varies continuously in
hilbertschmidt norm. 

note that jl(t) = jg1jg + 1 = 2jg1gj, so g1g is also a

continuous jsymmetric hilbertschmidt operator, as is g1

+ g  1.

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

15

4.2 the characterization theorem

theorem 2 a generator a of a stronglycontinuous oneparameter sub-
group of sp is a generator of a stronglycontinuous oneparameter sub-
group of sprest i the following condition holds: let g(t) = eta, and let
g(t) = eta be the associated oneparameter group acting on the compact
operators on h by conjugation. then for any  in the resolvent set of a,
the quantity r(,a)l(0) (is dened as a limit in the space of linear forms
on d(aj)  d(a) and) is a hilbertschmidt operator.
proof note that d(aj)  d(a) is a hilbertable space, and so will be the
space of linear forms on it.
0 g(u)l(0) du. the idea will be to integrate this
against et. however, since l(0) is only weakly dened, it will be easier
to approach this integral as a limit. consider then, for a hilbertschmidt
operator b,

we have l(t) = r t

z 

0

etz t

0

g(u)b du dt =z 

0

1e(a)ub du

= 1r(,a) b

here the spectrum of a must lie in a strip |z| < 2c for some c > 0, and
so the integral converges for  suciently positive. now, as b approaches
l(0) (in the space of forms on d(aj)  d(a)), the lefthand side of this
equation approachesr 
0 etl(t) dt in the space of forms, but this integral
is in fact a hilbertschmidt operator. (this follows from proposition 5.)
therefore, as b tends to l(0) as a form, the quantity 1r(,a) b tends
to a limit, which we denote 1r(,a) l(0), equal to the integral.
z t

g(u)r(,a)l(0) du + (1  g(t))r(,a)l(0) ,
and the righthand side is hilbertschmidt in view of proposition 2. 

g(u)l(0) du = z t

for the converse, we note that

0

0

this theorem is one of our main results. in applications, the operator a is
the hamiltonian operator for the classical eld equations, acting on cauchy
data. the complex structure j is a pseudodierential operator whose sin-
gular part is determined by the local structure of the eld operator. thus
r(,a)l(0) can be computed by pseudodierential operator techniques
from local data. whether it exists as a hilbertschmidt operator is in most
cases easily read o simply by considering the orders of the dominant terms.

5 existence of a hamiltonian

the characterization theorem determines the conditions under which a
stronglycontinuous oneparameter subgroup of sp lies in sprest. in this

16

adam d. helfer

case, it is what one might call pointwise unitarily implementable, that is,
for each t there exists a unitary transformation u (t) on the fock space
implementing eta. (each of these transformations is determined uniquely
up to phase.) one would like to know if (with an appropriate choice of

that this is always the case.

phases) we have u (t) = eitbh for a selfadjoint hamiltonian bh. it turns out

in order to prove this, and for its own interest, we shall work out an
explicit formula for u (t). formulas equivalent to this one (modulo phase)
are known. however, it is worth going through the analysis explicitly here,
for two reasons. first, the phase is of some interest and is technically dicult
to analyze. second, we need ne control over some of the terms in order to
establish the strong continuity of u (t), and so a careful presentation is
worthwhile.

5.1 the representation

the representation is dened as follows. let z a  hc. (we shall use an
index notation when convenient.) the z a will be creation operators, with
a = /z a annihilation operators. then the state wave functions are holo-
morphic functions  (z a). it is sometimes convenient to distinguish between
these wave functions and the abstract state vectors |i; the two are related
by
(19)
where |0zi is the vacuum state. in this equation, the terms in the power
series  (z a) are thought of as creation operators.

|i =  (z a)|0zi ,

the inner product is

h|i =z  ehz,zidzdz .

(20)

this integral is dened as the integral of   against a promeasure; alter-
natively, it may be regarded as a shorthand for the power series in the
coecients of  ,  it formally determines. the normalization is xed so
that the norm of (z) = 1 is unity.

now let g = g(t) be a symplectomorphism. it induces an action on the

eld operators which is conventionally written as

z a = a

a = a

bz a + abb
bb + abz b .

(21)
(22)

here ,  are essentially the jlinear and antilinear parts of g(t), and
are known as bogoliubov coecients. that g(t) be a symplectomorphism is
equivalent to

0 = acb
ca
b = b

a

c

c  bca
c  bcac .

(23)
(24)

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

17

note that this implies  is invertible. that g(t) lie in sprest is equivalent to
requiring  to be hilbertschmidt.

the image of the vacuum is determined by the requirement that it be

annihilated by all operators 

a, and from this one nds the state is

where

n exp(1/2)qabz az b ,
qab =(cid:0)1(cid:1)a

ccb

(25)

(26)

(27)

.

is symmetric and the normalization n has modulus

|n| =(cid:2)det(cid:0)a

ac

b  q

qcb(cid:1)(cid:3)1/2

the conditions on  and  above imply that this state is welldened (and
that |n|, as dened here, is positive).
write the abstract ket as

the evolution of a general state vector may now be determined. let is

|i =  (z)|0zi =  (z )|0z i ,

where

|0zi ,

|0z i = n exp(1/2)qabz az b|0zi

(28)

(29)

are the vacua with respect to j and g(t)jg(t). now write, in matrix no-
tation,

z  = z + 

= z + ()z
= e(1/2)z z ze(1/2)z z ,

(30)

(31)
(32)

where z = /(z). the last line of the displayed equation is valid,
for example, as an operator identity with the exponentials dened by their
formal power series, acting on polynomials, and extends by linearity to
suitable holomorphic functions. then we have

 (z) =  (z )n e(1/2)qabz az b

(33)

= e(1/2)z z  (z)e(1/2)z z n e(1/2)qabz az b

. (34)

this formula denes u (t), modulo phase. we know that it is a one
parameter projective unitary group. if we can show that this projective
group is strongly continuous, and that the phases can be chosen to make
the full group strongly continuous, then we shall be assured of the existence
of a selfadjoint generator.

18

adam d. helfer

5.2 continuity of some operations

proposition 9 qab is a continuous function of t in the hilbertschmidt
norm.

proof we shall work with q

ab

, to avoid conjugating  and .

for this, we must derive the precise relation between the s, s, and g.
this arises from the canonical quantization prescription, which in our case
amounts to the replacement of the variables z a, z a with the operators z a,
a. we see that  is precisely g+, the jlinear part of g. we can work out
 from the identity

v az a = v aa

bz b + abv az b

from which we nd

abv az b = hv, gzi  hz, g+zi = hv, gzi

and thus

1a

bbcz az c = hz, (g+)1gzi .

it was shown in proposition 8 (and the comments following that proposition)
that (g+)1g is continuous in hilbertschmidt norm. 
proposition 10 with the choice of phase n = |n|, the image of the j
vacuum varies continuously with t.
proof let |ti be the image of the vacuum at time t. then

ht  s|t  si =z |nt exp(1/2)qtabz az b  ns exp(1/2)qsabz az b|2

ehz,zidzdz

= 2  2nsnt det(i  qsqt(cid:1)1

.

since q varies continuously in hilbertschmidt norm, for any xed t, this
can be made as close to zero as desired by choosing s close enough to t. 
we now turn to a similar, more general computation. the trigonometric
polynomials are dense in h. (this is the present formulation of the well
known statement that the vacuum is a cyclic state for this representation.)
we shall show that they vary continuously with t.
proposition 11 with the choice of phase n = |n|, the image of any
trigonometric polynomial varies continuously with t.

proof it is enough to establish this for trigonometric monomials.

for any a  h, let w (a) = exp i(az +a) be the corresponding weyl
operator. then a trigonometric monomial is (a constant times) w (a)|0i for
some a. the image of this state at time t is

w(cid:0)g(t)a(cid:1)nt exp(1/2)qtabz az b = nt exp{(1/2)hat, ati
t )z a(cid:9) ,

t  (1/2)qtabz az b + i(ata  qtabab

+(1/2)qtabaa

t ab

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

19

where at = g(t)a. we nd

ca

b  qtbcq

s (cid:17)1
hs|ti = n snt det(cid:16)a
 exp(1/2)nhas, asi  hat, ati + qtabaa
s asbi" a
 exp(1/2)h ata  qtabab

s  q

t aa

t ab

ab

t + qsabaa

s ab

so
b#1" aa
t# .
ab
s  q
s asb
ata  qtabab

ab
b q
s
qtab a

since, as s approaches t, we have as  at and qs to qt in hilbertschmidt
norm, this tends to unity as s  t. 

5.3 existence theorem for the hamiltonian

we are now in a position to prove the existence of the hamiltonian.

theorem 3 if eta is a stronglycontinuous oneparameter subgroup of

sprest, then there exists a selfadjoint operator bh on hilbert space, unique
up to an additive constant, such that u (t) = eitbh implements eta.
proof with the choice of phases n = |n|, we have a projective unitary
representation u (t). the cocycle representing its deviation from a true rep-
resentation is u (s)u (t)u (s  t). this can be computed by lengthy but
straightforward means. in matrix notation, we nd it is

(cid:16)det

c

(i + qtqt)(i  qs+tqs(i  qt+sqt+s)1)(cid:17)1/2

.

here the quantity whose determinant is to be taken is of the form i + t ,
where t varies continuously in trace norm in s and t. from this it follows
that the cocycle is continuous, and so a continuous choice of phase is possi-
ble, making u (t) into a oneparameter unitary group. let such a choice be
made.

finally, we must show that this group is strongly continuous. since the
phases vary continuously, it is enough to show that the original, projective
representation is strongly continuous. while this could probably be done
directly from the formula above, it is probably clearer to give an indirect
argument.

in the previous subsection it was shown that u (t) is strongly continuous
on a dense family of states. (recall that now the phase has been chosen so
that u (t) is a oneparameter unitary group.) for any such state |i and
0 u (u)|i du is in the domain of t,0u (t). it follows
that u (t) has a denselydened generator, which, because u (t) is unitary,
must be selfadjoint. 

any t, the state (1/t)r t

there is an interesting conseqence of the formulas above:

20

adam d. helfer

corollary 3 we have

for every t.

h0|eit h|0i 6= 0

this means that, for any linear unitarily implementable evolution, if the
state is initially vacuum, at any later time a quantum measurement to
determine the state will have a positive probability of nding vacuum.

we have shown that under certain conditions a selfadjoint hamiltonian

bh exists generating a oneparameter family u (t) of unitary transformations.

in the course of this argument, we determined u (t) up to phase. it would
be of interest to determine the phase. however, here i shall only indicate
that the problem is essentially one of renormalization.

we recall from the proof of theorem 3 that the cocycle u (s)u (t)u (st)

for the projective representation was given by

(cid:16)det

c

(i + qtqt)(i  qs+tqs(i  qt+sqt+s)1)(cid:17)1/2

after a little algebra, this can be rewritten as

.

(35)

(cid:16)det

c

t (cid:17)1/2

s+t1

s 1

.

(36)

if the determinant of  were known to exist and depend continuously on
t, it would be simple to factor this: the phase would simply be (detc )1/2.
however, the present hypotheses do not ensure that the determinant of  is
dened. (we only know that  is the identity plus a hilbertschmidt term,
not a traceclass term.) thus the isolation of the phase is more delicate.
one can think of this as nding a renormalized denition of detc .

6 scalar fields in curved spacetime

these papers were motivated by problems which arose in the theory of quan-
tum elds in curved spacetime. in this section, we apply the theory to that
case. in particular, we settle an outstanding question: is the hamiltonian
for such elds selfadjointly implementable in generic circumstances?

there are already two sorts of evidence pointing to a negative answer
(helfer 1996). first, it is known that evolution in time by a nite motion is
not unitarily implementable. one might think that in this case a selfadjoint
family of hamiltonians could not exist, for if it did one could integrate it to
deduce a unitary evolution, which would be a contradiction. however, in the
present, nonautonomous, situation, the domains of the hamiltonians could
be timedependent, and so the integration might not be possible. thus the
nonunitary implementability of nite motions is not, in itself, enough to
imply nonselfadjoint implementability of the hamiltonian.

the second sort of evidence comes from the formal expression for the
hamiltonian. this formal expression is known not to have any hadamard

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

21

states in its domain. (hadamard states are in a sense the nicest test states
in curved spacetime, and often one takes as axioms that certain operators
should have welldened actions on these states.) while this is some indica-
tion of a pathological structure, it does not prove that the hamiltonian fails
to exist  the hamiltonian could be dened on some recondite domain,
or its formal expression, derived under the assumption of a certain renor-
malization prescription being valid, might be incorrect. thus, the formal
singularity of the hamiltonian is also inconclusive.

we shall show however that these arguments do suggest the correct
answer: the hamiltonian is not selfadjointly implementable. these conclu-
sions (and somewhat broader ones) could be deduced a bit more quickly
from the results of the next paper, but we wish to illustrate how the general
structure developed here applies.

the general setup is the following. we consider a spacetime (m, gab)
which is oriented, timeoriented and globally hyperbolic. global hyperbolic-
ity ensures that relativistic eld equations are wellposed, and is necessary
to ensure that a quantum eld theory can be constructed along conventional
lines. (see wald 1994 for an outline of the construction of the quantum eld
theory.) we shall also assume that the cauchy surfaces are compact. this
is only done for technical reasons (it rules out all infrared diculties and
ambiguities): the problems we shall uncover will be manifested in the lo-
cal, ultraviolet, divergences of certain traces, and would be present in any
hadamard quantization, whether the cauchy surfaces are compact or not.

the eld equation is

(aa + m2) = 0 ,

surface.

and the symplectic form is (, ) =r(  ). here  is any cauchy
(cid:21), as usual, and choose normal coordi-
initial data for the eld at  as(cid:20) 

the complex structure is determined from the hadamard twopoint
function, and is a certain pseudodierential operator. if we decompose the

nates (in terms of the induced metric) on , then one has for the symbol
of j

(cid:20) sym  ||1
|| sym (cid:21) +(cid:20) o(||2) o(||3 log ||)
o(||2)

o(||1 log ||

(cid:21) ,

(37)

(38)

(39)

where

2sym  = a

a||1  abab||3 ,

with a the fourier transform variable and ab the second fundamental form
of  (helfer 1996). (this  is not the same as the bogoliubov coecient.)
we shall consider, for simplicity, evolution along the unit timelike normal

to . in this case, the operator a is

(cid:20) 0 1
s2 0(cid:21) ,

(40)

22

adam d. helfer

where we have put s =  + m2, with  the laplacian on the surface.
it is convenient to make a change of basis to make a diagonal. ac-
cordigly, we shall put  = (+) + () and  = is((+)  ()). here ()
are not the positive and negativefrequency parts of  (which are dened
using j), but are the projections of  onto the eigenspaces of a. acting on
(cid:20) (+)
()(cid:21), the operator a is

and the symbol of j is

a =(cid:20)is 0
0 is(cid:21) ,
 i(cid:21) + o(||2 log ||) .

sym j =(cid:20)i 

(41)

(42)

from these equations, we may read o the symbol of g(t)jg(t), as a fourier
integral operator:

(cid:20)

i

sym (x + t)e2i||t

sym (x  t)e2i||t

i

(cid:21) ,

(43)

where  is the unit vector i the direction . one sees directly from this that
g(t)jg(t) j, for nite t will generally be an operator of order 1, and so
not hilbertschmidt. this is a direct estimate of g(t)jg(t)  j; it is not
necessary here to use the characterization theorem.
however, it is instructive to see the connection between this and the
characterization theorem. for this we need to compute q = (  a)1aj.
thus one should solve [a, j] = q [a, q] for q, which is a linear evolution
equation for q along the vector eld generating a. this is an autonomous
system, because the coecients a and data j are given (as operators on
initial data) at .

integration of this system can be accomplished directly, or by more
general formal means. we shall take advantage of the computation for
g(t)jg(t) we have already made. we have the identity
etetaaj dt .

(44)

(  a)1aj =z 
r 

using the formula (43), we nd (  a)1aj is
2i||(cid:20)

sym (x + xt)e(2i||)t dt

0

0

(45)
for large enough real , the contributions from  occur in arbitrarily small
neighborhoods of t = 0, and so the leading behavior (of the upperright
term, say) is

0

sym (x  xt)e(+2i||)t dt

0

(cid:21) .

0

r 

 2i||(sym )( + 2i||)1 .

(46)

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

the contribution of this term to the hilbertschmidt norm is

(2)3z

d(x)z||>>0

d3

4||2
2 + 4||2|sym |2 .

23

(47)

we now do the angular part of the integral. let us put sym  = ab a b/||.

then the angular contribution is (up to radially symmetric factors)

zs 2

abcd a b c dd2  = (4/5)abcd(abcd)

= (4/15)(cid:0)a

ab

b + 2abab(cid:1) ,

(48)

(49)

where ab is the threedimensional euclidean metric and the parentheses
on the subscripts indicate symmetrization. this is a positivedenite sym-
metric form in ab, and so is positive unless ab vanishes identically, that
is, unless sym  vanishes identically.

turning to the radial integral, since  is of order 1, this is ultraviolet
divergent unless  vanishes identically. inspecting the form of sym  (equa-
tion 39), we see that this would require ab to vanish identically. thus we
have proved:

theorem 4 let (m, gab) be an oriented, timeoriented, globally hyperbolic
spacetime with compact cauchy surfaces. consider the quantum eld theory
of a scalar eld subject to the equation

(aa + m2) = 0

in a hadamard representation. let  be a particular cauchy surface, and
a the operator generating evolution along the unit normal. if the second
fundamental form of  does not vanish identically, then a in not self
adjointly implementable.

in the set of cauchy surfaces, those with vanishing second fundamental
forms constitute a thin set in any reasonable topology. indeed, the class
of globally hyperbolic spacetimes admitting a cauchy surface with van-
ishing second fundamental form is arguably a thin set in any reasonable
topology. (in the vacuum case, these are spacetimes which possess time
reection symmetry.) we may say that generically a is not selfadjointly
implementable.

more generally, one would conjecture that a hamiltonian a correspond-
ing to evolution along a vector eld va at  would not be selfadjointly
implementable unless va satised killings equation (restricted to ) (cf.
helfer 1996, p. l133).

24

7 comments

adam d. helfer

the results of this paper were outlined in the introduction, and no summary
will be given here. rather, this section contains a few technical comments.
the two main general results in this paper are theorem 2, which estab-
lishes which classical hamiltonian vector elds generate motions which are
implementable on the quantum hilbert space by unitary transformations,
and theorem 3, which shows that when such unitary implementation is
possible a quantum hamiltonian necessarily exists.

the latter result is gratifying physically, in that it means a certain type of
pathology is absent. (the pathology would be that each classical canonical
transformation in the oneparameter family would have a unitary implemen-
tation, but that it would not be possible to choose this family of unitary
motions with strong enough continuity prorperties to guarantee the exis-
tence of a selfadjoint generator.) however, at least the present argument
for this is rather delicate (one has just enough convergence to establish
it). it would be worthwhile to nd a simple argument to replace it.

in some sense, the lesson of theorem 2 is that what is important is not
so much the generator a of the classical motions (that is, the hamiltonian
vector eld), as its lie adjoint a = [a,]: one needs

(a  )1aj

(50)

to be hilbertschmidt (for suciently large ) in order that a be self
adjointly implementable. if a were known to have a spectral representation,
then this criterion would amount to saying that, in terms of its spectral res-

olution, the quantity aj projected near the origin (that is,r||<a de()aj,

where de() is the spectral measure) was hilbertschmidt, and that j pro-
jected near innity was. in other words, the complex structure j should
have certain asymptotics in terms of the spectral resolution of a.
we shall see in the sequel that classically positive hamiltonians have
hamiltonian vectors which are necessarily spectral operators (and hence
a is spectral). however, in more general circumstances, this need not be
the case. for example, take the phase space to be the countable direct
sum n{(pn, qn)  r2} of twodimensional phase spaces. the hamiltonian
function will be
(51)
so that the induced canonical transformation is, in block form with respect
to the (q, p) decomposition

h = p1q2 + p2q3 + 



0 1 0 0 
0 0 1 0 

. . .

0 0 0 
0
1 0 0 0 
0 1 0 0 
. . .



(52)

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

25

(blank places are occupied by zeroes). this decomposes into two shift oper-
ators, which are the wellknown to be nonspectral (dunford & schwartz
1971). (we remark that this operator is not only bounded but contractive:
kavk  kvk, where k  k is the standard l2 norm.)

it is a pleasure to thank members of the university of missouri

acknowledgements
columbia mathematics department, especially peter casazza, nigel kalton, yuri
latushkin and stephen montgomerysmith, for helpful conversations; and paul
robinson for a useful electronic exchange.

references

1. barnett, s. m. in: reynaud, s., giacobino, e. and zinnjustin, j. (eds.) ecole
dete de physique theorique, les houches lxiii: fluctuations quantiques. am-
sterdam and new york: elsevier 1997.

2. bloch, f. and nordsieck, a.: phys. rev. 52, 5459 (1937).
3. bogoliubov, n. n.: zurn. eksp. teor. fiz. 34, 73 (1958); english translation

sov. phys. jetp1, 51 (1958).

4. dunford, n. and schwartz, j. t.: linear operators, part i. new york et al.:

wiley 1958.

5. dunford, n. and schwartz, j. t.: linear operators, part iii. new york et al.:

wiley 1971.

6. ford, l. h. and roman, t. a.: phys. rev. d55, 2082 (1997).
7. helfer, a. d.: class. quant. grav. 13, l129134 (1996).
8. helfer, a. d.: class. quant. grav. 15, 1169 (1998).
9. honegger, r. and rieckers, a. j.: math. phys. 37, 42924309 (1996).
10. klein, a.: trans. a.m.s. 181, 439456 (1973).
11. loudon, r. and knight, p. l.: j. mod. optics 34, 709759 (1987).
12. shale, d.: trans. a.m.s. 103, 149167 (1962).
13. treves, f.: introduction to pseudodierential and fourier integral operators

(two volumes). new york: plenum 1980.

14. wald, r. m.: quantum eld theory in curved spacetime and black hole ther-

modynamics. chicago: university press 1994.

