on the nontriviality of abelian gauged nambujona-lasinio

models in four dimensions

ug-30/99

manuel reenders

institute for theoretical physics,

university of groningen, 9747 ag groningen, the netherlands

(august 1999)

abstract

we study a particular class of abelian gauged nambujona-lasinio models
with global ul(n ) ur(n ) symmetry, where n is the number of fermion a-
vors. we show, by treating the gauge interaction in the ladder approximation
and four-fermion interactions in the leading order of the 1/n expansion, that
the renormalization group  function of the u (1) gauge coupling has ultravi-
olet stable xed points for suciently large n . this implies the existence of
a nontrivial continuum limit.

11.10.hi, 11.15.tk, 11.30.qc, 11.30.rd

9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
4
2

 

 
 

1
v
8
5
1
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

typeset using revtex

m.reenders@phys.rug.nl

1

i. introduction

the triviality of abelian gauge theories in four dimensions such as qed is due to the
screening of charged particles by their interactions with virtual fermionanti-fermion pairs
from the vacuum. such charge screening is described by the vacuum polarization  (fig. 1).
the qed vacuum is not a perfect insulator and can be considered as a medium of dipoles
representing the virtual fermionanti-fermion pairs, i.e. the fermion loops in the vacuum
polarization. within perturbation theory, the electromagnetic charge or gauge coupling is
screened completely in the continuum limit (  , where  is the ultraviolet cuto).
this can be seen by considering the renormalization group (rg) transformation of qed
[1], which relates the gauge coupling or ne-structure constant () in the infrared (ir)
region to the bare gauge coupling 0 = () in the ultraviolet (uv) via

() = r [/, 0] ,

r [/, 0] =

0

1 +  [/, 0]

.

in perturbation theory, the one-loop leading contribution to  is

 [/, 0] =

2n0

3

ln




,

(1)

(2)

where n is the number of fermion avors. this logarithmic screening eect is sucient to
cause the complete screening of charge in the continuum limit [2,3].

from the rg point of view triviality is merely due to the absence of an uv stable xed

point or nontrivial root of the  function

(0)  

d0
d

=

r [x, 0]

x

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)x=1

for the gauge coupling. eq. (2) gives rise to the following  function

() =

2n2

3

,

(3)

(4)

which only has an ir stable xed point or trivial root:  = 0 (
(0)  0). a nontrivial or
interacting theory only arises whenever  has a root which is an uv stable xed point. in
case of asymptotic free theories such as qcd the origin  = 0 is an uv stable xed point.
besides motivated only on the level of perturbation theory the above consideration is
too naive. according to the rg methods of wilson [4,5], one should consider the rg ow
in the space of all coupling constants (respecting certain symmetries) or at least for those
coupling constants which can be classied as relevant close to a particular critical manifold
in coupling constant space. the problem is that for a possible nontrivial continuum limit of
qed, critical and hence nonperturbative dynamical eects are required.

therefore, the discovery of dynamical chiral symmetry breaking (dsb) in the strong
coupling phase of qed (0  c = /3) [68] and the existence of an uv stable xed point
in the quenched-ladder approximation [911] sheds new light on the nonperturbative nature
of qed and triviality. lattice simulations of noncompact quenched qed have conrmed
the existence of a continuous chiral phase transition [1214].

2

an important step was performed by bardeen, leung, and love in refs. [15,16]. these
authors realized that, in quenched-ladder qed, attractive four-fermion interactions de-
scribed by a dimensionless four-fermion coupling g0  0 have a so-called scaling dimension 4
instead of 6 at the critical gauge coupling 0 = c. consequently these operators mix with
the gauge interaction which also has dimension 4 in four space-time dimensions; this means
that qed is not a closed theory at the chiral phase transition. the scaling dimension of an
operator is important in determining whether or not such an operator describes a long-range
interaction. the model of bardeen, leung, and love is referred to as the gauged nambu
jona-lasinio (gnjl) model, and the mechanism of dynamical chiral symmetry breaking
proposed by them should be regarded in the context of the rg methods of wilson.

wilson pointed out that a nontrivial renormalizable model can only be formulated if the
rg transformation exhibits uv stable xed points. uv stable xed points are singular
points1 of the rg transformation at which the model becomes scale (conformal) invariant.
natural candidates for uv stable xed points are critical points governing a continuous
phase transition. since, at a continuous phase transition, the correlation length  is innite
and the model is scale invariant.

the most crucial observation of wilson is that in the rg transformation, i.e. the coarse
graining process, new types of local interactions are generated and that the new interac-
tions can be classied as either irrelevant or relevant interactions. only relevant (including
marginal) interactions are important in determining what kind of infrared dynamics char-
acterized by a scale   1/ emerges from the microscopic or bare model characterized by
the cuto . the eect of irrelevant interactions can always be absorbed by adapting the
coupling constants of relevant and marginal interactions.

especially, close to a continuous phase transition, the rg methods show that it is im-
possible, a priori (without solving the equations of motion), to determine which interactions
are relevant or irrelevant; particular interactions can acquire anomalous dimensions and in-
teractions which are irrelevant in a certain region of coupling constant space might become
relevant in another region.

in this respect the gnjl model should be considered as the wilsonian eective (or micro-
scopic) action of qed taking into account the four-fermion interactions describing neutral
scalar and pseudoscalar fermionanti-fermion composites. it was shown in refs. [17,18] that
there is a critical line (curve) in the coupling constant plane (0, g0) of the gnjl model
separating a chiral symmetric phase from the chiral broken phase. the critical line is given
by

gc(0) = (1 + )2/4,

0 = 30/4,

(5)

 = q1  40,

in the neighborhood of the critical line four-fermion interactions acquire suciently large
anomalous dimensions to become relevant operators. the existence of nontrivial scaling
behavior of the model near criticality implies that these scalar and pseudoscalar composites
are relevant degrees of freedom at both short and long distances2.

1 uv stable xed points are specic roots of the  functions.

2the composites are light states, as well in the symmetric phase as in the broken phase.

3

lattice simulations of noncompact quenched qed with an induced four-fermion coupling
were performed by the illinois group in refs. [19,20]. the illinois group obtained a critical
point (0.44c, 0.76) in the (0, g0) plane, which ts nicely on the critical line eq. (5). however
it was not possible at that time to investigate by means of lattice simulations the phase
transition along the critical line.

later, the gnjl model was studied on the lattice in noncompact formulation using some
mean-eld approach for the fermions in ref. [21]. they obtained a critical line qualitatively
similar to the schwingerdyson equation (sde) approach eq. (5).3

in the intermediate region (0 < 0 < c), the critical exponents describing the chiral
phase transition satisfy non mean-eld hyperscaling relations which supports the view that,
within the quenched-ladder mean-eld approximation, the gnjl model has a nontrivial
continuum limit [19,23]. also in ref. [21] nonmean eld critical exponents were obtained.

in this paper we argue that these (pseudo)scalar composites might play a crucial role
in the phenomenon of charge screening. we show that, by considering the abelian gnjl
model, uv stable xed points of the  function of the gauge coupling can be realized,
provided the number of fermion avors n exceeds some critical value. the existence of uv
stable xed points gives rise to a nontrivial theory.

an important observation is that the nonmean eld values for the critical exponents
suggest the existence of a nontrivial yukawa interaction describing the interactions of the
composites with fermions. this also points out the inconsistency of the mean-eld approx-
imation (hartreefock approximation) for the four-fermion interactions. therefore we go
beyond the mean-eld approximation by incorporating the (pseudo)scalar composites (the
 and  exchanges) in the 1/n expansion.

the setup of this paper is the following.

in sec. ii we introduce the abelian gnjl
model with ul(n)  ur(n) symmetry, where n is the number of fermion avors. further-
more, we sketch how we will search for the existence of an uv stable xed point in the
coupling constant plane (0, g0). in sec. iii we discuss, within the quenched-ladder mean-
eld approximation, the importance of hyperscaling relations and how this is related to the
existence of a nontrivial yukawa interaction in the gnjl model. we discuss how to proceed
beyond the quenched mean-eld approximation in sec. iv. the 1/n expansion is discussed
in sec. v. in order to get some idea how the scalar and pseudoscalar composites contribute
to vacuum polarization we illustrate such contributions on the level of perturbation theory
for a gaugehiggsyukawa model in sec. vi. then, in sec. vii, we argue how we can exploit
the 1/n expansion and derive a computable expression for the  function  of the gauge
coupling. subsequently  is computed explicitly in sec. viii. the existence of uv stable
xed points is addressed in sec. ix. finally, we present our conclusions in sec. x.

3studies of the compact gnjl model [22] (with torus topology) showed to have both a rst
order transition as well a second order phase transition similar to the continuous transition in the
noncompact formulation [21].

4

ii. the abelian gnjl model

we consider the gnjl model with u(1) gauge symmetry (the abelian gnjl model) with
n number of fermion avors described by the following lagrangian (see also refs. [24,25]):

l1 = i(id  m0)i 

1
4

ff  +

g0
2

n 21

x=0 (cid:20)(cid:16) i 

ijj(cid:17)2

+(cid:16) i 

ij(i5)j(cid:17)2(cid:21) ,

(6)

where d =   ie0a and where the avor labels i, j run from 1 to n. the lagrangian
l1 is parametrized by the following three dimensionless bare coupling constants:
g0 = g02/42  g(),

0 = m0/  m(),

0/4  (),

0 = e2

(7)

where  is the ultraviolet cuto. we assume that the above set of dimensionless coupling
constants comprises the entire set of relevant (including marginal) dimensionless coupling
constants respecting particular chiral, vector, and gauge symmetries.

if the bare mass m0 is zero, l1 has a global ul(n)  ur(n) symmetry. the generators,

 , of the u(n) lie algebra have the following properties:

  =  ,

tr    = ,

n 21

x=0

ij 
 

kl = ilkj.

(8)

the last identity is called the fierz identity.

the abelian gnjl model described by eq. (6) can be conveniently analyzed in terms
of auxiliary or composite elds  = g0   and  = g0  (i5) describing scalar
and pseudoscalar degrees of freedom. in this way l1 can be rewritten as

l2 = iidi 

1
4

ff  

n 21

x=0

i 

ij( + i5)j 

1

2g0

n 21

x=0 h()2 + ()2i ,

(9)

where m0 has been set to zero. in this formulation the four-fermion interactions are described
by the interactions of the auxiliary elds with the fermion elds. then the connected two-
point green functions of the  elds describe n 2 nambugoldstone bosons ( bosons) and
the connected two-point green functions of the  elds describe n 2 higgs bosons (
bosons).

although the lagrangian (6) has very interesting properties, surprisingly this particular
class of gnjl models with ul(n)  ur(n) has not received much attention. one such
property is that eq. (6) comprises the largest set of relevant chiral invariant four-fermion
operators for a model of n fermions. another independent set of vector-like chiral invariant
four-fermion interactions such as ( )2 do not acquire large anomalous dimensions and
remain irrelevant near the critical point (line). this has been shown in refs. [26,27], where
the rg ow of scalar-like chiral invariant and vector-like chiral invariant four-fermion inter-
actions has been considered. moreover, the specic form of the chiral symmetry, where the
number of scalars equals the number of pseudoscalars, turns out to have useful implications
in the context of 1/n expansions as we will discuss later in secs. iv and v.

in case of l2 there are four renormalization constants:

5

2

(/)()(x) = (x), z 1/2

z 1/2
z(/)()(x) = (x), z(/)()(x) = (x),

(/)a

()(x) = a(x),

3

(10)

(11)

near the critical point a new scale is generated: the correlation length .

where /  1, and the elds , a, ,  are the bare elds dened at the uv cuto .
in case of
second order type of phase transition, the correlation length exists in both phases of the
system. in the broken phase the inverse correlation length is real and can be considered as
a physical mass of particles, for instance the mass of the scalar bound state (the  boson)
m, or the mass of fermion mdyn. in the symmetric phase the fermion is massless, and the
scalar and pseudoscalar composites are unstable states characterized by a complex mass
pole in their respective propagators describing the mass and the width of the breitwigner
type resonance, see refs. [2830]. the absolute value of the complex mass pole |m| can be
considered as the inverse correlation length.
the rg transformation dictates the ow of the dimensionless bare couplings as function
of the uv cuto . typically the bare relevant and marginal couplings (e.g. 0, 0, g0) have
to be ne-tuned suciently close to the critical point in order for scaling behavior to set in,
so that the physics in the infrared can be related to experimental data. scaling behavior is
obtained when there is a large scale hierarchy between the infrared length scale  and the
ultraviolet length scale a = 1/, i.e.   a.
the ne-tuning depends on the eigenvalues of the rg transformation of the couplings
close to the critical point and hence on the critical exponents. these critical exponents can
be derived from the  functions for the coupling constants 0, 0, and g0;



d0
d

= (0, 0, g0), 

d0
d

= (0, 0, g0), 

dg0
d

= g(0, 0, g0).

(12)

the crucial step is determine the xed points (, , g) of the rg equations (12), i.e.

(, , g) = 0,

(, , g) = 0,

g(, , g) = 0,

(13)

since the nature of the xed point determines whether a nontrivial continuum limit can be
realized or not. for a nontrivial continuum limit (, , g) should be a uv stable xed
point.

the rg equations follow from the regularized sdes of the generating functional de-
scribed by the lagrangian (9).4 the uv stable xed point for  is  = 0, hence we can
write



d0
d   (1 + m) 0,

(14)

where m is the anomalous dimension of the mass operator  evaluated at the xed point
(, , g). in case of the quenched gnjl models 1  m  2. thus the dimensionless bare
mass 0 is a relevant coupling requiring ne-tuning.

4a derivation of the set of (full) sdes for the two and three-point functions is given in chapter 2
of [25].

6

after setting 0 =  = 0, the problem reduces to the determination of the uv stable

xed points in the coupling constant plane (0, g0), i.e.,

g(, g) = 0,

g(, g) =


g(, g)

g

(, g) = 0,

(, g) =


(, g)



< 0,

< 0.

(15)

(16)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(,g)=(,g)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(,g)=(,g)

the quenched-ladder approximation simplies the solutions of eqs. (15) and (16) con-
siderably since the quenched hypothesis explicitly sets  = 0 for all 0 by omiting fermion
loops. it was shown in ref. [31] that, in the symmetric phase (g0  gc),

g(0, g0) = 2

(g0  gc),

(17)

g0
gc

with  and gc given in eq. (5). in the next section, eq. (17) will be derived. clearly, in this
way, the uv stable xed point of g is given by

g = gc(0),

g(0, gc(0)) = 0.

(18)

now eq. (16) should be reconsidered. we will analyze eq. (16) beyond the quenched ap-
proximation, and try to solve

(, gc()) = 0.

(19)

in sec. vii an explicit expression for  will be derived by assuming that g0 is at its critical
value gc and that it has an uv stable xed point so that in the neighborhood of this point
  0.

iii. hyperscaling in the quenched-ladder mean-field

approximation

in analogy with statistical mechanics, the continuous chiral phase transition can be
classied in terms of critical exponents which describe the scaling of various macroscopic
quantities (e.g. the chiral condensate, correlation length, eective potential, chiral suscep-
tibility) close to or at the critical point. it is considered a strong indication of the existence
of a nontrivial continuum limit (  ), if so-called hyperscaling relations between these
various critical exponents are satised, see refs. [19,23,3234].
for the gnjl model, the critical exponents , , , and  are the dened by the scalings:

at m0 = 0,

(20)

(21)

(22)
(23)
where g0 = g0  gc, h i is the chiral condensate,  is the chiral susceptibility, and m
is the mass of the  boson. as was mentioned previously, the mass m is the natural

at g0 = 0,
at m0 = 0,

0

 

h i  (g0)

h i

m0 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)m0=0  (g0),

h i  m1/
|m|  (g0)

7

candidate for the inverse correlation length (m  1/), since the  boson propagator s is
the connected correlation function of the eld  describing correlations parallel to direction
of symmetry breaking (i.e. parallel to the direction of long-range ordering).

in the quenched-ladder approximation treating four-fermion interaction in a mean-eld

approximation, the critical exponents are

 =

2 + 
2  

,

 =

2  
2

,

 =

1
2

,

 = 1,

and satisfy the hyperscaling relations

 = (  1),

4 = 2 + .

(24)

(25)

other hyperscaling relations involving the critical exponent  describing the scaling of the
eective potential are satised too [19,23]. furthermore it was argued in [19] that the
validity of the quenched-ladder mean-eld approximation relies on the verication that the
critical exponent  = 1. the interpretation of  = 1 is the factorization ( )2 = 2( ).
a renormalization of the chiral condensate simultaneously renormalizes the propagators s
and p .
indeed the lattice computations of the critical exponent  reported in [1921]
showed strong evidence for  = 1.

the anomalous dimension  describes the scaling of the connected two-point green
function s at the critical point. in ref. [30] the scalar propagator s (see fig. 2) and the
scalar yukawa vertex s (see fig. 3) have been computed in the symmetric phase in the
quenched-ladder approximation by means of a so-called two-channel approximation.

in the symmetric phase the yukawa vertex has the following form

s(p + q, p) = 1 [f1(p + q, p) + (q p  pq) f2(p + q, p)] .

(26)

these vertex functions f1 and f2 can be expanded in terms of chebyshev polynomials of
the second kind:

f1(p + q, p) =

f2(p + q, p) =





xn=0
xn=0

fn(p2, q2)un(cos ),

gn(p2, q2)un(cos ),

cos  =

p  q
pq

.

(27)

(28)

the two-channel approximation of ref. [30] now holds in that the yukawa vertex is

approximated by the angular average of the vertex function f1 in the following way

s(p + q, p)  1z dp

22 f1(p + q, p) = 1f0(p2, q2),

where

f0(p2, q2)  fir(p2, q2)(q2  p2) + fuv(p2, q2)(p2  q2).

(29)

(30)

the functions fir and fuv are respectively referred to as the ir channel (infrared), and the
uv channel (ultraviolet).

8

the specic choice of chebyshev expansion and consequently, the choice of zeroth order
coecient f0, is convenient, since the infrared limit (q2  p2), and ultraviolet limit (q2  p2)
of s are both described by f0,

lim
p2q2
lim
q2p2

s(p + q, p) = 1 lim
p2q2
s(p + q, p) = 1 lim
q2p2

fuv(p2, q2),

fir(p2, q2).

(31)

(32)

the scaling form for s(q) is well described by these two functions fir and fuv.

the zeroth order chebyshev expansion or two-channel approximation gives second order
dierential equations for the lowest order harmonic with appropriate ir and uv boundary
conditions. these dierential equations are exactly solvable and. the solutions are expressed
in terms of a bessel function of the rst kind for fir and in terms of modied bessel functions
for fuv. the following solutions have been obtained [30]:

fir(p2, q2) = z 1  q2

fuv(p2, q2) =



2 , !  q2
z 1  q2
 "()i s 20q2

j1 s 20p2
q2 ! ,
p2!1/2

p2!1/2
2 , !  q2
p2 !  ()i s 20q2

2 sin 

p2 !# ,

where  and 0 are dened in eq. (5), and where

z(q2/2, ) 



2 sin  h()g(q2/2,)  ()g(q2/2, )i ,
1(q20)i(q20)(cid:21) ,
2 

s 20q2
(cid:21).
2 i 


()  q20(cid:20)j1(q20)i 
(q20) + j 
2 
s 20q2
 s 20q2

2(cid:20)i


2s q2

1

g(q2/2, ) 

(33)

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)

with the asymptotic solutions for s given in terms of fir and fuv, eqs. (33) and

(34), an analytic expression for the  boson is obtained from

s(q2) =

2
42

1

0 hfuv(2, q2)  1i ,

1
s (q) = 

1
g0

+ s(q2),

(38)

which has been argued in [30] to be correct up to leading and next-to-leading order in q2/2
and is valid along the entire critical curve gc.

it has been shown in [28,30] (d = 4) and [29] (d = 3) that s has a complex pole on a

second riemann sheet in (minkowsky) momentum space.

also one can derive that the solutions for s and are consistent with hyperscaling for
0 < 0 < c. this is intimately related to the fact that the renormalization of the auxiliary
elds  and , eq. (11), simultaneously renormalizes the yukawa vertex and the scalar
propagator.

at g0 = gc the scalar propagator s has the scaling form

9

where

s(q)  

42
2

1

q2!
b()   2

,

q2  2,

b() =

16

(1  2)2

()
()

2 !
(2 + )   0
(2  )

.

(39)

(40)

the scaling hypothesis states that the scalar propagator s should have the following

scaling form [25,3234] (in euclidean formulation):

s(q) =

1

2   2

q2!1/2

f(|m|2/q2),

(41)

where  is by denition the anomalous dimension. the mass m is the complex pole of s
and the absolute value |m| scales according to eq. (23). more precisely, in [28,30] it is
derived that

|m|  " g0

gcg0b()#1/2

,

g0 = g0  gc.

then

s(q) = 

42
2

1

b()   2

q2!"1 + |m|2
q2 !

+ o   q2

2!1!#1

,

(42)

(43)

where the exponent 1 > 0 for 0 <  < 1. from this we read of that the anomalous
dimension  is given by

 = 2(1  ),

and with eq. (24) satises the hyperscaling relation

 = (2  ).
the scaling function is (provided |m|2, q2  2)

f(x)  

42
b()

1

1 + x .

(44)

(45)

(46)

thus indeed if q2  |m|2 we obtain eq. (39), and when q2  |m|2 we get the chiral
susceptibility relation [35,36,25]

 

s(0)

g0

=

hi

m0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)m0=0

=

gc
g0  (g0),

(47)

supporting the fact that the critical exponent  = 1 within the quenched-ladder approxima-
tion.

the chiral ward-takahashi identity for the pseudoscalar propagator is

10

 hi

m0

=

p (0)

g0

.

(48)

from the gap equation (with nonzero bare mass) in the symmetric phase (g0 < 0) it can
be derived that5

s(0)

g0

=

p (0)

g0

=

gc
g0

,

(49)

see for more details [25].

since the absolute value of the complex pole of s, i.e. |m|, is now the scale (besides
the uv cuto) generated close to the critical curve, it is natural to take it to be a physi-
cal, macroscopic or infrared scale, which by denition should be independent of . using
eq. (42), we can derive the  function of g0 by assuming that

0 = 

d|m|
d

= g(0, g0) = 2

g0
gc

(g0  gc),

(50)

which is equivalent to the  function given in ref. [31] and sec. ii. hence the critical curve
g0 = gc is an uv stable xed point g(0, gc) = 0 (

g(0, gc) < 0) of the rg ow.

with q2  2 the function z of eq. (35) scales in the following way
2!(1)/2

2 !/2  q2

z(q2/2, ) 

2 sin 

()



2

(1 + )

(1  )   0

in this way the yukawa vertex can be written as

.

(51)

q2!/4

s(p + q, p)  1 2
where, for p2, q2  2,
fir(p2, q2)    2

q2!/4

hfir(cid:16)p2/q2(cid:17) (q2  p2) + fuv(cid:16)q2/p2(cid:17) (p2  q2)i ,

fir(cid:16)p2/q2(cid:17) ,

fuv(p2, q2)    2

q2!/4

fuv(cid:16)q2/p2(cid:17) ,

and

fir(cid:16)p2/q2(cid:17) =
fuv(cid:16)q2/p2(cid:17) =

2



2 sin 

2

()
(1 + )  0
(1  )
 "()i s 20q2

p2!1/2

2 !/2  q2
p2!1/2

(1 + )  0
(1  )
2 !/2  q2
p2 !  ()i s 20q2

()

p2 !# .

j1 s 20p2
q2 ! ,

5since s = p in the symmetric phase.

11

(52)

(53)

(54)

(55)

from the above scaling form for s and s it is clear that four-fermion scattering

amplitudes such as

s(p1 + q, p1)s(q)s(p2, p2 + q) 

1
q2 ,

p2
1, p2

2  q2  2.

(56)

are independent of  and express the long-range nature6 of yukawa forces. for arbitrary
dimensions, this is pointed out in ref. [29]. the long-range yukawa forces and their non-
trivial contributions to scattering amplitudes in the infrared are a direct consequence of
hyperscaling and thus power-like renormalizability.

in ref. [36] it was argued that the triviality of 4 theory cannot be a good guide
to understanding the possible triviality of the pure nambujona-lasinio (njl) or spinor
qed. the main reason is that the nambu-goldstone bosons in models with fundamental
fermions which undergo (dynamical) chiral symmetry breaking are composite, and their
propagators have a large anomalous dimension, whereas they are fundamental in theories
with scalars that exhibit a magnetic phase transition, and the anomalous dimension is small.
the consequence is the following. although both the njl model and 4 theory violate
hyperscaling due to the appearance of logarithmic corrections, and hence are trivial, the
bounds on the critical exponents are dierent.
in njl type of models the logarithmic
violations reduce the critical exponent  below its mean eld value  < 3, whereas in scalar
models the critical exponent exceeds its mean eld value  > 3. such logarithmic violations7
of scaling and the direction of violation were tested in [37] and [38].

we can consider this in the dsb phase. the consensus is that in four dimensions
due to the logarithmic corrections, the hyperscaling relations are violated, and we have the
following inequalities:

4 > 2 + ,

 > (  1).

(57)

this violation of hyperscaling is believed to be a sign of triviality meaning that the eective
yukawa-coupling (which couples goldstone bosons to the fermions) vanishes in the contin-
uum limit. the continuum limit is non-interacting, hence trivial. this can be seen in the
following way. assuming that in the low energy region the correlation length  is the only
relevant length scale, we dene an eective yukawa-coupling gy by the zero-momentum limit
of the four-fermion scattering amplitude (two fermions exchanging a scalar bound state) in
the dsb phase

g2
y
  2g2
m2

y  s(0, 0)s(0)s(0, 0),

(58)

where s(0, 0) and s(0) are given by the chiral susceptibility relations

6the correlation length is large, 1/|m|  1/.
7 pure power law scaling is rather hard to distinguish from logarithmic scaling on the lattice due
to the niteness of the system.

12

s(0) = g0

hi
m0

,

s(p, p) = (1)

(p2)
hi

,

(59)

where 0 = (0) is the fermion mass in the broken phase. by making use of the scaling
laws (20)(23) and that   1/0  1/m, hi  h i, we can derive that

1

g2
y 

(60)

2   0

hi!2 hi

m0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)m0=0  (2+4)/.

this expression is related to the denition of gr  g2
y given in ref. [36], and it is clear that
the scaling inequalities (57) imply that g2
y  0 when   . thus, only if the hyperscaling
relations (25) are satised, a nonzero gy might be realized in the continuum limit (  ),
thereby giving rise to a nontrivial interacting theory.

iv. beyond the quenched-ladder mean-field approximation

dynamical chiral symmetry breaking being a strong coupling phenomenon has been
predominantly studied in the framework of sdes in the quenched-ladder approximation,
due to the lack of other (analytically) solvable approximations. lattice simulations provide
a very powerful numerical tool for studying critical phenomena such as dsb, since they
do not suer from uncontrollable truncations (such as ladder approximation) which are
necessarily used to solve continuum sdes.

the physical implications and the consistency of the quenched-ladder results with many
quenched lattice simulations, and with the nonperturbative rg techniques, support the view
that the qualitative features of the approach might be realistic and describe properties of
the full theory. most likely this is due to the ladder approach respecting the vector and axial
wardtakahashi identities.

let us mention some attempts to study dsb beyond the ladder approximation in
framework of the sd approach. in refs. [39,40] the validity of the ladder approximation
is analyzed by including the eects of e.g. crossed photon exchange graphs. moreover,
holdom [40] gives strong arguments that the scaling law for the fermion dynamical mass
mdyn in the quenched theory (including also crossed photon graphs, and vertex corrections)
is of the same form as the scaling law with essential singularity obtained in the quenched-
ladder approximation in ref. [9,11]. this is analogous to the statement that the anomalous
dimension is one (m = 1) in quenched qed.

in addition, the nonperturbative renormalization group methods (nprg) of refs. [26,27]
provide a way to check the quenched-ladder approximation in the gnjl model by including
the eect of crossed photon exchange graphs, and four-fermion interactions in the rg ow
of coupling constants. the basic principle of the nprg methods is to write down the
equation for the so-called shell-mode eective action, which follows from varying the cuto
of the wilsonian eective action. in principle the nprg method is exact, but unsolvable
in practice, since it involves the computation of the rg ows of an innite set of operators
and couplings. the systematic approximation is to write down the nprg equations for a
suitable nite set of local operators, which is called the local potential approximation (lpa).
the next step is that the solutions obtained in the lpa have to be checked for stability with
respect to enlargement of the set of operators.

13

in ref. [27] the critical line in the full quenched gnjl model is obtained in a par-
ticular lpa, which incorporates besides crossed photon exchange graphs also four-fermion
exchanges beyond the mean eld approach. the equation for the critical line obtained by
aoki et al. reads

gc(0) = (1 + )2 /3,

(61)

and in comparison with eq. (5) the dierence is just an overall factor 3/4. thus these studies
support the reliability of the ladder approximation. moreover in ref. [27] it is shown that the
critical exponents agree rather well with the quenched-ladder results for small values of 0.
however, for values of the gauge coupling 0 close to the conformal phase transition (cpt)
point 0 = c [41], a small quantitative dierence in the values of the critical exponents
emerges.

the quenched approximation is analogous to the assumption that the full gauge boson
propagator d(k) can be approximated by the bare or canonical propagator (for large
momenta),

d(k) =  g +

kk

k2 ! 1
k2 ,

(62)

in the landau gauge. the quenched approximation is only consistent when the vacuum
polarization is nite in the continuum limit, i.e. the logarithmic running of the coupling is
absent. this is the case at an uv stable xed point of the  function, eq. (16), of 0. the
assumption that such a critical xed point exists, and that it lies somewhere on the critical
curve (5) is the starting point for many studies of dynamical chiral symmetry breaking in
context of the gnjl model. in fact the quenched hypothesis is only consistent when the
bare gauge coupling 0 is near the xed point of the theory,   0.
attempts to include a logarithmic running of the coupling drastically changes the chiral
phase transition and the critical line, see refs. [4245]. it was shown in refs. [4548] that
m = 2, which is analogous to the vanishing of the anomalous dimension of the scalar
propagator,  = 2(2 m) = 0 (e.g. see eq. (41)). consequently, the critical exponents turn
out to be of the mean eld type (up to logarithmic violations) leading to a trivial theory.
the quenched theory and the theory with the logarithmically running coupling seem to be
two dierent theories.

lattice simulations of noncompact full (unquenched) qed on the lattice (with avors,
n = 2 and n = 4) are controversial [49]. the illinois group [50,51] (see also [52,13]) and
the zaragosa group [53,54], nd power-law scaling and nonmean eld critical exponents, sig-
naling a possible nontrivial continuum limit for the strong coupling broken phase, whereas
[55,56,49] obtain mean eld behavior (mean eld critical exponents with logarithmic correc-
tions). thus gockeler et al. nd a vanishing renormalized gauge coupling and a vanishing
eective yukawa coupling (dened by the goldbergertreiman relation), and they conclude
that lattice qed is trivial, see for their most recent result ref. [57].

the authors of [58,50,51] found indications that monopole condensation and chiral sym-
metry transitions coincide. these results suggested that theories of fundamental charges and
monopoles provide a natural scenario for nontrivial ultraviolet behavior. however later anal-
ysis of [59] and the discussion in [60] put in doubt the initial ideas on the role of monopole
condensation driving the chiral phase transition.

14

lattice simulations of gnjl models are very complicated to perform, since these tech-
niques have diculties in incorporating composite states with light masses. clearly it is
essential to keep the light composite degrees of freedom and their eective interactions in
the sdes to properly understand the scaling structure of the full unquenched gnjl model.
in many approximations of the gnjl model, the four-fermion interactions are treated in
a mean-eld approach known as the hartreefock approximation. in mean-eld approxima-
tions the composite operators such as  are replaced by their vacuum expectation values
(   h i) and uctuations about that value are ignored. thus quantum corrections
corresponding to four-fermion interactions are neglected beyond tree level.
as long as four-fermion interactions are irrelevant the mean-eld approach for these
operators is justied. however in refs. [19,23] it is concluded that, within the quenched-
ladder mean-eld approximation to the gnjl model, the hyperscaling equations for the
critical exponents are satised, implying that the four-fermion operators become relevant due
to the appearance of large anomalous dimensions. in other words, the mean-eld approach
yields non mean-eld exponents, thereby being inconsistent (e.g. see refs. [21,33]).

the uctuations of the gauge eld for the composite degrees of freedom are essential
and cannot be neglected; they give rise to a large anomalous dimension turning irrelevant
four-fermion interactions into relevant ones implying that such interactions might give non-
trivial quantum corrections at long distances. this is illustrated by the computations of
the anomalous scaling laws for the yukawa vertices and the propagators of the scalar and
pseudoscalar composite states, i.e. the  and  bosons of [30]. in fact, as was discussed in
sec. iii, the hyperscaling relations imply the existence of a nontrivial yukawa interaction
describing the interaction between fermions and  and  composites in the gnjl model.

the question is; how to modify the mean-eld approach? we propose the following.
firstly we point out the usefulness of skeleton expansions. secondly we make use of the
specic form of the chiral symmetry. and thirdly we adopt the 1/n expansion (with n the
number of fermion avors)

a. beyond the mean-eld approach

the anomalous dimensions describe the scaling behavior of the fully dressed yukawa
vertices and  and  propagators at the critical line. the non mean-eld values of the
anomalous dimensions imply that one cannot neglect (as is done in mean-eld approxima-
tions) the full connected green functions corresponding to the composites (or at least the
leading or asymptotic parts of these functions) in the sdes.

on the level of the bethesalpeter (bs) fermionanti-fermion scattering kernels the 
and  composites can be incorporated in a rg invariant manner by making use of the
skeleton expansion (see e.g. bjorken and drell [61]). analogous to qed kernels we dene
the one-boson irreducible kernel k (1), and the two-fermion one-boson irreducible bs kernel
k (2), where these kernels now also include the  and  composites. for both type of kernels
a skeleton expansion exists. the integral equation between k (1) and k (2) is known as the
bethe-salpeter equation.

the skeleton expansion is a series in topologically distinct feynman diagrams with all
vertices and propagators fully dressed. the skeleton expansion is a special way of resumming
the entire set of feynman diagrams in a consistent manner, i.e., without double counting.

15

the lowest order terms (lowest in terms of loops) of the skeleton expansions for k (1),
respectively, k (2) are illustrated in fig. 4, respectively, fig. 5. the blobs with the letter b
in the full vertices and propagators represent photons, and composite  and  exchanges.

each term in the skeleton expansion of the bs kernel k (2) is rg invariant, up to fermion
wave function factors, i.e. the expansion is independent of the renormalization factors z3
and z = z = z (see eqs. (10) and (11)) of, respectively, the gauge eld and the com-
posite elds  and . the two z 1 factors with anomalous dimensions of each yukawa
vertex cancel with the z 2 factors of the  and  propagators, leading to cuto independent
fermionanti-fermion scattering amplitudes, e.g. see eq. (56). since in the quenched approx-
imation the renormalization constant of the gauge eld is one (z3 = 1), the quenched-ladder
approximation is self-consistent from the rg point of view.

as was mentioned in sec. ii, the abelian gnjl model, with n number of fermion
avors, is taken to be invariant under global ul(n) ur(n) chiral transformations, so that
both the scalar and pseudoscalar four-fermion interactions are in the adjoint representation,
and, consequently, the number of scalar composites (n 2) equals the number of pseudoscalar
composites (n 2). in this way, when n is large we can use the 1/n expansion introduced
by t hooft [62]. the 1/n expansion states that planar, i.e.
ladder, graphs describe the
dominant contribution to green functions. the 1/n expansion will be discussed in the next
section.

with the gauge interaction treated in the ladder approximation each full yukawa vertex

and ,  boson propagator can be written as



sab
ij

(k, p) =  

ijsab(k, p),

()

s (q) = s(q),

(63)

see ref. [25] for the denitions of the proper vertices and connected two point green func-
tions. so that

n 21

x=0



sab
ij

(k + q, k)()

s (q)
scd
kl

(p, p + q) = ilkjsab(k + q, k)s(q)scd(p, p + q),

(64)

where we have used the fierz identity (8). then the rst term of the skeleton expansion for
k (2) is the following single boson exchange term:

0)k (2)

ab,cd
i1 j1 ,i2 j2

(ie2
i2j1i1j2(ie0)
ad(k, k + q)
+i1j1i2j2(i)scb(p + q, p)is(q)(i)sad(k, k + q)
+i1j1i2j2(i)p cb(p + q, p)ip (q)(i)p ad(k, k + q),
where the labels is and js are avor labels (a, b, c, d are spinor labels).

(k, p, p + q) =
cb(p + q, p)id(q)(ie0)

(65)

as a result of the chiral symmetry the contributions of four-fermion interactions, which
are represented by  and  exchanges, exhibit two distinct features depending on whether
they are incorporated in sdes describing quantities connected with so-called zero-spin struc-
tures8 (e.g. the dynamical mass , the yukawa vertices s, p , and the  and  propagators

8such structures are characterized by spinor matrices which commute with the 5 matrix.

16

s, p ), or whether the exchanges are included in sdes describing nonzero-spin structures
(anti-commuting with 5) (e.g. the vacuum polarization , the photon-fermion vertex ,
and the fermion wave function z = z2). henceforth, we refer to (non)zero-spin functions,
and their equations as (non)zero-spin channels.

the chiral symmetry gives rise to the following properties:

1. in spin-zero-channels, the contribution of planar diagrams (i.e. planar in  and 
exchanges) vanishes due to the fact that the exchange of a  has an opposite sign
with respect to a  exchange. why? let us consider a planar contribution to the
scalar vacuum polarization which contains (amongst others) a  exchange. both 5
matrices corresponding to this particular planar  exchange can be eliminated from
the fermion trace of the scalar vacuum polarization by moving them to the right-hand
side of the trace. for planar diagrams such a process involves the interchange of the
5 matrix with an even number of fermion propagators, and an arbitrary number of
yukawa vertices. since the yukawa vertices commute with the 5 matrix, and 5 anti-
commutes with the fermion propagator9 s, the process of moving the 5 to the right
does not introduce an overall minus sign. now using that (i5)(i5) = (1)(1), we see
that the diagram containing a specic planar  exchange is identical to minus the same
diagram with the  exchange replaced by a  exchange. since each diagram containing
a  exchange has a scalar counter part (i.e. an analogous diagram with a  instead of
a  exchange), the sum of all planar diagrams, with a particular number of exchanges,
vanishes. thus in channels with spin-zero matrix structures (i.e. channels which
correspond to vertices which commute with 5) scalar forces appear to be opposite to
pseudoscalar forces.

2. in nonzero-spin channels (think of , , etc.) containing vertices which anti-commute
with the 5 matrix, the situation is dierent: planar  and  exchanges contribute
with identical sign. let us now consider a planar contribution to the (photon) vacuum
polarization containing a  exchange. if we again move the 5 matrices to the right-
hand side of the trace, we get an overall minus sign due to the anti-commutation of 5
with . this means that any planar diagram in the vacuum polarization containing
a  exchange is identical to the same diagram with the  exchange replaced by a 
exchange. hence, in channels connected with spin structures anti-commuting with 5,
 and  exchanges behave identical. in other words, in such channels, pseudoscalar
and scalar forces act in the same direction (instead of canceling).

the properties described above are, strictly speaking, only valid in the symmetric (massless)
phase, where the (2n 2)  and  bosons are degenerate. however, in the broken phase,
the properties are valid whenever momenta larger than the dynamical mass  or m are
considered, because then the degeneracy emerges too.

these properties also provide us with a general argument why the mean-eld approach
for four-fermion operators for green functions corresponding to spin-zero channels (e.g.

9in the symmetric phase 5s = s5.

17

s and s) is reliable. for such channels planar contributions vanish and the next non-
vanishing contributions (such as contributions containing crossed  and  exchanges) are
proportional to 1/n, thus small for large n. this implies that quantities such as the critical
curve, dynamical mass, anomalous dimensions etc., are nearly independent of n, and are
described rather well by the mean-eld approach.

however, such a cancellation of scalars against pseudoscalars degrees of freedom does not
occur in nonzero-spin channels, such as the vacuum polarization . in the vacuum polar-
ization it turns out that  and  exchanges are attractive and virtual fermionanti-fermion
pairs from vacuum uctuations are constrained by these forces, reducing their capability to
screen.

b. the fermion wave function

the inclusion of relevant four-fermion interactions beyond the mean-eld approach re-

quires a reinvestigation of the sde for the fermion wave function z = z2 (eq. (10)),

s(p) = z(p2)
p  (p2)

,

(66)

with s the fermion propagator and  the dynamical mass. in qed in the quenched-ladder
approximation, the fermion wave function has a gauge dependent anomalous dimension. in
the landau gauge, this anomalous dimension vanishes and the fermion wave function equals
one (z = 1). we conjecture that the inclusion of relevant four-fermion interactions does
not introduce an anomalous dimension for the fermion wave function other than already
introduced by the gauge interactions. thus, in the landau gauge, the wave function z is
nite though it might deviate from unity. the argument in support of the conjecture stated
above is that only one full yukawa vertex appears in the self-energy part, which means
that anomalous dimensions of four-fermion interactions are not canceled. only two fully
dressed yukawa vertices and a fully dressed scalar composite are rg invariant (anomalous
dimensions cancel!).

the consequence is that a remnant power of the cuto (related to anomalous dimension
of a yukawa vertex) lowers the degree of divergence of the self-energy part from a logarithmic
divergence to a nite integral. the question is how to compute the nite correction to z.
the problem of the self-energy sdes lies in regulating it. in case of the fermion-loops
appearing in vacuum polarizations it is possible to introduce pauli-villars elds which will
regulate the fermion loops. however an additional regularization and elds are needed in
order to regulate self-energy parts of the fermion, especially the wave function, since the
sde is naively linearly divergent, and shifts in momentum integration variables are tricky.
a momentum shift invariant regularization is by no means trivial to implement. at the
moment we do not know how to properly regularize the sde for z, and how to compute a
possible deviation of z from unity in the landau gauge.
we believe that the conjecture holds irrespectively of the regularization method. there-
fore throughout this paper we assume z = 1. eventually, a deviation from unity might
change the results presented here quantitatively, although this is not expected, since we
will use a nonperturbative method introduced by johnson, willey, and baker [63], which is

18

independent of z. the nice feature of the assumption that z = 1 is that with the gauge
interaction treated in the quenched-ladder approach the chiral and vector wardtakahashi
identities are preserved, since in channels with spin-zero the planar  and  exchanges cancel
each other.

v. the 1/n expansion

the 1/n expansion of t hooft (see refs. [62,64]) provides us with a useful nonpertur-
bative tool to incorporate four-fermion interactions beyond the mean-eld approach. as
mentioned previously, the 1/n expansion states that the planar (i.e. ladder) diagrams, with
fermions at the edges, describe the leading or dominant contributions to green functions.
the interesting feature of the 1/n expansion is that feynman diagrams can be classied in
terms of two-dimensional surfaces with specic topology. diagrams with other (than planar)
topological structures are multiplied by factors of 1/n, and in the limit of large n, their
contribution can be neglected with respect to planar graphs. one important rule is to draw
feynman graphs with fermion loops forming the boundary of the graph (if possible). in this
way, vertex corrections are not necessarily classied as being planar.

in the context of the 1/n expansion of t hooft [62], we should consider internal or
virtual  and  exchanges analogous to the gluon exchanges with the important dierence
that due to the chiral symmetry we have two types of particles both being in the adjoint
representation (n 2 scalars and n 2 pseudoscalars).

suppose we can dene an eective yukawa coupling gy describing the interaction of
scalars and pseudoscalar with fermions. for the time being we leave unspecied such a
coupling. let us consider n large with g2

y n is xed and of order one

g2
y n  o(1).

(67)

if the theory under consideration is rewritten in terms of the coupling constant g2
a 1/n expansion can be formulated straightforwardly.

n  g2

y n,

then, by keeping track of the avor indices within a particular feynman diagram, we
can count factors of 1/n. each fermion carries a avor index (i), which runs from 1 to
n. a virtual ,  exchange carries two avor indices. this follows from eq. (64) and
the fierz identity (8). each virtual ,  exchange is associated with two yukawa vertices,
therefore giving rise to a pair of kronecker delta functions connecting the avor indices of the
scattered fermions. in the context of avor indices, either a  or  boson can be considered
as a propagating fermionanti-fermion pair carrying double avor indices.

whenever a trace over a avor kronecker delta function enters into the expression for a
particular feynman diagram, we speak of an index loop. an index loop is easily identied
by using the double-line representation of t hooft. a fermion propagator is represented by a
single index-line (i.e. fermion line), whereas each internal scalar, respectively, pseudoscalar
propagator is represented by a double index-line. consequently, whenever, after drawing a
particular feynman diagram, an index-line closes, it forms an index loop giving rise to a
factor

n = tr  =

ii.

n

xi=1

19

(68)

a particular feynman diagram containing a number of virtual  and  exchanges is associ-
ated with a factor

r = gv

y n i,

(69)

where v is the number of yukawa vertices, and i the number of index loops. the factor r
can be written as

r = (g2

y n)v /2n  = gv

n n ,

where the euler characteristic  is given by

 = 2  2h  b,

(70)

(71)

with h the number of handles, and b the number of holes of the two dimensional
surface to which the feynman diagram can be associated. the euler characteristic 10 is
a topological invariant. for instance, the vacuum polarization has the topology of a sphere
with a single hole (i.e. a disk), where the fermion-loop forms the boundary (i.e. hole) of
the graph. thus planar diagrams in the vacuum polarization with n exchanges of s and
s are associated with a factor

r = n(g2

y n)n.

(72)

other types of diagrams, e.g. diagrams with one crossed , respectively,  exchange have
the topology of a disk with a handle, hence giving rise to a factor

r = n 1(g2

y n)2.

(73)

however, the sum of such type of vacuum polarization diagrams is zero due to the chiral
symmetry.

since planar diagrams vanish in spin-zero channels such as the sde for the dynamical
mass, the rst nonzero contribution is given by diagrams with crossed  and  exchanges,
and vertex corrections. those type of diagrams have one extra handle as compared with
planar graphs. therefore in zero-spin channels, we should compare e.g. graphs with a single
handle with the gauge interaction in the planar (ladder) approximation. furthermore, each
y , and since gy is small because of the assumption (67), g4
handle correspond to a factor g4
y
should be compared with the gauge coupling 0. then, if the following inequality holds

0  2

y /,

y = g2

y /4,

(74)

the gauge interaction dominates over four-fermion interactions, and we have an argument
supporting the validity of the mean-eld approach in such channels.

10not to be confused with the chiral susceptibility (21).

20

vi. scalars, pseudoscalars, and charge screening

since, in the gnjl model, the scalars and pseudoscalars are neutral states which there-
fore do not couple to the photon eld, their contribution to the vacuum polarization is
described indirectly in terms of photon-fermion vertex corrections, and fermion self-energy
corrections. hence, in order to gain some intuition for the role of scalar degrees of freedom
on the mechanism of charge screening, we analyze the two-loop contribution arising from 
and  exchanges to the vacuum polarization.

let us consider a gaugehiggsyukawa type of interaction described by the lagrangian

lghy = 

1
4

1
2

1
2

ff  + i +

()2 +

()2

 e0 a  gy ( + i5)  v (, ),

(75)

where the potential v contains e.g. mass terms, and a 4 type of interaction (i.e. a quartic
scalar interaction). for simplicity, we take n = 1, and we ignore the eect of the potential
v .

the lagrangian lghy gives rise to the following bare or free propagators for the scalar

and pseudoscalar bosons:

p (p) = s(p) =

1
p2 .

(76)

in appendix e of ref. [25], the two-loop contribution has been computed for the special
if the scalar and pseudoscalar elds in eq. (75) are both in the adjoint

case of n = 1.
representation of u(n), the result, for arbitrary n, reads

 [/, 0, y ] 

n0

   2

3

+

0
2 

ny

2 ! ln




+ (0/)o(1),

with y = g2

y /4. the  function corresponding to such a vacuum polarization is

(0, y ) =

n2
0

   2

3

+

0
2 

ny

2 ! .

(77)

(78)

the interesting result of this computation is dierence in sign between terms corresponding
to photon exchanges, and terms corresponding to (pseudo)scalar exchanges. furthermore,
we might be tempted to conclude that a nontrivial root of eq. (78) could be realized whenever
ny /2  2/3. however, the complete situation is more involved. the rg equation for
e.g. y should be considered too, i.e. we should compute the  functions of y , and of
any quartic scalar coupling. if and only if a nontrivial (nonzero) uv stable xed point for
y exists, the realization of a zero of eq. (78) becomes a realistic option. in other words,
such a scenario is only possible if the yukawa interaction y is nontrivial. the discussion in
sec. iii implies that in order to obtain a nontrivial yukawa coupling, the hyperscaling laws
should be obeyed.

in this context, we mention that the renormalization of gauge-higgs-yukawa models,
with a non-abelian gauge interaction, has been considered extensively in ref. [65].
in
that paper, it was shown that special nontrivial cases of gauge-higgs-yukawa models are

21

equivalent to gnjl models with non-abelian (asymptotically free) gauge interaction (see
also ref. [66]), hence proving the renormalizability of non-abelian gnjl models.

moreover, in appendix e of ref. [25] it is shown explicitly that when gauge-invariant
four-fermion interactions are treated perturbatively (thus their anomalous dimensions are
small), they do not contribute to the vacuum polarization, and consequently to .
in
fact, the conclusion can be drawn beforehand, since the rg of wilson states that irrelevant
interactions cannot aect low-energy eective quantities.

summarizing, we have illustrated that fundamental scalars and pseudoscalars in a gauge-
higgs-yukawa system tend to decrease charge screening. on the other hand, perturbatively
irrelevant four-fermion interaction do not contribute to the vacuum polarization. the idea is
that, nonperturbatively, close to the critical curve in the gnjl model, the scalar and pseu-
doscalar yukawa interactions are nontrivial, and kinetic terms for the scalar and pseudoscalar
composites are eectively induced via the appearance of a large anomalous dimension.

vii. the vacuum polarization in the 1/n expansion

in case of the abelian gnjl model the gauge coupling () in the infrared (ir) region

is related to the bare gauge coupling 0 via the rg transformation

() = r [/, 0, g0] ,

r [/, 0, g0] =

0

1 +  [/, 0, g0]

,

(79)

where the four-fermion interactions contribute to the vacuum polarization  (fig. 1) through
the full photon fermion vertex, see fig. 6. the vacuum polarization is

 [/, 0, g0] = f (0, g0) ln




+ o(1) + o ((/)) ,

  ,

(80)

with  > 0. the vacuum polarization contains only a single power of ln . higher powers
of ln , which correspond to a higher number of fermion-loops, are absent. as was pointed
out previously (e.g. sec. vi), only relevant and marginal interactions can contribute to the
function f , since by denition the eect of an irrelevant coupling is suppressed by positive
powers of / in the infrared region   .

the  function (12) at () is

((), g())  

d()

d

.

since the bare coupling is independent of , we have the identity

(0, g0) = lim




d()

d

= 0f (0, g0).

(81)

(82)

thus the function f is proportional to the  function, clearly the  function has a gaussian
or trivial xed point at 0 = 0.

the form for  in eq. (80) is supposed to be valid close to an uv stable xed point, since
we have neglected vacuum polarization corrections to internal photon propagators. such a
quenching of internal photon propagators is self-consistent close to an uv stable xed point.

22

therefore we assume that (0, g0) is ne-tuned suciently close to its critical value (, g)
so that

f (0, g0) ln


  1.

now in correspondence with eq. (19) we search for uv stable roots of

(0, gc) = 0f (0, gc).

(83)

(84)

in case of pure qed (without four-fermion coupling) the function f has been studied
thoroughly by johnson et al. in refs. [63,67,68] and by adler [69] in the context of massless
qed, these authors write (according to ref. [63])

f (0) =

n0

 (cid:20)2

3

+ (0)(cid:21) ,

(85)

where the term with the 2/3 is the one-loop vacuum polarization. johnson et al. derived
an expression for (0) in terms of the bs kernel k (2) (sec. iv a) as the single unknown
green function.

we mention that, although the strong belief of johnson et al. in the possible existence
of an uv stable xed point for 0, might seem poorly motivated from the point of view
of wilsons rg methods (see ref [5])11, their methods and techniques are still valid and
directly applicable to the gnjl model.

taking now into account also relevant four-fermion interactions at g0 = gc, we can derive

in analogy with ref. [63] that

(0, gc) =

1 + 2(2 + 2)

1  1

+ 3,

where the functions j are similar to the functions fj dened in ref. [63], with

1(0, gc)  xavors 

ie2
0

48 z

d4p
(2)4

 tr"( p   p)

2p4

k (2)(p, k)(

k  

k)# ,

ie2
0

48 z
2(0, gc)  xavors 
48 z
3(0, gc)  xavors

ie2
0

d4p

(2)4 tr" p p
(2)4 tr" p p

d4p

p4 k (2)(p, k)(k  k)# ,
p4 k (2)

(p, k)kk# ,



(86)

(87)

(88)

(89)

where

11johnson et al. dont explain the dynamical origin of the singular critical behavior (the chiral
phase transition), which would be required for the realization of an uv stable xed point in qed.

23




q
2

k (2)(p, k) 
k (2)

k (2)(p, k)  k (2)(p, p + q, k + q)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)q=0
k (2)(p, p + q, k + q)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)q=0
k (2)(p, p + q, k + q)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)q=0
+ 3# .

n2
0

 " 2

1 + 2(2 + 2)

(p, k) 

qq

+

3

(0, gc) =

,

.

in appendix f of ref. [25] a derivation of the functions j is reviewed.

then, eqs. (82), (85), and (86) give rise to the following  function:

,

1  1

(90)

(91)

(92)

(93)

as was pointed out in section v, the 1/n expansion states that the planar diagrams
for the  and  exchanges are dominant. the approximation for the bs kernel k (2), which
generates the entire set of planar scalar and pseudoscalar skeleton diagrams including ladder
gauge boson exchanges for the vacuum polarization is the following: the bs kernel k (2) is
approximated by its lowest order skeleton graph, i.e.,

k (2)

cd,ab
kl,ij

(p, p + q, k + q) =

ilkj

0 (cid:20)scb(k + q, p + q)s(k  p)sad(p, k)

e2

+ p cb(k + q, p + q)p (k  p)p ad(p, k)(cid:21)
+ ijkl

ad

cbd(k  p).

(94)

in the symmetric phase, the decomposition of the scalar yukawa vertex s is given by

eq. (26). furthermore, due to chiral symmetry, we have the identities

(i5)s(k, p) = p (k, p),

s(q) = p (q),

(95)

the  and  propagators are degenerate. secondly, it was shown in ref. [30] that the structure
function f2 is rather small compared to the leading structure function f1. (it is assumed that
f1 describes the leading asymptotic behavior of the yukawa vertices). therefore, we neglect
contributions related to the scalar structure function f2. although it might be possible that
the contribution coming from gauge interactions is smaller, than corrections resulting from
this structure function f2, we keep the gauge interaction in order to compare with results
mentioned in the literature. thus, we take for k (2)

k (2)

cd,ab
kl,ij

(p, p + q, k + q) 

ilkj

e2
0

f1(k + q, p + q)f1(p, k)s(k  p)

 [1ad1cb + i5adi5cb]
+ ijkld(k  p)
ad
cb.

(96)

with this truncation for the bs kernel k (2), we can actually compute the j functions
(87)(89), and subsequently analyze the  function (93). the truncation (96) generates an
innite series of planar contributions to the vacuum polarization as the leading order in
1/n, see fig. 7. we recall that, in the vacuum polarization, the scalars and pseudoscalars
give the same contribution in the functions j. moreover the sum over avor indices yields a
factor of n in the expressions for j for contributions corresponding to  and  exchanges.

24

viii. computation of the  function

in computing the functions 1, 2, and 3, we initially neglect the ladder photon exchange
given in eq. (96). since such contributions were already computed in ref. [63], it will be
rather easy to include them later in the analysis.

it is straightforward to show that, within the proposed approximations, 2 vanishes.

using eq. (96), we obtain that

trhp pk (p, k)(k  k)i  trhp p(k  k)i = 0.

thus,

eq. (87) for 1 reads

2(0, gc) = 0.

1(0, gc) = 2niz

d4p
(2)4

(p + k)  k
(p + k)4 [f1(k + p, k)]2s(p),

(97)

(98)

(99)

where we have performed a harmless12 shift of integration, and used the fact that f1 is
symmetric in the fermion momenta, f1(p, k) = f1(k, p), because of charge conjugation. the
factor n results from the trace of the avor kronecker  function, i.e. an index line which
closes, see sec. v. after a wick rotation

1(0, gc) =

n
82

2

z0

dp2 z dp

22

p2(p  k + k2)

(p + k)4

[f1(k + p, k)]2s(p).

(100)

since the integrals for the functions j are nite, the cuto can be taken to innity (the

continuum limit). this can be written as

lim


1(0, gc)  n



z0

du g1(u) + o ((k/)2) ,

(101)

where 2 is some positive power, u = p2/k2, and

g1(p2/k2)   lim



1

82 z dp

22

k2p2(k  p + k2)

(k + p)4

[f1(k + p, k)]2s(p).

(102)

the function g1 is dened with a minus sign to make it a positive function, as will be shown
to be the case later. the angular integral can be performed if we make use of the following
chebyshev expansion

k2(k  p + k2)

(k + p)4 =



xn=0

cn(k2, p2)un(cos ),

cos  =

k  p
kp

,

(103)

12the integral is naively logarithmically divergent (in fact it is nite), therefore translationally
invariant.

25

where

cn(k2, p2) =

cn(k2, p2) =

2


z0
(1)n



2

(104)

(105)

d sin2  un(cos )

k2(k  p + k2)

(k + p)4

,


k(cid:19)n
(2 + n)(k2  p2)(cid:18) p

 n(p2  k2) k

p!n+2
 .

the chebyshev expansion for the function f1 was already introduced in eq. (27) (and [30]).
thus, following analogous derivations in the appendix of ref. [30], the function g1 can be
expressed as

g1(p2/k2) =  lim



p2s(p)

82



xl,m,n=0

clmn cl(k2, p2)fm(k2, p2)fn(k2, p2),

(106)

where the fully symmetric index clmn satises

clmn = 1  l + m + n = even,

clmn = 0  l + m + n = odd.

(107)

we approximate g1 by keeping only the lowest order term in the chebyshev expansion,

g1(p2/k2)   lim



p2s(p)

82

c0(k2, p2)hf0(k2, p2)i2

,

(108)

where f0 is decomposed into the two channel functions fuv and fir, see eq. (30). then,
the asymptotics, k2  p2, respectively, p2  k2, of g1 are well approximated by the lowest
order chebyshev term (108). again, this is the two channel approximation for the yukawa
vertices [30]. however for momenta k2  p2 the channel approximation is not necessarily
valid. so, how about g1(1)? since, from the appendix of refs. [30,25], it follows that the
chebyshev coecients

f2n(k2, p2)  0,

f2n+1(k2, p2)  0,

and from eq. (105) that

cn(k2, k2) =

(1)n

2

 c2n(k2, k2)  0,

c2n+1(k2, k2)  0.

hence, by using eq. (107), we conclude that all terms of the series



xl,m,n=0

clmn cl(k2, k2)fm(k2, k2)fn(k2, k2)

(109)

(110)

(111)

of g1 are positive, and the lowest order term gives a lower bound on the series,

c0(k2, k2)hf0(k2, k2)i2





xl,m,n=0

clmncl(k2, k2)fm(k2, k2)fn(k2, k2).

(112)

therefore, the approximation eq. (108) is reliable for the asymptotics k2  p2, and p2 
k2. moreover, eq. (108) is a lower bound on eq. (106) at k2 = p2, so that at least we

26

wont overestimate the contribution of scalar and pseudoscalar composites to the vacuum
polarization.

the function g1 can now be computed, since f0 is expressed in terms of the channel

functions fuv and fir of eq. (30). furthermore, from eq. (105) we see that

c0(k2, p2) = (k2  p2),

(113)

and the only nonzero contribution to g1 of eq. (108) comes from the momenta k2  p2.
thus, using eqs. (108), (30), and (113), we nd

g1(p2/k2)   lim



p2s(p)

82

[fuv(k2, p2)]2(k2  p2).

(114)

the ultraviolet channel function fuv is proportional to the factor z 1(p2/2, ), eq. (35),
and the scalar propagator is proportional to z 2. thus the z factors in eq. (114) cancel as
was expected and the angular integral eq. (102) can indeed be written in terms of a function
which depends only on the ratio of p2/k2.

the scaling form (p2  2) for the scalar propagator s(p) at g0 = gc is given by
eq. (39). the scaling form for the channel function fuv(k2, p2) is given by eqs. (53) and
(55), with p2  k2  2. inserting eqs. (39), (53), and (55) in (114), we obtain for g1

g1(u) =

(2  )(2 + )
8()()
 u(cid:20)()i(cid:18)q20u(cid:19)  ()i(cid:18)q20u(cid:19)(cid:21)2

(1  u),

where u = p2/k2. thus eq. (101) is

where

lim


1(0, gc)  n1(0),

1(0) =

1

z0

du g1(u)  0.

(115)

(116)

(117)

the function g1 is positive, hence 1 is negative. the integral over the function g1 can be
done explicitly by making use of the integral identity 2.15.19.1 in volume 2 of prudnikov et
al. [70]. the result is

1(0) =

1


0

2 (

1

(2 + )

2 !
(1 + )()   0
(1  )()

1

(1 + )()

 2f3 (2 + , 1/2 + ; 3 + , 1 + 2, 1 + ; 20)
 2f3 (2, 1/2; 3, 1 + , 1  ; 20)
2 !
(1  )()   0
+

(2  )
 2f3 (2  , 1/2  ; 3  , 1  2, 1  ; 20)).

27

(118)

the above analysis of the function 1 is repeated for the function 3. the second

derivative of the bs kernel, k 

 (p, k) of eq. (96), is

k 
 (p, k)  lim

q0

2

qq

f1(k + q, p + q).

the sde for f1 (in quenched-ladder approximation, see fig. 3) is given by

f1(k + q, p + q) = 1  i0z

d4r
2

(r2 + (k  p)  r)

r2(r + k  p)2(r  p  q)2 f1(r + k  p, r),

where we recall that we neglect the vertex function f2. thus

lim
q0

2

qq

f1(k + q, p + q) = i0z

d4r
2

(r2 + (k  p)  r)
r2(r + k  p)2 f1(r + k  p, r)
(r  p  q)2 .

1

2

qq

by making use of the identity

 lim

q0

(119)

(120)

(121)

(122)

(123)


q


q

1
q2 = 42i4(q),

we obtain

k 

 cd,ab
kl,ij

(p, k) =

ilkj

0  40

e2

p2k2! [f1(p, k)]2 s(p  k) [1ad1cb + i5adi5cb] ,
p  k

in minkowsky formulation. inserting the above expression in eq. (89) the equation for 3(0)
takes the form

3(0, gc) = 

0


n
82

2

z0

dp2 z dp

22

p2
k2

(p  k + k2)3
(p + k)6

[f1(k + p, k)]2s(p).

(124)

then

lim


3(0, gc)  n



z0

du g3(u) + o ((k/)3) ,

(125)

where u = p2/k2, 3 > 0, and

g3(p2/k2)  lim



0


1

82 z dp

22

p2(k  p + k2)3

(k + p)6

[f1(k + p, k)]2s(p).

(126)

we use the following chebyshev expansion

(k  p + k2)3
(k + p)6 =



xn=0

dn(k2, p2)un(cos ),

cos  =

k  p
kp

,

(127)

where

28



(p  k + k2)3
(p + k)6

,

2


3p2

dn(k2, p2) =

d sin2  un(cos )

z0
4k2! (k2  p2),
d0(k2, p2) =  1 
(1)n
8 (n + 1 +"6 +
xl=0
8 (n + 1 "n1
(1)n
(2  l)# 1 
xl=0
n  1.

dn(k2, p2) =



n1

(4 + l)# 1 

p2

k2!) (k2  p2)(cid:18) p
k(cid:19)n
p!n
p2!) (p2  k2) k

k2

,

(128)

(129)

(130)

the function g3 can be expressed as

g3(p2/k2) = lim



0


p2s(p)

82



xl,m,n=0

clmn dl(k2, p2)fm(k2, p2)fn(k2, p2).

(131)

we also approximate g3 by keeping only the lowest order term in the chebyshev expansion,

g3(p2/k2)  lim



0


p2s(p)

82

d0(k2, p2)hf0(k2, p2)i2

.

(132)

then, again the asymptotics, k2  p2, respectively, p2  k2, of g3 are well approximated
by the lowest order chebyshev term. moreover, for momenta k2 = p2 the approximation
eq. (132) is exact, since

dn(k2, k2) = 0,

 n  1.

(133)

therefore, the approximation eq. (132) is even better than the analogous approximation,
eq. (108), to g1. furthermore, from eq. (129) we see that the only nonzero contributions
to g3 of eq. (132) are given by momenta k2  p2. thus, using eqs. (132), (30), and (129),
we nd

g3(p2/k2)  lim



0

  1 

3p2

4k2! p2s(p)

82

[fuv(k2, p2)]2(k2  p2).

(134)

substituting eqs. (39), (53) and (55) in eq. (134), we obtain for g3

g3(u) =

0

3u

4 (cid:19) (2  )(2 + )
8()()

 (cid:18)1 
 u(cid:20)()i(cid:18)q20u(cid:19)  ()i(cid:18)q20u(cid:19)(cid:21)2

where u = p2/k2. thus eq. (125) is

where

lim


3(0, gc)  n3(0),

29

(1  u),

(135)

(136)

3(0) =

1

z0

du g3(u)  0.

(137)

the function 3 is positive, and can be computed in the same way as 1. the result is

3(0) =

0


[1(0)   (0)] ,

where

 (0) =

3
4

0

2 (

1

(3 + )

2 !
(1 + )()   0
(1  )()

 2f3 (3 + , 1/2 + ; 4 + , 1 + 2, 1 + ; 20)


2
3 2f3 (3, 1/2; 4, 1 + , 1  ; 20)
2 !

(1  )()   0

(3  )
 2f3 (3  , 1/2  ; 4  , 1  2, 1  ; 20)).

1

(1 + )()

+

(138)

(139)

in the computation of the functions 1, 2, and 3 the ladder (planar) photon exchanges
have been neglected. after reinstating the ladder photon exchange term of eq. (96), we
obtain, together with eqs. (116) and (136), that

1(0, gc) =

0
2  n1(0), 2(0, gc) = 0, 3(0, gc) = n3(0).

(140)

the ladder photon exchange only contributes to 1, see again [63]. after substitution of
eq. (140) in eq. (93), the  function reads

(0, gc) =

n2
0

 " 2

3

+

0/2  n1(0)
1  0/2 + n1(0)

+ n3(0)# ,

(141)

where explicit expressions for 1 and 3 are given by eq. (118) and eqs. (138), (139).

ix. uv stable fixed points

let us start analyzing eq. (141) by rst considering the properties of the functions
1(0) and 3(0). these functions have been plotted versus 0/c in fig. 8. firstly, it
is clear that the 1 and 3, are positive, and have a maximum at some intermediate value
of 0 < 0 < c = /3. for instance, 1 has a maximum 1  0.123 at 0/c  0.58
(  0.65). secondly, the functions 1 and 3 vanish at the pure njl point 0 = 0, and at
the cpt point 0 = c. at 0 = 0, we can consider this is as a reection of the fact that
hyperscaling breaks down due to logarithmic corrections; the eective yukawa coupling
is trivial, therefore vanishes. at 0 = c, where the critical exponents become singular, the
vanishing of 1 and 3 is related to the dynamics of the conformal phase transition (cpt),

30

which has been thoroughly discussed in ref. [41]. there are no light  and  exchanges in the
symmetric phase which consequently implies the absence of eective yukawa interactions.13
let us illustrate this by comparing the  function (141) with the  function (78) of the
gaugehiggsyukawa model (75) in the 1/n expansion. then, the entire set of planar 
and  exchanges is generated by the kernel

k (2)

cd,ab
kl,ij

g2
y
e2
0

s(k  p) [1ad1cb + i5adi5cb] ,

(142)

(p, p + q, k + q)  ilkj
1

s(k  p) =

(k  p)2 .

with such a kernel, 2 and 3 are zero, because the right-hand side of eq. (142) does not
depend on the momentum q. the equation for 1 reads

1 = 2ng2

y iz

d4p
(2)4

p  k
p4

1

(p  k)2 .

after a standard wick rotation, the integral can be performed in the standard way:

1 = 

= 

2

ny
2

z0
4 


ny

22

dp2 z dp
dp2 1
z0

k2 +

k2

1

p  k
p2

(p  k)2
p4
dp2 k2


2

zk2

ny

4 "2 

k2

2# .

= 

then, taking the cuto to innity, we obtain

1(y ) = 

ny
2

.

again we introduce the ladder photon exchanges by the replacement

1(y )  1(0, y ) =

0
2 

ny
2

.

hence, in this case, the  function is

(0, y ) =

n2
0

 " 2

3

+

1  0/2 + ny /2# .
0/2  ny /2

(143)

(144)

(145)

(146)

(147)

comparing the  functions (141) and (147) leads to the suggestion that 1(0) is analogous
to the yukawa coupling y in a gauge-higgs-yukawa model,

1(0) 

y
2

.

(148)

13moreover at the cpt point four-fermion interaction are marginal instead of relevant, and start
to mix with the gauge interaction, hence the analysis becomes considerably more complicated.

31

this is a crucial point. the general consensus is that for a gauge-higgs-yukawa model
the yukawa interaction y is trivial, thus y  0 in eq. (147). however, the situation is
essentially dierent for 1 in the gnjl model. there the eective coupling 1 is formed by
the exchange of  and  bosons, with the yukawa vertices, and (pseudo)scalar propagators
fully dressed (i.e. the skeleton expansion). the cancellation of the z factors, see sec. iii,
which is related to the fact that the hyperscaling equations are satised, gives rise to a nite
nonzero 1(0) at the critical curve (g0 = gc) for 0 < 0 < c. the other nonzero function
3 results from taking into account fully dressed yukawa vertices.

let us now the discuss the possible existence of uv stable xed points. a necessary but
not a sucient condition for the realization of an uv stable xed point is that n1 has to
be larger than both n3 and 0/2, and n1  o(1). for large n, the contribution of the
planar photon exchanges (represented by the 0/2 terms) is negligible with respect to n1
and n3. moreover fig. 8 shows, for 0 small, that 1 is considerably larger than 3. this
means that only for avors n larger than some critical value nc uv stable xed points can
be obtained.

by substituting the expressions (118) and (138) for 1 and 3 in eq. (141), we can
straightforwardly analyze the  function graphically. in fig. 9 the  function is plotted for
various values of n. fig. 9 shows that for values of n > nc, with 55 > nc > 54, uv stable
xed points exists, the largest being   0.13,

n = 55 :
n = 60 :

 (0.13, gc(0.13))  0,
 (0.1, gc(0.1))  0.

(149)
(150)

the general pattern is clear; the larger n, with n > nc, the smaller will be the uv stable
xed point. moreover, fig. 9 shows that the uv stable xed points are rst order zeros of
, and clearly satisfy eq. (16).

since we have made use of results obtained in the quenched approximation, we mention
that the plots of the  function are (at the most) reliable at or in the vicinity of the uv
stable xed points at which the quenched approach is self consistent.

in fig. 10, the case of n = 60 fermion avors is compared with the one-loop  function
of qed. for very small values of 0 < 1/100 indeed the one-loop qed result coincides with
that of the gnjl model, however for larger values of 0 the  function (141) deviates from
the one-loop expression, and eventually an uv stable xed point is realized at   0.1.

the analysis shows that a rather large number of avors,

n > nc  54,

(151)

is required to obtain uv stable xed points. from the point of view of the 1/n expansion
this seems a consistent result, since other than planar contributions are suppressed by at
least factors of (say) 1/nc. however, from the phenomenological point of view, the result is
unsatisfactory, since it implies that the unquenched abelian gnjl model (exhibiting uv
stable xed points) is only practically applicable for models which have at least nc fermion
avors (fractions rounded up). therefore, it is appropriate to discuss how nc depends on
the approximation.

firstly, we stress that the second term on the right-hand side in eq. (141) containing
the 1 function causes the suppression of charge screening and is responsible for the possible

32

realization of an uv stable xed point. the denominator in the second term is a direct
consequence of the resummation of the innite ladder  and  exchanges, and it is mainly
due to this denominator 1 + n1 that the critical number of fermion avors nc is large.

secondly, the existence of an uv stable xed point for a specic number of fermion avors
n depends on the interplay between the functions 1 and 3, which are given in terms of
integrals of the functions g1 and g3. let us recall that the lowest order chebyshev expansion
for g1, eq. (108) is a lower bound on g1 of eq. (106), since all terms of the chebyshev
expansion are positive at k2 = p2, the same cannot be said about the approximation (132)
for g3. thus keeping more terms in the chebyshev expansion leads to an increase of 1,
whereas the eect on 3 is less clear, because of the alternating chebyshev series for 3.
therefore, an improvement of the computation of 1 will most likely lead to a decrease of
the critical avor number nc.

moreover in the computation of the functions 1 and 3 we have used yukawa vertices (s)
and  and  propagators (s) which were obtained in the quenched-ladder approximation.
it is an interesting question, whether the improvement of the ladder approximation for the
gauge interaction (e.g. by including crossed photon exchanges) leads to a increase of 1, and
thus a decrease of nc.

finally, we recall that we have neglected the eect of the yukawa vertex function f2
(eq. (26)), but clearly the inclusion of f2 in the analysis could change the results quantita-
tively. whether such an improvement will tend to increase or decrease nc remains unclear
at this stage.

a. close to the njl point

let us analyze the interplay between 1 and 3 in more detail close to the pure njl point
(0 = 0) by expanding these functions in 0. the computation of the lowest order terms in
0 of eqs. (118) and (138) is laborious but straightforward, therefore we mention just the
nal results:

1(0) 

30
2

+ o(2
0),

3(0) 

15
16

2
0
2 + o(3
0).

with these expansions in 0, the  function eq. (141) reads

(0, gc) =

n2
0

 "2
3 

2# .
let us write the  function in terms of the variable x  n0/c, then
n# .

(3n  1)0/2
1 + (3n  1)0/2

 "2
3 

(0, gc) =

x2

+

5
48

+ n

2
0

15
16

n2
0

(1  1/3n)x
2 + (1  1/3n)x

(152)

(153)

(154)

the equation for the zero of  is a third order equation, and an uv stable xed point is
given by the lowest positive root satisfying eq. (16). the equation is

4  (1  )x +

15
8

x2 +

15
16

(1  )x3 = 0,

1
3n

.

 

(155)

33

the expression for the relevant root is rather ugly. however, in the limit n   keeping x
xed, the solution is

x  (cid:20)4 +

94
3

1

n(cid:21) ,

n  ,

x = constant.

(156)

the critical number of avors nc, below which no uv stable xed point can be realized, is
given by the following expression

1
nc

=

3

64 (cid:20)2209 + 28557 q9505410 + 125913057(cid:21) = nc  45.42.

(157)

this nc is slightly smaller than the critical number nc  54, which was obtained graphically
from fig. 9. the value of the root x at this critical number nc is

x  6.32131 =   0.146.

(158)
summarizing, we nd, that for n > nc  45 uv stable xed points  ( < 0.146) are
obtained. moreover, with the identication eq. (148), y = g2
y /4 and the fact that 1 is
of order 0 the inequality (74) is satised for 0 suciently small.

x. conclusion

there is strong evidence that four-fermion interactions become relevant near the chiral
phase transition in gnjl models in four dimensions. at the chiral phase transition (e.g.
the critical curve given by eq. (5)) in the quenched gnjl model, the appearance of a large
anomalous dimension is believed to turn naively irrelevant interactions into relevant ones.
the main objective of this paper was to study the eect of such relevant four-fermion inter-
actions on the vacuum polarization of the gauge coupling and to reinvestigate the problem
of triviality for a particular abelian gnjl model with n fermion avors. to obtain new
results, the four-fermion interactions had to be taken into account beyond the commonly
used hartreefock or mean-eld approach.

the crucial feature of the gnjl model, within the quenched mean-eld approximation, is
that a nontrivial yukawa interaction (i.e. an interaction between composite (pseudo)scalars
and fermions) exists for 0 < 0 < c. the existence of such a nontrivial yukawa interaction
requires the cancellation of z factors14 in fermionanti-fermion scattering amplitudes such as
the bs kernel k (2), and is analogous to the requirement of hyperscaling (see sec. iii). if the
hyperscaling equations are satised, then only two of the critical exponents are independent,
namely  and , with

see eqs. (24) and (44). we recall that the anomalous dimension  is dened at the critical
point, whereas  describes scaling in the neighborhood of the critical point.15 the existence

(159)

 = 1,

 = 2(1  ),

 = q1  0/c,

14the z factor is the wave function renormalization constant of the  and  elds.

15these values of the critical exponents are in rather good agreement with lattice simulations,
and results obtained by nonperturbative rg techniques.

34

of hyperscaling relations between the critical exponents is intimately connected with the
existence of wardtakahashi identities (and thus the goldstone mechanism) arising from
the continuous symmetries of the model.

the skeleton expansion for the bs kernel k (2) provides a natural framework to take into
account the anomalous dimensions of yukawa vertices and  and  propagators. within
the skeleton expansion,  and  exchanges are described in terms of fully dressed yukawa
vertices and  and  propagators. the actual computation of the anomalous dimension,
and the resolution of the scaling form requires a solution of the sdes for yukawa vertices,
and  and  bosons.

in previous work such fully dressed yukawa vertices and  and  propagators have been
analized in the quenched-ladder mean-eld approximation, see ref. [30] and chapter 4 of
[25], and references therein. to make use of these results consistently, we used the following
approximations. firstly, we assumed that the bare coupling parameters are ne-tuned close
to the critical point, i.e. close to an uv stable xed point, at which g  0 and   0.
in that case, the quenched approximation is self-consistent. secondly, the gauge-interaction
is considered in the ladder form, with bare vertices. thirdly, we used the 1/n expansion
(with n the number of fermion avors) which states that planar  and  exchanges describe
the leading contribution to green functions for large n. then, due to the specic form
of the chiral symmetry with both scalars and pseudoscalar in the adjoint representation
of the ul(n)  ur(n) symmetry, we argued that in so-called zero-spin channels (such as
yukawa vertices and  and  propagators) the planar  and  exchanges cancel each other
for momenta larger than the inverse correlation length (in fact in the symmetric phase this
cancellation is exact). we recall that the inverse correlation length in the gnjl model is
the mass of the  boson, 1 = m. moreover, an important property of the planar (ladder)
approximations is that they respect the vector and chiral wardtakahashi identities.

the method of ref. [63], provides a nonperturbative framework independent of the
fermion wave function z, and allowed us to compute the contributions of the innite set of
planar  and  exchanges to the vacuum polarization. the result of the computations is
that the gnjl model exhibits an uv stable xed point, (, gc()) = 0, for any value of
n that exceeds some critical value nc (n > nc). this critical number of avors turned out
to be nc  54. the larger the number of fermion avors, the smaller the uv stable xed
point  will be, provided n > nc.
the large value for nc puts questions to the applicability of the gnjl. however, we have
given a few arguments in the previous section suggesting that nc could be rather sensitive
to approximations, and that an improvement of the approximations and calculations will
probably lead to a smaller value for nc.

the mechanism responsible for the realization of an uv stable xed point is illustrated by
the observation that contributions of planar  and  exchanges to the vacuum polarization
have identical sign, and tend to reduce screening. the four-fermion interactions describe
attractive forces between virtual fermionanti-fermion pairs in the vacuum polarization.

the conventional leading term in the vacuum polarization is the one-loop correction
describing the creation of fermionanti-fermion pairs. these virtual pairs can be considered
as dipoles causing the screening; the vacuum is a medium of the insulator type. such a
screening is proportional to the coupling 0 and proportional to the number of fermion
avors n. however, if a particular fraction of the total amount of fermionanti-fermion

35

pairs created are correlated by attractive four-fermion interactions, represented by  and 
exchanges, then clearly these composite neutral states are not capable of screening. thus
the negative term n1 in the  function (141) represents the contributions and the attractive
nature of four-fermion interactions in the vacuum polarization.

it is known that in the quenched approximation, the critical curve and critical exponents
are independent of the number of fermion avors. in the quenched-ladder approximation
using the mean-eld approach for the four-fermion interactions it is straightforward to derive
that this is indeed the case. clearly, the mechanism of charge screening is avor dependent,
since the total number of virtual fermionanti-fermion pairs is proportional to n and the
total number of composite scalars and pseudoscalars grows as 2n 2. the larger the number
of avors, the stronger the eect of four-fermion interactions. the xed point appears when
the virtual pairs completely loose the ability to screen.

the existence of an uv stable xed point implies a nontrivial continuum limit of the
abelian gnjl model. the analysis presented here suggest that in the full unquenched
gnjl model the critical line is replaced by an uv stable xed point somewhere on the
critical line depending on the number of fermion avors. an impression of the rg ow
in the neighborhood of such an uv stable xed point is given in fig. 11. if the number
of fermion avors is below some specic value, the critical four-fermion dynamics are not
sucient to yield an uv stable xed point. in that case the unquenched gnjl model only
has a trivial (ir) xed point and the chiral phase transition is of the mean-eld type.

finally, let us briey compare our results with that obtained by lattice simulations and
nonperturbative rg techniques. although there still is some controversy between dierent
groups performing lattice computations, the standard conclusion of the desy group (gockeler
et al.) is that qed is trivial and that the chiral phase transition is of the mean-eld type.
our results agree with these conclusions for n < nc.

using nonperturbative rg techniques, it was found in refs. [26,27], that within a par-
ticular local potential approach the gauge coupling 0 in gnjl model is trivial. again
for n < nc the results agree. however, for large n, we think that, in order to compare
such type of approaches with our results, the rg ows of operators corresponding to the
dynamical nature of  and  exchanges should be taken into account. within the context
of nprg techniques, we think this probably involves taking into account higher (than 6)
dimensional chiral invariant operators containing derivatives in the rg ow of the gauge
coupling.

acknowledgments

the author wishes to thank valery gusynin for the enjoyable and fruitful collaboration,
the numerous stimulating discussions, and important suggestions. it is a pleasure to thank
marinus winnink for useful comments and encouragement.

36

references

[1] m. gell-mann and f.e. low, phys. rev. 95, 1300 (1954).
[2] l.d. landau and i.ya. pomeranchuk, dokl. akad. nauk. 102, 489 (1955).
[3] e.s. fradkin, sov. phys. jetp 28, 750 (1955).
[4] k.g. wilson, phys. rev. b4, 3174, 3184 (1971).
[5] k.g. wilson and j.b. kogut, phys. rep. c12, 75 (1974).
[6] r. fukuda and t. kugo, nucl. phys. b117, 250 (1976).
[7] p.i. fomin and v.a. miransky, phys. lett. b64, 166 (1976).
[8] p.i. fomin, v.p. gusynin, v.a. miransky, and yu.a. sitenko, nucl. phys. b110, 445

(1976).

[9] p.i. fomin, v.p. gusynin, and v.a. miransky, phys. lett. b78, 136 (1978).
[10] p.i. fomin, v.p. gusynin, v.a. miransky, and yu.a. sitenko, riv. nuovo cim. 6, 1

(1983).

[11] v.a. miransky, nuovo cim. a 90, 149 (1985).
[12] j.b. kogut, e. dagotto, and a. kocic, phys. rev. lett. 60, 772 (1988).
[13] j.b. kogut, e. dagotto, and a. kocic, nucl. phys. b317, 271 (1989).
[14] j.b. kogut, e. dagotto, and a. kocic, nucl. phys. b317, 253 (1989).
[15] w.a. bardeen, c.n. leung, and s.t. love, phys. rev. lett. 56, 1230 (1986).
[16] c.n. leung, s.t. love, and w.a. bardeen, nucl. phys. b273, 649 (1986).
[17] k-i. kondo, h. mino, and k. yamawaki, phys. rev. d39, 2430 (1989).
[18] t. appelquist, m. soldate, t. takeuchi, and l.c.r. wijewardhana, in proceedings of
john hopkins workshop on current problems in particle theory, g. domokos and
s. kovesi-domokos, editors, singapore, 1988. world scientic.

[19] a. kocic, s. hands, j.b. kogut, and e. dagotto, nucl. phys. b347, 217 (1990).
[20] a. kocic, j.b. kogut, m-p. lombardo, and k.c. wang, nucl. phys. b397, 451 (1993).
[21] v. azcoiti, g. di carlo, a. galante, a.f. grillo, v. laliena, and c.e. piedrata, phys.

lett. b355, 270 (1995).

[22] v. azcoiti, g. di carlo, a. galante, a.f. grillo, and v. laliena, phys. lett. b416, 409

(1998).

[23] w.a. bardeen, s.t. love, and v.a. miransky, phys. rev. d42, 3514 (1990).
[24] v.a. miransky, dynamical symmetry breaking in quantum field theories, world-

scientic, singapore, 1993.

[25] m. reenders, dynamical symmetry breaking in the gauged nambujona-lasinio model,

phd thesis, university of groningen, 1999, hep-th/9906034.

[26] k-i. aoki, k. morikawa, j-i. sumi, h. terao, and m. tomoyose, prog. theor. phys. 97,

479 (1997).

[27] k-i. aoki, in proceedings of international workshop on perspectives of strong coupling
gauge theories, nagoya, 1996, k. yamawaki, editor, page 479, singapore, 1996. world
scientic, hep-ph/9706204.

[28] t. appelquist, j. terning, and l.c.r. wijewardhana, phys. rev. d44, 871 (1991).
[29] s. hands, a. kocic, and j.b. kogut, annals phys. 224, 29 (1993).
[30] v.p. gusynin and m. reenders, phys. rev. d57, 6356 (1998).
[31] k-i. kondo, m. tanabashi, and k. yamawaki, prog. theor. phys. 89, 1249 (1993).
[32] d.j. amit, field theory, the renormalization group, and critical phenomena, world

scientic, singapore, revised second edition, 1989.

37

[33] n. goldenfeld, lectures on phase transitions and the renormalization group, addison-

wesley publishing company, reading, 1992.

[34] j. zinn-justin, quantum field theory and critical phenomena, clarendon press, ox-

ford, 1989.

[35] a. kocic, j.b. kogut, and m-p. lombardo, nucl. phys. b398, 376 (1993).
[36] a. kocic and j.b. kogut, nucl. phys. b422, 593 (1994).
[37] s. kim, a. kocic, and j.b. kogut, nucl. phys. b429, 407 (1994).
[38] v. azcoiti, g. di carlo, a. galante, a.f. grillo, v. laliena, and c.e. piedrata, phys.

lett. b379, 179 (1996).

[39] t. appelquist, k. lane, and u. mahanta, phys. rev. lett. 61, 1553 (1988).
[40] b. holdom, phys. rev. lett. 62, 997 (1989).
[41] v.a. miransky and k. yamawaki, phys. rev. d55, 5051 (1997).
[42] v.p. gusynin, mod. phys. lett. a5, 133 (1990).
[43] e.v. gorbar, ukr. fiz. zh. 35, 982 (1990).
[44] p.e.l. rakow, nucl. phys. b356, 27 (1991).
[45] k-i. kondo, nucl. phys. b351, 259 (1991).
[46] k-i. kondo, int. j. mod. phys. a6, 5447 (1991).
[47] v.p. gusynin, ukr. phys. j. 36, 1819 (1991).
[48] e.v. gorbar and e. sausedo, ukr. phys. j. 36, 1025 (1991).
[49] m. gockeler, r. horsley, v. linke, p.e.l. rakow, g. schierholz, and h. stuben, nucl.

phys. b487, 313 (1997).

[50] a. kocic, j.b. kogut, and k.c. wang, nucl. phys. b398, 405 (1993).
[51] s.j. hands, a. kocic, j.b. kogut, r.l. renken, d.k. sinclair, and k.c. wang, nucl.

phys. b413, 503 (1994).

[52] e. dagotto, a. kocic, and j.b. kogut, phys. lett. b232, 235 (1989).
[53] v. azcoiti, g. di carlo, and a.f. grillo, int. j. mod. phys. a8, 4235 (1993).
[54] v. azcoiti, g. di carlo, a. galante, a.f. grillo, v. laliena, and c.e. piedrata, phys.

lett. b353, 279 (1995).

[55] m. gockeler, r. horsley, e. laermann, p. rakow, g. schierholz, r. sommer, and u.-j.

wiese, phys. lett. b251, 567 (1990).

[56] m. gockeler, r. horsley, p.e.l. rakow, g. schierholz, and r. sommer, nucl.

phys. b371, 713 (1992).

[57] m. gockeler, r. horsley, v. linke, p.e.l. rakow, g. schierholz, and h. stuben, phys.

rev. lett. 80, 4119 (1998).

[58] a. kocic, j.b. kogut, and s.j. hands, phys. lett. b289, 400 (1992).
[59] m. gockeler, r. horsley, p.e.l. rakow, and g. schierholz, phys. rev. d53, 1508 (1996).
[60] s. hands and j.b. kogut, nucl. phys. b462, 291 (1996).
[61] j.d. bjorken and s.d. drell, relativistic quantum fields, mcgraw-hill, new york,

1965.

[62] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b75, 461 (1974).
[63] k. johnson, r. willey, and m. baker, phys. rev. 163, 1699 (1967).
[64] s. coleman, aspects of symmetry, cambridge university press, cambridge, 1985.
[65] m. harada, y. kikukawa, t. kugo, and h. nakano, prog. theor. phys. 92, 1161 (1994).
[66] k-i. kondo, s. shuto, and k. yamawaki, mod. phys. lett. a6, 3385 (1991).
[67] m. baker and k. johnson, phys. rev. 183, 1292 (1969).

38

[68] k. johnson and m. baker, phys. rev. d8, 1110 (1973).
[69] s.l. adler, phys. rev. d5, 3021 (1972).
[70] a.p. prudnikov, yu.a. brychkov, and o.i. marichev, integrals and series, volume 2:

special functions, gordon and breach science publishers, new york, 1986.

39

figures

fig. 1. the vacuum polarization tensor  (q) = (q2g + qq)(q2), with the blobs repre-

senting full fermion propagators and a full photon-fermion vertex.

1

=

s

1



s

fig. 2. sde for the scalar propagator or  boson s(q).

s

=

+

s

fig. 3. sde for the scalar vertex or yukawa vertex s(p + q, p) in the quenched-ladder ap-

proximation.

40

1

2

=



=



b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

+

+

b

b

b

b

b

b

b



b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

+

b

b

b

b

b

+ . . .

fig. 4. skeleton expansion for k (1).

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

+



b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

b

+ . . .

fig. 5. skeleton expansion for the bs kernel k (2).

=

+

2

fig. 6. sde for the full photon-fermion vertex (k, p).

41

+

b

b

b

+

b

b

b

b

b

b

+

. . .

fig. 7. planar skeleton contributions to the vacuum polarization; the blobs represent both

gauge boson and  and  exchanges.

the functions (cid:16)

and (cid:16)





(cid:16)

((cid:11)

)



 

(cid:16)

((cid:11)

)



 

 :

 :

 : 

 : 

 : 

 : 

 

 

 :

 :

 :

 :

: 

(cid:11)

=(cid:11)

 

c

fig. 8. the functions 1 and 3 plotted versus 0/c.

42

the (cid:12) function for n =  ; ; ;  

n= 

n=

n=

n= 

 : 

 :  

(cid:11)

(cid:12)

 

 

 : 

 :

 :

(cid:11)

 

fig. 9. plot of the function  versus the gauge coupling 0 for various values of the fermion

avor number n .

the (cid:12) function for n =  

 : 

one-loop

with (cid:27) and (cid:25) exchange

(cid:11)

(cid:12)

 :  

 

 

 : 

 :

(cid:11)

 

fig. 10. the one-loop  function for n = 60 compared with the  function including

four-fermion interactions.

43

rg (cid:13)ow near ((cid:11)

; g

((cid:11)

))

c

?

?

critical curve

critical point

:



 

g

broken phase

 :

symm. phase

 :

 :

 :

 :

 :

(cid:11)

?

(cid:11)

 

fig. 11. hypothetical picture of the rg ow near an uv stable xed point (n = 55) in the

coupling constant plane (0, g0). the arrows point towards the infrared region.

44

