aei-1999-13
hub-ep-99/43
thu-99/22

hep-th/9908169

9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
6
2

 

 
 

1
v
9
6
1
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

space-time supersymmetry, iia/b duality and

m-theory

mohab abou-zeid1a, bernard de wit1,2 b, dieter lust3c and hermann nicolai1d

1max planck institut fur gravitationsphysik, albert einstein institut,

am muhlenberg 5, d-14476 golm, germany

2institute for theoretical physics, utrecht university,

princetonplein 5, 3508 ta utrecht, the netherlands

3institut fur physik, humboldt universitat zu berlin,

invalidenstrasse, d-10115 berlin, germany

abstract

the connection between iia superstring theory compactied on a circle of
radius r and iib theory compactied on a circle of radius 1/r is reexamined
from the perspective of n = 2, d = 9 space-time supersymmetry. we argue
that the consistency of iia/b duality requires the bps states corresponding
to momentum and winding of either of the type-ii superstrings to transform
as inequivalent supermultiplets. we show that this is indeed the case for
any nite compactication radius, thus providing a nontrivial conrmation of
iia/b duality. from the point of view of n = 2, d = 9 supergravity, one is
naturally led to an sl(2, z) invariant eld theory that encompasses both the
m-theory torus and the kaluza-klein states of the iib theory.

august, 1999

aabouzeid@aei-potsdam.mpg.de
bbdewit@phys.uu.nl
cluest@physik.hu-berlin.de
dnicolai@aei-potsdam.mpg.de

the bosonic string compactied on a circle of radius r is subject to a duality
which relates the theory obtained at a compactication radius r to the theory
compactied at radius 1/r, where we set the string scale to unity [1]. the origin
of this duality is that momentum modes, whose masses are multiples of 1/r are
accompanied by winding modes, whose masses are multiples of r. the spectrum
exhibits a symmetry under r  1/r combined with an interchange of momentum
and winding states, which in fact is a symmetry of the full string theory. because
large and small distances are related, r can be restricted to the interval [1,) and
the theory appears to have a smallest length set by the string scale. at r =  the
theory decompacties while at the self-dual point r = 1 the winding and momentum
states acquire equal masses and gauge symmetry enhancement takes place. the
heterotic string possesses the same kind of duality symmetry [2].

however, there are situations where string theory is not self-dual in this naive
sense, although the spectra at compactication scales r and 1/r seem to be iden-
tical. this is the case for the type-ii string theories [3, 4]. one way to analyze
whether or not the theory is self-dual is to start at large compactication radius and
to extrapolate all the way to zero radius. in that limit, the winding states become
massless and the theory is expected to again decompactify. if this is indeed the case,
one must obtain one of the consistent string theories dened in the uncompactied
space-time; either this is the theory one started with, or it is a dierent string theory.
the approach followed in this paper is that one can understand which theories
are related by duality without extrapolating to zero radius provided the winding
and momentum states carry dierent space-time quantum numbers from the very
beginning, where by space-time we refer to the generic space-time with one com-
pactied coordinate of nite radius. we claim that this happens to the type-ii string
theories, where we will show that the momentum and winding states constitute in-
equivalent n = 2, d = 9 supermultiplets at any given compactication radius. in
this situation two immediate conclusions are obvious. first of all, there will be no
symmetry enhancement when the masses of momentum and winding states become
equal (this is consistent with the fact that the underlying conformal theory does
not give rise to gauge symmetry enhancement), and secondly, the uncompactied
theory obtained at r = 0 is distinct from the theory at r = . in this case, duality
is conceptually dierent from a symmetry. clearly one must nd a dierent theory
for any value of the compactication radius. there are no two radii at which the
corresponding theories could conceivably be identical, because their spectra will be
inequivalent; thus the dierent theories are now parametrized by the radius r in the
interval (0,). duality means that two theories that are unrelated in the uncom-
pactied space-time, can be viewed as dierent limits in the moduli space of the
compactied theories. of course, one can describe the compactied theory from the

1

perspective of one of the two inequivalent uncompacied theories associated with
the endpoints r =  and r = 0, but this leaves it unchanged.

the present evidence for iia/b duality is either based on formally mapping one
theory onto the other, or on studying the behaviour near the two decompactication
in [3] it was argued that the consistency of the
points at r =  and r = 0.
interchange of momentum and winding numbers, and of r and 1/r, with world-
sheet superconformal invariance requires that the components in the compactied
direction of both the left-moving bosonic and fermionic world-sheet elds change
sign, leading to a corresponding ip in the gso projection [5]. formally, one thus
obtains a mapping between two consistent theories, namely compactied iia and
compactied iib string theory, which extends to their respective vertex operators.
in [4] a possible continuous connection between the two theories is investigated by
considering the lorentz generators near the two decompactication points. the
sign change of the world-sheet elds is invoked in order to show that the lorentz
representations carried by the ramond-ramond ground state in these two limits
must be dierent. in this approach, however (as noted in [4]), the ten-dimensional
lorentz invariance is broken when the compactication radius r is dierent from
zero or innity, so that one cannot truly interpolate between the two theories.

the arguments given in this paper provide additional evidence that the iia and
the iib theories are asymptotic limits in a one-parameter moduli space of theories.
first, we analyze the nine-dimensional n = 2 supersymmetry algebra from the
space-time viewpoint and on the basis of perturbative string theory and m-theory.
this analysis indeed conrms that the winding and momentum states constitute
inequivalent supermultiplets in either of the type-ii string theories at a given com-
pactication radius. we then show that the same conclusion follows upon imposing
the physical state conditions on the relevant string vertex operators. in fact, n = 2,
d = 9 supersymmetry alone already gives rise to a unied description encompass-
ing both the m-theory torus and the kaluza-klein states of the iib theory. our
work lends support to the arguments given in [6] that there is a duality between
m-theory and iib theory which can be understood in terms of the fundamental su-
permembrane [7]. the coupling of one class of bps states to supergravity breaks
the continuous sl(2, r) symmetry group into a discrete subgroup associated with
the kaluza-klein states on t 2. the second class of bps multiplets carries charges
that are unrelated to t 2 and can be identied with either the kaluza-klein states
of the iib theory, or the wrapping of a membrane around the torus.

n=2 supersymmetry in nine dimensions

let us rst summarize the various possible bps multiplets associated with the nine-
dimensional supersymmetry algebra with lorentz invariant central charges. we

2

consider the supersymmetry algebra in an n = 2 majorana basis and write it as
follows,

{qi

 , q j

 } = (p/ 0) + z ij (i0) .

(1)

we recall that, in nine dimensions, the charge conjugation matrix is symmetric and
can be chosen equal to the identity; therefore z ij is a real symmetric matrix. we
can decompose the central charge as

z ij = m [ b ij + a (cos  3 + sin  1)ij],

(2)

where m is the rest mass of the representation and 1, 2, 3 denote the usual pauli
matrices. it is clear, and this is crucial for what follows, that these central charges
fall into two categories. the component proportional to b denes an so(2) invariant
central charge, while the two components proportional to a rotate into each other
under the action of the automorphism group so(2).

let us rst derive the possible values for z ij when straightforwardly reducing the
ten-dimensional supersymmetry algebra. we rst decompose the cliord algebra
generated by the ten-dimensional gamma matrices m , and dene 11 by 11 =
01    9. nine-dimensional gamma matrices, which commute with 9 and 11,
are given by

 =  ,

 = 0, 1, 2, . . . , 8,

(3)
where  = i911, such that the product 01    8 = i1. observe that the
dirac conjugate of a spinor is changed accordingly.e the ten-dimensional charge-
conjugation matrix can now be written as , so that the nine-dimensional gamma
matrices are symmetric and the nine-dimensional charge-conjugation matrix equals
the unit matrix. with these conventions, the ten-dimensional supersymmetry al-
gebra {q, q} = ipm m is converted into the nine-dimensional algebra {q, q} =
ip  p9 11. hence the sign of the p9 term depends on the chirality of the
supercharge. therefore, the matrix z ij will be proportional to (3)ij for iia theory,
where one has supercharges of opposite chirality, and proportional to ij for iib
theory, where the charges have equal chirality.

it is also of interest to consider the supersymmetry algebra that emerges from

the eleven-dimensional superalgebra in the presence of a membrane charge,

{q, q} = ip m  m + 1

2iz m n  m n ,

(4)

where we have eleven-dimensional momenta p m , two-brane charges z m n and 32-
component spinor charges. upon reducing this algebra to nine dimensions, assuming
ein nine and ten dimensions, the dirac conjugate is dened by  = i 0 and  = i0,
respectively. note that the  and m are hermitean, with the exception of  0 and 0, which are
anti-hermitean. we use the mostly plus metric. observe that our conventions are such that there
is no 10 matrix.

3

that z m n takes only values in the two extra dimensions labeled by m = 9, 10, we
obtain for the central-charge matrix z ij,

z ij = z9 10 ij  (p9 3  p10 1)ij .

(5)

we will further elaborate on the signicance of this formula later.

we now briey discuss the bps multiplets in nine dimensions. by an appropriate
so(2) transformation we diagonalize the matrix (2) so that  = 0.
in the rest
frame the anticommutator (1) decomposes into four eight-dimensional unit matrices,
according to the decomposition 8c + 8s + 8c + 8s of the thirty-two supercharges, with
coecients equal to m times (1 + a + b), (1  a  b), (1  a + b) and (1 + a  b),
respectively. we have bps multiplets whenever one of these coecients vanishes.
so we distinguish the following three cases:

 choosing a = 1 and b = 0 leads to the (8v + 8s) (8v + 8c) decomposition of
the 28-dimensional supermultiplet with respect to the rest-frame spin rotation
group so(8). as always we can combine multiplets into larger multiplets
with higher spin (i.e. by assigning spin to the cliord vacuum), but here
we concentrate on the smallest multiplet. note that this multiplet contains
fermions of mixed chirality. another characteristic feature is the presence of
a 56v spin representation. this is the multiplet that comprises the kaluza-
klein states of iia supergravity compactied on s1, which are the momentum
states of the compactied iia string. therefore this particular multiplet will
be called the kka multiplet.

 choosing a = 0 and b = 1 leads to the 28-dimensional multiplet (8v + 8c) 
(8v + 8c). again we can obtain larger multiplets of higher spin, but these
will not be discussed here. a sign change in b leads to the conjugate multi-
plet, where 8s and 8c are interchanged. obviously the fermions have denite
chirality and their partners in the conjugate supermultiplet carry opposite chi-
rality. observe also the absence of 56v states. this supermultiplet comprises
the momentum states of the iib theory and therefore it will be called the
kkb multiplet. clearly, the bps states associated with a membrane wrapped
around t 2 in eleven dimensions constitute kkb multiplets. observe that this
is crucial for the duality between m-theory and iib theory, noted in [6].

 the multiplets with a  b = 1 comprise 212 states. they do appear in
string theory as mixed states containing both winding and momentum and
have a nonzero oscillator number in order to satisfy the mass-shell condition.
hence they carry masses of the order of the string scale. the smallest multiplet
associated with the lowest spins decomposes as (8v + 8c)(8v + 8c)(8v + 8s).

4

again there is a conjugate multiplet when changing the signs of a and b. this
class of bps supermultiplets will not play a role in what follows.

in the literature one often nds the statement that the iia and the iib theories
become indistinguishable when viewed in a nine-dimensional context, because the
so(7) decompositions of the iia and iib massless multiplets coincide. although
this is true, it is essential to understand that the kaluza-klein momentum states
for the two theories remain dierent in nine dimensions: for massive states in nine
dimensions, the rest-frame so(8) rotation group coincides with the so(8) helicity
group for massless states in ten dimensions.

it is important to realize that the kka and kkb multiplets dier not only in
their spin decomposition, but also carry inequivalent charges. we will return to this
shortly, but we already note here that a kka supermultiplet carries a nonzero so(2)
doublet charge while a kkb supermultiplet carries the so(2) invariant charge. it
follows from the above observations that these charges are mutually exclusive for
these multiplets (but not for the intermediate multiplets with 212 states). as
explained in the introduction, it is of vital importance for duality between the two
type-ii string theories that the winding and the momentum modes of a given type-
ii theory at a given compactication radius constitute inequivalent representations
and correspond to dierent kinds of string states. therefore we will rst establish
this fact from the world-sheet superconformal eld theory.

world sheet description

in type-ii string theory, the two majorana supercharges can be represented as con-
tour intergrals over world-sheet operators. one charge, q1
, resides in the left-moving
sector and the other one, q2

, resides in the right-moving sector, so we dene

 = i dz
q1

2i

v(z) ,

 = i dz
q2

2i

v(z) .

(6)

in the canonical q = 1/2 ghost picture the two covariant left- and right-moving
fermion vertex operators v(z) and v(z) are given by [8] (omitting normal-ordering
symbols)

v(1/2)(z) = ()1/4 s(z) exp( 1
v(1/2)(z) = ()1/4 s(z) exp( 1

2(z)) ,
2(z)) ,

(7)

where (z) ((z)) is one of the left- (right)-moving bosonized superconformal ghosts
and s(z), s(z) are the spin eld vertex operators in the 16 or 16 chiral spinor
representations of so(9, 1). note that (7) is valid for both iia and iib string
theory, as we refrain from using dotted and undotted indices to indicate the chirality.
whenever this may lead to confusion, the reader should remember to simply project

5

onto the corresponding chiral subspaces. the ten world-sheet fermions m (z) can
be bosonized in terms of ve scalars ~ as exp(i~v  ~), with the so(1,9) vector
weights ~v = (0, . . . ,1, 0, . . .) (thus 2
v = 1). the spin eld operators s(z) can be
similarly expressed as exp(i~s  ~(z)), or exp(i~c  ~(z)), where ~s and ~c denote the
two so(9,1) chiral spinor weights ( 1
2), with an even (odd) number
of minus signs for the positive (negative) chirality (and 2

2 , 1

2 , 1

2, 1

2, 1

s = 2

c = 5

4).

in order to compute the supersymmetry algebra from these world sheet elds it is
convenient to introduce the supercharges in the equivalent q = +1/2 superconformal
ghost picture. in this ghost picture v(z), for example, takes the form

v(+1/2)(z) = ()3/4 x m

l (z) (m s(z)) exp( 1

2(z)) ,

(8)

where the chirality of s is opposite to the chirality of the s used in the correspond-
ing expression (7). the supersymmetry algebra can now be obtained by computing
the following operator products between the vertex operators in the two dierent
ghost pictures,

1

v(1/2)(z) v(+1/2)(w) 
v(1/2)(z) v(+1/2)( w) 
v(1/2)(z) v(+1/2)( w)  0 ,

1

z  w
z  w

1
 (c m ) x m
1
 (c m ) x m

l (w) +    ,
r ( w) +    ,

(9)

where c is the ten-dimensional charge-conjugation matrix. taking the contour
integrals and converting to the nine-dimensional gamma indices introduced earlier,
we nd the {qi, qj} anticommutator in terms of the nine-dimensional momenta and
the right- and left-moving zero-mode momenta,

pl =

pr =

1

2i

 i dz
 i dz

2i

1

i x 9

l(z) =

i x 9

r(z) =

1

 (cid:18) m
 (cid:18)m

t  nt(cid:19) ,
+ nt(cid:19) ,

t

1

(10)

where we measure the compactication radius r in string units by means of a
dimensionless parameter t = r/. the integers m and n denote the momentum
and winding numbers, respectively. this yields the following supersymmetry algebra
for the iia/b superstrings in nine space-time dimensions

{q1, q1} = ip   pl 11 ,
{q2, q2} = ip   pr 11 ,
{q1, q2} = 0 .

(11)

comparing with the previously derived supersymmetry algebra (1), it is now obvious
that the central charges are just linear combinations of the internal left- and right

6

momenta pl and pr. to be more precise, in the iia and the iib theory the central
charge matrix z ij takes one of the two alternative forms (up to an overall sign),

z ij = 


1

2(pl + pr) ij + 1
2(pl  pr) ij + 1

1

2(pl  pr) (3)ij
2 (pl + pr) (3)ij

for iib

for iia

(12)

this proves our assertion that the momentum and winding bps states constitute
inequivalent supermultiplets. the iia momentum states and the iib winding states
are in the kka representation, whereas the iia winding states and the iib momen-
tum states are in the kkb representation. this ensures that the two decompact-
ication limits t  0 and t   lead to dierent theories. moreover, it proves
that type-ii string compactications on circles of dierent radii must be inequiva-
lent. and nally, it is clear that no symmetry enhancement will take place when
the momentum and the winding states have coinciding masses, as these states are
always distinctly dierent. this is in accord with the fact that no gauge symmetry
enhancement is possible in the conformal eld theory.

the emergence of dierent representations for the momentum and winding states
can also be understood in terms of the corresponding covariant physical vertex
operators. to write them down for the compactied theory in nine dimensions,
we again make use of the so(1,9) covariant ghost and spin eld vertex operators.
the vertex operators for the kaluza-klein and winding states in nine dimensions
can be directly obtained from the vertex operators of the massless states in ten
dimensions by splitting the physical momenta as in (11). more precisely, we consider
the ramond-ramond operators

exp (ipx 
 exp (ipx 

l(z) + iplx 9
r(z) + iprx 9

l(z)) u
r(z)) u

l(p)s(z) exp( 1
r(p)s(z) exp( 1

2(z))
2 (z)) ,

(13)

where the 16-component spinors ul(p) and ur(p) denote the chiral so(1,9) spinor
polarizations of the left- and right-moving states (so that we have implemented a
gso projection) and the p are the values taken by the nine-dimensional momentum
operators p. again we refrain from using dotted and undotted so(1,9) spinor
indices and we leave the chirality of the spin elds and therefore of the polarization
spinors unspecied. note, however, that the chirality of the s must be the same
as in (7). we recall also that the ghost and spinor weights for the vertex operator
must be chosen in accordance with the locality requirement (see [9] for a detailed
discussion of this point).

to the operators (13) we must apply the physical state condition which fol-
lows from requiring that they commute with the left- and right-moving brst
operators. the relevant part of the left-moving such operator is proportional to
x m
l (z) l m (z) exp((z)); the formula for its right-moving counterpart is simi-
l = p2
lar. in this way we recover rst of all the mass-shell condition pp = p2
r,

7

where the last equality is valid only for states without oscillator excitations. sec-
ondly, we obtain the dirac equation for the spinor polarizations. written with
nine-dimensional gamma matrices, this yields,

(ip + pl11)ul(p) = (ip + pr11)ur(p) = 0 .

(14)

these conditions reduce the number of physical spinor polarizations from 16 to 8,
so that the vertex operators (13) describe 8  8 = 64 states for given momentum.
when combined with the neveu-schwarz sector these states comprise full bps su-
permultiplets.
in obtaining the so(8) representations in accord with our earlier
analysis, it is important to realize that the chirality of the polarization spinors is
opposite to that of the corresponding s.

the above results are in precise correspondence with our previous analysis of the
superalgebra relations (11). the mass-shell condition tells us that pl = pr, and
depending on this sign, we get either the same or dierent so(8) representations
from the physical state condition (14). thus winding and momentum states indeed
constitute inequivalent supermultiplets.

finally let us discuss the choice of the chirality for the spinors in (7) and in
(13). clearly we only need to distinguish beween equal and opposite chirality for
the left- and right-moving spinor elds. on the other hand, switching the relative
chirality, e.g. by changing the chirality of s(z), and correspondingly of ul, can
be compensated for by assigning an opposite momentum pl to that state, leaving
pr unchanged. this corresponds to interchanging the winding and the momentum
numbers m and n in (10), together with the interchange of t with 1/t . so the
states and the corresponding supermultiplets remain the same; what changes is
only the notion of a momentum and a winding state. clearly, there is a type-iia
and a type-iib description, but of a single theory. in the decompactication limits
t  0 and t  , one is left with inequivalent supermultiplets as the mass of
one supermultiplet vanishes and that of its inequivalent counterpart is pushed to
innity.

it is equally straightforward to analyze the intermediate bps multiplets with
212 states from this point of view. however, the corresponding vertex operators
are more complicated due to oscillator contributions, which modies the relation
between pl and pr.

n = 2 supergravity in nine dimensions
we will now use n = 2 supergravity in d = 9 dimensions together with some basic
input from string theory to obtain independent conrmation of the result that the
momentum and winding states are in dierent supermultiplets. let us rst discuss
some features of the massless elds which consitute n = 2 supergravity in nine

8

dimensions. this theory has already been discussed in the literature; in particular,
its relation to string theory and iia/b duality was studied in [10], so we will be
brief here. the focus of our attention is the coupling of the massless theory to the
massive bps states that we discussed above. in particular, we want to exhibit the
coupling of the nine-dimensional gauge elds to the bps states.

in nine dimensions there is only one n = 2 supergravity theory, whose scalar
sector is governed by an sl(2, r)/so(2) non-linear -model, and which therefore
exhibits an invariance under a nonlinearly realized sl(2, r). in addition there is an
invariance under so(1,1), which can be systematically understood from combining
ordinary dimensional analysis with scale transformations on the compactied co-
ordinate [11]. from the iib supergravity perspective, the sl(2, r) originates from
the sl(2, r)/so(2) coset structure and the sl(2, r) symmetry which are already
present in ten dimensions [12]. from the perspective of eleven-dimensional super-
gravity [13], on the other hand, these are just the hidden symmetries obtained
by reducing the theory from eleven to nine dimensions on the torus t 2.
in this
reduction, the dieomorphism symmetry in the compactied dimensions is frozen
to a rigid gl(2, r) = sl(2, r)  so(1, 1) symmetry. similarly, the full lorentz
symmetry in eleven dimensions is reduced to so(1, 8)  so(2)  so(1, 10), where
so(2) is converted into the r-symmetry corresponding to the automorphism group
of the nine-dimensional n = 2 superalgebra.

identifying the various transformations, one readily obtains the various quantum
numbers, without the need for a detailed dimensional reduction. we denote the
bosonic elds of eleven-dimensional supergravity by g m n and a m n p . the bosonic
elds of iia supergravity are denoted by gm n , cm , cm n , cm n p and , and those of
iib supergravity by gm n , a 
m n ,  and am n p q. here the index  is associated with
sl(2, r). the elds of n = 2 nine-dimensional supergravity are the metric g, three
scalars  and , three abelian gauge elds b and a 
 , two antisymmetric tensors
a 
 and a three-rank antisymmetric gauge eld a. the elds and their so(1,1)
weights are summarized in table. we use the einstein frame, so that the metric is
invariant under so(1,1). the scalar elds  characterize the coset representative of
sl(2, r)/so(2). they satisfy a constraint  = 1 and are subject to local so(2)
transformations, so that they correspond to one complex eld. the scalar exp() will
be dened as g99, the iib metric in the compactied dimension. the determinant
of the eleven-dimensional metric in the two compactied directions is then equal to
exp( 4
3 ). we have ignored certain nonlinear features of the relationship with the
higher-dimensional elds. on the other hand, the assignments are also relevant for
the massive kaluza-klein states in the t 2 and s1 compactications [11].

now we consider the three abelian vector gauge elds in the nine-dimensional
theory, which decompose into a singlet and a doublet under sl(2, r). note that their

9

d = 11

g
a 9 10

g 9, g 10
a 9, a 10

a

iia

g
c 9

g 9 , c
c 9, c

c

g9 10, g9 9, g10 10 , g9 9, c9 


d = 9

iib

so(1,1)

g
b
a 

a 

a

exp()

g
g 9
a 
 9
a 

a

g9 9

0
4
3
1
2

0
7

table 1: the bosonic elds of the eleven dimensional, type-iia, nine-dimensional
n = 2 and type-iib supergravity theories. the eleven-dimensional and ten-
dimensional indices, respectively, are split as m = (, 9, 10) and m = (, 9), where
 = 0, 1, . . . 8. the last column lists the so(1,1) scaling weights of the elds.

origin is rather dierent when viewed from the iia and from the iib side. the singlet
eld is the graviphoton from the iib side, so it must couple to the iib momentum
states. the doublet elds originate from the iib doublet of tensor elds, so they
couple to the iib winding states.
it thus follows that the iib momentum states
constitute kkb states (by denition) whereas the iib winding states constitute
kka multiplets. the second kka charge can only be understood beyond string
perturbation theory; the degeneracy in the winding states is due to winding of
fundamental and d-strings.

the pattern is the same, but complementary on the iia side. here the momen-
tum states carry the doublet charges, so they constitute (again by denition) kka
multiplets. accordingly, the two graviphotons originating from eleven dimensions
transform as an sl(2, r) doublet. the degeneracy in the momentum states can
thus be understood from eleven-dimensional supergravity, as the doublet charges
nd their origin in the t 2 on which the theory is compactied. the winding states
couple to the singlet eld, which originates from the iia tensor eld. hence the
iia winding states constitute kkb multiplets. alternatively these states can be
understood as membranes wrapped around the m-theory torus [6], because, as we
have shown before, these constitute the same supermultiplets.

coupling to bps supermultiplets
one may contemplate the construction of a nine-dimensional eld theory consisting
of n = 2 supergravity coupled to an innite tower of bps supermultiplets with a
two-dimensional charge lattice (q1, q2) for the kka states and a one-dimensional

10

lattice of charges p for the kkb states. this theory encompasses both eleven-
dimensional supergravity (compactied on t 2) and iib supergravity (compactied
on s1). the usual t-duality is trivial for this theory.
it is not associated with
any symmetry and only amounts to certain eld redenitons. we know that the
theory is free from inconsistencies in each of these sectors separately and it is an
interesting question whether such a dichotomic eld theory could be (classically)
consistent to all orders.
in low orders of perturbation theory, its short-distance
behaviour should be relatively mild as it can be viewed as a combination of known
supergravity theories. of course, this is not truly an eective eld theory as the
masses of the various states will never be light simultaneously with respect to the
string scale. the theory is manifestly invariant under so(1, 1) and under sl(2, z).
the latter is the integer-valued subgroup of sl(2, r) that leaves the charge lattice
of the kka states invariant. there is a formulation in which the sl(2, r) is linearly
realized, also in the presence of the bps states.
in that case the massive elds
transform only under the local (composite) so(2) and not directly under sl(2, r).
however, the kka elds have a minimal coupling with respect to q a
, which, in
order to remain invariant under the integer-valued subgroup, requires the charges to
transform covariantly under this subgroup. the kkb elds have a minimal coupling
to p b, which is sl(2, r) invariant.

it should be clear that the theory will only exhibit ten- or eleven-dimensional
in terms of the kka charges q and of the
lorentz invariance in certain limits.
kkb charges p, the mass formula for the various bps states in the nine-dimensional
einstein frame reads

m 2 = m2

kka |q |2 + m2

kkb p2 ,

(15)

where mkka and mkkb denote two dierent mass scales, whose product is inversely
proportional to . here we made use of the fact that the mass should be sl(2, z)
and so(1,1) invariant in the einstein frame.

as stressed in [6] the above formula corresponds exactly to that of a membrane
wrapped around a torus with modular parameter   1 + i2. here we should point
out that the supersymmetry algebra for a fundamental supermembrane gives rise to
precisely the algebra (5) with z m n describing the winding of the membrane over
some compact space [14]. in the case of a torus with area a, the bps mass formula
reads (in eleven-dimensional planck units),

m 2 =

1
a 2 |q1   q2|2 +

a2
t 2
m

p2 ,

(16)

where tm denotes the supermembrane tension, q1,2 label the momentum modes
on the torus and p is the number of times the membrane is wrapped (including
orientation) over the torus. we refrain from indicating how the modular parameter

11

is dened in terms of the elds  but simply note that both formulae are invariant
under sl(2, z).

the above formula can now be interpreted in two dierent ways. from the
perspective of iia string theory, one of the qs is the iia kaluza-klein momentum
number, while the other is the d0 charge; as is well known, the mass of the d0 branes
is inversely proportional to the iia string coupling constant [15]. then p is the iia
winding number. conversely, from the iib perspective, q1 and q2 are the winding
numbers of the elementary string and of the solitonic d1 string (which corresponds
to a d0 brane in the iia description). now the sl(2, z) is a strong-weak coupling
duality, as it interchanges the elementary strings with the d1 strings. the modular
parameter associated with the elds  is the iib dilaton which contains the iib
string coupling constant. from this perspective the integral charge lattice follows
from a dirac-type quantization condition. the integer p is just the iib kaluza-klein
momentum number.

the question that remains is, of course, what iia/b duality can teach us about
m-theory and its fundamental degrees of freedom. the theory we referred to as
dichotomic above transcends both eleven-dimensional supergravity and iib super-
gravity. the above results can be interpreted as evidence that m-theory is just
the fundamental supermembrane. supermembrane theory may not suer from the
incompleteness of perturbative string theory. unlike superstring theory, which has
both a string tension as well as a coupling constant, it has no conventional perturba-
tive expansion as its only parameter is the membrane tension tm. as is evident from
(5) and (16), both the kaluza-klein doublet states and the winding states arise nat-
urally upon compactication to nine dimensions. likewise, the perturbative massive
string states, which have no analog in the supermembrane, can emerge out of the
continuous supermembrane spectrum [16], but only in the reduction from eleven to
ten dimensions (recall that the excited superstring states cannot be combined into
massive d = 11 multiplets). this indicates that the quantum supermembrane is not
only a second quantized, but also a non-perturbative theory from the very outset 
like m-theory.

acknowledgements

we would like to thank michael green, joseph polchinski, bert schellekens and
nathan seiberg for discussions. b.d.w. is grateful to the alexander von humboldt-
stiftung for supporting his stay at the aei as part of the humboldt award program.
this work is supported in part by the european commission tmr program under
contract erbfmrx-ct96-0045, in which the humboldt university at berlin and
utrecht university are associated.

12

references

[1] k. kikkawa and m. yamasaki, phys. lett. b149 (1984) 357,

n. sakai and i. senda, prog. theor. phys. 75 (1986) 692; erratum-ibid 77
(1987) 773.

[2] p. ginsparg, phys. rev. d35 (1987) 648.

[3] m. dine, p. huet and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b322 (1989) 301.

[4] j. dai, r. g. leigh and j. polchinski, mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 2073.

[5] f. gliozzi, j. scherk and d. olive, phys. lett. b65 (1976) 282; nucl. phys.

b122 (1977) 253.

[6] j. h. schwarz, phys. lett. b360 (1995) 13, [hep-th/9508143]; erratum: ibid,
b364 (1995) 252; nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 49 (1996) 183, [hep-th/9509148];
phys. lett. b367 (1996) 97, [hep-th/9510086];
p. s. aspinwall, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 46 (1996) 30, [hep-th/9508154].

[7] e. bergshoe, e. sezgin and p.k. townsend, phys. lett. 189b (1987) 75.

[8] d. friedan, e. martinec and s. shenker, nucl. phys. b271 (1986) 93.

[9] v. kostelecky, o. lechtenfeld, w. lerche, s. samuel and s. watamura, nucl.

phys. b288 (1987) 173.

[10] e. bergshoe, c. hull and t. ortin, nucl. phys. b451, 547 (1995), [hep-

th/9504081].

[11] b. de wit and j. louis, supersymmetry and dualities in various dimensions,

[hep-th/9801132].

[12] j. h. schwarz, nucl. phys. b226 (1983) 269.

[13] e. cremmer, b. julia and j. scherk, phys. lett. b76 (1978) 409.

[14] b. de wit, k. peeters and j. plefka, phys. lett. b409 (1997) 117,

[hep-

th/9705225].

[15] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 184, [hep-th/9510017].

[16] b. de wit, m. luscher and h. nicolai, nucl. phys. b305 [fs23] (1990) 39.

13

