mit-ctp-2892
pupt-1883
nsf-itp-99-092

9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
0
1

 

 
 

1
v
6
7
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the shape of gravity

joseph lykken

institute for theoretical physics,

university of california, santa barbara, ca 93106.

and

theoretical physics dept.

fermi national accelerator laboratory, batavia, il 60510.

lisa randall

joseph henry laboratories, princeton university, princeton, nj 08543, usa

and

center for theoretical physics,

massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, ma 02139, usa

lykken@fnal.gov

randall@feynman.princeton.edu

abstract

in a nontrivial background geometry with extra dimensions, gravitational eects will depend
on the shape of the kaluza-klein excitations of the graviton. we investigate a consistent
scenario of this type with two positive tension three-branes separated in a ve-dimensional
anti-de sitter geometry. the graviton is localized on the planck brane, while a gapless
continuum of additional gravity eigenmodes probe the innitely large fth dimension. de-
spite the background ve-dimensional geometry, an observer conned to either brane sees
gravity as essentially four-dimensional up to a position-dependent strong coupling scale, no
matter where the brane is located. we apply this scenario to generate the tev scale as
a hierarchically suppressed mass scale. arbitrarily light gravitational modes appear in this
scenario, but with suppressed couplings. real emission of these modes is observable at future
colliders; the eects are similar to those produced by six large toroidal dimensions.

extra dimensions provide an alternative route to addressing the hierarchy problem. this
is because the planck scale, describing the strength of the graviton coupling at low energies,
is a derived scale. in a simple factorizable geometry, the planck scale of a four-dimensional
world is related to that of a higher dimensional world simply by a volume factor. the
large planck scale indicates weak graviton coupling which is in turn a consequence of the
large volume over which the graviton can propagate [1]. in this scenario, a large hierarchy
only arises in the presence of a large volume for the compactied dimensions, which is very
dicult to justify. a more compelling alternative has been suggested in ref. [2]. the idea
of this paper was that the weak graviton coupling arises because of an interesting shape of
the graviton wave function in the extra dimensions. the graviton is localized away from the
3+1-dimensional world on which the standard model resides. the large value of the planck
scale arises because of the small amplitude for the graviton to coincide with our brane.

in ref.

[3], it was shown that the geometry of a single brane with cosmological energy

densities tuned to guarantee poincare invariance takes the form:

ds2 = e2k|y|dxdx + dy2

,

(1)

where ,  parameterize the four-dimensional coordinates of our world, and y is the coordi-
nate of a fth dimension. the remarkable aspect of the above geometry is that it gives rise
to a localized graviton eld. mechanisms for conning matter and gauge elds to a smaller
dimensional subspace were already known. the new feature here is that the background
geometry gives rise to a single gravitational bound state. this mode plays the role of the
graviton of a four-dimensional world, and is responsible for reproducing four-dimensional
gravity. in ref.
[3], the kaluza-klein (kk) spectrum reecting the large extra dimension
was derived and it was argued that the additional continuum gapless spectrum of states gives
rise to very suppressed corrections to conventional four-dimensional gravity, suppressed by
(energy/mp l)2.

however, from the perspective of generating the mass hierarchy between the planck and
weak scales, the important aspect of this geometry is the correspondence between location
in the fth dimension and the overall mass scale. this can be understood by the fact that
the warp factor is a conformal factor so far as a four-dimensional world located at a xed
y location is concerned. mass factors are rescaled by this factor, so that a natural scale for
mass parameters might be mp l = 1019 gev on a brane at the origin, but is mp lexpk|y|
for physics conned to a location y. this exponential could be the source of the hierarchy
between the electroweak scale of order tev and the planck scale which is approximately
1015 times bigger. notice that the generation of this hierarchy only requires an exponential
of order 30.
in ref.

[2], this observation was exploited by introducing an orbifold geometry, and
located a positive energy brane at one point and a negative energy brane at the second
orbifold point. if the standard model is located on this second, negative energy brane, the
amplitude of the graviton is exponentially suppressed and a hierarchy is generated.

the potential disadvantage of this setup is the necessity for the negative energy object
and the orbifold geometry. although not ruled out, it is desirable to have an alternative setup

1

involving only positive energy objects. the advantages of such a setup are as follows. first,
there are positive energy objects, namely d-branes and ns-branes, that are well understood
and on which gauge elds and matter elds can be localized so that the standard model
elds can be placed there. second, some potentially problematic aspects of the cosmology
of this system were presented in [4, 5], though it is not yet clear how general the conclusions
will prove. finally, there is the aesthetic advantage of allowing for an innite dimensional
space in which mass scales are associated with denite locations in the space, a point further
emphasized by [6]. if one permits all possible mass scales (all possible distances in the fth
dimension), one presumably has a better chance of addressing dicult cosmological issues
such as the cosmological constant problem and black-hole physics. one also has a better
chance for exploiting holographic ideas by exploiting the correspondence between location
in the fth dimension and mass scale.

in this paper, we demonstrate that one can address the hierarchy problem with only
positive energy objects by combining the two observations of ref.
[2, 3], namely 1) it is
consistent to live with an innite fth dimension, and 2) one can generate a hierarchy by
living far from the brane on which gravity is localized. this was implicit also in ref.
[6],
where the connection between distance in the fth dimension and overall mass scale was made
explicit in an ads geometry derived from d-3 branes (so that the maldacena conjecture [7]
could be exploited), and so that the tev scale corresponded to a xed coordinate y0.

the crucial question is whether an observer on this tev brane sees a consistent theory
of gravity. in ref. [3], it was only shown that one sees a theory of gravity that is very close
to a four-dimensional gravitational theory if one lives on the brane on which the graviton
is localized. in this paper, we argue that even for an observer quite far from that brane,
one obtains an acceptable gravitational theory, essentially indistinguishable from a four-
dimensional world!

the picture that emerges is remarkably beautiful. the graviton is localized on a brane
that we call the planck brane from now on. we live on a brane separated from the planck
brane by roughly 30 planck lengths in the fth dimension. on this brane, mass scales are
exponentially suppressed, yielding a natural generation of the weak scale. furthermore, the
maximal scale we can probe on our brane is this same tev scale, since all string modes
become strongly interacting at this scale. the location of the brane, which we denote by y0,
was determined to give the correct ratio of the weak scale to the planck scale. we call the
brane at this location the tev brane.

the potentially dangerous aspect of this setup is the multiplicity of the arbitrarily light
kaluza-klein modes. in ref. [2], it was argued that the kk modes were extremely strongly
coupled (with tev coupling suppression rather than mp l). in ref.
[3], it was shown that
one signal of the innite extra dimension is a gapless continuum of kaluza-klein modes.
clearly, if these modes were all so strongly coupled, the theory would be disastrous, since
gravitational and particle physics tests would be badly violated.

what we show in this paper is that the situation is far more clever. production of modes
less than the tev scale are suppressed. futhermore, modes less than 104 ev (which happens
to correspond to the length scales on which gravity has been directly probed,) still couple

2

with planck scale suppression. thus the theory interpolates between a four-dimensional and
ve-dimensional world (reminiscent of a holographic interpretation). the observer on the
brane at the tev scale sees the modes below a tev in energy as weakly coupled. modes
higher in mass than a tev are much more strongly coupled, and would in principle reproduce
the expected ve-dimensional result. however, they are impossible to access! generalizing
to an arbitrary location, one never recognizes the higher dimensional geometry. independent
of location, the world appears lower dimensional at low energies.

we now elaborate on this observation. the results follow readily from papers [2, 3]. our
setup is a planck brane (or set of branes) on which the graviton zero mode is conned,
exponentially falling o in the direction y. the new feature is a single brane (or multiple
branes) located a distance y0 from this brane, where ekyo = tev/mp l, where k is related to
the cosmological constant on the brane and determines the exponential fallo of the graviton,
as in ref.
[2, 3]. the new brane can be regarded as a probe of the geometry determined
by the planck brane, either by assuming that the planck brane has much larger tension, or
consists of a large set of branes. it is readily seen that inclusion of a small brane tension
does not substantially aect the result. we also remark that we do not address the question
of determining the location y0 here, though mechanisms that stabilize the orbifold geometry
(such as in ref. [8]) should also apply.

it is clear that the zero mode generates consistent gravity.

if we take the coordinate

y = 0 to be the location of the planck brane, one can readily derive:

m 2

p l = 2z 

0

dy e2kym 3 =

m 3
k

,

(2)

so that with m and k taken of order mp l = 1019 gev, the zero mode is coupled correctly to
generate four-dimensional gravity.

it is therefore the contribution of the additional kk modes that is our focus. everything
follows from the detailed form of these modes, derived in [3]. the graviton zero mode
(properly normalized) is

k(|z| + 1/k)3/2
where the coordinate z is related to y by the expression

0(z) =

1

z =

sgn(y)

k

(cid:16)ek|y|  1(cid:17)

note that at the tev brane z = z0  1 tev1.

the continuum kk modes are given by:

,

.

(3)

(4)

(5)

m  nm(|z| + 1/k)1/2"y2(m(|z| + 1/k)) +

4k2

m2 j2(m(|z| + 1/k))#

,

where m is the mass of the mode, y2 and j2 are bessel functions, and nm is a normalization
factor.

3

for large mz, these modes asymptote to continuum plane wave behavior. this can be

seen from the asymptotic form for the bessel functions:

zj2(mz)  s 2

m

cos(mz 

) , zy2(mz)  s 2

m

5
4

sin(mz 

5
4

) .

the normalization constants nm are determined by this plane wave behavior [3]:

nm 

m5/2
4k2

.

(6)

(7)

we are adopting here a delta-function normalization such that physical quantities will al-
ways involve an integration over m for which the proper measure is just dm. none of our
calculations will involve any dependence on the y   regulator scheme (i.e. the regulator
brane of [3] or the alternative proposed in [6]).
it is edifying to consider what these modes tell us in a couple of limiting situations.
first, let us remind the reader of what happens if you live on the planck brane (z = 0). the
exact eect depends on the particular gravitational process under consideration; let us rst
consider the corrections to newtons law from the kk modes. one nds a potential between
two masses m1 and m2:

v = gn

m1m2

r

+z 

0

dm
k

gn

m
k

m1m2emr

r

= gn

m1m2

r

(cid:18)1 +

1

k2r2(cid:19) .

(8)

the kk contribution is suppressed at large distances over and above that expected from
having one additional dimension, because of the amplitude suppression near the brane. this
is due to the barrier of the analog quantum mechanical problem used to nd the kk modes.
now let us consider the opposite extreme. suppose we were at high energies and suppose
it were appropriate to use the plane wave form of the modes. at a given location y0, what
would be the corrections to newtons law? they would be

v  gn

m1m2

r

+z 

0

dm
k

gn

m1m2emr

r

e3ky0  gn

m1m2

r  1 +

e3ky0

kr ! .

(9)

it is useful to write this answer in terms of mass scales and compare to a at ve-
dimensional space.
if y0 is chosen to address the tev hierarchy, one nds the correction
p l/tev3r. with a cross product
factor (mp l/tev)3/kr. taking k  mp l, one derives m 2
background metric, one would derive the tev scale by choosing rc as m 3rc = m 2
p l where m
is of order a tev and the mass of the kk modes would be starting at 1/rc. the corrections
to gravity would be those of the number of modes of energy less than 1/r, which would
be m 2
p l/rm 3. this precisely agrees with the contribution one would have in the warped
background if one saw the full continuum contribution. this would of course be ruled out
by current experiments as it is far too strong a correction to gravity.

however, the calculation in the ads background based on the continuum form of the kk
modes is not appropriate. it helps to examine the detailed form of the kk modes. recall

4

figure 1: schematic view of the kaluza-klein gravity modes. the x-axis is the fth dimen-
sion. the left/right vertical lines represent the planck/tev branes. the volcano potential
rises then falls o rapidly away from the planck brane. plotted are the squared amplitudes
of two kk gravity modes relative to the graviton zero mode. the heavy m >> 1 tev
mode takes its asymptotic (oscillating) form at the tev brane, the other mode exhibits the
characteristic behavior for m << 1 tev. very light modes with m < 104 ev would appear
as at lines, since they track the zero mode.

that they were derived in a background ads space in which there was a four-dimensional at
brane with localized energy density. one derives the kk modes by assuming they factorize
into momentum eigenstates with mass m, where m is determined by solving an analog
quantum mechanics problem describing the shape of the kk mode in the fth dimension.
the analog potential for these modes was dubbed the volcano potential because there was
a delta-function at the origin, a barrier, and then a smooth fall-o to zero the zero mode is
the single bound state. all other modes are suppressed at the origin (as the rst calculation
of corrections to newtons law showed) and then turn into continuum plane wave modes in
the large y region, far from the brane.

at a given location y0, modes which are suciently light are suppressed relative to their
continuum form, while modes which have already assumed their asymptotic form are un-
suppressed. we can quantify this statement by examining the explicit expression for the
modes eq. (5). the asymptotic forms of the bessel functions, and thus the onset of con-
tinuum behavior, requires mz0 much greater than 1, which is only true for modes of mass
greater than a tev. this is an important result. it says that modes at all energies below the
strongly interacting regime are more suppressed than a continuum kk mode. this result

5

could have been anticipated from ref. [2], where it was shown that quantization was in units
of approximately tev. modes do not appear to have their continuum form until they are at
least this massive.

the suppression of the lighter modes is addressed by looking at the asymptotic form of

the bessel functions for small mz:

zj2(mz) 

m2
8

z5/2 , zy2(mz)  

4

m2z3/2 

z1/2


.

(10)

we see that y2 tracks the zero mode, whereas j2 rises sharply with respect to the zero
mode. so long as y2 dominates, the contribution from the kk modes is as suppressed
relative to that of the zero mode as if we were probing gravity on the planck brane; e.g. the
corrections to newtons law are given by eqn. (8). we nd that y2 dominates so long as
0), which is approximately 104 ev. all
we are exploring modes with mass less than 1/(kz2
gravitational experiments to date see the corrections to gravity to be as small as if we were
living on the planck brane!

modes with masses in the region intermediate between 104 ev and 1 tev are controlled
by the small mz behavior of the dominant j2 term.
if these modes had already reached
their continuum form at z = z0, the cross section for real emission of these modes would be
proportional to e/(tev)3, where e denotes the relevant physical energy scale. this agrees
with [9] for n = 1 extra dimensions, and leads to astrophysical and collider eects which
are clearly excluded by observations. using the actual form of these modes at z0, we nd
instead that the real emission cross section is proportional to

e 6

(tev)8

 

.

(11)

so in fact the leading order energy dependence of these modes agrees with the large torus
compactications of [1] for the case of n = 6 extra dimensions! because these eects are much
softer in the infrared, they turn out to be easily compatible with all existing observations
[9].

in fact, a stronger result readily follows. if matter is localized to any four-dimensional
at brane between the planck and tev branes, the force between the matter will look four-
dimensional for energies less than a tev. this means that one could imagine doing physics
in the bulk, analogous to what one might have tried in the orbifold case, to explain features
of our observable world.

what emerges is a very compelling picture. the world is ve dimensional: the coordinate
y extends to innity. however, for any observer localized to a given location y0, the modes of
mass greater than mp l expk|y0| are strongly coupled. the amplitude of lighter modes on
0 (104 ev in our case) are coupled
the y0 brane is suppressed. those of mass less than 1/kz2
by 1/mp l with further amplitude suppression. heavier modes are power law suppressed over
what would be expected had the metric been at. so the observer conned to the brane sees
gravity as essentially four-dimensional, no matter where the brane is located! we can live
with an innite extra dimension and simply not know it.

6

the scenario presented here will be tested at future collider experiments. to leading
order in (e/tev), real emission eects will mimic those of n = 6 extra dimensions in the
scenario of [1]. because of the strong power suppression, it is important to be able to probe
energy scales close to (1/z0). there may also be detectable eects from virtual exchanges of
kk modes. however such eects are dicult to compute since they are dominated by heavy
modes near the tev cuto; a string theory calculation is probably required to get a reliable
estimate.

this is a very tantalizing scenario. it clearly ties in well with the holographic picture
advocated in [6]. again, with the innite dimension, one expects the gravitational theory
to correspond to a gauge theory cut-o in the ultraviolet. within this theory, there is a
correspondence between location y and mass scale determined by the shape of the zero
mode. the additional contribution of this paper is to demonstrate that the kaluza-klein
excitations do not disturb this picture. they give small corrections to the theory of gravity,
so long as one is at suciently low energy. this new venue should provide new avenues for
addressing important problems in cosmology and gravity.

acknowledgements: we wish to acknowledge useful discussions with savas dimopou-
los, ann nelson, stuart raby, raman sundrum, and herman verlinde. we thank martin
gremm and emanuel katz for comments on the manuscript. we also wish to thank the
aspen center for physics, where this work was initiated. the research of joe lykken was
supported by nsf grant phy94-07194, and by doe grant de-ac02-76ch03000. the
research of lisa randall was supported in part by doe under cooperative agreement de-
fc02-94er40818 and under grant number de-fg02-91er4071.

7

references

[1] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, and g. dvali, phys. lett. b429, 263 (1998); i. anto-
niadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, and g. dvali, phys lett. b436, 257 (1998).

[2] l. randall and r. sundrum, a large mass hierarchy from a small extra dimension,

hep-th/9905221, (e-print archive, 1999).

[3] l. randall and r. sundrum, an alternative to compactication, hep-th/9906064,

(e-print archive, 1999).

[4] c. csaki, m. graesser, c. kolda, j. terning, cosmology of one extra dimension with

localized gravity, hep-ph/9906513, (e-print archive, 1999).

[5] n. kaloper, bent domain walls as brane-worlds, hep-th/9905210, (e-print archive,

1999).

[6] h. verlinde, holography and compactication, hep-th/9906182, (e-print archive,

1999).

[7] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 231 (1998); o. aharony, s. gubser, j. mal-
dacena, h. ooguri and y. oz, large n eld theories, string theory and gravity,
hep-th/9905111, (e-print archive, 1999).

[8] w. goldberger and m. wise, modulus stablization with bulk elds, hep-ph/9907447,

(e-print archive, 1999).

[9] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, and g. dvali, phys. rev. d59, 086004 (1999).

8

