9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
4

 

 
 

1
v
6
2
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

ftuam-99-5

ift-uam/csic-99-6

large n corrections to the strong coupling

behaviour of su (n )/zn lattice gauge theories

a. gonzalez-arroyo1, and c. pena2,

departamento de fsica teorica c-xi and

instituto de fsica teorica c-xvi

universidad autonoma de madrid,

cantoblanco, madrid 28049, spain.

abstract

we derive a formula for the large n behaviour of the expectation values of

an arbitrary product of wilson loops in the adjoint representation. we show

the consequences of our formula for the study of the large n strong coupling

behaviour of su(n)/zn pure gauge theories, and theories with matter elds

in the adjoint representation. this allows us to calculate large n corrections

to the gluino condensate and meson propagators in the lattice version of

supersymmetric yang-mills. applications to the strong coupling behaviour

of the kazakov-migdal model are also given.

pacs: 11.15.ha, 11.15.pg, 11.15.me

keywords: lattice gauge theories, large n expansions, strong coupling

expansions.

1e-mail: tony@martin.ft.uam.es
2e-mail: carlos@martin.ft.uam.es

1

1 introduction

su(n) group integration formulas at large n have attracted interest since

the late 70s. they occur in the study of large n lattice gauge theories and

in connection with matrix models. the latter have found a wide range of

applications over the years in areas going from 2-dimensional quantum grav-

ity to 4-dimensional yang-mills theory. the class of matrix models involving

large n group integrations are the unitary matrix models (see ref. [1] for a

recent review).

within lattice gauge theories, su(n) group integrations arise naturally

when studying strong coupling expansions of lattice gauge theory models,

which simplify in the large n limit. the most standard method [2] uses an

eective action approach centered around the one-link integral. our motiva-

tion for this paper arose in the context of n = 1 susy yang-mills on the

lattice, an interesting testing ground for non-perturbative methods, and for

which some monte carlo data are available [3]. the model contains lattice

gauge elds and quarks (gluinos) in the adjoint representation of the group.

when studying the model at strong coupling one notices that the eective

potential method cannot be carried through, lacking an equivalent one-link

integral formula in the adjoint representation. our approach [4] was based

on the hopping parameter expansion expressed as a sum of random walks

on the lattice [5, 6]. then, one has to perform the gauge eld integration

of an expression containing products of traces of wilson loops in the adjoint

representation. it turns out, as will be shown in this paper, that the leading

large n contribution is rather trivial from the point of view of large n in-

tegration. it arises from loops which are pure-spikes (or pure backtrackers)

and that actually do not depend on the gauge elds.

2

another instance in which group integrals of quantities in the adjoint

representation have acquired relevance is in the context of induced qcd [7].

the kazakov-migdal model has scalar quarks in the adjoint representation

coupled to a  = 0 lattice gauge eld. a wide variety of techniques have

been applied to this model. the strong coupling (large mass) region solution

of the gaussian model was obtained by gross [8]. again, as realised later by

khoklachev and makeenko [9], the role of the large n integration over the

gauge variables is simply to restrict the sum over random walks to pure-spike

paths. their contribution does not depend on the gauge elds, so that it can

be taken outside the integral.

in this paper we will address the problem of computing the leading non-

trivial large n integral of a product of traces of wilson loops in the adjoint

representation. the result is more easily presented in the form of the evalu-

ation of a generating function (eq. (1)) for adjoint wilson loops. the main

result is presented in eq. (13). the formula is obtained by expanding the

exponential, performing the integration and resumming the result, so that it

is only valid for suciently small lattice couplings s(), i.e. it is the strong

coupling expression of the generating functional. the result is the exponen-

tial of a quantity which is of order 1 ( n 0). this contrasts with the typical

n 2 behaviour for the fundamental representation. indeed, in applications to

strong coupling expansions of theories with matter elds, there is an addi-

tional n 2  1 term arising from trivial wilson loops which are proportional

to the trace of the unit matrix in this representation. this term comes from

the pure-spike paths mentioned previously. thus, the terms we are calcu-

lating here give large n subleading contributions to the observables of these

theories. we emphasise nevertheless that our calculation gives the leading

term in which the actual details of the group integration play any role.

3

the paper is organised as follows. the main quantity we are calculating

is given in eq. (1) of section 2, and the result for it is given in eq. (13). the

rest of the section contains the outline of the derivation, with details and

terminology collected in the two appendices (this includes a useful diagram-

matic formalism to deal with the computation of group invariants). readers

not interested in the derivation might jump directly to section 3, where the

formula in question is put to work in calculating large n corrections to the

strong coupling values of observables in su(n)/zn lattice gauge theories,

with or without matter elds. explicit formulas are given for the lattice ver-

sion of n = 1 supersymmetric yang-mills theory. this includes the large

n corrections to the gluino condensate and the leading non-ozi contribu-

tions to the scalar meson propagator. similar calculations can be carried on

for the gaussian kazakov-migdal model. as an example, we show how from

our formulas one can deduce the leading n behaviour of the propagators of

the p-scalar bound states. the masses of these states are explicitly given.

finally, the paper is ended with a short conclusion section.

2 group integration formulas

we consider an su(n) gauge theory dened on a hypercubic, d-dimensional

innite lattice . to any link  of the lattice there is associated a group

element g. most expressions that we will use involve the matrices corre-

sponding to the adjoint representation of the group ua(g)  u. regard-

ing geometrical objects on the lattice, such as lattice paths, we will adopt

the terminology and conventions of ref. [6]. given a closed lattice path ,

tr (wa()) labels the trace of the corresponding wilson loop evaluated in

the adjoint representation.

4

our main goal in this section is to compute, to leading order in n, the

result of integrating over the group variables g an arbitrary product of traces

of adjoint wilson loops. this result is best collected in the form of the

following generating function:

z(s) =y

(cid:18)z dh(g)(cid:19) exp{x
e

s(e) tr (wa(e))} .

(1)

in this expression, dh(g) is the haar measure on the group variable g, and

the product extends to all the links  of the lattice. the sum in the exponent

runs over all equivalence classes of closed paths. each equivalence class e

contains all paths such that the traces of the adjoint wilson loops computed

along them coincide for an arbitrary gauge eld conguration. the common

that z(s) can also be looked at as the partition function of a certain kind

value of the trace of the adjoint wilson loop is labelled tr (wa(e)). the
arguments of the generating function are the real parameters s(e). notice
of pure gauge theory. the parameters s(e) would in that case appear as

the (lattice) couplings of the corresponding action. although the action is

not the most general su(n)/zn invariant action, other terms would give

superuous information. from this point of view the result of this section

can be interpreted as the evaluation of the partition function of this pure

gauge model in the strong coupling region (small values of s(e)).

the expansion of the exponential in z gives us the integrals of traces that

we are interested in:

z(s) =

xn=0

with

e(e1 . . .en) =y

1

. . .x
n!x
s(e1) . . . s(en) e(e1 . . .en) ,
en
e1
(z dh(g)) tr (wa(e1)) . . . tr (wa(en)) .

5

(2)

(3)

to compute the previous expression one must rst select a representative of

the classe. we will choose a closed path without spikes (backtracking parts).

it is always possible to reduce an arbitrary path by eliminating its spikes in a

systematic way and reach a path which is called simple in ref. [6]. as we will

see later there is more than one simple path within each class, but anyone

will do. let us, from now on, use the same symbole to refer to the class and

to its representative simple path. in the rest of this section we will show the

main steps in the evaluation of expression (3). many of the technical details

are collected in appendices a and b.

a possible approach would be to express the adjoint wilson loops in

terms of fundamental representation ones and then use the formulas available

for the latter.

instead we would use a procedure which could allow the

calculation of traces of adjoint wilson loops and other gauge invariant objects

systematically to all orders in 1/n. what we do rst is to express the

integrand in eq. (3) as a sum of products of the elements of the adjoint

representation matrices u:

e(e1 . . .en) =xai,bi

()a1...alb1...bly

(cid:18)z dh(g)(cid:19) u a1b1

1

. . . u albl

l

.

(4)

the sum extends over the 2l(n 2  1) possible values of the indices. for

simplicity we will refer to the indices jointly by the set i  {a1, b1, . . . al, bl}.

the integer l gives the length of the total joint path e1 . . .en. the labels

1 . . . l refer to the links of this joint path taken in an arbitrary order and

where a given link can occur more than once in the sequence. finally, the

symbol () contains the contraction of the indices necessary to produce the

traces given in eq. (3). it is given by a product of l kronecker deltas. it

is clear that which index is contracted with which depends on the naming

of the indices and on the geometry of the paths. this information can be

6

coded into an application  : i  i which maps the contracted indices onto

each other ((c) = c ; (c) = c). since the application is bijective it can be

seen as an element of the group s2l of permutations of 2l indices, having

the properties of a pairing. it is clear from the denition of the index set i,

that there is another pairing   s2l naturally dened on our system. it is

the application which maps the two indices of a given link matrix onto each

other:  (ai) = bi ;  (bi) = ai.

the next step in the calculation is the evaluation of the group integrals

involved in eq. (4). our procedure will be to express the adjoint representa-

tion matrices in terms of the fundamental representation ones, and then to

make use of the available formulas for that case. here we will just explain

and make use of the results, collecting the details of the derivation within

appendix a. first, one can look at the result of integrating over a single link

variable. the result can be expressed as a linear combination of invariant

group tensors, with coecients depending on n. these tensors have indices

within those elements of i which belong to the matrices corresponding to

this link. the result of integrating over all link variables can be expressed

similarly as a linear combination of invariant tensors, this time involving all

the indices of the set i. thus we can write:

e(e1 . . .en) =xci

()c1...c2l xs

cn () t ()c1...c2l ,

(5)

where t ()c1...c2l is an invariant tensor and cn () the corresponding n-

dependent coecient. the indices ci simply label the elements of i. the

symbol  stands for a permutation ( : i  i). in appendix a (eq. 37) we

describe how one can associate to any permutation of a certain type an in-

variant tensor (  t ()). there, one can also see that if the permutation

has a nonvanishing number of 1-cycles, the corresponding tensor vanishes.

7

it is clear by the construction that both the invariant tensor and its coe-

cient factorise into a product of contributions of single links. this and other

properties (like the absence of 1-cycles) restrict the space of possible . the

full set labelled s denes a certain subgroup of s2l. we will leave out its

characterisation for later and continue with the outline of the procedure.

the nal step consists in performing the summation over the values of the

indices, which is equivalent to contracting the colour indices of the invariant

tensor with the (). dening

dn (, ) xci
e(e1 . . .en) = xs

()c1...c2l t ()c1...c2l

cn ()dn (, ) .

(6)

(7)

we nally get:

the result is expressed in terms of the coecients cn () and dn (, ).

explicit forms for these quantities can be traced back from eqs. (41) and

(42) in appendix a. the main point now is to analyse the behaviour of these

coecients as n  .

the large-n behaviour of the coecients cn () follows from the result

for the corresponding coecient in the one-link integral, eq. (35); one gets:

n(cid:19)l
cn () = a() (cid:18) 2

+ subleading terms .

(8)

where the leading prefactor a() is zero for all but a restricted class of

permutations . it is not hard to characterise this subset within s. it is

given by those permutations  satisfying:   = e, where e is the identity

mapping. for these permutations the coecient a() is equal to 1. this

result rests on the work of ref. [10].

the machinery to deal with the contractions of invariant tensors entering

the denition of dn , and extract their leading n behaviour, is set up in

8

appendix b, whither we refer for details. the method follows by setting up

a feynman-diagram interpretation of each term in the sum eq. (7). for that

we need to enter into the structure of the invariant tensors t (). these are

products of traces of products of the group generators in the fundamental

representation (cf. eq. (39)). to any p-cycle contained in the permutation 

there corresponds an invariant tensor of the form tr (c1 . . . cp) (where ci is

a group generator). it is clear why the tensor vanishes if there are 1-cycles.

we look at these traces as vertices of a feynman diagram where the indices

play the role of the legs. the vertices are not symmetric with respect to

the exchange of the legs but only cyclic-symmetric. this form of vertices

is characteristic of planar diagrams in large hermitian matrix models, for

example. thus, for the full  one obtains a bunch of vertices with a total of

2l legs. the contractions encoded in  can be seen as propagators joining

pairs of legs of dierent or the same vertices. thus to every term in eq. (7)

one can associate a (vacuum) feynman diagram with v vertices and l lines

(note that l, which is the total number of pairs of colour indices in eq. (4),

is the only topological quantity of the diagrams being equal for all the  and

). we further call k the number of connected components of the diagram.

in appendix b we prove that the large n maximal leading contribution of

a diagram with k connected components, v vertices, and l lines is given by

m 2ln 2kv +l, where m is an integer that can be zero or one. corrections

go like inverse powers of n 2. if we combine this with (8), we obtain that the
leading term coming from cn ()dn (, ) goes at most as n 2kv .

now, from the topological constraints it is clear that 1  k  v . there-

fore, the maximum value of 2k  v would occur when k = v . this means

that all propagators go from one vertex to itself. to understand the impli-

cations of this we need to make use of some of the properties of the vertices

9

appearing in such a diagram and its relation to the original set of lattice

paths. since vertices arise from link integration they can only contain in-

dices pertaining to matrices of the same link. furthermore, vertices only mix

the rst indices of the matrices among themselves and the second among

themselves (see appendix a for details). hence, a contraction between two

indices of the same vertex comes from a contraction of the link matrix with

itself. but since the rst index is contracted with the rst or the second with

the second, we have either u t

 , which due to the orthogonal nature
of the adjoint representation matrix allows to eliminate the two matrices al-

 u or uu t

together.

in terms of the original paths a self contraction corresponds to

the path moving in one direction forward and backward consecutively. this

gives what we call spikes. but remember that our original paths were sim-

ple, and hence had no spikes. in conclusion, the restriction to simple paths

tells us that there are no self-contractions of our diagrammatic vertices, cor-

responding to the situation when these vertices come from normal ordered

operators.

we then conclude that all connected components of the diagram have at

least two vertices. hence, the leading term arises from diagrams for which

2k = v and which give a contribution of order one as n  . finally, we

arrive at

e(e1, . . .en) = 0 + o(

1
n 2 ) ,

(9)

where 0 is an integer summing the contribution from all the leading order

diagrams. this is the main result that was needed in ref. [4] to justify the

restriction to pure-spike paths. in what follows we will proceed to compute

the value of 0.

first of all let us study what can we learn about the graphs giving nonva-

nishing leading contribution (o(n 0)). we have not yet given the condition

10

that has to be satised by  to give a nonvanishing leading contribution to

dn (, ). this occurs (see appendix b) when the permutation  satises

the relation:  = e. this is very similar to the characterisation coming

from the link integration, with the replacement of  by . our nal number

0 comes from counting the number of possible permutations  within s

satisfying both relations simultaneously. furthermore, the set s is charac-

terised by saying that it contains all permutations having no 1-cycles and

such that all cycles contain indices belonging to matrices of the same link

and to either the rst or the second index of these matrices (but not both).

to understand the implications of the previous conditions, let us return

to the connection between the original pathsei and the permutation . any

of the paths is an ordered sequence of matrices. since the matrices have two

indices we get a classication of indices into two sets: those appearing as a

rst or a second index of the matrices. notice that if the link is followed in

the reverse direction the denition of what index is rst or last is exchanged.

any path is then associated to two equal length closed sequences of indices.

it corresponds to two of the cycles of the permutation  . the two cycles can

be connected by means of  (or ). now, from the conditions characterising

the leading , we conclude:

 =  1

.

(10)

this means that  must map complete cycles of  into equal length cycles.

given the identication of these cycles with the original paths, we see that

a leading  just maps complete paths of equal length among themselves.

but since  only connects indices belonging to the same lattice point, we

conclude that the actual paths connected by  have to coincide. there are

a few very simple conclusions one can extract from this result. the rst is

11

that there is a factorisation property satised by the integral e(e1, . . .en). its

value factorises into a product of contributions of distint paths. this follows

from a similar factorisation property for , since indices from dierent paths

cannot be connected by it, despite the fact that the paths might overlap

partially. thus, the nal number of maximal permutations 0 factorises as

well. one might have guessed this factorisation from the standard arguments

in the large n limit; notice, however, that the factorisation is not complete:

as we will see, the integral of a given wilson loop to the power n is not the

n-th power of the integral of a single wilson loop, so that the result is not

classical.

it only remains, therefore, to compute 0 for the case of a single wilson

not be reducible equivalently. we will refer to  as the winding number of

loop tr (wa(e)) taken to the power n. to do this, it is convenient to express
the path e in the form (), where  is a positive integer. this notation
means that e is built up by describing  sequentially  times;  itself must
the path, and write it as (e). these considerations are necessary, as our
results will depend explicitly on (e).
for our path conguration we have that  has n cycles of length l(e)

(the length of the path). the permutation  maps one cycle into other

preserving the ordering within each cycle. thus, it is specied by giving the

corresponding mapping of the indices at a given space point. naively one

would say that the number is then n!. in fact this has to be corrected by two

facts: the rst is that we have to eliminate all permutations  having 1-cycles;

points. this last issue can be dealt with by arranging the indices belonging

the second is that one must take into account that if (e) is larger than 1,
the mapping has to respect the cyclic ordering in which e describes these
to the same path into cycles of length (e).

in a compact mathematical

12

form we have that, given a permutation   having n -cycles, we want to

 1 =  . let us call this number p n

count how many permutations  without 1 cycles of the n indices satisfy:
 . the action of  is simply the
mathematical statement of a change of names of the indices, so that without

the requirement of no 1-cycles, the solution would be simply n!n. this

comes because we must map complete cycles into complete cycles, so we

have n! possibilities. then after having selected the mapping of the cycles,

there are  possible assignements for each cycle (it is enough to specify the

mapping of 1 element of the cycle and the rest would follow): this gives the

n. subtracting the permutations which have 1-cycles takes a little more

eort but presents no real problem. as a matter of fact, it is easier and

more compact to determine the expression for the generating function rst

and deduce from it the expression of the quantity p n

 . for the generating

function corresponding to a single path one obtains:

y

(cid:18)z dh(g)(cid:19) exp{s(e) tr (wa(e))} =

exp{s(e)}
(1  (e)s(e))

for completeness we give an expression for the numbers p n

 themselves:

,

(11)

p n

 = n!

nxp=0

(1)p

p!

np

.

(12)

finally, we combine the result eq. (11) for all the paths via the factorisa-

tion property and arrive at the desired leading contribution to the generating

functional eq. (1):

z(s) = exp

(s(e) + log(1  (e)s(e)))


(13)

x
e

which is the main result of this section. as explained in the introduction the

exponent is of order n 0. had we added a contribution to the initial action

13

proportional to the trace of the unit matrix in the adjoint representation, the

term would have remained unchanged by the integration (being a constant)

and would have given a contribution to the exponent of order n 2  1 (the

dimension of the adjoint representation). although trivial, this remark is im-

portant in practice because such a term actually arises in many applications.

it can be associated to the trivial path of zero length.

3 application to strong coupling expansions

in this section we will use the group integration formula obtained in the last

section to derive results which are relevant for the behaviour of su(n)/zn

gauge theories on the lattice, with or without matter elds, at strong cou-

pling and large n. these include pure gauge theories, gauge theories with

fermions in the adjoint representation, a particularly interesting case being

the lattice version of n = 1 supersymmetric yang-mills [3], and also gauge-

higgs models with scalars in the adjoint representation like the kazakov-

migdal model [7]. in all cases, after integrating out the matter elds via a

hopping parameter expansion, one ends up with an eective action of the

type given in eq. (1). our integration formula eq. (13) allows us to write

immediately the expression for the free energy in the strong coupling region

at large n. in what follows we will give the explicit formulas in some of the

cases that have been studied previously in the literature.

consider rst the case of su(n)/zn pure gauge lattice theories. for this

case the consequence of our formulas can be easily deduced. as mentioned

at the beginning of section 2, the generating function z(s) can be seen as

the partition function of a pure gauge model where the couplings a(e) are
identied with s(e). the free energy of the model is then given by the

14

exponent of the right hand side of eq. (13). as a particular example we can

write down the case of the wilson-type plaquette action model. the free

energy per unit volume of the model is given by:

f (a)/v olume =

d(d  1)

2

(a  log(1  a))

,

(14)

which has a singularity at a = 1. actually, the position of the singularity

coincides with the position of the third-order phase transition point in the

2-dimensional lattice gauge theory [11]. in higher dimensions the model is

known to have a rst order phase transition line at a < 1 [12, 11]. thus,

the strong coupling phase depicted by eq. (14) extends into the metastable

region as is usually the case for these transitions. there is one atypical

behaviour of the free energy eq. (14) which explains why this formula was

not found before. this is the fact that it is of order 1 = o(n 0). typically

the free energy goes like n 2, as for example is the case in this same model

above the rst order phase transition point. the dierent n dependence of

the free energy above and below the transition suggests that the position of

the transition is given by the vanishing of the weak coupling free energy. this

is indeed the case in 2 dimensions. an n 2 behaviour is also shown by the

free energy of the mixed fundamental-adjoint action for any non-zero value

of the fundamental coupling [11]. thus, in older work the free energy (14) of

this model is taken to be zero [13]. remarkably, from eq. (13) one can easily

read out the free energy for an arbitrary su(n)/zn invariant action.

let us now consider the addition of matter elds in the adjoint represen-

tation. the general features and behaviour is similar for scalar or fermionic

matter. for deniteness we will illustrate the formulas restricting to the

fermionic case. indeed, our concern with n = 1 susy yang-mills triggered

our interest in the problem. here we will follow the procedure of ref. [4].

15

performing the integration over the quark (gluino) elds leads to a deter-

minant. in the large mass (small hopping) region, this determinant can be

written as the exponential of an eective action expressable as a sum over

closed paths on the lattice:

sef f = fxx

xl=1 xsl(x)

1
l

tr (w ())tr (()) ,

(15)

where sl(x) is the set of closed paths of length l with origin in the lattice

point x, and () is a spin matrix associated to the path, whose explicit

form we will detail later (cf. eq. (18)). the factor f takes into account

the dierent possibilities for the nature of the fermion eld: m ajorana = 1/2,

while dirac = 1.

in ref. [6] it is shown how it is convenient and possible to rearrange the

summation over paths into a sum over classes of paths labelled by what is

called a simple path. a simple path is a closed contour that has no spikes or

backtracking pieces. it is easy to see that for all paths associated with the

same simple path the trace of the wilson loop is exactly the same, so that

they actually belong to a single equivalence class of the type dened at the

beginning of section 2. however, the classes considered in this paper contain

more than one simple path and its corresponding classmates. the reason is

that in ref. [6] closed paths are dened as ordered sets of links, which have

therefore a rst and a last element. it is clear, however, that which link is

taken as the rst one is irrelevant for the gauge eld dependence, being given

by a trace. this is just a technical point, but essential to get the numbers

right. to compensate for this point one has simply to multiply by a counting

factor which gives the number of links that can be chosen as rst element.

curiously this factor is not the length of the path l(e) but l(e)/(e), where
(e) is the winding number factor dened in the last section. when the path

16

goes round a given loop (e) times, it is clear that the relevant factor is the

number of links in the basic loop, and not in the total path. in addition, the

orientation of the path is irrelevant for the gauge eld dependence, so that

our present classes contain each path and its reverse. in summary, we stress

that the classes of paths dened in section 2 contain a basic simple path,

its reverse and all the l(e)/(e) simple paths obtained by selecting a point

along the path (as origin).

finally, one can rewrite the eective action (eq. (15)) in the form of

the exponent of eq. (1), with coecients s(e) which depend on the basic

parameters of the original theory. these coecients are o(1) in n. one can

include in them the contribution of the pure gauge action. restricting for

deniteness to one avour adjoint fermions at zero gauge couplings, which

contains the lattice version of n = 1 supersymmetric yang-mills, one obtains

the following coecients:

,

s(e) =
 (e) 

 (e)
(e)
(1  )l(e)(cid:0)tr ((e)) + tr ((e1)(cid:1)

f

(16)

(17)

,

where 1 is the reverse of the path , and the matrix (e) is the spin matrix

of the path, given by the product along the path of the link matrices:

 (ris  )

.

(18)

in the previous expression  is the hopping parameter, r the wilson parame-

ter, and the spin matrices  are just the dirac matrices up to a sign, positive

if the path traverses the link with positive orientation and negative if not.

the factor 1   in eq. (17) is the result of resumming all paths within each

class, with  given by:

 =

1 p1  4(2d  1)2(r2  1)

2

,

(19)

17

where d is the space-time dimension.

with the previous expression and formula (13), one can obtain the free

energy of the model at large n:

f = f (n 2  1) f0 v olume 

(20)

x
e

(cid:18)  (e)
(e)

+ log(1   (e))(cid:19) ,

where the sum runs over the equivalence classes of paths e dened in sec-

tion 2.

we see that our result provides the o(1) contribution to the free energy.

this is not however the leading piece, which is given by the term proportional
to f0, and is of order n 2. the latter was given in ref. [6] and its value is:

f0 = f(cid:16)  d log(1  ) + (d  1) log(1 

2d

2d  1

)(cid:17)tr (is) ,

(21)

where is is the identity matrix in spin space. this term arises from the

paths whose gauge eld contribution is proportional to the trace of the unit

matrix. this occurs for the so-called pure-spike paths, which are paths such

that after eliminating all backtracking parts we are left with a single point

(a path of zero length). this contribution is, however, fairly trivial from the

point of view of the group integration, so that the o(1) contribution is the

rst one in which the characteristics of group integration show up.

obtaining a closed expression for the o(1) contribution to the free energy

involves performing the sum over path classes explicitly. similar resumma-

tions can be performed (see ref. [6] for a derivation of these resummations

and for earlier references on the subject). the appearance of the factor (e)

in the formula has prevented us so far from obtaining such a closed expres-

sion.

18

1

v olumex
e

f (1  2)(cid:18)
l(e)  (e)

1

(e)

+

1

1   (e)(cid:19) ,

(22)

other interesting quantities can be computed to the order in n at which

we are working. this includes the gluino condensate, which can be obtained

by an appropriate dierentiation of the free energy. as in the previous case,

the leading term given in ref. [4] comes from pure-spike paths, and is (up

to some multiplication factors) independent of the group representation in

which the quarks are living. this is a particular manifestation of the triviality

from the point of view of group integration of the leading term. finally, our

expression is as follows:

h (x)(x)i = 

(n 2  1)tr (is)

1  2d

2d1



by the volume in the previous expression is simply accounted for by picking

where l(e) is the length of any representative simple path. the division
a single simple path e from the space of all space-time translates. the

correction is the rst unquenched contribution. the leading one coincides

with the result of the quenched approximation [4]. to arrive at expression

eq. (22) we have made use of the resummation formulas of ref. [6]. the

origin of the 1  2 factor can be traced back to the rearrangement of sum

over paths into sums over simple paths.

in a similar fashion, it is possible to derive the large n correction to the

meson and p-gluino propagators and spectrum, which are given in ref. [4].

we will not give the formulas explicitly since they are notationally fairly

lengthy. instead we will provide the expression of a quantity for which our

present computation gives the leading large n behaviour. this quantity

is the non-ozi contribution to the meson propagator.

in a theory with

dierent equal mass avours, this term gives the main contribution to the

19

mass dierence between the non-singlet and singlet mesons. it contains what

in the continuum would be the contribution of the anomaly. when expanding

the fermion propagators in terms of paths, the non-ozi contributions come

from 2 closed paths originating at the 2 meson positions (see ref. [4] for

details). due to the main factorisation property which we have obtained for

wilson loop integration at this order in n, the contribution is only non-zero

when the two paths (classes) coincide. to the order in n at which we are

working, this term is non-zero both in the quenched approximation and in the

full theory. for simplicity, we give the contribution to the scalar propagator:

gnonozi(x, y) =

2

1

2d1 (cid:1)2 x12

f(cid:0)1  2d

 (1) (2) e1e2(cid:18) (e)
1   (e)(cid:19)2

(23)

where the sum now extends over all closed terse paths 1 with origin in x

and 2 with origin in y (see ref. [6] for an explanation of the lattice path

that the two paths have the same common reduced simple path, which we

terminology and an account of the resummation formulas). the e1e2 imposes
labele. it is possible to eliminate the constraint given by the  in the previous

formula, but its treatment exceeds the purpose of this paper.

in a similar way one can study other models, like the kazakov-migdal

model which has scalars in the adjoint representation. the gaussian model

can be treated in a similar way as the fermionic model. in this model there

are composites formed by p scalars, which are the analog of the p-gluino

bound states of the fermionic model [4]. the operators which produce these

states can be written in our notation as follows:

op(x)  a1(x)    ap(x) t (l(p)

+ )a1...ap

.

(24)

at strong coupling the correlator of two operators at dierent points (say x

and y) can be written as a sum over p paths (1 . . . p) joining the elds at

20

the two dierent points. the gauge eld dependence of such a contribution

is as follows (we restrict to correlators that are leading at large n):

t (l(p)

+ )a1...ap t (l(p)

+ )bp...b1 (wa(1))a1b1 . . . (wa(p))apbp

.

(25)

now we have to evaluate its expectation value with respect to the gauge

eld in the large n limit. the quantity is not a product of traces of wilson

loops. to handle this in a simple way with our formulas, we might add a
new big link l going from y to x and its corresponding group element (as an

independent variable). now, one can form p closed paths by attaching to each
of the original open paths i the big link l (note they all have  = 1). one
can then compute the expectation value of the product of the corresponding

wilson loops. clearly s for these paths is zero, since none of the paths

in the eective action contains the big link. the large n leading term of

the connected expectation value is obtained for all paths belonging to the

same class. the corresponding contribution is the p-th derivative of the free

energy in eq. (13) at s = 0, which is (p  1)!. what has this to do with

the expectation value of eq. (25)? to see that, one has simply to integrate

over the big link group variable. one gets terms like eq. (25) multiplied by

is (p  1)!. hence, nally, the expectation value of eq. (25) to leading order

n(cid:1)p. then one has to multiply by the number of dierent p-cycles, which
(cid:0) 2
2(cid:1)p, and is achieved when all the path classes e1 . . .ep coincide.
is given by(cid:0) n

similar results can be obtained in the fermionic model, thus justifying the

treatment of p-gluinos of ref. [4]. as an application of this result one can

proceed in a similar fashion as in ref. [4] and deduce the values of the masses

mp of the p-eld bound states for this theory:

cosh(mp) =

(2d  1)p/2

2

(cid:18)(cid:18)1  

 (cid:19)p/2

+

21

(2d  1)p1(cid:18) 

1  (cid:19)p/2(cid:19) , (26)

1

 being an integer number in {(d  1), . . . , (d  1)}, which accounts for all

the possible doubler modes (see [4] for details), and  is given by the same

formula as before (eq. 19) with r2  1 set to 1.

4 conclusions

in this paper we have studied the leading behaviour for large number of

colours of su(n) group link integrals of products of traces of wilson loops

in the adjoint representation. we have proven that the leading (non-trivial)

result is o(1) = o(n 0). the corresponding coecient has been computed in

section 2. the result factorises into contributions of wilson loops associated

to inequivalent paths. this allows us to compute up to this order and in the

strong coupling (small s()) region the corresponding generating function,

given in eq. (13) of section 2.

in section 3 we have shown how this generating functional and its deriva-

tives enter in expressions which are relevant in the context of strong coupling

expansions for gauge theories with matter elds in the adjoint representation.

we have given the expression for the free energy of a pure gauge su(n)/zn

model at strong coupling. adjoint wilson loop expectation values can be

read out immediately for these theories. we then proceeded to show how the

large mass expansion of theories with matter elds in the adjoint represen-

tation yields an eective action suitable for treatment with our formula. we

illustrate the applications by calculating explicitly the large n corrections

to various quantities in the lattice version of supersymmetric yang-mills. in

all cases, to obtain a compact form, one is faced with a path resummation

problem which at the moment we have been unable to solve. (the problem

looks tractable, though). we also showed that our present formulas can be

22

used to prove the form of the leading large n behaviour for p-gluino propa-

gators and spectra given in ref. [4]. we then took the case of the gaussian

kazakov-migdal model to show how, similarly, one arrives at the large n

values of the masses of the p-particle bound states at strong coupling.

from the methodological point of view, our paper might also prove of

interest in other contexts where the large n limit is at play. our diagram-

matical technique is non-standard and could help to complement other well-

known techniques as loop equations, orthogonal polynomials, master eld

equation, etc. it allows the computation of higher order corrections in 1/n 2

keeping the feynman diagram analogy. on the negative side, such a tech-

nique does not look appropriate for dealing with the weak coupling (large

s()) behaviour of the generating function.

acknowledgements

this work has been nanced by the cicyt under grant aen97-1678. a. g-

a wants to thank the theory division at cern for its hospitality during

the last stages of this work. the authors acknowledge useful conversations

with e. gabrielli and j. vermaseren.

appendix a

in this appendix we study group integrals with variables in the adjoint rep-

resentation of the gauge group. for this purpose, as explained in section 2,

we will relate the matrices in the adjoint representation to their fundamental

counterparts, and afterwards we will use known integration formulas for the

latter. these will be rst applied to the computation of single link integrals,

23

and then we will use the result to evaluate the multilink integral in eq. (4),

and reduce it explicitly to the compact form in eq. (5).

let us rst establish some notations and conventions. we write a for

the generators of su(n) in the fundamental representation. they close the

group algebra:

[a, b] = f abcc

,

(27)

where the indices a, b, c range from 1 to n 2  1. we choose the generators

to be normalised as:

tr (ab) =

1
2

ab

.

furthermore, the completeness relation is written as:

(a)ij(a)kl =

1
2

jkil 

1
2n

ijkl

.

(28)

(29)

now, the group integrals we want to compute have the general form:

z dh(g) u a1b1 . . . u anbn ,

(30)

where u = ua(g) is the matrix corresponding to a given group element g in

the adjoint representation, and dh(g) is the haar measure on su(n).

the relation of u with the matrix u = uf (g) corresponding to the same

group element in the fundamental representation reads, with the conventions

adopted above:

u ab = 2 tr (u aub) .

(31)

this allows us to rewrite (30) as an integral for matrices in the fundamental

representation, whose indices are contracted with a certain tensor built up

of a product of generators. before casting this statement into an explicit

equality, let us introduce the following known formula for group integrals in

24

the fundamental representation [10]:

r dh(g) u i1j1 . . . u injn(u )l1m1 . . . (u )lnmn =

(j, (l)) (m, (i)) c n

n (  ) ,

x,sn

(32)

with n < n .

in this expression, sn is the permutation group of n elements, and we have

introduced the following notation:

(j, (l)) 

nyk=1

jkl(k)

,

(33)

where l(k) is the k-th element of ({l1, . . . , ln}), with   sn.

c n

the coecients c n

n are class-functions on the space of permutations, i.e.,
n () for any (, )
(the notation    stands for the composition of two permutations), so

n is a map sn  r fullling c n

n (    1) = c n

that the value c n

n () only depends on the total number of cycles in the
permutation . for this purpose we call ck() the number of k-cycles in ,

and c() pk ck(). with this notation, it can be shown that the following

relation holds [10]:

  = xsn

c n

n (  ) n c()

,

(34)

which allows to determine c n

n () recursively. its general form turns out to
q(n ), where q(n) = n 2(n 2  1) . . . (n 2  (n  1)2), and p (n)

be c n

n () = p (n )

is a polynomial whose leading term is n c(). hence, at large n we get:

n () n=
c n

1
n n ,e + subleading terms ,

(35)

where e is the identity permutation, which maps a sequence to itself.

25

if we now merge eqs. (31) and (32), the result for (30) can be written as:

z dh u a1b1 . . . u anbn = 2n x,esn

c n

n ( e) t ()a1...an t (e)b1...bn ,

(36)

where we have introduced the following notation:

t ()a1...an  (a1)j1k1 . . . (an)jnkn(k, (j)) = (a1)j1j(1) . . . (an)jnj(n)

,

(37)

an implicit summation over matrix indices being understood. these objects

are products of traces of products of generators, and therefore invariant group

tensors. to make this more explicit, we can introduce the one-step-forward
cyclic permutation of m elements l(m)
and l(m)

+ (ai) = ai+1 for i < m

+ , dened by l(m)

+ (am) = a1, such that:

t (l(m)

+ )a1...am = tr (a1 . . . am) .

(38)

then we notice that each cycle in a generic permutation of n elements , as

that appearing in (37), closes an l+ trace, so that we can write:

t ()a1...an =

c()yi=1

t (l(i)

+ )ai(1)...ai(i)

,

(39)

where i is a sub-permutation giving the index order inside the i-th cycle,

which is a i-cycle.

now we address the computation of eq. (4). if we substitute for each

single-link integration in it the result (36) we get:

e(e1 . . .en) = 2lxai,bi

()a1...alb1...bl

lyk=1h x(k),e(k)snk

c nk

n ((k) e(k)) t ((k))a1a2...ank t (e(k))b1b2...bnki ,

26

(40)

where the index k labels the links which contribute at least one u in eq. (4),

the total number of these links being l (note that the integral over a link

carrying no u is 1). we call nk the number of us in (4) lying on the link k;

as we dene in section 2 the total number of us to be l, it is obvious that

k=1 nk = l.
one can put the result in a more compact form by introducing a permu-

pl
tation   s2l combining the set {(k),e(k); k = 1, . . . , l}. it is important

to notice that the set s of all the possible  obtained in this way is, in

general, only a subgroup of s2l, determined by the structure of the joint

path e1  . . . en. notice that the condition for cn () to be leading in n
is read from eq. (35) to be (k) =e(k)1 for any k; when written in terms of

the joint permutation , this condition is equivalent to   = e, where  is

a pairing, dened in section 2, such that  (ai) = bi,  (bi) = ai.

once  is xed, we can dene:

cn ()  2l

t ()c1...c2l 

c nk

n ((k) e(k)) ,

lyk=1
lyk=1
t ((k))a1a2...ank t (e(k))b1b2...bnk

(41)

,

(42)

after renaming the colour indices as in section 2.

it is these denitions,

together with eq. (6), that give the nal form eq. (7).

appendix b

in this appendix we will study the large n behaviour of scalars (invariants)

formed by contraction of invariant tensors. this type of objects appears

in the denition of the quantities dn entering in eq. (7). we will use the

symbolic representation for tensors as given in (37). for notational details we

27

refer the reader to appendix a. computational methods for calculating these

quantities have been devised [14] due to their interest in dierent contexts.

our iterative technique is related to the method of cvitanovic [15].

first of all we will set up a feynman diagram-like representation for the

invariant tensors t ()a1...am. for that, one uses the decomposition of the

permutation  into cycles (see eq. (39)). the tensor corresponding to an
m-cycle t (l(m)
+ )b1...bm is the trace of the product of m group generators, as
shown in eq. (38). now, to each l(m)
+ tensor we associate an m-legged vertex,
where the external legs are attached to indices, oriented clockwise according

to the orientation given by the cycle. in this way, a tensor associated to the

permutation  is associated to c() vertices. furthermore it will prove useful

to consider vertices with no legs, associated to the trace of the identity. this

representation is illustrated by the following:

t (l(n)

+ )b1...bn 

bn

b1 b2

b3

b

1(
1)

t ()b1...bn 

b

1(1)

b

1(2)
b

1(3)

b

c()(

c())

b

c()(1)

b

c()(2)
b

c()(3)

tr (i) = n 

the contraction of two indices of a tensor is represented in the diagrams

by joining the corresponding legs. given a product of invariant traces with

contracted indices, these prescriptions allow to represent it by a diagram con-

sisting of a certain number of vertices, joined by internal lines, and possibly

with some external lines representing unsaturated indices of the tensor. for

28

the scalar quantities we are interested in, the corresponding diagram is a

vacuum diagram with no external legs. notice, however, that the ordering

of the legs in a vertex is relevant, up to cyclic permutations. as explained

in section 2 and used later, the actual pattern of contraction of indices in

a tensor can be labelled by a pairing  of the indices, that is a permutation

made up of only 2-cycles.

our technique is based upon equations which express the result of con-

tracting two indices in an (m + n + 2)-tensor as a linear combination of

(m + n)-tensors. these equations can be obtained easily from the complete-

ness relation of the group generators eq. (29). we will refer to the basic

equations as fusion and ssion rules, and they are given respectively by:

xa

t (l(m+1)

+

)ab1...bmt (l(n+1)

+

)ac1...cn =

1
2

t (l(m+n)

+

)b1...bmc1...cn 

1
2n

t (l(m)

+ )b1...bmt (l(n)

+ )c1...cn (43)

xa

t (l(m+n+2)

+

)ab1...bmac1...cn =

1
2

t (l(m)

+ )b1...bmt (l(n)

+ )c1...cn 

1
2n

t (l(m+n)

+

)b1...bmc1...cn .

(44)

in our diagrammatic representation the fusion and ssion rules can be

depicted as:

bm

b1

bm

b1

c1

cn

c1

cn

=

1
2

bm

c1

b1

cn



1
2n

bm

b1

c1

cn

=

1
2

c1

cn

bm

b1

29



1
2n

bm

c1

b1

cn

(45)

(46)

it is easy to see that the repeated application of eqs. (45, 46) allows the

evaluation of all scalars formed by contracting the indices of an arbitrary

tensor. our goal will be to extract information on the n dependence from

these equations. as an example and for later use, we give in table 1 the

value and associated diagram for all independent tensor contractions up to

six indices. the corresponding diagrams have k = 1 connected components

and up to l = 3 internal lines.

if the number of indices of a tensor is odd, making all possible contractions

would leave an unsaturated index. applying the fusion-ssion rules would

reduce it to a linear combination of tensors with one index. but the only

one-index tensor tr (a) vanishes, and hence the contribution of a diagram

with a single external leg vanishes too. this allows to prove a result which

will be needed in what follows: the scalar corresponding to a one-particle

reducible diagram vanishes; by applying fusion and ssion rules iteratively

in each of those two sides of the diagram connected by the reducible line we

would reach the form b(n) tr (a)tr (a), which is zero q.e.d.

now we will prove a result concerning the n dependence of the scalars

formed by contraction of a given tensor, expressed in terms of the topological

properties of the associated diagram. the result is that the leading n be-

haviour of such a scalar is given by m2ln 2kv +l, with m being either 0 or

1. it is easy to check this property directly for tensors with few indices. the

tensor contractions given in table 1 and their multiplication allow to check

it up to l  3. the general proof will be done by induction, making use of

the fusion and ssion rules. hence, we will start by assuming that the result

has been proven for all scalars obtained after the contraction of l pairs of

indices, and end up proving that the result is also true for l + 1 contractions.

consider then a scalar formed by performing l + 1 contractions of the

30

indices of a 2l + 2 invariant tensor and its associated one-particle irreducible

diagram. let say it has k connected components, v vertices and l + 1

internal lines. applying the fusion rule its contribution is given as a linear

combination of the contribution of two diagrams with l internal lines, with

coecients 1/2 and 1/2n. the rst diagram has l internal lines, v  1

vertices and k connected components; thus, its leading term is of the form
m12ln 2kv +l+1. the second has l internal lines, v vertices and k con-
nected components3, so that the leading contribution is m22ln 2kv +l1,

which is subleading with respect to the previous one. in summary, the be-

haviour of the initial scalar is given by m2(l+1)n 2kv +(l+1), as predicted

by our result, with m = m1.

now let us turn to the ssion rule. as the original diagram has k con-

nected components, v vertices and l + 1 internal lines, then the two sub-

diagrams in the decomposition have (k , v + 1, l) and (k, v, l) topological

numbers respectively, with k  being either k or k + 1. the leading term

of the original diagram is thus of the required form m2(l+1)n 2kv +(l+1),

with m = 0 if k  = k and m = m1 if k  = k + 1. this completes the proof.

the previous result is used in section 2, to prove that the coecients

dn (, ), which are associated to a given diagram, have the mentioned large

n behaviour. this, combined with the leading behaviour of the coecients

cn , leads to the conclusion that the large n dominant behaviour of the

integrals e (eq. (3)) can only come from diagrams made out of connected

components with two vertices. from our previous results we also know that

the prefactor of the leading term is an integer counting the number of dia-

grams giving a non-vanishing maximal leading behaviour. for that purpose

3it cannot have k + 1 since this would contradict the hypothesis that the original

diagram is one-particle irreducible.

31

we need to complement our previous result by characterising those diagrams

which have a maximal large n behaviour (m = 1). fortunately, we only need

to do this for diagrams with two vertices v = 2 (and no self-contractions),

making up one of the connected components of a possible maximal diagram.

in the remaining of this appendix, we will prove the statement made

in section 2, namely that the two-vertex connected (and with no self-con-

tractions) diagrams having maximal leading behaviour (n l) are the ones

satisfying the identity  = e, where  is the permutation giving the

vertex structure and  the permutation specifying the contractions. by the

form of the diagram we know that  is made of 2 cycles of length l, and 

of l cycles of length 2. let us see what this means in diagrammatic terms.

take the legs of one vertex and label one as a1, then label the subsequent legs

ai+1  (ai). this means that the legs are ordered in a clockwise fashion.

now call bi  (ai) the indices of the other vertex (remember there are no self-

contractions). the condition  = e is equivalent to having (bi) = bi1.

this means that in the other vertex the ordering of the indices is counter-

clockwise. the corresponding diagram can then be drawn by joining the legs

with lines which do not cross: the diagram is planar.

using this graphical characterisation, it is easy to show that a diagram

coming from  6= e can never have a leading term, of the form studied

above, with m = 1. on the other hand, an exact formula can be derived for

planar diagrams by iterating the fusion rule; the result with l  2 lines is:

(cid:18)n 2  1

2n (cid:19)l(cid:18)1 

(1  n 2)l1(cid:19) ,

1

(47)

and obviously gives leading behaviour with m = 1.

to prove that any nonplanar diagram is necessarily not leading, let us

depict a generic nonplanar diagram with l = s + 2 lines in the following

32

form (which is always attainable),

bn

b1

a1

am

dq

d1

c1

cp

where the indexed legs are completely contracted between themselves

(remember that no self-contractions are allowed), and s = m + n = p + q  1.

the nonplanarity condition enters as a constraint: both a  c and a  d

contractions exist.

if a fusion is applied, and then a ssion to the resulting rst term in the

rhs, one gets:

bn

b1

a1

am

dq

d1

c1

cp

=

1
4

dq

d1

a1

am

bn

b1

c1

cp



1
4n

d1
cp

a1

dq

am
b1

bn

c1



1
2n

a1

bn

am

b1

d1

cp

dq

c1

(48)

now, the nonplanarity constraint prevents the rst term in the rhs to have

more than one connected component. it is then immediate, after applying

the rule for the leading term to each diagram in the rhs, that the leading

behaviour for the nonplanar diagram goes at most like n l2.

33

references

[1] p. rossi, m. campostrini and e. vicari, phys.rep. 302 (1998) 143.

[2] h. kluberg-stern, a. morel, o. napoly and b. petersson, nucl. phys.

b190[fs3] (1981) 504;

n. kawamoto and j. smit, nucl. phys. b192 (1981) 100.

[3] g. curci and g. veneziano, nucl. phys. b292 (1987) 555;

i. montvay, nucl. phys. b466 (1996) 259;

g. koutsoumbas and i. montvay, phys.lett. 398b (1997) 130-134;

a. donini, m. guagnelli, p. hernandez and a.vladikas, nucl. phys.

b523 (1998) 529;

r. kirchner, s. luckmann, i. montvay, k. spanderen, j. westphalen,

phys.lett. 446b (1999) 209;

i. campos, a. feo, r. kirchner, s. luckmann, i. montvay, g. munster,

k. spanderen and j. westphalen, hep-th/9903014.

[4] e. gabrielli, a. gonzalez-arroyo and c. pena, n = 1 supersymmetric

yang-mills on the lattice at strong coupling, preprint ftuam-98-24,

ift-uam/csic-99-4; hep-th/9902209.

[5] k.g. wilson, in new phenomena in subnuclear physics (erice, 1975),

ed. a. zichichi (new york, plenum, 1975);

n. kawamoto, nucl. phys. b190 [fs3] (1981) 617.

[6] a. gonzalez-arroyo, combinatorics of lattice paths with and without

spikes, preprint ftuam-99-4, ift-uam/csic-99-5; hep-th/9903037.

[7] v.a. kazakov, a.a. migdal, nucl. phys. b397 (1993) 214.

34

[8] d.j. gross, phys. lett. 293b (1992) 181.

[9] s.b. khokhlachev and yu.m. makeenko, mod. phys. lett. a7 (1992)

3653.

[10] i. bars and f. green, phys. rev. d20 (1979) 3311.

[11] yu.m. makeenko, m.i. polikarpov, nucl. phys. b205 [fs5] (1982) 386;

t.-l. chen, c.-i. tan and x.-t. zheng, phys. lett. 109b (1982) 383;

s. samuel, phys. lett. 112b (1982) 237; phys. lett. 122b (1983) 287.

[12] s.b. khokhlachev and yu.m. makeenko, phys. lett. 101b (1981) 403;

zh. eksp. teor. fiz. 53 (1981) 448 (sov. phys. jetp 53 (1981) 228).

[13] y. brihaye and p. rossi, nucl. phys. b235 [fs11] (1984) 226.

[14] t. van ritbergen, a.n. schellekens and j.a.m. vermaseren, int. j. mod.

phys. a14 (1999) 41.

[15] p. cvitanovic, phys. rev. d14 (1977) 1536.

35

table 1: explicit results for all topologically inequivalent, nonvanishing, com-

pletely connected diagrams corresponding to contractions of invariant traces

with up to 3 internal lines are shown. disconnected diagrams with l  3

can be built as products of the ones shown here.

= tr (aa)

= tr (abba)

= tr (abab)

= tr (ab)tr (ab)

= tr (abccba)

= tr (aabbcc)

=

=

n 2  1

2

(n 2  1)2

4n

= 

n 2  1

4n

=

=

=

n 2  1

4

(n 2  1)3

8n 2

(n 2  1)3

8n 2

= tr (ababcc)

= 

(n 2  1)2

8n 2

= tr (abcabc)

=

n 2  1

8n 2

= tr (abc)tr (cba) =

(n 2  1)(n 2  2)

8n

36

= tr (abc)tr (abc) = 

n 2  1

4n

= tr (aabc)tr (bc) =

(n 2  1)2

8n

= tr (abac)tr (bc) = 

n 2  1

8n

= tr (ab)tr (bc)tr (ca) =

n 2  1

8

37

