9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
2

 

 
 

1
v
2
1
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

ii. classically positive hamiltonians

adam d. helfer

department of mathematics, university of missouri, columbia, mo 65211, u.s.a.

received: date / revised version: date

abstract for linear bose eld theories, i show that if a classical hamilto-
nian function is strictly positive, the classical evolution must be conjugate,
by a symplectic motion, to a strongly continuous oneparameter orthogonal
group. this can be viewed as an innitedimensional analog of the existence
of actionangle coordinates.

this result is used to show that there is an intimate connection between
unitarity of the quantum evolution and boundednessbelow of the quantum
hamiltonians. (recent work has shown that generically, the hamiltonian
operators of quantum elds in curved spacetime are not bounded below
and do not generate unitary evolutions.) precisely, whenever the quantum
hamiltonians exist as selfadjoint operators, they are bounded below. lower
bounds on the normalordered quantum hamiltonian operators are com-
puted.

finally, it is shown that there is a broad class of quantum inequalities:
it f ab is a smooth compactlysupported futuredirected test function, then

the operator r f abbtab dvol is bounded below.

1 introduction

this is the second of a threepart series analyzing the hamiltonians of linear
quantum elds. a general introduction will be found in the rst paper, helfer
(1999), hereafter called part i.

when the evolution of the eld operators in a linear quantum eld theory
does not preserve their decomposition into creation and annihilation parts,
the analysis of the theory can be dicult and is not yet wholly understood.
this situation can arise for several reasons:

2

adam d. helfer

 it occurs naturally in the presence of timedependent external poten-
tials; in particular, it is the generic situation for quantum elds in curved
spacetime.

 it occurs when several linear elds are linearly coupled, for instance, in

models of the quantum electromagnetic eld in dispersive media.

 it occurs when the evolution is not a perfect symmetry. this happens, for
example, when the corresponding operator is an inhomogeneous spatial
or temporal average of the stressenergy. such operators are the subject
of the quantum inequalities, which bound the persistence of negative
energy densities, and are important in quantum measurement issues.

in such situations, phenomena which are at leat naively very patho-
logical can occur. in the case of quantum elds in curved spacetime, it
has been shown that the quantum hamiltonian operators have only a re-
stricted existence, being dened only as quadratic forms. (that is, there is

a dense family of states for which the expectations h|bh|i are dened, but
there are no known nonzero states for which bh|i exists as an element in

the physical hilbert space.) the quantum hamlitonians expectations are
unbounded below, and the corresponding evolutions are not unitarily imple-
mentable. this means that the algebra of eld operators does not evolve
by unitary motions. this is distinct from the evolution of the state vec-
tors, which is unitary (and, in the usual relativistic heisenberg picture,
trivial except for reductions). any sort of nonunitarity in quantum the-
ory should be taken seriously, and the physical signicance that discovered
recently is not yet clear. one of the main aims of these papers is to get a
rm enough mathematical control on the phenomenon that progress on a
physical understanding will be possible.

in part i of this series, i determined under what conditions an innites-
imal symmetry of the classical phase space gave rise to a selfadjoint quan-
tum operator. in that paper, no special properties of the symmetry were
used. in the present paper, i specialize to those symmetries corresponding to
positive classical hamiltonian functions. these arise in particular for those
which are energy operators, in the sense that they correspond to evolution
forward in time.

structure theory the rst aim of this paper is to classify the dierent
possible structures such classical hamiltonians might have. this will then
be used to analyze their quantizations.

theorem 1, then, is a classication of the possible classical hamilto-
nians. it states that a classically positive hamiltonian function generates
a family of motions which is similar, by a canonical transformation, to a
oneparameter orthogonal group.1 this comes about because even in this
innitedimensional context there is something like a compactness of the
constantenergy surfaces in the classical phase space. this is a delicate and

1 this assertion is proved here under an additional technical hypothesis, which

is believed not to be necessary. see the discussion preceding the theorem.

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

3

remarkable result, which is presumably of interest in the theory of innite
dimensional dynamical systems. it implies an innitedimensional analog
of the existence of actionangle variables, for example. it also implies that
the classical evolution remains uniformly bounded in time. this extends the
structure theory for classical hamiltonian eld theories that was developed
earlier (see cherno and marsden 1974).

selfadjointness and boundednessbelow using the classical structure the-
orem to get a handle on the quantum theory, we nd (theorem 2) that a
classically positive hamiltonian is selfadjointly implementable i the simi-
larity eecting its transformation to a generator of orthogonal motions cor-
responds to a restricted bogoliubov transformation, and, in this case, the
quantum hamiltonian must be bounded below.2 thus one has a very strong
connection between selfadjointness and boundednessbelow, for energy op-
erators. it should be emphasized that these results make no presupposition
about what renormalization prescription is to be used.

there is an old folktheorem in quantum eld theory: a hamiltonian
determines its quantization, meaning that a formal expression for a hamil-
tonian should have a unique (modulo cnumbers) implementation as an op-
erator. theorem 2 can be viewed as allowing one to make this statement
precise, for linear eld theories. it shows that classically positive hamiltoni-
ans have certain mathematically allowed quantizations, which may or may
not be physically acceptable, according to whether the bogoliubov transfor-
mation is restricted. one might think that the correct interpretation of the
present results is simply that, when the bogoliubov transformations turn out
not to be restricted, one picked the wrong original set of canonical vari-
ables, and one should choose another, leading to an allowed quantization.
however, at least for the case of quantum elds in curved spacetime, this
does not seem to be the correct interpretation. there, the acceptable choices
of canonical variables for quantization are determined by the hadamard
condition, and in general the hamiltonians are not compatible with this.

in other words, the physical considerations leading to a choice of canon-
ical variables, and those leading to the choice of hamiltonian, conict in
that the hamiltonian cannot be selfadjointly realized. it should also be
metioned that even if one choses a mathematically allowed quantization
giving rise to a selfadjoint hamiltonian on one hypersurface in spacetime,
one would need inequivalent representations for the hamiltonians at nearby
hypersurfaces.

normalordering and lower bounds the results described so far are gen-
eral statements about when a classical hamitlonian is selfadjointly imple-
mentable at the quantum level, without presupposing a specic renormal-
ization scheme. one would like to know what relation these results bear

2 recall that the restricted bogoliubov transformations are those which lead to

unitarily equivalent quantizations.

4

adam d. helfer

to standard renormalization theory. a choice of renormalization prescrip-
tion is necessary, too, to move beyond the statement that the hamiltoni-
ans are bounded below and be able to speak of their lower bounds (since
renormalization in particular determines the cnumber contribution to the
hamiltonians).

almost universally for linear elds, normalordering (or an equivalent
prescription, like pointsplitting) is used as the prescription. we show that,
for classically positive operators, normal ordering may not suce to renor-
malize the hamiltonian, and that niteness of the normallyordered ground
state energy is equivalent to the existence of the normallyordered hamilto-
nian as a selfadjoint operator (theorems 3 ands 4). we also compute some
lower bounds for the normallyordered ground state energy (theorem 5).

quantum inequalities for some time now, it has been conjectured that
suitably temporally averaged measures of the energy density operator for
quantum elds in curved spacetime should be bounded below. such bounds
are known as quantum inequalities, following pioneering work of ford (1978).
we establish the existence (but not the precise numerical bounds) of a wide
class of these: for any smooth, compactlysupported test function f ab which
is futuredirected in the sense that it is at each point a symmetrized product
taub + uatb of futuredirected vectors, the operator

z btabf ab dvol

(1)

is bounded below (theorem 7). the signicance of this result is discussed
more fully at the beginning of section 6.

unfortunately, in order to establish these inequalities, we cannot make
direct use of the earlier structure results. this is because the hamiltonians
corresponding to averages of components of the stressenergy over compact
regions of spacetime, do not satisfy the strong form of classical positivity
needed for those theorems. the quantum inequalities are proved from a
partial result on the structure theory for these weakly positive classical
hamiltonians, theorem 6.

the organization of the paper is this. section 2 contains some prelimi-
naries. section 3 goes over the main structure of classically positive hamil-
tonians; in section 4, these results are applied to quantum eld theory.
section 5 works out the connection with normal ordering, and section 6 the
structure necessary to establish the existence of the quantum inequalities.
the last section contains some discussion.

summary of notation. here is a summary of the notation used. un-
fortunately, there are quite a few things denoted conventionally by similar
symbols.

h is the space of solutions of the classical eld equations, a real separable

hilbertable space equipped with a symplectic form .

hc is the space h equipped with the complex structure dened by j,

and so made into a complex hilbert space.

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

5

h is the hilbert space on which the representation acts.
k  kop is the operator norm.
k  khs is the hilbertschmidt norm.
a is the eld algebra.
a is the hamiltonian vector eld on the space of classical solutions.
a is the lie adjoint of a, that is, the derivative of conjugation by g(t) =
note. since h is not canonically a hilbert space, i will generally empha-
size the dependence of properties on the choice of norm, that is, of j. thus
one has jlinear, rather than complexlinear, transformations. similarly,
there are jsymmetric, jorthogonal, etc., transformationm.

eta.

2 preliminaries

throughout, we shall let hc be a complex innitedimensional separable
hilbert space. the complex inner product on hc will be denoted h,i. we
shall let h be the unerlying real hilbert space. then we write j : h  h
for the reallinear map given by v 7 iv, and
(v, w) = hv, wi
(v, w) = hv, wi

(2)
(3)

then (,) is the canonical real inner product on h and  is a symplectic
form on h which is nondegenerate in that it denes isomorphisms from h
to its dual. note that

(v, w) = (v, jw) .

(4)

thus any two of , j and (,) determine the third.
throughout, the real adjoint of a reallinear operator (perhaps only
densely dened) l will be denoted l. thus the dening relation is (v, lw) =
(lv, w) with domain d(l) = {w  h | (v, lw) = (lv, w) for some lw
for all v  d(l)}.
denition 1 the symplectic group of h is

sp(h) = {g : h  h | g is linear, continuous, and preserves } .

its elements are the symplectomorphisms.

the symplectic group does not depend on the real inner product on h
(or on the complex structure); it depends only on  and the structure of
h as a hilbertable space. it has naturally the structure of a banach group,
using the operator norm to dene the topology.

denition 2 the restricted symplectic group of hc is

sprest(hc) = {g  sp(h) | g1jg  g is hilbertschmidt} .

6

adam d. helfer

we recall that a strongly continuous oneparameter subgroup of sp(h)
is a oneparameter subgroup t 7 g(t) such that, for each v  h, the map
t 7 g(t)v is continuous. (in general, one can also consider semigroups,
dened for t  0, but as every symplectomorphism is invertible, in our
case every semigroup extends to a group, which is strongly continuous i
the semigroup is.) according to the hillyoshidaphillips theorem, such
groups have the form g(t) = eta, where a is a denselydened operator
on h (with certain spectral properties), and kg(t)kop  m ect for some
m, c  0. the spectrum of a is conned to the strip ||  c.

3 classically positive hamiltonians

the analysis so far has been concerned with general symmetries of the phase
space. in the case of time evolution, there are important additional prop-
erties. the most fundamental of these is that, in the classical context, the
energy cannot be negative. indeed, this fact plays a key role in establishing
the existence and stability of temporal evolution from initial data. in this
section, we shall investigate this extra structure.

a key result is that when the energy function is positive, the evolution
must be conjugate to a unitary group. this is quite remarkable, even in
the case of nite dimensions, since the eigenvalues of a general hamiltonian
vector may be complex. on the other hand, the result is (in nite dimen-
sions) essentially an extension of the proof of the existence of actionangle
variables.

the argument in nite dimensions is this. let a be the generator of a
oneparameter group of symplectic transformations, and suppose its energy
function (1/2)(v, av) is a positivedenite quadratic form. since evolution
by g(t) = eta preserves this form, we see that g(t)v remains bounded for all
t, for any v. this means that the eigenvalues of a must be purely imaginary,
and that its jordan form (over the complex) must be purely diagonal. thus
a must be conjugate to an antihermitian matrix.

in innite dimensions, the result is made more dicult for several rea-
sons. in the rst place, since the operator a is unbounded, the form (v, av)
is not dened everywhere. this means that for a dense family of vs, the
form has the value +, and the fact that this value remains constant in t
does not allow us to conclude that the orbits g(t)v remain bounded. also,
it is not known a priori that a (or even g(t)) has anything like a jordan
normal form. (indeed, the required property, known as spectrality, is in
general a very delicate thing to establish. an example of a hamiltonian
with a nonspectral was given in paper i.) in fact, our argument turns on
a recently established hyperfunctional analog of a theorem of bochner, and
it is possible that the lack of adequate analytic tools prevented an earlier
proof.

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

7

denition 3 the generator a of a stronglycontinuous oneparameter sub-
group of the symplectic group is called classically positive
if the form
(1/2)(v, av)  ckvk2 for some c > 0.

the requirement that c be strictly positive will be used essentially in
what follows. its eect is to rule out certain potential infrared problems.
(the analysis could be modied to accomodate a nite number of zero
modes of a, however.)

the next theorem is one of our main results. it asserts that (with one
technical proviso) classically positive hamiltonians are in fact similar, by
bounded symplectomorphisms, to the generators of orthogonal motions on
phase space. thus this is a general structure theorem, which can be thought
of as an analog of the statement that actionangle variables exist for linear
systems with positive hamiltonians and nitely many degrees of freedom.
as mentioned above, the theorem contains a technical proviso, which is
that a, the jantilinear part of a, be bounded. (so the theorem would ap-
ply to any a such that an some positive complex structure j could be found
for which a is bounded.) this condition is veried in all examples known to
me, and holds in particular for quantum elds in curved spacetime (helfer
1996). still, it would be be more satisfying to remove this hypothesis, and
i believe this can be done. however, the arguments if unbounded a are
allowed are much more technically complicated, will be pursued elsewhere.

proposition 1 let a be classically positive. then its spectrum lies on the
imaginary axis.

proof let d(a) be the domain of a. the spectrum of a is the set of points
 at which the map a : d(a)  h is not invertible. more precisely, since
h is not canonically a complex vector space, we work with the complexi-
cation. this will be done in the usual way, without introducing unnecessary
notations for complexications. then (v, av) is a hermitian form bounded
away from zero (as a form).

suppose   a is not onetoone. then a has an eigenvector v with

eigenvalue . then

ketvk2 = kg(t)vk2

 c1(cid:0)g(t)v, ag(t)v(cid:1)

= e2t(v, av) .

this can hold for all t only if  is purely imaginary (or zero).

now suppose that a is not onto, and its image lies in some hyperplane
{x | (v, x) = 0}. this means that v is an eigenvector of at with eigenvalues
. now at is the generator of gt (t) = jg(t)j. the domain of at is
jd(a), and the energy function is (1/2)(y, at y) = (1/2)(y, jajy) =
(1/2)(cid:0)(jy), a(jy)(cid:1). as in the previous paragraph, we nd

ketvk2  c1e2t(v, at v) ,

8

adam d. helfer

forcing the real part of  to vanish.

we now take up the more delicate case, where   a is onetoone but
not onto, but its image is dense. in this case, we may nd a sequence vn of
unit vectors in h which are elements of d(a) such that kvnk + kavnk is
bounded and (  a)vn tends to zero. we have

(cid:0)g(t)  et(cid:1)v = etz t

0

g(u)eudu (a  )v

for any v  d(a). thus

k(cid:0)g(t)  et(cid:1)vk  |et|m(cid:0)et  et(cid:1)(  )1k(a  )vk

where we have taken t  0 for simplicity.
now, suppose  > 0. we may choose t > 0 so that et is as large as
desired. for such a t , and any  > 0, we may choose n large enough so that
k(cid:0)g(t)  et(cid:1)vnk <  for all 0  t  t . in this case we will have
(cid:0)pc1(vn, avn) + (cid:1)2

ketvnk2 (cid:0)kg(t)vnk + (cid:1)2

this is inconsistent with the requirement that kvnk and (vn, avn) be uni-
formly bounded. thus  6 >0.
consideration of t < 0 similarly rules out the case  < 0, and so we
must have  = 0. 
theorem 1 let a be classically positive, and suppose its jantilinear part
a is bounded. then there is a postivedenite bounded jsymmetric sym-
plectomorphism , and a jrealantiselfadjoint jlinear closed (possibly
unbounded) operator , such that

.

g(t) = 1et .

there is a jorthogonal jinvariant projectionvalued measure df () sup-
ported on [0,) for some 0 > 0 such that

et =zr

etjdf () .

proof the idea will be to dene a positive complex structure ja relative to
which g(t) is orthogonal. the conclusions will follow almost directly from
this. at a formal level, one has

ja = 1z 



(  a)1d .

however, it is dicult to show that this integral converges as   . so
we shall proceed a little indirectly.

suppose v  d(a). then we have

2(cid:0)(  a)1  1(cid:1) v = (  a)1av ,

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

9

which tends to av as   . using a subscript minus to stand for the
antilinear part, we have then

2(cid:0)(  a)1(cid:1) v  av

as    for any v  h, since a is bounded. this implies that near
innity

(cid:0)(  a)1(cid:1) v = 2av + o(2) ;

in particular, the lefthand side is integrable.

we may now dene what will turn out to be the jantilinear part of ja

(and we anticipate this in the notation), by

(ja) = 1z 

(cid:0)(  a)1(cid:1) d ,

the equation being interpreted strongly. this is jantilinear by construction,
and is easily seen to be jsymmetric as well. from this point on, many of
the steps are routine linearalgebraic calculations, and only a representative
few of these will be given explicitly.

dene a jsymmetric, and we dene a jsymmetric jantilinear oper-

ator  by

if we set

sinh(2) = (ja) .

 = cosh  + j sinh  ,

then it is easily veried that  is a symplectomorphism. we dene

ja = j1 .

then ja is a positive complex structure with jantilinear part (ja), as
dened before.

now we shall show that g(t)1 is jorthogonal:

(g(t)1v, jg(t)1w) = (v, g(t)1jg(t)1w)

= (v, g(t)jag(t)1w)
= (v, ja1w)
= (v, jw) .

since g(t)1 is jorthogonal and a symplectomorphism, it is jlinear.
we may thus set

 = 1a .

it only remains to check that j sinh  is jsymmetric and positive, and to
note that  must be classically positive to establish the remaining claims.


10

adam d. helfer

4 application to quantum field theory

we now apply the structure theorems of the previous section to quantum
eld theory.

theorem 2 in order that a classically positive operator a with bounded
antilinear part generate a oneparameter group of restricted symplectic mo-
tions, it is necessary and sucient that the operator  be a restricted sym-
plectomorphism. in this case the corresponding hamiltonian operator is
bounded below.

proof the jantilinear part of g(t) is

j sinh et cosh  + cosh et(j sinh )
= j(cid:0)sinh et cosh   cosh et sinh (cid:1) .

multiplying on the left by j sech  and on the right by sech  (both
bounded operators with bounded inverses), we see that the antilinear part
of g(t) is hilbertschmidt i

is, or equivalently if

is.

tanh et  et tanh 

tanh   et tanh et

the idea now will be to think of tanh  as a vector in the space of
symmetric bounded operators, and consider the action of et on this space
by conjugation. however, this space is not a hilbert space, and in order
to take advantage of the spectral theory of operators on hilbert space, it
is more convenient to regard tanh  as a sort of unbounded form on the
hilbertschmidt operators.

let v be the space of hilbertschmidt jantilinear, jsymmetric en-
domorphisms of h. this space is naturally a complex hilbert space, with
complex structure given by l 7 jl and inner product
hhm, lii = tr(m l) + i tr(ljm ) .

conjugation by exp t is a strongly continuous unitary map on this space.
we may apply the usual spectral theory of oneparameter unitary groups
on hilbert space to this.

in fact, we can work out the spectral resolution explicitly in terms of

that for exp t. for we have

etlet = z etjdf ()letj df ()
= z e(+)tjdf ()ldf ()
= z etj de()l

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

11

where we have dened de()l = r(,)|+= df ()ldf (). one can check
that de is a projectionvalued measure on v , and the equation above pro-
vides the spectral resolution of conjugation by et. note that since de() is
supported for   0 > 0, the measure de() is supported for   20 > 0.
(this may be counterintuitive, as one thinks of the generator of a one
parameter group of conjugations as having eigenvalues which are dierences
of the eigenvalues of the generator of the original group. however, in the
present case there is a very curious interaction between the fact that the
spectrum is imaginary and the antilinearity of the elements of v . this is in
some sense the central point of the proof.)

the above analysis does not quite apply directly to tanh  or , since
 may not be hilbertschmidt. however, the operator  is bounded, and
so can be regarded as a linear functional on the space v0 of traceclass
elements of v . the space v0 is dense in v and invariant under conjugation
by et, and so the spectral resolution derived above for this conjugation can
be applied, by duality, to , and similarly to tanh .

that g(t) be hilbertschmidt is thus equivalent to requiring

z[20,)(cid:0)etj  1(cid:1) de() tanh 

to be so. since de() resolves v into the orthogonal direct integral of
hilbertschmidt operators, the integral above, restricted to any compact
interval of values, must be hilbertschmidt. this may be seen to be
equivalent to the requirement tanh  be hilbertschmidt by elementary ar-
guments. and since  is jsymmetric, this is equivalent to  being hilbert
schmidt.

we now take up the boundednessbelow. if  is hilbertschmidt, then
exp j provides a restriced symplectomorphism taking a to . the image
of the restricted symplectomorphism is unitarily implementable, and the
bz ab, which is bounded
quantum hamiltonian induced by exp t is (j)a
below. 

this results also implies that the selfadjoint implementation of the

hamiltonian is essentially unique.

corollary 1 if a classically positive operator a with bounded antilinear
part is selfadjointly implementable in the representations determined by
j1 and j2, then its implementations are unitarily equivalent (modulo an
additive constant).

corollary 2 a classically positive operator a with bounded antilinear part
xes a distinguished complex structure ja, relative to which a is jalinear
and jaantiselfadjoint. the operator a is selfadjointly implementable in
the representation determined by a second complex structure j  if and only
if ja  j  is hilbertschmidt.

12

adam d. helfer

5 connection with normal ordering

as is wellknown, even the simplest linear quantum eld theories in minkow-
ski space contain divergent terms. for example, the vacuum energy in a

region is (1/2)p , where  runs over all the independent modes. the

standard prescription for dealing with these divergences is normal ordering,
that is, writing all creation operators before annihilation operators, thus
eliminating the innite cnumber terms. of course, normal ordering will
not distinguish between two operators diering by a nite cnumber, but
will reduce them to the same operator. for this reason, normal ordering
operators may lose certain important physical information, for example,
casimirtype eects.

in this section, though, we are concerned with a more severe question:
supposing that one knows that a selfadjoint hamiltonian exists, can it
necessarily be given by normalordering the classical hamiltonian (modulo
a nite cnumber term)? we shall nd that the answer may be no. in
other words, there are at least in principle linear quantum eld theories
which require more than normalordering to be successfully renormalized.
this points up the delicacy of the issues involved in analyzing the quantum
hamiltonian.

while in elementary examples, there is no ambiguity in what is meant
by normalordering an operator, in the present, very general, context, some
care is needed to make this precise. this will now be explained.

let a be a classically positive hamiltonian, and let  and  be as in
the previous section:  is a jskew, jlinear, jselfadjoint map and  is a
jantilinear, jsymmetric bounded operator with  = ejaej. we put
d = j. then, using the representation by creation operators z  and
destruction operators  as described in the previous paper, the quantum
z  under conjuga-
hamiltonian corresponding to a is the image of d
tion by the bogoliubov transformation induced by exp j. notice that with
z , and
this denition, the hamiltonian has the same spectrum as d
in particular has zero as its minimum.

at a formal level, the normal ordering is accomplished in the usual way,

and one nds

where the normalordered hamiltonian is

bh = bhnormal + e0

bhnormal = cz z  + b

z  + c ,

with

c = j cosh d sinh 

b = cosh d cosh  + sinh d sinh 
e0 = tr sinh d sinh 

in matrix form.

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)
(9)

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

13

the diculty in making the relations (6)(9) precise is not merely in
the fact that it is hard to analyze the individual quantities b, c, e0. one
has to decide what sort of properties are required of these in order to say
that one has successfully renormalized the hamiltonian by normal ordering.

in the simplest case, one could require that e0 is nite, and that bhnormal

be welldened by termbyterm action on (at least) a dense family of
polynomials. however, one could also imagine a more general situation,
where the domain consisted of functions  (z) such that, while the actions of
the individual terms in (6) did not give elements in the hilbert space, there
were nevertheless cancellations so that the net result was indeed an element
of the hilbert space. indeed, there are even more extreme possibilities. one
could envisage situations in which e0 = , but the elements in the domain
are chosen so that, with a proper limiting procedure, the quantity bh|i is
welldened even though bhnormal|i is not separately!3 thus at some point

one must decide what sort of regularity the notion of normal ordering
requires; otherwise, saying that normal ordering suces to renormalize the
hamiltonian becomes a statement with no force. at present, we shall assume
it requires e0 to be nite. this is very weak.

theorem 3 let a be classically positive with bounded antilinear part. the
minimum of the normalordered hamiltonian is

e0 =  tr sinh d sinh 

if this is nite. if it is nite, it is negative. if this is innite, normal ordering
does not suce to renormalize the hamiltonian.

proof we have mentioned everything except the negativity. but the quan-
tity sinh d sinh  is a positive symmetric form. 

since one can arrange for  to be hilbertschmidt but e0 divergent,
this implies that in principle at least that there are linear quantum eld
theories for which selfadjoint hamiltonians exist, but they cannot be real-
ized by normalordered operators: some more sophisticated renormalization
is required. there would be no general reason for rejecting such hamiltoni-
ans as unphysical, although in a particular system one might have physical
arguments that normalordering should suce to regularize the theory.

for classically positive hamiltonians, niteness of the normalordered
groundstate energy implies existence of the classical hamiltonian as a self
adjoint operator:

theorem 4 let a be classically positive with bounded antilinear part, and
suppose the normalordered ground state energy e0 is nite. then the hamil-
tonian is a selfadjoint operator.

3 just this sort of thing would occur if one dened bh| i by a sequence of for-

mal operations which amounted to conjugation by the bogoliubov transformation
exp j .

14

adam d. helfer

proof let vj be a jorthonormal basis, and let d =r[0,) de(), where

0 > 0. then we are given that

xj (cid:0)vj, sinh z[0,)

de() sinh vj(cid:1)

converges. the sum and integration are of nonnegative terms, so the con-
vergence is absolute. this quantity dominates tr sinh 0i sinh  (where i
is the identity). since 0 > 0, this implies sinh  is hilbertschmidt, which
implies  is. 

in general, it is hard to work out  from the normalordered hamil-
tonian. in principle, one can work out the groundstate energy exactly as

(1/4) trr(cid:0)|a|  b(cid:1), where |a| = a2; this expression does not require

a knowledge of . however, this quantity is usually too awkward to work
with directly in applications. it is usful to have some approximate formulas
in terms of b and c, which can be worked out directly from a and j.

theorem 5 if the hamiltonian is classically positive with bounded antilin-
ear part and the normalordered groundstate energy is nite, it is bounded
by

and also by

e0   tr cb1c
e0   trqc

t

c .

if a is classically positive with bounded antilinear part and either of the
quantities on the right is nite, then the hamiltonian is selfadjoint and
can be renormalized by normal ordering.

proof we have b  cosh d cosh  as (denselydened) symmetric forms.
thus b1  (cosh d cosh )1 as symmetric forms. thus

tr cb1c  tr j sinh d cosh (cosh d cosh )1 cosh d sinh j

= e0 .

we have

t

c

c = sinh d cosh2 d sinh 

= sinh d2 sinh  + (sinh d sinh )2 .

however, since the rst form is positive and symmetric we have

t

qc
c  sinh d sinh 
e0  trqc

c .

t

as forms, and so



the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

15

6 quantum inequalities

in this section, i show how to adapt the previous arguments to a certain
important family of situations where (v, av) is a positive indenite form.
i will begin by discussing the class of operators to be considered and its
signicance. then i shall give the results.

the proofs of the theorems in this section are fairly lengthy. this is
ultimately bound up with technical problems at the boundary of the space
time region whose energymomentum content is to be measured. a brief
discussion of this is given at the end of this section, after theorem 7, but
some readers may want to look at this before the proofs of theorems 6 and
7.

6.1 the sorts of results sought

ford (1978) was the rst to show that temporal averaging could bound some
of the local negative energies encountered in quantum eld theory. in the
case of the kleingordon eld on minkowski space, he and roman (1997)
proved that

h|z 

 bt00(t, 0, 0, 0)b(t) dt|i/h|i  

3

322

c
(ct0)4 ,

where

b(t) =

t0/
t2 + t2
0

(10)

(11)

is a sampling function of area unity and characteristic scale  t0. follow-
ing ford, lower bounds on energy operators for relativistic quantum eld
theories are known as quantum inequalities.

while a number of quantum inequalities are now known, results of great
generality do not exist. the main outlines of the results are as follows; see
references within these for further work.

 for the massless eld in twodimensional minkowski space, there is a
broad class of elegant results (flanagan 1997). however, the divergences
of this theory are signicantly softer than in four dimensions. it is espe-
cially problematic to draw conclusions about the boundedness of four
dimensional energies from twodimensional results.

 for the energy density measured by static observers in static space
times, there are some recent results (pfenning and ford 1997, 1998;
fewster and teo 1999). these results are so far established only for a
few specic choices of sampling function.4 while these results represent

4 while the general approach of these papers leads to a formal bound for any
sampling function, in only a few cases has it been proved that this bound is non
trivial, that is, not .

16

adam d. helfer

a signicant technical accomplishment, the restriction to static space
times must be considered severe. for example, in paper i, we saw that
it was precisely the nonstaticity (ab 6= 0) that was responsible for
nonunitarily implementable evolution.
 very little is known about bounds on the fourmomentum density of the

quantum eld. there is one result, in minkowski space (helfer 1998).

one would like to generalize these results in a number of ways.

 one would like results that apply not just to the energy density, but to
other components of the stressenergy tensor. this is because classical
matter elds satisfy not only the weak energy condition (which re-
quires the energy density to be positive) but also the dominant energy
condition (which requires the fourmomentum density to be future
pointing). one would like to know what bounds there are on violations
of the dominant energy condition.

 one would like to be able to generalize to other sampling functions, and

to domains other than static worldlines.

 most importantly, one would like to be able to treat generic spacetimes.

our analysis applies to all three. since it encompasses quantum elds
in curved spacetime, and our understanding of this is more primitive than
for minkowski space, some care is needed to explain which problems are
important.

for generic spacetimes, there is no preferred vacuum state and no pre-
ferred associated quantization. rather, one has a family of unitarily equiv-
alent (modulo infrared issues) hadamard quantizations. dierent choices
of such quantization lead to dierent normalordering prescriptions and
normalordered hamiltonians which dier by cnumbers. this is bound up
with the wellknown ambiguities in xing the cnumber part of the stress
energy operator in generic spacetimes. thus, a specic numerical lower
bound on the hamiltonian is only meaningful given choices which resolve
these ambiguities. given our current lack of understanding of how to eect
these resolutions, such numerical values would be data of no clear signi-
cance.

there are, however, two sorts of results which would be of immediate
signicance. one of these would be asymptotic formula for lower bounds,
as the sampling function becomes more and more localized. (for example,
as t0  0 in (10).) in such cases, because the energy densities diverge, the
cnumber ambiguities in the stressenergy become insignicant. while i
believe that such results can be derived using the techniques of this paper,
they require lengthy computations which are too far out of the main line of
argument. i shall give such results elsewhere.

the second sort of presentlyuseful result would be a general proof that
temporallyaveraged hamiltonians are bounded below. this is a statement
which is meaningful even in the face of the cnumber ambiguities, and it is
this result which will be proved in the remainder of this section.

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

17

in order to treat such very general cases, it is probably necessary to
pass to compactly supported sampling functions. (for otherwise, with no
assumptions about the spacetime, one has no control about how small data
from initially spatially distant regions propagate inwards and are amplied
by the spacetime geometry.) i shall not use the stressenergy localized to a
worldline, but rather to a compact fourvolume. probably one can obtain
parallel results for worldlines, but the proofs would be longer. for four
volumes, we can appeal to very general results in distribution theory (cf.
the proof of proposition 2, below).

6.2 structure of the hamiltonians; boundednessbelow

let (m, gab) be an oriented, timeoriented spacetime, globally hyperbolic
with compact cauchy surfaces. (the restriction to compact cauchy surfaces
is a technical device to simplify the analysis and remove infrared ambigui-
ties. it is not physically signicant. the analysis is all local, and the spatial
dimensions can be arbitrarily large.) consider the quantum theory of a real
scalar eld governed by the equation

(aa + m2) = 0 ,

where m2  0. the associated classical stressenergy is

tab = ab  (1/2)gab(cc  m22) .

(12)

(13)

we shall say a smooth symmetric compactlysupported tensor eld f ab is
futuredirected if it is at any point a sum of terms taub + uatb with ta,
ua futurepointing. the content of the classical dominant energy condition

(which holds for this classical eld) is thatr f abtabdvol  0 for any future

directed f ab.

letting a be the generator corresponding to this hamiltonian, we have

(1/2)(, a) =z f abtabdvol .

(14)

the operator a is not in general classically positive. in the rst place, the
test function may be supported in an arbitrarily small volume, and so a may
have a large kernel. a more severe problem is that the smooth fallo of the
test function generally leads to a spectrum including points arbitrarily close
to zero. however, a good fraction of the structure deduced for classically
positive hamiltonians still applies.

proposition 2 let a be the generator associated to a smooth compactly
supported test eld (not necessarily futuredirected). then a, the janti-
linear part of a, is represented on initial data by an operator with smooth
kernel. in particular, the operator a is compact.

18

adam d. helfer

proof we make use of the microlocal properties of the twopoint functions,
discovered by radzikowski (1992) and junker (1995). a summary adequate
for understanding this proof is in the paper of brunetti et al. (1996). for
the general theory of wavefront sets, see hormander (1983).

the antilinear part of a corresponds to the twopoint kernel

a(y, z) =z f ab(x)(cid:0)(xa k(x, y))(xb k(x, z))
(1/2)gab(xck(x, y))(xc
+(1/2)gabk(x, y)k(x, z) dvol(z) .

k(x, z))

here k(x, y) is the twopoint function. the wavefront set of k(x, y) is

wf(k) = {(x, k; y, l) | (x, k)  (y, l) , k is futurepointing}.

here and in what follows, it is understood that (x, k), (y, l)  t m  {0};
and (x, k)  (y, l) i there is a null geodesic from x to y with covector k at
x and l at y. thus

wf(k(x, y)k(x, z))  {(x, k, y, l, z, m) | (x, k)  (y, l) or (x, k)  (z, m)}

 {(x, k, y, l, z, m) | (x, k1)  (y, l) and (x, k2)  (z, m)

for some k1, k2 with k = k1 + k2} .

when this is integrated against f ab(x) to form a(y, z), the result has

wf (a(y, z))  {(y, l, z, m) | (x, 0, y, l, z, m)  wf(k(x, y)k(x, z))} ,

which is empty. since the twopoint function has a smooth kernel, so does
its restriction to act on initial data. 
proposition 3 let a be the generator associated to smooth compactly
supported future directed test eld. then the spectrum of a lies on the imag-
inary axis.

proof consider a = a+ + a as a perturbation of its jlinear part. the
term a+ is jreal antiselfadjoint and so has purely imaginary spectrum.
on the other hand, the compactness of a means that any element of
spec a  spec a+ must be an eigenvalue. (to see this, suppose one has  
speca  speca+ and a sequence vn of unit vectors in the domain of a with
( a)vn  0. multiplying by ( a+)1 we have vn ( a+)1avn 
0. since (  a+)1a is compact, this implies (  a+)1a has an
eigenvalue unity. however, this implies  is an eigenvalue of a.) however,
then the positivity of a implies, as in the proof of proposition 1, that any
such eigenvalue is imaginary. 
proposition 4 let a be the generator associated to smooth compactly
supported futuredirected test eld. then for any t  r, the spectrum of
g(t) = exp ta lies on the unit circle.

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

19

proof we consider g(t) as a perturbation of exp ta+; the latter is junitary
and so has spectrum on the unit circle. it follows from standard perturbation
theory (dunford and schwartz 1988, theorem viii.1.19) that g(t)exp ta+
is compact. applying the argument of the previous proof, we see that any
element of the spectrum of g(t) not already in the spectrum of exp ta+ must
be an eigenvalue; but then that g(t) be a symplectomorphism implies that
eigenvalue lies on the unit circle. 
theorem 6 let a be the generator associated to smooth compactlysupport-
ed futuredirected test eld. then there is a (strong) projectionvalued dis-

tribution de(l) such that a =r ilde(l) on d(a).

the distribution de(l) is locally a measure, and this measure is inte-
grable except possibly at zero; the quantity lde(l) is integrable at zero. (here
and throughout, these statements are to be understood strongly, that is, the
operators applied to elements of h.)

proof this proof is somehat technical, and makes use of the theory of
fourier hyperfunctions. this is the class of generalized functions f  dual
to f = { |  ,  are both smooth of exponential decay }. (here  denotes
the fourier transform of .) the results we use are contained in the papers
of chung and kim (1995) and chung et al. (1994).

put  = il, where l is a real parameter (which may acquire a small
imaginary part). let [(il  a)1] denote the jump in (il  a)1 from above
the real laxis to below; this jump is by denition a hyperfunction. we
shall interpret this hyperfunction in the strong sense, that is, as applied to
any vector in h. all integrals of operators in what follows are also to be
interpreted in the strong sense.



[(il  a)1] (l) dl = z 
= z 

we now show that [(il  a)1] is not just a hyperfunction, but in fact
a fourier hyperfunction. this means that for any   f = { |  ,  are
both smooth of exponential decay }, the integral r 
[(il  a)1] (l) dl is
dened and varies continuously with . we have
z 
(cid:2)(il +   a)1  (il    a)1(cid:3) (l) dl
(cid:20)z 
+z 0
z 

g(t)et(il)dt(cid:21) (l) dl

g(t)e|t|iltdt (l) dl

g(t)et(+il)dt

g(t)e|t| (t) dt

g(t) (t) dt ,

0





= z 
= z 
= z 





the limit   0 being understood. this is welldened, since the class f is
invariant under fourier transform. to see that it depends continuously on

20

adam d. helfer

, we note that if j is a sequence tending to zero in f , then there exists
h > 0 such that sup j (t) exp h|t| tends to zero as j  . however, since
kg(t)kop  m exp h|t|/2 (say), the integrals tend to zero as j  .
some comments are in order at this point: (a) we have just shown that
the jump in the resolvent is the fourier transform of g(t). (b) the integral
displayed above must lie in the domain of a (since the class f is invariant
under dierentiation). (c) these results are independent of positivity prop-
erties of a. in general, then, groups of type zero (in the semigroup sense)
have generators which can be analyzed in terms of fourier hyperfunctions.
these generalized functions admit a useful microlocalization.

a direct argument to establish positivity is probably possible, but partly
for techical reasons and partly for its future utility, i shall give another.
every fourier hyperfunction can be viewed as an initial datum for the heat
equation. if the corresponding solution for t > 0 is everywhere non-negative,
then the hyperfunction is a measure. this result is due to chung et al.
(1995), and can be thought of as an extension of the bochnerschwartz
theorem. (in this context, the initial datum is called an aronszajn trace.)

the solution to the heat equation with initial value [(il  a)1] is

u (x, t) = (4t)1/2z 



= 21/2z 



e(xl)2/(4t)[(il  a)1] dl

g(s)eixsts2

ds .

for t > 0, this maps to the domain of a. we also note the identities

and

u (x, t)u (x, t) = (/4t)1/2u (x, t/2)

u (x, t) = 21/2z 



g(s)eixsts2

ds ,

where the overline indicates the complex conjugate. using these, we have

(cid:0)v, au (x, t)v(cid:1) = (4t/)1/2 (cid:0)v, au (x, 2t)u (x, 2t)v(cid:1)
= (4t/)1/2 (cid:0)u (x, 2t)v, au (x, 2t)v(cid:1) ,

and this is positive.

we know at this point that for any v, the quantity (v, a[(il  a)1]v)
is an exponentially tempered measure. it is easily veried that the form
(, a[(il  a)1]) is hermitian, so by polarization a[(il  a)1] is an
operatorvalued exponentially tempered measure (in the strong sense). if
we could divide this by il, we could conclude that [(il  a)1] is a measure.
however, this is not obviously possible.
+ ((l) (0)el2
).
then ((l)  (0)el2
) is l times a smooth function. using this decomposi-
ton, it is easy to see that [(il  a)1] extends to a linear form on those
continuous functions of subexponential growth which are c1 at the origin.

for any test function (l)  f, write (l) = (0)el2

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

21

in particular, the fourier hyperfunction [(il  a)1] is a distribution. since
l[(il a)1] is a measure, we must have [(il a)1] = (l) +  for some 
and some measure . (we are following the convention where distributions
are represented by generalized functions under the integral sign, and so
the measure is represented as  or dl. this is only a symbolic repre-
sentation, and is not meant to assert any regularity of the measure with
repsect to lebesgue measure. we should more carefully absorb the dls into
[(il a)1] and (l) and write simply d(l).) we caution that dl is known
to be locally nite only on r  {0}.
the coecient  must vanish. to see this, note that we have (strongly)

 = lim

a0z 



[(il  a)1]lel2/(2a2)dl

and hence

a = a lim

a0z 
a0z 





= lim

[(il  a)1]lel2/(2a2)dl
i[(il  a)1]l2el2/(2a2)dl

= 0 .

passage from the rst to the second line is justied by use of the fourier
transform for [(il  a)1]; passage from the second to the last by the fact
that l[(il  a)1] is a measure. now let v  h and let w = v. it is easy
to see that as a distribution in spacetime, the quantity w vanishes on
m  supp f ab. on the other hand, since aw = 0, the local positivity of the
form tabf ab implies that w vanishes on the interior of supp f ab. thus if w
were known to be smooth, we would have w = 0. however, it is easy to
check that for any u  h we have (u, w) = (u, v). by the arguments
just given, this vanishes for smooth u; since the smooth us are dense in h,
it vanishes always and w = 0. hence  = 0.

we shall now write de(l) = [(il  a)1]dl. it is a projectionvalued
distribution which is locally a projectionvalued measure. to see that it is
projectionvalued, note that for any test function (l) we have

(cid:18)z 



[(il  a)1] (l) dl(cid:19)2



= z 
= z 
= z 





g(t)g(s) (t) (s) dt ds

g(u) (u  s) (s)du ds
[(il  a)1] (l)2 dl .

to establish the compatibility of the decompositions with the symplectic

structure, notice that

(z (l)de(l)v,z (k)de(k)w) = (v,z (l)de(l)z (k)de(k)w)

22

adam d. helfer

= (v,z (l)(l)de(l)w) .

for a subspace hs =rs de(l)h to be real, the set s must be symmetric (up
to terms of demeasure zero). for symmetric sets, the equation above shows
that hs  hs  = {0} if s  s = . thus the spectral decomposition by de
respects the symplectic structure. that  must be strongly nondegenerate
on each hs follows.
finally, if we dene a1 = r(1,1) ilde(l), it is easy to check that a 
a1 is a classically positive generator of symplectic motions with bounded
antilinear part. (strictly speaking, the operator aa1 is classically positive
on h/image a1.) thus theorem 1 can be applied to it, and we conclude de(l)
is integrable at innity.



while we are not guaranteed the sort of canonical form we had for classi-
cally positive operators, we may still draw some conclusions by considering
h as a limit of spaces.

proposition 5 let a be the generator associated to smooth compactly
supported future directed test eld. then the associated normallyordered
hamiltonian operator is bounded below if a is traceclass; in this case,
there is a bound

e0  trqc

t

c .

proof let us write a =rr(,) ilde(l), which makes sense as an operator
with domain d(a) in view of the theorem above. we have av  av as
  0 for v  d(a), since lde(l)v is a measure (and the mass of {0}, that
is, the coecient  in the previous proof, is zero).
now let |i be any hadamard state of norm unity. this means that in
the holomorphic representation  (z) is a polynomial whose coecients are
represented by smooth elds on spacetime; in particular, these coecients
lie in (tensor products of) d(a). thus we may compute

h|bh|i = lim

0h|bh|i ,

where bh is the hamiltonian dened from a by normal ordering. (brunetti
et al. 1996 showed that bh may be dened by normal ordering.) but we
know a lower bound of bh is  tr|(a)|. now in fact the lower bounds

are monotonically decreasing with . this follows from the fact that for
any xed 0 > 0, a xed  can be found which simultaneously provides a
similarity of all a with  > 0 to generators of orthogonal groups. it follows
that

inf bh  lim

0

inf bh ,

where inf bh denotes the inmum of the spectrum.

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

23

similarly, it follows from the formula for c

t
 c
is a family of symmetric positive forms, which are (as forms) increasing as
  0. but as we know that c  c strongly, we have

c in theorem 5 that c

t

trqc

t

 c  trqc

lim
0

t

c .


we are now in a position to establish the existence of a very large class

of quantum inequalities.

theorem 7 let a be the generator associated to smooth compactlysupport-
ed futuredirected test eld. then the associated quantum hamiltonian is
bounded below.

proof it only remains to note that since a has a smooth kernel, it is
traceclass. 

the argument for this result has been very technical, and i wish to

comment here on why this is.

first, it must be emphasized that because in general the operators we are
dealing with are not selfadjoint (nor unitary), merely having some control
over their spectrum tells us very little. for example, suppose we have an
operator with a discrete set of eigenvalues:

xj

jej ,

(15)

where the ej s are projections. if the operator is selfadjoint, then the
ejs are orthogonal projections, and in particular, uniformly bounded as
operators. however, in the more general case, the ejs may have diverging
bounds. (that is, we may be able to nd a unit vector vj so that kejvjk 
.) thus it is quite possible to have j  0 but still have the sum above
represent an unbounded operator, or to have the bounds of jej not tend
to zero.

just these sorts of concerns are present in the regime l  0 for the
operator a. this can be understood by considering its interpretation in
spacetime, as follows. since l is the fourier transform variable to t, we
may expect that the behavior of a near the spectral parameter l = 0 is
related to the t   asymptotics of g(t). in spacetime, this corresponds
to owing along the hamiltonian vector eld determined by r f abtabdvol
for very long times. now, if we start with some general solution  and ow
along this vector eld, whatever oscillations  has within the region f ab 6= 0
will tend to pile up on the future and past boundaries of that region. thus
as t  , the quantity g(t) will be approximately some average value
in the interior of f ab 6= 0, but quite scrunched up near the boundary. it is
very possible that this results in de(l) not being integrable at l = 0.

24

adam d. helfer

a second diculty is that we do not have very good control over the
quantization of a, compared to that for classically positive operators. we
know, from the work of brunetti et al., that a is
selfadjointly imple-
mentable by normalordering, but we do not have the sorts of explicit con-
trol over its lower bound that we had in the previous section. this is related
to the rst diculty, in that what prevents us from having this control is
the fact that the operator  may not be bounded, which is again due to
the l  0 behavior of a.
to get around this lack of control of the quantization, we approximated
the operator a by operators a. this approximation, though, was rather
weak, necessitating some further, indirect steps.

from a physical point of view, the dierences between a and the limit

of the as, and bh and the bhs, are measures of the importance of eects
the boundary of the region f ab 6= 0, which one would hope are unimportant.
after all, the point of having f ab approach zero smoothly at the boundaries
was precisely to try to minimize edge eects. however, at least the present

argument does not show, for example, that lim0 inf bh = inf bh.

7 summary and conclusions

these papers were motivated by the desire to understand some surprising
and at least apparently pathological results for quantum elds in curved
spacetime. the worst of these is that, in generic circumstances, the hamil-
tonians are unbounded below. this is absolutely counter to ones expec-
tations. if in fact these eld theories do describe the real world, then one
must explain why these pervasive arbitrarily negative energies do not lead
to instabilities.

as emphasized in the introduction to paper i, the present analysis is
only a step to understanding these properties. we have aimed here to get
a clear statement of what the mathematical structure of the theory actu-
ally is. we have seen that the assumption that the classical energy function
of a hamiltonian system is strictly positive provides a very strong restric-
tion on its structure, somewhat analogous to the compactness of the energy
surfaces in the nitedimensional case. this gives one good mathematical
control, and one can say under what conditions a selfadjoint quantum
hamiltonian exists. we have seen that there is an intimate connection be-
tween selfadjointness (or, at the level of nite evolutions, unitarity), and
boundedness below. all selfadjoint quantizations are unitarily equivalent
(modulo additive constants), and all are bounded below.

these positive mathematical results throw the pathological features into
stronger relief. in generic circumstances, the hamiltonians for temporal evo-
lution of quantum eld theories are neither selfadjoint nor bounded be-
low. typically, it is only temporallyaveraged energy operators which are
bounded below (and are selfadjoint): this is the force of the quantum in-
equalities, proved in the previous section.

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields

25

the resolution of the pathologies will require physical input. i have
shown earlier that, at least in many circumstances, there are limits from
quantum measurement theory on the detection of negative energy densities
(helfer 1998). however, this is at present far from an explanation of why
the predictedly generic arbitrarily negative energy densities seem to have
no role in the world.

acknowledgements
columbia mathematics department, especially peter casazza, nigel kalton, yuri
latushkin and stephen montgomerysmith, for helpful conversations.

it is a pleasure to thank members of the university of missouri

references

1. brunetti r., fredenhagen, k. and kohler, m.: commun. math. phys. 180, 633

(1996).

2. cherno, p. and marsden, j.: properties of innite dimensional hamiltonian

systems, lecture notes in mathematics 425 (berlin: springer 1974).

3. chung, jaeyoung; chung, soonyeong and kim, dohan: nagoya math. j. 140,

139149 (1995).

4. chung, soonyeong and kim, dohan: pub. rims, kyoto univ. 31, 829845

(1995).

5. dunford, n. and schwartz, j. t.: linear operators, part i. (new york et al:

wiley 1988).

6. fewster, c. j. and teo, e.: phys. rev. d59, 104016 (1999).
7. flanagan, e. e.: phys. rev. d56, 4922 (1997).
8. ford, l. h.: proc. r. soc. lond. a364, 227 (1978).
9. ford, l. h. and roman, t. a.: phys. rev. d55, 2082 (1997).
10. helfer, a. d.: class. quant. grav. 13, l129l134 (1996).
11. helfer, a. d.: class. quant. grav. 15, 116983 (1998).
12. helfer, a. d.: the hamiltonians of linear quantum elds. i: existence theory,

preprint (1999).

13. honegger, r. and rieckers, a.: j. math. phys. 37, 42924309 (1996).
14. hormander, l.: the analysis of linear partial dierential operators i. (berlin:

springer 1983).

15. junker, w.: adiabatic vacua and hadamard states for scalar elds on curved

spacetimes. ph. d. thesis, university of hamburg (1995).

16. pfenning, m. j. and ford, l. h.: phys. rev. d55, 4813 (1997).
17. pfenning, m. j. and ford, l. h.: phys. rev. d57, 3489 (1998).
18. radzikowski, m. j.: the hadamard condition and kays conjecture in (ax-
iomatic) quantum eld theory on curved spacetime. ph. d. thesis, princeton
(1992).

