calt-68-2234
hep-th/9908091

remarks on non-bps d-branes1

california institute of technology, pasadena, ca 91125, usa

john h. schwarz

abstract

following sens discovery of various stable non-bps d-branes, k-theory has been

shown to be the appropriate mathematical framework for classifying conserved
d-brane charges. the classication accounts for known d-branes and predicts

some new ones including a d8-brane in type i superstring theory. after briey
reviewing these developments, we discuss certain issues pertaining to the d8-

brane, which is unstable.

9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
2
1

 

 
 

1
v
1
9
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

presented at strings 99

1work supported in part by the u.s. dept. of energy under grant no. de-fg03-92-er40701.

1 unstable type ii d-branes

during the past two years ashoke sen has pioneered the study of non-bps d-brane systems.
(for reviews see [1, 2].) in particular, he has focused on systems of coincident d-branes

and anti-d-branes. the basic idea is that whereas a system of coincident d-branes (or
anti-d-branes) would be a stable supersymmetric (bps) conguration, a system with both

branes and anti-branes is not. each separately preserves half of the supersymmetries of the
ambient background, but dierent halves are preserved in each case, so that when both are

present, there is no unbroken supersymmetry. one manifestation of this fact is that the
excitation spectrum of open strings connecting dp-branes to dp-branes has the reversed
gso projection compared to ones connecting dp-branes to dp-branes (or dp-branes to dp-

branes). this results in tachyon elds on the world volume, which signal an instability.
when the tachyon elds roll to a minimum  in a higgs-like manner  this represents

annihilation of branes and anti-branes.

to be specic, consider a system of n dp-branes and n  dp-branes all of which are
coincident (p + 1)-dimensional hyperplanes embedded in r10. the ground state of the dp -
dp open strings gives u(n) gauge elds a and the dp - dp open strings give u(n ) gauge
elds a. the dp - dp open strings, on the other hand, give a bifundamental (n, n ) tachyon
t . these elds can be written together as a superconnection

a =  a t

t a ! .

(1)

one issue is whether or not the branes and anti-branes can completely annihilate. the
criterion, basically, is whether the total d-brane charge (which is conserved) is zero or not.
cancelling the dp-brane charge requires n = n , of course, but that is not the whole story.
it is also necessary that the gauge bundles e and e  (associated to branes and anti-branes)
should be topologically equivalent, e  e . otherwise, there is some lower-dimension d-
brane charge, and such a d-brane would survive. to illustrate this consider the case of
one d2-brane and one d2-brane, which are wrapped on a t 2, and coincident in the other
dimensions. the wess-zumino term of the d2-brane world-volume action contains

z (cef )3 =zrt 2

(c3 + c1  f ),

(2)

where the cs are rr potentials. from this formula we see that the magnetic ux rt 2 f

is a source of c1, which means that it carries d0-brane charge. thus, for example, if the
d2-brane has ux giving one unit of d0-brane charge and the d2-brane has no such ux,

then the annihilation leaves a d0-brane

d2 + d2  d0.

1

(3)

the world-volume theory that describes a coincident dp + dp system can be formulated in
terms of the gauge elds and tachyons, where one imagines that all other modes have been

integrated out. it is hard to make this explicit in a controlled manner, since the tachyon mass
is generally string scale. thus the discussion that follows is necessarily somewhat qualitative

and heuristic.
it does have the advantage of being very physical and intuitive, however.
analyses with better mathematical control lead to the same conclusions. one approach is
to use conformal eld theory methods, as described in sens lecture. another one is to use

boundary-state techniques, as described in gaberdiels lecture. in any case, working with
gauge elds and tachyons, the world-volume theory has a tachyon potential v (t ), which
must be invariant under the u(n)  u(n ) gauge symmetry. moreover, when n = n , sen
argues that it should have minima that correspond to pure vacuum. the locus of minima,
all of which are gauge equivalent, is given by t = t0 u, where t0 is a xed positive real
number and u is an arbitrary constant element of u(n). at the minimum, the tachyon
condensation energy should exactly cancel the energy of the d-branes

here, tdp is the tension of a single dp-brane. thus when e  e  and t = t0 u, the
dp + dp system is equivalent to pure vacuum. what happens to the u(n) gauge groups is

v (t0 u) + 2ntdp = 0.

(4)

not completely understood.

let us now take n = n  = 1 and consider a kink conguration of the tachyon eld t .
t is complex, so let us consider im t = 0 and re t = t0 tanh(x/a), where x is one of the
cartesian coordinates on the branes. this describes a solitonic d(p  1)-brane of thickness
a concentrated in the vicinity of x = 0. (the precise functional form is not important.)
since the vacuum manifold |t| = t0 is a circle, and 0(s 1) is trivial, this d-brane has a real
tachyon in its world volume and is unstable. this is just as well, since the stable d-branes
of type ii theories are believed to be known, and this one is not in the list. in fact, such
unstable d-branes can be constructed for all wrong values of p in type ii theories. stable

d-branes exist for p = even in the iia theory and p = odd in the iib theory. the unstable
ones occur for the other values of p. sen has demonstrated that these unstable d-branes are

useful for analyzing certain issues. my purpose in describing them here is to set the stage
for an analogous construction, which will appear later.

2 non-bps type i d0-branes

let me now review one of sens constructions of a non-bps stable d0-brane in type i

superstring theory. the construction we will consider is in terms a tachyon kink in a d-
string anti-d-string conguration. recall that the type i d-string is actually the spin (32)/z2

2

heterotic string continued to strong coupling. the continuation is reliable, because the string
is bps. a system of n coincident d strings has world volume gauge group o(n). this can be

understood as the subgroup of u(n) on a set of type iib d-strings that survives orientifold
projection. in particular, for a single d-string the group is o(1) = z2. even though there

are no gauge elds in this case, the group matters. in particular, a d-string wrapped on a
circular spatial dimension has possible wilson lines w = 1.

the 32 left-moving fermion elds a on the d-string world-sheet arise as zero modes of
d1 - d9 open strings. when wrapped on a circular dimension, the wilson line encodes their
periodicity

a(x + 2r) = w a(x).

(5)

thus, for w = 1, a has zero modes, which satisfy a cliord algebra, and d-string quantum
states are gauge group spinors (with 215 components).

now consider a d1 + d1 pair wrapped on a circle.

if one string has w = 1 and the
other one has w = 1, then the overall two-particle state is a gauge group spinor. since
the gauge group is not broken, this implies that complete annihilation is not possible. the

tachyonic ground state of the open string connecting the d-string and the anti-d-string is
real in this case. for the case of opposite wilson lines that we are considering, the tachyon

eld is antiperiodic. thus it has the fourier series expansion

tn+1/2(t) exp"i  n + 1/2

r ! x# .

t =xn

the mass of tn+1/2, considered as a particle in 9d, is

m 2

n+1/2 = (n + 1/2)2/r2  1/2.

(6)

(7)

the 1/2 term is the tachyonic mass-squared value (in string units) in 10d, as usual for an
rns string. from this formula we see that for r < 1/2, there is no tachyonic instability
and the wrapped d1 + d1 pair does not annihilate. for r > 1/2, on the other hand, t1/2
(and possibly other modes) are tachyonic. this means that the strings can annihilate. what

results is a stable non-bps d0-brane, which is a gauge group spinor. it carries a conserved
z2 charge. in this case, the z2 corresponds to the two conjugacy classes of spin (32)/z2.

at r = rc = 1/2 and small string coupling constant g
md0  2  2rc  td1 = 2/g.

(8)

sen has argued that this is the leading small g value of the type 1 d0-brane mass for all r,

though there are higher-order corrections. it has the usual 1/g factor that is characteristic
of d-branes. curiously, its mass diers from that of the type iia d0-brane by a factor of

3

2 (in leading order). in the s-dual heterotic theory the lightest gauge group spinor occurs
at the rst excited level in the perturbative spectrum. presumably, the non-bps d0-brane

of type i is this state continued to strong coupling.

3 k-theory classication of d-branes

recall that a dp + dp system is characterized by a pair of vector bundles (e, e ) and a
tachyon t , which is a section of e  e . complete annihilation should be possible if and
only if e  e . this requires n = n , in particular. following an earlier suggestion by
moore and minasian [3], witten has argued that equivalence classes of pairs (e, e ) that can
be related by brane annihilation and creation correspond to k-theory classes [4]. so these
are the mathematical objects that correspond to conserved d-brane charges.
for example, d-brane charges of the type iib theory on r10 are given by

k(s 9p) =( z p = odd

p = even

0

.

(9)

this accounts for the rr charges of all stable type iib d-branes. note that the unstable

d-branes (for p = even) carry no conserved charges and do not show up in this classication.
in the case of type i theory, e is an o(n + 32) bundle and e  is an o(n) bundle, so
that the total rr 9-brane charge is 32. the relevant k-theory groups for r10 in this case

the results are as follows:

are denoted gko(s 9p), as explained by witten.
 gko(s 9p) = z for p = 1, 5, 9
 gko(s 9p) = z2 for p = 1, 0, 7, 8
p = 1 corresponds to the type i d-instanton, and p = 0 corresponds to the non-
bps d0-brane, which we have discussed. the cases p = 7, 8 are additional non-bps

these classify the charges for the three kinds of bps dp-branes of type i.

d-branes proposed by witten.

 gko(s 9p) = 0 for p = 2, 3, 4, 6

there are no conserved d-brane charges in these cases.

4 issues concerning the type i d8-brane

the k theory classication of type i d-branes, which we have just summarized, suggests two

new d-branes not discussed previously: d7 and d8, each of which is supposed to carry a
conserved z2 charge.

4

as noted in the nal paragraph of ref. [5], there is a tachyon in the spectrum of d7 -
d9 and d8 - d9 open strings. this means that the world volume of a d7-brane or d8-brane

contains 32 tachyon elds. therefore neither of these d-branes is stable. this raises the
question of what happens to the conserved z2 charge when they dissolve into the background

d9-branes. the comments that follow arose out of discussions with oren bergman and
ashoke sen, as well as correspondence with edward witten.
i will only discuss the d8-
brane, though the d7-brane story is likely to be similar.

witten has argued in support of the d8-brane as follows: the type i d-instanton implies
that there are two dierent vacua, distinguished by the sign of the instanton amplitudes.

this is a z2 analog of the  angle in qcd. one should expect that there is a domain wall
separating the two vacua and this should be the d8-brane. the sign change of instanton

amplitudes would mean that the d-instanton is the em dual of the d8-brane. investigations
that support this picture were carried out by gukov [6].

the k-theory analysis incorporates bott periodicity. this suggests that the type i d8-
brane should have features in common with the type i d0-brane, discussed in section 2. of
course, bott periodicity should be taken cum grano salis, since the total spacetime dimension

is ten. the construction of the type i d0-brane that we described involved wrapping d-
strings on a circle, which was a convenient regulator. however, one might argue that a

localized d8-brane should not exist on a circle (in the direction normal to the brane), since
this would require identifying the two distinct vacua. therefore we will analyze the situation
in uncompactied r10.

the d0-brane could have been presented without involving compactication.

in any
case, by considering the r   limit of the construction in section 2, we see that the
d0-brane can be described as a tachyonic kink in a system consisting of an innite straight
d-string and a coincident anti-d-string. the kink conguration would be exactly the same

as we described for type ii theories in section 1. however, unlike the type ii examples, the
tachyon eld is real in this case, and the potential v (t ) is an even function because of the

z2 gauge symmetries. the kink conguration describing the d0-brane is topologically stable
in this case because the vacuum manifold is s 0 (t = t0) and 0(s 0) = z2.

let us now try to construct the d8-brane out of d9-branes in an analogous manner. one
essential dierence is that the total d9-brane charge must be 32. therefore the simplest
analog to consider is 33 d9-branes and one d9-brane lling the entire r10 spacetime. in
this case the open strings connecting the d9 to the d9-branes give 33 real tachyon elds
t in the fundamental representation of so(33). (it doesnt matter whether one uses o(n)
or so(n) in the present setting.) the potential v (t ) must have so(33) symmetry and
therefore the vacuum manifold should be given by |t | = t0, which describes an s 32. this

5

manifold is connected, so there is no topologically stable kink. this is the same situation we
encountered for the unstable type ii d-branes in section 1. in this case there are 32 directions

of instability, so one expects to nd 32 tachyon elds in the d8-brane world volume. this
agrees with the conclusion of ref. [5], which identied them with modes of d8 - d9 open

strings.

so what are we to make of all this? i think it is clear that the d8-brane is unstable, at least
unless something further is done to stabilize it. still, it may be interesting to consider setting

up a d8-brane conguration and exploring what that implies. i wont present the details
of the reasoning here, but it appears that the vacua on the two sides of the d8-brane are

distinguished by the chirality of gauge group spinors. of course, once the d8-brane decays,
eventually leaving a uniform type i vacuum, only one chirality will remain. this may sound

paradoxical, but it is possible because the gauge group is broken inside the d8-brane.

in conclusion, k-theory classies d-brane charges. however, high dimension non-bps

d-branes are sometimes destabilized by tachyonic modes of open strings connecting them to
background spacetime lling d-branes.

acknowledgments

i am grateful to oren bergman, ashoke sen, and edward witten for helpful discussions and
suggestions.

6

references

[1] a. sen, non-bps states and branes in string theory, hep-th/9904207.

[2] a.lerda and r. russo, stable non-bps states in string theory: a pedagogical review,

hep-th/9905006.

[3] g. moore and r. minasian, k-theory and ramond-ramond charges, jhep 9711:002,

1997, hep-th/9710230.

[4] e. witten, d-branes and k-theory, hep-th/9810188.

[5] m. frau, l. gallot, a. lerda, and p. strigazzi, stable non-bps d-branes in type i

theory, hep-th/9903123.

[6] s. gukov, k-theory, reality, and orientifolds, hep-th/9901042.

7

