tev-scale supersymmetric standard model with

hutp-99/a039, nub 3203

higgs as a slepton

zurab kakushadze

jeerson laboratory of physics, harvard university, cambridge, ma 02138

department of physics, northeastern university, boston, ma 02115

and

(august 2, 1999)

abstract

recently it was pointed out that in the tev-scale brane world there is a logical
possibility where the electroweak higgs can be identied with a fourth gener-
ation slepton. in this paper we address various issues in this four-generation
tev-scale supersymmetric standard model with higgs as a slepton. in par-
ticular we discuss how to achieve proton stability by suppressing the corre-
sponding baryon number violating operators via gauging (a discrete subgroup
of) the baryon number u (1) symmetry. dimension ve lepton number violat-
ing operators which would result in unacceptably large neutrino masses can
be similarly suppressed via gauging a discrete subgroup of the lepton number
u (1) symmetry. in fact, the four generation feature allows for a novel higher
dimensional mechanism for generating small majorana neutrino masses. we
also discuss how to achieve gauge coupling unication, which can be as precise
at one loop as in the mssm, and point out a possible geometric embedding
of the corresponding matter content in the brane world context. finally,
we discuss adequate suppression of avor changing neutral currents in this
model, and also point out a novel possibility for supersymmetry breaking via
a non-zero f-term of the fourth generation lepton supereld.

9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
0
2

 

 
 

2
v
6
1
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

typeset using revtex

e-mail: zurab@string.harvard.edu. address after september 1, 1999: c.n. yang institute for
theoretical physics, state university of new york, stony brook, ny 11794.

1

i. introduction

the electroweak symmetry is believed to be broken via the higgs mechanism. in the non-
supersymmetric standard model one can introduce a complex scalar eld that can play the
role of the higgs. in the supersymmetric extensions of the standard model, however, adding
a single chiral higgs supereld is not possible due to the corresponding gauge anomaly.

if one does not wish to introduce superelds with exotic quantum numbers, then the
anomaly cancellation allows only two possibilities. we can introduce either vector-like
higgs pairs or complete generations. the former possibility has been explored in detail,
and the supersymmetric extension of the standard model with one vector-like higgs pair
is known as the minimal supersymmetric standard model (mssm). on the other hand,
identifying the higgs as a part of a complete generation is also a logical possibility. this
possibility stems from the fact that the su(3)c  su(2)w  u(1)y quantum numbers of
the electroweak higgs are the same as those of an su(2)w doublet lepton. thus, one can
attempt to identify the electroweak higgs with the scalar superpartner of the electroweak
doublet lepton (that is, the corresponding slepton) in one of the generations.

it is, however, non-trivial to realize this higgs as slepton scenario. first, within the
usual paradigm where the fundamental planck scale mp  1019 gev this is impossible due
to the well known rules for writing supersymmetric lagrangians. thus, in such a scenario
the up-quark masses would have to be generated via the couplings of the form lqu, which
are suppressed by the factor m 2

susy/m 2

p  1032.

however, the situation is rather dierent if the fundamental planck scale mp f is around a
tev [1]. in particular, now the desired couplings of the slepton higgs to the standard model
fermions can be generated via the couplings of the form x lqu in the kahler potential,
where x is the spurion supereld whose f-term hfxi  m 2
p f breaks supersymmetry.
note that in this context no additional suppression appears in the corresponding yukawa
couplings. this observation was recently utilized in [2] where the higgs as a slepton scenario
was proposed.

there is, however, another non-trivial constraint arising from the neutrino masses. thus,
we cannot identify the higgs with the superpartner of a known lepton, which is due to the
fact that, via a mixing with neutral gauginos, the corresponding neutrino, which is the
superpartner of the neutral higgs, invariably acquires a see-saw type of mass of order of 10
gev. for this reason, in [2] it was proposed that there exists the fourth generation, and the
higgs is identied with the corresponding slepton.

in [2] it was shown that such a scenario is not ruled out by the present data, but at the
same time can conceivably be tested by lep-ii or the tevatron. in particular, the fourth
generation neutrino picks up a see-saw type of mass, which one requires to be at least 45
gev to comply with the z-decay data. this then implies that at least one out of three
neutralinos in this scenario is lighter than 65 gev. in fact, the neutralino production cross
sections appear to be testable by the lep-ii data.

even though the above scenario is not excluded experimentally, it is desirable to address
various issues invariably arising in the context of tev-scale quantum gravity. thus, the
purpose of this paper is to address within the above proposal some of these issues such as
proton stability, neutrino masses, gauge coupling unication as well as suppression of avor-
changing neutral currents (fcncs). these issues were discussed in detail in the context of

2

the three-generation tev-scale supersymmetric standard model (tssm) proposed in [3].
the gauge coupling unication in the tssm, which is as precise at one loop as in the mssm,
was discussed in [3] in the context of the higher dimensional scenario proposed in [4]1, where
gauge coupling unication occurs via kaluza-klein (kk) thresholds. higher loop eects were
shown to be subleading in this context due to the underlying n = 2 supersymmetry at the
heavy kk levels in [3,7]. proton stability and adequate suppression of dimension ve lepton
number violating operators (which would lead to unacceptably large majorana masses for
neutrinos) was achieved in in the tssm in [8] by gauging an anomaly free discrete z3  z3
gauge symmetry. finally, adequate suppression of fcncs in the tssm was discussed in [9],
in particular, via introducing an anomaly free non-abelian discrete avor symmetry tl  tr
(here t is the tetrahedral subgroup of su(2)) accompanied by an abelian (continuous or
discrete) bulk avor symmetry.

in this paper we discuss the above issues in the context of the four-generation tev-scale
supersymmetric standard model with higgs as a fourth-generation slepton. to distinguish it
from the tssm, we will refer to this model as the tssm4. as we will discuss in the remainder
of this paper, proton stability in the tssm4 can be guaranteed by gauging an anomaly free
bulk u(1)b symmetry related to the baryon number. this, in fact, was originally proposed
in [10]. however, this u(1)b symmetry must be broken, and, if it is broken completely,
then in certain cases there might be induced b = 1 dimension ve operators of the form
qqql/mp (here mp is the four dimensional planck scale), which are well known to be
disastrous for proton stability via a one-loop graph involving a chargino exchange [11]. to
guarantee proton stability we propose gauging a discrete subgroup of u(1)b very much
along the lines of [8]. in fact, it actually suces to gauge a discrete z2 subgroup of u(1)b
for this purpose. other dangerous higher dimensional baryon number violating operators,
namely, those with b = 2, are not forbidden by this z2 discrete symmetry. to achieve
their suppression one can gauge a z4 (instead of z2) subgroup of u(1)b. in fact, for this
purpose it suces to have the unbroken z2 discrete symmetry with the u(1)b  z2 (or
even z4  z2) breaking taking place on a distant brane.

suppression of the dangerous dimension ve lepton number violating operators in the
tssm4 is achieved by gauging a discrete z3 subgroup of an anomaly free u(1)l symmetry
related to the lepton number. as we point out in the following, gauging the full u(1)l
symmetry in the tssm4 context is not possible for the reason that the higgs is identied
with the corresponding fourth generation slepton, and the desired yukawa couplings would
be absent if u(1)l were gauged in the bulk. its z3 subgroup, however, which is completely
adequate for the purposes of suppressing dimension ve lepton number violating operators,
is compatible with the yukawa couplings of the higgs with the standard model fermions.

the gauge coupling unication in the tssm4 is based on the same idea as in the tssm,
but a concrete realization is a bit more non-trivial. in particular, we discuss possible geo-
metric embeddings (in terms of orbifold compactications) of the tssm4 (with its discrete
symmetries) in the brane world context. (for general discussions of embedding the tev-
scale quantum gravity scenario in the brane world context, see [10,12,13].) finally, we also

1tev-scale compactications were originally discussed in [5] in the context of supersymmetry
breaking. kaluza-klein threshold corrections to gauge couplings were rst studied in [6].

3

discuss how to suppress fcncs in the tssm4 (which is very much along the lines of [9]
with some dierences due to the presence of the fourth generation) as well as some other
issues.

ii. tssm4

in this section we briey review the tssm4 proposed in [2]. the gauge group of this
model is the same as in the mssm (or the tssm), that is, su(3)c  su(2)w  u(1)y . the
light spectrum2 of the model is n = 1 supersymmetric, and along with the vector superelds
transforming in the adjoint of su(3)c  su(2)w  u(1)y we also have the following chiral
superelds:

qi = 4  (3, 2)(+1/3) , di = 4  (3, 1)(+2/3) , ui = 4  (3, 1)(4/3) ,
li = 4  (1, 2)(1) , ei = 4  (1, 1)(+2) , ni = 4  (1, 1)(0) .

here the su(3)c  su(2)w quantum numbers are given in bold font, whereas the u(1)y
hypercharge is given in parentheses. the four generations (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) of quarks and
leptons are given by qi, di, ui respectively li, ei, ni (the chiral superelds ni correspond
to the right-handed neutrinos3). the massive kk spectrum will be described in section iv
where we discuss the gauge coupling unication in the tssm4.

in the rst approximation we assume that there is no mixing (at least in the lepton sector)
between the rst three (i = 1, 2, 3) and the fourth generations. in the next section we will
discuss how to achieve this using (discrete) gauge symmetries. then we identify the rst
three generations with the known quarks and leptons, whereas the heavy fourth generation
is new. the fourth generation supereld l4 is then identied with the electroweak higgs
supereld.

next, let x be the spurion supereld whose f-term breaks supersymmetry. the down-
quark masses are generated via the usual couplings in the superpotential which are of the
following type:

qidjl4 ,

i, j = 1, 2, 3, 4 .

(1)

the up-quark masses, however, are generated via the following couplings in the kahler
potential:

qiujl

4x /m 2

s ,

i, j = 1, 2, 3, 4 .

(2)

2by the light spectrum we mean the states which are massless before the supersymme-
try/electroweak symmetry breaking.

3as we will point out in the next section, majorana masses for neutrinos can be generated in
the tssm4 without introducing bulk right-handed neutrinos but via a novel higher dimensional
mechanism.

4

if the f-term hfxi  m 2
yukawa couplings are not suppressed.

s , where the string scale ms is in the tev range4, then the up-quark

the charged lepton masses for the rst three generations are generated via the usual

couplings in the superpotential:

laebl4 ,

a, b = 1, 2, 3 .

(3)

note that the analogous couplings for the fourth generation such as l4e4l4 are absent
due to antisymmetry of the su(2)w contractions. thus, the desired yukawa coupling for
the fourth generation charged lepton must come from the kahler potential. one possible
coupling of this type is the following:

(dx)x l4(dl4)e4/m 4

s .

(4)

once again, this coupling is not suppressed as long as hfxi  m 2
masses will be discussed in the next section.

s . generation of neutrino

finally, let us note that a light higgs is no longer a prediction of supersymmetry in the
present context. thus, in the tssm4 the higgs potential can come from the following terms
in the kahler potential (here c is a model dependent numerical constant)

(xx /m 2

s )(l4l

4 + c(l4l

4)2/m 2

s + . . .) ,

(5)

which can in principle tolerate any mass the higgs could have in the context of the non-
supersymmetric standard model.

iii. proton stability and neutrino masses

in this section we discuss proton stability and generation of small neutrino masses in
the tssm4.
in particular, we consider gauging u(1)b and u(1)l bulk symmetries (or,
more precisely, discrete subgroups thereof) corresponding to the baryon respectively lepton
numbers.

a. proton stability

to ensure proton stability within the tssm4, the simplest possibility is to gauge the
baryon number. note that in the context of three-generation models this is problematic as
the corresponding u(1) symmetry would be anomalous. however, with four generations we
can have an anomaly free u(1) gauge symmetry corresponding to the baryon number [10].
indeed, consider the following u(1)b charge assignments:

4here and in the following we assume that the string coupling is of order one, so that the string
scale ms and the fundamental planck scale mp f are of the same order of magnitude. moreover, by
tev range we do not necessarily mean that ms is of order of a few tev, but can be  10  100
tev. in fact, as was pointed out in [3], which we will re-iterate in the following, this range for the
string scale might be preferred from various phenomenological considerations.

5

qa : + 1 , da :  1 , ua :  1 ,
q4 :  3 , d4 : + 3 , u4 : + 3 ,
li : 0 , ei : 0 , ni : 0 ,

i = 1, 2, 3, 4 .

a = 1, 2, 3 ,

note that the above u(1)b charge assignment is such that b = 3b for the rst three
generations, where b is the usual baryon number. the b charge assignment for the fourth
generation quarks is dictated by the anomaly cancellation requirement. cancellation of the
u(1)b anomalies can be seen by noting that the above u(1)b charge assignment can be
viewed as descending from a vector-like su(4) avor symmetry with the left handed
quarks transforming in 4 of su(4), and the left-handed anti-quarks transforming in 4.

note that the u(1)b symmetry must somehow be broken or else it would lead to a new
long-range force contradicting the data. here we have a few dierent possibilities. first,
we can break u(1)b, which in this case is a bulk gauge symmetry, on a distant brane, so
that this breaking is communicated to the brane on which the standard model elds are
localized via the large extra dimensional bulk elds. the u(1)b gauge symmetry breaking
can then be (almost) maximal on the distant brane, while on our brane it is suppressed by the
corresponding factor related to the volume of the large extra dimensions. it is not dicult
to see that the baryon number violating operators are suppressed by the appropriate powers
of ms/mp (where mp is the four dimensional planck scale) provided that the separation
between the branes is of order of the size of the large extra dimensions. moreover, the u(1)b
gauge boson picks up a mass of order of or larger than an inverse millimeter leading to a
new force which could be observable in the sub-millimeter range [5,1].

note, however, that if we break the u(1)b gauge symmetry completely, then in certain
cases there might be induced b = 1 dimension ve operators of the form qqql/mp
without any additional suppression. such operators are disastrous for proton stability in
the supersymmetric context (which we adapt) via a one-loop graph involving a chargino
exchange [11]. thus, to guarantee proton stability, instead of breaking u(1)b completely,
we can consider breaking it to its discrete subgroup which would forbid such dimension ve
operators. alternatively, we may completely bypass u(1)b and directly consider gauging
such a discrete symmetry. in fact, a z2 subgroup eb2 (in the following we will denote the zn
subgroup of any u(1)a gauge symmetry by ean ) suces for these purposes5. moreover, if
we gauge the eb2 subgroup, then proton is completely stable. indeed, the higher dimensional
operators responsible for proton decay can be schematically written as qqqlk+1(l
4)k, and
violate the baryon number by b = 1, that is, they violate the b number by b = 3.
if, however, the b number is conserved modulo 2, which is the case when we gauge the
eb2 discrete subgroup, then these operators are all forbidden, so that proton is completely
stable.

note, however, that b = 2 processes would be allowed by the eb2 symmetry. these
must also be suppressed as there are experimental bounds on such processes (for instance,
from the nn   transitions, where n = p, n). the corresponding higher dimensional
operators can be completely suppressed if instead of the z2 subgroup eb2 of u(1)b we gauge

5note that this z2 discrete symmetry also forbids dimension four baryon number violating oper-
ators of the form u dd.

6

its z4 subgroup eb4. indeed, b = 2 implies b = 6, and since the b number is conserved
modulo 4 in this case, all such processes are forbidden.

finally, let us point out a hybrid possibility which might be of interest in the light
of the discussion in section iii, where we consider possible geometric embeddings of the
tssm4 in the brane world context. thus, consider gauging the eb2 discrete symmetry
with the u(1)b  eb2 breaking taking place on a distant brane6. then proton would be
completely stable but the b = 2 baryon number violating processes would be allowed
albeit adequately suppressed by the appropriate powers of ms/mp .

the above hybrid possibility might be interesting in the context of baryogenesis. it
seems non-trivial to have successful baryogenesis in the context of tev-scale brane world
for the following reason. on the one hand, baryon number violating processes must be ade-
quately suppressed by various (discrete) gauge symmetries, and the allowed baryon number
operators then have rather high dimensions. on the other hand, the reheat temperature
cannot be too high in the context of tev-scale brane world or else one generically runs into
various cosmological problems (for instance, with the bulk gravitons) [1]. here we would like
to point out the following possibility. in the above hybrid scenario, where eb2 is unbroken
but u(1)b (or eb4) is broken down to eb2 on a distant brane, the dimension ve operators
qqql are forbidden, but the operators of the form qqqqqql4l4 (after the electroweak
breaking) give rise to eective six-fermion operators (which violate the baryon number by
b = 2) suppressed by m 2
s . here the additional suppression factor  (which is given
by the appropriate powers of ms/mp ) is due to the fact that the above breaking occurs on
a distant brane. however, in the early universe the branes can be much closer to each other.
in fact, even though the sizes of the large extra dimensions can already be xed at their
zero temperature values, the brane stabilization need not have taken place yet as the latter
may be due to dynamics dierent from that responsible for radius stabilization. (for recent
discussions on brane stabilization in the brane world context, see, e.g., [14,15].) thus, when
the branes are at distances of order 1/ms from each other, the factor   1, so that there is
no extra suppression in the above eective six-fermion operators. we should point out that
it is still not completely clear whether one can have successful baryogenesis in this context,
and it would be interesting to understand this issue in more detail. (for recent discussions
on baryogenesis in the context of tev-scale brane world, see, e.g., [1618].)

ew/m 7

b. neutrino masses

to generate small (dirac) neutrino masses in the tssm4, we can assume that the right-
handed neutrinos ni are bulk elds, and then the neutrino masses are generated via the
higher dimensional mechanism of [19]. however, as was pointed out in [8], for this mechanism
to work one must adequately suppress dangerous (eective) dimension ve lepton number
violating operators which in the tssm4 context have the following form: lalbl
4, a, b =
1, 2, 3. here we take fermionic components for la and lb, and bosonic components for both

4l

6alternatively, we could imagine that we start with the eb4 symmetry broken on a distant brane
to its z2 subgroup eb2.

7

l
4s. if these operators are suppressed only by 1/ms, then upon the electroweak symmetry
breaking (that is, once the l4 vev is non-zero) such operators would generate unacceptably
large majorana neutrino masses of order m 2
ew/ms for the rst three generation neutrinos.
on the other hand, the analogous operator of the form l4l4l
4 is welcome. in fact, the
see-saw type of mass for the fourth generation neutrino amounts to generating precisely
such an operator via the mixing of the fourth generation neutrino with the neutral gauginos
(whose linear combination in this case plays the role of the corresponding right-handed
neutrino).

4l

to suppress the operators of the form lalbl

4, the simplest possibility is to gauge
the lepton number. note that, just as in the case of the baryon number, in the context of
the three-generation models this is problematic as the corresponding u(1) symmetry would
be anomalous. however, with four generations we can have an anomaly free u(1) gauge
symmetry corresponding to the lepton number. indeed, consider the following u(1)l charge
assignments:

4l

qi : 0, di : 0 , ui : 0 ,
la : + 1 , ea :  1 , na :  1 ,
l4 :  3 , e4 : + 3 , n4 : + 3 .

i = 1, 2, 3, 4 ,

a = 1, 2, 3 ,

note that the above u(1)l charge assignment is such that l = l for the rst three gen-
erations, where l is the usual lepton number. the l charge assignment for the fourth
generation leptons is dictated by the anomaly cancellation requirement. cancellation of the
u(1)l anomalies is completely analogous to that for u(1)b.

4l

note that the u(1)l gauge symmetry forbids the operators of the form lalbl

4 (but
allows the operator l4l4l
4). thus, gauging the u(1)l symmetry would suce for the
purposes of suppressing dangerous dimension ve lepton number violating operators. note,
however, that the u(1)l symmetry is unnecessarily strong for these purposes alone. more-
over, it actually forbids the desirable (eective) yukawa couplings of the form qdl4, qul
4,
lel4 as well as lnl
4 as l4 carries a non-zero u(1)l charge. to remedy this, instead of
gauging the full u(1)l symmetry, very much in the spirit of [8] we propose to gauge its z3
subgroup el3. the el3 charge assignments are given by:

4l

qi : 0, di : 0 , ui : 0 ,
la : + 1 , ea :  1 , na :  1 ,
l4 : 0 , e4 : 0 , n4 : 0 .

i = 1, 2, 3, 4 ,

a = 1, 2, 3 ,

note that the el3 charge is conserved modulo 3. thus, the operators lalbl
forbidden, while the (eective) yukawa couplings qdl4, qul
now allowed.

4, lel4 as well as lnl

4l

4 are still
4 are

gauging the el3 discrete symmetry allows for an interesting novel higher dimensional
mechanism for generating small majorana masses without introducing bulk right-handed
neutrinos. (a similar mechanism was pointed out in [8] in the tssm context.) thus, note
that the mixing between the rst three and the fourth generation leptons is absent if the
el3 discrete symmetry is exact. however, imagine that this symmetry is broken on a distant
brane. then generically there is going to be induced non-zero mixing between the rst three
and the fourth generation leptons, but this mixing is suppressed by a factor of ms/m, where

8

m (which is roughly of order mp , but can actually be a few orders of magnitude smaller)
is related to the volume of the large extra dimensions, and with the appropriate separation
between the branes can be of the correct order of magnitude so that the induced majorana
masses for the rst three generation neutrinos are in the desirable range. (recall that the
fourth generation neutrino has a mass between 45 and 65 gev.) note that this mechanism
for generating small majorana masses does not require bulk right-handed neutrinos. the
role of the fourth generation right-handed neutrino is played by a linear combination of
neutral gauginos, and the rst three generations acquire majorana masses via the mixing
with the fourth generation neutrino. nonetheless, the presence of the states ni in this
scenario is still required by anomaly cancellation, but what is dierent now is that these
states need not be bulk elds. thus, we can assume that they do not propagate in the large
extra dimensions. however, if they are localized on the same brane as the elds li, then we
would generically have unacceptably large dirac neutrino masses coming from the allowed
couplings lnl
4. this can be remedied by assuming that the states ni are localized on
a distant brane (or, alternatively, they come from dierent xed points in the context of
orbifold compactications7 - see the next section), in which case the above couplings are at
least exponentially suppressed.

iv. gauge coupling unification

in this section we discuss the gauge coupling unication in tssm4. since the unica-
tion scale, which we identify with the string scale, is now in the tev range, the unication
mechanism must be very dierent from that in the mssm. in [4] such a unication mecha-
nism was proposed. thus, let the standard model elds be localized on dp-branes (where
p = 4, 5) with p  3 extra directions compactied on a space with linear size(s) of order
r. let us assume that r  1/ms. then between the kaluza-klein (kk) threshold 1/r
and the cut-o ms we have  (rms)p3 heavy kk modes carrying the corresponding gauge
quantum numbers. these states contribute into the gauge coupling running above the scale
1/r, and if we are interested in the contributions of these states (that is the corresponding
thresholds) into the low energy (that is, at scales   1/r  ms) gauge coupling renormal-
ization at one loop, they are proportional to the number of these states n  (rms)p3  1.
thus, one can hope that there might be a possibility of an accelerated unication at ms in
the tev range.

as was explained in detail in [3,7], this mechanism would have no predictive power
unless we adapt the supersymmetric context where the zero modes of the compactication
(corresponding, in particular, to the standard model elds) are n = 1 supersymmetric,

7thus, for instance, if we assume that our brane is sitting at an orbifold xed point while the
elds ni come from a dierent xed point, then the couplings ln l
4 would be suppressed by an
exponential factor  exp(c(rms)2), where r is (roughly) the linear size of dimensions along
which the orbifold xed points are separated (and these dimensions are assumed to be large enough
so that this exponential factor is adequately suppressed), while c is a model dependent numerical
constant of order 1.

9

while the heavy kk modes have n = 2 supersymmetry. the reason is that higher loop
eects would otherwise be as large as the one-loop threshold contribution as we have a large
number n of heavy kk modes circulating in loops. the underlying n = 2 supersymmetry
at the heavy kk modes guarantees, as was shown in [3,7], that the higher loop eects are
subleading compared with the leading one-loop threshold contribution. this is due to the
well known non-renormalization property in n = 2 gauge theories. note, however, that, as
was stressed in [3,7], higher loop cancellations due to the underlying supersymmetry persist
after supersymmetry breaking only if msusy  1/r. this is one of the key reasons why we
assume that ms is at least 10  100 tev.

we will discuss possible geometric embeddings (via orbifolds) of such compactications in
the next subsection. here let us just assume that the zero modes are n = 1 supersymmetric
with the one-loop -function coecients br, r = 1, 2, 3 (here r labels the corresponding
subgroup of su(3)c  su(2)w  u(1)y ), while the heavy kk levels are populated by n = 2
supermultiplets with the one-loop -function coecients ebr. it is then not dicult to show
that the unication of gauge couplings in such a model is as precise as in the mssm (at one
loop) if and only if the following constraint is satised:

rs   is independent of r, s, where rs 

ebr  ebs
r  b
b
s

for r 6= s.

(6)

r are the one-loop -function coecients in the mssm: b

here b
(we are using the standard normalization for the u(1)y gauge coupling 1 = (5/3)y ).

3 = 3

1 = 33/5, b

2 = 1, b

in the following we assume that at the heavy kk levels we have n = 2 vector multiplets
in the adjoint of the gauge group, and the charged n = 2 hypermultiplets can only have the
gauge quantum numbers of q, d, u, l, e (that is, we have no exotic matter). moreover,
we will not distinguish between the q, d, u, l, e and their conjugate quantum numbers as
the dierence is immaterial as far as the one-loop gauge coupling running is concerned. we
will denote the number of the corresponding charged hypermultiplets (per heavy kk mass
level) by nq, nd, nu , nl, ne.

the one-loop -function coecients ebr are given by:

eb1 =

1
5

(nq + 2nd + 8nu + 3nl + 6ne) ,

eb2 = 4 + 3nq + nl ,
eb3 = 6 + 2nq + nd + nu .

the constraint (6) can then be rewritten as

nq + nl  nd  nu = 4  2 ,
nu + ne  2nq = 6  4 .

it is straightforward to analyze this system of algebraic equations, but, instead of being most
general here, for illustrative purposes let us consider possible solutions with  = 1. one such
solution is nq = nd = nu = nf , nl = ne = nf + 2. note that this precisely corresponds to
the tssm matter content of [3] with nf generations plus h and f hypermultiplets (see
[3] for details) propagating in the p  3 dimensional bulk (where the gauge bosons live).

10

here we are interested in a four-generation model (that is, the tssm4), where we do
not wish to add any extra vector-like states (such as h of the mssm, or f of the
tssm). one interesting (for the reason we will explain in a moment) solution of this type
is the following. let nq = nd = ne = 0, nu = 2, and nl = 4. then we can imagine the
following setup. we have four generations of quarks and leptons only. the states qi, di, ei,
i = 1, 2, 3, 4, are localized at xed points (see the next subsection), so that they do not
propagate in the p  3 dimensional bulk. the same is the case for the states u1, u2. the
states u3, u4 as well as li, i = 1, 2, 3, 4, however, are not localized at xed points, but
propagate in the p  3 dimensional bulk. then the unication in the tssm4 within this
setup is as precise at one loop as in the mssm and the tssm.

a. brane world embedding

as we mentioned above, the massless modes in the tssm4 are n = 1 supersymmetric,
whereas the massive kk modes have n = 2 supersymmetry. such spectra arise in orb-
ifold compactications in the brane world context, more concretely, in compactications on
generalized voisin-borcea orbifolds. thus, consider type i/type i string theory compacti-
ed on an elliptically bered calabi-yau three-fold (with su(3) holonomy) of the following
form: m3 = (t 2  k3)/zm , where the generator g of zm (here m can only take values
m = 2, 3, 4, 6 as the action of g on t 2 must be crystallographic) acts as a 2/m rotation
gz1 = z1 on t 2 (z1 is the complex coordinate parametrizing t 2, and   exp(2i/m)),
and as g2 = 12 on k3 (2 is the holomorphic 2-form on k3). next, consider d5-branes
wrapping the ber t 2. then the zero modes of the gauge theory living in the world-volume
of the d5-branes are n = 1 supersymmetric, while the heavy kk modes are n = 2 super-
symmetric.

in the following we would like to discuss possible brane world embeddings of the tssm4
in the context of such orbifold compactications. in particular, solutions to the constraint (6)
imply that some of the matter elds should be localized at xed points while others propagate
in the entire world-volume of d5-branes. it is therefore necessary to check whether any such
solution is at least in principle compatible with the geometric embedding via orbifolds8. here
we should stress that the following discussion still does not guarantee that the corresponding
model exists as due to the lack of necessary model building technology it is not clear at
present whether there exists the appropriate choice of the gauge bundle which would give
the desired gauge group and spectrum9. however, as we discuss in the following, the purely

8this was checked for the tssm in [3,8]. subsequently other straightforward variations of the
tssm were discussed in the literature (see, e.g., [20]), where some elds are supposed to be
localized at xed points while others propagate in the bulk. however, it is not enough to simply
nd a solution to the constraint (6), which is straightforward, but one must also check whether
such a solution is at least conceivably embeddable in the brane world context.

9here we would like to point out that, if such an embedding exists, the string coupling is expected
to be of order 1 as otherwise it is dicult to imagine how the dilaton could be stabilized [13]. the

11

geometric part of this issue can be studied by considering possible orbifold compactications
with the corresponding discrete gauge symmetries.

our discussion in this subsection will be brief as most of the ingredients we are going to
use here were discussed in detail in [3]. thus, we wish to obtain a model where the elds
qi, di, ei, u1,2 (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) are localized at xed points, while the elds li, u3,4 propa-
gate in the bulk (see above). as was pointed out in [3], the elds localized at the orbifold
xed points arise in the type i/type i compactications in the context of non-perturbative
orientifolds examples of which were recently constructed in [21] (for recent progress in per-
turbative orientifolds, see, e.g., [22]). in particular, these states arise in the twisted sectors,
and, therefore, carry the corresponding discrete quantum numbers. thus, we will rst gauge
an anomaly free discrete symmetry under which the states qi, di, ui, li, ei, ni have certain
discrete gauge charge assignments, and then we will identify this discrete symmetry with
that of an orbifold compactication. this will suggest a possible brane world embedding of
the tssm4 with the above matter content.

our strategy for gauging the desired discrete symmetry will be to rst gauge an anomaly-
free continuous abelian symmetry, and then to restrict to its discrete subgroup. thus,
consider the u(1)z symmetry, where z  3(y r), and the z action is the same on all four
generations (that is, the u(1)z symmetry is generation blind). here y is the hypercharge,
while the r charge assignment (which is generation blind) is given by:

rq = 0 , rd = +1 , ru = 1 ,
rl = 0 , re = +1 , rn = 1 .

note that the u(1)r symmetry is anomaly free and compatible with the ub and ul sym-
metries. this implies that so is u(1)z . in fact, the z charge assignment is such that z acts
as 3(b  l) on the rst three generations.

in the following we will be interested in gauging not u(1)z but rather u(1)z , where

z   z  r. the u(1)z  charge assignment is given by:

z 
z 

q = +1 , z 
l = 3 , z 

d = 2 , z 
e = +2 , z 

u = 0 ,
n = +4 .

3 be a z3 subgroup of u(1)z , and let  be the generator of ez 

3. the ez 

3 charge

let ez 
assignment is given by (the ez 

3 charge is conserved modulo 3):

qi : + 1 , d: + 1 , ui : 0 ,
li : 0 , ei :  1 , ni : + 1 .

weakness of the standard model gauge couplings then requires that the volume of the compact
dimensions inside of the d5-branes on which the standard model gauge elds are localized be
somewhat larger than 1 (in the string units) as is the case in the context of unication via kaluza-
klein thresholds. note that even though the underlying string theory is in the non-perturbative
regime, the corresponding eective eld theory is weakly coupled, so that various perturbative
considerations such as gauge coupling unication are valid. in fact, in the present context this issue
was discussed in detail in [3,7], where the importance of the underlying n = 2 supersymmetry at
the heavy kaluza-klein levels was stressed.

12

here i = 1, 2, 3, 4, and ez 

3 is a generation blind symmetry.

next, consider the u(1)r symmetry, where r acts as r on the rst two generations,
while the other two generations have zero r charges. this symmetry is anomaly free and
compatible with all the other symmetries we have considered so far. in the following we will
need a z2 subgroup fr

2 of u(1)r, whose generator we will denote by r.

3  fr
2.

the discrete symmetry we are interested in here is the z6 symmetry ez 

in
particular, we will identify the generator r of this group with the generator g of the
orbifold group zm with m = 6 in the above discussion. then the states li, u3,4 come from
the untwisted sector, the states qi, d3,4, n3,4 come from the -twisted (that is, g2-twisted)
sector, the states e3,4 come from the 1-twisted (that is, g2-twisted) sector, the states
d1,2, u1,2, n1,2 come from the r-twisted (that is, g-twisted) sector, and the states e1,2
come from the 1r-twisted (that is, g1-twisted) sector. the r-twisted (that is, g3-twisted
sector) does not contain any states. with the above identications, it is conceivable that the
above model may be obtainable as a type i/type i compactication on a generalized voisin-
borcea orbifold of the form (t 2k3)/z6. whether the number of the corresponding elds in
each sector (as well as their gauge quantum numbers) can come out right is a model building
question which depends on an appropriate choice of the gauge bundle (whose existence is a
non-trivial issue) as discussed in detail in [3].

before we end this section, let us point out that the el3 and eb2 discrete gauge symmetries
may also be embeddable in the above context if we take k3 to be an orbifold k3 with the
orbifold group being z
6 acts trivially on the ber
t 2 . note that we could not embed eb4 instead of eb2 in this context as the total orbifold
group in this case could not act crystallographically. this is the reason why we considered
a hybrid possibility for suppressing baryon number violation in subsection iii.a.

6  el3  eb2, where the generator g of z

also note that the above z6 discrete symmetry must actually be broken or else the
desirable yukawa couplings of the standard model fermions to the higgs would be forbidden.
this implies that we are actually talking about (at least partially) blown-up orbifolds. in
fact, if the breaking of z6 can be viewed as being due to some elds charged under z6
acquiring non-zero vevs in an asymmetric fashion (that is, the vev of the eld with the
+1 z6 charge is dierent from that of the eld with the 1 z6 charge, which is conceivable in
the context of almost completely broken supersymmetry), then this could be used to explain
the vertical hierarchy in the quark and lepton sectors.

finally, we note that if we consider the z6  z

6 orbifold, then the right-handed neutri-
nos can be seen to be localized at (3+1)-dimensional xed points, that is, they do not
propagate in large extra dimensions in this case. this is one of the reasons why the novel
mechanism for generating small majorana neutrino masses discussed in subsection iii.b
might be appealing in this context.

v. other issues

in this section we would like to briey discuss some other issues in the tssm4 such as

adequate suppression of fcncs, and also a novel possibility for supersymmetry breaking.

suppressing (eective) four-fermion operators potentially inducing unacceptably large
fcncs in the tssm was discussed in detail in [9]. there it was shown that a non-abelian
discrete avor group tl  tr (where t is the tetrahedral subgroup of su(2)) accompanied

13

by a vector-like u(1)v avor symmetry (or its appropriate discrete subgroup) can adequately
suppress all such operators. here the tl  tr discrete avor symmetry acts only on the
rst two generation quarks and leptons, whereas the u(1)v avor symmetry acts only on
the third generation quarks and leptons (in the avor basis). the former suppresses four-
fermion operators involving only the rst two generation states, while the latter guarantees
that four-fermion operators also involving the third generation states are suppressed as well.
the above mechanism for suppressing fcncs can also be applied to the tssm4. the
only dierence is that we now have the fourth generation, and we must also worry about
possible fcncs coming from the mixing between the rst three and the fourth generations.
note, however, that this mixing is guaranteed to be small in the quark sector if the u(1)b 
eb2 breaking occurs on a distant brane as in the hybrid scenario discussed in subsection
iii.a. as to the lepton sector, in the limit of unbroken el3 discrete gauge symmetry the
mixing between the rst three and the fourth generation leptons is absent, and, since this
discrete gauge symmetry is broken on a distant brane, the resulting fcncs are completely
adequately suppressed.

finally, we would like to point out that in the tssm4 there a priori exists a novel
possibility for supersymmetry breaking.
in particular, imagine that not only the lowest
(that is, scalar) component of the chiral supereld l4 has a non-zero vev, but also the
highest component (that is, the f-term) develops a non-zero vev. then the f-term fl4
could be responsible for supersymmetry breaking. in fact, in this case we might no longer
need a spurion supereld x introduced in section ii. thus, the up-quark masses could be
generated from the following dimension ve operators in the kahler potential: qul
4/ms.
indeed, if hfl4i  m 2
s , then we have eective yukawa couplings in the up-quark sector.
similar consideration apply, for instance, to the yukawa couplings for the fourth generation
charged leptons. it would be interesting to investigate this new possibility for supersymmetry
breaking in the tssm4 in more detail.

acknowledgments

i would like to thank gregory gabadadze and aaron grant for discussions. this work
was supported in part by the grant nsf phy-96-02074, and the doe 1994 oji award. i
would also like to thank albert and ribena yu for nancial support.

14

references

[1] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. lett. b429 (1998) 263; phys.

rev. d59 (1999) 0860004.

[2] a.k. grant and z. kakushadze, hep-ph/9906556.
[3] z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b548 (1999) 205.
[4] k.r. dienes, e. dudas and t. gherghetta, phys. lett. b436 (1998) 55; nucl. phys.

b537 (1999) 47; hep-ph/9807522.

[5] i. antoniadis, phys. lett. b246 (1990) 317.
[6] t.r. taylor and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b212 (1988) 147.
[7] z. kakushadze and t.r. taylor, hep-th/9905137.
[8] z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b552 (1999) 3.
[9] z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b551 (1999) 549.
[10] i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. lett. b436 (1998)

257.

[11] s. weinberg, phys. rev. d26 (1982) 287;

n. sakai and t. yanagida, nucl. phys. b197 (1982) 533.
[12] g. shiu and s.-h.h. tye, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 106007.
[13] z. kakushadze and s.-h.h. tye, nucl. phys. b548 (1999) 180.
[14] g. dvali, hep-ph/9905204.
[15] z. kakushadze, hep-th/9906222.
[16] k. benakli and s. davidson, phys. rev. d60 (1999) 025004.
[17] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, n. kaloper and j. march-russell, hep-ph/9903224.
[18] g. dvali and g. gabadadze, hep-ph/9904221.
[19] n. arkani-named, s. dimopoulos, g. dvali and j. march-russell, talk presented by s.

dimopoulos at susy98, hep-ph/9811448.
[20] c.d. carone, phys. lett. b454 (1999) 70;

a. delgado and m. quiros, hep-ph/9903400;
p.h. frampton and a. rasin, hep-ph/9903479.

[21] z. kakushadze, phys. lett. b455 (1999) 120; hep-th/9904211; hep-th/9905033.
[22] m. berkooz and r.g. leigh, nucl. phys. b483 (1997) 187;

c. angelantonj, m. bianchi, g. pradisi, a. sagnotti and ya.s. stanev, phys. lett. b385
(1996) 96;
z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b512 (1998) 221; nucl. phys. b529 (1998) 157; phys.
lett. b434 (1998) 269; nucl. phys. b535 (1998) 311; phys. rev. d58 (1998) 101901;
z. kakushadze and g. shiu, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 3686; nucl. phys. b520 (1998) 75;
g. zwart, nucl. phys. b526 (1998) 378;
g. aldazabal, a. font, l.e. ibanez and g. violero, nucl. phys. b536 (1998) 29;
z. kakushadze, g. shiu and s.-h.h. tye, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 25;
j. lykken, e. poppitz and s.p. trivedi, nucl. phys. b543 (1999) 105;
r. blumenhagen and a. wisskirchen, phys. lett. b438 (1998) 52;
z. kakushadze and s.-h.h. tye, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 126001.

15

