9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
0
3

 

 
 

1
v
4
9
1
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

cosmic string helicity: constraints on loop congurations,

and the

quantization of baryon number

tsippy r. mendelson

racach institute of physics, hebrew university, givat ram, jerusalem 91904, israel.

we apply the concept of helicity from classical hydrodynamics to elu-
cidate two problematical issues in cosmic string physics. helicity, the space
integral of the scalar product of a velocity-like eld with its vorticity eld
(curl), can be dened for a complex scalar eld in analogy with uids. we
dwell on the topological interpretation of helicity as related to the linking of
eld lines of the vorticity eld. earlier works failed to fully implement this
interpretation for cosmic strings by missing a term connected with the link-
ing of these lines inside the strings. as a result paradoxical conclusions were
drawn: global cosmic string loops may not take on certain simple shapes, and
baryon number is not quantized in integers in the presence of local cosmic
strings in gauge theory. we show that both paradoxes are removed when in-
ternal contributions to helicity are properly taken into account. in particular,
quantization of baryon number can be understood within a special case of the
glashow-weinberg-salam model if cosmic strings are the unique mechanism
for baryosynthesis. in addition, we nd a new constraint on the permitted
linkages of cosmic strings in a string tangle.

i. introduction

cosmic strings are a special case of the vorticity phenomenon, which appears in many
forms - in the ow of rivers and streams, in smoke rings, in hurricanes and tornadoes,
etc. a special case of vorticity are the quantum vortices [1,2] which include vortices in
superuids, ux tubes in superconductors and cosmic strings. global cosmic strings are
analogues to vortices in superuids while local cosmic strings are analogues to ux tubes in
superconductors [3]. all these vortices are described by a complex wave function or scalar
eld with a multivalued phase function , such that

i   dl = 2n

n = 1, 2, ...

(1.1)

over a closed contour surrounding the string. as a result dierent physical quantities get
quantized: the circulation of a superuid vortex, the magnetic ux in a superconductor, the
magnetic ux in a local cosmic string.

e-mail: tsippora@shum.huji.ac.il

e-mail: perachsheli@hotmail.com

1

vorticity was rst investigated by helmholz and kelvin who set down the foundations for
the study of vorticity in hydrodynamics. in this work we try to implement concepts born
in the eld of classical hydrodynamics to cosmic strings. as we shall see the interaction
between these two elds can be very rewarding. turbulent uid is regarded as full of vortex
laments [4]. quantum turbulence in superuids has likewise been dened as a superuid
state featuring a tangle of quantum vortex laments [5]. this paper is concerned with
helicity of a tangle of cosmic strings.

the concept of uid helicity was introduced by moatt [6] as a useful measure of the
degree of linkage of ordinary uid vortice loops. it is dened as the volume integral of the
scalar product of a velocity eld v and its curl, the vorticity . following this, moatt [4,6,7]
and others [810] considered helicity integrals in general, i.e. the space integral over the
scalar product of a vector eld and its curl

h = z v    v d3r,

(1.2)

and found them to have a topological interpretation as the linking of the eld lines of the
divergence free eld   v. thus the conservation of helicity can be explained for systems
in which the eld lines may not cross each other, such as vortex lines in an inviscid uid
and the magnetic eld lines in a perfectly conducting uid [6]. for these ows the eld lines
are said to be frozen into the ow, and the helicity is a topological invariant mathematically
related to the hopf invariant [11] classifying the nontrivial homotopy classes of maps from
s 3 to s 2.1

superuids and cosmic strings are both described by eld theories of a complex eld
 = e which obeys a nonlinear eld equation [13], e.g. the nonlinear ginzburg-pitaevskii
equation [14] or the higgs equation. cosmic strings and superuid vortices both occur in
the presence of spontaneous symmetry breaking [15]. a vortex lament or cosmic string is
a conguration of  which approaches asymptotically the broken symmetry vacuum, and is
characterized by a phase  which changes by 2n (n  z) when one goes once around the
lament or string axis. n, is termed the winding number of the string. single valuedness
of the eld  on the lament axis requires that  = 0 along it. the curves along which
 = 0 dene the position of the strings. a vortex lament or cosmic string must either be
innite in both directions, close on itself (cosmic string loop, vortex ring), or terminate on
a boundary of the system. otherwise the behavior of the phase just beyond the laments
free ends would be ambiguous. we assume throughout that all strings are closed un-knotted
loops conned to a nite region.

the analogy between vortices in superuids and global cosmic strings has inspired the
construction of a helicity for global cosmic strings. bekenstein [16] dened a helicity for

1the existence of a relation between helicity integrals and the topological hopf invariant has been
mentioned by [4,8,10,12]. however, the exact relation had been derived by arnold [9]. the hopf
invariant has an elementary geometric interpretation as the linking number of the preimages of
the points of the target space s 2, which are isomorphic to circles in s 3. the hopf invariant is
equivalent to the helicity integral of a vector eld whos eld lines lie tangent to the preimage
circles. in this sense the hopf invariant is a helicity integral term, but the inverse is usually not
the case.

2

global strings, and vachaspati and field [17], sato and yahikozawa [18] and sato [19] did this
for local strings. these works tried to relate helicity for cosmic strings with the topological
and geometrical structure of these strings (such as linking, knotting, writhing and twisting).
in all these works bizarre physical conclusions were drawn. bekenstein concluded that
an isolated unknotted loop of global string is restricted to a plane [16] i.e., only planar
congurations may exist. this is strange since dynamically there seems to be no constraint
on a loop accumulating a distortion continuously in an arbitrary direction. furthermore
simulations of the formation and evolution of cosmic strings show the formation of loops
which are not planar [20,21]. bekenstein also claimed that the contortion of a single knot
is quantized in integers. this is also strange because it says a single knot may not wiggle
freely about, but is frozen in a conguration of integer contortion.

for local cosmic strings there is a relation between the electroweak magnetic helicity of
a tangle of strings and the violation of baryon number conservation via what is known as
the chiral anomaly [17,19]. vachaspati and field, sato and yahikozawa and sato found the
helicity to change continuously with the shape of the strings, which implies that baryon
number changes continuously too. this clashes with the expectation that baryon number is
quantized in integers.

we show here that the topological interpretation of helicity as the linking of eld lines
themselves is not fully incorporated in these works, and hence an important term was left out,
which accounts for all the mentioned unacceptable conclusions. helicity arises from internal
structure within a string, determined by the twist and writhe of the string, in addition to
the external relations between strings, i.e.
linking and knotting. the missing term arises
from the internal structure of eld lines within the strings which we name internal helicity.
it was previously believed [3] that since the strings length is much greater than its width,
the internal structure of the string becomes unimportant and physical quantities of interest
can be averaged over the string cross-section. however, as we will see this is not always the
case.

in order to clarify the contribution of internal helicity, the relation of helicity to the
topological structure of eld lines will be further developed here. field lines of vector elds
which are divergence-free do not have endpoints. this property allows us to examine such
eld structures in terms of the topology of closed curves. the link between helicity and
topological invariants of curves was rst conjectured by moatt in 1981 [4] and then devel-
oped by berger and field in 1984 [8]. in 1992 moatt and ricca [7] managed to derive the
extra term, arising from the internal structure of magnetic ux tubes, directly from the eld
equations of motion for a magnetohydrodynamic uid. this is not possible when calculating
the helicity of cosmic strings since their equations are second order non-linear equations, and
therefore the calculation is too complicated. however, using formulas describing curves, de-
veloped by mathematical biologists investigating the structure of dna [22,23], the internal
helicity may be calculated. by adding it to the external helicity we correct the mentioned
results.

in section ii we review the concept of helicity of a solenoidal (divergence free) vector
eld, and dwell on the relation of the helicity to the linking of the eld lines of the solenoidal
eld. in section iii we review the construction and calculation of the helicity for a tangle of
global cosmic string loops, as a function of dierent geometrical and topological properties
of the strings [16]. next we correct the previously mentioned conclusions of bekenstein by

3

means of the internal helicity. in section iv we deduce new constraints on the permitted
linkages of string loops. we nd that the linking possibilities of string loops depends on
their winding numbers. in section v we review how the electroweak helicity of local cosmic
strings in the weinberg-salam model is related to the baryon number, and clarify how baryon
number conservation is violated. the baryon number is found to be quantized, in contrast
to previous results. again, we show how internal helicity accounts for the new results.

ii. helicity as topological invariant

the term helicity is used in particle physics for the scalar product of the momentum and
spin of a particle. moatt [6] adopted this term to describe the volume integral over the
scalar product of a velocity eld v and its curl, the vorticity 

h = z v   dv

(2.1)

which he named the helicity of the ow. this idea stemmed from the essentially kinematical
interpretation of the quantity v  . the streamlines of the ow passing near any representa-
tive point 0 in a small volume element dv are (locally) helices about the streamline through
0, and the contribution

v   dv  v0  0 dv

(2.2)

to h from dv is positive or negative according as the screw of these helices is right-handed
or left-handed.

more generally, the concept of helicity describes the volume integral over the scalar
product of any general vector and its curl. in particular, the magnetic helicity of magneto-
hydrodynamic ow

h = z a  b dv

(2.3)

had already been shown by woltjer [24,25] to be conserved for a perfectly conducting uid.
later moatt [6] showed that the uid helicity of an ideal barotropic uid is conserved as
well.2 both these cases share the property that the divergence free eld lines (vortex lines or
magnetic eld lines) are frozen into the uid, and that in consequence knots and linkages of
the eld lines are inevitably conserved. it was through struggling to understand the physical
meaning of this result that moatt was led to the topological interpretation of helicity in
terms of links and knots in convected vector elds generally, and to the characterization of
helicity as a topological invariant for these cases. moreau [26] observed that conservation of
uid helicity can be deduced from noethers theorem. helicity thus appears to have status
comparable to energy, momentum and angular momentum in this sense. as we shall see,
unlike these quantities helicity also has a strong topological character. to demonstrate this

2this is true for any inviscid ow which conserves circulation, including irrotational ow.

4

we review the calculation of helicity for the simple case of two linked ux tubes and show
that the helicity counts the gauss linking number of the tubes [7].

consider two ux tubes linked once (fig. 1), carrying uxes 1 and 2 respectively, of

the vector eld b =   a (the ux is zero everywhere outside the laments).



2



1

 b

b

fig. 1. two linked b ux tubes with no twist in the eld lines and with linking number

l12 = +1.

within each lament, the b-lines are unlinked curves which close on themselves after
just one passage round the lament. the helicity h of the two ux tubes has the same form
as the pseudo-scalar quantity described in (2.3).3

adopting the coulomb gauge for a (i.e.   a = 0), and imposing the further condition

a = o(|r|3) as |r|  , a is given by the biot-savart law:

so that from (2.3),

h =

a(r) =

1

4 z b(r)  (r  r)

|r  r|3

dv ,

1

4 z z b(r)  b(r)  (r  r)

|r  r|3

dv dv .

(2.4)

(2.5)

each tube may be built of many innitely small ux tubes carrying uxes 1 and 2.
replacing bdv by  dl: allowing for the fact that each ux lament is integrated over twice
once as r and once as r, we nd that h = 2 l12 12 with
(dl  dl)  (r  r)

1

(2.6)

l12 =

4 ic1ic2

|r  r|3

which is the gauss formula for the linking of two curves. the sign of l12 depends on the
relative orientations of the eld in the two laments (according to the right hand rule).4

3it is straightforward that h does not depend on the gauge of a; for if a is replaced by a + ,
then h is unchanged.

4in this derivation, it is essential that each ux tube should by itself have zero helicity and this
is ensured by the above assumption that the b-lines within either tube on its own are unlinked
closed curves.

5

it is simple to obtain the total helicity of the two ux tubes. each pair of laments (one
from each tube) make a contribution 2l12 12 to the total helicity, so that summing over
all such pairs, this is now given by

h = 2 l12 12.

(2.7)

helicity has been shown to be an invariant for ows in which the divergence free eld
lines are frozen into the ow (woltjer [24,25] for a perfectly conducting uid and moatt [6]
for ideal barotropic ow). combining this knowledge with (2.7), the interpretation of the
invariant in terms of conservation of linkage of the (vortex/magnetic) eld lines which are
frozen in the uid is immediate.

iii. helicity of global cosmic strings

states of a higgs eld containing a tangle of cosmic strings resemble a tangle of quan-
tum vortex laments which arise in quantum turbulent ow in superuids. they are both
described by a complex wave function  = e and a winding number n. the phase 
changes by 2n when one goes once around the lament or string axes. the curve  = 0
denes the position of the strings and the passage from  = 0 to the vacuum value of  takes
place over a certain lengthscale denoted by r0. this lengthscale is very small in comparison
with the strings lengths and distances between the strings, i.e. the strings are very thin.

motivated by this resemblance bekenstein [16] designed a helicity for cosmic strings in
analogy with uid helicity of a superuid. we rst review the original calculation [16] of
the helicity of a tangle of strings, and then correct it for the left-out contribution of internal
helicity.

a. constructing the helicity of global cosmic strings

in a superuid the velocity is proportional to the gradient of the phase of the wave

function; bekenstein denes the vector

v = (2),

(3.1)

where (2) is taken to be a function which rises rapidly from its value at a string axis
(0) = 0 to near its asymptotic value, (2
0) = 1, over an interval of 2 which corresponds
to a distance of order r0. v is a kind of regularised velocity in that the singularity of 
on the axis is defused by the  function (far from the axis v will drop inversely with the
distance from it as bets a vortex velocity eld). we have

  v = (2)2  ,

(3.2)

where (2) is the derivative of (2) with respect to 2. (2) has a rather sharp peak at
a distance  r0 from a string axis and the integral of  over all 2 is unity.

the helicity of the eld v is dened as

h = z v    v d3r.

6

(3.3)

unlike ordinary uid helicity, this one vanishes.5 this is clear since the vectors v and   v
are perpendicular by construction. nevertheless, string loops (and vortex rings) can link,
and knot, and their linkage is correlated with other topological properties of the strings to
be introduced later.

throughout it is assumed that linked and knotted loops can occur over some periods
with no intersections. situations where there are intersecting strings are viewed as repre-
senting singular moments, not generic ones. (simulations of the development of superuid
vortices [5] and global cosmic strings [21] conrm this assumption). bekenstein develops
from the zero helicity a quantitative relation between the linkage and other properties of the
loops.

b. evaluation of global cosmic strings helicity

in order to evaluate the helicity explicitly for a tangle of cosmic string loops, it is conve-
nient to rewrite (3.3) as a two-point functional of v (this is valid if the loops are conned
to a nite region [16])

h = h[v] = z d3rz d3r (  v)  (  v)  (r  r)

4|r  r|3

.

(3.4)

we follow bekenstein in the following discussion of the reduction of h[v], and the con-
clusions that may be drawn from it. for eld congurations of size large compared to r0,
and where all the string axis are always well apart on scale r0, h receives a contribution only
when each of r and r lies very close to a string axis. this stems from the fact that the 
function in (3.2) connes the integrals to very near the axis. hence, bekenstein assumes h is
equivalent to a double line integral taken along the string axis. in addition the cross section
of each loop is very little distorted by the presence of the other loops and nearby portions
of itself and therefore is assumed to possess a line symmetry. under these assumptions and
a few manipulations bekenstein concludes that

z d3r   v = 2|n|ds

(3.5)

for the contribution of a little piece of string, where ds here is the vectorial line element
along the piece of string considered.

inserting (3.5) into (3.4) we obtain a double contribution to helicity from each pair of
loops, because ds may progress through one loop (call it i) while ds does so through the
other (j) and vice-versa. in addition we obtain a contribution from each string loop alone
so that

5a helicity which vanishes inherently cannot be used to study the dynamics of a system; only
results that relate to static congurations can be obtained. there is no physical meaning to the
conservation of a helicity of this kind. if one is interested in drawing conclusions on the dynamics
of a network of strings, a helicity which does not vanish must be constructed, and then conditions
on its conservation must be found.

7

h[v] =

1

2 xi6=j

2lij(2|ni|)(2|nj|) +xi

wi(2|ni|)2.

(3.6)

where

lij =

1

4 iiij

ds  ds  (r  r)

|r  r|3

is the gauss linking number (2.6) of the two loops i and j and

wi =

1

4 iiii

ds  ds  (r  r)

|r  r|3

(3.7)

(3.8)

is the writhing number of loop i (fuller [23]).6 while lij is a topological invariant of the
linking of the string loops and must be an integer, wi is not a topological invariant.
it
changes with the shape of the loop and can obtain any value. wi measures the deviation of
a loop from its plane; the writhe of a planar loop is zero.

when all loops are conned to a nite region, h = h = 0, and (3.6) gives

0 = (2)2xi6=j

lij|ni||nj| + (2)2xi

win 2
i .

(3.9)

we thus obtain a constraint connecting the linking of a collection of loops with their geo-
metrical shapes. particularly simple is the case of an isolated loop. then lij = 0. for such
a loop we must have wi = 0 too. according to this result an isolated un-knotted loop must
be a planar loop at any instant [16]. this is hard to accept since dynamically there seems to
be no constraint on a loop accumulating a distortion continuously in an arbitrary direction.
furthermore simulations of the formation and evolution of cosmic strings [20,21] show the
formation of loops which are not planar! similarly, according to (3.9) two loops linked once
may never be planar since the contribution of their writhe to the helicity must cancel out
the contribution from their linkage. this restriction is again hard to accept.

to obtain another constraint bekenstein introduces the relation [22,23]

k = w + c.

(3.10)

k measures the knotting of the curve and can jump by increments of 2, and c is the

contortion of the loop dened by c = (2)1h  ds which integrates the torsion over the

whole loop.7 inserting w from (3.10) into (3.9) gives the following constraint connecting
the contortion, knotting and linking of a collection of loops:

6equation (3.6) diers from the original one in [16] by a factor of 4 which was missed in the
previous calculation.

7the axis of a string can be treated as a curve in dierential geometry. a curve r = x(s) (s is
the arc length) has t = x(s) as unit tangent vector, has a unit normal n , and a unit binormal
b = t  n . they are connected by the frenet-serret equations

8

xi

cin 2

i = xi6=j

lij|ninj| +xi

kin 2
i .

(3.11)

this relation says that the sum of contortions of a collection of unit winding number loops
is quantized in integers [16]. this implies that the contortion of any single knot is quantized
in integers: the knot cannot wiggle freely about, but is frozen in a conguration of integer
contortion. this is a very strong constraint on the dynamics of such a conguration, and
together with our previous observations, makes us suspect that the calculation has missed
a term.

c. internal helicity

the rst clue of the missing term was presented by moatt [4], who notes that close

inspection of an expression of the form

hi = zi

d3rzi

d3r (  v)  (  v)  (r  r)

4|r  r|3

,

integrated over a single ux loop i (of an arbitrary divergence-free vector eld), shows that
the helicity in this limit has an additional contribution from pairs of points r, r separated
by a distance comparable to the cross-sectional span of the loop. in addition to the writhe
w (3.8), which we introduced earlier as the sole contribution to helicity from a single loop,
moatt conjectures that the close points contribute an extra term namely

hi = ci2

(3.12)

where ci is the contortion of loop i dened earlier, and  is the ux of the loop. actually it
is easy to see that bekensteins calculation in sec. iii b ignores the thickness of the string,
i.e. the contribution from close pairs of points r and r. equation (3.5) reduces a volume
integral to a line integral along the core of the string and thus treats the string as though it
where innitely thin. moatt speculates that the additional contribution, from close pairs of
points r and r, is related to the contortion so that the helicity will be a topological invariant
of the loop, i.e., hi = (wi + ci)2 = ki2 by (3.10). but, thinking this over we realize
that the contortion is also just a property of the ux tubes (strings) axis and not of its
internal structure hence we should expect a dierent term to appear.

later moatt [7] explicitly calculated the helicity of a magnetohydrodynamic system of
ux tubes to nd that his earlier speculation was not exact, and that k is not a topological
invariant after all since its value jumps discontinuously at inexion points (points of zero
curvature). in this later calculation moatt manipulates the magnetohydrodynamic equa-
tion of motion of a conguration of eld lines moving with the ow. this calculation is




= (b   t ) 


t
n
b

,




where , a positive scalar, is called the curvature of the curve, and  , which may take on either
sign, is called the torsion.

t
n
b

d

ds 


9

much too complicated to carry over to the case of cosmic strings since the eld equations for
these are non-linear. hence we will follow in the footsteps of berger and field [8] who also
calculate the internal helicity due to the internal structure of a ux tube, but we will present
a slightly dierent calculation, and a slightly dierent result. berger and fields result was
that h = t 2 where t is any real number, while we obtain the same result as moatt [7]
with h = n2 and n, an integer, is the linking number of the eld lines in the ux tube.

we rst calculate exactly the contribution to the helicity of a single vortex loop . first
we consider the inner structure of the string to consist of nested toroidal vorticity surfaces
(a peace of the loop is shown in fig. 2). then we may build up the string by increments of
vorticity ux d composed of many thin ux tubes  that wind around the inner ux tube
 n times.

fig. 2. the linking of ux tubes inside a string.

the increment in helicity for each such ux tube  is 2n where n is the gauss linking
number of element  with  (the inner ux tube). the increment in helicity for the whole
of d is simply 2nd. (the ux d simply counts the number of eld lines intersecting the
increment in the cross section of the string, and hence the number of eld lines wrapped
around the ux tube in the center.) we thus have according to (3.4)

d3r (  v)  (  v)  (r  r)

(3.13)

h = z
= z 

0

d3rz
d i i (dl  dl)  (r  r)

4|r  r|3

4|r  r|3

= z 

0

d  2n

where dl is along the axis of the string and dl is along one of the eld lines in  wrapping
, and vice-versa. finally, integrating over all the nested ux tubes

h =

2
2

2n = n(2n)2,

(3.14)

where n is the winding number of the cosmic string (the ux  is easily calculated using
the denition of v, stokes theorem and (1.1)).

throughout this calculation we have assumed that  and  have the same linking
number as a single eld line in  with the axis of the string. we have also assumed that all
eld lines have the same linking number with the axis of the string (and with each other).
this is plausible for a continuous eld. as we see, the internal helicity is due to the linking

10

of the   v eld lines inside the string. this linking occurs when the eld   v is twisted:
if the eld lines do not link the internal helicity is zero.

we would now like to express the linking number of the eld lines n as a sum of w and
some other term or terms, so that we may reconcile this calculation with bekensteins result
(3.6). the linking number n of  with  is equal to the linking number of a single eld line
in  with the axis of the string. since these are two closed curves at a very short distance
apart, the axis of the string can be treated as a curve in dierential geometry, forming the
edge of a ribbon whose other edge is traced by the eld line.

this type of problem appears rst to have been addressed by calugareanu [27,28], who
considered two neighboring closed curves c, c  forming the boundaries of a (possibly knot-
ted) ribbon of small spanwise width , and showed that for suciently small  the linking
number n of c and c  can be expressed in the form

n = w + c + n ,

(3.15)

where w and c are respectively the writhe and the contortion of c, and n is an integer
representing the number of rotations of the unit spanwise vector u on the ribbon relative
to the frenet pair (the unit normal and unit binormal8) in one passage round c.
(the
contortion c actually measures the rotation round the curve of the frenet pair itself.)

u

x(s)

u

fig. 3. two curves form the edges of a ribbon. u is the unit spanwise vector of the ribbon

and x(s) is the curve of one of the edges of the ribbon

the frenet pair has discontinuous behavior in going through a point of inexion (zero
curvature). as a result c and n are not well dened if c has inexion points.
if c is
continuously deformed through an inexional conguration, then c is discontinuous by 1,
but n is simultaneously discontinuous by an equal and opposite amount 1, so that the
sum c + n does vary continuously through inexion points [7]. this sum is known as the
twist of the ribbon [22,23,29]

t = c + n .

(3.16)

thus, as we remarked earlier, k = w + c is not a topological invariant while n (3.15) is.

with the help of (3.15) and (3.16) we are now ready to complete the calculation of the
helicity for a single (un- knotted) cosmic string loop . we take c above to be the strings
axis and c  to be along one of the eld lines twisted around the axis. then for the i-th loop

8see footnote 7.

11

hi = ni2 = wi(2ni)2 + ti(2ni)2.

(3.17)

our nal expression for the helicity of a tangle of cosmic string loops is therefore

h[v] = xi6=j

lij(2|ni|)(2|nj|) +xi

wi(2ni)2 + ti(2ni)2.

(3.18)

contrast this (correct) result with (3.6). the twist t is the contribution from the close pairs
of points r and r inside the string; it is not a property of the axes of the string alone, but
rather of the internal structure of the eld lines inside the string core.

iv. new constraints on string configurations

in the previous sections we learned that helicity measures the linkage of the eld lines of
v, and that the total helicity of global cosmic strings is zero whatever their conguration
may be. these properties must put some constraint on the possible congurations of the
strings. in this section we show that the knotting and external linkage of a cosmic string
determines the internal structure of the eld lines inside the string, and thus external and
internal helicity cancel each other out so that the total helicity is zero. since the eld lines in
a string must close on themselves, and their twist depends on external knotting and linking,
we will get constraints on the possible congurations of string loops. these constraints
are weaker than those proposed by bekenstein, and are free from the latters paradoxical
aspects.

a. determining internal linking from winding numbers of a string loop

let us start by examining  (the gradient of the phase) of the most simple conguration,
a single loop. as we know the phase varies when one goes once around the string by 2n,
where n is the winding number of the string.

fig. 4. sense of variation of the phase for an isolated cosmic string loop.

what happens if the phase varies along the string too? because of periodicity this is

only possible if

i s  ds = 2n 

(4.1)

where ds is along the string axis. but in this case there will be another topological require-
ment. because the phase varies by 2n  around the perimeter of the loop, for every surface
spanning the loop there must be at least one place where the amplitude  = 0 so that the
eld  will be single-valued. this is actually the requirement that the loop be threaded by

12

another n  unit winding-strings or a single string with winding number n . hence an iso-
lated loop must have n  = 0; for a totally symmetric loop  will have only one component,
in the direction around the string.9

how does this aect the conguration of the eld lines of   v ? we recall that by
denition (3.1), v is parallel to  and   v (3.2) is perpendicular to v. hence if v has a
component only around the string,   v will have a component only along the string, and
its eld lines will not be twisted or linked. since linkage of the eld lines is a topological
property, it will not change for continuous deformation of the loop; therefore the eld lines
of any isolated loop with arbitrary shape will be unlinked. the immediate result is that
the total helicity of any isolated loop with arbitrary shape is zero. this corrects bekensteins
conclusion (3.9) that an isolated loop must be a planar loop at any instant so that the
helicity will be zero.

we next investigate a conguration of two linked loops 1 and 2 with winding numbers
n1 and n2 respectively. we now have a component of  in the direction along the strings
too. the phase will vary around the perimeter of loop 1 by 2n2 and around the perimeter
of 2 by 2n1 (fig. 5). now that  has components along the string and around it, we must
introduce a new concept, the chirality (handedness) of a string loop. a loop is right-handed
(and has positive chirality) when the component of  along the string is in the direction
of the thumb of the right hand, whose ngers point along the component of  around the
string. if the component of  along the string is in an opposite direction to the thumb,
the loop is left-handed (and the chirality is negative).

fig. 5. two at linked cosmic strings. for reasons of continuity the phase along the linked
string must change by the same amount as the change in the phase around the other string.

(a) negative chirality.                                              (b) positive chirality. 
       

only strings with the same chirality can link.

along with the denition of chirality comes the denition of the sign of the directions
along and around the string. we dene the positive direction around the string to coincide
with the direction of  around it, and the positive direction along the string to coincide with
the direction of the thumb of the right hand whose ngers follow the direction of  around
the string axis. in a right-handed (left-handed) string loop whose phase changes around the

9to be more accurate, the average and not the value at every point, of the component of 
along the loop must be zero for an isolated loop. however, any conguration where the average
of the component of  along the loop is zero can be continuously deformed into a conguration
where the component of  along the loop equals zero at every point. hence, as we shall see the
linking of the   v eld lines is not aected.

13

string by 2n and along the string by 2n , n and n  will have equal (opposite) signs. it
is easy to see that two strings may link only if they have the same chirality; otherwise there
would be a discontinuity in the phase.

what will be the structure of the   v eld lines in such a conguration? now that 
has components in two directions,   v will also have at least two components, one along
the string and one around it. the eld lines will be twisted and linked (fig. 6).

in such a case we expect to have two contributions to helicity, a contribution from the
external linkage of the string loops, and a contribution from the internal linkage of the
eld lines inside the strings. these two contributions must cancel each other so that this
conguration may exist. the external helicity for such a conguration with l12 = l21 = 1
and winding numbers n1 and n2 is simply

hext = l12(2n1)(2n2) + l21(2n2)(2n1) = 2(2n1)(2n2),

(4.2)

where the sign of l12 is determined by the relative direction of   v along the perimeter
of both loops. we will show below that l12 is positive for right-handed congurations and
negative for left-handed ones.10

but computing the internal helicity

hint = n1(2n1)2 + n2(2n2)2

(4.3)

is not straightforward. the internal helicity of magnetic ux tubes in a magnetohydrody-
namic uid or of vortices in an ordinary uid is arbitrary since there is no restriction on
the linking of the eld lines inside the ux tube. in those systems the internal structure
of the eld lines is not determined by the topology of the ux tubes or vortex laments
and, therefore, the total helicity cannot be determined exactly from their conguration. by
contrast we shall now show that the internal helicity of cosmic strings is solely determined
by the winding numbers of the strings and their topological conguration, so that the total
helicity for a conguration of linked vortices can be expressed as a function of their linkage
and winding numbers alone.

fig. 6. the twist in the vorticity eld   v for two linked strings. when strings are linked
the phase must change along the string too. hence  will have a component along the string
in addition to its component around the string. as a result   v also has components along
and around the string, and its eld lines are twisted and link each other.

10since the sign of the winding numbers (n1, n2) is always positive by our current denition,
there is no need to take the absolute of the winding numbers as in (3.18).

14

we now attempt to derive the internal linking number n, that measures the linkage of
the eld lines inside a cosmic string loop. the loop is characterized by winding numbers n
and n  around and along the perimeter of the loop respectively. any (un-knotted) cosmic
string loop may be deformed continuously into a planar circle loop, and the twist of the eld
lines inside it uniformly distributed, without changing the linking of the eld lines. this is
possible since the linking is a topological property of the eld lines, and does not change by
continuous deformations. it would further simplify our calculation if we could perform it
in cylindrical symmetric coordinates, by virtually cutting the loop and standing it upright,
such that it acquires cylindrical symmetry (fig. 7). we may convince ourselves that this is
possible since very close to the axis of the string the eld lines have cylindrical symmetry
around the string, and for reasons of continuity the linkage of the eld lines cannot change
as we move away from the string.

fig. 7. a string loop may be virtually cut open and straightened out without changing the

linking of the eld lines.

the linking number n is simply the number of times   v is wrapped around the z axis
(which coincides with the axis of the string). this must be an integer for the string to form
a loop. the vectors v and   v are computed in cylindrical symmetric coordinates (r, , z)
as follows: first

where (2) in (3.1) is taken to be f (r), a function of r only. the gradient of  must obey

v = f (r),

(4.4)

where l is the length of the string. hence for uniformly distributed twist

0 z  dz = 2n ,

i   rd = 2n and

r l

the calculation of   v gives

 =

n
r

 +

2n 

l

z.

  v = f (r)(cid:18)n z 

2r
l

n  (cid:19) .

(4.5)

(4.6)

(4.7)

we are interested in the number of times each eld line encircles the z axis. often we
associate ow lines with vector elds by imagining how a test particle would move if the

15

vector eld were its velocity eld. let us assume the eld line traces out the trajectory
of a point particle traveling with constant velocity during a period of time t. the velocity
components of the particle are equal to the components of   v. the following simple
equations must apply so that the eld lines may reconnect when the string forms a loop

(  v)z  t = l and (  v)  t = n  2r.

(4.8)

by eliminating t between the two equations and using   v from (4.7) we obtain the result

n = n /n.

(4.9)

thus the internal linking number n depends exclusively on the winding numbers of the loop.
to evaluate the total helicity for two linked un-knotted cosmic string loops, we rst
determine the sign of the gauss linking number l12 for left-handed and right-handed con-
gurations, which depends on the direction of   v along the perimeter of both loops. by
our denition above, the winding numbers around the axis of the string are always positive,
since we have dened the positive direction around the string to coincide with the direction
of  around the axis of the string. hence from (4.7) the component of   v along the axis
is always in the positive direction i.e. along the thumb of the right hand whose ngers follow
the positive direction around the axis of the string. fig. 8 makes it clear that a right-handed
conguration will have l12 = +1 and the left-handed conguration will have l12 = 1.

(a) negative chirality.                                              (b) positive chirality.
            l = -1                                                                    l = +1

fig. 8. right-handed linked strings have a positive gauss linking number and left-handed
linked strings have a negative gauss linking number. the thick arrows represent the direction
of v along the string while the thin ones represent v. v is always in the positive direction
along the axis of the string.

the sign of the internal linking number n also depends on whether the conguration
is left-handed or right-handed. as we explained earlier, in a right-handed conguration
n and n  have equal signs while in a left-handed conguration, they have opposite signs.
therefore, by (4.9) n is negative for a right-handed pair and positive for a left-handed one.
the signs of the external and internal linkages are opposite.

we are now able to write down the total helicity for a pair of linked strings. for two
right-handed linked strings with winding numbers n1 and n2, we have n 
2 = n1
(since the axis of each loop encircles the other loop) and by (4.2) and (4.3) the total helicity
is

1 = n2 and n 

16

h = 2  (2n1)  (2n2) 

n2
n1

 (2n1)2 

n1
n2

 (2n2)2 = 0.

(4.10)

for two left-handed linked loops the total helicity is

h = 2  (2n1)  (2n2) +

n2
n1

 (2n1)2 +

n1
n2

 (2n2)2 = 0.

(4.11)

the external and internal helicities thus cancel each other out without constraining the
shapes of the loops.

we have thus removed the constraint on the geometrical shape of a single loop, a pair of
linked loops or any other conguration. the contributions to helicity are purely topological.
but (4.9) introduces a new topological constraint. the internal gauss linking number n of
the eld lines in the string must be an integer. hence the winding number n  along the
perimeter of the string is not free to take on just any value, i.e., a string loop with winding
number n cannot be linked arbitrarily with other loops. for the right handed pair of linked
loops 1 and 2, for example, the internal linking number of 1 is n1 = n2/n1 and the
internal linking number of 2 is n2 = n1/n2. therefore we must have n1 = n2 so that
both n1 and n2 be integers. this means that only string loops with the same winding number
may link once. in the next section we generalize this result to a generic conguration of
linked un-knotted loops.

b. generalized topological constraint on congurations of un-knotted linked loops

examining a couple more examples will help us formulate a more general result.

fig. 9. two cosmic strings linked twice.

fig. 9 depicts a right-handed cosmic string loop 1 with winding number n1 linked twice
with a cosmic string loop 2 with winding number n2 such that their gauss linking number is
l12 = 2. as explained earlier the change in phase along the perimeter of a loop is determined
by the winding numbers of the strings threading it. since 2 links 1 twice the change in
phase along 1 is 2  2n2 so that n 
1 = 2n2; correspondingly the phase along 2 changes by
2  2n1 so that n 
2 = 2n1. hence the internal linking number of 1 is n1 = 2n2/n1 and
that of 2 is n2 = 2n1/n2. thus the values of n2 must be restricted to the integers that
divide 2n1 and are greater than or equal to n1/2. for a few examples see table i, only
such loops may link twice. the total helicity for this conguration is

h = 2  2(2n1)(2n2) 

2n2
n1

 (2n1)2 

2n1
n2

 (2n2)2 = 0.

(4.12)

17

n1 n2
1, 2
1
1, 2, 4
2
3
3, 6
2, 4, 8
4
5, 10
5
3, 6, 12
6
7
7, 14
4, 8, 16
8
9
9, 18
10 5, 10, 20

table i. the only permissible values of n2 for dierent values of n1 for the conguration

in fig. 9.

our second example in fig. 10 depicts a left-handed string loop with winding number
n1 linked once with two other left-handed string loops, one with winding number n2 and
the other with winding number n3.

fig. 10. a cosmic string linked once with two others.

the external gauss linking numbers are l12 = 1 and l13 = 1 and l23 = 0. the
change in phase around the perimeter of the strings, and the internal linking numbers are
determined by the same arguments as above, such that n1 = (n2 + n3)/n1, n2 = n1/n2
and n3 = n1/n3. the total helicity will thus be

h = 2  (1)(2n1)(2n2) + 2  (1)(2n1)(2n3)

+

(n2 + n3)

n1

 (2n1)2 +

n1
n2

 (2n2)2 +

n1
n3

 (2n3)2 = 0

(4.13)

as we would expect.

by generalizing from these examples we see that the internal linking number ni for a

loop i linked with an arbitrary number of other loops is

ni =

p pj6=i |lij|nj

ni

,

(4.14)

where p is equal to +1 for right handed loops and -1 for left handed ones. this equation
is also a constraint on the winding numbers and the gauss linking numbers of the loops
linking i, since ni must come out an integer.

18

the total helicity of loops linked in an arbitrary manner thus vanishes:

h = 42
= 42
= 42

p  xi,j6=i
p  xi,j6=i
p  xi,j6=i

nin 2

|lij|ninj +xi
|lij|ninj xi
|lij|ninj  p xi xi6=j

i 

p pj6=i |lij|nj
|lij|njni



ni

 n 2

i 

 = 0.

(4.15)

v. electroweak helicity of local cosmic strings and

baryogenesis

local cosmic strings are solutions to lagrangians invariant under local gauge transfor-
mations. the simplest model for a local cosmic string is the abelian higgs model; it has
u(1) local symmetry. nielsen and olesen [30] found straight string (cylindrically symmetric)
solutions to this model characterized by a magnetic eld conned to the strings core whose
ux is quantized in proportion to the winding number n of the string. another important
property of these strings is that they have nite energy per unit length (in contrast to the
global strings) since the gauge eld a can cancel out the gradient of the phase at spatial
innity.

the nielsen-olesen string is actually a two dimensional vortex solution with energy
density localized around a point in space, which can trivially be embedded into the extra
dimension to produce an innite string-like object whose energy density is localized along
a line. by embedding the vortex along a closed curve, rather than a straight line, the ends
of the string can be joined to produce a closed string of nite length. thus we may have a
conguration that is a tangle of such local cosmic strings which are both knotted and linked
with each other. since these strings have quantized magnetic ux tubes in their cores, we
actually have a tangle of knotted and linked magnetic ux tubes, and each conguration
may be characterized by a magnetic helicity quantifying the linking of the cosmic strings,
and the internal linkage of the magnetic eld lines inside each string.

in this section we refer to the result [17,19,31,32] that the change in the electroweak
magnetic helicity of a tangle of local cosmic strings, in the standard model, is related to
baryon number violation. previous works indicated a continuous change in baryon number.
in contradiction to these works, we show here, by using our knowledge of the topological
interpretation of helicity as the linking of eld lines that, baryon number on local strings is
quantized in this model.

a. the term i = r d4x f f  for nielsen-olesen strings

sato and yahikozawa [18] scrutinize the geometrical and topological properties of the

abelian higgs model with vortex strings by calculating the topological term i

19

i  z d4x f f ,

(5.1)

which originates from the chiral anomaly, and is the cp violating  term in the action.11 the
denition of the dual is the following: f  = 1
2f . i is evaluated for cases where all
vortex strings are closed, with winding number n = 1, and the number of the vortex strings
is conserved i.e. vortex string reconnection does not occur. using a topological formulation
which they developed, and via a complicated calculation, sato and yahikozawa show that

i = 

82

e2 h

n

xi6=j=1

lij +

n

xi=1

wiit=+

t=

.

(5.2)

the rst term is the linking number between each pair of strings and comes from the mutual
interactions between dierent vortex strings. the second term is the writhing number; it
comes from the self-interactions of each vortex string, and can vary with the shape of the
string.

it is plain that the value of i changes continuously with the shape of the strings as time
elapses. equation (5.2) strongly resembles bekensteins result (3.6) for the helicity of global
cosmic strings. we shall now show that i is just the total change in time of the magnetic
helicity of the abelian higgs model with local vortex strings, and hence equal to the change
in the external and internal linking numbers of the magnetic eld lines each weighed by the
square of the quantized ux in the corresponding vortex.

(5.3)

(5.4)

by construction f f  = 4e  b, so we may write
i = 4z d4 xe  b.

using maxwells equations

and

and integration by parts,

e = 

a
t

 , b =   a

b
t

=   e,

z d4x e  b = z d3xa  b(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
= z d3xa  b(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

b
t

+z d4 xa 
z d4x e    a

t=+

t=
t=+

t=

where we have used the relation   (e  a) = a  (  e)  e  (  a) and the assumption
that all elds die o at spatial innity. our nal result is thus

11see weinberg [33] ch. 22-23, peskin & schroeder [34] ch. 19.

20

where h stands for the magnetic helicity.

i = 2z d3 xa  b(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

t=+

t=

= 2h

(5.5)

as we already know, the magnetic helicity may be written as the sum of the external
linkages of the ux tubes and the internal linkage of the eld lines in each ux tube, times
the square of the ux (3.18)

lij  (

h = xi6=j

2
e

)2 +xi

wi  (

2
e

)2 +xi

ti  (

2
e

)2.

(5.6)

the two terms wi + ti add to ni, the internal linking number (3.17), and the magnetic ux
in a local string of unit winding number in this model is 2/e.12 therefore, according to
(5.5) and (5.6) the term i is simply equal to

i = 

82

e2 hxi6=j

lij +xi

wi +xi

tiit=+

t=

.

(5.7)

comparing this with (5.2) we see that sato and yahikozawa have missed out the twist term.
this resulted from neglecting the internal structure of the vortex strings in their calculation.
our result is crucially dierent from theirs: according to their result the term i may have
a continuous range of values, while according to our result i is quantized because h is
quantized by the internal and external linking numbers of the magnetic ux tubes threading
the strings cores. this fact has an important physical consequence, as we shall see presently.

b. the chiral anomaly and baryogenesis

the origin of the excess of matter over antimatter in our universe remains one of the
fundamental problems. a widely discussed model [3,3537] is baryogenesis in the course
of the broken symmetry electroweak transition, where the baryonic asymmetry is induced
by the quantum chiral adler-bell-jackiw anomaly [38,39]. in models of fermions coupled
to gauge elds, certain current-conservation laws are violated by this anomaly. the term
f f  calculated on the background of the nielsen-olesen strings has been shown to cause
violation of baryon number conservation via this anomaly.

the anomaly arises when a classical symmetry of the lagrangian does not survive the
process of quantization and regularization: the symmetry of the lagrangian is not inher-
ited by the eective action. an axial current that is conserved at the level of the classical
equations of motion can thus acquire a nonzero divergence through one-loop diagrams that
couple this current to a pair of gauge boson elds. the feynman diagram that contains this
anomalous contribution is a triangle diagram with the axial current and the two gauge cur-
rents at its vertices.13 left and right handed fermions contribute terms with opposite signs

12finite energy of the string requires d = (  ea)  0 as r  . hence,  = ea and
via stokes theorem and (1.1) the magnetic ux is 2/e.

13a good account of this subject can be found in peskin [34].

21

to the anomaly; however, in chiral theories in which the gauge bosons do not couple equally
to right- and left-handed species, the sum of these terms can give a non-zero contribution.
in theories such as qed or qcd in which the gauge bosons couple equally to right- and
left-handed fermions, the anomalies automatically cancel.

within the standard model of weak interactions (the glashow-weinberg-salam su(2) 
u(1) invariant theory), the requirement from experiment that weak interaction currents
are left-handed forces us to choose a chiral gauge coupling. the coupling of the w boson
to quarks and leptons can be derived by assigning the left-handed components of quarks
and leptons to doublets of an su(2) gauge symmetry, and then identifying the w bosons
as gauge elds that couple to this su(2) group, while making the right-handed fermions
singlets under this group. the restriction of the symmetry to left-handed elds leads to
the helicity structure of the weak interactions eective lagrangian, and thus causes the
chiral anomaly of the baryon current to arise.14 the baryon number current in this model
is j

b = qq and the anomalous baryonic current conservation equation is

j

b =

nf
322 (g2w a



w a + g2y y ),

(5.8)

 and y are the eld strengths for the three su(2) and one u(1) gauge elds
 (a = 1, 2, 3) and y respectively, and g and g are their charges. nf is the number of

where w a
w a
quark families.

the baryon number current can be integrated to yield the change in the baryon number
between two dierent times, if we assume that the baryonic ux through the surface of the
three-volume of interest vanishes:

qb = z d3x j 0
qb = z dt 0qb = z d4x 0j 0

b = z d4x j

b.

(5.9)

(5.10)

equations (5.8) and (5.10) relate the change in the baryon number to terms of the form

r d4x f f  which we calculated in the previous section for an abelian model on the back-

ground of nielsen-olesen vortices. this term was found to be related to the change in the
sum of the linking of the strings from their initial to nal congurations (5.7). this leads
us to an exciting idea [17,31]: if chiral fermions are coupled to electroweak vortices, baryon
number may be violated because of the anomaly as vortices link and de-link. for this to
happen there must be a stable string solution in this model, and the change in the baryon
number must be related to the helicity of an electroweak eld whose ux is conned to the
string.

it is generally believed that the standard electroweak model is free from topological

defects. the reason is that the rst homotopy group of

14all the possible gauge anomalies of weak interaction theory must vanish for the glashow-
wienberg-salam theory to be consistent. it turns out that the leptons and quarks exactly cancel
each others anomalies. in fact, the charge assignments of the quarks and leptons in the standard
model are precisely the ones that cancel the anomaly.

22

m = g/h = (su(2)l  u(1))/u(1)em

can be shown to be trivial i.e. 1(m) = 0 [40,41]. however, this does not mean that the
model is free from non-topological defects.
it has been shown by manton [42] that the
conguration space of classical bosonic weinberg-salam theory has a non-contractible loop.
hence an unstable, static, nite-energy solution of the eld equations can exist. vachas-
pati [43,44] showed that exact vortex solutions exist, which are stable to small perturbations
for large values of the weinberg angle w and small values of the higgs boson mass.15 this
expectation has been conrmed by the numerical results of james, perivolaropoulos and
vachaspati [46].16

dening

z = cos w w 3
a = sin w w 3

  sin w y
 + cos w y,

(5.11)

where tan w = g/g, the static vortex solution that extremizes the energy functional was
found to be:

and

 = fn o(r)eim  0

1 ! , z = an o,

a = 0 = w a

 (a = 1, 2).

(5.12)

(5.13)

the subscript no on the functions f and a means that they are identical to the corre-
sponding functions found by nielsen and olesen for the usual abelian-higgs string. in other
words, the weinberg-salam theory has a vortex solution which is simply the no vortex of
the abelian higgs model embedded in the non-abelian theory. substituting this solution
into (5.8) we have

j

b =

nf 2
322 cos 2w z z 

where  = g sin w + g cos w and 2 = g2 + g2.

the change in the baryon number is now

qb =

nf 2

162 qz d3x z    z

(5.14)

(5.15)

15string like congurations in the weinberg-salam theory had been discussed earlier by nambu
in 1977 [45].

16somewhat disappointingly, they also found that the strings are unstable for realistic parameter
values in the electroweak model. it is possible, however, that there are extensions of the standard
model for which the string solutions are stable.

23

via equations (5.10), (5.14) and (5.5) and with q = cos 2w playing the role of baryon number
charge. we see that the change in the baryon number is proportional to the change in the
z elds helicity. for a conguration of tangled strings with arbitrary winding numbers ni

qb =

nf 2

162 q
xi6=j

lijninj +xi

nin 2

i 


 (cid:19)2
(cid:18)4

(5.16)

where the ux of each vortex is 4ni/.17 the nal result for a conguration of strings with
unit winding number is

qb = nf q
xi6=j

lij +xi

ni


(5.17)

and baryon number is quantized.

vi. summary

earlier works failed to fully implement the topological interpretation of helicity as the
measure of the linkage of eld lines of the divergence free eld. since eld lines may be
twisted and linked inside a vortex core, the inner structure of the eld inside the core may not
be ignored when calculating helicity terms. neglecting internal helicity had led to peculiar
results: unacceptable constraints on string congurations and continuous violation of baryon
number. once we add the contribution from the internal structure of the strings, we nd
new constraints on the congurations of linked global cosmic strings, which are physically
more pleasing, and we also nd that, the baryon number is quantized as we would expect.
our work is another demonstration of the fact that helicity counts the linkage of the
divergence free eld lines. we explain how there is no contradiction between the fact that
helicity counts the linkage of eld lines, and that the total helicity of any conguration
of knotted linked loops always manages to vanish. the vector v (3.1) constructed for the
purpose of obtaining a helicity term for global cosmic strings is proportional to . hence
it is perpendicular to   v (3.2) and the helicity must vanish. on the other hand the
helicity counts the linkage of eld lines of   v, and these lines must have external and
internal linkages for linked congurations of cosmic string loops. what we have discovered
is that the eld lines arrange themselves in such a manner that the external and internal
helicities exactly cancel each other. the eld lines inside a string may not link in an arbitrary
manner, their linkage is constrained by the topological conguration of the string and by its
linking relations to other strings. further, we have discovered a constraint on the permitted
congurations of un-knotted linked loops, in the form of (4.14) which must produce integer

17the covariant derivative for this model is

and hence the factor of 2 for the ux.

d =  + 


2

z

24

values. this constraint results from the combination of the topological character of helicity
integrals with the topological nature of cosmic strings as topological defects.

in this work we conned ourselves to the problem of un-knotted linked loops. the prob-
lem of knotted congurations is far more complicated since it is hard to separate the external
contribution to helicity (depending on the topology of the knot) from the internal contribu-
tion depending on the twist of the eld lines inside the knot. moatt [7] proposed a method
for calculating the external helicity, but it turns out that for some knotted congurations
this method is ambiguous (it may be that it works only for chiral knots, i.e. knots that are
not isotopic to their mirror images). hence, we leave the treatment of knots to later work.
for local cosmic strings in the standard model, the change in the helicity of the elec-
troweak magnetic eld conned to the strings core is related to the change in baryon number
over a period of time (5.15). thus, baryon number conservation is violated as cosmic strings
link and de-link. the idea that violation of baryon number may be related to the change in
the linking of electroweak strings has been developed by cohen and manohar [31], vachas-
pati and field [17] and garriga and vachapati [32]. however, they neglected the contribution
of the writhe of the strings to helicity. sato [19] adds the writhe term, but misses out the
twist term. this led to his conclusion that baryon number conservation is violated as vor-
tices change their shape, which implies that baryon number may change continuously and,
therefore, is not quantized. only by including both the writhe and the twist terms, which
together give the internal linkage of the eld lines, do we recover a quantized baryon number!
charge quantization has previously been related to ux quantization. it was suggested by
dirac in 1931 [47] to explain the quantization of the electric charge. this idea was developed
further by jehle [48].
in general, quantization of charges is not a direct consequence of
standard (non-gut) eld theories. particularly, the quantization of electric charge has no
widely accepted explanation within the standard model. during the last decade it has been
suggested [49] that the electric charges can be heavily constrained within the framework of
the standard model. this is achieved partly by constraints related to the classical structure
of the theory (such as the requirement that the lagrangian be gauge-invariant), and from
the cancelation of anomalies, at the quantum level. the novel idea in this work is that
quantization of the baryon number may arise from the topological nature of helicity integrals
calculated on the background of local cosmic strings and from the ux quantization in the
strings.

acknowledgments

i thank prof. jacob. d. bekenstein for his guidance during the course of this work and for
many discussions. i am also grateful to dr. l.sriramkumar for many stimulating discussions.
this research is supported by a grant from the israel science foundation, established by the
israel academy of sciences and humanities.

[1] l. onsager, nuovo cim. 6, suppl. 2, 246 (1949).

25

[2] r.p. feynman, in: progress in low temperature physics, vol. 1, ed. c.j. gorter (north-holland,

amsterdam, 1955).

[3] a. vilenkin, and e..p.s. shellard, in: cosmic strings and other topological defects, (cambridge

u.p., cambridge, 1994)

[4] h.k. moatt, [1981], j. fluid mech. 106, 27 (1955).
[5] r.j. donnelly and c.e. swanson, j. fluid mech. 173, 387 (1986); k.w. schwartz, phys. rev.

b 38, 2398 (1988).

[6] h.k. moat, j. fluid mech. 35, 117 (1969).
[7] h.k. moatt and r.l. ricca, proc. r. soc. lond. a 439, 411 (1992).
[8] m.a. berger and g.b. field, j. fluid. mech. 147, 133 (1984).
[9] v.i. arnold, (in russian), proc. summer school in dierential equations, ereran, armenian

ssr acad. sci. (1974). (trans. in sel. math. sov. 5, 327 (1986).)

[10] e.a. kuznetsov and a.v. mikhailov, phys. lett. a 77, 37 (1980).
[11] h. hopf, math. annalen 104, 637 (1931).
[12] j.h.c. whitehead, proc. n. a. s. 33, 117 (1947).
[13] r.l. davis and e.p.s. shellard, phys. rev. lett. 63, 2021 (1989).
[14] v.l. ginzburg, and l.p. pitaevskii, zh. eksp. teor. fiz. 24, 1240 (1958). (sov. phys. jetp

7, 858 (1958)).

[15] t.w.b. kibble, j. phys. a9, 1387 (1976).
[16] j.d. bekenstein, phys. lett. b 282, 44 (1992).
[17] t. vachaspati and g.b. field, phys. rev. lett. 73, 373 (1994).
[18] m. sato, and s. yahikozawa, nucl. phys. b436, 100 (1995).
[19] m. sato, shapes of cosmic strings and baryon number violation, hep-ph/9508375.
[20] t. vachaspati and a. vilenkin, phys. rev. d 30, 2036 (1984).
[21] e.p.s. shellard and b. allen, in: the formation and evolution of cosmic strings, eds. g.

gibbons, s.w. hawking and t. vachaspati (cambridge u.p., cambridge, 1990).

[22] j.h. white, am. j. maths 91, 693 (1969).
[23] f.b. fuller, proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 68, 815 (1971).
[24] l. woltjer, proc. nat. acad. sci. u.s.a. 44, 489 (1958).
[25] l. woltjer, proc. nat. acad. sci. u.s.a. 44, 833 (1958).
[26] j.j. moreau, seminaire danalyse convexe montpellier, expose no. 7 (1977).
[27] g. calugareanu, rev. math. pures appl. 4, 5 (1959).
[28] g. calugareanu, czechoslovak. math. j. 11, 588 (1961).
[29] f.b. fuller, proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 75, 3557 (1978).
[30] h.b. nielsen and p. olesen, nucl. phys. b61, 45 (1973).
[31] a.g. cohen, and a.v. manohar, phys. lett. b265, 406 (1991).
[32] j. garriga, and t. vachaspati, nucl. phys. b438, 161 (1995).
[33] s. weinberg, the quantum theory of elds, (cambridge u.p., cambridge, 1996).
[34] m.e. peskin and d.v. schroeder, an introduction to quantum field theory, (addison-wesley,

new york, 1995).

[35] a.d. dolgov, rep. prog. phys. 222, 309 (1992).
[36] n. turok, in: formation and interaction of topological defects, p.283, eds. a.c. davis and r.

brandenberger (plenum press, new york, 1995).

[37] m.b. hindmarsh and t.w.b. kibble, rep. prog. phys. 58, 477 (1995).
[38] s.l. adler, phys. rev. 177, 2426 (1969).

26

[39] j.s bell and r. jackiw, nuovo cim. 60a, 47 (1969).
[40] s. weinberg, phys. rev. lett. 19, 1264 (1967).
[41] a. salam, elementary particle theory, ed. n. svarthholm, (almquist and forlag, stockholm,

1968).

[42] n.s. manton, phys. rev. d 28, 2019 (1983).
[43] t. vachaspati, phys. rev. lett. 68, 1977 (1992).
[44] t. vachaspati, nucl. phys. b397, 648 (1993).
[45] y. nambu, nucl. phys. b130, 505 (1977).
[46] m. james, l. perivolaropoulos and t. vachaspati, nucl. phys. b395, 534 (1993).
[47] p.a.m. dirac, proc. roy. soc. (london) a133, 60 (1931).
[48] h. jehle, phys. rev. d 3, 306 (1971).
[49] r. foot, h. lew and r.r. volkas, j. phys. g 19, 361 (1993).

27

