9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
3
1

 

 
 

1
v
3
9
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

on holography and cosmology

reza tavakol1 and george ellis1,2

1 astronomy unit,

school of mathematical sciences,
queen mary & westeld college,

mile end road,

london. e1 4ns. uk

2 department of applied mathematics,

university of cape town,

cape town,
south africa

submitted to phys lett b on 22 july 1999

abstract

starting with the suggestion of fischler and susskind, various attempts have
recently been made to apply the holographic principle to cosmology. among these
is a generalisation by bousso which avoids the diculties of the original proposal in
the re-collapsing flrw models.

here we take a closer look at the question of holography in cosmology with
particular reference to this generalisation. we demonstrate that in general realistic
inhomogeneous universes such a proposal would involve extremely complicated -
possibly fractal - light sheets. furthermore, in a real inhomogeneous universe with
evolving degrees of lumpiness on a variety of scales, such a light sheet becomes time
dependent and cannot be known a priori on the basis of theory. its construction
requires a detailed knowledge of the distribution and growth of inhomogeneities on
all scales, and of the resulting caustics in null surfaces. moreover, the evolution
of the universe makes it clear that in general such bounds cannot remain invariant
under time reversal and will change with epoch.

we propose a modied version of this proposal in which the light sheets end
on the boundary of the past, and hence avoid contact with the caustics. in this
way the resulting light sheets and projections can be made much simpler. we
discuss the question of operational denability of these sheets within the context
of both proposals and conclude that in both cases the theoretical existence of such
sheets must be clearly distinguished from their complexity and the diculty of their
construction in practice. this puts into perspective the likely practical diculties
one would face in applying the holographic principle to the real cosmos. these issues
may also be of relevance in debates regarding the applications of the holographic
principle to other settings such as string theory.

1 introduction

according to the so called holography principle, the maximum number of degrees of free-
dom in a volume is proportional to its bounding surface area [1, 2]. if true, this would
amount to an enormous simplication of the world, as it would enormously reduce the
degrees of freedom required to understand it. furthermore, it would be informative as it
could provide a holographic bound on entropy in a variety of physical settings, including
cosmology.

there are two ways to approach this question: either phenomenologically or at a
fundamental level. here - in line with other applications of this principle to cosmology
- we shall concentrate on the former. we recall that an important motivation for this
idea comes from the bekenstein-hawking results [3, 4] concerning black holes, according
to which the entropy of the matter inside a black hole of mass sm cannot exceed the
bekenstein-hawking entropy sbh given by a quarter of the area a of its event horizon in
planck units, i.e.

sm  sbh =

a
4

.

(1)

the aim of the holographic principle is essentially to generalise this result to more gen-
eral settings, including cosmology [5]. leaving aside the justication for this enormous
extrapolation, this generalisation poses important questions. to begin with, as opposed
to the case of the black holes (bh), where appropriate notions of volume and surface are
naturally provided by the event horizon, it is not clear whether appropriate analogues
of these notions in fact exist in general cosmological settings and if so whether they are
unique and how they should be determined. this is particularly true of the choice of
surfaces, as even for a xed volume, the surface is not uniquely dened.

recently fischler and susskind [5] have considered the application of holography prin-

ciple to cosmology. their proposal may be stated as follows:

fischlersusskind proposal [5]: let m be a four-dimensional spacetime. let  be a
spatial region in m with a two-dimensional spatial boundary b. let l be the light surface
bounded by b and generated by the past light rays from b towards the centre of . then
the entropy passing through l never exceeds the area of the bounding surface b.

in particular, in the case of adiabatic evolution, the total entropy of the matter within
the particle horizon1 must be smaller than the area of the horizon. they have shown
that this proposal is compatible with at and open friedman-lemaitre-robinson-walker
(flrw) cosmologies, but that it fails for the k = +1 recollapsing models. a number of
attempts have subsequently been made to remedy this diculty [9]-[14]. in particular,
bousso [15, 16] has recently put forward a generalisation of this proposal and has applied
it to a number of examples including the recollapsing k = +1 flrw cosmological models2.

1here this is taken to mean the creation light cone, as in [6], rather than the set of particles bounding

causal connection, as originally dened by rindler [7, 8].

2see [17] for a recent critique of this scenario.

here we take a closer look at the question of holography in a generic realistic inho-
mogeneous cosmological setting. we consider the proposal by bousso as well as putting
forward a modied version, in each case discussing the nature of the resulting light sur-
faces and the diculties in their operational denability. in section 2, we briey look at
the application of this principle to flrw models. sections 3 and 4 contain a brief dis-
cussion of boussos proposal in the inhomogeneous cosmological settings, and the nature
of the resulting light surfaces in these settings respectively. in section 5 we put forward
a modied version to this proposal and discuss the nature of the resulting light surfaces.
finally section 6 contains our conclusions.

2 holography and flrw universes

to begin with, let us briey recall how the proposal by fischler and susskind [5] runs into
diculty in the case of k = +1 recollapsing flrw universes. in this case the metric is
given by

ds2 = dt2 + a2(t)(cid:16)d2 + sin2 d2(cid:17) ,

(2)

where a(t) is the scale factor,  is the azimuthal angle and d2 is the line element of the
2sphere at constant . assuming a constant3 comoving entropy density , the ratio s/a
can be readily given as [10]

s
a

= " 2h  sin 2h

4a2(h ) sin2(h )# ,

(3)

where h = r t

dt
a(t) is the comoving horizon size. this clearly shows that the bound can be
violated in this case, on noting that the area (given by the denominator of (3)) becomes
zero at the epoch of maximum expansion (a = amax) given by h = .

0

in order to remedy this shortcoming, bousso has put forward a generalisation of the
fischlersusskind proposal which considers all four light-like directions and selects some
according to an additional criterion of non-positive expansion of the null congruences gen-
erating the null surfaces orthogonal to the starting surface b. more precisely, the idea is
as follows:

boussos proposal [16]: let m be a four-dimensional spacetime which satises ein-
steins equations with the dominant condition holding for matter. let a be the connected
area of a two-dimensional spatial surface b contained in m. let l be the connected part
of a hypersurface bounded by b and generated by one of the four null congruences orthog-
onal to b such that the expansion of this congruence, measured in the direction away from
b, is non-positive everywhere. let s be the total entropy contained in l. then s  a/4.

a hypersurface l with the above properties is then referred to as a light sheet (surface)
ls for the surface b. the crucial points regarding this proposal are that rst it selects
which of the four null surfaces orthogonal to b can be considered as light sheets, and
second it determines what part of those null surfaces will be included in the light sheet:

3an assumption that will obviously not be correct in a general inhomogeneous universe.

namely, they start at b, and any caustics present in the surface must act as end points
to the light sheet [16], if it is extended that far.

considering the case of flrw universes, on choosing a surface within the apparent
horizon as the surface b, this proposal prevents the violation of the holography bound
in the contracting phase [16]. we note that in this simple (homogeneous and isotropic)
case the light sheet, given optimally by the apparent horizon in a at radiation dominated
universe, is indeed connected as well as being dierentiable. note that while the denition
used is time symmetric, the null surfaces in the expanding universe are not invariant un-
der time reversal except at an instant of maximum expansion in a homogeneous universe
(which does not correspond to the present day situation), and clearly almost never in an
inhomogeneous universe.

in the following sections we study various aspects of this proposal in inhomogeneous
cosmological settings. this is an essential extension of the previous work if it is to be
taken as referring to the real universe.

3 holography and inhomogeneous universes

let us consider a general realistic inhomogeneous universe, which may possibly possess
a recollapsing phase. to begin with, recall that a fundamental feature of classical self-
gravitating systems is that in general they are not in equilibrium states. this instability
gives rise to spontaneous creation of structure (lumpiness) which in the physically realistic
case increases with time. as an example of this we briey recall a recent study of this
question in the context of lemaitretolman and szekeres inhomogeneous cosmological
models [18]. employing as a measure of density contrast (structuration), covariant density
contrast indicators in the form

dv,

(4)

hab



xa

dc = z(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)



xb(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

it has been shown that in general such structuration varies with time, as expected4. here
 is the density, hab = gab + uaub projects orthogonal to the unit 4-velocity ua and  is a
3-surface. this indicates that density contrast (lumpiness) is likely to change with time
in inhomogeneous cosmological models, which is bound to be reected in the behaviour
of the corresponding ricci and weyl tensors.

now the geometry of an arbitrary null surface encodes detailed information about the
ricci and the weyl tensors encountered by that surface, as shown by the usual optical
scalar equation (see e.g. [19])

d
d

= 

1
2

2  abab + abab  rabab

(5)

4moreover, it has been shown that indicators of this kind exist which grow monotonically with time
for both ever-expanding and recollapsing models of lemaitretolman and szekeres types, simultaneously
(see [18] for details).

together with

ccab = ab + ccbadcd
ccab = ab,

(6)
(7)

where , ab and ab are respectively the expansion, shear and the twist of a congruence
of null geodesics with the tangent eld a. the convergence of the null generators changes
according to the null component of the ricci tensor sampled by the tangent vector and
the rate of change of distortion according to the weyl tensor component sampled by
these generators. the shear in turn alters the expansion which determines the local rate
of change of area along the generators. the total area entering the inequality in the
holography conjecture is a summation of all the resulting innitesimal area elements of
the null surface, and so is a coarse-grained summation of all this information (in which
all the ne details are lost).

as the universe evolves and structures form, the gravitational focusing (and caustic5)
properties in inhomogeneous cosmologies are time dependent, which in turn makes the
structure of the light surfaces time dependent in these models, i.e.
if we look at light
surfaces associated with a spatial surface b2 that lies to the future of a surface b1 we
expect a time dependence in the associated area and entropy.

to x ideas, consider an inhomogeneous universe possessing n lumps at a given time
t. let us denote by ci the caustics produced by the lump i in a null surface orthogonal
to b that starts o with non-expanding normals at b. now given that, according to
the above proposal, caustics must act as end points to the light surface ls, a necessary
condition ls needs to satisfy to ensure the holography bound according to the above
proposal is that it should contain all such caustics and hence

this immediately raises a number of fundamental issues concerning the nature of such
light surfaces and their operational denability in practice.

ls  [i

ci.

(8)

4 nature of the light sheets in inhomogeneous uni-

verses

assuming that the bound dened by ls does indeed hold in general inhomogeneous
cosmological settings, a number of important questions still need to be addressed. they
include:

4.1 dierentiability and connectedness

given that light surfaces end at caustics, their structures are in general forced to be ex-
tremely complex and non-dierentible, with possibly disconnected or even fractal bound-
aries, depending upon the nature of the inhomogeneous lumpiness and the resultant caus-
tics in the universe.

5clearly focusing does not always lead to caustics.

we recall that a given source (lens) can in principle produce a hierarchy of caustics
with a range of intensities. thus each star will generally cause strong gravitational lensing
with associated caustics6. however if the star is in the core of a galaxy, there will also be
much larger scale multiple images and caustics associated with the gravitational eld of
the galaxy itself; and if that in turn is in the core of a rich cluster of galaxies, the cluster
will produce strong lensing with associated arcs and articles at even larger angular scales.
in this way, each such a star would contribute to multiple levels of lensing and caustics.
furthermore, strong gravitational lensing is a commonplace phenomenon. indeed in the
real universe we expect such a hierarchical structure, with at least 1022 caustics in our
past light cone because of lensing caused by all the stars our past light cone intersects in
all visible galaxies, with further multiple layers of caustics caused by additional lensing
associated with at least some galaxy cores and some rich clusters of galaxies, as just
indicated.

at each level, caustics occur that are associated with parts of the past light cone
that lie as indentations inside the boundary of the past, and are associated with multiple
images of distant objects (see for example [20, 21]). when lensing occurs, the past light
rays generating a past light cone self-intersect rst non-locally and then locally, as one
follows them back from the apex of the light cone. a light ray near a lensing object
is deected inwards by the gravitational eld of the lens as it moves near it. it swings
back towards the optic axis (the null geodesic from the observer through the centre of
the lens) and self-intersects a similar family of geodesics coming from the other side. at
this point it moves from generating the outer part of the past light cone (the boundary of
the past) to an inner part, folded inside and lying within the past of the apex point7. it
continues till local self-intersection occurs at a cusp; from there on it generates the back
part of the folded light cone, which also lies inside the past of the apex point. this is
a general structure that results from the nature of the boundary of the past of a set of
points in a generic space-time [22]. in the case of non-spherical lenses, multiple caustics
due to a single lens can lie inside each other; these complex nullcone geometries have
been investigated analytically in the case of elliptical lenses, and numerically in the case
of realistic lensing models (see e.g. [23]).

additionally, it has been shown that the presence of single bh can produce an innity
of caustics associated with light rays that circle the black hole an arbitrary number of
times - albeit with rapidly decreasing intensities8 [24, 25]. thus even a nite universe
with say 1011 black holes in the visible region - a very conservative estimate, given that
we expect massive black holes at the centres of many galaxies, as well as all those resulting
from the collapse of super-massive stars - could give rise to an innite number of caustics
associated with each of these black holes, and hence to an extremely complicated light
surface.

in this way the light sheet ls (whether the past light cone of single point or not)
may be said to light trace the content of the universe on all scales and thus encode its
complexity, particularly through its caustic structure. this makes sense, as in contrast

6the corresponding multiple images will in general not be detectable because they will lie too close

to the apparent surface of the star.

7as is implied by figure 3 of [15].
8note that even though in practice caustics below a certain cut-o intensity may be ignored, in

principle they all need to be taken into account.

to the case of bh9 and completely smooth flrw cosmological models, for which ls
is readily given in terms of the small number of parameters which characterise these
systems10, one would in general cosmological settings expect this surface to be complex
since no such constraints exist. to describe the detailed structure of a null surface (e.g. a
past light cone) in a realistic cosmological setting will require many millions of parameters.

4.2 operational denability

strictly speaking, to dene the holography bound precisely, all ci need to be included
in the construction of ls. the problem, however, is that the details of ci are not given
a priori in terms of theory, but depend on the details of the contents of the universe
(including the masses and sizes of the sources and lenses, together with the detailed
knowledge of their distributions in space and time), which needs to be specied through
observations. the crucial point being that ls is constructive rather than theoretically
given. this then raises the important question of operational denability of ls for the real
universe. now given that all observations possess nite resolutions, only sources, lenses
and caustics above certain threshold levels can be observable in practice. in this way, a
cut-o (course-graining) is inevitably involved in the denition of ls. thus limitations
in observational resolution become a barrier to constructing the precise form of ls and
hence ensuring the bound.

this then raises the interesting question of whether one could formulate an aver-
aged holography principle in terms of the averaged (coarse-grained) light surface als.
the problem, however, is that the coarse-graining (averaging) of the content (say mat-
ter distribution) does not commute with the averaging of the geometry, mainly due to
the nonlinearity of the curvature tensor (see for example [26] and references therein for
a detailed discussion of this issue). worse still, coarse-graining of neither of these two
quantities would in general commute with coarse-graining the caustics. for example, a
single bh of a given mass can produce an innite number of caustics; it is not clear that
a cut-o on the mass of the lens in general results in a similar cut-o in the area of the
resulting caustics.

4.3 time dependence and reversibility

as was pointed out above, in a real universe the number of lumps n as well as their posi-
tions, masses and shapes vary with time, this is interesting as, in addition to the precise
distribution of sources, lenses etc, their time evolution is also important for the construc-
tion of ls, which is time dependent as the surface b is moved to dierent epochs in the
universes history. now given that this evolution must ultimately be related to the ques-
tion of entropy (whatever its precise formulation may be in the presence of gravitational
elds), the surface ls seems to encode time-dependent information regarding entropy as
well. what has not been done is to show that at later times in a realistic cosmological
setting the total entropy encoded this way will be larger than at earlier times. this is one

9where the presence of the no-hair theorem smoothes the information on the event horizon boundary.
10namely mass m in the case of bh and the deceleration and the hubble parameters (q0, h) in the

case of flrw models.

of the issues that needs clarifying; if the denition of entropy has the desired properties,
this must work out successfully.

additionally, even though locally (in a spacetime sense) in the neighbourhood of the
bounding surface b one might argue (as is done by bousso [15]) that the screen denition
is invariant under time reversal, the actual surfaces will not be in an expanding universe:
a unique direction of time will be picked by the expansion of the universe, and usually this
will be marked by a dierence in the expansions of the null normals to b. this dierence
will be enhanced by a major dierence between the caustics encountered in the future and
the past of b, with the growth of inhomogeneities at quite dierent evolutionary stages
in the two directions of time from b, giving another way in which the geometry of ls
causes this time symmetry to be violated.

5 a modied proposal

in the previous section it was shown that the light surfaces in boussos proposal are likely
to have extremely complicated structures in a real inhomogeneous universe. this is a
direct consequence of the fact that in this proposal light surfaces are taken to end at
caustics.

here we put forward a modied proposal which drastically simplies the structure of
these light surfaces. before doing so, we note that it is important to distinguish carefully
between pb, the boundary of the past of the 2surface b that starts o from b with
converging null geodesics, and the light sheet ls suggested by bousso. the former is
a subset of the latter; the boundary pb ends at the rst self-intersections of the null
sheets orthogonal to b, which will usually be non-local intersections, whereas the light
sheet ends at caustics, which are local self-intersections. it is the region between these
self-intersections where the complex connectivity occurs.

it therefore makes sense to separate out the part of the light surface which is not
part of the boundary of the past of b. we shall call this the inner light sheet (ils)
and refer to the rest of the ls, i.e. the part of the null surface through b that is also
the null boundary of the past of b, as the outer light sheet (ols). then ils encodes
detailed information on the strong lensing that occurs for the null surface, for it bounds
the region after self-intersection but before caustics. the number and topology of such
components depends on the lensing objects and hence reects the degree of strong density
inhomogeneity. however, weak inhomogeneities will not cause strong lensing and so will
not be encoded in ils.
it is thus this inner light sheet that produces the enormous
complexity in the light sheets proposed by bousso.

additionally, continuing the null surface beyond the rst self-intersections until the
caustics actually result in multiple coverings of part of the interior of b by the null
surfaces, which have turned in on themselves. thus including this part results in excess
area being counted, and a much more complex projection of data onto the null boundary
than is necessary when setting up the holographic principle. for this purpose, it is only
necessary to include data on the outer light surface ols; the data on ils is then
redundant, having already been counted on ols.

we therefore propose a modied version of boussos proposal thus:

proposal: let m be a four-dimensional spacetime which satises einsteins equations
with the dominant condition holding for matter. let a be the connected area of a two-
dimensional spatial surface b contained in m. let l be the hypersurface bounded by b
and generated by one of the four null congruences orthogonal to b such that the expansion
of this congruence, measured in the direction away from b, is non-positive everywhere,
and ending on the boundary of the past of b. let s be the total entropy contained in l.
then s  a/4.

the hypersurface l with the above properties is the outer light surface ols. the
important feature of this modied proposal is that it cuts out the ils, together with the
caustics and the fractal boundaries arising from them, and therefore has a much simpler
light sheet structure. it also covers regions in the interior of b only once. we therefore
suggest that, in the case of realistic inhomogeneous cosmologies, this is a better surface
to choose for the holographic principle and the associated entropy conjecture.

5.1 nature of the light sheets in the modied proposal

to begin with let us note that the modied covariant entropy conjecture proposed above
leaves unchanged all the examples considered by bousso [16], including the k = +1
flrw model. this is clear since none of the null surfaces in these examples contain self-
intersections other than caustics, for example those at the origin of coordinates (r = 0)
in the light-sheets of 2-surfaces b that are spherically placed about the origin (see figure
2 of [15].)

in the case of the more complicated inhomogeneous models with both caustics and
self-intersections present, on the other hand, replacing ls by ols enormously simplies
the structure of the light surface. despite this, there are a number of dicult points that
still remain.

firstly, even though the caustics are removed in this formulation, the non-continuity of
the generators of the boundary of the past of b still remain at the self-intersections, which
make the ols surface non-dierentiable there. however a simple smoothing over these
regions where the outer surface has self-intersections should deal with this adequately in
most cases, where the area of the smoothed surface can be arbitrarily close to that of the
real surface. when this smoothing cannot be done, new eects may occur and a very
careful analysis will be required.

secondly, since caustics can be locally determined, the end points of the ls in boussos
proposal were denable locally - at least in principle. our proposal relies on the determi-
nation of the null boundary of the past of b, which cannot be determined locally. so in
this sense there are both advantages and disadvantages with this new proposal. it greatly
simplies the shape of the ls - at least in theory, but operationally it is still dicult to
determine ols.

5.2 coarse-graining and information loss

crucial to the whole discussion is the issue of the scale of description used in the space-
time model. one can represent the same physical situation at dierent averaging scales:

thus we can represent the real universe (a) at a smoothed out cosmological scale, where
a flrw model will suce; (b) a ner scale, where each cluster of galaxies is represented
as an inhomogeneity; (c) a ner scale, where each galaxy is represented; (d) a still ner
scale where each star and each black hole is individually represented. the nature of
the surface ls will be drastically dierent in these dierent representations. a coarse-
graining procedure will relate them to each other [27] - remembering all the time that
these are dierent geometrical representations of the same physical situation.

now it is plausible that in most circumstances, the denition of entropy is closely
associated with coarse-graining, and with the loss of information that results from coarse-
graining [28] (see also [29]). we might therefore expect quite dierent results for the
entropy determined in terms of the areas associated with the null surfaces obtained on
dierent averaging scales for models representing the same physical situation. we regard
this as a fundamental issue but will not pursue it further here except for the following
remarks.

the area of the smoothed out model can be expected to be close to that obtained in the
detailed (lumpy) model for the surface ols. it is the area of ls and of ils that will be
very dierent in these two cases; indeed the latter will be empty in the smoothed-out case.
the area of ils is associated with strong lensing only, and may perhaps be considered as a
measure of the pure gravitational entropy of the solution: the larger that area is, the larger
the degree of inhomogeneity (and hence entropy) encoded in the gravitational eld. on
coarse-graining and consequent smoothing of the matter representation, the corresponding
ils will decrease to zero. the loss of this area represents loss of detailed information on
the inhomogeneity structure of the gravitational eld resulting from this coarse-graining.
the one-way nature of the information loss associated with coarse-graining is reected
in the fact that the area of the ne-grained surface ls is necessarily larger than that of
ls, the latter being close to the area of the ols in the smoothed-out (coarse-grained)
description.

there are potential parallels here with the presence of reversibility at the level of
microphysics and irreversibility at the macroscopic level. what is needed to make the
denitions and theory compelling is a comparison of entropy estimates and associated
areas at earlier and later times in the history of the expansion of the universe, at dierent
scales of description. we do not attempt this here, but note it as an important problem.

6 conclusion

we have taken a closer look at the applications of the holography principle to cosmology
and in particular the proposal recently put forward by bousso. we have argued that in a
real inhomogeneous universe, the light surfaces dened in his way in order to satisfy the
holography principle would be non-dierentiable and extremely (in principle innitely)
complicated. such a light surface can be viewed as a light tracing of the complexity in
the universe, projected onto this surface; like a cosmological analogue of the images on
the walls of platos cave!

in this way, to satisfy the holography principle in a general inhomogeneous universe
requires a detailed knowledge of the contents of the universe and in turn its detailed
caustic structure. furthermore, the inevitable limits to the observational resolution puts

fundamental limits on the operational denability of this surface. moreover, given the
dynamical (and irreversible) evolutionary nature of light surfaces in general, such bounds
cannot remain invariant under time reversal.

we have introduced an alternative proposal which results in a much simpler light
surface. however, operationally, it is still very dicult to dene such surfaces in practice.
this leads us to conclude that in a realistic setting the theoretical existence of such
surfaces must be clearly distinguished from their complexity and operational denability.
it would be extremely useful if an averaged holography principle could be formulated.
failing this, given the enormous amount of detailed information required for the con-
struction of such light sheets, it is dicult to see how such a principle - formulated
phenomenologically - can prove useful in simplifying the understanding of the cosmos in
practice. this of course does not rule out the possibility of correctness and usefulness of
such a principle in the real world at a fundamental level and that could still be vitally
important. on the other hand, the phenomenological diculties raised here, including
the complexity, nondierentiability and potential fractality of such surfaces, might have
some relevance in debates regarding the applications of the holographic principle at a
fundamental level in other settings such as string theory.

acknowledgments: we wish to thank robert brandenberger, nemanja kaloper and
lee smolin for valuable discussions and comments. rt beneted from pparc uk grant
no. l39094 and ge from support from the frd (south africa).

references

[1] g. t hooft, dimension reduction in quantum gravity, in salam festschrift: a
collection of talks, eds. a. ali, j. ellis and s. randjbar-daemi (world scientic, 1993)

[2] l. susskind, the world as a hologram, j. maths. phys., 36 (1995) 6377

[3] j. bekenstein, black holes abd entropy, phys. rev. d7 (1973) 2333; generalised
second law of thermodynamics, phys. rev. d9 (1994) 3292; a universal upper bound
on the entropy ratio for bounded systems, phys. rev. d23 (1984) 1669

[4] s. hawking, commun. maths. phys., 43 (1974) 199

[5] w. fischler and l. susskind, holography and cosmology, hep-th/9806039

[6] r. penrose, structure of space time. in battelle rencontres, ed c m de witt and j

a wheeler (w a benjamin, 1968), 121.

[7] w. rindler, visual horizons in world models, mon. not. roy. ast. soc., 116 (1956)

662.

[8] f. j. tipler, c. j. s. clarke, and g. f. r. ellis: singularities and horizons: a review
article. in general relativity and gravitation: one hundred years after the birth of
albert einstein, vol. 2, ed. a. held for the international society of general relativity
and gravitation (plenum press, 1980), 97-206.

[9] d. bak and s.-j. rey, cosmic holography, hep-th/9902173

[10] n. kaloper and a. linde, cosmology vs. holography, hep-th/9904120

[11] r. easther and d.a. lowe, holography, cosmology and the second law of ther-

modynamics, phys. rev. lett. 82 (1999) 4967; hep-th/9902088

[12] g. veneziano, pre-bangian origin of our entropy and time arrow, phys. lett. b454

(1999) 22; hep-th/9902126.

[13] a.k. biswas, j. maharana and r.k. pradhan, the holography hypothesis and pre-

big bang cosmology, hep-th/9811051.

[14] s.k. rama and t. sarkar, holographic principle in the closed universe : a resolu-

tion with negative pressure, phys. lett. b450 (1999) 55.

[15] r. bousso, a covariant entropy conjecture, hep-th/9905177

[16] r. bousso, holography in general space-times, hep-th/9906022

[17] d. a. lowe, comments on a covariant entropy conjecture, hep-th/9907062

[18] f.c. mena and r. tavakol, evolution of the density contrast in inhomogeneous dust

models, class. quant. grav., 16 (1999) 435

[19] r. m. wald, general relativity, the university of chicago press, chicago (1984)

[20] g. f. r. ellis, b. a. c. c. bassett, and p. k. s. dunsby. lensing and caustic eects

on cosmological distances, class. quant. grav., 15 (1998) 2345

[21] j. ehlers, s. frittelli, and e. t. newman. gravitational lensing from a space-time

perspective. preprint (1999)

[22] r. penrose: techniques of dierential topology in relativity. (siam, bristol, uk:

1972), see figure 49.

[23] f. bernardeau, gravitational lenses, cargese lecture notes, ed m lachieze-ray

(1999), see section 4.4.

[24] k. s. virbhadra and g. f. r. ellis. schwarzschild black hole lensing. preprint

(1999).

[25] s. corley and t. jacobnson,

focusing and the holographic hypothesis, gr-

qc/9602043.

[26] r. tavakol and r. zalaletdinov, on the domain of applicability of general rela-

tivity, found. phys., 28, no.2 (1998) 307

[27] g f r ellis (1984): relativistic cosmology: its nature, aims and problems. invited
talk at gr10 conference, padua. in general relativity and gravitation, ed b bertotti
et al (reidel), 215- 288.

[28] r. penrose. the emperors new mind (oxford university press, 1989), chapter 7.

[29] r. brandenberger t. prokopec and v. mukhanov, the entropy of the gravitational

field, phys. rev. d48 (1993) 2443

