9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
9
1

 

 
 

1
v
9
2
1
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

kcl-th-99-36
hep-th/9908129
august 1999

m-theory and hypercharge

n.d. lambert

and

p.c. west



department of mathematics

kings college, london

england

wc2r 2ls

abstract

we discuss the possibility that the electro-weak and strong interactions arise as
the low energy eective description of branes in m-theory. as a step towards con-
structing such a model we show how one can naturally obtain su(n1) su(n2)
u(1) gauge theories from branes, including matter in the bi-fundamental represen-
tation of su(n1)  su(n2) which are fractionally charged under u(1).

key words: hypercharge, brane dynamics, m-theory.

pacs: 12.25.mj, 11.25.sq, 12.10.dm, 12.60.jv.

 lambert, pwest@mth.kcl.ac.uk

1. introduction

branes occur as solutions to supergravity theories in ten and eleven dimensions
and play a natural role in the dynamics of string theories and the underlying, but
elusive, m-theory. from this origin it was somewhat surprising to nd that branes
had the ability to describe sophisticated properties of four-dimensional quantum
eld theories that had been studied for many years. these quantum eld theories
quantum eld theories live on the intersection of branes and their dynamics, at
low energies, can be computed from the dynamics of the branes. the prototypical
example is the spontaneously broken su(2) n=2 yang-mills theory in four dimen-
sions which can be realised on the intersection of ns-vebranes and d-fourbranes in
type iia string theory. at strong coupling this conguration is lifted to m-theory
and appears as a single m-vebrane wrapped on a riemann surface [1]. more-
over the complete low energy eective action can be computed from the classical
dynamics of the m-vebrane [2,3] and this agrees precisely with the perturbative
[4,5,6] and non-perturbative [7] quantum dynamics of the n=2 yang-mills theory.

given a self intersecting or wrapped m-vebrane we can compute from the
its equations of motion an eective action which describes the low energy be-
haviour of the conguration. this eective action lives on the self intersection
of the m-vebrane and its degrees of freedom are the moduli corresponding to
the m-vebrane soliton solution that describes the wrapping. the procedure has
some similarities to that used to compute the motion of monopoles except now the
elds of the underlying theory describe the embedding of the m-vebrane and the
behaviour of its worldvolume gauge eld. since m-theory is the strong coupling
description of the type iia string we can, by shrinking one of the dimensions in the
background spacetime in which the m-vebrane is wrapped, nd a corresponding
iia description. in this limit the single m-vebrane becomes a system of intersect-
ing ns-vebranes and d-fourbranes. the d-fourbranes have associated with them
a non-abelian gauge theory, the degrees of freedom of which arise as the modes
of open strings stretched between the d-fourbranes [8,9]. since these modes also
describe the uctuations of the branes their behaviour provides a description of
the the brane conguration in the iia limit which is the strong coupling limit of
that found from the m-vebrane equations of motion.

an innite number of the modes of the open strings have masses of the order of
the string scale, but there exist a nite number of modes that are either massless
or have masses on the scales set by the brane conguration. at energies below
the string scale only these latter modes are relevant and one can consider the

2

eective action that results from the scattering of the open strings and describes
their behaviour. the terms in this action that involve parameters of positive mass
dimension will resemble a conventional renormalisable quantum eld theory which
we refer to as the dual theory.

for the case of n = 2 yang-mills theory mentioned above the complete low
energy eective action of the dual quantum eld theory including all perturbative
and non-perturbative eects agrees with the low energy eective action found from
the m-vebrane equations of motion. however, one would not expect that the
higher derivative corrections to agree and indeed it is known that for n = 2
gauge theories the higher derivative terms of yang-mills theory and those from
the m-vebrane dynamics dier [10,3]. while one may not expect the low energy
eects of the dual theory and the low energy eective action of the m-vebrane
to agree in all circumstances one would expect a substantial degree of agreement
at energies below the scales of the brane conguration.
in particular these two
theories share the same spectrum of states and gauge symmetry. however if a
microscopic description of m-theory were available then we would expect that the
brane eective eld theory and the dual yang-mills eective eld theory would
agree at scales below the plank scale.

the m-vebrane is particularly interesting to study since it has a two-form
gauge eld in its worldvolume theory which satises a non-linear self-duality con-
straint. there is no known microscopic description available as there is for d-
branes, however the low energy eective dynamics of m-vebranes are known,
although only for the case of a single m-vebrane corresponding to an abelian
two-form. now since m-theory is the strong coupling limit of type iia string the-
ory, the m-vebrane describes the strong coupling limit of d-fourbranes, includ-
ing quantum eects. thus the two-form gauge eld contains information about
strongly coupled non-abelian d-fourbrane dynamics, even though the only low
energy eective actions that one obtain at present from the m-vebrane contain
only abelian gauge elds. however these abelian theories do incorporate some
of the non-abelian aspects of the dual theory, up to the characteristic symmetry
breaking scale. for example, the non-linearities in the eective action reect the
scattering of the low energy modes which result from the interactions of the dual
theory determined by non-abelian gauge symmetry, in a manor similar to how the
four-fermi theory accounted for the interactions of the standard model. it is also
possible to consider m-vebrane congurations corresponding to conned gauge
theories, with no long range gauge group. although the lack of a microscopic de-
scription makes quantitative predictions dicult to obtain. in fact, the degrees of

3

freedom that occur in the dual theory that have masses of the order of scales set
by the brane conguration also have a description in terms of the dynamics of the
m-vebrane. for example the the solitonic solutions that occur in the underlying
non-abelian theory, in particular monopoles. in yang-mills theories these rely on
the non-abelian structure for their existence and do not occur as solutions of the
low energy eective action. however their properties can be inferred from the brane
dynamics by introducing m-twobranes which intersect the m-vebrane worldvol-
ume [1,11,12,13,14]. in this way the brane congurations mimic the behaviour of
the dual yang-mills theories.

if string theory is to play a role in the complete description of physics then
it must contain the physics of the standard model at low energy. it seems very
natural that branes will play a part in the way the standard model arises (for some
recent work and some reviews see [15,16,17,18,19,20,21] and the references therein).
in these scenarios it is usually assumed that the standard model itself is the low
energy eective action of string theory, perhaps with some background brane
conguration. moreover it is usually assumed that the minimal supersymmetric
extension of the standard model, or a grand unied extension of it, is the low energy
action of string theory, which should become valid at some scale near mw . in
this paper we will take a signicantly dierent approach to deriving low energy
eective dynamics of the electro-weak interactions. we will exploit the fact that
a single m-vebrane naturally leads to a low energy eective action with broken
supersymmetry, spontaneously broken gauge symmetry whose only unbroken gauge
groups are u(1) factor or are connement.

there is of course very good experimental conrmation that the electro-weak
and strong nuclear force is described by the su(3)  su(2)  u(1) quantum eld
theory of the standard model, at least up to energy scales around its symme-
try breaking scale mw . as we have explained above, although branes naturally
incorporate spontaneously broken gauge symmetry and supersymmetry breaking
they do not easily lead to eective theories with unconned non-abelian gauge
groups. on the other hand, in nature the only unbroken gauge groups are the
conned su(3) and the u(1) of electromagnetism. since branes naturally lead to
eective theories with these groups, in this paper we explore the possibility that
m-vebrane dynamics can produce a low energy eective theory with the above
unbroken gauge groups and that this low energy eective theory will have a dual
theory that is the standard model, e.g. that this theory has the same spectrum of
states as the standard model. as we have discussed above this brane derived low
energy eective theory will not agree exactly with all the dynamical predictions of

4

the standard model, but one may hope that they will be suciently close to agree
with the parts of the standard model which have been veried experimentally. if
so such a brane conguration would hold out the exciting possibility of new, braney
physics beyond the mw scale. we also hope that the work we describe here will
be useful for studying other phenomenological models derived from branes.

although in this paper we will not nd such a brane derived low energy eec-
tive action we will systematically identify the problems that one encounters and
illustrate how some of them may be solved within the context of a toy model.
these problems can be thought about in essentially two ways. firstly we must
nd a brane conguration with the correct modes (e.g. the dual theory should be
the standard model). secondly we must analyse this conguration in m-theory
to obtain the brane low energy eective action (e.g. we need to determine the
geometry of the m-vebrane and its resulting zero modes).

one of the most obvious problems is to nd a brane conguration which has
the gauge group su(3)su(2)u(1). a particular diculty arises because states
in the standard model are charged under all three gauge groups, whereas in the
d-brane description of branes, states can only be charged under two groups - one
for each end point of an open string. a way out of this dilemma is to recall that
the brane gauge group that arises from open string theory is u(n), rather than
su(n).
in previous studies of gauge theories from branes the additional u(1)
factors of u(n) are either trivial and decouple, or they are frozen out of the low
energy dynamics. in this paper we will provide explicit examples which rely on
compactied spaces and show that this is generically not the case. furthermore we
derive a specic formula for the u(1) charge of state in terms of its representation
under su(n1)  su(n2). intriguingly this formula reproduces the correct hyper-
charges of many elds in the standard model, although it also contains elds with
the opposite hypercharges.

in section two we discuss how one can nd dynamical u(1) gauge groups in
the low energy brane theory. we also present a toy brane conguration with four-
dimensional n = 2 supersymmetry whose dual theory is an su(3)  su(2) 
u(1) gauge theory. this model has quarks states that transform in the (3, 2)
of su(3)  su(2) and have u(1) charge 1/6.
in section three we present a
systematic discussion of the problems and issues in constructing a more realistic
brane conguration. section four provides a brief conclusion of our work.

5

2. hypercharge from branes

in this section we wish to construct type iia brane congurations whose low
energy description is a four-dimensional n = 2 gauge theory where some resid-
ual u(1) gauge elds do not decouple. our strategy is to consider intersecting
m-vebranes in eleven dimensions where x10 is compact with period 2r. in par-
ticular we consider congurations which have four-dimensional poincare symmetry
and preserve n = 2 supersymmetry, i.e. threebrane solitons on the m-vebrane.
furthermore we wish to consider m-vebrane intersections which, when r  0
and dimensionally reduced to type iia string theory in ten dimensions, can be in-
terpreted as congurations of ns-vebranes with d-fourbranes suspended between
them, as rst studied in [1]. this then allows us to approach their analysis in
two ways. on the one hand we can use perturbative type iia d-brane physics to
calculate the low energy modes and determine the corresponding dual yang-mills
theory. on the other hand we may solve these models in m-theory where they
appear as a single m-vebrane wrapped on a surface  and the classical equations
of motion provide a good approximation.

it was noted in [1] that one can avoid freezing out all the u(1) factors if the
brane conguration is compactied in the x6 direction, although only congurations
for which the residual u(1) was trivial were considered. in this section we wish to
extend this analysis to obtain non-trivial u(1) gauge groups in the dual theory and
evaluate their eective action. therefore we will generalise the so-called elliptic
models in [1], where x6 = x6 + l. these are congurations of m-vebranes which
intersect over the four dimensions x,  = 0, 1, 2, 3. alternatively they can be
interpreted as a single m-vebrane wrapped on a surface  embedded in r2  t2.
demanding that half of the sixteen supersymmetries are preserved requires that 
is a riemann surface [22,23].

we introduce the complex coordinate s = x6 + ix10 and the weierstrass -

function (s) associated to the torus

s = s + 1 ,

s = s + 2 ,

(2.1)

with 1 = l and 2 = 2ir. as is well-known  is a two-to-one map of the at
torus onto cp1 (in other words it is a one-to-one map onto a the twice cut cp1)
and satises the cubic equation

((s))2 = 4((s)  e1)((s)  e2)((s)  e3) ,

(2.2)

where ei = ( i

2 ) for i = 1, 2, 3 and 3 = 1 + 2. in this case the limit r  0

6

corresponds to going to type iia string theory on r9  s1 and the limit l  
corresponds to uncompactifying this s1 factor. our next step is to introduce a
variable t through

t = (s) .

(2.3)

the role of (s) generalises that of es/r, which maps the cylinder to cp1 in the
non-elliptic models of [1].

to analysis our congurations we will consider the limit l  . in this limit

(s) takes the form (see for example [24])

(s) =

1

r2 (cid:20) 1

12

+

1

es/r + es/r  2(cid:21) .

(2.4)

note that two of the branch points e1 = ( 1
2 ) have coalesced to
1
12r2 , whereas the other two branch points are e2 = ( 2
6r2 and e4 = . it
will be helpful to perform a modular transformation on t so as to map the branch
points e2 and e4 to 1 and +1 respectively and the degenerating branch points e1
and e3 to . thus we introduce

2 ) and e3 = ( 3
2 ) =  1

t =

12r2

t + 5
t  1

12r2

,

(2.5)

so that, in the limit l  , e4 = e2 = 1 and e1 = e3 = .

to describe an embedding of the m-vebrane we need to specify a function

f (s, z) = 0 ,

(2.6)

where z = x4 + ix5 is a complex coordinate on the m-vebrane and s is a complex
coordinate transverse to the m-vebrane. as shown in [22,23], this will preserve
four-dimensional n = 2 supersymmetry for any holomorphic function f . a natural
form for the embedding of the surface  into r2  t2 is

a1(z)tk + a2(z)tk1 + . . . + ak+1(z) = 0 ,

(2.7)

where ai(z) are polynomials of degree ni in z.

7

we may now justify this form for the embedding by considering the limit

l   where (2.7) reduces to

a1(z)(es/r + es/r)k + a2(z)(es/r + es/r)k1 + . . . + ak+1 = 0 ,

(2.8)

which is the form of the curve used in [1] for non-elliptic models. note that s only
appears in the combination ss/r + es/r so that these brane congurations all
have the symmetry s  s. this is not unexpected from our construction since,
when viewed as limit of a conguration which is periodic in s, the behaviour as
s   and s   must be the same. clearly, for nite l, the semi-innite
d-fourbranes going o to the left are identied with those going o to the right.

let us consider the perturbative type iia description of this conguration
obtained in the r  0 limit. after compactication components of the m-vebrane
that are wrapped on x10 become d-fourbranes in ten dimensions, whereas the
components which are not wrapped on x10 become ns-vebranes. since (s) is a
two-to-one map the surface described by (2.7) consists of a 2k-sheeted cover of the
z plane with some number of branch cuts on each sheet which is determined by
the degrees of the polynomials ai(z). in the type iia limit each sheet corresponds
to an ns-vebrane while each branch cut appears as a d-fourbrane stretching
between two ns-vebranes. it is helpful to now consider the limit l  . due to
a1(z), there will be n1 d-fourbranes attached to the rst ns-vebrane and n1 d-
fourbranes attached to the last ns-vebrane which stretch to s =  and s = 
respectively. when l is nite these semi-innite d-fourbranes are identied with
each other and become n1 nite d-fourbranes stretched between the rst and last
ns-vebrane. note that, and this will be crucial in our analysis, we do not restrict
attention to conformal models with the same number of d-fourbranes suspended
between all pairs of ns-vebranes as was studied in [1].

the low energy description of this system is obtained by analysing open strings
with end points on the d-fourbranes. the ns-vebranes are innitely heavy in the
weak coupling limit so that their dynamics are suppressed. strings that begin and
end on the same set of parallel d-fourbranes give a ve-dimensional vector multiplet
with sixteen supersymmetries and gauge group u(ni). however, the presence of
the ns-vebranes causes the x6 direction of the d-fourbrane to be compactied
and projects out half of the supersymmetries and states. this leaves us with a
four-dimensional n = 2 u(n1)  u(n2)  . . .  u(nk) gauge theory. we must
also consider open strings with one end point on the ith set of d-fourbranes and
one end point on the jth set of d-fourbranes with i 6= j. these strings give an

8

n = 2 hyper multiplet in four dimensions in the bi-fundamental representation of
u(ni)  u(nj) [1].

for example consider the simplest case k = 1 where

t = (s) =

in the l   limit this is simply

1

12r2 (cid:18)a2/a1  5

a2/a1 + 1(cid:19) .

(2.9)

a1(z)(es/r)2 + 2a2(z)(es/r) + a1(z) = 0 ,

(2.10)

which corresponds to two ns-vebranes with n2 d-fourbranes suspended between
them with n1 semi-innite d-fourbranes coming o to the left and n1 semi-
innite d-fourbranes coming o to the right of the ns-vebranes. for nite l
the semi-innite d-fourbranes are identied and become nite so that we have a
four-dimensional n = 2 u(n1) u(n2) gauge theory with a single hypermultiplet
in the bi-fundamental representation.

we now need to discuss the low energy dynamics of these congurations ob-
tained from m-theory. in static gauge the bosonic elds of the m-vebrane world-
volume theory consist of ve scalars which correspond to its position in the trans-
verse space and a two-form gauge eld whose three-form eld strength satises a
non-linear self-duality constraint. in our case all but two of the scalars are triv-
ial and can be set to zero. the remaining two scalars can be identied with the
complex coordinate s. to obtain the eective action for the brane conguration
we need only expand the equations of motion to second order in eld strengths
and spacetime derivatives . from the constraints of n = 2 supersymmetry it
is sucient to consider only the scalar zero modes since the rest of the low energy
eective action may be determined uniquely from the purely scalar terms. to this
end we follow the procedure used in [2], however for more realistic cases with less
supersymmetry one must use the analysis of the three-form given in [3]. when the
three-form is set to zero the lowest order term in the eective lagrangian is [2]

1

l =

=

2 z d2zss ,
8 z d2z

1

tt

|(t  e1)(t  e2)(t  e3)|

(2.11)

.

to obtain the low energy dynamics of the soliton dened by (2.7), we write the

9

ai(z) polynomials in (2.7) as

ai(z) = ui,0zni + ui,1zni1 + . . . + ui,ni

(2.12)

and let the moduli ui,a become functions of the four coordinates x,  = 0, 1, 2, 3.
the lagrangian for these scalars can be evaluated as

l =

1

8 z d2z

k+1

xi=1

ni

xa=0

ui,a ui,a

|(t  e1)(t  e2)(t  e3)| (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

t

ui,a(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

.

(2.13)

let us now concentrate on the simplest conguration (2.9) corresponding to a

u(n1)  u(n2) gauge theory and write

a1 = u0zn1 + u1zn11 + . . . + un1 ,
a2 = v0zn2 + v1zn21 + . . . + vn2 .

(2.14)

here we will be interested in cases where n1 < n2 and we may therefore rescale z
and the curve (2.9) so that u0 = v0 = 1. recall that the zeros of ai(z) represent
the positions of the ni parallel d-fourbranes [1]. in particular the sub-leading coef-
cients u1 and v1 are the sum of the positions of two sets of parallel d-fourbranes.

let us now check the convergence of the integral over z. for l <  the
branch points e1, e2 and e3 are distinct and there are two potential divergences:
from the large z limit and from points where t/ui,a diverges. for large z we
see that t  1/12r2 whereas t/ui,a  z(n2n1+1) so that the integrand is well
behaved. next we see that t/ui,a diverges when a2 = a1 or when ( a2
)/ua
i
diverges. in the rst case t also diverges and this causes the integrand in (2.13)
to vanish at these points. the second case can occur when z   which we have
already considered and potentially at a1 = 0. however when a1 = 0 one nds
that t/ui,a is nite. thus we nd that all the moduli u1, ..., un1 and v1, ..., vn2 in
a1(z) and a2(z) have nite action for nite l. thus, in contrast to the non-elliptic
case, the centre of mass of the d-fourbranes has nite energy. therefore the u1 and
v1 moduli will appear in the low energy eective action as non-trivial dynamical
elds.

a1

10

clearly for any conguration we may shift z  z + z0 without changing the
lagrangian l. under this shift the centre of mass moduli are altered according to

u1  u1 + n1z0 ,

v1  v1 + n2z0 .

(2.15)

it follows that the low energy eective action has a non-trivial dependence on the
relative centre of mass between the two sets of d-fourbranes

ur =

u1
n1 

v1
n2

,

but depends trivially on the over-all centre of mass

uc =

u1 + v1
n1 + n2

.

(2.16)

(2.17)

therefore although the low energy eective lagrangian will contain kinetic terms
for both uc and ur, uc will be a free eld. in addition, due to n = 2 supersym-
metry, the low energy eective action must also have two u(1) gauge elds

a2

 ,

ar

 =

ac

 =

1
n1

a1
 
1

n1 + n2

1
n2
a1

1

n1 + n2

a2

 ,

(2.18)

 +

which are the n = 2 superpartners of ur and uc at linearised level respectively
[3]. however since uc is a free eld ac
 completely decouples from the dynamics
and appears trivially in the eective action. on the other hand the eective action
will depend non-trivially on ur, corresponding to massive states which do carry
ar
 charge that have been integrated out. therefore our u(n1)  u(n2) brane
conguration has a non-trivial su(n1)  su(n2)  ur(1) gauge theory on its
worldvolume and we may ignore the elds uc and ac
 .

let us now examine the charges of the various states under the u1(1)  u2(1)
factor of u(n1)u(n2) = u1(1)u2(1)su(n1)su(n2). the charge of states
from an open string stretched between two distinct d-branes is (1,1). here the
relative minus sign comes from the orientation of the open string. cpt conjugate
states in the n = 2 multiplet are obtained by considering an open string with the
opposite orientation. if an open string begins and ends on the same d-brane then

11

it must be uncharged since it is indistinguishable from an open string with the
opposite orientation, i.e. it carries u1(1)  u2(1) charge (0, 0). thus for an open
string with one end on a set of n1 parallel d-fourbranes and the other on a set of
n2 parallel d-fourbranes the uc (1) charge always vanishes; qc = 0. however the
ur(1) charge is

qr =

1
n1 

1
n2

.

(2.19)

from this formula we see that if an open string begins and ends on the same set of
d-fourbranes then its ur(1) charge is zero, as one expects since it is in the adjoint
representation of u(n). if we consider the conformal cases where n1 = n2 then the
strings stretched between dierent sets of d-fourbranes are also uncharged under
ur(1). in these cases the ur(1) is therefore trivial and can be omitted from the
low energy dynamics as in the models of [1]. however in general open strings from
one set of d-fourbranes to a dierent set will yield states with fractional ur(1)
charge.

from the point of view of the m-vebrane each of the low energy u(1) vector
gauge elds comes from the period of the abelian two-form gauge eld over a one-
cycle in  [3]. however the self-duality constraint of the three-form eld strength
implies that a one-cycle and its conjugate one-cycle of the riemann surface give
rise to the same low energy u(1). so if  has genus g, we expect g u(1) gauge
elds in the low energy eective action. it is easy to see the extra u(1) we have
just discussed is associated with the one-cycle corresponding to x6 = x6 + l. thus
for a more general embedding with k > 1 we expect only one additional u(1),
corresponding to an su(n1)  su(n2)  . . . su(nk) u(1) gauge theory, since
by compactifying x6 we increase the genus of , and therefore the number of u(1)
gauge elds, by one. this was also noted in [1] from a dierent perspective. to
be more explicit we have shown that the one-cycle x6  x6 + l of the background
spacetime coincides with a one-cycle of the embedded surface . this leads to an
additional u(1) gauge eld in the low energy eective theory which in the type iia
limit may be identied with the relative centre of mass of the d-fourbranes.

we should comment here on an apparent diculty:

if a brane low energy
eective action has n u(1) gauge elds how do we know whether a particular one
of these u(1)s arises from the cartan subalgebra of su(n) of whether it arises
as a relative ur(1)? to be more concrete suppose we have a model with two u(1)
gauge elds in the low energy eective action. how can we tell if this comes from
spontaneously broken su(3) gauge theory or an su(2) u(1) theory? as one can

12

see from above analysis, the appearance of the ur(1) factor is associated with the
non-trivial topology of spacetime, i.e. compactness of x6. this means that there
is no point in the brane moduli space where this non-trivial one-cycle associated
to ur(1) degenerates and a non-abelian symmetry is restored. in contrast for an
su(3) gauge theory there will be points in the brane moduli space, i.e. vacuum
expectation values of the scalars, where the gauge symmetry will be enhanced and
the corresponding one-cycles in  are degenerate.

thus we can construct a toy model for the electro-weak interactions by taking

k = 1, n1 = 2 and n2 = 3, i.e. we consider the embedding

(z2 + u1z + u2)t + (z3 + v1z2 + v2z + v3) = 0 .

(2.20)

the corresponding type iia brane conguration is shown in gure one. the ver-
tical lines denote the ns-vebranes, the horizontal lines the d-fourbranes and the
dashed lines the various possible open strings that can stretch between the d-
fourbranes. the non-trivial part of the low energy dynamics consists of an n = 2
supersymmetric su(2)  su(3)  ur(1) gauge theory. in addition we have a hy-
per multiplet of quarks in the (2, 3) of su(2)  su(3) with ur(1) charge 1/6.
in fact, since the open strings that stretch between the two sets of parallel d-
fourbranes can wrap n times around the compact x6 direction, we nd an innite
tower of quark generations whose masses increase linearly with n. of course this
model is far from describing the quarks of the standard model. most notably it is
non-chiral, has n = 2 supersymmetry and the su(3) factor of the gauge group is
spontaneously broken, rather than conned. nevertheless this model arises natu-
rally and quite simply from brane congurations and the charges of the quarks
are realistic.

figure 1

13

3. towards a fivebrane realisation of the

electro-weak and strong interactions

in this section we wish to explore the possibility that m-theory can describe the
electro-weak and strong interactions. more precisely we wish the theory of electro-
weak and strong interactions to arise from an intersecting m-vebrane conguration
in an eleven-dimensional background spacetime. the eective low energy action
can be calculated from m-theory and will live on the worldvolume of the self-
intersection of the m-vebrane. this space is to be identied with the world in
which we live and so is taken to be four dimensional minkowski space m1,3. the
remaining two dimensions of the m-vebrane are wrapped on a two dimensional
manifold  embedded in the background spacetime. this eective action will
describe the electro-weak and strong interactions. a necessary condition for this
to occur is that the dual gauge theory that arises in this brane congurations as
identied in the iia limit must be a su(3)  su(2)  u(1) gauge theory which
has the same matter content as the standard model. in particular the resulting
brane conguration that emerges in the iia limit must have the eld gauge group
su(3)su(2)u(1) which is spontaneously broken to u(1) and a conning su(3)
and have the eld content of the standard model. of course it must therefore have
no supersymmetry.

the background spacetime must be a solution of eleven dimensional supergrav-
ity of the form m1,3  q, where q is a seven dimensional space. the m-vebrane
dynamics describe the embedding of  into q. here we will use the classical
equations of motion of the m-vebrane to determine features of the low energy ef-
fective action for this embedding. these are only a good approximation when the
manifolds q and  are suciently large and smooth. although when considering
branes that lead to conning gauge groups this is not always the case, the classical
equations of motion along with what is known about the quantum corrections to
the m-vebrane will provide a qualitative description of the low energy dynamics.
from the perturbative iia string theory point of view, for which there is the dual
yang-mills theory interpretation, an analysis of the classical m-vebrane dynamics
incorporates the strong coupling regime of this theory. the limit to the iia theory
is found by shrinking one of the one-cycles in the background spacetime. clearly in
order to obtain a system of ns-vebranes and d-fourbranes this cycle must belong
to both  and q. thus our task is to identify a suitable choice for  and q that
will lead to a low energy eective action for the m-vebrane which describes the
electro-weak and strong interactions.

14

in order to illustrate more clearly the problems that must be solved let us rst
consider the toy model discussed in the previous section. in this case we consider
a background spacetime q = t2  r2  r3 where the r3 factor is trivial. the m-
vebrane is wrapped around a riemann surface  embedded in t2  r2 dened
by the embedding (2.20). the self-intersection of the m-vebrane in spacetime
appears, from the perspective of the m-vebrane, as the presence of threebrane
soliton solutions on its worldvolume. using the classical m-vebrane dynamics we
can compute the low energy eective action for the motion of these threebranes.
indeed the scalar part of this low energy eective action is given by (2.11). the
result is a low energy eective action in four-dimensional minkowski space. more
precisely, the degrees of freedom of this low energy eective action arise from moduli
in the solution of the m-vebrane equations of motion. in the threebrane solution
only the transverse scalar coordinates of the m-vebrane are active and changes
of the moduli that only aect these coordinates correspond to deformations of the
embedded surface on which the m-vebrane is wrapped. these moduli lead to
scalar degrees of freedom in the low energy eective action, namely ur, u2, v2, v3.
there are also moduli which correspond to a non-vanishing worldvolume two-form
gauge eld and are associated with large gauge transformations. such moduli arise
as periods of the two-form potential over one-cycles on  and lead to vector elds
in the four-dimensional low energy eective action [3]. for example in the toy
model there are four non-trivial one-cycles: two from the set of three parallel d-
fourbranes, one from the set of two parallel d-fourbrane and the fourth comes from
the x6 cycle in spacetime. this leads to an u(1)4 vector gauge potential in the low
energy eective dynamics. there are four conjugate one-cycles on the riemann
surface, however due to the self-duality constraint on the three-form eld strength
these do not lead to additional low energy vector elds (this will be discussed in
greater detail below). finally we have fermionic moduli that lead to spin 1/2
particles in the low energy eective action.

as we explained above, we can consider the limit in which one dimension x10
of the background torus is shrunk to zero. in this limit the wrapped m-vebrane
becomes a system of intersecting ns-vebranes and d-fourbranes in type iia string
theory. the excitations of this brane conguration are described by the open strings
stretched between the d-fourbranes. the modes of the open strings can be divided
into those that have masses on the string scale, and are therefore rather heavy, as
well as a nite number of modes whose masses are much below the string scale.
the latter include massless modes for open strings whose ends are attached to
the same d-fourbrane or whose ends are xed to d-fourbranes that touch at one

15

or more points, and massive modes for those open strings whose ends are xed
to d-fourbranes that are never touch. the mass of the latter is proportional to
the minimum length of the stretched open string and so are xed by the scales of
the brane conguration, rather than the string scale. the lowest energy modes of
these open strings correspond to the excitations of the brane congurations. at a
rst approximations the dynamics of these modes, which are in fact given by open
string perturbation theory, can be described by the dual yang-mills quantum eld
theory on the worldvolume of the intersection. thus using the connection between
m-theory and iia string theory we can identify the dual quantum eld theory. in
addition the complete low energy eective action is exactly described by the low
energy dynamics for the self-intersecting m-vebranes [2,3].

although the non-linearity of the low energy eective action can be thought
of as arising from integrating out particles such as the non-abelian gauge elds
it is dicult to infer the existence and properties of these particle from the low
energy eective action. however, all the particles of the quantum eld theory
on the brane, as identied in the iia limit, do occur naturally in the m-theory
description. the particles that occur in the iia limit that have masses on brane
scales arise as excitations of the string stretched between dierent d-fourbranes.
in m-theory, since there are only m-twobranes and m-vebranes, when we lift a
iia conguration the open strings between the d-fourbranes must correspond to
m-twobranes which end on the m-vebrane. these m-twobranes appear on the
worldvolume of the m-vebrane as a self-dual string solitons that carry the two-
form gauge eld charge [29]. for general congurations, these states occur solitons
on the m-vebrane with non-vanishing worldvolume gauge eld corresponding to
a self-dual string wrapping  [13,14]. the type of particle one nds depends on
how the self-dual string wraps itself around  [1,11,12]. in this way one can nd
in particular the the charged spin one vector bosons w  and the monopoles of
the su(2)  su(3) factor. such m-vebrane solutions were explicitly constructed
in reference [13,14] with in the context of the m-vebrane wrapped on a riemann
surface embedded in at spacetime in the case of a single su(2) gauge group.
although the m-vebrane equations only described a u(1) gauge theory it was
argued in [14] that nite energy solutions corresponding to the non-abelian vectors
and monopoles do exist. the low energy scattering of these particles can also be
deduced from the m-vebrane equations of motion by letting the moduli associated
with the solution (including the self-dual string) become dynamical [14].

thus despite the rather dierent techniques used to nd the two descriptions,
one from m-theory and the other from the perturbative iia string, there is a one-

16

to-one correspondence between the spectrum and low energy dynamics of the two
theories. although we have been describing systems with n = 2, where there
are signicant constraints, the qualitative features of the dual quantum yang-mills
theory and m-vebrane gauge theory should agree for systems with less and even
no supersymmetry.

let us now return to the task in hand, to construct a solution of m-theory
that describes the electro-weak and strong interactions. we require a worldvolume
threebrane soliton, described by the wrapping of the m-vebrane on a surface 
embedded in a background spacetime of the form m 1,3  q. our rst restriction
on q arises because gravity is not a low energy mode of the brane and in fact
propagates in the full eleven-dimensional spacetime. the simplest way to obtain
a 1/r2 force law for gravity, rather than a 1/r9 law, is compactify all directions
x4, x5, x6, . . . , x10 so that gravity is four-dimensional on macroscopic scales. there-
fore we assume that q is a compact manifold. note that some alternatives where
the extra dimensions are non-compact have recently appeared [25,26,27,28].

since we wish to nd a description of the electro-weak and strong nuclear forces
the m-vebrane wrapped on   q should break all supersymmetries. there are
two ways in which this could happen. either the background spacetime q breaks
all the supersymmetries of m-theory, or the background preserves some or all of
the supersymmetries of m-theory, but the two-cycle  is not supersymmetric (i.e.
is not a calibrated submanifold [22,30,31,40,32]). in either case one must ensure
that the conguration is stable. in the later case the preservation of some super-
symmetry by the background space-time implies that the manifold will possess
reduced holonomy. if the background gauge eld is zero such manifolds are clas-
sied [39] and the only seven-dimensional manifolds which do not have a direct
product structure have g2 holonomy. the residual supersymmetry is then broken
by the wrapping of the m-vebrane on .

a systematic study of the possible supersymmetric intersections of a single
m-vebrane was given in reference [40]. if the compact manifold q has a direct
product structure then there are a number of ways of wrapping the m-vebrane
such that supersymmetry is preserved. one example being given in the previous
section. however, if q does not have a direct product structure then there are
no background manifolds with two submanifolds  such that any supersymmetry
is preserved by the wrapped m-vebrane. in particular, g2 holonomy manifolds
generically possess nonsupersymmetric two-cycles. even though wrapping a m-
vebrane on such a two-cycle dos not preserve supersymmetry there may exist in

17

the background manifold cycles of dierent dimensions which wrapping the m-
twobranes or other m-vebranes leads to supersymmetric states. for example, g2
holonomy manifolds do possess non-trivial three and four-cycles over which one
can wrap m-vebranes without breaking all the supersymmetry [40]. these would
lead to supersymmetric states in spacetime corresponding to topological defects in
m1,3. we observe that if we require q to not possess a direct product structure and
the self intersection of the m-vebrane to be four-dimensional then the resulting
low energy eective action will break supersymmetry.

once one has identied a suitable type iia brane conguration and its cor-
responding lift to an embedding   q the next step to analyse the low energy
eective dynamics and states using the m-vebrane dynamics. we now describe
these two steps in greater detail.

the iia limit

as is well known the standard model

is based on a non-supersymmetric
su(3)  su(2)  uy (1) yang-mills gauge theory which is spontaneously broken
to su(3)  u(1) and in addition the su(3) factor is conned. the matter con-
tent consists of three generations, which, from a group theoretic point of view are
identical but whose masses vary dramatically. here we shall concentrate on the
lightest generation which has the following the matter content

su(2) su(3)

y

ql
el
ur
dr
er

2

2

1

1

1

3

1

3

3

1

1/6
1/2
2/3
1/3
1

where l/r denotes the left/right-handed weyl component of the spinor eld.

as we have discussed above, it is rather straightforward to nd brane cong-
urations that lead to the gauge groups su(n1)  su(n2); one simply takes n1
and n2 parallel d branes which are suspended between ns-vebranes. the addi-
tional u(1) factor which one might naively expect to be present is frozen out if
one demands that the low energy eective action is nite [1]. one way to avoid
such an innity and so nd a u(1) factor is to compactify directions in which the

18

d-fourbranes lie in. this occured in the so called elliptic models of [1]. unfortu-
nately in these models considered there the gauge group was su(n)k  u(1) and
the u(1) gauge eld decoupled from the rest of the theory.

in the previous section we showed that one could compactify one of the di-
rections and nd a theory with the gauge group su(3)  su(2)  u(1) and the
hypermultiplets are charged under the u(1) factor. we recall that the existence of
an additional u(1) relies on the presence of a one-cycle of  that coincides with a
one-cycle in the background space q. although this model possess n = 2 super-
symmetry and so is unrealistic it clearly illustrates that one can nd the correct
gauge group. let us consider its matter content and postpone the problem that
these states form a non-chiral n = 2 hyper multiplet. the toy model possessed
a quark that was in the same group representation as ql, including the correct
u(1) charge (it also possessed a quark with the opposite u(1) charge). in addi-
tion the toy model had a generation structure, although these states had a linearly
increasing mass as a function of their wrapping number n, whereas in the standard
model the mass of the successive generations increases much more rapidly.

the toy model can be made more realistic in a number of ways. to gain a
conning su(3) we can follow [33,34,35] and rotate one of the ns-vebranes so
that it lies in the x7, x8 plane rather than in the x4, x5 plane. from the geometrical
point of view this corresponds to embedding  non-trivially in six of the dimensions
of q. in these congurations there the distance between the ns-vebranes which
connect the three parallel d-fourbranes are no longer constant and therefore the
three parallel d-fourbranes will lie along the shortest distance between them. in
this case the m-vebrane worldvolume is no longer a smooth manifold but has
a singularity where the d-fourbrane sit on top of each other. the m-vebrane
equations of motion are no longer valid and in addition the system can no longer
be described by a single m-vebrane. the d-fourbranes no longer have any scalar
moduli and lead to a conning su(3) [34,35]. indeed if q is a curved manifold then
one might expect there to be no scalar moduli for a particular embedding since in
general the minimal sized cycles and distances will be unique, i.e. there will be
no at directions in the m-vebrane moduli space. to remove the massless scalar
from the broken su(2) sector of the theory one may suppose that q is curved so
that there are two paths which are (locally) the shortest distance between the ns-
vebranes. this would then remove the massless scalar mode that represents the
uctuations of the d-fourbranes but still lead to a spontaneously broken su(2).

we can also gain a more realistic matter content by introducing additional sets

19

of d-fourbranes into the toy model. in particular we can add a single d-fourbrane
stretched between additional ns-vebranes to our conguration in a manner similar
to gure two. although the conguration in gure two is not of the form described
in the previous section, it might still be possible to nd other embeddings which
allow it to be compactied. from the discussion in the last section this would not
lead to additional su(n) or u(1) factors of the gauge group. however open strings
stretched from the additional d-fourbrane to the sets of two and three parallel d-
fourbranes we would obtain states in the (1, 2) and (3, 1) of su(3) su(2). their
representation would be the same as for el and ur respectively, again obeying the
u(1) charge formula (2.19) derived in the previous section (up to a sign). on the
other hand it is not clear how to obtain states corresponding to dr and er. in this
case the formula (2.19) does not appear to work for these states, although it only
diers by an additive factor of one.

figure 2

another key problem with the toy model is that it is non-chiral. the open
strings that are used to study a d-brane conguration naturally come with sixteen
supersymmetries and produce four-dimensional n = 4 supermultiplets. by placing
ns-vebranes into the conguration the number of preserved supersymmetries is
decreased and the size of the supermultiplet is reduced accordingly [1]. in par-
ticular, within the green-schwarz formalism, this leads to a mechanism where as
supersymmetries are projected out and the multiplet is reduced [36]. in some cases,
when all of the supersymmetries are projected out, only the highest spin compo-
nent of the open string multiplet survives [36]. thus we might expect that only the
spin 1 and spin 1/2 states of the vector and hyper multiplets respectively survive
in many non-supersymmetric brane conguration. this is just as is required to

20

make contact with the elds of the standard model, i.e. vector elds with chiral
matter.

the low energy eective action

let us now consider the requirements that the m-vebrane wrapping on the
two-cycle must possess in order to describe the required low energy eective theory.

one of the remarkable features of the standard model is that there are no ex-
plicit mass terms in the theory as a consequence of the dierent multiplet structures
of the weyl left-handed and right-handed fermions, the gauge symmetry for the
vector bosons and the doublet structure of the higgs. after the symmetry breaking
all particles get a mass through the higgs mechanism except for the photon, gluons
and neutrinos. particles which get their mass in the symmetry breaking must be
regarded as associated with the symmetry breaking scale and will not appear as
dynamical moduli in the low energy theory. hence we should only nd moduli in
the m-vebrane embedding solution that correspond to the photon, gluons and the
neutrino. however as we mentioned above the gluons, due to connement, are not
described by the classical low energy eective action of the m-vebrane. instead
one needs to know the microscopic theory underlying the m-vebrane dynamics
describe them. all the other particles in the standard model should arise as more
complicated m-vebrane solutions consisting of a self-dual string wrapping around
the two-cycle . as we have discussed above these particles arise as modes of the
stretched open strings between the d-fourbranes in the type iia limit.

it is instructive to examine the m-vebrane equations that must be solved.
we use the covariant equations of motion found in [37] which were derived from
the superembedding formalism applied to the m-vebrane [38]. neglecting the
background three-form gauge eld the scalars of the obey the equation [37]

gmnm(nx p) = 0 ,

(3.1)

where the covariant derivative m is a connection with respect to worldvol-
ume and background indices. here and below underlined indices run over the
eleven-dimensional background space m, n, p = 0, 1, 2, ..., 10, whereas m, n, p, ... =
0, 1, 2, ..., 5 are worldvolume coordinates. to be precise

p
n = mv

mv

p

n  q

mnv

p
q + mx r

p
rsv s
n ,

(3.2)

where the connections are the standard christoel connections coecients with
respect to the induced metric gmn on the worldvolume and background metric

21

mn respectively (note that the last term was neglected in [37]). we also need
to introduce tangent indices for the m-vebrane worldvolume a, b, c, ... and the
vielbein gmn = e a

n ab. the tensor gmn is dened as

m e b

a e n
b

a =  b

gmn = (m2)abe m
m b

,
a  2hacdhbcd .

(3.3)

here habc is related to the three-form eld strength and will be dened below.

the actual embedding is given by a eld conguration in which the worldvol-
ume gauge eld bmn vanishes, the at coordinates x  of the self-intersection
of the m-vebrane are taken to belong to four-dimensional minkowski space;
x p = 0,  = 0, 1, 2, 3. equation (3.1) then determines the behaviour of the
scalar coordinates on the two remaining coordinates x4, x5 of the m-vebrane and
specify how it wraps around the two-cycle  of the background space q.

the scalar moduli of the embedding solution become dynamical when they are
allowed to depend on the at worldvolume which has coordinates x and their
equation of motion can be derived from equation (3.1) by dimensionally reducing
the equations of motion over x4 and x5. the behaviour of these moduli can be
studied in the absence of worldvolume gauge elds.
in this case the equation
minimises the volume of . the smallest volume is likely to be given by the m-
vebrane wrapping tightly to any xed background cycles. in such a case one will
nd no scalar moduli as any deviation will lead to a solution with an increased
energy. this is a welcome feature as we should nd no scalar elds in our low
energy eective action.

it is instructive to realise the dierence with the toy model studied in section
two where scalar moduli were present. in this case the background space had cer-
tain at directions, partly because there was no xed two-cycle in q around which
the m-vebrane wrapped. the equations of motion were satised by any rie-
mann surface  and thus there were corresponding scalar moduli parameterising
the moduli space of riemann surfaces with a xed genus. if q had a more com-
plicated topology and geometry then one would not expect to nd moduli spaces
of solutions with the same energy, but rather a xed surface .

let us now examine how gauge elds can arise in the eective action. the
worldvolume three-form eld strength h = db of the m-vebrane obeys a non-
linear self-duality constraint. this is most easily described by rst considering a

22

linearly self-dual eld h

habc =

1
3!

abcdef hdef .

next we construct the eld strength habc as

habc = (m1) d

a hdbc .

(3.4)

(3.5)

a nal step is to impose that h is closed, so that we may identify h = db. as
a consequence of this non-linear self-duality constraint the closure of h is in fact
equivalent to the equation of motion [37]

gmnmhnpq = 0 .

(3.6)

in general it is rather complicated to solve this system of equations, but to
discover the presence of vector elds in the low energy eective action it is sucient
to work to linearised order in h and to zeroth order in derivatives of the scalar
with respect to the coordinates x. in this case we need only solve h = h and
dh = 0. we may write h in the form

h = f   + k   + l

(3.7)

where  and  are one-forms and two-forms on  respectively and k, f and l are
one, two and three-forms on m1,3 respectively. to the approximation to which we
are working, the equation dh = 0 implies that

d2 = 0 ,

d4f = 0 ,

d4k = 0 ,

d4l = 0 ,

(3.8)

where d2 and d4 are the exterior derivatives on  and m1,3 respectively. low
energy modes arising from k and l contribute additional four-dimensional scalars
and thus we must also ensure that these do not occur.

the self-duality of h then implies that

hi =

1
2

det(e)ijgjkhkj ,

(3.9)

where i, j = 4, 5. we may decompose  into the self-dual one-forms 

a which

23

satisfy 

ai = ideteijgjk

ak, a = 1, 2, 3, ..., g. writing

g

f   =

a +

xa=1(cid:0)f +

a + f 

a 

a(cid:1) ,

we nd that the above self duality condition becomes

f 
a = 

i
2

f 

a

.

(3.10)

(3.11)

dening f 
a = fa  i  fa we conclude that fa is real and satises dfa = 0 and
d  fa = 0. as such it represents a u(1) gauge eld in the low energy eective
action. hence we may conclude that the for every pair of conjugate two-cycles in ,
we nd a u(1) gauge eld in the eective action. for our purposes we require only
one gauge eld hence only one pair of one-cycles. we recall from section two that
the existence of a u(1) factor required a one-cycle in  that was also a one-cycle
in the background spacetime q.

let us now turn our attention to the worldvolume fermions ,  =

1, 2, 3, ..., 32. without gauge xing these obey the equation [37]

gmnn(1  )


 (m) = 0 .

where e a

n is the eleven-dimensional vielbein, m = mx ne a

n a and

 =

1

6!g

mnpqrsmnpqrs +

1
3

hmnpmnp .

(3.12)

(3.13)

note that this equation involves a dirac operator that is quite dierent to that
usually found for fermions propagating in a curved background. as such the usual
discussions of zero modes which are for example found in kaluza-klein theories
will not apply in an obvious way. the fermionic moduli are the zero modes of
(3.12) in the presence of the threebrane solution. the fermions that appear in
the low energy eective action are found by letting these zero modes depend on
x  and their equation of motion is derived by from (3.12). it is immediately clear
that these fermions couple to the worldvolume background gauge eld strength
and do not couple minimally to the gauge eld. since the worldvolume gauge eld
contains all the gauge elds of the eective action, it follows that the zero mode
fermions of the eective action are uncharged under the u(1) gauge elds of the
eective action.

24

for our application we require only one left-handed fermion, that is the neu-
trino and two other similar particles for the other generations. the neutrino is
uncharged under the unbroken u(1) and is therefore compatible with it being
a zero mode of (3.12). as the toy model discussed above illustrates the other,
charged, particles of the standard model should appear in m-theory as solitonic
solutions that generalise the embedding solution to include a non-vanishing world-
volume gauge eld. the appearance of these states as stretched open strings in
the iia limit ensures the existence of such solutions on the m-vebrane.

a nal problem that we will mention here concerns the masses of the states. as
we mentioned states corresponding to matter elds arise a soliton solutions on the
m-vebrane and therefore it is not unreasonable that one could nd a spectrum of
masses that have a complicated pattern. however, one should also explain the large
hierarchy of masses found in the standard model which extends over many orders
of magnitude even below mw . in particular, the electron should appear as just
such a soliton, however, one must explain why its mass is six orders of magnitude
lower than the mass of the w-bosons. however there is an additional problem
in the toy model with the gauge elds. namely although the toy model has the
correct gauge group it has four low energy u(1) vector elds whereas the standard
model has only one. if the su(3) factor is made conning, as we discussed above,
then this would still leave two u(1) vector elds from the cartan subalgebra of
su(2)  u(1). therefore we need to nd some mechanism whereby only a linear
combination of these two u(1) vector elds remains massless.

according to the ideas set out in this paper the observable massless elds of
the standard model, namely the neutrino and the photon, arise as moduli of the
m-vebrane soliton soliton associated with the fermion and worldvolume gauge
eld respectively. however, the fermions of the m-vebrane are the goldstone
fermions corresponding to the breaking of the supersymmetry of m-theory by the
m-vebrane. as such the neutrino is a goldstone fermion. this is reminiscent of
the old suggestion of volkov and akulov [41] where the neutrino is a goldstone
fermion corresponding to the breaking of supersymmetries in four-dimensional
spacetime. although in our case the broken supersymmetries are not those associ-
ated to our four-dimensional spacetime. similarly, here one may regard the photon
as a goldstone boson which is probably related to the breakdown of the central
charge symmetries that occur in the eleven-dimensional supersymmetry algebra.

the remaining particles in the standard model all carry electric charges and
must arise as solitons associated with self-dual strings on the vebrane which are

25

wrapped on the surface . the charge of these particles arises from the charge
carried by the self-dual string. their mass is given by the rest energy of the
soliton and is unlikely to be zero. indeed, since the massless zero modes of the m-
vebrane are necessarily uncharged with respect to the nal low energy u(1) gauge
eld, there is a link between the electric charge of a particle and its mass. this
generalises similar mass inequalities which occur when masses arise in spontaneous
symmetry breakdown or when bps bounds are saturated.

4. conclusion

we have discussed a novel way to derive electro-weak and strong interactions
from m-theory and string theory. in particular we have shown how one can nat-
urally obtain a non-trivial u(1) hypercharge in the low energy eective dynamics
of branes. although we have not presented a concrete model with the correct fea-
tures of the standard model, we have outlined the problems that one faces and
also some possible means to over come them. in particular we have shown how the
su(3)  su(2)  u(1) gauge group arises naturally from branes and with matter
that has realistic hypercharge assignments. of course even if a model which satis-
es our criteria is found, it would be remarkable if it were to be in agreement with
the vast amount of experimental evidence on electro-weak and strong interactions.
however, if this is the case then such a model would hold out the very exciting
possibility of signicant new physics that could test m-theory and string theory in
the next generation of particle accelerator experiments. we also hope that the dis-
cussion we have given here will be helpful for other phenomenological applications
of branes. we note that the model we described here appears to be signicantly
harder to use to calculate cross sections and scattering than a standard quantum
eld theory. its main advantage is that it is a manifestly nite string theoretic,
and so unied, description of nature that arises in a simple and straightforward
manner from m-theory.

26

5. acknowledgements

one of the authors (pcw) would like to thank the universities of tasmania
and naples for their hospitality where some of this work was carried out and also
the royal society for a travel grant to tasmania

references

1. e. witten, nucl. phys. solutions of four-dimensional field theories via

m-theory, b500 (1997) 3, hep-th/9703166.

2. p.s. howe, n.d. lambert and p.c. west, classical m-fivebrane dynam-
ics and quantum n = 2 yang-mills, phys. lett. b418 (1998) 85, hep-
th/9710034.

3. n.d. lambert and p.c. west, gauge fields and m-fivebrane dynamics,

nucl. phys. b524 (1998) 141, hep-th/9712040.

4. p. howe, k. stelle and p. west, a class of finite four-dimensional super-

symmertric field theories, phys. lett. 124b (1983) 55.

5. n. seiberg, supersymmetry and nonperturbative beta functions, phys. lett.

b206 (1988) 75.

6. p. di vecchia, r. musto, f. nicodemi and r. pettorino, the anomaly term

in the n=2 supersymmetric gauge theory, nucl. phys. b252 (1985) 635.

7. n. seiberg and e. witten, electomagnetic duality, monopole condensation
and connement in n=2 supersymmetric yang-mills theory, nucl. phys.
b426 (1994) 19, hep-th/9407087.

8. j. dai, r.g. leigh and j. polchinski, new connections between string

theories, mod. phys. lett. a4 21 (1989) 2073.

9. j. polchinski, d-branes and ramond-ramond charges, phys. rev. lett. 75

(1995) 4724, hep-th/9510017.

10. j. de boer, k. hori, h. ooguri and y. oz, kahler potential and higher

derivative terms from m-theory fivebrane nucl.phys. b518 (1998) 173

11. m. henningson and p. yi, four-dimensional bps-specta via m-theory,

phys.rev. d57 (1998) 1291, hep-th/9707251

12. a. mikhailov, bps states and minimal surfaces, nucl. phys. b533 (1998)

243, hep-th/9708068.

27

13. j.p. gauntlett, n.d. lambert and p.c. west, supersymmetric fivebrane

solitons, adv. theor. math. phys. 3 (1998) 1, hep-th/9811024.

14. n.d. lambert and p.c. west, monopole dynamics from the m-vebrane,

hep-th/9811025.

15. i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, new dimen-
sions at a millimeter to a fermi ad superstrings at a tev, phys. lett. b436
(1998) 257, hep-ph/9804398.

16. z. kakushadze and s.-h.h. tye, brane world, hep-th/9809147.

17. l. randall and r. sundrum, out of this world supersymmetry breaking,

hep-th/9810155.

18. t. banks, m. dine and a.e. nelson, constraints on theories with large

extra dimensions, hep-th/9903019.

19. c. bachas, desert in energy or transverse space, hep-th/9907023.

20. i. antoniadis, e. dudas and a. sagnotti, brane supersymmetry breaking,

hep-th/9908023.

21. l.e. ibanez and f. quevedo, anomalous u(1)s and proton stability in

brane models, hep-ph/9908305.

22. k. becker, m. becker and a. strominger, fivebranes, membranes and non-
perturbative string theory, nucl. phys. b456 (1995) 130, hep-th/9507158.

23. p.s. howe, n.d. lambert and p.c. west, the three-brane soliton of the

m-fivebrane, phys. lett. b419 (1998) 79, hep-th/9710033.

24. h. bateman, higher transcendental functions, vol. 2, mcgraw-hill, new

york, 1953.

25. m. gogberashvili, gravitational trapping for extra dimensions, hep-

ph/9808347.

26. l. randall and r. sundrum, an alternative to compactication, hep-

th/9906064.

27. n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, g. dvali and n. kaloper inntely large

new dimensions, hep-th/9907209.

28. a. brandhuber and k. sfetsos non-standard compactications with mass

gaps and newtons law, hep-th/9908116.

28

29. p.s. howe, n.d. lambert and p.c. west, the self-dual string soliton, nucl.

phys. b515 (1998) 203, hep-th/9709014.

30. k. becker, m. becker, d.r. morrison, h. ooguri, y. oz and z. yin super-
symmetric cycles in exceptional holonomy manifolds and calabi-yau 4-f
olds, nucl. phys. b480 (1996) 225, hep-th/9608116.

31. g.w. gibbons and g. papadopoulos, calibrations and intersecting branes,

hep-th/9803163.

32. b.s. acharya, j.m. figueroa-ofarrill and b. spence, branes at angles and

calibrated geometry, hep-th/9803260.

33. j.l.f. barbon, rotated branes and n=1 duality, phys. lett. b402 (1997)

59, hep-th/9703051.

34. k. hori, h. ooguri and y. oz, strong coupling dynamics of four-

dimensional n=1 gauge theories from m theory fivebrane, adv. theor.
math. phys. 1 (1998) 1, hep-th/9706082.

35. e. witten, branes and the dynamics of qcd, nucl. phys. 507 (1998) 658,

hep-th/9706109.

36. n.d. lambert and p.c. west, d-branes in the green-schwarz formalism,

hep-th/9905031.

37. p. s. howe, e. sezgin and p. c. west, covariant field equations of the

m-theory fivebrane, phys. lett. b399 (1997) 49, hep-th/9702008.

38. p. s. howe and e. sezgin, d=11, p=5, phys. lett. b394 (1997) 62, hep-

th/9611008.

39. m.berger, sur les groupes dholomony des varieties a connexion ane
et des varieties riemanniennes, bull. soc. math. france 83 (1955) 279;
remarques sur le group dholonomie des varieties riemannienes, c.r.sci.
paris 262 (1966) 1316, for a review see s. salamon, riemannian geometry
and holonomy groups, longman 1989.

40. j.p. gauntlett, n.d. lambert and p.c. west, branes and calibrated geome-

tries, comm. math. b202 (1999) 571, hep-th/9803216.

41. d.v. volkov and v.p. akulov, is the neutrino a goldstone particle, phys.

lett. b46 (1973) 109.

29

