9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
4
1

 

 
 

2
v
4
4
1
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

calt-68-2237
hep-th/9908144

tasi lectures on non-bps d-brane systems

california institute of technology, pasadena, ca 91125, usa

john h. schwarz

abstract

in this set of lectures various properties of d-branes are discussed. after re-

viewing the basics, we discuss unstable d-brane/anti-d-brane systems, a subject
pioneered by sen. following him, we discuss the construction of the non-bps
d0-brane in type i theory. this state is stable since it carries a conserved z2
charge. the general classication of d-brane charges using k-theory is discussed.
the results for the type i theory, and the t-dual type i theory, are emphasized.
compactication of type i on a circle or torus gives a theory with 16 supersym-

metries in 9d or 8d.
in each case the moduli space has three branches. the
spectrum of non-bps d-branes are dierent for each of these branches. we con-
clude by pointing out some problems with the type i d7-brane and d8-brane

predicted by k-theory.

presented at tasi-99 and carg`ese-99

contents

1 introduction

2 review of basics

2.1 type ii rr gauge elds

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 bps d-branes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 t duality for d-branes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4 type i superstrings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5 t-dual description of the type i theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 d-brane anti-d-brane systems

3.1 type ii dp + dp systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 vortex solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 unstable type ii d-branes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.4 type i dp + dp systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.5 non-bps d0-brane in type i . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 k-theory classication of d-branes

4.1 motivation and background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 type ii d-branes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3 type i d-branes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 moduli spaces of theories with 16 supercharges

5.1 three components in d = 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 the type i theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 consistent vacua in eight dimensions

6 non-bps d-branes in type i

6.1 determination of the nonperturbative gauge groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.2
instability of d7 and d8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3 further analysis of the d8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7 concluding remarks

3

4

4

6
8

10
11

13

13
15
16

17
19

22

22
24

26

29

29
30

31

32

33

33
33

34

2

1 introduction

in the past couple of years sen has drawn attention to various non-bps d-brane congu-
rations in type ii superstring theories as well as various type ii orbifolds and orientifolds

[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. two review articles have been written [6, 7]. one goal is to identify and
understand various objects that are stable but not supersymmetric. by now the bps d-

branes that preserve half the ambient supersymmetry have been extensively studied and are
quite well understood [8, 9]. so it is time to move on and develop an understanding of other

objects that carry conserved charges and therefore should have a stable ground state. in
these lectures we will concentrate on the simplest examples only  especially those that
occur in the type i superstring theory in ten dimensions.

non-bps d-brane congurations can be used to give a new outlook on bps d-branes.
for example, a non-bps system consisting of a type ii dp-brane and a coincident dp-brane
can give a novel characterization of a bps d(p  2)-brane if the world-volume elds have a
suitable vortex-like conguration. one can also use other eld congurations to construct
unstable d(p  1)-branes. even though they are unstable, and carry no conserved charges,
such unstable d-branes are useful for certain purposes.

the basic observation that has arisen from these studies is that a system of coincident

d-branes and anti-d-branes is characterized by a pair of vector bundles (one for the d-
branes and one for the anti-d-branes). however, when keeping track of conserved charges,

one wants to allow for the possibility of brane-antibrane annihilation. thus one is led to
introduce equivalence classes of pairs of bundles. such classes turn out to be elements of

k-theory groups. thus, k-theory is the appropriate mathematical framework for classifying
conserved d-brane charges [10, 11]. of course, one has to understand the physics to do this

right. for one thing, one must gure out which k-theory group is appropriate for classifying
d-brane charges for a particular superstring theory vacuum. also, the mathematical theory
may only apply when certain physical conditions are satised. specically, one must use

care in analyzing d-branes of high dimension (low co-dimension), as we will explain.

we will be considering various unstable brane congurations for which annihilation is

expected to occur. the signal of the instability will always be the occurrence of one or
more tachyons in the world-volume theory appropriate to the d-brane system in question.

we will always assume that the tachyon rolls to a stable minimum, as in the usual higgs
mechanism. the arguments we will give are physically motivated and plausible. but they are

only qualitative, as in most cases we do not have very good mathematical control. this will
be sucient for our purposes in these lectures. it should be pointed out, however, that there
are two other approaches that have been used to give more mathematical control in certain

3

cases.
in the rst approach (used extensively in sens papers) the tachyon condensation
mechanism is translated into a well-controlled change in the coupling of a marginal operator

in a conformal eld theory. another useful technique for characterizing d-brane systems uses
the so-called boundary-state formalism [12, 13, 14]. it has also been applied to the study of

non-bps d-brane systems [15, 16]. the idea, roughly, is that open-string partition functions
can be viewed as cylindrical world sheets whose boundary is on the d-brane. therefore
the d-brane can be characterized by an appropriate coherent state in the closed-string fock

space.

the stable non-bps d-branes that we will discuss occur in theories with 16 supercharges.

in ten dimensions this is just the type i theory. (heterotic theories do not have d-branes.)
in fewer than 10 dimensions there are more possibilities, however. for example, in 8 or 9

dimensions the moduli space of quantum vacua with 16 supercharges has three disconnected
components. we will explain this and show that the dierent components can have dierent

types of non-bps d-branes, even though the bps ones are the same for all components. in
discussing the type i theory compactied on a circle, it is sometimes illuminating to consider
the t-dual description, called type i. at several places in our discussion we will comment
on the type i interpretation of the results.

2 review of basics

in these lectures we will be concerned with d-branes, which are dynamical objects on
which fundamental strings can terminate.
(d stands for dirichlet.) such objects occur

in weakly coupled type i and type ii superstring theories, but not in heterotic string the-
ories. the superstring theories have world-sheet supersymmetry for both left-movers and
right-movers. thus, in the ramondneveuschwarz (rns) formulation, the world-sheet

spinor has both left and right-moving components, and hence the space-time spectrum has
a ramond-ramond (rr) sector. in this section we review some basic facts about rr gauge

elds and d-branes [17, 18].

2.1 type ii rr gauge elds

superstrings in the rns formalism have world-sheet elds x (,  ) and (,  ) that are
related by world-sheet supersymmetry. here x , which describes the embedding of the
world-sheet in the spacetime, transforms as a space-time vector and a collection of world-
sheet scalars. its superpartner, , is also a spacetime vector but a collection of world-sheet
spinors. the 2d world-sheet conformal anomaly cancels for d= 10 ( = 0, 1, . . . , 9). there
are a variety of ways of showing this. one is to note that the anomaly contribution of x  is

4

d and of  is 1
, give contributions of 26 and +11, respectively. thus the sum vanishes for d= 10.

2d. the dieomorphism and supersymmetry ghosts, b and

2 d for a total of 3

for closed strings, parameterized by a periodic coordinate 0   < 2, the world-sheet
equations of motion are easily solved in a at spacetime. for example, x  satises the 2d
wave equation and therefore

x (,  ) = x 

l( +  ) + x 

r(   ).

(1)

r(   ). x  is required to be periodic in , and thus x 

similarly, the two components of (,  ), which satisfy a 2d dirac equation, are just 
 ) and 
2. however, 
neveuschwarz sector (ns).
l (or 

l( +
r each have period
r can belong to the periodic ramond sector (r) or the antiperiodic

0 . the
canonical anticommutation relations derived from the world-sheet action imply that these

r) has integer fourier modes, including a zero mode 

in the r sector 

l and x 

l and 

zero modes satisfy a dirac algebra

0 , 

{

0} = .

(2)

thus, aside from a factor of 2, 
0 can be identied with dirac matrices  in ten dimen-
sions. (such matrices are 32  32.) representations of this algebra give space-time spinors
(fermions). spinors in 10d can be taken to both majorana and weyl at the same time. this
means that they are real (in a majorana representation of the dirac matrices) and eigenstates
of 11 = 0 . . . 9. the eigenvalue (1) determines the chirality. thus the minimal spinor in
10d has 16 real components. for a massless spinor on-shell particle, also satisfying a dirac
equation, only eight components would describe independent propagating modes. the fact

that a minimal spinor has 16 real components explains why the number of conserved super-
charges in 10d must be a multiple of 16. it is 16 for the type i theory and 32 for the type

ii theories. in the iia theory the two 16-component supercharges have opposite chirality,
whereas in the iib theory they have the same chirality.

the closed-string particle spectrum has four sectors, since 

r can each have r
or ns boundary conditions. the sectors that give spacetime bosons are nsns and rr,
while the ones that give spacetime fermions are nsr and rns. after gliozzischerk
olive (gso) projection, which requires the world-sheet fermion number to be odd (for left-
movers and right-movers separately), the spectrum is supersymmetric [19]. in particular, it

l and 

contains zero-mass and positive-mass particles, but no tachyons.

the massless bosons in the nsns sector arise from tensoring two vectors, whereas in
the rr sector they arise from tensoring two spinors. thus in the nsns sector one nds
the metric tensor g, an antisymmetric tensor (two-form) b, and the dilaton . in the

5

rr sector one obtains a bispinor cab (for the iia case where the chiralities are opposite)
or cab (for the iib case where the chiralities are the same) [20]. however, these are reducible
representations, and one can write

cab  xn odd
cab  xn even

1...n
ab

c1...n

1...n
ab

c1...n.

here  = 2

0 are 10d dirac matrices and 1...n is an antisymmetrized product

1...n = [12 . . . n].

(3)

(4)

(5)

the rr gauge elds c1...n are totally antisymmetric in their indices, and therefore they
can also be represented as dierential forms

c (n)  c1...ndx1  . . .  dxn.

(6)

2.2 bps d-branes

the dening property of dp-branes is that they are (p + 1)-dimensional dynamical hyper-
surfaces in 10d spacetime  with p spatial dimensions and time  on which fundamental

strings can end [21, 22]. as a result, their dynamics (for small string coupling constant g)
can be studied using string perturbation theory, even though they themselves are nonper-
turbative excitations. it turns out that each bps dp-brane is a source for an rr gauge eld
c (p+1) with one unit of the corresponding rr charge [8]. with this convention, a dp-brane
has rr charge 1.

the stable bps dp-branes in 10d minkowski spacetime are easily deduced by noting

which rr gauge elds c (p+1) occur in the spectrum. the results are

p = 1, 5, 9

type i
type iia p = 0, 2, 4, 6, 8
type iib p = 1, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9.

(7)

of course, for high-dimension branes (p = 7, 8, 9) there are restrictions on whether such

d-branes can actually be present. the story for p = 7 is given by f theory [23], which will
not be discussed in these lectures. the restrictions for p = 8, 9 will be discussed later. the
case p = 1 is the d-instanton, which is point-like in the euclideanized theory.

the rr charges appear as central charges in the supersymmetry algebra. as a result, the

bps condition ensuring that half of the supersymmetries are unbroken, relates the tension
of a dp-brane (tdp) to the charge. the result turns out to be [8]

tdp = 2

mp+1

s
g

.

6

(8)

the conventions are that the universal regge slope  is the square of the fundamental string
length s ( = 2
s), and the string coupling constant is determined by the dilaton , which
we are assuming is constant, by g = e. we also dene a string mass scale

ms =

1

2s

.

(9)

usually, we set s = 1.

the world-volume theory of dp-branes is most conveniently presented in the green
schwarz (gs) formalism. the type ii dp-brane theories contain superspace elds x () and
a() as well as a world-volume gauge eld a(). here  represents the p + 1 coordinates of
the world volume, the index a is a spacetime spinor label, and the index  is a world-volume
vector label. the end of an open string attached to the d-brane gives a point-charge source
for the u(1) gauge eld a.

the eective world-volume action for a dp-brane, sdp, can be written as a sum of two

terms

sdp = sdbi + swz,

(10)

where dbi denotes dirac-born-infeld and wz denotes wesszumino. complete world-
volume actions with local kappa symmetry have been presented elsewhere [24, 25, 26]. here

we will simply sketch some basic features. dropping fermions and normalization factors,

sdbi  z dp+1qdet(g + f)
swz  z (cef )p+1.

the notation requires some explanation. g() is the induced world-volume metric

g() = g(x)x x ,

f is the u(1) eld strength, and (cef )p+1 means the (p + 1)-form part where

c =xk

c (k).

(11)

(12)

(13)

the index k runs over odd integers in the iia case and even integers in the iib case.

n parallel static dp-branes also give a bps system. the rr charge and the tension are
both increased by a factor of n, so the ratio is unchanged. it follows that there is a precise

cancellation of forces so that the system is in neutral equilibrium for arbitrary separations.
when the branes coincide there is an enhanced nonabelian gauge symmetry [27], which

is broken when they are separated. in the case of type ii dp-branes the enhanced gauge
symmetry is u(n) for all values of p. the type i theory can be obtained from the iib

7

theory by an orientifold projection described later. this projection also inuences the gauge
symmetry on the brane system. thus one obtains o(n) for p = 1, 9 and sp(n) for p = 5.

(in writing o(n) i am not being careful about distinguishing o(n), so(n), spin (n),

etc. such issues will be important later.) the wz term r [c]p+1 = r c (p+1) shows that the

dp-brane is a source for c (p+1) with one unit of rr charge.

like all dynamical objects, d-branes are sources for the gravitational eld giving rise to
spacetime curvature. in the famous ads/cft duality [28] this geometry plays a crucial role.
there one considers a large n limit holding the t hooft parameter  = g2
y m n xed. the
string coupling g = g2
y m goes to zero in this limit. the eect of n d-branes on the geometry
is controlled by

n  tdp  gn  n 

1
g  g2  gn,

(14)

where gn is newtons constant in 10d. this combination is held xed in the ads/cft
story. however, we will be concerned with a dierent limit, namely g  0 with n xed. in
this limit the eect of the d-branes on the geometry can be ignored at leading order, and

one can simply regard them as hypersurfaces embedded in minkowski spacetime, which is
what we will do. this reasoning is reliable for branes of suciently low dimension (or high

co-dimension) so that gravitational elds fall with distance from the branes. otherwise, as
in the case of d8-branes in the type i theory, the eect on the geometry cannot be ignored.
it is also worth noting that this decoupling of the geometry would not work for ns 5-branes,
which have t  1/g2.

2.3 t duality for d-branes

let us consider how t duality [29] works for d-branes in the simplest setting, namely when
the spacetime is r9  s1, with a single circular dimension x9  x of radius r. the corre-
sponding string world-sheet eld x(,  ) then takes the form

x = mr +

n
r

 + periodic terms.

(15)

this describes a closed string with winding number = m and kaluzaklein (kk) momentum
= n. decomposing x into left-moving and right-moving parts xl( +  ) and xr(   ),

xl =

xr =

1

2(cid:18)mr +
2(cid:18)mr 

1

n

r(cid:19) ( +  ) + . . .
r(cid:19) (   ) + . . . .

n

under a t-duality transformation xr  xr, while xl is unchanged. thus

x = xl + xr  xl  xr =

8

n
r

 + mr + . . . .

(16)

(17)

comparing with the original x, we see that this describes a closed string on a circle of radius
1/r with winding number = n and kk momentum = m.

r  9

world-sheet supersymmetry requires that the transformation xr  xr be accom-
panied by 9
r. this has the consequence of reversing the right-moving chirality
projection, in particular 11  11. it therefore follows that iia  iib. thus, to reca-
pitulate, the iia theory compactied on a circle of radius r is equivalent to the iib theory
on a circle of radius 1/r and the role of winding number and kk excitation number is

interchanged under this map.

now let us examine the implications for d-branes. suppose, for example, we start with

a pair of parallel dp-branes with positions given by

#1 : x i = di
1

i = p + 1, . . . , 9

#2 : x i = di
2

i = p + 1, . . . , 9.

(18)

(19)

thus the branes ll the dimensions x m, m = 0, 1, . . . , p and are localized in the other
9  p dimensions. an open string connecting the two d-branes satises neumann boundary
conditions in the rst p + 1 dimensions

x m|= = 0, m = 0, . . . , p

and dirichlet boundary conditions in the remaining 9  p dimensions
i = p + 1, . . . , 9.

x i|=0 = di

1, x i|= = di
2,

solving the 2d wave equation with these boundary conditions gives

x m = xm + pm + ixn6=0
+xn6=0

2  di
1)

1 + (di




x i = di

m
n
n

cos n ein

i
n
n

sin n ein .

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

suppose now that x 9 is a circle as before. what happens to the dp-branes under
the t-duality transformation? it is easy to see that xr  xr simply interchanges the
dirichlet and neumann boundary conditions. therefore the d-branes, which we assumed
were localized on the original circle of radius r, are wrapped on the t-dual circle of radius

1/r. thus in the t-dual theory there are d(p+1)-branes, wrapped on the circular dimension.
thus the general rule is that under t duality: unwrapped dp  wrapped d(p + 1). this
meshes nicely with the fact that bps dp-branes exist in the iia theory for even values of p
and in the iib theory for odd values of p.

9

now a question arises. in the t-dual description, where the d-branes are wrapped on the
dual circle, how are the positions on the original circle encoded? clearly, this information

must not be lost, since the transformation should be invertible. the key to answering this
question is to recall that t duality interchanges winding number and kk excitation number.

however, the original conguration has charged states with fractional winding associated to
open strings that connect the two d-branes. so in the dual description these charge states

should have fractional kk number. this is achieved by wilson lines exp[ih a9] in the world-

volume gauge theories of the wrapped d-branes. in other words, the component of the gauge
elds along the circle encodes the position of the original dp-branes on the circle.

2.4 type i superstrings

the modern construction of type i superstring theory (not the way it was originally devel-
oped) is as an orientifold projection of the type iib theory [30, 31, 32]. recall that in the
type iib theory, the fermions associated with left-movers and right-movers have the same
chirality. as a result the world-sheet theory has a z2 symmetry corresponding to interchange
of all left-movers and right-movers

l  x 
x 

r, 

l  
r.

(24)

equivalently, one can speak of world-sheet parity , which reects the spatial world-sheet
coordinate (   or 2 ). one can, therefore, project the spectrum of the theory onto
a left-right symmetric subspace by using the projection operator 1
2 (1 + ). the result of this
is to give a closed string with a restricted set of excitations. this is the type i closed-string,
which is unoriented.

the interacting theory of type i closed strings is not consistent by itself. this fact can be
understood in a variety of ways. for one thing it is a chiral theory with n = 1 supersymmetry

(16 supercharges), and it has gravitational anomalies. to achieve consistency one must add a
twisted sector, which consists of open strings. these are strings whose ends are associated

to the xed points of the orientifold projection ( = 0 and  = ). they are also unoriented.
it is known from the anomaly cancellation requirement that the open strings should carry

so(32) chanpaton charges at their ends, since this is the only chanpaton gauge group
for which the anomalies can be cancelled [33]. (e8  e8 cannot be realized in this way.)

the orientifold projection construction can be interpreted as giving rise to a spacetime

lling orientifold plane  an o9-plane. the reason it lls the entire space-time is that every
x is a xed point of , which does not act on x. this o9-plane carries 32 units of rr
charge. this charge needs to be cancelled. this is achieved by adding 32 d9-branes, which
also ll the entire spacetime. the so(32) gauge elds arise as zero modes of open strings

10

that connect any pair of d-branes. (these are the same open strings that were introduced
earlier.) in type ii theories coincident d-branes give u(n) gauge groups, because the open

strings are oriented.
orthogonal or symplectic gauge groups.

in the type i theory they are unoriented, and therefore one obtains

2.5 t-dual description of the type i theory

in section 2.3 we saw that t duality on a circle s1 corresponds to xr  xr (and r 
r), and this implies that

x = xl + xr  x  = xl  xr.

(25)

in the case of type ii theories, x  describes a dual circle s1 of radius r = 1/r. the type i
theory is constructed by gauging the world-sheet parity symmetry  of the type iib theory.
this corresponds to xl  xr (and l  r). thus, we see that in the t-dual description
the action of  gives x   x . this gauging therefore gives an orbifold projection of the
dual circle: s1/z2 [34]. this orbifold describes an interval

0  x   r.

(26)

an alternative viewpoint is that the entire circle s1 is present, but that what happens on
the semicircle r  x   2r is determined by the other semicircle. more generally, t
duality along an n-torus t n results in an orbifold t n/in. here in denotes the simultaneous
inversion of all n coordinates of the torus t n. more precisely, this inversion is carried out
simultaneously with the orientation reversal  of the non-compact coordinates (x 
l  x 
r).
the fermions are transformed at the same time.

in the case of a circle (n = 1), the t-dual theory can be regarded as type iia orientifold

of the form

(r9  s1)/  i1.

(27)

the combined operation i1 is the relevant z2 projection in this case. the resulting theory
 the t-dual description of type i theory compactied on a circle  is called the type i
theory. (sometimes the alternative name type ia is used.) t duality in this setting is the
equivalence of the type i theory with the type iib orientifold

(r9  s1)/,

(28)

which is the compactied type i theory.

the ends of the interval x  = 0, r are the xed-point set of the iia orientifold pro-
jection, and, therefore, they are the locations of orientifold planes  o8-planes. each of

11

these orientifold planes can be regarded as carrying 8 units of rr charge. consistency
of the type i theory then requires adding 16 d8-branes to cancel the rr charges. they
are parallel to the o8-planes, which means that they are localized at points in the interval
0  x   r, and ll the other nine dimensions. in addition there are 16 mirror image
d8-branes on the other half of the circle (r  x   2r). altogether, these 32 d8-branes
are the t-duals of the 32 d9-branes in the type i description.

the position of the d8-branes along the interval in the type i description are determined
in the type i description by wilson lines. the wilson line is an element of so(32) and by
an equivalence transformation can be brought to a canonical form in which it is written as

16 blocks of so(2) matrices, which are characterized by angles

i = x 

i/r,

i = 1, 2, . . . , 16.

(29)

i are then the positions of the 16 dual d8-branes, and their mirror images are located

the x 
at 2r  x 
i.

by introducing a wilson line into the compactied type i theory, one breaks the so(32)
gauge group to the subgroup that commutes with the wilson line matrix. expressed in
terms of the type i description, this gives the following rules:

 when n d8-branes coincide in the interior of the interval, they give an unbroken u(n)

gauge group.

 when n d8-branes coincide with one of the o8-planes, they give an unbroken so(2n)

gauge group.

in both cases the gauge bosons arise as zero modes of d8  d8 open strings. in the second
case, the additional symmetry enhancement can be traced to open strings connecting d8-
branes to mirror-image d8-branes.

the case of a trivial wilson line (w = 1) corresponds to having all 16 d8-branes coin-
cide with one of the o8-planes, which gives the expected unbroken so(32) gauge symmetry.

it should be noted that there are two additional u(1)s that cannot be pictured in terms of
d-branes. rather they are associated to gauge elds g9 and b9 that are dened in the
bulk. one linear combination of these gauge elds belongs to the 9d supergravity multiplet.

another linear combination belongs to a 9d vector supermultiplet. the latter can participate
in further symmetry enhancement in special cases [35, 36]. for example, the wilson line

w =  i16+2n

0

0

i162n !

generically gives the gauge symmetry

so(16 + 2n)  so(16  2n)  u(1)2.

12

(30)

(31)

however, from the s-dual perturbative heterotic theory one knows that there is additional
gauge symmetry enhancement.

so(16  2n)  u(1)  e9n ,

(32)

for a specic value of the compactication radius. in type i units, this radius is given by
r2 = gn/8. i will not explore this issue further in these lectures.

3 d-brane anti-d-brane systems

when one superposes a bps dp-brane and a bps dp-brane the system is no longer bps, and
it is unstable. the basic idea is that the open string connecting them has a spectrum based

on a gso projection that is the reverse of the usual one, and as a result its ground state
is a tachyon, which signals an instability. one method of deriving this result is to consider
starting with a pair of coincident dp-branes and then imagine rotating one of them by an

angle  thereby turning it into an dp-brane [37]. at intermediate angles  the intersection
takes place on p1 spatial dimensions. by working through the implications of dirichlet and
neumann boundary conditions for arbitrary angles  and continuing from  = 0 to  = ,
one can deduce the reversal of the gso projection. the occurrence of a tachyon at  =  is

physically sensible, of course, as it signals the possibility of annihilation, which is no longer
prevented by charge conservation.

we will begin by discussing such systems for type ii theories and then move on to the
type i theory. in each case, we will be interested in exploring the possibility of setting up
eld congurations on the dp + dp system such that something stable survives after the

annihilation takes place.

3.1 type ii dp + dp systems

in the case of type ii theories the open strings connecting d-branes are oriented, and as a
result the tachyonic mode of the dp dp open string is complex. denoting the tachyon eld
in the (p + 1)-dimensional world volume by t , one can combine it with the gauge elds in a

superconnection of the form

a =  a t

t a ! .

(33)

here a is the u(1) gauge eld associated to the dp-brane and a is the u(1) gauge eld
associated to the dp-brane. the tachyon is charged with respect to both of them. more
generally, one could consider n dp-branes and n  dp-branes. then a would be u(n) gauge

13

elds, a would be u(n ) gauge elds, and t would be an n  n  matrix transforming as
(n, n ). to start with, we will restrict consideration to the case n = n  = 1.

as an explicit example of what can happen, let us (following sen [3]) consider a d2 + d2
system wrapped on a rectangular torus with radii r1, r2. as we discussed earlier, the wz
term of the d2-brane is

z (cef )3 =zt 2r

(c3 + c1  f ).

(34)

this formula shows that magnetic ux through the torus  rt 2 f  is a source of c1. in

other words, a d2-brane with magnetic ux carries d0-brane charge.

suppose that the d2 and the d2 each have one unit of d0-brane charge. assuming

constant elds, this means that

f12 = f 

12 =

2
v

,

(35)

where v = (2r1)(2r2) is the volume of the torus. let us now examine the system
described above from a t-dual viewpoint.
in the t-dual description (which is also type
iia, since the torus has even dimension) we get a dual torus t 2 with radii ri = 1/ri. by
matching coupling constants in eight dimensions one learns that

v
g2 =

v
g2 ,

(36)

and hence that

g = g/(r1r2).

(37)
since the t-duality transformation interchanges d0  d2, the uxes that gave d0-brane
charges imply that the dual system has two d2-branes wrapping t2. being two coincident
type ii d-branes, the system has a u(2) gauge symmetry. the original d2 and d2 give rise
to a d0 on one d2 and a d0 on the other. thus the dual magnetic ux is

f12 =

2

v   1

0

0 1 ! .

(38)

the original d2 + d2 system had a complex tachyon, signaling instability, and the t-
duality transformation certainly doesnt change that fact. however, now the instability is

attributable to structure of the ux matrix. the minimum energy conguration corresponds
to f12 = 0, which corresponds to annihilation of the d0 + d0. the nontrivial fact, which
sen has demonstrated, is that the ux in eq. (38) is continuously connected to f12 = 0. so
this deformation corresponds to the tachyon rolling to a minimum in the dual picture. we

are thus left with a pair of wrapped d2-branes and no ux.

the total mass at the minimum (ignoring the contribution of radiation emitted in the

annihilation process) is

m = 2 v td2 = 2  42r1r2 

1

42g

=

2
g

= 2td0.

(39)

14

this calculation shows that the mass is just that of two d0-branes in the original picture.
this means that on the original torus the mass density m/v vanishes in the limit of large

v . this implies that the tachyon potential at its minimum precisely cancels the d-brane
tension. specically

2td2 + v (t0) = 0,

(40)

where |t| = t0 is the (assumed) position of the minimum. this reasoning generalizes to
arbitrary dimensions of the branes. so the general conclusion is that a coincident dp-brane

+dp-brane system with the tachyon eld at a minimum is equivalent to pure vacuum. this
result makes good sense. it is also a very insightful viewpoint.

3.2 vortex solutions

let us now consider the d2 + d2 system in r10. as we already noted, the tachyon t has
charge (1,1) with respect to the u(1)u(1) gauge symmetry. the tachyon potential v (t )
is gauge invariant. therefore, it can only depend on the magnitude |t|, and its minimum is
assumed to occur for |t| = t0. its kinetic term is |dt|2, where

dt = (  ia + ia

)t.

(41)

a single d0-brane can be described as a vortex solution on the innite d2 + d2 system [4].

working in polar coordinates (r, ) we want to describe a vortex localized in the vicinity
of r = 0. we want the eld conguration to describe pure vacuum for large r, but in a
topologically nontrivial way. this is achieved by requiring that as r  

t  t0ei
a  a
  1.

(42)

these ensure that dt  0 and v (t )  v (t0), so that the energy density cancels for large
r leaving a soliton in the small r region. we can see that this conguration has the quantum
numbers of a d0-brane, since

(a  a

)d = 2

12)dx1dx2 = 2.

(43)

(44)

implies that

ilarge circle
z (f12  f 

as we see it is only the relative u(1) group that matters. we could, for example, set a = 0.
in any case, we conclude that there is one unit of magnetic ux, as required for a d0-brane.

this result extends trivially to larger values of p by simply adding additional inert di-
rections. the conclusion is that a d(p  2)-brane can be described as a vortex solution in

15

a dp + dp system. the fact that it carries the correct rr charge can be understood as a
consequence of the coupling

z cp1 dtd t ,

which is required for consistency of the picture. this term can be elegantly described us-
ing the superconnection a, following kennedy and wilkins [38]. first one introduces the
supercurvature

f = da + aa =  f  t t

dt

dt

f   t t ! ,

which has even-dimensional forms on the diagonal, and odd-dimensional ones on the o-

diagonal. using this one can construct a suggestive generalization of the wz term to brane-
antibrane systems, namely

(45)

(46)

(47)

(48)

swz =z cst r(ef).
z c(ef  ef 

),

the symbol st r is the usual super-trace for graded algebras. this contains the usual terms

where the minus sign reects the opposite rr charges. it also contains the term in eq. (45),
as well as some others. it would be interesting to see whether this nice formula reects some

new symmetry.

3.3 unstable type ii d-branes

we have seen that a suitably chosen vortex in a coincident dp + dp system describes a
stable d(p  2)-brane. now (following sen [4]) we would like to consider a dierent eld
conguration that describes an unstable soliton. recall that at its minimum (|t| = t0)
the energy density associated with the tachyon potential exactly cancels the tension of the
branes, v (t0) + 2tdp = 0, leaving a conguration equivalent to pure vacuum. the proposal
is to construct a d(p  1)-brane as a domain-wall on the dp + dp system. this means that
if x denotes a cartesian coordinate, we want to construct a soliton localized in the vicinity

of x = 0.

the way to construct a localized domain wall is by choosing a kink conguration for the
tachyon eld. specically consider choosing im t = 0 and re t = t0 tanh(x/a). this has
the property that t  t0 for x  + and t  t0 for x  . also, |t| diers from
t0 appreciably only in a region of thickness a in the vicinity of x = 0. the precise functional
form of t (x) is not important. this conguration gives pure vacuum except in the vicinity
of x = 0, so it can be interpreted as a d(p  1)-brane. this domain wall soliton is unstable
because the eld conguration we have chosen is topologically trivial. to understand this,

16

we note that the vacuum manifold given by |t| = t0 is a circle (s1). however, a circle is
connected (0(s1) is trivial). therefore, by turning on im t and increasing the thickness a
this conguration can be continuously deformed to pure vacuum. thus we conclude that this
d-brane is unstable. since it carries no conserved charge it can decay into neutral radiation

(such as gravitons). despite their instability, sen has demonstrated that it is useful to
consider these objects. they can be dened in type ii theories for all wrong values of p
(odd for iia and even for iib).

the instability of the d(p 1)-brane is reected in the fact that its world-volume theory
contains a real tachyon. the reason there is one real tachyon is that there is one direction of

instability for unwinding the kink in the vacuum moduli space. it can also be understood as
the ground state of the open string connecting the d-brane to itself. in any case, we can use

this tachyon to repeat the kink construction. this gives us a domain wall on the unstable
d(p  1)-brane, which is interpreted as a d(p  2)-brane. this kink is topologically stable,
however. the tachyon on the d(p  1)-brane is real and the vacuum moduli space in this
case is two disconnected points t = t0. so this construction gives a stable d(p 2)-brane,
which carries a conserved charge.

we already have a candidate for what this d(p 2)-brane is. it is exactly the same stable
bps d-brane that we constructed as a vortex solution in section 3.2. sen has shown that

this two-step kink construction is equivalent to the vortex solution.

3.4 type i dp + dp systems

the type i theory has three types of bps dp-branes, namely p = 1, 5, 9. just as we con-
structed the type ii d(p  2)-brane as a soliton in a dp + dp system, so we can construct
type i d-branes as solitons in higher-dimensional brane-antibrane systems. in this section we

will sketch the construction of the d1-brane as an instanton-like conguration in a d5 + d5
system [4] and the construction of the d5-brane as an instanton-like conguration in a

d9 + d9 system [11]. the two constructions are not completely identical (unlike for the type
ii theories), and therefore need to be considered separately.

before proceeding, let us recall a few basic facts about the type i d-branes. first of

all, the d1-brane or d-string is nothing but the so(32) heterotic string in disguise. recall
that the so(32) heterotic theory is s-dual to the type i theory [39, 34], which means that
the coupling constants are related by gh = 1/g. in talking about the type i theory it is
implicit that g is small, so that we can use perturbative analysis. in type i string units,

the type i fundamental string has tension 1/2, whereas the d-string has tension 1/(2g)
and thus appears as a nonperturbative object. even so, the d-string can be identied as

the heterotic string continued to strong coupling. this string is bps, carrying a conserved

17

charge. this charge is an rr charge from the type i viewpoint, though it is ns from the
heterotic viewpoint. the type i d5-brane is the electromagnetic dual of the d-string and is

also bps. we also need to know the gauge groups that are associated to the d-brane world
volumes.
it turns out that n coincident d-strings give o(n) gauge symmetry, whereas
n coincident d5-branes gives sp(n)  usp(2n) gauge symmetry [40]. these facts can be
derived by considering coincident type iib d-branes and applying the appropriate orientifold
projection.

let us now consider a coincident type i d5 + d5 system. the world-volume theory has
su(2)  su(2) gauge symmetry since each brane has an sp(1) = su(2) gauge eld on its
world volume. the ground state of the open string connecting the d5 to the d5 gives a
tachyon t with (2, 2) quantum numbers. it can be parameterized in the form

t = w,

(49)

where  is a positive real number and w is an su(2) matrix. the two su(2)s act on t by
left and right multiplication. the tachyon potential v (t ) is required to be gauge invariant,

which implies that it is a function of  only. as in the corresponding type ii constructions,
we assume that it has an isolated minimum at some value  = 0 and that if t = 0w ,
with w xed, and all gauge elds vanishing, then the d5 + d5 system is equivalent to pure
vacuum. as before, this requires that

v (0) + 2td5 = 0,

(50)

so that the total energy density cancels at the minimum.

we now wish to construct a eld conguration on the d5 + d5 system that describes a

string-like soliton, which can be identied as the d-string. thus we will assume symmetry
in one cartesian direction. the four orthogonal spatial directions can be described by a
distance r from the core of the string and a sphere s3. so we want the solitons energy to
be concentrated in the vicinity of r = 0 and to approach zero as r  . at innity, we
certainly need that   0, but we also need that the tachyon kinetic energy

t r[(dt )dt ],

(51)

should vanish as well. here

dt = t + i(at  t a
and a is the su(2) gauge eld of the d5-brane and a
 is the su(2) gauge eld of the
d5-brane. the story is very similar to the type ii vortex solution, except that it is now
based on an instanton-like construction.

(52)

),

18

we require that for large r

where the su(2) element u is identied with the spatial s3. then the tachyon kinetic energy
can be made to vanish at the same time by requiring that

t  0u,

(53)

a  iu  u 1
a
  0.

(54)

the rst formula is the standard instanton conguration and gives one unit of instanton
number

1

8zr4

tr(ff ) = 1.

(55)

then the structure of the wz term implies that this conguration carries one unit of d1-
brane rr charge and can be identied as the d-string. the various properties of the d-string,

such as it various zero modes, can also be derived from this construction, but we will not
pursue that here.

the construction described above is based on the work of sen. however, it should be
pointed out that something closely related was done earlier by douglas [41]. specically,
douglas considered an instanton conguration on a single d5-brane and argued that this

describes a d-string bound to the d5-brane.

let us now turn to the construction of the d5-brane as a soliton. for this purpose we

need to consider four d9-branes and four d9-branes in addition to the usual 32 d9-branes
that are present in the type i vacuum conguration. the chan-paton group of the d9s,

say, is

so(4) = su(2)  su(2).

(56)

the idea is to introduce an instanton conguration in one of these su(2)s and accompany it
by an appropriate tachyon conguration rather like the one in the previous construction. in
this way one makes the d5-brane. moreover, the su(2), which is not used in the instanton

construction, survives as the gauge symmetry of the d5-brane. the so(32) gauge symmetry
carried by the d9-branes that are inert in this construction survives as a global symmetry

of the d5-brane world-volume theory. (this is also true for the d-string in the previous
construction.)

3.5 non-bps d0-brane in type i

the perturbative so(32) heterotic string spectrum has a spin(32)/z2 spinor representation
at the rst excited level. even through it is not bps, and belongs to a long representation

19

of the supersymmetry algebra, it is nonetheless absolutely stable as a consequence of charge
conservation. in heterotic string units, its mass is

mspinor = 2f (gh),

(57)

where f (gh) = 1 + o(g2
h). sen [4] has posed the question what happens to this state as
gh  ? for a bps state, the answer would be trivial, as the charge would control the
mass for all values of the coupling. however, this state is not bps, so the answer is not
at all obvious. however, one can hope to answer the question because large gh corresponds
to small g = 1/gh type i coupling. thus what one needs to do is to identify a plausible
candidate for the lightest gauge group spinor in the type i setting and determine its mass to
leading order in g.

ordinarily, the type iib theory has no stable d0-branes, though in section 3.3 we dis-
cussed how to construct an unstable d0-brane. however, in the presence of an orientifold

(or orbifold) plane they can exist as stable particles embedded in the orientifold (or orbifold)
plane. one viewpoint is that the orientifold projection eliminates the tachyonic modes from
the world-volume of the unstable type ii d-brane. sen has studied these possibilities for

both o5-planes and o9-planes. here we will only consider the latter case, which is realized
by the uncompactied type i theory.

we will construct a type i candidate for the desired gauge group spinor as a d0-brane.
the procedure will be based on a setting like that of the preceding sections. namely, following

sen, we will construct a d1 + d1 system with a eld conguration that describes a stable
soliton.

as we have already remarked, the gauge group on the world volume of n coincident
type i d-strings is o(n). in particular, for the case of a single d-string, it is o(1) = z2.
this z2 is the subgroup of the u(1) of a type iib d-string that survives the orientifold
projection. being discrete, this gauge group has no associated eld, but it does have physical
consequences. the point is that the gauge group determines the possible wilson lines when

the string is wrapped on a circular compact dimension. thus the possible wilson lines for
a wrapped d-string are w = 1. the d-string has 32 left-moving fermion elds a on its
world sheet, which arise as the zero modes of d1  d9 open strings. (this is also known
from the identication of the d-string with the heterotic string.) the possible wilson lines
(or holonomies) w = 1 correspond to whether the a elds of the wrapped d-string are
periodic or antiperiodic

a(x + 2r) = w a(x).

(58)

when w = 1, the as have zero modes in their fourier expansions, which obey a cliord
algebra. therefore, the quantum states of a wrapped d-string with w = 1 belong to the

20

spinor conjugacy class of spin(32)/z2. similarly, the states of a wrapped d-string with
w = 1 belong to the adjoint (or singlet) conjugacy class.

now consider a d1 + d1 pair wrapped on the circle and coincident in the other dimen-
sions. to get an overall gauge group spinor one of the strings should have w = 1 and the
other should have w = 1. in this case it is clear (by charge conservation) that complete
annihilation of the strings is not possible. the wrapped d1 + d1 system contains a real
tachyon eld t with a potential v (t ). t is odd under the action of either of the z2 gauge
groups, and therefore gauge invariance requires that v (t ) = v (t ). by the same reasoning
as before, v should have an isolated minimum at |t| = t0 with v (t0) + 2td1 = 0.

when both wilson lines are the same, so that their product is +1 and the system can be
a gauge group singlet, t (x) is periodic and it is possible to choose t (x) = t0. this would
then be equivalent to pure vacuum. however, when the product of the wilson lines is 1,
t (x) is forced to be antiperiodic

t (x + 2r) = t (x),

(59)

so that t (x) = t0 is no longer a possibility.
fourier series expansion of the form

indeed, in this case the tachyon eld has a

t (x, t) =xn

tn+1/2(t)ei(n+1/2)x/r.

this tells us that the kk mass of the nth mode is
(n + 1/2)2

m 2

n =

1
2

.



r2

this shows that there is actually no instability for r < rc, where

rc = 1/2.

(60)

(61)

(62)

in this case the two-particle system is the ground state. there is no lighter bound state
with the same quantum numbers. on the other hand, when r > rc, t1/2 are tachyonic
signaling an instability. in this case there is a bound state  the d0-brane  that has the

same quantum numbers and lower mass.

the mass of the d0-brane can be estimated for small g by considering the transition
point r = rc. at this point the mass of two wrapped strings and the mass of the d0-brane
should be degenerate. the two wrapped strings have a mass that is approximately given by

m = 2  2rc  td1 = 2/g.

(63)

sen argues that this result is exact to leading order in small g, and that any (possibly r-
dependent) corrections are of o(1). as an example of such a correction consider a localized

21

d0-brane on the circle. it experiences gravitational interactions with its images, which are
of order gn m 2. however, m  1/g and gn  g2, so this is o(1). other eects, due to
wilson lines or kk momenta, are also o(1).

we have now determined the answer to sens question. the mass of the lightest gauge

group spinor is a non-bps d0-brane of the type i theory whose mass (in type i units) is
2/g + o(1). to compare to the perturbative heterotic result, we must still convert to
heterotic string units. then we conclude that

f (gh)  gh

for large gh.

(64)

to complete the story let us describe the d0-brane soliton of the d1 + d1 system in the
decompactication limit. in this case we have a localized kink, like the ones we described in
section 3.3. in the present case t (x) is real and the vacuum manifold |t| = t0 consists of
two distinct points. thus the kink conguration is topologically nontrivial. it follows that
the resulting d0-brane carries a conserved z2 charge. this means that whereas they are
individually stable, they are tcp self-conjugate and can annihilate in pairs. this meshes

nicely with the fact that they are gauge group spinors.

4 k-theory classication of d-branes

4.1 motivation and background

since d-branes carry conserved charges that are sources for rr gauge elds, which are

dierential forms, one might suppose that the charges could be identied with cohomology
classes. this is roughly, but not precisely, correct. moore and minasian noted that the

more precise mathematical identication of d-brane charges is with elements of k-theory
groups [10]. this was explained in detail in a subsequent paper by witten [11]. here, we

will summarize some of the basic ideas, though we will not go deeply into the mathematics.
wittens explanation begins with the observation that the pattern of bps d-branes is

reminiscent of the bott periodicity rules for homotopy groups. for example,

i(u(n)) = i(u(n + 2)),

(65)

when n is suciently large (the stable regime). this pattern is reminiscent of the fact

that bps d-branes occur for even values of p in the iia theory and odd values of p in the
iib theory, and that the gauge group of n coincident type ii d-branes is u(n).

the bott periodicity rule

i(o(n)) = i4(sp(n)),

(66)

22

for suciently large n, is reminiscent of the pattern of bps d-branes in the type i theory. in
type i, n coincident d1-branes or d9-branes have an o(n) gauge group (roughly), whereas

n coincident d5-branes have an sp(n) gauge group.

the challenge is to nd the right mathematical framework to explain these coincidences

and to account for the non-bps d-branes, as well. k-theory turns out to be the key. it
provides a classication of pairs of vector bundles with equivalence relations that mesh nicely
with what we have learned from sens studies.

let us rst discuss the relevance of homotopy groups. the world-volume theories are
gauge theories, which (as we have seen) can support solitons. these solitons tend to be

stable when there is a topologically nontrivial lump in codimension n. the eld conguration
represents a nontrivial element of n1(g) that is identied as the conserved rr charge.
thus, for example, in the case of the non-bps d0-brane we used the fact that 0(z2) = z2
to describe a codimension one lump on a d1 + d1 system. similarly, we used 3(su(2)) = z
to construct the d-string in a d5 + d5 system. in the type ii theories, the vortex solutions
utilized the fact that 1(u(1)) = z.

instead of the constructions listed above, we could have constructed all of these objects

as suitable bundles on space-time lling nine-branes. from that point of view, we would
understand the existence of the type i d-string as a consequence of

and the non-bps d0-brane as a consequence of

7(o(32)) = z,

8(o(32)) = z2.

(67)

(68)

not everything is group theory and topology, however. dynamics also matters. when
the codimension n is greater than four, as in these two cases, the lump cannot be described
as an extremum of the low-energy eective action

se =z dnx tr(fijf ij).

(69)

to see this, suppose ai(x) is a eld conguration of the desired topology. (more precisely
one denes a bundle by a collection of ais on open sets together with suitable transition
functions.) now lets rescale the gauge eld as follows

ai(x)  ai(x),

(70)

which sends fij(x)  2fij(x). thus, one nds that se  4nse. therefore, for n > 4
the action (or energy) is reduced by shrinking the soliton. presumably it shrinks to string

23

scale where it is stabilized by the competing eects of higher-dimension corrections to se.
thus, the string scale should characterize the thickness of the d-string or the d0-brane.

suppose, on the other hand that the soliton has co-dimension n < 4. in this case the
same scaling argument would suggest that the soliton wants to spread out and become more

diuse. this doesnt always happen, because there can be other eects that stabilize the
soliton, but it is an issue to be considered.

4.2 type ii d-branes

consider now a collection of coincident type ii d-branes  n dp-branes and n  dp-branes.
as we discussed in section 3.1, the important world-volume elds can be combined in a
superconnection

a =  a t

t a ! ,

(71)

where a is a connection on a u(n) vector bundle e, a is a connection on a u(n ) vector
bundle e, and t is a section of e  e. the (p + 1)-dimensional world-volume of the
branes, x, is the base of e and e.

as we have discussed at some length in section 3, if e and e are topologically equivalent
(e  e) complete annihilation should be possible. this requires n = n  and a minimum
of the tachyon potential t = t0, where

v (t0) + 2ntdp = 0.

(72)

as a specic example, consider the case p = 9 in the type iib theory. consistency

of the quantum theory (tadpole cancellation) requires that the total rr 9-brane charge
should vanish, and thus n = n . so we have an equal number of d9-branes and d9-branes
lling the 10d spacetime x. associated to this we have a pair of vector bundles (e, e),
where e and e are rank n complex vector bundles. we now want to dene equivalence of
pairs (e, e) and (f, f ) whenever the associated 9-brane systems can be related by brane-
antibrane annihilation and creation. in particular, e  e corresponds to pure vacuum, and
therefore

if we add more d9-branes and d9-branes with identical vector bundles h, this should not

give anything new, since they are allowed to annihilate. this means that

(e, e)  0  e  e.

(73)

(e  h, e  h)  (e, e).

(74)

in this way we form equivalence classes of pairs of bundles. these classes form an abelian
group. for example, (e, e) belongs to the inverse class of the class containing (e, e). if

24

n and n  are unrestricted, the group is called k(x). however, the group that we have
constructed above is the subgroup of k(x) dened by requiring n = n . this subgroup
is called k(x). thus type iib d-brane charges should be classied by elements of k(x).
lets examine whether this works.

the formalism is quite general, but to begin we will only consider the relatively simple
case of dp-branes that are hyperplanes in at r10. for this purpose it is natural to decompose
the space into tangential and normal directions

r10 = rp+1  r9p,

(75)

and consider bundles that are independent of the tangential rp+1 coordinates. if the elds
fall suciently at innity, so that the energy is normalizable, then we can add the point at

innity thereby compactifying the normal space so that it becomes topologically a sphere
s9p. then the relevant base space for the dp-brane bundles in x = s9p. we can now
invoke the mathematical results:

k(s9p) =( z p = odd

0 p = even

.

(76)

this precisely accounts for the rr charge of all the stable (bps) dp-branes of the type iib
theory on r10. the relation to homotopy is

k(sn) = n1(u(n))

(large n).

(77)

note that n does not appear on the left-hand side. k-theory groups are automatically

in the stable regime. it should also be noted that the unstable type iib d-branes, which
we discussed in section 3.3, carry no conserved charges, and they do not show up in this

classication.

suppose now that some dimensions form a compact manifold q of dimension q, so that the
total spacetime is r10qq. then the construction of a dp-brane requires compactifying the
normal space r9pq  q to give s9pq  q. this involves adjoining a copy of q at innity.
in this case the appropriate mathematical objects to classify d-brane charges are relative
k-theory groups k(s9pq  q, q) [42]. in particular, if q = s1, we have k(s8p  s1, s1).
mathematically, it is known that this relative k-theory group can be decomposed into two

pieces

k(x  s1, s1) = k 1(x)  k(x).

(78)

the physical interpretation of this formula is very nice.
d-branes that are wrapped on the circle, whereas

k(s8p) classies the type iib

k 1(s8p) = k(s9p),

25

(79)

classies unwrapped d-branes. so, altogether, in nine dimensions there are additive d-brane
charges for all p < 8.

the type iia case is somewhat more subtle, since the spacetime lling d9-branes are
unstable in this case. also, they are tcp self-conjugate. the right k-theory group was
conjectured by witten, and subsequently explained by horava [43]. the answer is k 1(x),
which (as we have already indicated) has

k 1(s9p) =( z for p = even

0 for p = odd.

(80)

this accounts for all the stable type iia dp-branes embedded in r10. the relation to
homotopy in this case is

k 1(sn) = n1 

u(2n)

u(n)  u(n)! (large n).

let me refer you to horavas paper for an explanation of these facts.

compactifying the type iia theory on a circle gives the relative k-theory group

k 1(x  s1, s1) = k(x)  k 1(x).

(81)

(82)

this time k 1(x) describes wrapped d-branes and k(x) describes unwrapped ones. this
result matches the type iib result in exactly the way required by t duality (wrapped 
unwrapped) [42].

4.3 type i d-branes

type i d-branes charges can also be classied using k-theory [11]. in this case we should
consider n + 32 d9-branes with an o(n + 32) vector bundle e and n d9-branes with an
o(n) vector bundle e. we dene equivalence classes as before

(e, e)  (e  h, e  h),

(83)

where h is an arbitrary so(k) vector bundle on x. these equivalence classes dene the
elements of a k-theory group. if rank e  rank e were unrestricted the group would be
ko(x). one can dene a subgroup of ko(x), called gko(x), by requiring rank e = rank
e + 32. this is a coset isomorphic to gko(x), so as far as k-theory is concerned the fact

e. however, this is not quite what we want. the type i theory requires rank e = rank

that the type i theory has 32 extra d9-branes is irrelevant. however, later we will show that

it is quite relevant to some of the physics. so we already see that k-theory is not the whole
story.

26

in any case, by the same reasoning as before, the conserved charges of type i d-branes

in r10 should be determined by the groups gko(s9p). the connection to homotopy in this

case is

(large n).

(84)

the results are as follows:

gko(sn) = n1(o(n))

these are the three kinds of bps d-branes which carry additive conserved charges.

 gko(s9p) = z for p = 1, 5, 9.
 gko(s9p) = z2
these are candidates for non-bps d-branes with a multiplicative (z2) conserved charges.
the p = 0 case corresponds to the non-bps d0-brane discussed in section 3.5. the p = 1
case is a type i d-instanton. the p = 7 and p = 8 cases will be discussed in section 6.

for p = 1, 0, 7, 8.

 gko(s9p) = 0

for p = 2, 3, 4, 6.

there are no conserved d-brane charges in these cases.

let us now consider compactifying the type i theory on a circle, so that the spacetime
is r9  s1. in this case we want to understand the classication of d-brane charges in nine
dimensions and the t-dual description in terms of type i theory. as in the type ii cases, the
k-theory description of d-brane charges of the compactied theory is given by the relative
k-theory group ko(x  s1, s1). as in the type ii case, the mathematical identity

ko(x  s1, s1) = gko

(x)  gko(x),

1

(85)

1

agrees with our physical expectations. specically, gko(s8p) classies the wrapped d-
branes and gko

there is a slightly subtle point. the k-theory group elements correspond to conserved
charges and not to stable d-branes. in section 3.5 we saw that the type i non-bps d0-

(s8p) describes unwrapped d-branes.

brane decays into two particles, which can be described as a wrapped d1 + d1 system when
the compactication radius r < 1/2. the wrapped d-string that has the trivial wilson
line (w = 1) is a gauge group spinor, and it carries the charge in question. the k-theory
classication of charges does not distinguish the cases r < 1/2 and r > 1/2. while it
classies charges, it doesnt identify which object is the ground state with that charge.

let us now examine the situation from the t-dual type i perspective [42]. in particular,
we would like to achieve a qualitative understanding of the transition at r = 1/2 (r =
2). to transcribe the picture to the type i perspective recall that under t duality wrapped
d-branes map to unwrapped d-branes and vice versa. recall, too, that the position of an

27

unwrapped d-brane is encoded in a wilson line of the corresponding wrapped d-brane. thus,
a non-bps d0-brane of type i localized on the circle (for r > 1/2) should correspond to
a non-bps d1-brane of type i stretched across the interval from x  = 0 to x  = r.
a wilson line of the u(1) gauge group on this string should encode the position of the

d0-brane.

if r < 1/2 (and r > 2), on the other hand, then in the type i picture one has a
wrapped d1+d1 pair. one of the strings has w = +1 and the other one has w = 1. these
strings correspond to d0-branes in the dual type i picture, and the wilson lines tell us that
those d0-branes are stuck to the orientifold planes. thus, to be specic, there is a d0-brane
stuck to the o8-plane at x  = 0 and a d0-brane stuck to the o8-plane at x  = r. an
interesting question is how such a conguration morphs into a string stretched across the
interval as r is decreased through the value 2. i have a conjecture for the answer to this
question, which goes beyond the perturbative framework in which we have been working. it

is reminiscent of similar phenomena found in other contexts, and is the only smooth way that
i can imagine the transition taking place. the idea is that as r approaches 2 from above,
the orientifold planes develop spikes so that the d0 and d0 approach one another. then in
the limit r  2 they touch and annihilate, leaving a connecting tube between the o8-

planes, which in the perturbative limit is identied as a string. this is somewhat analogous

to the joining/breaking transition of qcd ux tubes with the annihilation/creation of q q
pairs. it is also reminiscent of a description of fundamental strings ending on d-branes in

terms of a soliton eld conguration on the d-brane world-volume [44, 45]. however, it
diers from these examples in a rather peculiar way. in this case, the inside of the tube,
which is identied as a stretched non-bps d-string, is not even part of the spacetime!

we have just seen that there can be d0-branes stuck to o8-planes in the type i theory.
this is t-dual to the fact that a wrapped type i d-string can have wilson line w = 1, with
the two possibilities corresponding to the two orientifold planes. incidentally, this implies a
certain asymmetry between the orientifold planes, since w = 1 gives a gauge group spinor
and w = 1 does not.

the bulk of the type i spacetime is indistinguishable from type iia spacetime, at least
in the region where half of the d8-branes are to the left and half are to the right. (in other
regions one has a massive type iia spacetime of the type discovered by romans [46].)
we know that the type iia theory has a d0-brane, so this suggests that the type i theory
should also admit this possibility. the way this works is that a pair of stuck d0-branes on an
orientifold plane can pair up and move into the bulk, where the composite object is identied

as a single bulk d0-brane. it is instructive to understand the t-dual type i description of
this process.

28

consider a pair of wrapped type i d-strings. the world-volume gauge group is o(2),
which is nonabelian. this system corresponds to d0-branes in the type i description, with
positions controlled by the choice of o(2) wilson line. inequivalent choices of wilson line are
classied by conjugacy classes of the group. this group has two types of conjugacy classes.
a class of the rst type describes a rotation by  or 2  , which are equivalent, where
0    . this class corresponds to a composite bulk d0-brane located at x  = r and
its mirror image at x  = (2  )r. the remaining conjugacy class contains all reection
elements of o(2). a representative of this class is   1

0 1 !. thus this class corresponds

0

to having one stuck d0-brane on each o8-plane. note that the two-body system described

by this system is a gauge group spinor, whereas a one-body system described by a  class is
not a gauge group spinor. i have reviewed some additional related issues elsewhere [47].

5 moduli spaces of theories with 16 supercharges

consistent vacua of string theories typically form spaces, called moduli spaces, which are
parameterized by the vacuum values of massless scalar elds with at potentials. for theo-

ries with 16 unbroken supersymmetries (16 conserved supercharges) such as the type i and
heterotic theories, the vacuum moduli spaces are always of the narain type

mm,n = m,n(z)\so(m, n)/so(m)  so(n).

(86)

here m,n(z) is the standard innite discrete duality group given by integral so(m, n)
matrices. equivalently, it can be described as the subgroup of so(m, n) that preserves
an appropriate lattice of signature (m, n). when d  4, n = 10  d u(1) gauge elds
belong to the supergravity multiplet. the remainder of the gauge elds belong to vector
supermultiplets and form a gauge group of rank m. at generic points in the moduli space
this group is [u(1)]m but there is nonabelian symmetry enhancement on various subsurfaces
of the moduli space. the case d = 10 is special in that the moduli space consists of just two
points  corresponding to the e8  e8 and spin(32)/z2 theories.

5.1 three components in d = 9

in d = 9 the moduli space of consistent vacua with 16 unbroken supersymmetries turns

out to have three disconnected components. they correspond to the narain moduli spaces
m17,1, m9,1, and m1,1. since m n is a multiple of 8 in each case, they correspond to even
self-dual lattices, which is the key to establishing modular invariance of the corresponding

one-loop amplitudes. these three cases turn out to have amusing geometric descriptions in

29

terms of 11-dimensional m theory. they correspond to compactications r9  k, where k
is a cylinder for m = 17, a mobius strip for m = 9, and a klein bottle for m = 1 [48]. we

observe that each boundary component of k contributes 8 units of rank to the gauge groups.
the m theory viewpoint will not be pursued further in these lectures, because our focus is

on perturbative superstring descriptions, and the m theory picture is nonperturbative.

the case m = 17 also corresponds to compactication of the type i theory on a circle. we
have discussed this system, including its d-brane spectrum and the dual type i description
in the preceding section, so we will not say more about it here. the case m = 1 has a
perturbative superstring description in d = 9, which will be discussed in the next subsection.

the case m = 9 does not have a perturbative superstring description in d = 9 (even through
it does exist). however, a further compactication to a m10,2 moduli space in d = 8 makes it
amenable to perturbative superstring analysis. we will say a little about this case in section
5.3.

one of our main concerns is to identify the spectrum of d-branes and d-brane charges
in each case. the bps d-branes are always easy to identify, and are the same for all the
components of the moduli spaces (that have a perturbative description). the point is that
the c rr gauge eld of the type i theory in d = 10 gives rise to the relevant rr gauge
elds in the lower dimensions. knowing these gauge elds one can immediately read o the
corresponding spectrum of bps d-branes. for example, in d = 9 one has c and c9  c.
as a result there are bps d-branes in d = 9 for p = 0, 1, 4, 5 for both the m = 17 and

the m = 1 branches of the moduli space. there are corresponding stable p-branes in the
m = 9 case, as well. however, in that case there is no perturbative limit, so it is not very
meaningful to call them d-branes. in addition, each case requires a certain number of bps

d8-branes for quantum consistency.

5.2 the type i theory

there is a perturbative superstring description of the m1,1 component of the d = 9 moduli
space, which has been called the type i theory [49]. it is formulated as a type iib orientifold
that diers somewhat from the usual type i construction. one starts with the iib theory on
r9  s1, and then mods out by the z2 symmetry

 =   s1/2.

(87)

 is the usual world-sheet orientation reversal. but now it is accompanied by the operation
s1/2, which is translation half way around the circle. because of this half shift,  has no xed
points, and as a result the type i theory has no orientifold planes. therefore, no spacetime-
lling d-branes should be added to cancel the rr charge of o-planes. it follows that there

30

is no gauge group, analogous to so(32), associated to such d-branes. indeed the only gauge
symmetry of the 9d theory is [u(1)]2, where these elds arise from the components g9 and
c9 of the 10d metric and rr gauge elds. this is what one expects for m1,1. the t-dual
description of the type i theory is called type i. it consists of an interval 0  x   r (for
the same reason as type i). the interval is bounded by orientifold planes. however, unlike
the type i case, now the orientifold planes carry opposite rr charge, and could be denoted
o8+ and o8. as a result, the total rr charge vanishes and no parallel d8-branes should
be added.

we have already argued that the type i theory has the same spectrum of bps d-branes
as the type i theory compactied on a circle. we will now examine the spectrum of non-
bps d-branes and show that it diers from the spectrum of the compactied type i theory.

bergman, gimon, and horava examined this problem [42] and showed that the relevant k-

theory group is gksc(x) and that this predicts non-bps dp-branes carrying a z2 charge for
p = 1, 3, 7. i refer you to their paper for the k-theory analysis. what i want to describe
here is a physical argument they presented in support of this conclusion.

because we mod out by , a dp-brane localized on the circle must be accompanied by
an -reected dp-brane at the opposite location half way around the circle. now, the action
of  on type iib d-branes is as follows:

 : dp  dp
 : dp  dp

p = 1, 5, 9
p = 1, 3, 7.

(88)

this is why the type i theory only has bps d-branes for p = 1, 5, 9.

the congurations based on p = 1, 5 give expected bps d-branes in 9d. however, the
congurations with a p = 1, 3, 7 dp-brane and an accompanying dp-brane half-way around
the circle are non-bps. but they also correspond to stable congurations in 9d, at least when

the radius of the circle is large enough. (otherwise the open string connecting them might
develop a tachyonic mode.) so the result agrees with the k-theory prediction.

we can see that these non-bps dp-branes are conserved modulo 2, so that they carry a
z2 charge. imagine two of them localized on the circle. then one of them (and its image)
can be slid around the circle until the dp-brane of the rst pair encounters the dp-brane of

the second pair. at this point the pairs can annihilate into neutral radiation. as an exercise,
the reader might want to describe the t-dual type i description of this annihilation process.

5.3 consistent vacua in eight dimensions

the three 9d branches of the moduli space correspond to three branches in 8d, as well.
they are m18,2, m10,2, and m2,2. below 8d there are additional branches, which we will

31

not discuss here. the three branches in 8d can be constructed from a type i perspective
by compactifying on a torus, so that the spacetime is r8  t 2, and allowing appropriate
holonomies associated to the two cycles of the torus. the possible choices of holonomies
were analyzed by witten [50]. his key observation was that it is possible to have holonomies

that correspond to gauge bundles without vector structure.

the holonomies associated to the two cycles are elements of the gauge group, which we
in order to describe a at bundle, which is a

can write as 32  32 matrices g1 and g2.
necessary requirement, there are two possibilities

[g1, g2] = 0 or {g1, g2} = 0.

(89)

the rst case is the one with vector structure, and the second is the one without vector
structure. the point is that holonomies, when written in terms of allowed representations

of the gauge group, should commute to give a at bundle. however, the nonperturbative
gauge group is spin(32)/z2, which does not admit the 32-dimensional vector as an allowed
representation. matrices that anticommute in the 32 can correspond to ones that commute
when expressed in terms of any of the allowed representations.

witten analyzed the possibilities and found that there are three inequivalent choices, one
with vector structure and two without vector structure. the one with vector structure is
the obvious choice, which gives m18,2. in each case it is illuminating to consider the t-dual
description on t 2/z2. in this description the m18,2 branch of the moduli space corresponds
to having four o7-planes, each with rr charge 4. thus 16 d7-branes localized on t 2/z2
must be added. this is a straightforward generalization of the type i description in 9d.
the m10,2 branch corresponds to having three o7-planes with rr charge 4 and one with
charge +4. in this case eight d7-branes are required to cancel the charge. the last case,
m2,2 is described by two o7-planes with rr charge 4 and two with charge +4 and no
d7-branes. in each case, one sees that the number of d7-branes agrees with what is required
to explain the rank of the gauge group. incidentally, if there were more than two o7-planes
of positive charge, one would need d7-branes to cancel the rr charge. such a conguration

would not be supersymmetric.

an exercise that has not yet been carried out is to determine the spectrum of non-bps

d-branes for the m10,2 branch of the moduli space. this should be possible now.

6 non-bps d-branes in type i

32

6.1 determination of the nonperturbative gauge groups

the gauge symmetry of the perturbative type i theory is o(32). (the reections have no
consequence, so there is no harm in including them.) however, the non-bps d-instanton,
which showed up in the k-theory classication in section 4.3, arises because 9(so(32)) =
z2. witten argued that it is responsible for breaking o(32)  so(32) [11]. moreover, the
non-bps d-particle, which we have discussed at some length, is a gauge group spinor. more

precisely, it gives states belonging to one of the two spinorial conjugacy classes of spin(32).
when all of these facts are taken into account, one concludes that the nonperturbative

type i theory has a dierent gauge group than is visible in perturbation theory. specically,
it is spin(32)/z2. this agrees with the gauge symmetry that is manifest in the pertur-
bative heterotic theory. this agreement can be regarded as a successful test of s duality.
incidentally, we also can conclude that there are no nonperturbative eects in the heterotic
description that modify the gauge group.

6.2

instability of d7 and d8

the k-theory classication of type i d-brane charges, presented in section 4.3, suggests the
existence of a non-bps d7-brane and a non-bps d8-brane, each of which is supposed to
carry a conserved z2 charge. however, there is a tachyon in the spectrum of d7  d9 and
d8d9 open strings [51]. therefore, the proposed d7-brane and d8-brane should each have
32 tachyon elds in their world-volume theory, and therefore they must be unstable. (such
instability occurs for dp  dq open strings whenever 0 < |p  q| < 4.) this instability does
not, by itself, constitute a contradiction with the k-theory analysis, which only purports
to give the types of conserved d-brane charges, and not the specic objects which carry

them. but it is a cause for concern. clearly, the instability occurs in these cases because
their are 32 spacetime lling d9-branes in the type i vacuum. as we pointed out earlier,
the k-theory analysis is indierent to their presence. the question is to what extent the z2
charge survives when the d7 or the d8 dissolves in the background d9-branes.

6.3 further analysis of the d8

by bott periodicity, one might expect the non-bps d8-brane to have features in common
with the non-bps d0-brane. there is one essential dierence, however, the d0  d9 open
strings do not have tachyonic modes whereas the d8  d9 open strings do. we can conrm
this fact by trying to emulate sens construction of the d0-brane as a kink solution on a
d1 + d1 system [52].

in the case of the d1 + d1 system we saw that there is a single real tachyon t and a

33

potential v (t ) with minima at t = t0, which can be regarded as a 0-dimensional sphere.
the vacuum manifold has two disconnected components and, therefore, the kink solution that

connects them is topologically stable. the closest analog we can construct eight dimensions
higher is to consider a system consisting of 33 d9-branes and one d9-brane. the world
volume in this case has 33 tachyonic modes ~t belonging to the fundamental representation
of the o(33) gauge symmetry carried by the d9-branes. the potential v ( ~t ) must have
o(33) gauge symmetry, so the minima at | ~t| = t0 describe a s32 vacuum manifold. this
moduli space is connected, and therefore does not support a topologically stable kink. the
situation is very reminiscent of the unstable type ii d-branes discussed in section 3.3. in
that case there was an s1, and as a result the kink solution had one unstable direction, so
that the resulting d-brane ended up with one tachyonic mode. in the present case there are

32 unstable directions so that the resulting d8-brane has 32 tachyonic modes in its world
volume. of course, these are the same modes that one discovers by quantizing the d8  d9
open strings. in the case of the unstable type ii d-branes, there was no associated conserved
charge, and they did not appear in the k-theory analysis. the type i d8-brane, on the other
hand, does appear in the k-theory analysis, even though it has an analogous instability.

witten has argued in support of the d8-brane as follows: the d-instanton implies that
there are two distinct type i vacua distinguished by the sign of the d-instanton amplitude.
this is a z2 analog of the  angle in qcd. one should expect that there is a domain wall
connecting the two vacua  the d8-brane. the sign change in the instanton amplitude

means that the d-instanton is the electromagnetic dual of the d8-brane. this has been
investigated by gukov [53].

even though the d8-brane is unstable one could imagine forming it at some moment

in time and asking how the vacua on the two sides of its are distinguished. recalling that
the d-instanton was responsible for breaking o(32)  so(32), it seems clear that these
vacua should be distinguished by a gauge-group reection. this implies that opposite spinor
conjugacy classes would enter into the spin(32)/z2 gauge group on the two sides. of course,
once the d8-brane decays, the vacuum becomes uniform everywhere.

7 concluding remarks

there has been considerable progress in analyzing non-supersymmetric d-brane congura-
tions.
in particular, some stable non-bps d-branes have been identied, and they have
been studied in perturbative limits with some mathematical control. however, without the

bps property it is not possible (at present) to make quantitative studies away from weak
coupling.

34

another signicant development has been the identication of k-theory groups as the
appropriate mathematical objects for classifying d-brane charges. in the case of bps d-

branes, these charges are sources for rr gauge elds, whereas in non-bps cases they are
not. the non-bps d-branes that we have discussed carry conserved z2 charges. however,
sen has analyzed examples in which other charge groups (such as z) also appear. one lesson
we have learned is that k-theory does not take account of spacetime lling d-branes, such
as the 32 d9-branes of the type i theory. their presence can destabilize other d-branes in

certain cases.

acknowledgments

i am grateful to oren bergman, ashoke sen, and edward witten for helpful discussions and
suggestions. this work supported in part by the u.s. dept. of energy under grant no.

de-fg03-92-er40701.

references

[1] a. sen, stable non-bps states in string theory, jhep 9808:007 (1998), hep-

th/9803194.

[2] a. sen, stable non-bps bound states of bps d-branes, jhep 9808:010 (1998),

hep-th/9805019.

[3] a. sen, tachyon condensation on the brane-antibrane system,jhep 9808:012

(1998), hep-th/9805170.

[4] a. sen, so(32) spinors of type i and other solitons on brane-antibrane pairs, jhep

9809:023 (1998), hep-th/9808141.

[5] a. sen, type i d-particle and its interactions, jhep 9810:021 (1998), hep-

th/9809111.

[6] a. sen, non-bps states and branes in string theory, hep-th/9904207.

[7] a. lerda and r. russo, stable non-bps states in string theory: a pedagogical re-

view, hep-th/9905006.

[8] j. polchinski, dirichlet branes and ramond-ramond charges, phys. rev. lett. 75

(1995) 4724, hep-th/9510017.

35

[9] j. polchinski, tasi lectures on d-branes, p. 293 in fields, strings, and duality (tasi

96), eds. c. efthimiou and b. greene, world scientic 1997, hep-th/9611050.

[10] g. moore and r. minasian, k-theory and ramond-ramond charges, jhep

9711:002 (1997), hep-th/9710230.

[11] e. witten, d-branes and k-theory, jhep 9812:019 (1998), hep-th/9810188.

[12] j. polchinski and y. cai, consistency of open superstring theories, nucl. phys.

b296 (1988) 91.

[13] c. callan, c. lovelace, c. nappi, and s. yost, loop corrections to superstring equa-

tions of motion, nucl. phys. b308 (1988) 221.

[14] n. ishibashi and t. onogi, conformal field theories on surfaces with boundaries and
crosscaps, mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 161; n. ishibashi, the boundary and crosscap

states in conformal field theories, mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 251.

[15] o. bergman and m.r. gaberdiel, stable non-bps d-particles, phys. lett. b441

(1998) 133, hep-th/9806155.

[16] o. bergman and m.r. gaberdiel, non-bps dirichlet branes, hep-th/9908126.

[17] m.b. green, j.h. schwarz, and e. witten, superstring theory, 2 vols., (cambridge u.

press 1987).

[18] j. polchinski, string theory, 2 vols., (cambridge u. press 1998).

[19] f. gliozzi, j. scherk, and d. olive, supersymmetry, supergravity theories and the

dual spinor model, nucl. phys. b122 (1977) 253.

[20] m.b. green and j.h. schwarz, supersymmetrical dual string theory, nucl. phys.
b181 (1981) 502 and supersymmetrical string theories, phys. lett. b109 (1982)

444.

[21] j. dai, r. leigh, and j. polchinski, new connections between string theories, mod.

phys. lett. a4 (1989) 2073.

[22] r. leigh, diracborninfeld action from dirichlet sigma model, mod. phys. lett.

a4 (1989) 2767.

[23] c. vafa, evidence for f theory, nucl. phys. b469 (1996) 403, hep-th/9602022.

36

[24] m. cederwall, a. von gussich, b.e.w. nilsson, and a. westerberg, the dirich-
let super-three-brane in ten-dimensional type iib supergravity, nucl. phys. b490

(1997) 163, hep-th/9610148; m. cederwall, a. von gussich, b.e.w. nilsson, p. sundell
and a. westerberg, the dirichlet super p-branes in ten-dimensional type iia and

iib supergravity, nucl. phys. b490 (1997) 179, hep-th/9611159.

[25] m. aganagic, c. popescu, and j.h. schwarz, d-brane actions with local kappa
symmetry, phys. lett. b393 (1997) 311, hep-th/9610249; gauge-invariant and gauge-

fixed d-brane actions, nucl. phys. b495 (1997) 99, hep-th/9612080.

[26] e. bergshoe and p.k. townsend, super d-branes, nucl. phys. b490 (1997) 145,

hep-th/9611173.

[27] e. witten, bound states of strings and p-branes, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 335,

hep-th/9510135.

[28] j.m. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field theories and supergrav-

ity, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200.

[29] for a review of t duality see a. giveon, m. porrati, and e. rabinovici, target space

duality in string theory, phys. rept. 244, 77 (1994), hep-th/9401139.

[30] a. sagnotti, open strings and their symmetry groups, p. 521 in proc. of the 1987

carg`ese summer institute, eds. g. mack et al. (permagon press, 1988).

[31] g. pradisi and a. sagnotti, open string orbifolds, phys. lett. b216 (1989) 59.

[32] p. horava, strings on world sheet orbifolds, nucl. phys. b327 (1989) 461.

[33] m.b. green and j.h. schwarz, anomaly cancellation in supersymmetric d=10 gauge

theory and superstring theory, phys. lett. b149 (1984) 117.

[34] j. polchinski and e. witten, evidence for heterotic-type i string duality, nucl.

phys. b460 (1996) 525, hep-th/9510169.

[35] o. bergman, m.r. gaberdiel, and g. lifschytz, string creation and heterotic type

i duality, nucl. phys. b524 (1998) 524, hep-th/9711098.

[36] c.p. bachas, m.b. green, and a. schwimmer, (8,0) quantum mechanics and symme-

try enhancement in type i superstrings, jhep 9801:006 (1998), hep-th/9712086.

[37] s. de alwis, tachyon condensation in rotated brane congurations, hep-th/9905080.

37

[38] c. kennedy and a. wilkins, ramond-ramond couplings on brane-antibrane sys-

tems, hep-th/9905195.

[39] e. witten, string theory dynamics in various dimensions, nucl. phys. b443 (1995)

85 , hep-th/9503124.

[40] e. witten, small instantons in string theory, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 541 , hep-

th/9511030.

[41] m.r. douglas, gauge fields and d-branes, j. geom. phys. 28 (1998) 255, hep-

th/9604198.

[42] o. bergman, e.g. gimon, and p. horava, brane transfer operations and t-duality

of non-bps states, jhep 9904:010 (1999), hep-th/9902160.

[43] p. horava, type iia d-branes, k-theory, and matrix theory, adv. theor. math.

phys. 2 (1999) 1373, hep-th/9812135.

[44] c.g. callan and j.m. maldacena, brane death and dynamics from the borninfeld

action, nucl. phys. b513 (1998) 198, hep-th/9708147.

[45] g. gibbons, borninfeld particles and dirichlet p-branes, nucl. phys. b514 (1998)

603, hep-th/9709027.

[46] l. romans, massive n=2a supergravity in ten dimensions, phys. lett. b169 (1986)

374.

[47] j.h. schwarz, some properties of type i string theory, hep-th/9907061.

[48] a. dabholkar and j. park, strings on orientifolds, nucl. phys. b477 (1996) 701,

hep-th/9604178.

[49] e. gimon and j. polchinski, consistency conditions for orientifolds and d-manifolds,

phys. rev. d54 (1996) 1667, hep-th/9601038.

[50] e. witten, toroidal compactication without vector structure, jhep 9802:006

(1988), hep-th/9712028.

[51] m. frau, l. gallot, a. lerda, and p. strigazzi, stable non-bps d-branes in type i

string theory, hep-th/9903123.

[52] j.h. schwarz, remarks on non-bps d-branes, hep-th/9908091.

[53] s. gukov, k-theory, reality, and orientifolds, hep-th/9901042.

38

