9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
6
1

 

 
 

1
v
8
0
1
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

geometry of the non-abelian 2-index potential

and twisted de rham cohomology

tsou sheung tsun

and

ioannis p. zois

mathematical institute,

2429 st. giles, oxford ox1 3lb, uk.

abstract

it is found that the 2-index potential in nonabelian theories does
not behave geometrically as a connection but that, considered as an
element of the second de rham cohomology group twisted by a at
connection, it ts well with all the properties assigned to it in various
physical contexts. we also prove some results on the euler charac-
teristic of the twisted de rham complex. finally, provided that some
conditions are satised, we propose a non-abelian generalisation of
s-duality.

pacs classication: 11.10.-z, 11.15.-q, 11.30.ly

tsou @ maths.ox.ac.uk
izois @ maths.ox.ac.uk

0

1 the 2-index potential

a skew rank 2 tensor eld arises in various contexts: string theory, super-
gravity, and the loop space formulation of yangmills theory. for notational
convenience, we shall consider such a eld b(x) interchangeably as a 2-form
over spacetime.

in the abelian case, the 2-index eld is well studied [1] and ts neatly into
the dirac scheme of elds and potentials for general spin [2]. the eld b(x)
is usually regarded as a potential transforming under a gauge transformation
(x) as

b(x) = (x)  (x),

(1)

exactly as say the electromagnetic potential but with one more index. one
can also readily dene the eld strength, as a 3-form eld

h = b + b + b.

(2)

the question immediately arises whether the b eld can be interpreted
as some sort of connection. this point was investigated by teitelboim et al
[3], and they found that one could regard such a 2-form as a parallel transport
of loops (e.g. closed strings), provided the transformation is abelian, as in
(1). but for nonabelian b we have to look elsewhere.

freedman and townsend [4] proposed a lagrangian for the nonabelian
b. cast in a rst-order formulation of the non-linear  model, these elds
appear as the dual of the lagrange multiplier giving the at connecton con-
straint, thus

l = tr aa + tr bf ,

(3)

where b =  1
2 b is the (hodge) dual of b, and tr denotes the
trace over the nonabelian indices. this action is invariant under the trans-
formation

b = d  d,

(4)

with d =   iga the covariant derivative with respect to a, but a
itself should not transform.

a similar lagrangian appears in a loop space formulation of yangmills

theory as a nonlinear  model [5, 6]:

l = tr aa + tr bf ,

(5)

1

where a is the logarithmic derivative of the holonomy of the gauge poten-
tial a, and f the covariant curl of a. this is in exact analogy with the
freedmantownsend lagrangian (3). although the loop variables a can
be thought of as a connection, under a yangmills gauge transformation
(which transforms the potential a in the usual way), they are invariant.
moreover, the invariance of l under such a gauge transformation demands
that the b eld transforms as

b = d  d,

(6)

where d =   iga is the loop covariant derivative corresponding to a.
this is exactly the freedmantownsend transformation (4). at the same
time, this further conrms the result of [3] that nonabelian b does not
behave like a connection, not even in loop space.

in this paper we shall present a geometric framework in which the b(x)
eld is not regarded as a gauge potential but as a cohomological freedom
intimately related to the existence of a at connection a. we go on to
explore further mathematical consequences of this construction which may
have useful physical applications.

2 flat connections and the twisted de rham

complex

for ease of presentation, in this section we shall use almost exclusively the
index-free notation of dierential forms.

by a at connection we mean one with zero curvature. this means that we
shall include the more general case where the base space x (e.g. spacetime)
need not be simply connected, in which case a at connection may have non-
trivial holonomy. in fact, it is well known that gauge equivalent classes of at
connections are in 11 correspondence with conjugacy classes of irreducible
representations of 1(x) into the gauge group g [7].

if we denote the exterior covariant derivative and curvature of the con-

nection a by da and fa respectively, then on any form  we have

d2
a = da(da)

= da(d + a  )

2

= d(d + a  ) + a  (d + a  )
= (da + a  a)  
= fa  .

(7)

hence if a is at, d2
a = 0. this means that the exterior covariant derivative
can actually be used as the dierential in a dierential complex, in direct
contrast to the general yangmills case.

recall that associated to the principal g bundle over x, with at con-
nection a, we have a at vector bundle e (with bre the lie algebra of g).
we can consider the space p(x, e) of p-forms with values in e, which is by
denition the space of global sections of the vector bundle (pt x)  e, the
tensor product of the p-th exterior power of the cotangent bundle t x and
the vector bundle e. locally over an open set u  x such a p-form is given
by

 = x i  ei,

(8)

where i are p-forms on u and ei are sections of e over u, and the tensor
product is over the algebra of c  functions on u. in our case of a at vector
bundle e, we can extend the usual de rham complex (x, d) over x to
a complex (x, e, da) using the at connection a. the atness guaran-
tees the existence of locally constant sections e1
u (n=rank of e) with
daei
u = 0. we can then dene the exterior derivative da of the form  by

u , . . . , dn

da(x e  ei

u ) = x(di)  ei

u

(9)

over the open set u. since the sections ei
u are locally constant, it can read-
ily be seen that da agrees on overlaps and hence is globally dened [8].
moreover, d2
a = 0. it therefore makes sense to dene the cohomology groups
h 
a(x, e) as da-closed forms modulo da-exact forms in the usual way. it is
easy to see that if e is a trivial bundle of rank n with the trivial at connec-
tion, then h 
trivial(x, e) is just n copies of the usual de rham groups h (x)
(see [8] p.83 proposition 7.4).

it is generally recognized that cohomology group elements correspond to
physically interesting quantities [9]. if we now think of the b eld not as a
2-from but as a representative of an element of h 2, then its transformation
is nothing but the cohomological freedom of an exact 2-form:

b = da

3

(10)

with  a 1-form, in other words, the transformation (4). it is therefore not a
gauge freedom of the usual yangmills type. moreover, (10) reduces to (1)
in the abelian case, which need not therefore be interpreted as a gauge (in
the electromagnetism sense) transformation. in addition, the 3-form dab is
as that discussed [10] for the curvature of b.

as emphasized in [8] (see p.80 example 7.1) and obvious from the def-
inition (9), the cohomological groups depend in general on the particular
trivialization chosen for e. this means that, if we think of a as a connec-
tion in a principal bundle (as in the gauge case), then gauge equivalent as
may give rise to dierent bs. this makes perfect sense for the theory in
hand, because the term tr a2 in (3) makes it immediately obvious that the
lagrangian l is not gauge invariant. this is why whereas b transforms as
in (4), a must remain invariant.

the same observations apply to the loop space formulation of yangmills
theory. since the phase factor is yangmills gauge invariant, the loop space
connection a is also gauge invariant. so is of course the lagrangian in (5).
on the other hand, there is no freedom in transforming the loop connection
a, because that would mean changing the phase factor which is a physically
measurable quantity.

the twisted de rham cohomology groups h 

a(x, e) are topological in-
variants which are dened whenever there is a at connection on a vector
bundle e. now a at connection appears in many contexts which may be
physically interesting, notably in integrable systems. this is not surpris-
ing: a at connection ensures integrability of lifts. the following results are
easy consequences of the denitions and may prove useful in studying the
invariances of such systems.

in analogy with the usual euler characteristic of a manifold, we make the

following denition1.

denition the euler characteristic of the twisted de rham complex

1applying noncommutative geometry methods to the at foliation induced by the at
connection a, one can study the -invariant (related to global anomalies) which is more
sensitive than the euler characteristic dened here but less sensitive than the de rham
cohomology groups: it depends on the gauge equivalence class of a. this will be reported
elsewhere [12].

4

(x, e, da) is dened to be

(x, e) = x
i

(1)i dim(h i

a(x, e)).

(11)

the notation makes sense because of the following result.

proposition let e be the adjoint vector bundle adp , associated to the prin-
cipal bundle p over a manifold x with structure group g assumed compact
and connected, equipped with a at connection a. with respect to the induced
connection e is a at vector bundle. then the euler characteristic (x, e) is
independent of the at connection used in calculating the cohomology groups
h i

a(x, e).

proof we shall prove this by calculating the euler characteristic (x, e)
using the symbol of an elliptic operator associated to the dierential da.

for simplicity we shall use the same symbol da for all the dierentials in

the complex:

(da)p: (pt x)  e  (p+1t x)  e.

(12)

we can assemble the bundle (for details see [11]) by dening the single
operator

dda: even  odd,

(13)

where

dened by

that is,

even = (m
p
odd = (m
p

(2pt x)  e),

(2p+1t x)  e),

dda = da  d
a,

dda(0, 2, . . .) = (da0 + d

a2, da2 + d

a4, . . .),

(14)

(15)

where d
on x.

a is the formal adjoint of da with respect to some riemannian metric

recall the symbol (d) of a dierential operator from sections of a vector

bundle e to sections of a vector bundle f

d: (e)  (f )

(16)

5

is a vector bundle homomorphism

(d):  (e)   (f ),

(17)

where, for sx the unit sphere bundle in the tangent bundle,  is the canonical
projection sx  x. in local coordinates, since d is rst order in this case,
(d) is obtained by replacing / with i, where  is the th coordinate
in the cotangent bundle t x. furthermore, d is elliptic if its symbol is
invertible. this can be extended to a dierential complex e which is elliptic if
the corresponding sequence of symbols (e) is exact outside the zero section
of t x.

for the at bundle e, if we denote by p the laplacian on p(x, e),

thus

then (since d2

a = d
a

p = (da)p1(d
2 = 0)

a)p1 + (d

a)p(da)p,

(18)

dad

a = m 2p

d

ada = m 2p+1.

the exactness of the symbol complex ((x, e)) o the zero section then
implies that (p) is an isomorphism (o the zero section). therefore, p
and hence da are elliptic. then it follows from the usual hodge theory that

kerda = m h2i

cokerda = m h2i+1

where hi are the harmonic sections of the bundle l(pt x)  e, namely
elements of ker i. this means we have found an elliptic operator da whose
index gives the required euler characteristic:

ind(da) = (x, e).

(19)

by the atiyahsinger index formula [11], we know that this depends only on
the symbol of da and not on da itself.

it is obvious from the above that the symbol of da is independent of the
at connection a used, since the term of highest degree is /. the symbol
of da is given by i  i  (where   is contraction with ), also independent

6

of a. the index of da then gives the euler characteristic as above, which is
therefore independent of the at connection a used.


corollary 1 in fact (x, e) = (dimg)  (x).
proof obvious.

corollary 2 when x = r4, (x, e) =dim g.
proof follows directly from corollary 1.





corollary 3 the freedman-townsend invariance actually corresponds to the
stability equivalence relation in the denition of the topological k-groups.
proof from the preceeding proposition it is clear that since the princi-
pal symbol remains the same, we do not actually change our k-class. the
freedman-townsend invariance is obviously not a change of the trivialisation
of the bundle. hence it must correspond to the second equivallence relation
used in dening the k-groups, namely grothendiecks stability relation. 

3 remarks

first we want to remark on a possible non-abelian generalisation of s-duality.
it is clear that s-duality which is currently such an active eld of research
in theoretical physics, is actually a hodge star duality between the eld
strengths of dierent gauge potentials. for example, the membrane/5-brane
s-duality in m-theory (see for example [17]) appears as follows: in general a
p-brane moving in time sweps out a (p+1)-dim manifold, the worldvolume.
this is described by a (p+1)-form denoted bp+1 which is just the poincare
dual of the worldvolume. this (p+1)-form is seen as a gauge potential which
gives rise to a eld which is now a (p+2)-form denoted fp+2, which is dened
to be

fp+2 := dbp+1

then using the above notation one has for the membrane/5-brane duality
in m-theory that (recall that m-theory has an 11-manifold as underlying
space):

f7 = f4

now remember that the freedman-townsend theory is exactly the above
story for scalar elds (namely 0-forms) but now d is replaced by da, where

7

a is a at connexion 1-form. so essentially the point is that one can get a
non-abelian generalisation of s-duality, to begin with, provided that one can
have an analogue of the hodge theory for the da-cohomology.

assuming that our bundle also has a metric, a hodge theory for the da-
cohomology can be achieved if and only if the holonomy of the at connection
lies in the orthogonal group. so that can happen only for some at connec-
tion 1-forms.

now the second question is how can one get a 1-form to begin with and
then constrain it via some equations of motion to become at (just like in
freedman-townsend case). in freedman-townsend case they were interested
only in scalar elds and for the base space being actually rn, for some n,
so they actually constructed the at connection from the scalar eld. the
existence follows from the assumption that the coupling constant is small.
but this is a very special case, what we actually need is a similar construction
for a curved n-manifold and for arbitrary p-forms as gauge potentials.

we do not actually have something more specic on this, only two pre-
liminary observations which are promising: the rst is that a at connection
1-form actually exists in the loop space formulation of the chan-tsou du-
alised standard model (see [16] and [18]), so our idea to get a non-abelian
generalisation of s-duality may be applied in that context.

as about m-theory, there is actually a rather mysterious 1-form ap-
pearing in a purely topological lagrangian for 5-branes in m-theory using
gelfand-fuchs cohomology [19]. yet this has to be constrained somehow in
order to become at. this is all we can say for the moment. the interesting
point here we believe is that in principle one can have an analogue of hodge
theory for the da-cohomology and that is really interesting.

in the case when b is abelian, it can be shown easily [4] that the theory
is equivalent to a massless scalar eld. this is an example of the general
duality between scalar elds and (d  2)-form elds, where d is the dimen-
sion of spacetime [14]. here d = 4. this duality also interchanges bianchi
identities (topology) and equations of motion (dynamics), reminiscent of the
wuyang treatment of electric and magnetic charges [15, 6]. similar con-
siderations apply in the nonabelian case, giving the equivalence between the
rst-order and second-order formulations of the non-linear  model [4]. here

8

the scalar eld is obtained from the atness condition of a, which is locally
of the form g1g, with g an element of the group g.

one may ask where the extra degrees of freedom of a spin 2 eld have
gone to, if it is equivalent to a scalar eld. this is exactly accounted for by
its cohomological freedom (10). suppressing the lie algebra indices, the 6
degrees of freedom of a skew rank 2 tensor are taken up by the 4 degrees of
the vector , plus its cohomological freedom of an additive scalar, leaving
just the one degree of freedom of a scalar eld.

in the case of yangmills theory in loop space, this extra freedom gives
rise to a dual gauge symmetry which is magnetic in nature if the original
symmetry is considered to be electric. this leads to a fascinating electric
magnetic dual symmetry for yangmills theory which is somewhat unex-
pected [16].

in conclusion, the interpretation of the 2-index eld as a twisted de rham
cohomology group element, together with its inherent cohomological freedom,
gives a geometric explanation of many of its properties. this is particularly
interesting for the nonabelian case and may serve as a guide for studying
its possible interactions. furthermore, this geometric interpretation gives a
satisfying picture for the loop space formulation of yangmills theory, with
particular regard to its symmetry properties.

the second author wishes to thank london mathematical society for

nancial support.

references

[1] k. hayashi, phys. lett. 44b (1973) 497; m. kalb and p. ramond, phys.
rev. d9 (1974) 2273; e. cremmer andj. scherk, nucl. phys. b72 (1974)
117; y. nambu, phys. rept. 23 (1976) 250; j. thierry-mieg, nucl. phys.
b335 (1990) 334; m. blau and g. thompson, ann. phys. 205 (1991) 137;
p.j. arias et al., int. j. mod. phys. a4 (1992) 737.

[2] p.a.m. dirac, proc. roy. soc. london a155 (1936) 447.

[3] c. teitelboim, phys. lett. b167 (1986) 63; m. henneaux and c. teitel-

boim, found. phys. 16 (1986) 593.

9

[4] d.z. freedman and p.k. townsend, nucl. phys. b177 (1981) 282.

[5] a.m. polyakov, nucl. phys. b164 (1979) 171.

[6] chan hong-mo, p. scharbach and tsou sheung tsun, ann. phys. (n.y.)

167 (1986) 454.

[7] s.k. donaldson and p.b. kronheimer, the geometry of four manifolds

(oxford university press, oxford, 1990).

[8] see e.g. r. bott and l.w. tu, dierential forms in algebraic topology

(springer-verlag, new york, 1982).

[9] e. witten, j. di. geom. 17 (1982) 661.

[10] j. thierry-mieg and l. baulieu, nucl. phys. b228 (1983) 259.

[11] m.f. atiyah and i.m. singer, ann. math. 87 (1968) 485.

[12] ioannis p. zois, d.phil. thesis, oxford university 1996; tsou sheung

tsun and ioannis p. zois, in preparation.

[13] p. baum and r. douglas, proc. symp. pure maths. 38 (ams publica-

tions, rhode island, 1982).

[14] e.s. fradkin and a.a. tseytlin, ann. phys. 162 (1985) 31; n.j. hitchin
et al, comm. math. phys. 108 (1987) 535; e. alvarez, l. alvarez-gaume
and y. lozano, nucl. phys. b424 (1994) 155.

[15] tai tsun wu and chen ning yang, phys. rev. d14 (1976) 437.

[16] chan hong-mo, j. faridani and tsou sheung tsun, phys. rev. d53

(1996) 7293.

[17] m. j. du et all: string solitons, phys. rep. 259 (1995) 213

m. j. du: supermembranes, hep-th 9611203

[18] i. p. zois: on polyakovs basic variational formulae on loop spaces,

rep. on math. physics 42. 3, (1998) 373.

10

[19] i.p. zois: gelfand fuchs cohomology and m-theory as a tqft, hep-

th 9906045.

11

