9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
1

 

 
 

2
v
1
2
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

new concepts in particle physics from solution

of an old problem

bert schroer

institut fur theoretische physik

fu-berlin, arnimallee 14, 14195 berlin, germany

presently: cbpf, rua dr. xavier sigaud, 22290-180 rio de janeiro, brazil

schroer@cbpfsu1.cat.cbpf.br

july 1999

abstract

this is a survey on recent progress in the understanding of some pro-
found issues concerning the relation between on- and o-shell concepts in
local quantum physics.

the approach uses modular localization and is wide enough to cover
such disparate looking issues as d=1+1 factorizing theories, holographic
reductions of qft, scanning of higher dimensional qft by families of
chiral conformal theories and area laws of suitably dened localization
entropy of quantum matter.

as the old string theory, the present framework has the unraveling of
crossing symmetry and the issue of on/o mass shell behavior as its start-
ing motivation. but dierent from the former, the thermal (bekenstein,
hawking, unruh) aspects of matter behind causal horizons are shown to
be a direct consequence of a profound understanding of crossing proper-
ties without any intervening string models and independent of whether
the horizons are of classical (killing symmetry of the cst metric) or pure
quantum (boundaries of causally closed regions) origin.

the new framework is within an algebraic setting of local quantum
physics which de-emphasizes eld-coordinatizations in favor of nets of al-
gebras. the constructive use of modular theory strengthens this eld-
coordinate-free viewpoint and allows to give a very precise formulation of
light ray and light front reductions of qft. the related holographic ideas
become valuable tools of ordinary particle physics aspects of qft. they
are deeply related to a new mathematical theory of modular inclusions
and modular intersections which in fact was discovered in.conjunction
with such physical problems.

despite some analogies in the results, the present enrichment of non-
perturbative qft and recent concepts in string theory deviate in a sig-
nicant and interesting way. in particular it amplies those doubts about
a possible message about quantum gravity which were already raised by
rehrens proof of the maldacena-witten conjecture.

1

1 introduction

theoretical physicists, contrary to mathematicians, rarely return to their old
unsolved problems; they rather prefer to replace them by new inventions. the
content of the present article on some new concepts in particle physics is an
exception. the old problem it addresses and partially solves are those of the
relation between o-shell and on-shell quantities and in particular of crossing
symmetry in local quantum physics1. these structures also led to the invention
of the dual model and string theory.

the most prominent of on-shell quantities is the s-matrix of a local qft,
whereas elds and more general operators describing localized situations (in
the algebraic setting belonging to local subalgebras) are o-shell.
in this
paper we will have to consider a new kind of operators which, as a result of
their weak semiinnite (wedge-like) localization and their close relation to the
s-matrix, are to be considered as on-shell. this on-shell operators are essential
for our new approach which avoids pointlike elds at the beginning and starts
with generators of wedge-localized algebra. the o-shell compactly localized
operators are then obtained via intersections of wedge algebras. besides these
two extremes there are intermediate possibilities where on-shell and o-shell
aspects appear together. the most prominent and useful mixed objects are
bilinear forms on scattering vector states i.e. matrix elements of local operators
a (pointlike elds or bounded operators localized in smaller than wedge regions,
i.e. dierent from new operators) sandwiched between incoming and outgoing
multiparticle scattering states (in terms of feynman graphs one leg is o-shell)

out hq1, ...qn1, qn |a| pn, pn1, ...p1iin

(1)

which we will call (generalized) formfactors. these objects full the important
crossing symmetry which acts on the on-shell momenta.

the s-matrix whose matrix elements result from the previous formula for
a = 1, is the observable of particle physics par excellence, although strictly
speaking only (inclusive) cross sections are directly measured, a fact which is
especially important if interactions between zero mass particles leads to infrared
problems. however most of our physical intuition about causality and charge
ows in spacetime is based on (o-shell) local elds or local observables, the
new on-shell elds are somewhat more hidden.

the old problems on which there has been signicant recent progress can be

compressed in terms of the following questions

 does a physically admissable s-matrix fullling unitarity, crossing sym-
metry and certain analytic properties needed in its formulation, have an

1we will often use the name local quantum physics (lqp) instead of qft [1], if we
have in mind the physical principles of qft implemented by dierent concepts than those of
the various quantization formalisms (canonical, quantization via path integrals etc.) which
most of the readers are familiar with from the various textbooks. to the extend that the
reader does not automatically identify qft with those formalisms, he may without danger of
misunderstandings continue to use the good old name qft.

2

underlying (unique) local qft? this one may call the inverse problem of
qft associated with scattering.

 is there a constructive procedure in which, similar to the d=1+1 bootstrap-
formfactor program for factorizing models, the generalized formfactors
(which contain the s-matrix as a special case) enter as important con-
structive elements? in particular can one formulate such a constructive
approach in a conceptually intrinsic manner i.e. without any quantization
parallelism to classical eld theory and without the use of eld coordina-
tizations and ultraviolet divergencies?

remark 1 the most profound on-shell property which was discovered in the
60ies is crossing symmetry. it is deeper than tcp-symmetry which is in turn
the deepest among all presently known bona de pure quantum non-noetherian
symmetries. in fact it is a kind of individual tcp-transformation which eects
only one particle in the multiparticle incoming ket conguration and carries it
to the outgoing bra conguration as an antiparticle. in spite of its name it is
not a quantum theoretical (wigner) symmetry, since that process involves an
on-shell analytic continuation. for a formfactor we have
out hq1, ...qn1, qn |a| pn, pn1, ...p1iin

(2)

= out hp1,q1, ...qn1, qn |a| pn, pn1, ...p2iin

where the analytic continuation is carried out in the rapidity parametrization
by an i-shift:    + i, and the bar denotes the antiparticle. the di-
culties in physical interpretation and conceptual placement of this relation (of
which outside of perturbation theory rigorous information of sucient gener-
ality are scarce) reects the lack of its understanding. although its meaning
remains vague, most physicist agree that it should be viewed as a kind of on-
shell shadow of einstein causality. one of the results of the new conceptual
framework presented here is a an interpretation of the crossing property in terms
of wedge localization and the ensuing thermal properties.

after having given a glimpse of our physical motivation, we now sketch
our main mathematical tool for physical problems of (quantum) localization:
(tomitas) modular theory of von neumann algebras. these, tools which for
the rst time claried the on-o-shell relation and in particular the position of
on-shell crossing symmetry with o-shell einstein causality [2], were not avail-
able at the time of the invention of the dual model by veneziano. the original
motivation for the dual model proposal was to shed some light on the role of
crossing symmetry outside of perturbation theory. the hope was that this model
may have typical properties of strongly interacting s-matrices. although the
model did not increase the conceptual understanding of crossing symmetry it
was widely used in particle phenomenology. chews pure s-matrix approach
based on unitarity and crossing symmetry, which tried to cleanse all o-shell

3

notions from particle physics, slowly became the rst failed attempt2 at a the-
ory of everything (except gravity) in the setting of quantum theory. the dual
model was on its ascend and soon developed into (the old) string theory as a kind
of o-shell extension of the s-matrix. an important formal enrichment on this
way was virasoros observation that the higher-dimensional on-shell dual for-
malism could be streamlined by the use of an auxiliary o-shell two-dimensional
conformal eld formalism. it was this formalism which facilitated the interpre-
tation of the spectral properties of the dual model in terms of a string. this
conversion of the dual model into string theory marked return to a theoretical
issue. but by that time the original motivation to understand crossing sym-
metry was forgotten and string theory became a theoretical persuit in its own
right.

as all speculations about possibly dierent paths which history may have
taken (instead of string theory), the question of what would have happened if
the on/o shell issue would have been solved at the time of the dual model is
interesting and futile at the same time. in the last section we will make same
attempts of comparing the present approach to string theory.

the present line of research directly addresses the mentioned old unsolved
problems with new physical concepts and mathematical tools. the main new
tool is described in the following [3].

denition 2 a von neumann algebra a (weakly closed operator sub-algebra
of the full algebra b(h) on a hilbert space h) is in standard position with
respect to a vector   h, denoted as (a, ), if  is a cyclic and separating
vector for a. in this situation tomita denes the following involutive antilinear
but unbounded operator (the tomita involution s)

sa := a

(3)

its closability property (as physicists we use the same notation for the closure)
is the prerequisite for the polar decomposition

s = j

1
2

(4)

where the angular part j (the modular involution) is antiunitary with j 2 = 1
and  is unbounded positive and therefore leads to a unitary group it.

theorem 3 (tomita around 1965, with signicant simplications from take-
saki): the modular involution maps a on its von neumann commutant a in
h (analogy to tcp acting on the observable algebra localized in a wedge):

adj  a = a

(5)

2in retrospect it appears certainly the most successful among all failed theories in this
century. many useful concepts as e.g. weinbergs ideas on eective interactions resulted from
reading on-shell s-matrix properties back into o-shell qft. it left an impressive imprint on
particle physics.

4

the unitary it denes a modular automorphism group by

adit  a = a
(analogy to a dynamical law for the algebra).

(6)

the fear of an unprepared physicist in front of such a powerful and non-
trivial mathematical theorem is somewhat mitigated by the remark that three
physicist (haag, hugenholtz and winnink) were led to a closely related inde-
pendent discovery in their pursuit of conceptual problems in quantum statistical
mechanics which arise if one works directly in the thermodynamic limit [1]. as
everybody knows, the gibbs representation formula

hav i(v )



=

trehv av

trehv

av  algebra of box  qantization

(7)

ceases to make sense3 for innite volume although the weak convergence i.e. the
convergence in the sense of states on algebras (instead of state vectors in hilbert
space) is secured under very mild assumptions [1]. the three named authors
found out that the intrinsic gns-construction, i.e. the canonical construction
of a cyclic representation (a) in a hilbert space h, and a reference vector
  h with

hai = (, (a) )

(8)

elevates the so-called kms-condition4 to a very fundamental attribute of a ther-
mal state on an algebra a. this kms property then merged with tomitas mod-
ular theory and in this form entered connes characterization of certain invariant
properties of foleii of states on a c-algebra. in the 70ies haag and collaborators
were able to derive the kms condition directly from stability properties under
local deformations and pusz and woronowicz found a direct route to the second
law of thermodynamics [1]. a nice derivation of the kms thermal property and
an explanation of its stability in the context of the still ongoing ads-conformal
qft discussion has been presented in [4].

the relation with the locality (or einstein causality) concept of qft was
made around 1975 in a series of papers by bisognano and wichmann [1]. spe-
cializing to wedge algebras generated by wightman elds aw (w ) (the subscript
w stands for wightman), they proved the following theorem

theorem 4 the tomita modular theory for the wedge algebra and the vacuum
state vector (aw (w ), ) yields the following physical identications

it = u (w (2t))
j = t cp  u (rx())

(9)

3in a box the bounded below hamiltonian aquires a discrete spectrum and eh is of trace

class ( = e

1

2 h is h.s.), a property which is lost in the innite volume limit.

4this analytic property was used by kubo, martin and schwinger as a trick which substi-

tutes the calculation of gibbs traces with some easier analytic boundary problem.

5

here w denotes the boost which leaves the wedge invariant. if we choose
the standard t-x wedge then the rotation which aligns the tcp with tomitas
j is a rotation around the x-axis by an angle .

now i come to my own contributions which are of a more recent vintage
[8]. they result from the desire to invert the bisognano-wichmann theorem
i.e. to use tomitas modular theory for the actual construction (and classica-
tion) of wedge algebras belonging to interacting theories with the aim to use
a net of wedge algebras in order to obtain a net of compactly localized (e.g.
double cone) algebras. the latter are known to contain all physical properties
of local quantum physics and, if desired, can also be coordinatized by pointlike
elds. in order to achieve this one uses the helping hand of the powerful lsz or
haag-ruelle scattering theory which follows from the net structure. here one
makes the same assumption as in the old-fashioned kramers-kronig dispersion
approach to particle physics, namely the existence of a mass gap. with this one
immediately realizes that, whereas the connected part of the poincare group
is the same as that of the free incoming theory, the disconnected part and the
modular involution j carry the full interaction

it
w = it
jw = sscjw,in

w,in =: eikt

(10)

since we do not want to temper with historically grown notations, we have
added a subscript to the s-matrix ssc in order to distinguish it from tomitas
s. the modular hamiltonian k dened in the rst equation has always sym-
metric instead of one-sided spectrum. the last relation is nothing but the
tcp-transformation law of the s-matrix rewritten in terms of modular objects
associated with the wedge algebra. the above role of the s-matrix as a kind of
relative modular invariant of the wedge algebra (relative to the free one) is to-
tally characteristic for local quantum physics; it has no counterpart in qm. it is
this semilocal new aspect of the invariant s-matrix (together with the global
scattering aspect which it has in every particle theory) which as we will see
below, opens the gate for a new realm of particle physics far away from the var-
ious quantization approaches and the qft-formalisms of the text books, such
as interaction picture, time-ordered functions, euclidean functional integrals etc.
but to achieve this, one needs one more concept which has no counterpart in the
old quantum eld theory, i.e. with is totally hidden from quantization. this
is the existence of polarization-f ree generators (pfgs) of the wedge algebra.
it is deeply related to the vacuum structure of qft, which was rst observed in
the old days by heisenberg, euler and weisskopf. their observations transposed
into a modern lqp context suggest that any compactly localized operator ap-
plied to the vacuum generates clouds of pairs of particle/antiparticles, unless
the system is free i.e. without interactions (in which case a one-particle vector is
obtained by applying the free eld). more specically it leads to the impossibil-
ity of having a local generation of pure one-particle vectors unless the system is
interaction-free. in this respect the situation can be viewed as a generalization
of the jost-schroer theorem for pointlike elds (see streater-wightman [5]). in

6

fact, as i learned from detlev buchholz, the smallest region for which the proof
of this no go theorem against interactions breaks down is the wedge region. the
following notion uses this lack of no-go theorem for strict one particle creation
and lls it with a rich physical content [8].

denition 5 let t(w) be the space of schwartz test functions with support
in the wedge w. we call a set of operators f labelled by f  t (w ) which
create one particle state vectors (in an interacting theory) without polarization
contributions:

f ( f ) = 1  particle vector

(11)

polarization free (wedge) generators or pfgs.

it is easy to see that the wedge localization and the standardness of (a(w ), )

allows the formal way of writing

f ( f ) = z f (x)f (x)dd+1x
f (x) = z (cid:0)z(p)eipx + z (p)eipx(cid:1)

z(p) = 0 = z(p)

ddp
2

(12)

(13)

with z(p) being on-shell operators with a more complicated structure than mo-
mentum space free particle structure. the eld theoretic notation f (x) should
be handled with great care; unlike for pointlike elds, the x is not the position
of a spacetime localization but only a label on which poincare transformations
act in such a way that the generating family for w is taken into one for the
poincare transformed wedge. it is the constructive use of such nonlocal objects
which is responsible for the disappearance of the ultraviolet divergency problem
(and together with it the short-distance aspects of the renormalization problem).
this is a vast generalization of the observation that these problems are absent
in the d=1+1 bootstrap-formfactor program for factorizing models.

since according to the previous remarks pfgs do not exist (nontrivially)
for smaller localization regions o  w, and since they are physically uninter-
esting for regions larger than w, we omit the w from the pfg terminology.
pfgs generalize the free eld structure in the presence of interactions into
a controllable nonlocal direction which remains at the service of local theo-
ries, i.e.
they are auxiliary quantities in the hilbert space of the would be
local theory which coexist together with the more local operators obtained by
quantum localization via intersections of wedge algebras. with other words,
although they are nonlocal (semilocal in the sense of wedge localization) and in
some sense contain a cut-o aspect, these properties are not introduces ad hoc
but of deep physical origin and as a consequence no limiting process for cuto
removal is required. their existence is crucial for the linkage of the particle
physics crossing symmetry with the thermal and entropical aspects of modular

7

localization qft. although they were rst noticed in form of the bekenstein-
hawking-unruh properties of killing horizons in black hole physics, they are
not belonging exclusively to black hole physics but are part of particle physics
with or without curved spacetime. in other words these well-known classical
thermal properties in cst have a quantum counterpart in which bifurcated
killing horizons are substituted by surfaces of causally completed minkowski
space localization regions e.g. the light cone surface of a double cone. in fact
the geometric killing symmetry in the quantum setting passes to the (geometri-
cally) hidden quantum symmetry dened by the modular group corresponding
to the concrete situation. in unruhs case of a wedge region or in the analo-
gous case of conformal matter enclosed in a double cone, the hidden quantum
symmetry passes to the one described by a killing vector associated with the
lorentz- or conformal- group.

we have organized this survey as follows. the next section reviews and
illustrates the eld-coordinate-free approach for interaction-free theories and in
d=1+1 factorizing model. in the latter case the zamolodchikov-faddeev algebra
emerges in a natural way (without having been put in) and the z-f operators
for the rst time acquire a spacetime interpretation in connection with the new
pfg generators of wedge algebras. the presentation of polarization-free wedge
generators is extended to systems which are not factorizing i.e. theories with
on-shell (real in addition to virtual) particle creation in section 3.

after a brief introduction of the aqft framework in section 4, the fth
section introduces the light ray/front restriction and holography in terms of
associated chiral conformal eld theories. there we also discuss the problem
of undoing such maps (the blow up property) in terms of scanning a higher
dimensional qft by a fan-like family of chiral conformal theories. the mathe-
matical technology used in this section is one of the most powerful which aqft
presently is able to oer (the theory of modular inclusions and intersections).

in the sixth section we take up the problem of associating entropy for local-
ized matter. the previous association of chiral conformal theories to realistic
higher dimensional models oers the identication the relevant degrees of free-
dom (e.g. those which contribute to the entropy) with those of the associated
much simpler chiral theories. in the same section we also review rehrens pre-
sentation [6] of the ads-conformal eld theory isomorphism which is a more
special and simpler kind of holography (no modular inclusions and intersec-
tions are needed) which happens through a conformal theory attached at the
boundary at innity rather than at the light cone. in contradistinction to the
previous holography connected to a horizon (light ray/front holography), the
maldacena-witten holography is an isomorphism of two theories and not a re-
duction. although this makes it less useful for a constructive approach in (cst)
qft, this isomorphism, as pointed out by rehren, serves as an illustration par
excellence for the necessity and the power of the eld coordinate-free concept
of aqft.

the last section nally tries to confront our approach with string theory
and explain (without much success) why the latter has led to similar structures.
actually the dierences, especially those on the issue of the still elusive quantum

8

gravity, are more interesting than the similarities. the enigmatic power of these
dierences may in the long run turn out to determine the future path of particle
physics.

this presentation is a survey of published as well as of new results. i plan to
defer most proofs and a more detailed mathematical background to a separate
publication.

2 systems without interactions and factorizing

models

in trying to bring readers with a good knowledge of standard qft in contact
with some new (and old) concepts in algebraic qft (aqft) without sending
him back with a load of homework, i face a dicult problem. let us for the time-
being put aside the intrinsic logic, which would ask for a systematic presentation
of the general framework, and let us instead try to maneuver in a more less ad
hoc way.

in a pedestrian approach the problem of constructing nets of interaction free
systems from wigners one particle theory may serve as a nice pedagogical ex-
ercise. since wigners representation theory (we only need irreducible positive
energy representations) was the rst totally intrinsic quantum theory without
any quantization parallelism to classical particle theory, it is reasonable to ex-
pect in general that, if we nd the right concepts, we should be able to avoid
covariant pointlike elds altogether and rather delegate them to in certain cases
convenient coordinatizations of local observables similar to the intrinsic formu-
lation of dierential geometry which of course does not restrict the usefulness
of specically adjusted coordinates. this is indeed possible [8][9]. by using a
spatial variant of tomitas theory (i.e. by dening a kind of tomita s on the
wigner representation space without a von neumann algebra), one obtains a
real closed subspace hr(w ) of the wigner space h of multi-component mo-
mentum space wave functions as a say +1 eigenspace of an operator s in h
where s is dened to be the i continued boost (obtained by the functional cal-
culus associated with the spectral theory) multiplied by the one-particle version
of the j-reection (for which one only needs to extend the wigner representa-
tion to include the disconnected poincare transformations) which again yields
an unbounded antilinear involution [8]. the substitute for the von neumann
commutant in this spatial case is the symplectic (or real orthogonal complement
of hr(w ) in h. it turns out that this situation is standard in a spatial sense

hr(w ) + ihr(w ) is dense in h
hr(w )  ihr(w ) = {0}

(14)

as in the algebraic case, the modular formalism characterizes the localization
of subspaces, but is not able to distinguish individual elements in that subspace
(particular covariant x-space wave functions or testing functions with particular
support properties inside an x-space wedge). there is a good physical reason

9

for that because as soon as one tries to do that, one is forced to leave the unique
wigner (m,s) representation framework and pick a particular representation by
selecting one specic intertwiner among the innite set of u and v intertwin-
ers which link the unique wigner (m,s) representation to the countably innite
many covariant possibilities. with other words, one is in the framework ex-
plained and presented in the rst volume of weinbergs book [7]. any selection
of a specic covariant description, vis. by invoking euler-lagrange equations
and the existence of a lagrangian, may be convenient for doing computations
or as a mnemotechnical device for classifying polynomial interaction densities,
but is not demanded as an intrinsic attribute of physics. in the above spatial
modular manner, the uniqueness of the (m,s) wigner theory can be transported
directly to the qft and results in uniqueness of the local net. if we would have
taken the conventional route via interwiners and local elds, then we would have
been forced to use borchers construction of equivalence classes in order to see
that the dierent free elds associated with the (m,s) representation with the
same momentum space creation and annihilation operators in fock space are
just dierent generators of the same coherent families of local algebras i.e. yield
the same net. this would be analogous to working with particular coordinates
in dierential geometry and then proving at the end that the objects of interests
are invariant and therefore independent of coordinates.

on the mathematical side we meet for the rst time the modular machine
which is capable to encode informations about spacetime geometry into the
more technical looking domain properties of operators. this is achieved by
those strange antilinear tomita involutions s which are unbounded and which
create via their domain properties a host of antiunutary mirror transformations
and modular automorphisms with (sometimes only partial) manifest geometric
meaning.

it is amusing that this spatial modular formalism in wigner space also pre-
empts the particle statistics by producing a mismatch in the case of half-integer
spin between the real symplectic (orthogonal) complement and the result of a
geometric -rotation of the wedge into its opposite. the functorial way of asso-
ciating modular localized subalgebras with real subspaces of wigner space only
uses (exponentiated weyl-like in case of integer spin) momentum space creation
and annihilation operators related to the fockspace extension by forming ten-
sor products of wigner spaces; nowhere one is forced to use individual pointlike
elds.

of course we cannot use these nets in order to compute those interaction
densities to be used in a stuckelberg-bogoliubov causal perturbation theory;
this standard perturbative approach only works with pointlike elds. proofs
that the same physics could have been obtained in terms of dierent free eld
coordinatizations (rewriting the interaction polynomials) tend to be quite in-
volved.

the implementation of interactions in the framework of nets requires a rad-
ical rethinking of the formalism, even if we are only interested in perturbative
aspects of the nets. in order to get a clue, let us rst ask a less general question.
there is a class of theories in d=1+1 which are factorizing in the sense of the

10

multiparticle s-matrix which commutes with the incoming number operator nin

[ssc, nin] = 0

(15)

let us be very unsophisticated and try to implement the idea of a relativistic
particle pair interaction via an ansatz (assuming a situation of selfconjugate
particles) in on-shell rapidity variables

z()z() = u (  )z()z()
z()z () = v (  )z ()z() + (  )

(16)

with the -structure determining the remaining commutation relations. to-
gether with z() = 0 we can express all correlation functions of the would be
f(f)s in terms of us and vs. for this we have to relate the n-fold application
of z ()s to the vacuum to scattering states. we do this by dening one natu-
ral order say n > .... > 1 for which the zs are dened to create an n-particle
in-state vector. for any other permutation the state vector is then determined
by the above ansatz. in rapidity variables we can use the more appropriate
notation

f ( f ) =

1

2 zc

z()f ()

(17)

where c is a path consisting of the upper/lower rim of a i-strip with the real
-axis being the upper boundary. whereas the on-shell value of the fourier
transform f () of f is analytic in this strip, the relation z(  i) := z () is
an abbreviation (since operators are never analytic in spacetime labels!) which
however inside expectation values becomes coherent in notation with their mero-
morphic properties

we suspect the fs to be pfgs and a for a proof (as a result of modular
theory) we only have to check the kms property for the f-correlation functions
with the modular generator being the innitesimal boost k. the fact that in
contrast to the one-sided spectrum of the hamiltonians in the gibbs formula,
the spectrum of k is two-sided is encouraging. the desired kms-property for
the wedge reads

df ( fn)...f ( f1)e =df ( f 2i

1

)f ( fn)...f ( f2)e

(18)

where the superscript 2i indicates the imaginary rapidity translation from the
lower to the upper rim of the kms strip.

a rather straightforward calculation based on the previously explained rules

for the zs yields the following result

theorem 6 ([8][10]) the kms-thermal aspect of the wedge algebra generated
by the pfgs is equivalent to the crossing symmetry of the s-matrix

a(w ) := alg {f (f ); suppf  w}  v = u  s

11

furthermore the possible crossing symmetric poles in the physical strip of s will
be converted into intermediate composite particle states in the gns hilbert space
associated with the state dened by the correlations on the a(w )-algebra. the
latter commutes with its geometric opposite a(w opp) in case of a(w opp) =
a(w ) = adja(w ). a sucient condition for this is the existence of a parity
transformation whose action on a(w ) equals the commutant a(w ).

in more physical terms we may say that the wedge structure of factorizing
models is that of a relativistic qm. the bound state picture is part of this and
leads to nontrivial matrix elements of products of fs, in the simplest case

(19)

dp, b(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

f ( f2)f ( f1)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

e  f2( + ib)f1(  ib)

with ib being the imaginary rapidity related to the bound state mass. for
a detailed treatment which includes the bound state problem we refer to a
forthcoming paper.

the kms computation can be immediately extended to formfactors i.e.
mixed correlation functions containing in addition to fs one generic opera-
tor a  a(w ) so that the previous calculation results from the specialization
a = 1. this is because the connected parts of the mixed correlation function
is related to the various formfactors (1) obtained by the dierent ways of dis-
tributing n+m particles in and out states. these formfactors are described by
dierent boundary values of one analytic master function which is in turn related
to the various forward/backward on shell values which appear in one mixed a-f
correlation function. we may start from the correlation function with one a to
the left and n fs to the right and write the kms condition as

daf ( fn)...f ( f2)f ( f1)e =df ( f 2i

1

)af ( fn)...f ( f2)e

the n-fold application of the fs to the vacuum on the left hand side creates
besides an n-particle term involving n operators z  to the vacuum (or kms
reference state vector)  also contributions from a lower number of z s together
with z  z  contractions. as with free elds, the n-particle contribution can
be isolated by wick-ordering5

da : f ( fn)...f ( f2)f ( f1) :e =df ( f 2i

1

)a : f ( fn)...f ( f2) :e

rewritten in terms of a-formfactors the n-particle scattering contribution (us-
ing the denseness of the f ()) reads as

(20)

(21)

(22)

h, az (n)...z (2)z (  2i)i
= h, z(1 + i)az (n)...z (2)i
= hz (1  i), az (n)...z (2)z ()i

5note that as a result of the commutation relation (16), the change of order within the

wick-ordered products will produce rapidity dependent factors

12

here the notation contains the usual sloppiness of physicist: the analytic con-
tinuation continuation by 2i refers to the correlation function and not to the
operators. for the natural order of rapidities n > .. > 1 this yields the
following crossing relation

in(n)...a
h, aa
out(1), aa

in(2)a
in(n)...a

in(1  i)i
in(2)i

= ha

(23)

the out scattering notation on the bra-vectors becomes only relevant upon
iteration of the kms condition since the bra z s have the opposite natural or-
der. the above kms relation (21) contains additional information about bound
states and scattering states with a lower number of particles. the generalization
to the case of antiparticles6=particles is straightforward.

the upshot of this is that such an a must be of the form

a =x 1
n!zc

...zc

an(1, ...n) : z(1)...z(n) :

(24)

where the an have a simple relation to the various formfactors of a (including
bound states) whose dierent in-out distributions of momenta correspond to
the dierent contributions to the integral from the upper/lower rim of the strip
bounded by c which are related by crossing. the transcription into physical
formfactors complicates the notation since in the presence of bound states there
is a larger number of fock space particle creation operators than pfg wedge
generators f or z(). it is very comforting to know that the wedge genera-
tors despite their lack of vacuum polarization clouds nevertheless contain the
full (bound state) particle content. the wedge algebra structure for factorizing
models is like a relativistic qm, but as soon as one sharpens the localization
beyond wedge localization the eld theoretic vacuum structure will destroy this
simple picture and replace it with the appearance of the characteristic virtual
particle structure which separates local quantum physics from quantum me-
chanics.

to see by what mechanism the quantum mechanical picture is lost in the next
step of localization let us consider the construction of the double cone algebras
as a relative commutants of shifted wedge shifts by a inside the standard wedge.

a(ca)

: = a(wa)  a(w )

ca = w opp

a  w

(25)

for a  a(ca)  a(w ) and fa( fi)  a(wa)  a(w ) the kms condition for
the w-localization reads as before except that whenever a fa( fi) is crossed to the
left side of a we may commute it back to the right side sinceha(ca), fa( fi)i =

0. the resulting relations e.g.

dafa( f1) : fa( fn)...fa( f2) :e
= da : fa( fn)...fa( f2)fa( f 2i

1

) :e

13

(26)

note that the fa( f1) in the rst line is outside the wick-ordering. since it does
neither act on the bra nor the ket vacuum, it contains both frequency parts.
the creation part can be combined with the other f s under one common wick-
ordering whereas the annihilation part via contraction with one of the wick-
ordered f s will give an expectation value of one a with (n  2) f s. using the
density of the fs and going to rapidity space we obtain the so-called kinematical
pole relation
res12=i haz (n)...z (2)z (1)i = 2ic12 haz (n)...z (3)i (1  s1n...s13)
(27)

here the product of two-particle s-matrices results from commuting the z(1)
to the right so that it stands to the left of z (2) whereas the charge con-
jugation matrix c only appears if we relax our assumption of selfconjugacy.
this kinematical pole relation appears for the rst time in smirnovs axiomatic
approach [11] and more recently was derived as a consequence of the lsz for-
malism adapted to the factorizing model situation [12]. in the present approach
it is together with the z-f algebra structure a consequence of the wedge lo-
calization of the generators f ( f ) and the sharpened locality (25) of a. the
existence problem for the qft associated with an admissable s-matrix (uni-
tary, crossing symmetric, with correct physical residua at one-particle poles) of
a factorizing theory is the nontriviality of the relative commutant algebra i.e.
a(ca) 6= c 1. intuitively the operators in double cone algebras are expected to
behave like pointlike elds: applied to the vacuum they are expected to create
the full interacting polarization cloud structure in fact this is a consequence
of the above kinematical pole formula since this leads to a recursion which for
nontrivial two-particle s-matrices is inconsistent with a nite number of terms
in (24) unless the operator a is a composite of a free eld.

the determination of a relative commutant or an intersection of wedge alge-
bras is even in the context of factorizing models not an easy matter. we expect
that the use of the following holographic structure signicantly simplies this
problem. we rst perform a lightlike translation of the wedge into itself by let-
ting it slide along the upper light ray by the amount given by the lightlike vector
a+. we obtain an inclusion of algebras and an associated relative commutant

a(wa )  a(w )
a(wa )  a(w )

(28)

the intuitive picture is that the relative commutant lives on the a part of the
upper/lower light ray since this is the only region inside w which is spacelike
to the interior of the respective shifted wedges. this relative commutant subal-
gebra is part of the above double cone algebra, but it is easier to handle. one
only has to take a generic operator in the wedge algebra which formally can be
written as a power series (24) in the generators and [8][10] nd those operators
which commute with the shifted fs

[a, u (e+)f (f )u (e+)] = 0

(29)

14

since the shifted fs are linear expressions in the zs, the nth order polyno-
mial contribution to the commutator comes from only two adjacent terms in a
namely from an+1 and an1 which correspond to the annihilation/creation term
in f. the size of the shift gives rise to a paley-wiener behavior in imaginary
direction, whereas the relation between an+1 and an1 is identical to (27), so
we do not learn anything new beyond what was already observed with the kms
technique (26). however as will be explained in section 5, the net obtained from
the algebra

a := a a(ca)

(30)

is a chiral conformal net on the respective subspace h = a. if our initial
algebra were conformal d=1+1, the total space would factorize h = h+ h
and we would recover the well-known fact that two-dimensional local theory
factorizes into the two light cone theories. if the theory is massive, we expect
h = a. this would correspond to the dierence in classical propagation
of characteristic massless/massive data where it is known that although for
the massless case one needs the characteristic data on the two light rays, the
massive case only requires one light ray. in fact there exists a proof that this
classical behavior carries over to free quantum elds: with the exception of m=0
massless theories all other cases (including light-front data in higher dimensions)
the vacuum is cyclic with respect to one light front h = a [13]. the proof is
representation theoretic and the denseness argument holds in every scattering
n-particle subspace separately and the d=1+1 massless case remains the only
exception even if we consider higher dimensional theories. hence the holographic
light front reduction which has d-1 dimensions for d>2 always fulls the reeh-
schlieder property where for d=1+1 only massive theories obey holographic
cyclicity. in order to recover the wedge algebra from the holographic restriction
one needs the opposite translation with u (a) i.e. a(w ) = a<0adu (a)a+
. for the nontriviality of the net associated with a(w ) it is sucient to show
that the associated chiral conformal theory is nontrivial. in order to achieve
this, one has to convert the bilinear forms (24) in the z-basis which full the
recursion relation into operators on the one-dimensional light ray will not be
discussed here.

hence the modular approach leads to a dichotomy of real particle creation
(absent in factorizing models) in the pfgs and in the aspect of wedge localiza-
tion versus the full qft virtual particle structure of the vacuum6 if tested with
more local operators. in some sense the wedge is the best compromise between
the particle/eld point of view. since it is left invariant by an appropriate l-
boost, the algebra contains enough operators in order to resolve at least vacuum
and one-particle states which cannot be resolved from the remaining states in
any algebra with a lesser localization. in the next section we will argue that this
is not a freak of factorizing models, whereas in a later section we will reveal the

6the deeper understanding of the virtual vacuum structure (or the particle content of say
state vectors obtained by application of a double cone localized operator to the vacuum) is
presumably hidden in the modular groups of double cone algebras.

15

less pedestrian aspects of light cone subalgebras and holography. as we have
argued on the basis of the previous pedestrian approach, the holography aspect
will be important in the modular construction of qfts because it delegates
certain properties to those of simpler theories.

it is worthwhile to emphasize two aspects which already are visible from
this pedestrian considerations. one is the notion of quantum localization as
compared to the more classical localization in terms of test function smearing
of pointlike elds. the wedge localization of the pfgs cannot be improved by
choosing smaller supports of test functions inside the wedge; the only possibility
is to intersect algebras.
in that case the old generators become useless e.g.
in the description of the double cone algebras, the latter has new generators.
related to this is that the short distance behavior looses its dominating role.
if one does not use eld-coordinatizations it is not even clear what one means
by the short distance behavior of a theory, short distance behavior of what
object? there is no short distance problem of pfgs since they have some
natural cuto (to the extend that the use of such words which are lled with
old meaning is reasonable in the new context). intersection of algebras does
not give rise to short distance problems in the standard sense of this word.
an explicit construction of pointlike eld coordinates from algebraic nets is
presently only available for chiral conformal theories [14].
it produces elds
of arbitrary high operator dimension, and as a result of its group theoretical
techniques it also does not suer from short distance problems. this feature of
the modular approach clearly has an interesting but non-understood relation to
similar claims in string theory, which also does not seem to be threatened by
ultraviolet problems. .

3 pfgs in presence of real particle creation

for models with real particle creation it is not clear at all how to construct
pfgs. the quantization approach of the books does not give any clue of how
to obtain such nonlocal noncommutative objects.
in order to get some clue
we rst look at d=1+1 theories which do not have any transversal extension to
wedges. the appearance of transversal degrees of freedom in higher dimensional
eld theories is related to the existence of a (n (e+, e)1)-dimensional manifold
of wedges w at zero and hence modular objects (it
w , jw ), where n (e+, e)
is the number of pairs of light like vectors taken from the forward/backward
light cone (equal to the dimension of the lorentz group). it requires a more
detailed presentation which will be given in a future paper. from the previ-
ous discussion we take the idea that we should look for a relation between the
ordering of rapidities and the scattering operator. we x the state vector of
n z s applied to the vacuum for the natural order to be an incoming n-particle
state. the totally mirrored order should then be a vector obtained by applying
the full s-matrix to the incoming n-particle vector. if the particles are bosons,
the order in the incoming operators on which s is applied does not matter. but
what should we do for the remaining permutations? we should end up with a

16

prescription which for factorizing systems agrees with the old one. some think-
ing reveals that the right prescription consists in writing the given permutation
in terms of nonoverlapping mirror permutations. each mirror permutation
is to be replaced by the action of the s-matrix on that the appropriate parti-
cles in the tensor product muliparticle vector. from the meaning of the tensor
product structure it is clear that multiple actions of s on nonoverlapping (either
contained or disjoint) particle subcongurations have a good meaning whereas
on overlapping ones they do not. this leads to a unique representation of each
permutation in terms of well-dened products of s-matrices on the n-particle
tensor product vector. let us explain this in a pedestrian fashion by writing
some explicit formulas for n=2,3,4

z (2)z (1)  h(2, 1)a(2)a(1) + h(1, 2)sa(2)a(1) (31)
here h denotes the characteristic function of the respective orders and s is the
action of the s-matrix on the respective incoming particle state vector to the
right. dierent from the situation in the previous section, this action creates a
vector with a complicated incoming particle content having components to all
particle numbers. the constant in front is (as in the statictics consideration)
chosen so that the resulting vector is normalized. the next formula has six
terms

z (3)z (2)z (1)  h321a(3)a(2)a(1)+h312s21a(3)a(2)a(1)

+ h231s32a(3)a(2)a(1) + h123s321a(3)a(2)a(1)

+ h132s321  s

23a(3)a(2)a(1) + h213s321  s

12a(3)a(2)a(1)

an s-matrix with only two indices acts on the tensor product of two particles
leaving the third one unchanged, an operation which only is meaningful if the
two particles have adjacent rapidities in that ordering. to avoid any confusion,
we have supplies a three particle subscript to the full s-matrix.

the inner products of these vectors are those of the various summands which
contribute to the -integral together with the f -wave functions. the f ( f ) six-
point correlation function is made up from such inner products. these corre-
lation functions contain integrands with o-diagonal inclusive contributions as
e.g. from the last term.

12 |3, 2, 1i

1(cid:12)(cid:12) s321  s

(32)

3, 

2, 

(cid:10)

as well as on-diagonal products of rapidity -functions. the graphical represen-
tation of this o-diagonal term consists of an inverted two-particle interaction
s
12 which only acts on the rst two particles |2, 1i in the tensor product fol-
lowed by the full s-matrix acting on the tensor product vector |3i s
12 |2, 1i
in which 2, 1 are just labels of a complicated multiparticle vector (which has
components to all particle numbers) whereas the 3-particle which remained
a spectator in the rst interaction. in a graphical representation the two ss
are linked by a thick line (the dot in (32)) which corresponds to the inclu-
sive summation over all intermediate states. these inclusive processes are here

17

o-diagonal whereas the standard ones in cross sections are diagonal. the ap-
pearance of non-diagonal inclusive scattering contributions is a characteristic
feature of the new vacuum expectations of the pfg wedge generators. as in
the statistics discussion, each of the 6 terms occurs 6 times (thanks to the uni-
tarity of the s-matrix which leads to compensations in the inner product of bra
and ket vectors) in such a way that the ordering prescription for the rapidi-
ties is lost in the correlation functions. note that there is also a contribution
to the 6-point correlation function from the inner product of a 4-z () vector
with a 2-z () vector. by using the analytic connection between creation and
annihilation wave functions f () = f (  i) this can be converted into an an-
alytic continuation property which links the 2  4 contribution to the 6-point
function and its hermitian adjoint with the previously discussed 3 3 contribu-
tion. we will call this the modular crossing property since it is the necessary
and sucient requirement on the z() correlation functions which insures the
wedge localization for the pfg generators f ( f ). we have used a self-conjugate
model for explanatory purpose, the adjustment to the particle6=antiparticle case
is easily done. we interpret it as the rigorous version of the folklore crossing
symmetry of the old s-matrix bootstrap program which was expressed in terms
of converting external legs in scattering graphs by crossing incoming particle
legs to antiparticle outgoing legs. note that in the 6-point function the on-shell
energy-momentum conservation allows the crossing of a single z, whereas for
n=4 this was only possible with a crossing of a pair of zs.

the present analytic understanding in terms of the kms analyticity of the
wedge localization replaces the mysterious maximal analyticity. the present
modular approach also shows that the old bootstrap program contained a lot of
physically sound structures; it mainly failed (in the sense of becoming sterile)
because of its ideological cleansing rage against o-shell concepts as quantum
elds. in the present modular context it appears the most successful among all
failed theories of this century.

for n=4 there is the new possibility of having two -particle ss acting on
two nonoverlapping pairs of in-particles, before the action of either the identity
or the full s-matrix is applied. we will not write down all 24 contributions
for the dierent possible -orderings. rather we will list only the six classes of
nonoverlapping mirror permutation structures by one of their representatives.

(33)

a(4)a(3)a(2)a(1)
s  a(4)a(3)a(2)a(1)

(z (4)z (3)z (2))  a(1)
(z (4)z (3))  (z (2)z (1))
s  (z (4)z (3)z (2))  a(1)
s  (z (4)z (3))  (z (2)z (1))

the rst, second, fourth and last class contains only one vector, the third and
fth class contain 10 = 2  (6  1) elements (the dash on the bracket denotes
omission of the identity contribution which was already taken into account in the

18

rst term). these 24 contributions correspond to the 24 dierent -orderings
of 4 z-creation operators applied to the vacuum. again as in the n=3 case,
the ordering prescription for the -integration drops out in the calculation of
the 24 inner products which contribute to the 8-point function. the crossed
contributions of 3  5 (and then 2  6) are again interchanging their role with
the above 4  4 terms via analytic continuation as required by the validity of
the kms aspect of wedge localization.
the representation of general permutations in terms of nonoverlapping mir-
ror permutations and their use in the construction of the rapidity space inte-
grands of the correlation functions of pfgs f ( f ) can be generalized to arbitrary
n, a task which we will leave to the reader. at the end we obtain a system of cor-
relations fullling positivity (as a result that all representations of state vectors
take place in a fock space and are dened in terms of subsequent applications of
unitaries) and therefore dening a state on a -algebra generated by the f ( f ).
the generalization to higher dimensions involve more care in the choice of the
test function space and require a more careful consistency discussion due to the
transversal extension of wedges which will be postponed to a future publication.
having sketched the construction of wedge algebras via the correlation func-
tions of their pfg generators, one may ask the question of whether this on-shell
eld theoretic construction of a(w ), which is just the rst step in a construc-
tion of the local double cone nets, sheds any new light on the old s-matrix
program (which is after all among all failed theories of this century the most
impressive one concerning the pieces of ideas it left behind). in order to answer
that question, one would have to nd out precisely at what place the pertur-
bative version of chews on-shell program stopped. even though i was around
at that time (but not working on s-matrix theory), it is very dicult for me to
unearth the reason where and why the perturbative version of the pure s-matrix
program failed. as far as i have been able to reconstruct from old records, the
perturbative attempts was able to produce an on-shell crossing symmetric one
loop representation for s (using the crossing symmetric tree approximation as
an input). it seems to me that it failed (or rather got confused by overlapping
integration problems) on two loops since i was not able to nd an acceptable on-
shell two-loop representation in the old papers. i would appreciate any helpful
hint on this problem of the history of on-shell perturbation. i have some reasons
to believe that the modular ideas for wedge localization may now ll this gap in
due time. if this happens, one would have a perturbation theory directly for nets
without eld coordinatizations. the success of the d=1+1 bootstrap-formfactor
program for factorizing models yields s-matrices and formfactors which for mod-
els with a continuous coupling are analytic around g=0. the more local o-shell
quantities however (i.e. pointlike eld operators or operators from algebras be-
longing to bounded regions) are radically dierent since they involve virtual
particle polarization clouds which formally may be represented by innite series
in the on shell fs similar to the factorizing d=1+1 case of the previous section.
the analytic status of these quantities is presently not known; it may well turn
out that they are only borel summable or (in the general non-factorizable case
even) worse. the on-shell/o-shell dichotomy of the modular approach for the

19

rst time allows to localize where the nonanalyticity at zero arises.

a solution of these problems, even if limited to some new kind of perturbation
theory (perturbation theory of local nets, without pointlike elds), should also
shed some light on the question of how to handle theories involving higher spin
particles, which in the standard o-shell causal perturbation theory lead to short
distance non-renormalizability. a very good illustration of what i mean is the
local quantum physics of massive spin=1 vectormesons. here the coupling of
covariant elds obtained by covariantizing the wigner particle representation
theory in the sense of the previous section will not be renormalizable in the
sense of short distance power counting. in the standard perturbative approach
the ghosts are necessary to lower the operator dimension of the interaction
densities (free eld polynomials) w (x), which as a result of the free vectormeson
dimension dima = 2, are at least 5, down to the value 4 permitted by the
renormalization requirements in a d=1+3 causal perturbative approach [15].
since the ghosts are removed at the end, the situation is akin to a catalyzer in
chemistry: they do not appear in the original question and are absent in the nal
result (without leaving any intrinsic trace behind). in theoretical physics the
presence of such catalyzers should be understood as indicating that the theory
wants to be analyzed on a deeper level of local quantum physics i.e.
further
away from quantization and quasiclassics.

4 the aqft framework

after our pedestrian presentation of the wedge algebra approach it is time to
be more systematic and precise. for noninteracting free system the conversion
of the rather pedestrian spatial nets of real subspaces of the wigner space of
momentum space (m.,s) wave functions into a interaction-free net in fock space
produces with the following three properties which continue to hold in the pres-
ence of interactions. they have been explained in many articles [17] and a book
[1] and my main task here is their adjustment to the main problems of this
survey.

1. a net of local (c- or von neumann) operator algebras indexed by classical

spacetime regions o

o  a(o)

without loss of generality the regions o maybe restricted to the poincare
covariant family of general double cones and the range of this map may be
described in terms of a concrete operator algebra in hilbert space for which
the vacuum representation 0 may be taken i.e. a(o)  0(a(o)). the
geometrical and physical coherence properties as isotony: a(o1)  a(o2)
)  a(o) are then evident co-
for o1  o2 and einstein causality: a(o
herence requirements. here we use the standard notation of aqft: the
dash superscript on the region denotes the causal disjoint and on the von



20

neumann algebra it stands for the commutant within b(h) where h is the
ambient space (here the representation space of the vacuum representa-
tion). einstein causality can be interpreted as an a priori knowledge about
some with a(o) commensurable observables in the sense of von neumann.
this causality property suggests the question if complete knowledge about
) = a(o) is possible. it turns out that this is in-
commensurability a(o
deed the generic behavior of vacuum nets called haag duality. the cases of
violation of this duality are of particular interest since they can be related
to a very fundamental intrinsic characterization of spontaneous symme-
try breaking, thus vastly generalizing the nambu-goldstone mechanism
which was abstracted from quantization.



2. poincare covariance and spectral properties.

g  p  g automorphism

g(a(o)) = a(g(o))

is unitarily implements in the vacuum representation

u (g)au (g) = g(a)
a  a(o)

the unitaries for the translations have energy-momentum generators which
full the relativistic spectrum (positive energy) condition, symbolically
specu (a)  v  (the forward light cone)

3. the phase space structure of local quantum physics or the nuclearity

property.

remark 7 the precise fomulation of the third property is somewhat involved
and will be presented after the following remarks on the rst two structural
properties. since in the formulation of the net one may work without loss of
generality with von neumann algebras [1], the rst question is what type in the
murray-von neumann-connes-haagerup classication occurs. there is a very
precise answer for wedges (which may be considered as double cones at innity).
as a result of the existence of a one-sided translation into a wedge, the wedge
algebras a(w ) turn out to be a factor of type iii1. this implies in particular
that the algebra has properties which take it far away from the structure of qm
(factors of type i). such algebras do not have pure states or minimal projec-
tors, rather all faithful states on such algebras are thermal i.e. obey the kms
condition which makes them similar to states appearing in cst with bifurcated
horizons as in hawking-unruh situations (but more quantum.i.e. without the
classical geometric killing vector aspects of horizons). also in the case of the
wedge and double cone algebras the modular ow near the boundary becomes
asymptotically geometric and killing-like (in the wedge case it is even globally
geometric). the origin of the thermal aspects are primarily on the local quan-
tum physics side and not on the cst gravity side; the black hole has a natural

21

localizing horizons (or one created by the cosmological theater of the dear lord),
whereas the horizons of e.g.
localizing double cones algebras are constructs of
the human mind which serve to test the content of lqp.

the nuclearity requirement results from the idea to obtain a local quantum
physical counterpart of the phase space of qm in a box. the famous nite
number of degrees of freedom law per unit cell of qm phase space results from
limiting the discrete box spectrum by a cut-o in energy. as rst suggested by
haag and swieca [1], the corresponding lqp counterpart, based on the causally
closed double cone analogue of the quantization box in schrodinger qm, points
into the direction of a weakly innite number; according to their estimates
this set of state vectors was compact in hilbert space. subsequent renements of
techniques revealed that this set is slightly smaller namely nuclear, and exact
calculations with interaction-free theories demonstrated that the lqp situation
also cannot be better than nuclear.

the best way to understand this issue is to follow the motivating footsteps of
haag and swieca. they, as many other physicists at that time (and as contem-
porary philosophers of nature), were attracted by the intriguing consequences
of the of the so-called reeh-schlieder property of qft

p(o) = h, cyclicity of 

a  p(o), a = 0 = a = 0 i.e.  separating

(34)

which either holds for the polynomial algebras of elds or for operator alge-
bras a(o). the rst property, namely the denseness of states created from the
vacuum by operators from arbitrarily small localization regions (e.g. a state
describing a particle behind the moon7 and an antiparticle on the earth can be
approximated inside a laboratory of arbitrary small size and duration) is totally
unexpected from the global viewpoint of general qt. in the algebraic formula-
tion this can be shown to be dual to the second one (in the sense of passing to
the commutant), in which case the cyclicity passes to the separating property of
 with respect to a(o). referring to its use, the separating property is often
called the state vector-eld relation. the mathematical terminology is to say
that the pair ( a(o),) is standard. the large enough commutant required
by the latter property is guarantied by causality (the existence of a nontrivial
o) and shows that causality is again responsible for the unexpected property.
of course the claim that somebody causally separated from us may provide
us nevertheless with a dense set of states is somewhat queer if one thinks of the
tensor factorization properties of ordinary schrodinger qm with respect to an
inside/outside separation via a subsystem box.

if the naive interpretation of cyclicity/separability in the reeh-schlieder the-
orem leaves us with a feeling of science ction (and as already mentioned, also

7this weird aspect should not be held against qft but rather be taken as indicating that
localization by a piece of hardware in a laboratory is also limited by an arbitrary large but
nite energy, i.e.
in qm one
obtains genuine localized subspaces without energy limitations.

is a phase space localization (see subsequent discussion).

22

has attracted a lot of attention in philosophical quarters), the challenge for a
theoretical physicist is to nd an argument why, for all practical purposes, the
situation nevertheless remains similar to qm. this amounts to the fruitful ques-
tion namely which among the dense set of state vectors can be really produced
with a controllable expenditure (of energy); a problem from which haag and
swieca started their investigation. in qm this question is not that interesting
and urgent, since the localization at a given time via support properties of wave
functions leads to a tensor product factorization of inside/outside so that the in-
side state vectors are evidently never dense in the whole space and the particle
behind the moon paradox does not occur.

later we will see that most of the very important physical and geometrical
informations are encoded into features of dense domains, in fact the aforemen-
tioned modular theory is explaining this deep relation between operator domains
of the tomita ss and spacetime geometry. the individuality of the various s-
operators is only the dierence in domains, they always do the same thing in
their domains namely map a to a for all a  a(o).
for the case at hand the reconciliation of the paradoxical aspect of the reeh-
schlieder theorem with common sense has led to the discovery of the physical
relevance of localization with respect to phase space in lqp, i.e. the understand-

ing of the size of degrees of freedom in the set: (notation h =r edpe)

pea(o) is compact

pea(o) or eha(o) is nuclear

(35)

(36)

the rst property was introduces way back by haag and swieca [1] whereas
the second more rened statement (and similar nuclearity statements involving
modular operators of local regions instead of the global hamiltonian) which is
saturated by qft and easier to use, is a later result of buchholz and wichmann
[16].
it should be emphasized that the lqp degrees of freedom counting of
haag-swieca, which gives an innite but still compact set of localized states is
dierent from the qm niteness of degrees of freedom per phase used in entropy
calculations of string theory.

the map a(o)  eha(o) is only nuclear if the mass spectrum of
lqp is not too accumulative in nite mass intervals e.g.
in particular innite
towers of equal mass particles are excluded (which then would cause the strange
appearance of a maximal hagedorn temperature). the nuclearity assures that
a qft, which was given in terms of its vacuum representation, also exists in a
thermal state. an associated nuclearity index turns out to be the counterpart
of the quantum mechanical gibbs partition function [17] [1] and behaves in an
entirely analogous way.

the peculiarities of the above degrees-of freedom-counting are very much
related to one of the oldest exotic and at the same time characteristic aspects
of qft, namely vacuum polarization. as rst observed by heisenberg, the
partial charge:

qv =zv

j0(x)d3x = 

23

(37)

diverges as a result of uncontrolled vacuum particle/antiparticle uctuations
near the boundary. for the free eld current it is easy to see that a better de-
nition involving test functions, which smoothens the behavior near the boundary
and takes into account the fact that the current is a 4-dim distribution which
has no restriction to equal times, leads to a nite expression. the algebraic
counterpart is the so called split property, namely the statement [1] that if
one leaves between say the double cone (the inside of a relativistic box) ob-
servable algebra a(o) and its causal disjoint (its relativistic outside) a(o) a
collar (geometrical picture of the relative commutant) o
a(o)  a(o1), o  o1 , properly

1  o, i.e.

(38)

then it is possible to construct in a canonical way a type i tensor factor n which
extends in a fuzzy manner into the collar a(o)  a(o1) i.e. a(o)  n 
a(o1). with respect to n the hilbert space factorizes i.e. as in qm there are
states with no uctuations (or no entanglement) for the smoothened opera-
tors in n . whereas the original vacuum will be entangled from the box point
of view, there also exists a disentangled product vacuum on n . the algebraic
analogue of heisenbergs smoothening of the boundary is the construction of a
this factorization of the vacuum with respect to a suitably constructed type i
factor algebra which uses the collar extension of a(o). it turns out that there is
a canonical, i.e. mathematically distinguished factorization, which lends itself
to dene a natural localizing map  and which has given valuable insight into
an intrinsic lqp version of noethers theorem [1], i.e. one which does not rely
on any parallelism to classical structures as is the case with quantization. it is
this split inclusion which allows to bring back the familiar structure of qm
since type i factors allow for pure states, tensor product factorization, entangle-
ment and all the other properties at the heart of standard quantum theory and
the measurement process. however despite all the eorts to return to structures
known from qm, the original vacuum retains its thermal (entanglement) prop-
erties with respect to all localized algebras, even with respect to the fuzzy
localized n .
formulas for standard split inclusions [18]

let us collect in the following some useful mathematical denitions and

denition 8 an inclusion  = (a,b, ) of factors is called standard split if
the collar a  b as well as a,b together with  are standard in the previous
sense, and if in addition it is possible to place a type i factor n between a
and b.

in this situation there exists a canonical isomorphism of ab to the tensor
product a b which is implemented by a unitary u () : h  h1 h2 (the
localizing map) with

u ()(ab)u () = a b
a  a, b  b

24

(39)

this map permits to dene a canonical intermediate type i factor n (which
may dier from the n in the denition)

n := u ()b(h1)  1u ()  b  b(h)

(40)

it is possible to give an explicit formula for this canonical intermediate algebra in
terms of the modular conjugation j = u ()ja  jbu () of the collar algebra
(a  b, ) [18]

n = a  jaj = b  jbj

(41)

the tensor product representation gives the following equivalent tensor prod-

uct representation formulae for the various algebras

a  a  1
b  1  b
n  b(h)  1

(42)

as explained in [18], the uniqueness of u () and n is achieved with the help
of the natural cones p(ab) and p(ab). these are cones in hilbert
space whose position in h together with their facial subcone structures pre-
empt the full algebra structure on a spatial level. the corresponding marvelous
theorem of connes [19] goes far beyond the previously mentioned state vec-
tor/eld relation of the reeh-schlieder theorem.

returning to our physical problem, we have succeeded to nd the right
analogue of the qm box. contrary to the causally closed local type iii algebras
with their sharp light cone boundaries (quantum horizons), the fuzzy box
type i factor n permits all the structures we know from qm: pure states,
inside/outside tensor factorization, (dis)entanglement etc. in fact the vacuum
is highly entangled in the tensor product description, the modular group of the
state  |a b represented in the tensor product cone p(a b) is not the
tensorproduct of those of a and b, whereas the modular conjugation j acts
on the tensor product cone as ja jb (since the restriction  |a b is faithful).
note also that the restriction of the product state    to b or b is not
faithful resp. cyclic on the corresponding vectors and therefore the application
of those algebras to the representative vectors  yields projectors (e.g. p =
u ()b(h1) 1u ()).
since the fuzzy box algebra n is type i, we are allowed to use the usual
trace formalism based on the density matrix description, i.e. the vacuum state
can be written as a density matrix  on n which leads to a well-dened von
neumann entropy. we know that if we restrict to the collar subalgebra or to a,
we have for a  a

(, a) = tra
s() = trlog

25

(43)

(44)

but this is not sucient to determine  which is needed for the von neumann
entropy of the fuzzy box s(). if we would be able to compute the unitary
representer it
n of the modular group of the pair (n, ) then we know also
 since the modular operator of a type i factor is known to be related to an
unnormalized density matrix  with  = 1
 through the tensor product
tr
formula on h1 h2

 =  1



for chiral conformal theories on the line one can carry the analysis a bit further.
choose two intervals of length 2a > 2b symmetrically around the origin. thanks
scale invariance together with the canonicity of the construction of the fuzzy
interval algebra n, the scaled family 2a > 2b with collar size (ab) has the
same entropy independent of . hence if we keep the collar size xed say at the
value  and consider intervals of increasing length l = a, the limiting behavior
for l  is the same as for an interval of unit length with shrinking collar
size . from this observation we learn that small collar size can be interpreted
as large interval and hence the nite coecient of the leading 1 behavior is
nothing but the entropy per unit of length for a very long interval in the limit
l   and xed collar size. the coecient depends on the characteristics of
the conformal matter content (e.g.
for the minimal models with central term
c<1, the coecient is expected to be computable in terms of c only) and will
not be computed here.

returning to the general case, the behavior of the above nuclearity index
in the limit of o  rd [1] suggests that the fuzzy box entropy is proportional
to the volume of the box. therefore it comes as a surprise that in fact the
entropy in fact is only proportional to the area of the horizon (boundary of causal
completion) of the localization region in the limit of large localization regions.
a computation from rst principles is feasible with the help of the holographic
property which we will explain in section 6. but in contradistinction to the
entropy picture coming from black hole physics, the area behavior of localization
entropy is not limited to curved spacetime situations with bifurcated killing
horizons but rather represents a general behavior in local quantum physics for
horizons obtained by causal completion of localization regions. if these horizons
have in addition classical killing symmetry properties then one expects that
this entropy can also be seen on the side of the curved spacetime metric. this
would be the scenario for a quantum physical understanding of the bekenstein
area law from the lqp point of view. we will return to this question in the last
section.

5 modular inclusions and intersections, holog-

raphy

one of the oldest alternative proposals for canonical (equal time) quantizations
is the so called light ray or light front quantization. the trouble with it is that

26

it inherits the short distance diseases from the canonical quantization the latter
is known to only makes sense for superrenormalizable interactions but not for
strictly renormalizable ones which lead to innite multiplicative renormaliza-
tions. light cone quantization also develops some additional problems. if one
considers it as a quantization procedure, one looses the connection with local
qft; in the presence of interactions none of the papers on light cone quantiza-
tion has spelled out how to return to a local qft. this deciency of the light
cone approach becomes particularly annoying if one controls the existence of
the theory by other methods as e.g. in the case of the superrenormalizable 4
2.
if on the other hand one uses the idea of light cone restriction of local elds,
one already faces a small problem for free elds (which has been handled by
dening suitable test function spaces by dimock [20]) similar to the problem
of zero mass scalar bosons in d=1+1. the problems one encounters with such
restrictions in the presence of interactions are most clearly visible in the case
of noncanonical conformal elds which are sums over products of chiral blocks
acting on dierent sectors. such local eld coordinates have no reasonable -
nite restriction, although purely chiral ones do. in case of massive noncanonical
elds it is even more dicult to decide which eld coordinatizations are good
for restrictions and which are not.
in such a case one is well-advised to use
the net description of the previous section because it does the reprocessing of
bad into good ones automatically if one uses the right tools in order to make
the light cone idea precise. in d=1+1 the right tools are those which allow to
derive nontrivial consequences from the shifted wedge inclusions of the previous
section. one rst denes an abstract modular inclusion in the setting of von
neumann algebras. there are several types of inclusions which have received
mathematical attention8. an inclusion of two factors n  m is called (+
halfsided) modular if the modular group it
m for t<0 transforms n into itself
(compression of n )

adit

mn  n

(45)

we assume that tadit
mn =c1). this means
in particular that the two modular groups it
n generate a two para-
metric group of (translations, dilations) in which the translations have positive
energy. let us now look at the relative commutant [23].

mn is dense in m (or that tit
m and it

let (n  m, ) be modular with non trivial relative commutant. then look
at the subspace generated by relative commutant hred  (n   m)  h. the
modular groups to n and m leave invariant this subspace: it
m, t < 0 maps
n   m into itself by the inclusion being modular. look at the orthogonal
complement of hred in h. this orthogonal complement is mapped into itself by
it
m for positive t. let  be in that subspace, then

8in addition to the split inclusion of the previous section, there are the famous jones
inclusions whose charateristic property is the existence of conditional expectations. their
domain in particle physics is charge fusion and internal symmetry.

(46)

(cid:10), it

m(n   m)(cid:11) = 0 f or t > 0.

27

analyticity in t then gives the vanishing for all t.
due to takesaki theorem we can restrict m to hred using a conditional
expectation e to this subspace dened in terms of the projector p onto hred.
then

n   m = e(n   m)  e(m)

p  p = e()p

e(m)p = pmp = m|(n m)

(47)

is a reduced modular inclusion. n also restricts under e and this restriction is
obviously in the relative commutant of e(n   m) e(m). moreover using
arguments as above it is easy to see that the restriction is cyclic w.r.t.  on this
subspace. therefore we arrive at a reduced modular standard inclusion

(e(n )  e(m), )

(48)

standard modular inclusions are isomorphic to chiral conformal eld theories
[21][22].

this theorem and its extension to modular intersections leads to a wealth of
physical applications in qft, in particular in connection with hidden symme-
tries which are of purely modular origin and have no interpretation in terms of
quantized noether currents [31][23]. the modular techniques unravel structures
which cannot (or have not) be seen in terms of eld coordinatizations. hologra-
phy and problems of degrees of freedom counting (phase space in lqp) as well
as the issue of localization entropy are other examples.

let us briey look at applications to d=1+1 massive theories. it is clear
that in this case we should use the two modular inclusions which are obtained
by sliding the (right hand) wedge inside itself. hence we chose m = a(w ) and
n = a(wa+ ) or n = a(wa ) where wa denote the two upper/lower light
like translated wedges wa  w. as explained in section 2, following reference
([13]) we do expect p = 1 in the action of the relative commutants onto the
vacuum

a(i(0, a))  a(wa )  a(w )
a(i(0, a) = h

(49)

where the notation indicates that the localization of a(i(0, a)) is thought of
as the piece of the upper/lower light ray interval between the origin and the
endpoint a. by viewing this relative commutant as a lightlike limiting case
of a spacelike shift of w into itself (and using haag duality), on obtains the
interval i as a limit of a double cone. note that we adhere to the standard
denition of algebras indexes by submanifolds as being the intersection over
all algebras on regions containing this submanifold. together with the causal
shadow completion property, this would mean e.g. that the algebra indexed by
a piece of a spacelike surface is the double cone algebra subtended by it.

28

from the standardness of the inclusion one obtains according to the previous
dicussion an associated conformal net on the line with the following formula for
the chiral conformal algebra on the half line

a(r>)  [t0

adit

w (a(i(0, a)))  a(w ),

(50)

it is an interesting question whether this inclusion can be an equality. the idea
behind an equality

a(r>) = a(w )

(51)

would be that for massive theories the characteristic data on one light ray are
sucient to determine the algebra a wedge. this is a signicant strengthening
of the cyclicity property a(r>) = a(w ) for the characteristic data on
one light ray. for a free massive theory this can be seen on the basis of linear
propagation. in general this would follow from the causal completion property

a(w ) = a(r()
> )

(52)

>

where r()
> is the spacelike positive haline with inclination  with respect to
the x-axis. the idea is that if this relation would remain continuous for r()
approaching the light ray ( = 45 degrees) the desired equality would follow.
we believe that the relation (51) which will be called characteristic shadow
property is a general consequence of the causal shadow property (the identity

of a(o) = a(o) where o is the causal completion of the convex spacelike
region o).
theories with the characteristic shadow property are the objects of the light
ray folklore. the present conceptually more concise approach explains why
the light ray quantization in the presence of interactions is basically nonlocal
(which signicantly restricts its physical usefulness within a naive geometrical
view of qft). the reason is, that although the haline algebra is equal to
the wedge algebra (since all rays of forward light cone propagation which pass
through the upper/lower half light ray r> have passed or will pass through w ),
the locality on the light ray cannot be propagated into the wedge, it only serves
on its boundary. this is so since the strips inside the wedge subtended from
an interval i on the light ray by the action of the opposite light ray translation
are for massive theories not outside the past/future propagation region of the
complement of i. only for the haline itself one obtains a 2-dimensional shadow
region namely the wedge region; for an interval on the light ray there simply
exists no two-dimensional characteristic shadow region. if one uses both light
cones then it is possible to reconstruct a causal d=1+1 net by intersections. this
construction uses the two-dimensional translation group on the wedge and the
ensuing double cone relative commutants which is part of the modular group of
the wedge algebra. note that in order to achieve this with halines of light rays,
one needs the relative position of the two chiral light ray haline algebras relative
to each other in the common space h. in fact as is easily seen by using (51),

29

the right light ray chiral algebra shifted along itself by a together with its parity
reected image is equal to the union of two opposite spacelike separated wedge
algebras. the reected light ray algebra may also be replaced by a subalgebra
on the left hand extension of the original ray. the subalgebra is not geometric
(as it would be in the zero mass situation), but rather has a fuzzy localization.
it has the consequence that the modular group for two nonoverlapping wedge
algebras or their double cone commutant for massive theories cannot act as
geometric dieomorphisms. this agrees with the qualitative behavior for the
modular group in a free massive theory for double cones where the zero mass
geometrical behavior can only reappear near the boundary [31].

this underlines that if one uses several chiral conformal algebras in order to
describe the net of a massive theory the important part of the information of
regaining the massive theory from its conformal holographic pieces is encoded
in the relative positions of these algebras. the light ray algebra belonging to a
wedge diers from that of a chiral conformal qft only in that the former has
two independent translations instead of one. the mass spectrum of a d=1+1
massive theory is contained in these two translations. with just one light ray
and two translations acting dierently on the one ray one can already reconstruct
the full d=1+1 net. but note that whereas on translation acts as a translation
dieomorphism the opposite translation acts fuzzily on the entire half-ray.

because of the transversal extension, the holography in terms of one-dimensional

chiral conformal theories is more complicated in higher dimension. there one
needs a family of chiral conformal theories which is obtained from modular
intersections. rather than associating the chiral conformal theory with a light
ray, it is more appropriate to associate it with the (d-1)-dimensional upper hori-
zon space of the right wedge (the upper right light front) which contains the
upper right light ray as well as the full transversal space of the wedge. of
the two logitudinal translations only the one parallel to the light front acts lo-
cally in the longitudinal sense. as in the previous two-dimensional discussion,
the light front algebra has the wedge algebra as past or future characteristic
shadow. the transversal translations leave the light front net invariant i.e. act
as a kind of noncompact internal symmetry on the light front net. only if one
uses dierent light front nets one begins to see their geometrical spacetime ac-
tion which distinguishes them from inner symmetries. hence although the light
front algebra has a logitudinal net structure, in the transversal direction it only
has the translation covariance structure but lacks the transversal net (locality)
structure. the latter can only be obtained by applying l-boosts to the stan-
dard wedge w which tilt w around one of its dening light rays, so that by
intersecting a sucient number of such wedges one can build up a transversal
net structure. in this way one obtains a fan-like ordered family of wedges corre-
sponding to a family of chiral conformal theories whose relative position within
the original hilbert space contains all the informations which are necessary in
order to reconstruct the original (massive) theory. in fact knowing the relative
position of only a nite number of such chiral conformal theories with respect
to each other (the number increases with increasing spacetime dimensions), the
modular intersection method determines not only the transversal net structure

30

within a light front, but is also capable to reconstruct the original net (the
blow-up property in [23][2]).

the present algebraic light front analysis through modular methods contains
some interesting messages about the original scenario of holography which was
thought to be a light front phenomenon [26][30] rather than one taking place at
a boundary at innity (as the maldecena-witten holography). we learn that
the light front quantization method apart from its inherent lack of precision is in
essence (in the sence of local quantum physics) only 1-dimensional instead of the
expected (d-1)-dimensionality since locality-wise the method only supplies the
transversal global algebraic structure together with the transversal covariances
but not the physically important transversal structure of local observables. in
order to obtain a genuine light front theory with the full net structure to be
used for holography, one needs the above modular intersection theory of a -
nite number of carefully positioned light fronts (i.e. their characteristic wedge
shadows). the terminology scanning (by a nite family of chiral conformal
theories) is more appropriate for this construction of higher dimensional theories
[23][2]. although the dimensionality of the information corresponds to d-1, it is
physically more appropriate to envisage it in connection with d-1 especially rel-
atively positioned chiral theories rather than with one (d-1) dimensional light
front hyperplane. analogous to the previously d=1+1 case, the second light
front in higher dimensions which is needed in order to generate a longitudinal
net, can be thought of as obtained from the rst one by a unitary parity re-
ection (assuming that the theory is parity invariant). a detailed and rigorous
account will be given in a future paper.

it has been shown elsewhere [31] that the modular inclusion for two wedges

gives rise to two reected eight-parametric subgroups of the 10-parametric poincare
group which contain a two parametric transversal galilean subgroup of the type
found by formal light front quantization arguments [30]. this happens since one
of the poincare generators takes on the role of a central mass term within the
subgroup.

all these considerations show the primordial role of the chiral conformal
qft as a building block for the higher dimensional qfts. in the next section
we will argue that this property which originates from modular localization can
convert the localization entropy per unit length in the limit of innitely long
intervals derived in section 4 into the bekenstein area law for large horizons
which bound causally completed regions.

we will end this section by mentioning another much more special kind of
holography in which, dierent from the previous case, a genuine isomorphism
of a massive qft in d+1 dimensions to a conformal d-dimensional theory is
in the focus of interest. this isomorphism appears in rehrens solution [6]
of the maldacena-witten conjecture [24][25] about a holographic relation of
quantum matter in a (d+1)-dimensional anti de sitter spacetime with that in a
d-dimensional conformal qft. this maldacena-witten holography has not been
observed outside the anti de sitter spacetime and since it is an isomorphism to a
higher dimensional conformal theory (and not to a collection of chiral theories),
it is not clear in what sense the degrees of freedom are reduced and what could

31

be the meaning of horizon in the formulation of an area law for the entropy.

the m-w holography is apparently of importance within the development
of string theory, in fact the protagonists believe that it contains information
about about a quantum gravity content of string theory. within the present
aqft setting its main interest is that it requires the eld-coordinatization free
point of view in its strongest form: whereas in most problems of qft there
exist appropriate eld coordinatizations which often facilitate calculations, the
m-w isomorphism dened in rigorous terms by rehren is not pointlike and has
no description in terms of elds outside its algebraic version [6]. connected
with this is a somewhat weird form of the einstein causality structure and the
lack of global hyperbolicity. at this point of causality properties, one is nolens
volens driven into the aqft conceptual framework of nets with isomorphism
between algebras which are labeled by geometrically maps between regions9.
the understanding of this phenomenon is enhanced if one starts from an d+2
dimensional spacetime with two time like directions on which the conformal
symmetry group so(d,2) acts linearly which was already useful in handling the
conformal compactication which is necessary in order to give a meaning to
the nonlinear fractional action on d-dimensional minkowski space coordinates.
since the ads reading of conformal qft is very similar10, let us have a brief
look. the so(d,2) group is associated with the d+2 dim. metric

g

1

gab =


+1 


for the conformal compactication one considers the d+1 dim. submanifold

(53)

(54)

md+1 =(cid:8) = (, 5, 6)  rd+2 : 2 = 0, 6 > 0(cid:9)

i.e. the d+1 dim. surface of a d+2 dim. forward light cone. the parametrization
 = (sin ,~, 5, cos ) together with the requirement of e =(~, 5) being a unit
vector describes a parametrization of the rays on md+1. this parametrization
yields the compactied minkowski space

t =

~x =

sin

5 + cos

~

5 + cos

(55)

gives the compactication formula in terms of a periodic time  and the fact
that is a unit vector. in fact one obtains the well-known periodic embedding

9any other viewpoint about qft in ads inevitably leads to a certain amount of mysticism;

it is a bit like dowing qm via bohr-sommerfeld methods.

10the ads manifold is the mass hyperboloid in the linear representation space of so(d,2)
factorized by the total reection in the ambient space. the mass hyperboloid shares the same
asymptotic part with the md+1 the light cone surface.

32

of minkowski space m into m = sd1  r which is known to have a causal
structure.. for a single copy we have

m = {(e,  ) : cos + 5 > 0, <  < }

(56)

in the relation to ads one does not use the surface of the light cone in (54),
but rather a hyperboloid in the forward light cone. we leave the verication
that this causes more havoc with einstein causality than the previous lightlike
parametrization to the reader. the causality problems comes under control as
soon as one gives up the idea of a map between points and uses instead the
wedge/double cone spacetime indexing of the nets of aqft following rehrens
paper [6]. the ads-conformal isomorphism uses a boundary at innity rather
than the lightray in the previous light ray holography/scanning. from our
constructive use of holography there is not much to be gained (outside the
indicated pedagogical lesson) by this isomorphism since the higher conformal
eld theories are as dicult as their non-conformal counterparts.

at this point it may be helpful to remind the reader that the resolution
of the einstein causality paradox in conformal qft which consists in noting
that would be conformally invariant theories as the e.g. massless thirring
model, where charged elds violate huygens principle and hence lead to appar-
ent causality confusions (through the possibility of linking the timelike region in
m by global conformal transformations via lightlike innity to spacelike events),
led (already 10 years before the famous bpz paper11) to the appearance of the
conformal blocks in a decomposition theory with respect to the center of the
global conformal group [27]. with other words, genuinely interacting local elds
tend be reducible under the global conformal group and decompose into nonlocal
but irreducible conformal blocks. the knowledge of these irreducible compo-
nents is equivalent to a the description of a eld on the many sheeted covering
which is local in the sense of the causality structure of the covering space. ac-
cording to the expectations in [4][6] there should be a similar decomposition
theory with respect to nets on ads with a certain subclass of interacting the-
ories being given in terms of conformal block objects by inverting the rehren
isomorphism [2].

6 the entropy problem in lqp

the presentation of thermal aspects of modular localization versus the heat bath
setting would be incomplete without the incorporation of entropy. in fact in
the case of a black hole metric with its classical killing symmetry, the analogy
of the behavior of the black hole surfaces with the entropy of heat bath systems
rst observed by bekenstein was the basis of hawkings great discovery about
the thermal behavior of quantum matter enclosed behind black hole horizons.
in this setting it is not really necessary to directly confront the problem of

11but not yet to the discovery of minimal models! only the d=1+1 exponential bose elds

with abelian braid group statistics were known during the 70ies .

33

entropical behavior of enclosed quantum matter, rather one may understand a
large amount of facts about black holes via the classical metric and analogies
with thermodynamics. this elegant hiding of quantum matter behind the size
of the black hole surface led t hooft in more recent times to formulate a new
quantum principle: the holographic principle. the setting was that of quantum
matter in qft behind a bifurcate killing horizon. in fact as will be shown in
the following, the holographic aspect in the description of general qft of the
previous section combined with the remarks on localization entropy of the fuzzy
box in section 4 will lead to an understanding of the bekenstein area law of
a suitably dened entropy for large double cone localizations. in order to see
this, we choose a symmetric double cone oa with radius a around the origin
(for reasons of simplicity in d=1+2). its commutant algebra which accoding to
haag duality is a(o) = a(o) can be represented as the union of all wedges
obtained from a standard wedge translated by a into the x-direction a(wa) by
a spatial rotation rot() in the x-y plane. we have

a(o

a) = alg [
= alg [

adrot()a(wa)!
adrot()a+(ra)!

(57)

where ra =[a,]denotes the haline indexing for the chiral theory (which in
the previous section was associated with light fronts) and where we used the
characteristic shadow property for the wedge algebra a(wa). the unitary mod-
ular group for this situation commutes with the rotations since the latter leaves
the algebra as well as the reference state  invariant. on the rotation invariant
subalgebra, which as a result of the compactness can be obtained via a condi-
tional expectation with the projector onto the rotation invariant subspace, the
modular acts as the modular group on the haline. hence the localization en-
tropy for the rotational invariant subalgebra in a large radialy fuzzy box behaves
in the same way as the chiral conformal entropy in section 4

sinv() = trln  2  l = area

(58)

here  is the density matrix for the fuzzy radial box subalgebra of rotationally
invariant operators. the generalization to d>1+2 is straightforward.

the present method does not allow to derive the area law for the full non
rotationally invariant algebra. note that the area always refers to the causal
completion of the localization region. note also that the collar of the fuzzy box
can only be converted into the radial length in the limit if of l  . hence
the best way to express the area law is to introduce an area density of entropy
sinv() = 1
l sinv() or to restrict the consideration to ratios of entropies for
dierent matter content in the limit of l  . since the present consideration
give no natural choice for the collar size of the large l-situation, the entropy
density contains an undetermined normalization factor from which only ratios
with dierent matter content are uneected.

34

the divergence of localization entropy in the limit of vanishing collar size
was of course expected from the rmly established hypernite von neumann
type iii1 nature of (sharply) local algebras. this kind of ultraviolet divergence
is intrinsic and cannot be disposed of. under the previous conditions the scale
invariance of the light ray (or light front) chiral theory allows to convert the
inverse collar size of the fuzzy box into the area law at least for very large
localization regions. the resulting area law was not expected and comes as a
surprise. but all this does not require any knowledge of quantum gravity.

on the other hand the present notion of localized matter entropy has no
obvious relation to the classical notion of entropy a la bekenstein which one
expects to see on the side of the classical metric. the ultraviolet divergence for
vanishing collar size for regions with a nite horizon (double cone in minkowski
spacetime or black hole in cst) has no counterpart on the classical side. in
addition it is not clear how the metric can feels the specic matter content
or rather the net result of matter content with the undetermined normalization
which resulted from the collar dependence. in fact it since both the classical
entropy associated with the metric as well as the matter localization entropy
are based on rather fundamental structures, it appears that this gravitational
aspect of entropy cannot be reconciled with that of the quantum matter content
behind horizon.

the solution of this problem (if there is one) may contain indications which
point into the direction of that elusive quantum gravity. to see this, one should
notice that the above chiral matter entropy is a quantity which refers to an
equivalence class of theories. namely all theories which in the holographic re-
duction on the light ray (the bifurcated horizon) lead to the same chiral theory
will be members of this class.
if the horizons are killing horizons in curved
spacetime, one can also dene a family of metric which coalesce on the horizon.
this then would bring us close to a situation discussed by carlip [28], although
the details in particular the treatment of boundaries would be dierent12. as far
as i can see this is the only idea within the present framework of local quantum
physics on how possibly the elusive quantum gravity could leave an imprint on
cst+quantum matter enclosed behind a horizon. the string explanation may
be mathematically more elegant, but one is asked to accept a large number of
prescriptions and assumptions which have no good physical interpretations and
have not been confronted with those successful principles on which qft has
had its greatest triumph. in order to appreciate mathematical observations in
string theory as arguments of particle physics, the question of how to achieve
localization or at least a viable replacement for the physical interpretation of
the content has to be answered.

7 comparison with string theory

historically string theory originated from the attempt to understand the issue of
crossing symmetry of the s-matrix which remained an unexplained axiom in the

12i acknowledge a discussion on this issue with r. verch

35

pure s-matric theory of the 60ies and for which even qft at that time found
no real satisfactory placement which could have matched in conceptual clarity
that of the related tcp property. as mentioned in the introduction, at the
end of the 60ies veneziano succeeded to invent a model which exhibited what
appeared a nonperturbative version of crossing symmetry. his s-matrix was not
unitary and its unitarization led to an interesting new kind of systematics which
had the form of a perturbation theory with respect to the genus of riemann
surfaces in two auxiliary parameters (which in fact generalized a representation
parameter used by schwinger in qft) and which nicely complied with a string
interpretation which originated in connection with an underlying 2-dimensional
global conformal structure discovered by virasoro.

but it should be stressed that all these steps were formal and e.g. the fact
that these strings could only exist in very high-dimensional target-spaces had
to be discovered by mathematical consistency considerations; it was not the
result of physical intuition about physical strings13. also its remedy, the di-
mensional reduction by a klein-kaluza conversion of spacetime dimensions into
internal symmetry degrees of freedom was anything else than a natural idea with
respect to quantum physics; it was of classical origin and its consistency could
only been checked within semiclassical pictures. another problematic point is
the stringyness in form of an innite tower of mass degenerate particles. if
higher orders in the new perturbation theory in terms of the genus convert this
tower into innitely many resonances in the second riemann sheet of the in-
variant scattering energy (not that of the previous auxiliary variables!) so that,
as it is common in feynman perturbation theory, only a nite number of stable
particles remain, then the stringiness may be lost (since such a situation is not
ruled out by local qft). if on the other hand the s-matrix remains stringy
(i.e. the innite towers of particles are persistent to all orders) then, as was
seen in section 4, the situation leads to a quantum theory with vanishing hage-
dorn temperature. whereas a nite hagedorn temperature is bad enough, the
absence of any concept of temperature seems to indicate a physical disaster;
taking into account that the notion of temperature belongs to one of the most
important concepts in physics. a welcome aspect of string theory is its ultra-
violet niteness which is related to the extended nature of strings. but as we
pointed out in the rst sections, the lack of this niteness and the limitation
of the renormalizability requirement is not a characteristic feature of qft, but
only of its approach via lagrangian (action)-quantization.

as we showed in this paper, the wedge localization approach is ultraviolet
nite as a result of the construction of double cone algebras via intersecting
naturally cut-o wedge algebras. the existence problem of qft with that s-
matrix is then tied up with the nontriviality of these double cone intersections
(6= c1). in addition to the absence of the above (physically somewhat dubi-
ous) aspects of string theory, the wedge localization construction claried the
elusive interpretation of crossing symmetry in terms of well-known and very ba-

13as mentioned at another place in this paper, examples for physical strings are the d=1+2
semiinnite spacelike string-localized operators which are required for the spacetime carriers
of braid group statistics (anyons and plektons).

36

sic thermal kms properties of modular localization. both the modular wedge
localization approach as well as string theory attribute a basic signicance to
chiral conformal theory and both know the notion of holography. but the use
and the physical interpretation of these concepts is quite dierent. whereas the
primordial chiral theories are localized on light fronts in the respective space-
time, in string theory they refer to auxiliary variables without any localization
concept. little is known about localization in target spacetime [20]. another
point of dierence is the question of physical naturalness of supersymmetry.
string theory apparently requires this concept (together with the high space-
time dimension) for reasons of consistency. aqft on the other hand, although
having made an important contributions to the understanding of supersymme-
try [1], nevertheless views supersymmetry with a certain amount of physical
suspicion for several reasons. on the one hand aqft has not been able to
attribute a clear-cut physical aim to this symmetry.
it does not show up in
the extraction of internal symmetries from the superselection theory of aqft
[29], nor does its spacetime aspect appear in the modular inclusion approach
which ectracts spacetime symmetries from the relative (hilbert space) position
of algebras. on the other hand it does not play an essential role in the rigorous
construction of low-dimensional models14 (e.g. the tricritical ising model) which
can all be determined without knowing that they are supersymmetric; it seems
to be present for its own sake, like an accidental symmetry. indeed its behavior
under thermalization by a heat bath [32] (collapse instead of an expected spon-
taneous breaking of symmetry) lends additional weight to this suspicion. in the
present modular localization framework, one even looses the ultraviolet nite-
ness argument which is usually given in its favor. in order to shed some further
light on this conceptually confusing situation, it would be nice to have an ex-
plicit look at the lowest nontrivial order of gauge invariant correlation functions
in n=4 supersymmetric gauge theories. nontrivial conformal invariant 4-dim.
correlations (as this theory is claimed to possess) are sensational, even in lowest
order perturbation theory of gauge invariant 4-point conformal functions (the
2- and 3-point functions are not interesting except for their possible noncanon-
ical behavior). in the literature one only nds calculations for the vanishing
of the beta-functions and (in contrast to the many beautiful gauge invariant
perturbative calculation in qed) no lowest order gauge invariant correlation
functions.

perhaps the biggest dierence is the attitude towards the elusive quantum
gravity. it is well known that the occurrence of all spins including the spin=2
in string theory was interpreted in favor of messages about quantum gravity. in
fact this was the reason why the original interpretation in terms of strong inter-
action physics was abandoned and replaced by an interpretation as a theory of
everything including quantum gravity. this step which changed the interpre-
tation of the old theory by sliding up the energy scale by 15 orders of magnitude

14the various families of conformal or factorizing models are classied by their charge
superselection rules. the knowledge that the rotational eigenstates or particles which carry
these charges have a supersymmetric rotational or mass spectrum is not needed for their
construction.

37

without changing its mathematics (the dierential geometric enrichment came
many years later) was perhaps the most bizarre; it has no parallel in the history
of physics.

in fact the recent maldacena-witten conjecture on the ads-conformal cor-
respondence created considerable exitement as a result of this alleged quantum
gravity interpretation.
its solution in terms of an algebraic isomorphism by
rehren did not conrm this aspect of the conjecture. we have seen that the
present modular localization approach applies not only to localizations behind
natural cst horizons with classical killing symmetries [13] but also to quan-
tum horizons of causally completed minkowski space regions. if there is any
message about qg at all (i.e. something going beyond quantum matter in cst),
then it is buried in the interplay of the class of cst theories whose quantum
matter behavior becomes identical near the horizon and the family of spacetime
metrics which coalesce in their restriction to the horizon.

the logic of string theory is that of dierential geometry and topology,
whereas the present approach follows entirely the logic of local quantum physics
of which modular theory is the most important part. the reason why dierential
geometric methods have gained so much more popularity with physicist than
the modular method for nets of (von neumann) algebras, can be found in dis-
covery of euclidean eld theory and functional methods of the 60ies. these deep
structural observations which related certain families of (noncommutative) real
time local quantum theories with certain types of (commutative) classical sta-
tistical mechanics, and whose practical use for qft was very much restricted to
quasiclassical and perturbative computations, became gradually enriched with
dierential geometry and topology in the 70ies and 80ies. the esthetical appeal
of the latter as well as the subconscious and never completely abandoned desire
of many physicists for a return to more intuitive (semi)classical realm (with
added uctuations15) contributed to the unfortunately very widespread iden-
tication of local quantum physics with those commutative structures. some
physicists in more recent times tried to repair this dominance of classical struc-
tures by replacing the dierential geometry by noncommutative geometry. in
the present work modular theory on the one hand brought some geometric as-
pects (internal and external spacetime symmetries and low dimensional braid
group statistics as a result of relative positions in inclusions of algebras), but on
the other hand also placed severe limits on the applicability of dierential geom-
etry and classical topology to local quantum physics (most of the symmetries of
modular origin are fuzzy and hidden9.

if this paper convinced one or the other reader that the only safe way for
physical progress is to return to important cross roads of the past and to solve
some of the left crucial problems16, then its purpose has been accomplished.
in all cases of physically successful treatment of low dimensional exact model

15in a way this uctuating property added to a classical picture is a step back behind
heisenbergs realization that position and velocity are not attributes of the electron but rather
belong to the event caused by the measurement.

16this conservative message is not much dierent from that which we learned from renor-

malization theory [7].

38

solutions the natural real time noncommutative structure (and not actions and
lagrangians!) played the important role. even in soluble models of low dimen-
sional statistical mechanics, particularly the computation of critical indices, it
was the conversion into an auxiliary noncommutative real time problem (the
transfer matrix in case of lattice systems) which in the hand of baxter and others
nally led to a solution. the other way around, i.e. solutions of noncommuta-
tive real-time problems outside of quasiclassics or perturbation by commutative
methods (including the eucledian functional methods) results are very scarce
indeed.

acknowledgement 9 a correspondence with k.-h. rehren and discussions
with j. roberts and r. longo during a short visit of rome university led to
various improvements of the paper. i am particularly indebted to j. roberts for
the invitation which made these discussions possible.

references

[1] r. haag, local quantum physics, springer 1992

[2] b. schroer, modular theory and eyvind wichmanns contributions to mod-

ern particle physics theory, hep-th/9906071 and referinces therein

[3] h.-j. borchers, on the revolutionization of quantum field theory by

tomitas modular theory, university of goettingen preprint, april 1999

[4] d. buchholz, m. florig and s.j. summers, hawking-unruh temperature

and einstein causality in anti-de sitter space-time, hep-th/9905178

[5] r.f. streater and a.s. wightman, pct, spin and statistics and all that,

benjamin 1964

[6] k.-h. rehren, algebraic holography, hep-th/9905179

[7] s. weinberg, the quantum theory of fields, i, cambridge university press

1995

[8] b. schroer, ann. of phys. 275, (1999) 190

[9] r. brunetti, d. guido and r. longo, first quantization via bw property,

in preparation

[10] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, modular theory and geometry, math-

ph/9809003, to be published in rev. in math. phys.

[11] f. a. smirnov, int.j. mod. phys. a4, (1989) 156. our operator notation
is more close to m. yu lashkevich, sectors of mutually local fields in
integrable models of quantum field theory, hep-th/9406118

[12] h. babujian, a. fring, m. karowski and a. zapletal, nucl. phys. b 538,

(1999) 53glrv

39

[13] d. guido, r. longo, j.e. roberts and r. verch, charged sectors, spin
and statistics in quantum field theory on curved spacetimes, math-
ph/9906019

[14] k. fredenhagen and joerss, comm. math. phys. 176, (1996), 541

[15] duetsch and b. schroer; massive vectormesons and gauge theory, hep-

th/9906089

[16] d. buchholz and e. h. wichmann, commun. math. phys. 106, (1986) 321

[17] d. buchholz, current trends in axiomatic quantum eld theory, hep-

th/9811233

[18] s. doplicher and r. longo, invent. math. 75, (1984) 493

[19] a. connes, ann. inst. fourier 126, (1974) 121

[20] j. dimock, locality in free string theory, math-arc 99-311

[21] h.-w. wiesbrock, commun. math. phys. 158, (1993) 537

[22] d. guido, r. longo and h. w. wiesbrock, commun. math. phys. 192,

(1998) 217

[23] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, looking beyond the thermal horizon:
hidden symmetries in chiral models, hep-th/9901031, to be published in
rev. in math. phys.

[24] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, (1998) 231

[25] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, (1998) 253

[26] g. t hooft, in salam-festschrift, a. ali et al. eds., world scientic 1993,

284

[27] b. schroer and j. a. swieca, phys.rev. d 10, (1974) 480, b. schroer , j.
a. swieca and a. h. voelkel, phys. rev. d 11, (1975), 1509, see also: b.
schroer, principles of general quantum field theory versus new intuition
from model studies, an essay dedicated to the memory of jorge andre
swieca (1936-1980), in: the algebraic theory of superselection sectors,
introduction and recent results, page 573-604, ed. daniel kastler, world
scientic 1990

[28] s. carlip, black hole entropy from conformal field theory in any di-

mension, hep-th/9812013, and references therein.

[29] s. doplicher and j. e. roberts, commun. math. phys. 131, (1990) 51

[30] l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36, (1995) 6377

40

[31] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, modular constructions of quantum field
theories with interactions, hep-th/9812251, to be published in rev. math.
phys.

[32] d. buchholz and i. ojima, nucl. phys. b 498, (1997) 228

41

