9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
6
1

 

 
 

3
v
1
2
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

new concepts in particle physics from solution

of an old problem

bert schroer

institut fur theoretische physik

fu-berlin, arnimallee 14, 14195 berlin, germany

presently: cbpf, rua dr. xavier sigaud, 22290-180 rio de janeiro, brazil

schroer@cbpf.br

july 1999

abstract

recent ideas on modular localization in local quantum physics are
used to clarify the relation between on- and o-shell quantities in parti-
cle physics; in particular the relation between on-shell crossing symme-
try and o-shell einstein causality. among the collateral results of this
new nonperturbative approach are profound relations between crossing
symmetry of particle physics and hawking-unruh like thermal aspects
(kms property, entropy attached to horizons) of quantum matter behind
causal horizons which hitherto were more related with killing horizons in
curved spacetime than with localization aspects in minkowski space parti-
cle physics. the scope of this framework is wide and ranges from providing
a conceptual basis for the d=1+1 bootstrap-formfactor program for fac-
torizable d=1+1 models to a decomposition theory of qfts in terms of
a nite collection of unitarily equivalent chiral conformal theories placed
a specied relative position within a common hilbert space (in d=1+1
a holographic relation and in higher dimensions more like a scanning).
although dierent from string theory, some of its concepts originated as
string theory in the aftermath of the ill-fated s-matrix bootstrap approch
of the 60ies
. some remarks on the relation to string theory can be found
at the end.

1 introduction

theoretical physicists, contrary to mathematicians, rarely return to their old
unsolved problems; they rather prefer to replace them by new inventions. the
content of the present article on some new concepts in particle physics is an
exception. the old problems it addresses and partially solves are those of the
relation between o-shell and on-shell quantities (or between elds-particles)

1

and in particular of crossing symmetry in local quantum physics (lqp)1. these
structures also led to the invention of the dual model and string theory.

the most prominent of on-shell quantities is the s-matrix of a local qft,
whereas elds and more general operators (describing localized situations and
in the algebraic setting belonging to local subalgebras), are o-shell. in this
paper we will have to consider a new kind of operators which, as a result of
their weak semiinnite (wedge-like) localization and their close relation to the
s-matrix, are to be considered as on-shell. this on-shell operators are essential
for our new approach which avoids pointlike elds at the beginning and starts
with generators of wedge-localized algebra. the o-shell compactly localized
operators and local eld generators are then obtained via intersections of wedge
algebras. here and in the sequel the word localization region always stand for
the causal completion of a spacetime region; these are typically the regions
which one obtains by intersecting wedges.

besides these two extremes there are intermediate possibilities where on-
shell and o-shell aspects appear together. the most prominent and useful
mixed objects are bilinear forms on scattering vector states i.e. matrix elements
of local operators a (either pointlike elds or bounded operators localized in
smaller than wedge regions) taken between incoming and outgoing multiparticle
scattering states (in terms of feynman graphs, one leg is o-shell).

out hq1, ...qn1, qn |a| pn, pn1, ...p1iin

(1)

which we will call (generalized) formfactors. these objects full the important
crossing symmetry which acts on the on-shell momenta.

the s-matrix whose matrix elements result from the previous formula for a
= 1, is the observable of particle physics par excellence:
it is totally intrinsic
and independent of eld coordinatizations, although strictly speaking only (in-
clusive) cross sections are directly measured; a fact which is especially important
if interactions between zero mass particles leads to infrared problems. however
most of our physical intuition about causality and charge ows in spacetime is
based on (o-shell) local elds or local observables. the new on-shell elds intro-
duced in this paper are somewhat more hidden and in particular not obtainable
by lagrangian or more generally by any kind of quantization approach.

the old problems on which there has been signicant recent progress which
will be presented in the sequel can be compressed in terms of the following
questions

 does a physically admissable s-matrix fullling unitarity, crossing sym-
metry and certain analytic properties (needed in its formulation), have
an underlying unique local qft? this one may call the inverse problem

1we will often use the name local quantum physics (lqp) instead of qft [1], if we
have in mind the physical principles of qft implemented by dierent concepts than those of
the various quantization formalisms (canonical, quantization via path integrals etc.) which
most of the readers are familiar with from the various textbooks. to the extend that the
reader does not automatically identify qft with those formalisms, he may without danger of
misunderstandings continue to use the good old name qft.

2

of qft associated with scattering. it is a problem of principle interest to
take notice not only of the well-known fact that elds and local observable
lead to scattering, but that also local equivalence classes of elds2 or nets
of local observables are in turn determined by particle scattering data.

 is there a constructive procedure in which, similar to the d=1+1 bootstrap-
formfactor program for factorizing d=1+1 models (which in fact reappears
as a special case), the s-matrix and the generalized formfactors enter as im-
portant constructive elements in order to obtain o-shell objects as elds
or local observables? in particular can one formulate such a constructive
approach in a conceptually intrinsic manner i.e. without any quantization
parallelism to classical eld theory and without the use of eld coordi-
natizations and short-distance divergence problems? this could be of
tremendous practical importance.

remark 1 the most profound on-shell property which was discovered in the
60ies is crossing symmetry.
it is in a way deeper than tcp-symmetry, the
symmetry derived from causality which among other things requires the exis-
tence of an antiparticle to each particle. in fact it is a kind of individual tcp-
transformation which eects only one particle at a time within the multiparticle
incoming ket conguration and carries it to the outgoing bra conguration as
an antiparticle. in spite of its name it is not a quantum theoretical (wigner)
symmetry, since that crossing process involves an on-shell analytic continuation.
for a formfactor we have

out hq1, ...qn1, qn |a| pn, pn1, ...p1iin

= out hp1,q1, ...qn1, qn |a| pn, pn1, ...p2iin

(2)

where the analytic continuation is carried out in the rapidity parametrization
by an i-shift:    + i, and the bar denotes the antiparticle. the dicul-
ties in physical interpretation and conceptual placement of this relation (about
which rigorous information outside of perturbation theory of sucient general-
ity are scarce) reects the lack of its understanding. although its meaning re-
mains vague, most physicist think that it should be viewed as a kind of on-shell
shadow of einstein causality. one of the results of the new conceptual frame-
work presented here is a an interpretation of the crossing property in terms of
wedge localization and the ensuing thermal hawking-unruh properties which
are usually associated exclusively with black hole quantum physics, but in fact
turn out to be general properties of any local quantum description including of
particle physics in minkowski space.

after having sketched our physical motivation, we now briey present our
main mathematical tool which will be used for investigating physical problems of
(quantum) localization: (tomitas) modular theory of von neumann algebras

2that an s-matrix cannot determine individual elds had been known since the late 50ies .

3

in standard position. these concepts, which for the rst time claried the
on/o-shell relation and in particular the spacetime interpretation of on-shell
crossing symmetry (its relation with o-shell einstein causality [2]), were not
available at the time of the s-matrix bootstrap of the 60ies nor at the time
of the invention of the dual model by veneziano. the latter is mentioned here
because it represents the rst comprehensive attempt to incorporate the on-shell
s-matrix ideas, including the property of crossing symmetry (in the stronger
dual version), into a particle physics model. although at the end the model did
not increase the conceptual understanding of crossing symmetry, it was widely
used in particle phenomenology and later led to the old string theory.

chews pure s-matrix approach based on unitarity and crossing symmetry,
which tried to cleanse all o-shell notions from particle physics, slowly became
the rst failed attempt3 at a theory of everything (except gravity) in the set-
ting of quantum theory. the dual model on the other hand soon developed into
(the old) string theory as a kind of o-shell extension of the s-matrix. although
here we are not dealing with string theory, we nd it nevertheless interesting to
emphasize the common roots through the implementation of crossing symmetry.
apart from the historical aspects, there is also some similarity in the results,
even though the physical concepts and the mathematical formalisms are totally
dierent. in the last section we will return to these comparisons.

the present line of research directly addresses the mentioned old unsolved
problems with new physical concepts and mathematical tools. the main new
mathematical tool is briey described in the sequel; a more detailed description
can be found in [3]. since not only the mathematical formalism but also the
concepts themselves may be somewhat unfamiliarand i would like to reach also
particle physicist beyond a very small circle of specialists, i will try use the rest
of this introduction for a panoramic and semi-rigorous presentation (including
remarks on the history of the subject).

denition 2 a von neumann algebra a (weakly closed operator sub-algebra
of the full algebra b(h) on a hilbert space h) is in standard position with
respect to a vector   h, denoted as (a, ), if  is a cyclic and separating
vector for a. in this situation tomita denes the following involutive antilinear
but unbounded operator (the tomita involution s)

sa := a

(3)

where the star operation is the hermitian conjugate in operator algebras.
its
closability property (as physicists we use the same notation for the closure) is
the prerequisite for the polar decomposition

s = j

1
2

(4)

3in retrospect it appears certainly the most successful among all failed theories in this
century. many useful concepts as e.g. weinbergs ideas on eective interactions resulted from
reading on-shell s-matrix properties back into o-shell qft. it left an impressive imprint on
particle physics and its demise is more related to its ideological reservations against qft than
with false concepts.

4

where the angular part j (the modular involution) is antiunitary with j 2 = 1
and  is unbounded positive and therefore leads to a unitary group it.

theorem 3 (tomita 1965, with signicant improvements from takesaki): the
modular involution maps a on its von neumann commutant a in h:

adj  a = a

the unitary it denes a modular automorphism group by

adit  a = a
(analogy to a dynamical law for the algebra).

(5)

(6)

the awe of an unprepared physicist in front of such a powerful and nontriv-
ial mathematical theorem [4] is somewhat mitigated by the remark that three
physicist (haag, hugenholtz and winnink) were led to a closely related inde-
pendent discovery in their pursuit of conceptual problems in quantum statistical
mechanics which arise if one works directly in the thermodynamic limit [1]. as
it is well known, the gibbs representation formula

hav i(v )



=

trehv av

trehv

av  algebra of box  quantization

(7)

ceases to make sense4 for innite volume, although the weak convergence i.e. the
convergence in the sense of states on algebras (instead of state vectors in hilbert
space) is secured under very mild assumptions [1]. the three named authors
found out that the intrinsic gns-construction, i.e. the canonical construction
of a cyclic representation (a) in a hilbert space h, and a reference vector
  h with

hai = (, (a) )

(8)

elevates the so-called kms-condition5 to a very fundamental attribute of a ther-
mal state on an algebra a. this kms property then merged with tomitas
modular theory and in this form e.g. entered connes classication of type iii
von neumann algebras and characterization of certain invariance properties of
foleii of states on a c-algebra. in the 70ies haag and collaborators were able
to derive the kms condition directly from stability properties under local de-
formations and pusz and woronowicz found a direct link to the second law
of thermodynamics [1]. these ideas were recently used for the derivation of
thermal properties of quantum matter in an anti-de sitter spacetime [5].

4in a box the bounded below hamiltonian aquires a discrete spectrum and eh is of trace

class ( = e 1

2 h is h.s.), a property which is lost in the innite volume limit.

5this analytic property was used by kubo, martin and schwinger as a trick which substi-

tutes the calculation of gibbs traces with some easier analytic boundary problem.

5

the relation with the einstein causality of observables and locality of elds
in qft was made around 1975 in a series of papers by bisognano and wichmann
[1]. specializing to wedge algebras a(w ) generated by wightman elds, they
proved the following theorem

theorem 4 the tomita modular theory for the wedge algebra and the vacuum
state vector (a(w ), ) yields the following physical identications

it = u (w (2t))
j = t cp  u (rx())

(9)

here w denotes the boost which leaves the wedge w invariant. if we choose
the standard t-x wedge then the rotation which aligns the tcp with tomitas
j is a rotation around the x-axis by an angle .

now i come to my own contributions which are of a more recent vintage
[9]. they result from the desire to invert the bisognano-wichmann theorem i.e.
to use tomitas modular theory for the actual construction (and classication)
of (a net of) wedge algebras belonging to interacting theories with the nal
goal to intersect wedge algebras in order to obtain a net of compactly localized
double cone algebras. for the arguments which show that the particle physics
properties, in particular the scattering matrix and formfactors of distinguished
elds (conserved currents) can be abstracted from the net observables, i refer
to [1][22][19]. the nets can also be coordinatized by more traditional pointlike
elds and a rigorous derivation for chiral nets can be found in [16]. for the
derivation of lsz scattering theory one makes the same assumption as in the
old-fashioned kramers-kronig dispersion approach to particle physics, namely
the existence of a mass gap. with this one immediately realizes that, whereas
the connected part of the poincare group is the same as that of the free incoming
theory, the disconnected part containing time reversals and in particular the
modular involution j carry the full interaction

it
w = it
jw = sscjw,in

w,in =: eikt

(10)

here jw,in refers to the tomita involution (or tcp reection) of the wedge
algebra generated by the incoming eld.
if the theory is not asymptotically
complete (i.e. the vacuum is not cyclic with respect to th incoming elds) these
relations have to be modied, but here we discard such pathologies for which
no physical illustration exists. since we do not want to temper with historically
grown notations, we have added a subscript to the s-matrix ssc in order to
distinguish it from tomitas s. the modular hamiltonian k dened in the
rst equation (the boost generator= hamiltonian of a particular uniformely
accelerated observer) has always symmetric instead of one-sided spectrum.

the last relation (10) is nothing but the tcp-transformation law of the s-
matrix rewritten in terms of modular objects associated to the wedge algebra.
the above role of the s-matrix as a kind of relative modular invariant of the

6

wedge algebra (relative to the free one) is totally characteristic for local quantum
physics and has no counterpart in quantum mechanics. it is this semilocal
(referring to the semiinnite extension of wedge regions) new aspect of the
invariant s-matrix which together with the standard global scattering aspect
(which is also present in nonrelativistic particle scattering) which, as we will see
below, opens the gateway to a new realm of particle physics dierent from the
various quantization approaches and the qft-formalisms of the text books, such
as interaction picture, time-ordered functions, euclidean functional integrals etc.
in order to achieve this, one needs one more concept which has no coun-
terpart in the old quantum eld theory, i.e. with is totally hidden from
quantization. it is the existence of polarization-f ree generators (pfgs) of
the wedge algebra. this is deeply related to the characteristic vacuum struc-
ture of qft, which was rst observed in the old days by heisenberg, euler,
weisskopf and many others. their observations rephrased in the modern lqp
conceptual framework, and adapted to one-particle state vectors suggests that
any compactly localized operator applied to the vacuum generates clouds of
pairs of particle/antiparticles, unless the system is free i.e. the operator algebra
is generated by a free eld which is linear in the creation/annihilation operator.
more specically it leads to the impossibility of having a local generation of
pure one-particle vectors unless the system is interaction-free. in this respect
the situation can be viewed as a generalization of the jost-schroer theorem for
pointlike elds (see streater-wightman [6]). in fact, as i learned from detlev
buchholz, the smallest region for which the proof of this no go theorem against
interactions breaks down is the wedge region! the existenc of the pfgs shows
that not only its proof, but also theorem itself ceises to be true. indeed the
wedge-localized algebras can be shown to support nontrivial pfg operators
whose existence generates in a rich physical content [9].

denition 5 let t(w) be the space of schwartz test functions with support
in the wedge w. we call a set of operators f labelled by f  t (w ) which
create one particle state vectors (in an interacting theory) without polarization
contributions:

f ( f ) = 1  particle vector

(11)

polarization free (wedge) generators or pfgs.

it is easy to see that as a result of this denition, which forces the one-f-
state-vector (11) to lie on the mass shell, and the requirement that the fs act
cyclically and separating, i.e. without nontrivial annihilators of the vacuum in

algnf ( f ); supp f  wo , the f-operators themselves must lie on the mass shell

7

and hence:

f ( f ) =z f (x)f (x)dd+1x, supp f  w
f (x) =z (cid:0)z(p)eipx + z (p)eipx(cid:1)

z(p) = 0 = z(p)
z (p) = (p), z (p) = (p)

ddp
2

(12)

, x  w

this mass-shell property is the only property which the f (x) share with free
elds. here the bar on the operators and the one-particle state vectors  cor-
responds to antiparticles. the eld theoretic notation f (x) should be handled
with great care, because unlike for pointlike elds, the x is not the position of a
spacetime localization but only a label on which poincare transformations act in
such a way that the generating family for w is taken into one for the poincare
transformed wedge. it is the constructive use of such nonlocal6 objects which
is responsible for the disappearance of the ultraviolet divergency problem (and
together with it the short-distance aspects of the renormalization problem). we
remind the reader that this problem eects the standard perturbative approach
if one introduces interactions via multiplying local elds at the same point (the
meaning of which can only a posteriory be dened and changes with the model).
such ideas of an approach to qft which avoids the o-shell ultraviolett
problems are not entirely new. ignoring the afore-mentioned failed ambitious
pure s-matrix attempt in d=1+3, there is the very successful but annoyingly
special bootstrap-formfactor program which in its present form is limited to
d=1+1 factorizing (a terminology which refers to the s-matrix) models.
it
achieves its success precisely by avoiding the various quantization approaches
(canonical, functional integral) which are inexorably tight up with the standard
ultraviolett short distance problems7. but these d=1+1 bootstrap-formfactor
recipes had a very weak conceptual basis (related to the speciality of the situa-
tion which is described by these recipes). the new approach presented here is
a vast generalization of the concepts including those behind these recipes. in a
way it is a bit surprizing that the provocative challenging message of this more
than 20 year old low-dimensional successful construction program has not been
noticed and utilized before; it is hard to imagine that this could have happened
in an earlier time when the relation between formalism and conceptual under-
standing was more balanced. perhaps this is due to the fact that most particle
physicist consider qft as a basically settled issue with only nasty technical

6note that nonlocal does not refer to the theory (as in the case of momentum space
cutt-os) but rather to extended operators in a would be local theory whose locality becomes
exposed only after computing intersections of wedge algebras.

7in fact outside the context of qm and certain superrenormalizable qfts for which con-
structivists were able to show a good mathematical meaning, these quantization procedures
are artistic since by the time one arrived at the physical results (the renormalized elds),
the initial quantization requirements fail: no renormalized correlation function fulls a eu-
clidean functional representation. the algebraic approach was introduces in order to balance
this remarkable but somewhat unfortunate situation.

8

problems remaining. we will demonstrate in this paper that such a view is
quite premature.

since according to the previous remarks pfgs do not exist (nontrivially) for
smaller localization regions o  w, and since they are physically uninteresting
for regions larger than w, we omit the abbreviation for the region w from the
pfg terminology.

pfgs generalize the free eld structure in the presence of interactions into
a controllable nonlocal direction which however always remains at the service
of local theories, i.e. they are auxiliary quantities in the hilbert space of the
would be8 local theory and coexist together with the operators of increasing
locality obtained by quantum localization via intersections of wedge algebras.
with other words, although they are nonlocal (semilocal in the sense of the non-
compact wedge localization) and therfore in some sense contain a cut-o aspect,
these properties are not introduced ad hoc, but of deep physical origin, and as a
consequence no limiting process for cuto removal is required. their existence is
crucial for the linkage of the particle physics crossing symmetry with the thermal
and entropical aspects of modular localization qft. although they were rst
noticed in form of the bekenstein-hawking-unruh thermal properties of killing
horizons in black hole physics, they are not belonging exclusively to black hole
physics but are rather part of general particle physics with or without curved
spacetime. in other words these well-known classical thermal properties in
cst have a quantum counterpart in which bifurcated killing event-horizons
are substituted by surfaces of causally completed minkowski space localization
regions e.g. the light cone surface of a double cone. the geometric killing sym-
metry in the quantum setting passes to the (geometrically) hidden quantum
symmetry dened by the modular group corresponding to the concrete situa-
tion. in unruhs case of a wedge region or in the analogous case of conformal
matter enclosed in a double cone, the quantum symmetry is equal to the one
described by a killing vector associated with the lorentz- or conformal- group.
we have organized this paper as follows. the next section reviews and
illustrates the eld-coordinate-free approach for interaction-free theories and in
d=1+1 factorizing model. in the latter case the zamolodchikov-faddeev algebra
emerges in a natural way (without having been put in) and the z-f operators
for the rst time acquire a spacetime interpretation in connection with the new
pfg generators of wedge algebras. the presentation of polarization-free wedge
generators is extended to systems which are not factorizing (i.e. theories with
on-shell (real) particle creation) in section 3.

after a brief introduction of the aqft framework in section 4, the fth sec-
tion treats the light ray/front restriction and holography in terms of associated
chiral conformal eld theories. there we also discuss the problem of undoing
such maps (the blow up property) in terms of scanning a higher dimensional
qft by a nite family of chiral conformal theories. the mathematical technol-
ogy used in this section is one of the most powerful which aqft presently is

8the construction of the wedge algebras does not yet solve the existence problem of models
of local quantum physics, but one still needs to show the nontriviality (6= c1) of the double
cone algebras obtained by intersecting suciently many wedge algebras..

9

able to oer (the theory of modular inclusions and intersections).

in the sixth section we take up the problem of associating entropy for lo-
calized matter. the previous association of chiral conformal theories to two-
and higher dimensional models oers the identication the relevant degrees of
freedom (e.g. those which contibute to the entropy) with those of the associated
simpler chiral theories. in the same section we also review rehrens presentation
[7] of the ads-conformal eld theory isomorphism which is a more special and
simpler kind of holography (no modular inclusions and intersections are needed)
which happens through a conformal theory attached at the boundary at innity
rather than at the light cone. in contradistinction to the holography/scanning
approach connected to a horizon (light ray/front holography) in section 6, this
maldacena-witten adsd+1 holography is a correspondence between two equally
unknown and dicult (apart from d=1) theories. although this makes it less
useful for a constructive approach in (cst) qft, this isomorphism, as pointed
out by rehren, serves as an illustration par excellence for the necessity and the
power of the eld coordinate-free concept of aqft.

the last section nally tries to confront our approach with string theory
and explain (unfortunately without much success) why the two lead to similar-
ities. actually the dierences, especially those on the issue of the still elusive
quantum gravity, are as interesting and probably more important than the sim-
ilarities. the enigmatic power of these dierences may in the long run turn out
to determine the future path of particle physics.

this presentation is in part a survey of published [9][11] [35][26][2][15] as
well as of new results. i plan to defer most rigorous proofs of new statements
(i.e. to the extend that they have not appeared in the mentioned papers) to
a separate publication with a more mathematical content. i appologize to the
experts for some repetitions, but i think that to shed some light on a dicult
subject from slightly dierent angles may actually be helpful for nonexperts.

2 systems without interactions and factorizing

models

in trying to bring readers with a good knowledge of standard qft in contact
with some new (and old) concepts in algebraic qft (aqft) without sending
him back with a load of homework, i face a dicult problem. let us for the time-
being put aside the intrinsic logic, which would ask for a systematic presentation
of the general framework, and let us instead try to maneuver in a more less ad
hoc (occasionally even muddled) way.

in a pedestrian approach the problem of constructing nets of interaction
free systems from wigners one particle theory may serve as a nice pedagog-
ical exercise. since wigners representation theory (we only need irreducible
positive energy representations) was the rst totally intrinsic quantum theory
without any quantization parallelism to classical particle theory, it is reasonable
to expect in general that, if we nd the right concepts, we should be able to

10

avoid covariant pointlike elds alltogether in favor of a more intrinsic way to
implement the causality/locality principle. rather the local elds should be
similar to coordinatizations of local observables in analogy to dierential geom-
etry. this viewpoint is indeed consistent and helpful [9][10]. as a pedagogical
exercise let us rst mention how the free eld algebras are directly abstracted
from the wigner theory. by using a spatial variant of tomitas theory for the
wedge situation (i.e. by dening a kind of tomita s on the wigner representa-
tion space without a von neumann algebra), one obtains a real closed subspace
hr(w ) of the wigner space h of complex multi-component momentum space
wave functions as a say +1 eigenspace of a tomita-like quantum mechanical
operator s in h, where s is dened to be the i continued boost (obtained by
the functional calculus associated with the spectral theory) multiplied by the
one-particle version of the j-reection. for this one only needs to extend the
wigner representation to include the disconnected poincare transformations (re-
ections with determinant one) which together with the analytically continued
boost yields an unbounded antilinear involution on the quantum mechanical
wigner space [9][10]. the substitute for the von neumann commutant in this
spatial case is the symplectic (or real orthogonal) complement of hr(w ) in h.
it turns out that this situation is standard in a spatial sense

hr(w ) + ihr(w ) is dense in h
hr(w )  ihr(w ) = {0}

(13)

as in the algebraic case, the modular formalism characterizes the localization
of subspaces, but is not able to distinguish individual elements in that subspace
(particular covariant x-space wave functions or testing functions with particular
support properties inside an x-space wedge). there is a good physical reason
for that because as soon as one tries to do that, one is forced to leave the unique
wigner (m,s) representation framework and pick a particular representation by
selecting one specic intertwiner among the innite set of u and v intertwiners
which link the unique wigner (m,s) representation to the countably innite
many covariant possibilities [9]. with other words, one is in the framework
explained and presented in the rst volume of weinbergs book [8]. any selection
of a specic covariant description, vis. by invoking euler-lagrange equations
and the existence of a lagrangian, may be convenient for doing computations
or as a mnemotechnical device for classifying polynomial interaction densities9,
but is not demanded as an intrinsic attribute of physics. in the above spatial
modular manner, the uniqueness of the (m, s) wigner theory can be transported
(via application of the weyl resp. car functor) directly to the qft and
results in uniqueness of the local net which is obtained by intersections from
the more coarse wedge net.
if we would have taken the conventional route
via interwiners and local elds as in [8], then we would have been forced to use
borchers construction of equivalence classes in order to see that the dierent free

9the causal approach permits the transformation of a polynomial interaction from one
coordinatization to any other whereas a formalism using classical actions involving free eld
lagrangians l0 is restricted to the use of euler-lagrange eld coordinatizations.

11

elds associated with the (m,s) representation with the same momentum space
creation and annihilation operators in fock space are just dierent generators of
the same coherent families of local algebras i.e. yield the same net. this would
be analogous to working with particular coordinates in dierential geometry and
then proving at the end that the objects of interests are invariant and therefore
independent of coordinates.

on the mathematical side we meet for the rst time the modular machine
which is capable to encode informations about spacetime geometry into the
more technical looking domain properties of operators. this is achieved by
those strange antilinear tomita involutions s which are unbounded and which
create via their domain properties a host of antiunutary mirror transformations
and modular automorphisms with (sometimes only partial) manifest geometric
meaning. in other words the algebraic property (3) are the same (if you have
seen it once, you know it for all) are the same, the individuality of the ss is
solely concentrated in its domain property. this weird situation is required in
order to transmute hilbert space domain stu into spacetime geometry!

it is amusing that this spatial modular formalism in wigner space also pre-
empts the particle statistics by producing a mismatch in the case of half-integer
spin between the real symplectic (orthogonal) complement and the result of a
geometric -rotation of the wedge into its opposite. the functorial way of asso-
ciating modular localized subalgebras with real subspaces of wigner space only
uses (exponentiated weyl-like in case of integer spin) momentum space creation
and annihilation operators related to the fockspace extension by forming ten-
sor products of wigner spaces; nowhere one is forced to use individual pointlike
elds.

of course we cannot use these nets in order to replace those interaction
densities to be used in a stuckelberg-bogoliubov causal perturbation theory;
this standard perturbative approach only works with pointlike elds from the
very beginning. proofs that the same physics could have been obtained in terms
of dierent free eld coordinatizations (rewriting the interaction polynomials)
i.e. only depend on the net tend to be quite involved.

the implementation of interactions in the framework of nets requires a rad-
ical rethinking of the formalism, even if we are only interested in perturbative
aspects of the nets. in order to get a clue, let us rst ask a less general question.
it is well-known that there exists a special class of theories in d=1+1 which are
factorizing in the sense of the multiparticle s-matrix (which commutes with the
incoming number operator nin)

[ssc, nin] = 0

(14)

let us try to implement the idea of a relativistic particle pair interaction with
the simple ansatz (assuming a situation of selfconjugate particles) in on-shell
rapidity variables

z()z() = s(  )z()z()
z()z () = s1(  )z ()z() + (  )

(15)

12

with the star-structure determining the remaining commutation relations and
the unitarity of s with s1() = s() = s()10 etc. together with z() = 0
we can express all correlation functions of the would be pfgs f ( f )s in terms
of ss and the computation of correlation functions proceeds as for free elds
namely by commuting the annihilation operators z to the right vacuum e.g.

(, z(4)z(3)z (2)z (1)) = s(2  3)(3  1)(4  2) + ...

(16)

where the dots stand for pure -function contributions without s. one easily
sees that we could also have started from the following formula which represents
z z  state vectors in terms of corresponding free eld terms

z (2)z (1) = 21a(2)a(1) + 12s(2  1)a(1)a(2)

(17)

here the symbol p (1)...p (n) denotes the characteristic function of the region
p (1) > ... > p (n). it is easy to see that the s-dependent terms in the inner
product together with

(cid:8)12s(2  1) + 21

s(3  4)(cid:9)
= s(2  1)

(3  1)(4  2)
(3  1)(4  2)

(18)

lead to an ordering free result which agrees with (16) in fact if we had started
with a more general two-particle interaction ansatz by allowing the structure
of the second equation in (15) to be dierent s1  t, the consistency with
(17) would immediatly bring us back to t = s1.
the formula for the 4-point function suggests the possibility to replace the

algebraic ansatz by the following formula for multi-z  state vectors

z (n)...z (1)

= xperm

p (n)...p (1)( ytransp

s)a(p (n))...a(p (1))

(19)

where the product of s-factors in the bracket contains one s for each transposi-
tion. the associativity of the z s i.e. the yang-baxter relation for matrix-valued
ss insures the consistency of the formula. we call p (1) > ... > p (n) the nat-
ural order of the multi-z  state vector. from the state characterization (19)
one can derive the algebraic denition. the generalizations of pfgs beyond
factorizing systems in the next section are done on the level of the z -state
formulae with a suitable substitute for the bracket in (19) instead of (15).

the f s in (12) are most conveniently written in terms of rapidity variables

using the following more appropriate path notation

f ( f ) =

1

2 zc

z()f (), supp f  w

(20)

10the modular interpretation requires the s in (15) to be identied with the two-particle
s-matrix. consistency forces the time-dependent scattering theory for local elds or operators
from double cone localized algebras (wedge localization is not sucient for the derivation of
scattering theory) to reproduce this factorizing s-matrix.

13

where c is a path consisting of the upper/lower rim of a i-strip with the real
-axis being the upper boundary. whereas the on-shell value of the fourier
transform f () of f is analytic in this strip, the relation z(  i) := z () is
an abbreviation (since operators by themselves are never analytic in spacetime
labels!) which however inside expectation values becomes coherent in notation
with their meromorphic properties.

we want to show that the fs are pfgs and a for a proof (as a result of
modular theory) we only have to check the kms property for the f-correlation
functions with the modular generator being the innitesimal boost k. the fact
that in contrast to the one-sided spectrum of the hamiltonians in the gibbs
formula, the spectrum of the boost k is two-sided is encouraging. the desired
kms-property for the wedge reads

df ( fn)...f ( f1)e =df ( fn1)...f ( f2)f ( f 2i
n )e

(21)

where the superscript 2i indicates the imaginary rapidity translation from the
lower to the upper rim of the kms strip.

a rather straightforward calculation based on the previously explained rules

for the zs yields the following result

theorem 6 ([9][35]) the kms-thermal aspect of the wedge algebra generated
by the pfgs is equivalent to the crossing symmetry of the s-matrix

a(w ) := algnf ( f ); supp f  wo  s() = s(i  )

furthermore the possible crossing symmetric poles in the physical strip of s will
be converted into intermediate composite particle states in the gns hilbertspace
associated with the state dened by the correlations on the a(w )-algebra. the
latter commutes with its geometric opposite a(w opp) in case of a(w opp) =
a(w ) = adja(w ). a sucient condition for this is the existence of a parity
transformation whose action on a(w ) equals the commutant a(w ).

we sketch the proof for the 4-point function of f s which may be obtained
as the scalar product of two-particle state vectors (c.t. denotes the f-contaction
terms)

f ( f2)f ( f1) =z z f2(2  i)f1(1  i)z (1)z (2) + c.t.(22)

= z z f2(2  i)f1(1  i){12a(1)a(2) +

+21s(2  1)a(2)a(1)} + c

(23)

and the analogous formula for the bra-vector. the formula needs some expla-
nation. the symbol  with the permutation subscript denotes as before the
characteristic function associated with the permuted rapidity order. the or-
der for the free creation operators a is governed by particle statistics. for

14

each transposition starting from the natural order (19) one obtains an s fac-
tor11. the yang-baxter relation assures that the various ways of doing this
are consistent. for the inner product the s-dependent terms are. finally the
terms proportional to the vacuum are contraction terms corresponding to the
-function in (15). for the s-dependent terms in the inner product we obtain

z z f4(2)f3(1){21s(2  1) + 12

= z z f4(2)f4(1)s(2  1)f2(2  i)f1(1  i)d1d2

s(1  2)}f2(2  i)f1(1  i)d1d2
(24)

the analogous computation for kms crossed term in (29) gives

z z f2(1)f2(2)s(1  2)f1(1  i)f1 (2  i + 2i)d1d2

(25)

this formula makes only sense if the f (f ) operators are restricted in such a way
that the 2i translation on them is well-dened, i.e. for wave functions f which
are analytic in a strip of size 2i. it is well-known that the kms condition does
not hold on all operators of the algebra but rather on a dense set of suitably
dened analytic elements [12]. the s-independent terms which we have not
written down are identical to terms in the 4-point function of free elds they
separately satisfy the kms property. what remains is to show the identity
of (24) and (25). this is done by 2  2  i contour-shift in (25) without
picking up terms frm innity. using the denseness of the wave funcions one
nally obtains

s(2  1) = s(1  2 + i)

(26)

2 i.

which is the famous crossing symmetry or the z  z reection symmetry
around the point z0 = 1
in physical terms we may say that the wedge structure of factorizing models
is that of a kind of relativistic quantum mechanic. this continues to be true
if the crossing symmetric s-matrix has poles in the physical strip. in that case
the above contour shift would violate the kms property unless one modies the
multi-z  state vector formula (19) by the inclusion of bound states. for the
case n=2 (17) this means

z (2)z (1) = (z (2)z (1))scat +
+ |, bih, b|z (  ib)z ( + ib)| i

(27)

the bracket with the superscript scat denotes the previous contribution (17),
whereas the second line denotes the bound state contribution. the validity

11the notation has used the statistics in order to bring the product of incoming elds ain
into the natural order say 1...n. the ordering of the z s encodes the -ordering and not
the particle statistics.
it is connected with the dierent boundary values of state vectors
and expectation values in - space in approaching the physical boundary from the analytic
region. this is analogous to the association of the n! n-point x-space correlation functions
with dierent boundary values of one analytic master function in the wightman theory.

15

of the kms property demands the presence of this term and determines the
coecient; here b is the imaginary rapidity related to the bound state mass.
for a detailed treatment which includes the bound state problem, we refer to a
forthcoming paper. we emphasize again that it is the representation of the f -
correlations in terms of the s-matrix and the kms property of these correlation
functions, which via the gns construction converts the poles in the (possibly
matrix-valued) function s into the extension of the fock space of the as by
additional free eld operators. in this way the poles in numerical functions are
converted into the enlargment of fock space in such a way that a few z s can
describe many more particles. one may call the z to be fundamental and
the introduce new zb and f 
bs; the latter will however be operators which are
already associated with the original f-algebra. what needs an extension is the
wedge algebra of incoming elds. it is very important to note that this apparent
quantum mechanical picture is converted into lqp with vacuum polarization as
soon as we e.g. go to double cone localization; this will be shown in the sequel.
the extension of the above proof beyond 4-point functions is left to the reader.
the kms computation can be immediately extended to formfactors i.e.
mixed correlation functions containing in addition to fs one generic operator
a  a(w ) so that the previous calculation results from the specialization a = 1.
this is so because the connected parts of the mixed correlation function is
related to the various (n, m) formfactors (1) obtained by the dierent ways of
distributing n+m particles in and out states. these formfactors are described
by dierent boundary values of one analytic master function which is in turn
related to the various forward/backward on shell values which appear in one
mixed a-f correlation function. we may start from the correlation function
with one a to the left and say n fs to the right and write the kms condition
as

daf ( fn)...f ( f2)f ( f1)e =df ( f 2i

1

)af ( fn)...f ( f2)e

(28)

the n-fold application of the fs to the vacuum on the left hand side creates
besides an n-particle term involving n operators z  to the vacuum (or kms
reference state vector)  also contributions from a lower number of z s together
with z-z  contractions. as with free elds, the n-particle contribution can be
isolated by wick-ordering12

da : f ( fn)...f ( f2)f ( f1) :e =df ( f 2i

1

)a : f ( fn)...f ( f2) :e

rewritten in terms of a-formfactors the n-particle scattering contribution (us-
ing the denseness of the f ()) reads as

(29)

(30)

h, az (n)...z (2)z (1  2i)i
= h, z(1 + i)az (n)...z (2)i
= hz (1  i), az (n)...z (2)z ()i

12note that as a result of the commutation relation (15), the change of order within the

wick-ordered products will produce rapidity dependent factors

16

here the notation suers from the usual sloppiness of physicist: the analytic
continuation by 2i refers to the correlation function and not to the operators.
for the natural order of rapidities n > .. > 1 this yields the following crossing
relation

in(n)...a
h, aa
out(1), aa

in(2)a
in(n)...a

in(1  i)i
in(2)i

= ha

(31)

the out scattering notation on the bra-vectors becomes only relevant upon
iteration of the kms condition since the bra z s have the opposite natural or-
der. the above kms relation (29) contains additional information about bound
states and scattering states with a lower number of particles. the generalization
to the case of antiparticles6=particles is straightforward. more generally we see
that the connected part of the mixed matrix elements

ha
out(k)...a

out(1), aa

in(n)...a

in(k1)i

(32)

is related to h, az (n)...z (2)z (1)i by analytic continuation which a
posteriori justies the use of the name formfactors in connection with the mixed
a-f correlation functions.

the upshot of this is that such an a must be of the form

a =x 1
n!zc

...zc

an(1, ...n) : z(1)...z(n) :

(33)

where the an have a simple relation to the various formfactors of a (including
bound states) whose dierent in-out distributions of momenta correspond to
the dierent contributions to the integral from the upper/lower rim of the strip
bounded by c, which are related by crossing. the transcription of the an
coecient functions into physical formfactors (32) complicates the notation,
since in the presence of bound states there is a larger number of fock space
particle creation operators than pfg wedge generators f. it is comforting to
know that the wedge generators despite their lack of vacuum polarization clouds
nevertheless contain the full (bound state) particle content. the wedge algebra
structure for factorizing models is like a relativistic qm, but as soon as one
sharpens the localization beyond wedge localization the eld theoretic vacuum
structure will destroy this simple picture and replace it with the appearance
of the characteristic virtual particle structure which separates local quantum
physics from quantum mechanics.

in order to see by what mechanism the quantum mechanical picture is lost
in the next step of localization, let us consider the construction of the double
cone algebras as a relative commutants of of shifted wedge (shiftes by a inside
the standard wedge)

a(ca)

: = a(wa)  a(w )

ca = w opp

a  w

(34)

17

for a  a(ca)  a(w ) and fa( fi)  a(wa)  a(w ) the kms condition for
the w-localization reads as before except that whenever a fa( fi) is crossed to the
left side of a we may commute it back to the right side sinceha(ca), fa( fi)i =

0. the resulting relations e.g.

dafa( f1) : fa( fn)...fa( f2) :e
= da : fa( fn)...fa( f2)fa( f 2i
) :e

1

(35)

note that the fa( f1) in the rst line is outside the wick-ordering. since it does
neither act on the bra nor the ket vacuum, it contains both frequency parts.
the creation part can be combined with the other f s under one common wick-
ordering whereas the annihilation part via contraction with one of the wick-
ordered f s will give an expectation value of one a with (n  2) f s. using
the density of the f s and going to rapidity space we obtain ([11]) the so-called
kinematical pole relation
res12=i haz (n)...z (2)z (1)i = 2ic12 haz (n)...z (3)i (1  s1n...s13)
(36)

here the product of two-particle s-matrices results from commuting the z(1)
to the right so that it stands to the left of z (2) whereas the charge congugation
matrix c only appears if we relax our assumption of selfcongugacy. this relation
appears for the rst time in smirnovs axiomatic approach [13] as one of his
recipes and more recently was derived as a consequence of the lsz formalism
adapted to the factorizing model situation [14]. in the present approach it has an
apparently very dierent origin: it is together with the z-f algebra structure a
consequence of the wedge localization of the generators f ( f ) and the sharpened
double cone locality (34) of a. the existence problem for the qft associated
with an admissable s-matrix (unitary, crossing symmetric, with correct physical
residua at one-particle poles) of a factorizing theory is the nontriviality of the
relative commutant algebra i.e. a(ca) 6= c  1. intuitively the operators in
double cone algebras are expected to behave similar to pointlike elds applied to
the vacuum; namely one expects the full interacting polarization cloud structure.
for the case at hand this is in fact a consequence of the above kinematical
pole formula since this leads to a recursion which for nontrivial two-particle s-
matrices is inconsistent with a nite number of terms in (33) unless the operator
a is a composite of a free eld.

the determination of a relative commutant or an intersection of wedge alge-
bras is even in the context of factorizing models not an easy matter. we expect
that the use of the following holographic structure signicantly simplies this
problem. we rst perform a lightlike translation of the wedge into itself by let-
ting it slide along the upper light ray by the amount given by the lightlike vector
a+. we obtain an inclusion of algebras and an associated relative commutant

a(wa )  a(w )
a(wa )  a(w )

18

(37)

the intuitive picture is that the relative commutant lives on the a part of the
upper/lower light ray, since this is the only region inside w which is spacelike
to the interior of the respective shifted wedges. this relative commutant sub-
algebra is a lightray part of the above double cone algebra, and it is easier to
handle. one only has to take a generic operator in the wedge algebra which
formally can be written as a power series (33) in the generators and [9][35] nd
those operators which commute with the shifted fs

[a, u (e+)f (f )u (e+)] = 0

(38)

since the shifted fs are linear expressions in the zs, the nth order polyno-
mial contribution to the commutator comes from only two adjacent terms in a
namely from an+1 and an1 which correspond to the annihilation/creation term
in f. the size of the shift gives rise to a paley-wiener behavior in imaginary
direction, whereas the relation between an+1 and an1 is identical to (36), so
we do not learn anything new beyond what was already observed with the kms
technique (35). however as will be explained in section 5, the net obtained from
the algebra

a := a a(ca)

(39)

is a chiral conformal net on the respective subspace h = a. if our initial
algebra were conformal d=1+1, the total space would factorize h = h+ h =
(a+ a) , and we would recover the well-known fact that two-dimensional
local theory factorizes into the two light ray theories. if the theory is massive,
we expect h = a+ i.e. the hilbert space obtained from one horizon already
contains all state vectors. this would correspond to the dierence in classical
propagation of characteristic massless/massive data in d=1+1 where it is known
that although for the massless case one needs the characteristic data on the two
light rays, the massive case only requires one light ray. in fact there exists a rig-
orous proof that this classical behavior carries over to free quantum elds: with
the exception of m=0 massless theories, in all other cases (including light-front
data for higher dimensional m=0 situations) the vacuum is cyclic with respect
to one light front h = a [15]. the proof is representation theoretic and holds
for all cases except the d=1+1 massless case. hence in the case of interaction
free algebras the holographic light front reduction which has d-1 dimensions
always fullls for d>2 the reeh-schlieder property, where for d=1+1 only mas-
sive theories obey holographic cyclicity. in order to recover the wedge algebra
from the holographic restriction one needs the opposite translation with u (a)
i.e. a(w ) = a<0adu (a)a+ . for the nontriviality of the net associated
with a(w ) it is sucient to show that the associated chiral conformal theory
is nontrivial. in order to achieve this, one has to convert the bilinear forms (33)
in the z-basis which full the recursion relation into genuine operators on the
one-dimensional light ray. this is outside the scope of this paper.

hence the modular approach leads to a dichotomy of real particle creation
(absent in factorizing models) in the pfgs and in the aspect of wedge local-

19

ization, versus the full qft virtual particle structure of the vacuum13 if tested
with more sharply localized operators.
in some sense the wedge is the best
compromise between the particle/eld point of view. in this and only in this
sense the particle-eld dualism (as a generalization of the particle-wave dualism
of qm) applies to qft. since it is left invariant by an appropriate l-boost,
the algebra contains enough operators in order to resolve at least vacuum and
one-particle states which cannot be resolved from the remaining states in any
algebra with a lesser localization. in the next section we will argue that this is
not a freak of factorizing models, whereas in a later section we will reveal the
less pedestrian aspects of light cone subalgebras and holography. as we have
argued on the basis of the previous pedestrian approach, the holography aspect
will be important in the modular construction of qfts because it delegates
certain properties of a rather complicated theory to those of (in general several)
simpler theories.

it is worthwhile to emphasize two aspects which already are visible from
this pedestrian considerations. one is the notion of quantum localization as
compared to the more classical localization in terms of test function smearing
of pointlike elds. the wedge localization of the pfgs cannot be improved by
choosing smaller supports of test functions inside the wedge; the only possibility
is to intersect algebras. in that case the old generators become useless e.g. in the
description of the double cone algebras, the latter has new generators. related
to this is that the short distance behavior looses its dominating role.
if one
does not use eld-coordinatizations, it is not even clear what one means by the
(good or bad) short distance behavior of a theory, short distance behavior of
what object? there is no short distance problem of pfgs, since they have
some natural cuto (to the extend that the use of such words which are lled
with preasigned old meaning are reasonable in the new context). intersection of
algebras does not give rise to short distance problems in the standard sense of this
word. an explicit construction of pontlike eld coordinates from algebraic nets
is presently only available for chiral conformal theories [16]. it produces elds
of arbitrary high operator dimension, and as a result of its group theoretical
techniques it also does not suer from short distance problems. this feature of
the modular approach clearly has an interesting but non-understood relation to
similar claims in string theory, which also does not seem to be threatened by
ultraviolet problems (and also contains arbitrarily high spins).

3 pfgs in presence of real particle creation

for models with real particle creation it is not immediatly clear how to con-
struct pfgs. in order to get some clue we rst look at d=1+1 theories which
do not have any transversal extension to wedges. furthermore we assume that
there is only one kind of particle which corresponds to the previous assump-

13the deeper understanding of the virtual vacuum structure (or the particle content of say
state vectors obtained by application of a double cone localized operator to the vacuum) is
presumably hidden in the modular groups of double cone algebras.

20

tion concerning the absence of poles in the two-particle s-matrix for factorizing
models.

from the previous discussion we take the idea that we should look for a rela-
tion between the ordering of rapidities and the action of the scattering operator.
we x the state vector of n z s applied to the vacuum for the natural order
to be an incoming n-particle state. the totally mirrored order should then be a
vector obtained by applying the full s-matrix to the incoming n-particle vector.
if the particles are bosons, the order in the incoming operators on which s is
applied does not matter.

but what should we do do for the remaining permutations for the remaining
permutations? we should end up with a prescription which for factorizing
systems agrees with the old one. for two z  there is no problem; the formula
looks as before (17), except that the application of the s-operator to the two-
particle in-vector has components to all n-particle multiparticle vectors for n  2

z (2)z (1)  21a(2)a(1) + 21sa(1)a(2)
ha(n)...a(3)sa(1)a(2)i 6= 0, n  4

(40)

the 4-point f-correlation function has the same form as for the previous fac-
torizing case if one replaces (25) by

z z f



1(

1)f



2(

(41)

2, 

2)(cid:10)

1 |s| 2, 1(cid:11) f2(2) f1(1)

some thinking reveals that subsequent applications of s-matrices on tensor
factors of the n-particle tensor product vectors only makes sense for nonover-
lapping situations. the action of the s-matrix on one tensor factor is associated
with the mirror pertutation of that tensor factor 12...k  k...21 since intuitively
speaking one only obtains the full k-particle scattering if the incoming veloc-
ities (or rapidities) are such that all particles meet kinematically which only
happens if the order of incoming velocities is the mirrored natural order. math-
ematically we should write each permutation as the nonoverlapping product of
mirror permutations the smallest mirror permutations are transpositions of
adjacent factors. an example for an overlapping product is the product of two
such transpositions which have one element in common e.g 123  132  312;
there is no meaning interms of a subsequent tensor s-matrix action. however
the composition 123  213  312 has a meaningful s-matrix counterpart:
namely s  s12a(1)a(2)a(3) where s12 leaves the third tensor factor un-
changed i.e. is the fock space vector (sa(1)a(2))  a(3) on which the
subsequent action of s (which corresponds to the mirror permutation of all 3
objects) is well dened. in general if one mirror permutation is completely inside
a larger one the scattering correspondence which is consistent with the tensor
product structure of fock space. on the other hand for overlapping products
pf mirror permutations the association to scattering data becomes meaningless,
where overlapping means that part of each mirror permutation is outside of the
other. fortunately, as it is easy to see, there is precisely one representation in

21

terms of nonoverlapping mirror permutations. this leads to a unique repre-
sentation of multi z -state vectors in terms of scattering data. on the other
hand if we were to write each mirror permutation as a product of (necessar-
ily overlapping) transpositions, we loose the uniqueness and we then need the
yang-baxter structure in order to maintain consistency; in this case we return
to the modular setting of factorizing models in the previous section.

let us elaborate this in a pedestrian fashion by writing explicit formulas for

n=3,4. for n=3 the z -state vector is a sum of 3!=6 terms

z (3)z (2)z (1) 

321a(3)a(2)a(1) + 312s21a(3)a(2)a(1)

+ 231s32a(3)a(2)a(1) + 123s321a(3)a(2)a(1)

12a(3)a(2)a(1)

23a(3)a(2)a(1) + 213s321  s

+ 132s321  s
here  denotes again the characteristic function of the respective orders and
s.. acts on the respective tensor factor with the remaining particle being a spec-
tator. as in the two-particle case, this action creates a vector with a complicated
incoming particle content having components to all particle numbers. the nor-
malization constant in front is the same as for the statistics permutation i.e. as
in the case s=1. note that the last two terms correspond to nested mirror per-
mutations and, as will be seen below, results in the appearance of nondiagonal
inclusive processes terms in the f-correlation functions which generalize the
diagonal inclusive processes which result from the summation over nal states
in cross sections.

the inner products of these vectors with themselves contribute to the 6-point
f-correlation function. the integrand of one of those contributions describes the
already mentioned nondiaogonal inclusive contribution

3, 

2, 

(cid:10)

1 |s  s

12| 3, 2, 1(cid:11)

(42)

in a graphical scattering representation particle 1 and 2 would scatter rst and
produce arbitrarily many (subject to the conservation laws for the total energy-
momentum) particles which together with the third incoming particle (which
hitherto was only a spectator) enter an additional scattering process of which
only the 3-particle outgoing component is separated out by the matrix element
in (42). the dot means summation over all admissable intermediate states and
could be represented by e.g. a heavy line in the graphical representation in
order to distinguish it from the one-particle lines.

there are alltogether six s-independent diagonal term in the inner product
which result from the inner product of a bra-component with the ket compo-
nent having a characteristic function  with identical subscripts. thanks to
the unitarity of the s-matrix products compensate and in the remaining sum
involving products of  and matrix-elements of the unit operator the sum over

22

products of  add up to one and hence the s drop out. the terms which con-
tain s acting only on two-particle tensor factors are the same as for two-particle
scattering. terms containing the 3-particle s-matrix with one  function have
a corresponding term with the hermitian adjoint s and the mirrored . the
6-point correlation function also contains a contribution from the inner product
of a 4-z () vector with a 2-z () vector which originate from terms where
the rst z  in z z z  has been replaced by a z() = z ( + i). in the
inner product we simply transport z from the ket to the bra and in this way
one obtains a 2  4 inner product which apart from analytic continuation is
related to 3  3 by crossing. in vectors with more than 3 fs there are also
terms where annihilators appear between creators. we will not present the dis-
entangling of such terms. the presence of such terms is important for the kms
property since the crossing of one particle formally links the 2  4 contribution
to the analytically continued 3  3 contribution. the structure of the 4-z ()
vector will be described below. since the 6-point function of the f s also in-
volves as a meas of safety we will call the crossing symmetry obtained from
kms the modular crossing property simply to allow for the possibility that
the standard crossing symmetry to the extend that is has been dened in the
literature may not completely agree with the crossing derived from kms. here
we have used a self-conjugate model for explanatory purpose, the adjustment to
the particle6=antiparticle case is easily done. in terms of converting external legs
in scattering graphs by crossing incoming particle legs into antiparticle outgo-
ing legs continued to the negative mass shell. note that in the 6-point function
the on-shell energy-momentun conservation allows the crossing of a single z,
whereas for n=4 this was only possible with a crossing of a pair of zs.

the present analytic understanding in terms of the kms analyticity of the
wedge localization replaces the mysterious maximal analyticity. the present
modular approach also shows that the old bootstrap program contained a lot of
physically sound structures; it mainly failed (in the sence of becoming sterile)
because of its ideological cleansing rage against o-shell concepts as quantum
elds. in the present modular context it appears the most successful among all
failed theories of this century.

for a 4- z  state vector there is the new possibility of having two two-
particle ss acting on two nonoverlapping pairs of in-particles, before the action
of either the identity or the full s-matrix is applied. we will not write down all
24 contributions for the dierent possible -orderings. rather we will list only
the six classes of nonoverlapping mirror permutation structures by one of their

23

representatives using a recursive way of writing.

(43)

a(4)a(3)a(2)a(1)
s  a(4)a(3)a(2)a(1)

(z (4)z (3)z (2))  a(1)
(z (4)z (3))  (z (2)z (1))
s  (z (4)z (3)z (2))  a(1)
s  (z (4)z (3))  (z (2)z (1))

the rst, second, fourth and last class contains only one vector, the third and
fth class contain 10 = 2  (6  1) elements (the dash on the bracket denotes
omission of the identity contribution which was already taken into account in
the rst term). these 24 contributions correspond to the 24 dierent -orderings
of 4 z -creation operators applied to the vacuum. again as in the n=3 case,
the ordering prescription for the -integration drops out in the calculation of
the 24  24 inner products which contribute to the 8-point function.
the representation of permutations in terms of nonoverlapping mirror per-
mutations and their use in the construction of the rapidity space integrands of
the correlation functions of pfgs f ( f ) can be generalized to arbitrary n, a task
which we will leave to the reader. at the end we obtain a system of correlations
fullling positivity (as a result that all representations of state vectors take place
in a fock space and are dened in terms of subsequent applications of unitaties)
and therefore dening a state on a -algebra generated by the f ( f ).we will not
continue with our pedestrian computations to general n but be satised with
the 6-point function. a proof of the existence of the pfgs in the nonintegrable
case clearly requires a more streamlined formalism than the one used in this
paper. a forteriori the higher dimensional case will not be mentioned. it is not
clear presently whether one should try to construct higher dimensional wedge
algebras directly or via holographic techniques via chiral conformal qfts.

for non-factorizing theories the interest in the modular localization approach
is (besides the improvement in the understanding the structure of interacting
qft) the possible existence of an on-shell perturbation theory of local nets
avoiding the use of the nonintrinsic eld coordinatizations. this is a the re-
vival of the perturbative version of the old dream to construct an s-matrix just
using crossing symmetry in addition to unitarity and no pointlike elds. the
old s-matrix bootstrap program admittedly did not get far, but now we could
formulate a similar but structurally richer problem as a perturbative approach
to correlation functions of the on-shell pfgs. modular theory has given us a
lot of insight and nobody nowadays would try to cleanse the einstein causality
and locality concepts from the stage or claim that this way one can obtain a
toe (minus quantum gravity) as it was done in the 60ies (notably by g. chew
and h. stapp). to the contrary, the local o-shell observable algebras would be
in the center of interest and there is even no cleansing of eld coordinatiza-
tions for ideological reasons but just a pragmatical avoidance. in particular the
sharpening of localization beyond wedges is done by algebraic intersections of

24

wedge algebras rather than by cut-o or test function manipulations on eld
coordinates.

the successful d=1+1 bootstrap-formfactor program for factorizing models
yields s-matrices and formfactors which for models with a continuous coupling
are analytic around g=0. a good illustration is the sine-gordon theory [14]. the
more local o-shell quantities however (i.e. pointlike eld operators or operators
from algebras belonging to bounded regions) are radically dierent since they
involve virtual particle polarization clouds which formally may be represented
by innite series in the on shell fs similar to the factorizing d=1+1 case of the
previous section. the analytic status of these quantities (i.e. localized operators
and their correlation functions) is presently not known; it may well turn out that
they are only borel summable or (in the general non-factorizable case) worse.
the on-shell/o-shell dichotomy of the modular approach for the rst time
allows to determine more precisely if the cause of the possible nonanalyticity at
g=0 are the polarization clouds.

a solution of these problems, even if limited to some new kind of perturbation
theory (perturbation theory of wedge algebras and their intersections) should
also shed some light on the question of how to handle theories involving higher
spin particles, which in the standard o-shell causal perturbation theory lead to
short distance non-renormalizability. a very good illustration of what i mean
is the causal perturbation of massive spin=1 vectormesons. here the coupling
of covariant elds obtained by covariantizing the wigner particle representation
theory in the sense of the previous section will not be renormalizable in the
sense of short distance power counting. in the standard perturbative approach
the indenite metric ghosts are used to lower the operator dimension of the
interaction densities (free eld polynomials) w (x), which as a result of the free
vectormeson dimension dima = 2, are at least 5, down to the value 4 permitted
by the renormalization requirements in a d=1+3 causal perturbative approach
[20]. since the ghosts are removed at the end, the situation is akin to a catalyzer
in chemistry: they do not appear in the original question and are absent in the
nal result (without leaving any intrinsic trace behind). in theoretical physics
the presence of such catalyzers should be understood as indicating that the
theory wants to be analyzed on a deeper level of local quantum physics i.e.
further away from quantization and quasiclassics. indeed in the present on-shell
modular approach the short distance operator reason for introducing such ghosts
would not be there and the remaining question is again whether the modular
program allows for a perturbative analytically managable formulation.

4 the aqft framework

after our pedestrian presentation of the wedge algebra approach it is time to
be more systematic and precise. for noninteracting free system the conversion
of the rather pedestrian spatial nets of real subspaces of the wigner space of
momentum space (m.,s) wave functions into a interaction-free net in fock space

25

produces with the following three properties which continue to hold in the pres-
ence of interactions. they have been explained in many articles [22] and a book
[1] and my main task here is their adjustment to the main problems of this
survey.

1. a net of local (c- or von neumann) operator algebras indexed by classical

spacetime regions o

o  a(o)



without loss of generality the regions o maybe restricted to the poincare
covariant family of general double cones and the range of this map may be
described in terms of a concrete operator algebra in hilbert space for which
the vacuum representation 0 may be taken i.e. a(o)  0(a(o)). the
geometrical and physical coherence properties as isotony: a(o1)  a(o2)
)  a(o) are then evident co-
for o1  o2 and einstein causality: a(o
herence requirements. here we use the standard notation of aqft: the
dash superscript on the region denotes the causal disjoint and on the von
neumann algebra it stands for the commutant within b(h) where h is the
ambient space (here the representation space of the vacuum representa-
tion). einstein causality can be interpreted as an a priori knowledge about
some with a(o) commensurable observables in the sense of von neumann.
this causality property suggests the question if complete knowledge about
commensurability a(o) = a(o) is possible. it turns out that this is in-
deed the generic behavior of vacuum nets called haag duality. the cases of
violation of this duality are of particular interest since they can be related
to a very fundamental intrinsic characterization of spontaneous symme-
try breaking, thus vastly generalizing the nambu-goldstone mechanism
which was abstracted from quantization.

2. poincare covariance and spectral properties.

g  p  g automorphism

g(a(o)) = a(o)

is unitarily implements in the vacuum representation

u (g)au (g) = g(a)
a  a(o)

the unitaries for the translations have energy-momentum generators which
full the relativistic spectrum (positive energy) condition, symbolically
specu (a)  v  (the forward light cone)

3. the phase space structure of local quantum physics or the nuclearity

property.

26

remark 7 the precise fomulation of the third property is somewhat involved
and will be presented after the following remarks on the rst two structural
properties. since in the formulation of the net one may work without loss of
generality with von neumann algebras [1], the rst question is what type in the
murray-von neumann-connes-haagerup classication occurs. there is a very
precise answer for wedges (which may be considered as double cones at innity).
as a result of the existence of a one-sided translation into a wedge, the wedge
algebras a(w ) turn out to be a factor of type iii1. this implies in particular
that the algebra has properties which take it far away from the structure of qm
(factors of type i). such algebras do not have pure states or minimal projec-
tors, rather all faithful states on such algebras are thermal i.e. obey the kms
condition which makes them similar to states appearing in cst with bifurcated
horizons as in hawking-unruh situations (but more quantum.i.e. without the
classical geometric killing vector aspects of horizons). also in the case of the
wedge and double cone algebras the modular ow near the boundary becomes
asymptotically geometric and killing-like (in the wedge case it is even globally
geometric). the origin of the thermal aspects are primarily on the local quan-
tum physics side and not on the cst gravity side; the black hole has a natural
localizing horizons (or one created by the cosmological theater of the dear lord),
whereas the horizons of e.g.
localizing double cones algebras are constructs of
the human mind which serve to test the content of lqp.

the nuclearity requirement results from the idea to obtain a local quantum
physical counterpart of the phase space of qm in a box. the famous nite
number of degrees of freedom law per unit cell of qm phase space results from
limiting the discrete box spectrum by a cut-o in energy. as rst suggested by
haag and swieca [1], the corresponding lqp counterpart, based on the causally
closed double cone analogue of the quantization box in schrodinger qm, points
into the direction of a weakly innite number; according to their estimates
this set of state vectors was compact in hilbert space. subsequent renements of
techniques revealed that this set is slightly smaller namely nuclear, and exact
calculations with interaction-free theories demonstrated that the lqp situation
also cannot be better than nuclear.

the best way to understand this issue is to follow the motivating footsteps of
haag and swieca. they, as many other physicists at that time (and as contem-
porary philosophers of nature), were attracted by the intriguing consequences
of the of the so-called reeh-schlieder property of qft

p(o) = h, cyclicity of 

a  p(o), a = 0 = a = 0 i.e.  separating

(44)

which either holds for the polynomial algebras of elds or for operator alge-
bras a(o). the rst property, namely the denseness of states created from the
vacuum by operators from arbitrarily small localization regions (e.g. a state
describing a particle behind the moon14 and an antiparticle on the earth can be
14this weird aspect should not be held against qft but rather be taken as indicating that
localization by a piece of hardware in a laboratory is also limited by an arbitrary large but

27

approximated inside a laboratory of arbitrary small size and duration) is totally
unexpected from the global viewpoint of general qt. in the algebraic formula-
tion this can be shown to be dual to the second one (in the sense of passing to
the commutant), in which case the cyclicity passes to the separating property of
 with respect to a(o). referring to its use, the separating property is often
called the state vector-eld relation. the mathematical terminology is to say
that the pair ( a(o),) is standard. the large enough commutant required
by the latter property is guarantied by causality (the existence of a nontrivial
o) and shows that causality is again responsible for the unexpected property.
of course the claim that somebody causally separated from us may provide
us nevertheless with a dense set of states is somewhat queer if one thinks of the
tensor factorization properties of ordinary schrodinger qm with respect to an
inside/outside separation via a subsystem box.

if the naive interpretation of cyclicity/separability in the reeh-schlieder the-
orem leaves us with a feeling of science ction (and as already mentioned, also
has attracted a lot of attention in philosophical quarters), the challenge for a
theoretical physicist is to nd an argument why, for all practical purposes, the
situation nevertheless remains similar to qm. this amounts to the fruitful ques-
tion namely which among the dense set of state vectors can be really produced
with a controllable expenditure (of energy); a problem from which haag and
swieca started their investigation. in qm this question is not that interesting
and urgent, since the localization at a given time via support properties of wave
functions leads to a tensor product factorization of inside/outside so that the in-
side state vectors are evidently never dense in the whole space and the particle
behind the moon paradox does not occur.

later we will see that most of the very important physical and geometrical
informations are encoded into features of dense domains, in fact the aforemen-
tioned modular theory is explaining this deep relation between operator domains
of the tomita ss and spacetime geometry. the individuality of the various s-
operators is only the dierence in domains, they always do the same thing in
their domains namely map a to a for all a  a(o).
for the case at hand the reconciliation of the paradoxical aspect [17] of
the reeh-schlieder theorem with common sense has led to the discovery of
the physical relevance of localization with respect to phase space in lqp, i.e.
the understanding of the size of degrees of freedom in the set: (notation h =

r edpe)

pea(o) is compact

pea(o) or eha(o) is nuclear

(45)

(46)

the rst property was introduces way back by haag and swieca [1] whereas
the second more rened statement (and similar nuclearity statements involving
modular operators of local regions instead of the global hamiltonian) which is
saturated by qft and easier to use, is a later result of buchholz and wichmann

nite energy, i.e.
obtains genuine localized subspaces without energy limitations.

is a phase space localization (see subsequent discussion).

in qm one

28

[21].
it should be emphasized that the lqp degrees of freedom counting of
haag-swieca, which gives an innite but still compact set of localized states is
dierent from the qm niteness of degrees of freedom per phase used in entropy
calculations of string theory.

the map a(o)  eha(o) is only nuclear if the mass spectrum of
lqp is not too accumulative in nite mass intervals e.g.
in particular innite
towers of equal mass particles are excluded (which then would cause the strange
appearance of a maximal hagedorn temperature). the nuclearity assures that
a qft, which was given in terms of its vacuum representation, also exists in a
thermal state. an associated nuclearity index turns out to be the counterpart
of the quantum mechanical gibbs partition function [22] [1] and behaves in an
entirely analogous way.

the peculiarities of the above degrees-of freedom-counting are very much
related to one of the oldest exotic and at the same time characteristic aspects
of qft, namely vacuum polarization. as rst observed by heisenberg, the
partial charge:

qv =zv

j0(x)d3x = 

(47)

1  o, i.e.

diverges as a result of uncontrolled vacuum particle/antiparticle uctuations
near the boundary. for the free eld current it is easy to see that a better de-
nition involving test functions, which smoothens the behavior near the boundary
and takes into account the fact that the current is a 4-dim distribution which
has no restriction to equal times, leads to a nite expression. the algebraic
counterpart is the so called split property, namely the statement [1] that if
one leaves between say the double cone (the inside of a relativistic box) ob-
servable algebra a(o) and its causal disjoint (its relativistic outside) a(o) a
collar (geometrical picture of the relative commutant) o
a(o)  a(o1), o  o1 , properly

(48)
then it is possible to construct in a canonical way a type i tensor factor n which
extends in a fuzzy manner into the collar a(o)  a(o1) i.e. a(o)  n 
a(o1). with respect to n the hilbert space factorizes i.e. as in qm there are
states with no uctuations (or no entanglement) for the smoothened opera-
tors in n . whereas the original vacuum will be entangled from the box point
of view, there also exists a disentangled product vacuum on n . the algebraic
analogue of heisenbergs smoothening of the boundary is the construction of a
this factorization of the vacuum with respect to a suitably constructed type i
factor algebra which uses the collar extension of a(o). it turns out that there is
a canonical, i.e. mathematically distinguished factorization, which lends itself
to dene a natural localizing map  and which has given valuable insight into
an intrinsic lqp version of noethers theorem [1], i.e. one which does not rely
on any parallelism to classical structures as is the case with quantization. it is
this split inclusion which allows to bring back the familiar structure of qm
since type i factors allow for pure states, tensor product factorization, entangle-
ment and all the other properties at the heart of standard quantum theory and

29

the measurement process. however despite all the eorts to return to structures
known from qm, the original vacuum retains its thermal (entanglement) prop-
erties with respect to all localized algebras, even with respect to the fuzzy
localized n .
formulas for standard split inclusions [23]

let us collect in the following some useful mathematical denitions and

denition 8 an inclusion  = (a,b, ) of factors is called standard split if
the collar a  b as well as a,b together with  are standard in the previous
sense, and if in addition it is possible to place a type i factor n between a
and b.

in this situation there exists a canonical isomorphism of ab to the tensor
product a b which is implemented by a unitary u () : h  h1 h2 (the
localizing map) with

u ()(ab)u () = a b
a  a, b  b

(49)

this map permits to dene a canonical intermediate type i factor n (which
may dier from the n in the denition)

n := u ()b(h1)  1u ()  b  b(h)

(50)

it is possible to give an explicit formula for this canonical intermediate algebra in
terms of the modular conjugation j = u ()ja  jbu () of the collar algebra
(a  b, ) [23]

n = a  jaj = b  jbj

(51)

the tensor product representation gives the following equivalent tensor prod-

uct representation formulae for the various algebras

a  a  1
b  1  b
n  b(h)  1

(52)

as explained in [23], the uniqueness of u () and n is achieved with the help
of the natural cones p(ab) and p(ab). these are cones in hilbert
space whose position in h together with their facial subcone structures pre-
empt the full algebra structure on a spatial level. the corresponding marvelous
theorem of connes [24] goes far beyond the previously mentioned state vec-
tor/eld relation of the reeh-schlieder theorem.

returning to our physical problem, we have succeeded to nd the right
analogue of the qm box. contrary to the causally closed local type iii algebras
with their sharp light cone boundaries (quantum horizons), the fuzzy box

30

type i factor n permits all the structures we know from qm: pure states,
inside/outside tensor factorization, (dis)entanglement etc. in fact the vacuum
is highly entangled in the tensor product description, the modular group of the
state  |a b represented in the tensor product cone p(a b) is not the
tensorproduct of those of a and b, whereas the modular conjugation j acts
on the tensor product cone as ja jb (since the restriction  |a b is faithful).
note also that the restriction of the product state    to b or b is not
faithful resp. cyclic on the corresponding vectors and therefore the application
of those algebras to the representative vectors  yields projectors (e.g. p =
u ()b(h1) 1u ()).
since the fuzzy box algebra n is type i, we are allowed to use the usual
trace formalism based on the density matrix description, i.e. the vacuum state
can be written as a density matrix  on n which leads to a well-dened von
neumann entropy. we know that if we restrict to the collar subalgebra or to a,
we have for a  a

(, a) = tra
s() = trlog

(53)

(54)

but this is not sucient to determine  which is needed for the von neumann
entropy of of the fuzzy box s(). if we would be able to compute the unitary
representer it
n of the modular group of the pair (n, ) then we know also
 since the modular operator of a type i factor is known to be related to an
unnormalized density matrix  with  = 1
 through the tensor product
tr
formula on h1 h2

 =  1



for chiral conformal theories on the line one can carry the analysis a bit further.
choose two intervals of length 2a > 2b symmetrically around the origin. thanks
scale invariance together with the canonicity of the construction of the fuzzy
interval algebra n, the scaled family 2a > 2b with collar size (ab) has the
same entropy independent of . hence if we keep the collar size xed say at the
value  and consider intervals of increasing length l = a, the limiting behavior
for l  is the same as for an interval of unit length with shrinking collar
size . from this observation we learn that small collar size can be interpreted
as large interval and hence the nite coecient of the leading 1 behavior
is nothing but the entropy per unit of length for a very long interval. the
coecient depends on the characteristics of the conformal matter content (e.g.
for the minimal models with central term c<1, the coecient is expected to be
computable in terms of c only) and will not be computed here.

returning to the general case, the behavior of the above nuclearity index
in the limit of o  rd [1] suggests that the fuzzy box entropy is proportional
to the volume of the box. therefore it comes as a surprise that in fact the en-
tropy in fact is only proportional to the area of th horizon (boundary of causal
completion) of the localization region in the limit of large localization regions.

31

a computation from rst principles is feasible with the help of the holographic
property which we will explain in section 6. but in contradistinction to the en-
tropy picture coming from from black hole physics, the area behavior of localiza-
tion entropy is not limited to curved spacetime situations with bifurcated killing
horizons but rather represents a general behavior in local quantum physics for
horizons obtained by causal completion of localization regions. if these horizons
have in addition classical killing symmetry properties then one expects that
this entropy can also be seen on the side of the curved spacetime metric. this
would be the scenario for a quantum physical understanding of the bekenstein
aerea law from the lqp point of view. we will return to this question in the
last section.

5 modular inclusions and intersections, holog-

raphy

one of the oldest alternative proposals for canonical (equal time) quantizations
is the so called light ray or light front quantization. the trouble with it is
that it apparantly inherits some the short distance diseases from the canonical
quantization the latter is known to only makes sense for superrenormalizable
interactions but not for strictly renormalizable ones which lead to innite mul-
tiplicative renormalizations. let us ignore this and look at some additional
problems which canonical quantization does not have. if one considers it as a
quantization procedure, one looses the connection with local qft; in fact in
none of the papers on light cone quantization it is spelled out how to return to
a local qft. this problem of light front restricted qft was recently looked at
(for interaction free theories) by dimock [25].

our modular inclusion techniques in section 2 suggested that for massive
(and massless for d 6= 1 + 1) theories the wedge algebra and the chiral light
front algebra are identical

a(w ) = a(r>)

(55)

we already mentioned there that the chiral algebra really should be thought
of as the transversally unresolved light front algebra but the use of a light
front notation like a(rd1
> ) could suggest the wrong idea that one knows the
whole light front net. if we just refer to the global algebras and not to their
local (sub)net structure, then all three objects are equal and their could be
no confusion. the equality can be shown to hold for all algebras which have
pfg generators which includes free elds and according to our arguments in
the third section should encompass all qfts with a mass gap (which have a
lsz/haag-ruelle scattering theory). the rigorous construction of a chiral net
for a(r>) indicated in section 3 will now be presented in more detail within its
natural setting of modular inclusions [18].

32

one rst denes an abstract modular inclusion in the setting of von neumann
algebras. there are several types of inclusions which have received mathematical
attention15. an inclusion of two factors n  m is called (+ halfsided) modular
if the modular group it
m for t < 0 transforms n into itself (compression of n )
(56)

adit

mn  n

mn is dense in m (or that tit
m and it

we assume that tadit
mn =c1). this means
in particular that the two modular groups it
n generate a two para-
metric group of (translations, dilations) in which the translations have positive
energy. let us now look at the relative commutant as done in the appendix of
[26].

let (n  m, ) be modular with non trivial relative commutant. then look
at the subspace generated by relative commutant hred  (n   m)  h. the
modular groups to n and m leave invariant this subspace: it
m, t < 0 maps
n   m into itself by the inclusion being modular. look at the orthogonal
complement of hred in h. this orthogonal complement is mapped into itself by
it
m for positive t. let  be in that subspace, then

(cid:10), it

m(n   m)(cid:11) = 0 f or t > 0.

(57)

analyticity in t then gives the vanishing for all t.
due to takesakis theorem [4] we can restrict m to hred using a conditional
expectation to this subspace dened in terms of the projector p onto hred.
then

e(n   m)  m|(n m) = e(m)

e() = p  p

(58)

(59)

is a modular inclusion on the subspace hred. n also restricts to that sub-
space and this restriction is obviously in the relative commutant of e(n  
m) e(m). moreover using arguments as above it is easy to see that the re-
striction is cyclic w.r.t.  on this subspace. therefore we arrive at a reduced
modular standard inclusion

(e(n )  e(m), )

(60)

standard modular inclusions are however isomorphic to chiral conformal eld
theories [18].

this theorem and its extension to modular intersections leads to a wealth of
physical applications in qft, in particular in connection with hidden symme-
tries symmetries which are of purely modular origin and have no interpretation
in terms of quantized noether currents [11][26]. the modular techniques unravel
structures which cannot (or have not) be seen in terms of eld coordinatizations.

15in addition to the split inclusion of the previous section, there are the famous jones
inclusions whose charateristic property is the existence of conditional expectations. their
domain in particle physics is charge fusion and internal symmetry.

33

holography and problems of degrees of freedom counting (phase space in lqp)
as well as the issue of localization entropy are other examples.

let us briey look again at applications to d=1+1 massive theories.

it
is clear that in this case we should use the two modular inclusions which
are obtained by sliding the (right hand) wedge inside itself. hence we chose
m = a(w ) and n = a(wa+ ) or n = a(wa ) where wa denote the two
upper/lower light like translated wedges wa  w. as explained in section 2
following ([15]) and above, we do not expect the appearance of a nontrivial sub-
space (i.e. we expect p = 1) in the action of the relative commutants onto the
vacuum

a(i(0, a))  a(wa )  a(w )
a(i(0, a) = h

(61)

where the notation indicates that the localization of a(i(0, a)) is thought of
as the piece of the upper/lower light ray interval between the origin and the
endpoint a. by viewing this relative commutant as a lightlike limiting case
of a spacelike shift of w into itself (and using haag duality), on obtains the
interval i as a limit of a double cone.

from the standardness of the inclusion one obtains according to the previ-
ous dicussion an associated conformal net on the line with the following formula
for the chiral conformal algebra on the half line

a(r>)  [t0

adit

w (a(i(0, a)))  a(w ),

we expect the equality sign to hold

a(r>) = a(w )

(62)

(63)

but our argument was tied to the existence of pfgs since as a result of their
massshell structure

f ( f ) =z z()f ()d = fres( fres)

(64)

where the notation res indicates the corresponding generators in light ray theory
which are identical in rapidity space and only dier in their x-space appearance.
this is a signicant stengthening of the cyclicity property a(r>) = a(w )
for the characteristic data on one light ray. the argument is word for word
the same in higher spacetime dimensions since the appearance of transversal
components (which have no inuence on the localization) in addition to  do
not modify the argument. one would think that the inference of pfg generators
can even be disposed of and the equality should follow from the standard causal
shadow property of qft in the form

a(w ) = a(r()
> )

34

(65)

where r()
> is a spacelike positive haline with inclination  with respect to
the x-axis. the idea is that if this relation would remain continuous for r()
>
approaching the light ray ( = 45 ) which then leads to the desired equality.
we believe that the relation (65) which will be called characteristic shadow
property is a general consequence of the causal shadow property (the identity

of a(o) = a(o) where o is the causal completion of the convex spacelike
region o) in any spacetime dimension.
theories with the charateristic shadow property are the objects of the light
ray folklore. the present conceptually more concise approach explains why
the light ray quantization in the presence of interactions is basically nonlocal
which signicantly restricts its unqualied physical usefulness. the reason is
that also the haline algebra is equal to the wedge algebra (since all rays of
forward light cone propagation which pass through the upper/lower half light
ray r> have passes or will pass through w ), the locality on the light ray cannot
be propagated into the wedge (the strips inside the wedge subtended from an
interval i on the light ray by the action of the opposite light ray translation
are for massive theories not outside the propagation region of the complement
of i). only for the haline itself one obtains a 2-dimensional shadow region
namely the wedge region.
if one uses both light cones then it is possible to
reconstruct a causal d=1+1 net by intersections. this construction uses the the
two-dimensional translation group on the wedge and the ensuing double cone
relative commutants. note that in order to achieve this with halines of light
rays one needs the relative position of the two haline chiral light ray algebras
relative to each other in the common space h. in fact one shifted right light ray
chiral algebra together with its parity reected image is equal to the union of
two opposite spacelike separated wedge algebras. the reected light ray algebra
may also be replaced by a subalgebra on the left hand extension of the original
ray. as a result of the fact that the beginning of this left hand extension is not
in the complete shadow of the reected ray and therefore part of the subalgebra
is not geometric but fuzzy. a similar conclusion is valid for intersections of
light ray algebras with their parity reected images in which case the inner
of the double cone except its light cone boundaries is fuzzy. this agrees with
the qualitative behavior one expects for the modular group in a massive theory
for the union or the intersection of two appropriately shifted opposite wedges.
this underlines that if one uses several chiral conformal algebras in order to
desribe the net of a massive theory the important part of the information of
regaining the massive theory from its conformal holographic pieces is encoded
in the relative positions of these algebras. the light ray algebra belonging to a
wedge diers from that of a chiral conformal qft only in that the former has
two independent translations instead of one. the mass spectrum of a d=1+1
massive theory is contained in these two translations. with just one light ray and
two translations acting dierently on the one ray one can already reconstruct
the full d=1+1 net. later we will see that this is enough to understand the
localization entropy which turns out to have the surface behavior rst observed
in the context of classical localization behind black hole horizons by bekenstein.

35

because of the transversal extension, the holography in terms of one-dimensional

chiral conformal theories is more complicated for higher dimension. there one
needs a family of chiral conformal theories which is obtained from modular
intersections. rather than associating the chiral conformal theorie with a light
ray, it is more appropriate to associate it with the transverse space of the wedge
which contains the light cone (light front instead of light ray). such a family is
obtained by applying l-boosts to the standard wedge w which tilt w around
one of its dening light rays, so that the transversal degeneracy of the mod-
ular inclusion is destroyed. in this way one obtains a fan-like ordered family
of wedges corresponding to a family of chiral conformal theories whose relative
position within the original hilbert space contains all the informations which
are necessary in order to reconstruct the original (massive) theory. a detailed
and rigorous account will be given in a future paper. here we will only men-
tion some analogies to the above light ray situation. the process of tilting by
applying a family of boost transformations which leave the common light ray
invariant is described by unitary transformations of one chiral conformal theory
into another. each single one, according to the higher dimensional character-
istic shadow property, is equal to a wedge algebra. knowing the position of
a nite number of such chiral conformal theories with respect to each other
(the number increases with increasing spacetime dimensions), determines the
relative position of a nite number of wedge algebras which accoding to the pre-
vious remarks is sucient to reconstruct the original net (the blow-up property
in [26][2]). as previously mentioned, in the d=1+1 case the second light ray
can be thought of as obtained from the rst one by a unitary parity reection
(assuming that the theory is parity invariant). the terminology scanning by
a nite family of chiral conformal theories is more appropriate for the con-
struction of higher dimensional theories [35][26]. it has been shown elsewhere
[35] that the modular inclusion for two wedges gives rise to two reected eight-
parametric subgroups of the 10-parametric poincare group which contain a two
parametric transversal galileian subgroup of the type found by formal light
front quantization arguments [34]. all these considerations show the primordial
role of the chiral conformal qft as a building block for the higher dimensional
qfts.

there is another much more special kind of holography in which an iso-
morphism of a massive qft in d+1 dimensions to a conformal d-dimensional
theory is in the focus of interest. this isomorphism appears in rehrens solu-
tion [7] of maldacenas conjecture [27][28](see also preceeding work [29]) about
a holographic relation of quantum matter in a (d+1)-dimensional anti de sitter
spacetime with that in a d-dimensional conformal qft. this type of hologra-
phy has not been observed outside the anti de sitter spacetime and since it is
an isomorphism to a conformal theory, the degrees of freedom are not really
reduced in the sense of t hooft [30], as it was the case in the previous hologra-
phy via light ray reduction. the m-w holography is apparently of importance
within the development of string theory, in fact the protagonists believe that it
contains information about a possible message about quantum gravity of string
theory. within the present aqft setting its main interest is that it requires

36

the eld-coordinatization free point of view in its strongest form: whereas in
most problems of qft there exist appropriate eld coordinatizations which of-
ten facilitate calculations, the m-w isomorphism dened in rigorous terms by
rehren is not pointlike and has no description in terms of elds outside its al-
gebraic version. in contradistinction to the light ray holography which happens
at the causality horizon (light front boundary) of modular localization (or its
classical killing counterpart in case of black holes) the ads holography takes
place at the boundary at innity! this is a result of the weird einstein causality
structure of the ads curved spacetime which lacks the property of global hyper-
bolicity. at this point of causality properties one is nolens volens driven into the
aqft conceptual framework of nets with isomophism between algebras which
are labeled by geometrically maps between regions. the understanding of this
phenomenon is enhanced if one starts from an d+2 dimensional spacetime with
two time like directions on which the conformal symmetry group so(d,2) acts
linearly which was already useful in handling the conformal compactication
which is necessary in order to give a meaning to the nonlinear fractional action
on d-dimensional minkowski space coordinates. since the ads reading of con-
formal qft is very similar16, let us have a brief look. the so(d,2) group is
associated with the d+2 dim. metric

g

1

gab =


+1 


for the conformal compactication one considers the d+1 dim. submanifold

(66)

(67)

md+1 =(cid:8) = (, 5, 6)  rd+2 : 2 = 0, 6 > 0(cid:9)

i.e. the d+1 dim. surface of a d+2 dim. forward light cone. the parametrization
 = (sin ,~, 5, cos ) together with the requirement of e =(~, 5) being a unit
vector describes a parametrization of the rays on md+1. this parametrization
yields the compactied minkowski space

t =

~x =

sin

5 + cos

~

5 + cos

(68)

gives the compactication formula in terms of a periodic time  and the fact
that is a unit vector. in fact one obtains the well-known periodic embedding
of minkowski space m into m = sd1  r which is known to have a causal
structure.. for a single copy we have

m = {(e,  ) : cos + 5 > 0, <  < }

(69)

16the ads manifold is the mass hyperboloid in the linear representation space of so(d,2)
factorized by the total reection in the ambient space. the mass hyperboloid shares the same
asymptotic part with the md+1 the light cone surface.

37

in the relation to ads one does not use the surface of the light cone in (67),
but rather a hyperboloid in the forward light cone. we leave the verication
that this causes more havoc with einstein causality than the previous lightlike
parametrization to the reader. the causality problems comes under control as
soon as one gives up the idea of a map between points and uses instead the
wedge/double cone spacetime indexing of the nets of aqft following rehrens
paper [7]. the ads-conformal isomorphism uses a boundary at innity rather
than the lightray in the previous light ray holography/scanning. from our
constructive use of holography there is not much to be gained (outside the
indicated pedagogical lesson) by this isomorphism since the higher conformal
eld theories are as dicult as their non-conformal counterparts.

at this point it may be helpful to remind the reader that the resolution
of the einstein causality paradox in conformal qft which consists in noting
that would be conformally invariant theories as the e.g. massless thirring
model, where charged elds violate huygens principle and hence lead to appar-
ent causality confusions (through the possibility of linking the timelike region in
m by global conformal transformations via lightlike innity to spacelike events),
led (already 10 years before the famous bpz paper17) to the appearance of the
conformal blocks in a decomposition theory with respect to the center of the
global conformal group [31]. with other words, genuinely interacting local elds
tend be reducible under the global conformal group and decompose into nonlocal
but irreducible conformal blocks. the knowledge of these irreducible compo-
nents is equivalent to a the description of a eld on the many sheeted covering
which is local in the sense of the causality structure of the covering space. ac-
cording to the expectations in [5][7] there should be a similar decomposition
theory with respect to nets on ads with a certain subclass of interacting the-
ories being given in terms of conformal block objects by inverting the rehren
isomorphism [2].

6 the entropy problem in lqp

the presentation of thermal aspects of modular localization versus the heat bath
setting would be incomplete without the incorporation of entropy. in fact in
the case of a black hole metric with its classical killing symmetry, the analogy
of the behavior of the black hole surfaces with the entropy of heat bath systems
rst observed by bekenstein was the basis of hawkings great discovery about
the thermal behavior of quantum matter enclosed behind black hole horizons.
in this setting it is not really necessary to directly confront the problem of
entropical behavior of enclosed quantum matter, rather one may understand a
large amount of facts about black holes via the classical metric and analogies
with thermodynamics. this elegant hiding of quantum matter behind the size
of the black hole surface led t hooft in more recent times to formulate a new
quantum principle: the holographic principle. the setting was that of quantum

17but not yet to the discovery of minimal models! only the d=1+1 exponential bose elds

with abelian braid group statistics were known during the 70ies .

38

matter in qft behind a bifurcate killing horizon. in fact as will be shown in
the following, the holographic aspect in the description of general qft of the
previous section combined with the remarks on localization entropy of the fuzzy
box in section 4 will lead to an understanding of the bekenstein area law of
a suitably dened entropy for large double cone localizations. in order to see
this, we choose a symmetric double cone oa with radius a around the origin
(for reasons of simplicity in d=1+2). its commutant algebra which accoding to
haag duality is a(o) = a(o) can be represented as the union of all wedges
obtained from a standard wedge translated by a into the x-direction a(wa) by
a spatial rotation rot() in the x-y plane. we have

a(o

a) = alg([
= alg([

adrot()a(wa))
adrot()a+(ra))

(70)

where ra =[a,]denotes the haline indexing for the chiral theory and where
we used the characteristic shadow property for the wedge algebra a(wa). the
unitary modular group for this situation commutes with the rotations since
the latter leaves the algebra as well as the reference state  invariant. on
the rotation invariant subalgebra which as a result of the compactness can be
obtained via a conditional expectation with the projector onto the rotation
invariant subspace, the modular acts the modular group on the haline. hence
the localization entropy for the rotational invariant subalgebra in a large radialy
fuzzy box behaves as

sinv() = trln  2  l = area

(71)

here  is the density matrix for the fuzzy radial box subalgebra of rotationally
invariant operators. the result follows from the entropy in section 4 for a large
interval in a chiral conformal theory by mapping the radial problem into the
chiral one. the generalization to d>1+2 is straightforward. we believe that the
area law for the entropy remains valid without the restriction to a subalgebra
of rotationally invariant elements but have presently no proof. note that the
shape of the spacetime regions is restricted by the requirement that a horizon
of a localization region o must be the boundary of its causal completion o.
the divergence of localization entropy was of course expected from the rmly
established hypernite von neumann type iii1 nature of (sharply) local algebras.
this kind of ultraviolet divergence is intrinsic and cannot be disposed of. under
the previous conditions the scale invariance of the light ray (or light front) chiral
theory allows to convert the inverse collar size of the fuzzy box into the area
law (at the expense of loosing a normalization constant) at least for very large
localization regions. the resulting area law was not expected and comes as a
surprise. all this does not require any knowledge of quantum gravity.

on the other hand the present notion of localized matter entropy has no
obvious relation to the classical notion of entropy a la bekenstein which one

39

expects to see on the side of the classical metric. in fact it appears that this
gravitational aspect of entropy cannot be reconciled with that of the quantum
matter content behind horizon. the solution of this problem (if there is one)
may contain indications which point into the direction of that elusive quantum
gravity. to see this, one should notice that the above chiral matter entropy is
a quantity which refers to an equivalence class of theories. namely all theories
which in the holographic reduction on the light ray (the bifurcated horizon)
lead to the same chiral theory will be members of this class. if the horizons are
killing horizons in curved spacetime, the class contains families of metric which
coalesce on the horizon. this then would bring us close to a situation discussed
by carlip [32], although the details in particular the treatment of boundaries
would be dierent18. as far as i can see this is the only conservative idea of how
possibly the elusive quantum gravity could leave an imprint on cst+quantum
matter enclosed behind a horizon. the string explanation may be more elegant,
but one is asked to accept a large number of prescriptions and assumptions
which have no good physical interpretations and have not been confronted with
those successful principles on which qft has had its greatest triumph.

7 comparison with string theory

as mentioned in the introduction, historically string theory originated from
the attempt to understand and implement the issue of crossing symmetry of
the s-matrix. to be more specic, the dual model which was at the cradle of
string theory, used a special form of crossing called duality. the idea behind
this did not come from a conceptual spacetime analysis of qft, but was as
a kind of momentum space engineering of an entirely phenomenological ideas
in those days. for the two-particle s-matrix it consisted in demanding that
the sum over intermediate one-particle states in the s-channel agrees with the
similar sum over t-channel intermediate particle states. in view of the fact that
scattering theory demands the presence of multi-particle cuts it is really hard
to understand why a phenomenological idea which neglected important physical
structure enjoyed such past popularity. in fact after venezianos construction of
the dual model, it became clear that it had to be unitarized which, as a result
of the innite particle towers permitted a string theoretic interpretation in the
sense of the mass spectrum (but not in terms of localization).

this unitarization invalidated, as expected, on the one hand the original
naive duality requirement in terms of particles19, but on the other hand gave
birth to string theory. it led to an interesting new kind of systematics which has

18in particular it is unclear how the ultraviolet divergent part of the localized matter entropy
gets lost on the uctuating metric side (or why only the nite fuzzy box part appears on
the metric side).

19qft does not realize duality in the sense of equality of s and t channels on the level of
particles, but rather on the level of superselected charge sectors. the simplest illustration
of this is chiral conformal qft which may be interpreted as the solution of the nonlinear
schwinger-dyson equations with the imposition of the charge duality which linearizes this
system of equations for correlation functions.

40

the form of a perturbation theory with respect to the genus of riemann surfaces
in a complex auxiliary parameters which generalized a real -representation
parameter used in qed by schwinger and which nicely complied with a string
interpretation. but it should be stressed that the word string of string theory
has a very dierent meaning from string-localized objects in the formal intuitive
sense of mandelstam. they were as explained below spectral strings and the
fact that these strings could only exist in very high-dimensional spaces had
to be discovered by mathematical consistency considerations and was not the
result of apriori physical intuition. also its remedy, the dimensional reduction
by a klein-kaluza conversion of spacetime dimensions into internal symmetry
degrees of freedom was anything else than natural with respect to full local
quantum physics; it is entirely of (semi)classical origin and its consistency with
local quantum physics is hard to check (and never was checked) beyond the
semiclassical pictures.

another problematic point is the intrinsic meaning of stringyness in form
of an innite tower of particles with an oscillator-like mass spectrum. as long
as mass spectra do not accumulate (by increase of multiplicities) too densely,
they are compatible with the phase space structure of qft and lead to rea-
sonable thermal behaviour, i.e. the pathological situation of a nite hagedorn-
temperature can probably be avoided in string theory. but if this is the case,
what then is the intrinsic dierence with (nonperturbative) qft and the mean-
ing of stringyness? extended objects can also exist in qft build on perfect local
observables; in fact the superselection theory even demands their existence as
carriers of e.g. braidgroup statistics in d=1+2 dimensions.

the most important problem for any kind of relativistic quantum physics
is causality since it is inexorably linked to the interpretation of the theory.
there exists no physically interpretable framework without einstein causality
of observables and localization of elds/operators and all attempts to overcome
causality up to now have failed [17]. even if the positive energy condition is ful-
lled and the mass spectrum contains one-particle states as it happens in lowest
order of string perturbation, the interpretability is still far from being secured.
in order to e.g. resolve the interpretation of the continuum of the mass spec-
trum in terms of multi-particle scattering states, one needs cluster properties
which have their origin in locality in conjunction with spectral properties. the
diagonalization of a mass operator and the determination of its discrete eigen-
states is physically quite void unless one has an idea of how this operator can
be expressed in terms of localizable variables. unfortunately the ascend of the
string-theoretical formalism popularity went hand in hand with a loss of feeling
for the importance of conceptual properties as causality. hence it is not known
if the word string only refers to the oscillator-like mass spectrum or whether
it has something to do with the (target)spacetime localization. the key to this
problem, so it is said since almost 20 years, lies in a string eld theory. how
can one interpret something when the key to interpretation is missing? the only
paper(s) which have tried to shed some light on this question were conspicuously
ignored by string theorist ([25] and two references therein). therefore the rela-
tion of string theory to qft, and hence also the intrinsic meaning of the word

41

stringyness as a characteristic distinguishing property of string theory versus
(general, not just perturbative) qft remain obscure. here also the standard
string textbook analogy to some alleged relativistic quantum mechanics in terms
of a square root action (the line element in minkowski space) in a functional
integral does not help even if one is willing to overlook that there is no theory
of interactions of this kind (this is why we are doing eld theory after all!), the
tricks and the massaging which such expressions require in order to arrive at
schwingers -representation for the free propagator stand no comparision to
the lucidity of wigners representation approach to free particles. what is an
analogy good for which after a closer look goes in the opposite direction?

compared with the complicated historical path from s-matrix theory to
modern string theory, the arguments which led to the present modular approach
in qft are at least logically quite straightforward. the modular concepts serve
to close the gap between the crossing symmetric s-matrix framework and the
causal o-shell eld theory (without the inference of the old duality idea which
had to be abandoned in the unitarization of the dual model anyhow). the
main resulting message is the inexorable manner in which qft links crossing
symmetry and (hawking-unruh) localization-thermality (kms-properties) with
einstein causality.

an attractive aspect of string theory is of course its ultraviolet niteness
which is attributed to the extended nature of strings. as we showed in this
paper, the wedge localization approach is also ultraviolet nite. this is a result
of the construction of double cone algebras via intersecting (naturally cut-o)
wedge algebras and the avoidance of pointlike elds in intermediate computa-
tional steps. the existence problem of the modular approach is then tied up
with the nontriviality (6= c1) of the compactly localized algebras. even at
the risk of repetition we emphasize again that the wedge localization construc-
tion claries the elusive aspects of crossing symmetry in terms of well-known
and very basic thermal kms properties of modular localization. the thermal
aspects are independent of the origin of localization; they are present for clas-
sical horizons dened in terms of killing vector elds as one encounters them
in curved space time (black hole physics) as well as in minkowski spacetime
particle physics for matter enclosed behind the lightlike bounding surface of a
causally completed region. string theory lacks the local quantum aspects and
produces thermal behaviour via killing symmetry and dierential geometry. it
does not know thermalization via localization.

both the modular wedge localization approach as well as string theory at-
tribute a basic signicance to chiral conformal theory and both know the notion
of holography. but the use and the physical interpretation of these concepts
is quite dierent. whereas in aqft chiral conformal theories are the building
blocks of holographic images of higher dimensional theories and therefore are
positioned in the same minkowski space, string theory places the chiral confor-
mal data into an auxiliary source space and identies the physical space as the
target space of the elds in which they take their values. related to this is in
fact the notorious diculty of dening a string eld theory and an associated
locality concept.

42

another point of dierence is the question of physical naturalness of su-
persymmetry. string theory requires susy together with the high spacetime
dimension for reasons of consistency. aqft on the other hand, although having
made important contributions to the understanding of supersymmetry [1], nev-
ertheless views supersymmetry with a certain amount of physical reservations
for several reasons. aqft has not been able to attribute a clearcut physical
aim to this symmetry. it does not play any role in the extraction of internal
symmetries from the superselection theory of aqft [33], nor does it seem to
play an essential role in the rigorous construction of low-dimensional models20
(e.g. the tricritical ising model); it seems to be present for its own sake, like an
accidental symmetry. indeed its behavior under thermalization by a heat bath
[36] (collapse instead of spontaneous breaking of symmetry) lends additional
weight to this suspicion. in the present modular localization framework which
by its very nature is ultraviolet-nite, one even looses the ultraviolet niteness
argument which is usually given in its favor. in order to shed some further light
on this confusing situation it would be nice to have an explicit look at the lowest
nontrivial order of gauge invariant correlation functions in n=4 supersymmetric
gauge theories. nontrivial conformal invariant 4-dim. correlations are of course
sensational, even in lowest order perturbation theory (in particular gauge in-
variant low order 4-point conformal functions). in the literature one only nds
calculations on beta-functions and (in contrast to qed) no lowest order gauge
invariant correlation functions.

perhaps the biggest dierence is the attitude towards the elusive quantum
gravity. it is well known that the occurance of all spins including the spin=2
in string theory was interpreted in favor of messages about quantum gravity
i.e. the string tension coupling strength was identied by at with the grav-
ity coupling on the basis of this s=2 appearance and the dierential geometric
(sigma-model) reading was used as an additional argument. in fact this was
the reason why the original interpretation in terms of strong interaction physics
was abandoned and replaced by an interpretation as a theory of everything
including quantum gravity. the recent maldacena-witten conjecture [27][28] on
the ads-conformal correspondence created considerable exitement as a result of
this interpretation and its recent extensions. but its rigorous solution in terms
of an algebraic isomorphism [7] could not conrm this quantum gravity aspect
of the conjecture. we have seen that the present modular localization approach
applies to localizations behind natural cst horizons with classical killing sym-
metries as well as to quantum horizons of causally completed minkowski space
regions. if there is any message about qg at all, then as indicated in the pre-
vious section, it is buried in the interplay of the family of cst regions which
have the same quantum matter behavior near the horizon and the family of
spacetime metrics which coalesce if restricted to the horizon.

the logic of string theory is that of dierential geometry and topology

20the various families of conformal or factorizing models are classied by their charge
superselection rules. the knowledge that the rotational eigenstates or particles which carry
these charges have a supersymmetric rotational or mass spectrum is not needed for their
construction.

43

whereas the present approach follows entirely the logic of local quantum physics
of which modular theory is the most important part. the reason why dierential
geometric methods have gained so much more popularity with physicist than
those of local quantum physics can be found in the use of euclidean eld theory
and functional methods of the 60ies. these deep structural discoveries which
related certain families of (noncommutative) real time local quantum theories
with certain types of (commutative) classical statistical mechanics and whose
practical use for qft was very much restricted to quasiclassical and pertur-
bative computations, became gradually enriched with dierential geometry and
topology in the 70ies and 80ies. the esthetical appeal of the latter as well as the
subconscious desire of many physicists for a more intuitive classical realm (with
added uctuations) contributed to the unfortunately very widespread identi-
cation of qft with those commutative structures. in qm according to bohr
and heisenberg, the position and momentum are not attributes of the electron
but rather properties of the factualization in a measurement. in very special
situations one may apply quasiclassical (wkb) ideas i.e. uctuations around a
classical solution. in the transition from qm to local quantum physics (from
typei to typeiii observable algebras) this tendency towards the noncommutative
is even enhanced. in string theory on observes the opposite tendency because
there the classical picture corrected by some uctuations is the standard picture
of string theorists about their subject. it is amazing to see how particle physics
via string theory falls back into a pre heisenberg time. it is doubtful that an
added pinch of noncommutative geometry can correct this situation.

if this paper convinced one or the other reader that the only safe way is to
return to important cross roads of the past and to solve some of the left cru-
cial problems, then its purpose has been accomplished. in all cases of rigorous
physically successful treatment of low dimensional exactly soluable models, the
natural real time noncommutative structure (and not the commutative actions
and lagrangians) played the important role. even in soluable models of low
dimensional statistical mechanics, particularily the computation of critical in-
dices, it was the conversion into an auxiliary noncommutative real time problem
(the transfer matrix in case of lattice systems) which nally led to a solution
and rarely the other way around.

it is true that the rst attempt at an on-shell theory in form of the s-matrix
bootstrap of the 60ies failed. but its shortcoming was not in the basic on-shell
ideas as crossing itself, but rather its anti qft stance in the name of some
purity principle (concerning what constitutes a particle observable). as far as
failed particle theories of this century are concerned, it was amazingly successful;
many particle physics concepts originated in the tail of that framework. the
present modular localization approach tries to pick up that heritage and enrich
them with deep additional structures which preempt the all important einstein
causality already in the on-shell wedge algebra and its pfg generators.

acknowledgement 9 a correspondence with k.-h. rehren, and discussions
with j. roberts and r. longo during a short visit of rome university led to var-
ious improvements of the paper. i am particularily indebted to j. roberts for the

44

invitation which made these discussions possible. finally i would like to thank
my colleagues at the fu andreas fring, michael karowski, hradch babujian
and robert schrader for some good questions and constructive suggestions.

note added:
the reader certainly has noticed my critical attitude towards some aspects of
the post veltman-t hooft particle physics. the gain of mathematical sophisti-
cation e.g. in string theory (and other attempts at theories of everything) could
not hide the signicant loss of the art of particular that physical-conceptual
thinking which was so impressively embodied in the great pioneers of quantum
mechanics and quantum eld theory. the ascend of public relation and market-
ing in fundamental particle physics theory has been accompanied by an amazing
loss of knowledge and physics culture if not outright ignorance, in many cases
including knowledge about basic quantum theory (no problem for shareholders
in a theory of everything). texts like the above or other works cited therein,
which try to apply new methods of local quantum physics to some old and deep
problems as the characterization of interactions by their vacuum or one-particle
localization clouds and short distance behavior (questions for which the above
modular theory for the rst time gives a conceptual and mathematical machin-
ery) do not receive the attention which they deserve (already solved by string
theory!). it is so to say local quantum physics in its original pure form21 (not
commutative euclidean theory made noncommutative by adding a pinch of non-
commutative geometry). this is not to say that one does not nd journals with
editors which have an access to mature referees with a general physical culture
who are aware of the present precarious situation.

in order to test my claim, i submitted (contrary to my previous submissions)
this time to a journal with some renown especially in particle physics. trying to
be fair and not to burden this test by too many dicult mathematical structures,
i facilitated the intuitive understanding of its physical content by removing some
of the mathematical apparatus of a previous version and replaced it with some
verbalized conceptual arguments. the result below is what i expected, although
i certainly did not provoke it. what is so characteristic about this result is not
so much the referees complaint of lack of understanding. this is a subjective
matter which depends when and were you received your education, and what
one referee does not understand another one may grasp immediately. more
characteristic and totally expected is the uniform opinion of the editorial board
with the (intellectually, not personally) somewhat arrogant undertone that the
paper is also not worthwhile to be understood. this total loss of intellectual
curiosity and the total dependence on the market value are the hallmarks of
the end of a century which had such glorious beginnings. it is clear that the
editorial board did not even look at the content of the paper. ideologies of what
is the right physics and what is worthless, as any political ideology, do not have

21to bring a light-hearted touch into this very serious issue of the future of particle physics,
let me mention the following episode. around the beginning of the 60ies one of the us food
manufacturers tried to market a ketchup without the pinapple etc. additives. but the very
natural strong taste did not suit the customers who already were used to the blended stu.

45

to be enforced, they nd their followers driven by preemptive obedience to what
the zeitgeist demands.

the source from where this new conceptual illiteracy, fundamentalism and
general decadence of physical culture emanates is not to be found in some ideo-
logical pressure outside the physics community (actually ideologies as fascism or
communism, despite massive attempts, hardly made a dent at physics ); rather
there is an irresistible (carrier-inuencing) pressure emanating from inside, no-
tably some of the great international research centers and the journals which
carter to the particle theory produced there. the only hope for a future recovery
lies in the hands of a future young generation.

here is the result of the successful test with this updated version.

dear professor schroer,
the above paper has now been reviewed and the supervisory editors have
also been consulted regarding the suitability for publication in
nuclear physics b. the report is herewith attached.
in view of this, we regret being unable to publish your work in
nuclear physics b.
yours sincerely,
henk smid
for the editors of nuclear physics b
**********************************************************************
preliminary report on #7980. i have serious problems in
understanding the content of the paper under discussion: usually after
reading a theory paper one has a clear idea what is the problem the
author solved, what he calculated that wasnt calculated before, what
predictions he makes (ideally about the real world but lets content
ourselves with the behaviour of a model, at least) which werent known
before, etc. i have to confess that after reading the paper under
discussion i dont have any idea what the author tries to accomplish.
it would be very helpful if the author would oer some guidance to
the reviewer, and in consequence to the readers of the journal it was
submitted to. then maybe one can judge the content of the paper.

references

[1] r. haag, local quantum physics, springer 1992

[2] b. schroer, modular theory and eyvind wichmanns contributions to mod-

ern particle physics theory, hep-th/9906071 and referinces therein

[3] h.-j. borchers, on the revolutionization of quantum field theory by
tomitas modular theory, university of goettingen preprint, april 1999,
invited contribution to the issue 2000 of jmp

46

[4] m. takesaki, tomitas theory of modular hilbert algebras and its appli-
cations, lecture notes in mathematics, vol. 128, springer-verlag berlin,
heidelberg, new york (1970), s. stratila, modular theory in operator
algebras, abacus press turnbridge wells, kent, england (1981)

[5] d. buchholz, m. florig and s.j. summers, hawking-unruh temperature

and einstein causality in anti-de sitter space-time, hep-th/9905178

[6] r.f. streater and a.s. wightman, pct, spin and statistics and all that,

benjamin 1964

[7] k.-h. rehren, algebraic holography, hep-th/9905179

[8] s. weinberg, the quantum theory of fields, i, cambridge university press

1995

[9] b. schroer, annals of physics 275, no2 (1999) 190

[10] r. brunetti, d. guido and r. longo, first quantization via bw property,

in preparation

[11] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, modular theory and geometry, hep-

th/9809003, rev. in math. phys., in print

[12] o. bratteli and d. w. robinson, operator algebras and quantum statisti-
cal mechanics i, ii, springer verlag, new york, heidelberg, berlin (1979)

[13] f. a. smirnov, int.j. mod. phys. a4, (1989) 156. our operator notation
is more close to m. yu lashkevich, sectors of mutually local fields in
integrable models of quantum field theory, hep-th/9406118

[14] h. babujian, a. fring, m. karowski and a. zapletal, nucl. phys. b 538,

(1999) 53

[15] d. guido, r. longo, j.e. roberts and r. verch, charged sectors, spin
and statistics in quantum field theory on curved spacetimes, math-
ph/9906019

[16] k. fredenhagen and joerss, comm. math. phys. 176, (1996), 541

[17] b. schroer, jpa 32, (1999) 5937

[18] d. guido, r. longo and h.-w. wiesbrock, comm. math. phys. 192, (1998)

217

[19] d. buchholz and r. haag, the quest for understanding in relativistic
quantum physics, university of goettingen preprint october 1999, invited
contribution to the issue 2000 of jmp

[20] duetsch and b. schroer; massive vectormesons and gauge theory, hep-

th/9906089

47

[21] d. buchholz and e. h. wichmann, commun. math. phys. 106, (1986) 321

[22] d. buchholz, current trends in axiomatic quantum eld theory, hep-

th/9811233

[23] s. doplicher and r. longo, invent. math. 75, (1984) 493

[24] a. connes, ann. inst. fourier 126, (1974) 121

[25] j. dimock, locality in free string theory, mp-arc 98-311

[26] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, looking beyond the thermal horizon:
hidden symmetries in chiral models, hep-th/9901031, rev. in math. phys.
in print

[27] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, (1998) 231

[28] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, (1998) 253

[29] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov, a. m. polyakov, phys.lett. b428 (1998) 105

[30] g. t hooft, in salam-festschrift, a. ali et al. eds., world scientic 1993,

284

[31] b. schroer and j. a. swieca, phys.rev. d 10, (1974) 480, b. schroer , j.
a. swieca and a. h. voelkel, phys. rev. d 11, (1975), 1509, see also: b.
schroer, principles of general quantum field theory versus new intuition
from model studies, an essay dedicated to the memory of jorge andre
swieca (1936-1980), in: the algebraic theory of superselection sectors,
introduction and recent results, page 573-604, ed. daniel kastler, world
scientic 1990

[32] s. carlip, black hole entropy from conformal field theory in any di-

mension, hep-th/9812013, and references therein.

[33] s. doplicher and j. e. roberts, commun. math. phys. 131, (1990) 51

[34] l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36, (1995) 6377

[35] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, modular constructions of quantum field
theories with interactions, hep-th/9812251, rev. in math. phys. in print

[36] d. buchholz and i. ojima, nucl. phys. b 498, (1997) 228

48

