1
0
0
2

 

b
e
f
3

 

 
 

2
v
1
3
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

chaotic quantization of classical gauge fields

t.s. biro1, s.g. matinyan2, and b. muller3

1mta kfki rmki, h-1525 budapest, p.o.box 49, hungary

2yerevan physics institute, yerevan, armenia

3department of physics, duke university, durham, nc 27708-0305

3 february 2001

abstract

we argue that the quantized non-abelian gauge theory can be obtained
as the infrared limit of the corresponding classical gauge theory in a higher
dimension. we show how the transformation from classical to quantum eld
theory emerges, and calculate plancks constant from quantities dened in the
underlying classical gauge theory.

1 introduction

although much progress has been made in recent years, the question, how gravita-
tion and quantum mechanics should be combined into one consistent unied theory
of fundamental interactions, is still open. superstring theory [1], which describes
four-dimensional space-time as the low-energy limit of a ten- or eleven-dimensional
theory (m-theory [2]), may provide the correct answer, but the precise form and
content of the theory is not yet entirely clear. it is therefore legitimate to raise the
question whether the fundamental description of nature at the planck scale is really
quantum mechanical, or whether the underlying theory could be a classical extension
of general relativity. this questions was initially raised by t hooft, who has argued
that quantum mechanics can logically arise as low-energy limit of a microscopically
deterministic, but macroscopically dissipative theory [3].

it is the goal of this manuscript to present an explicit example that shows how (eu-
clidean) quantum eld theory can emerge in the infrared limit of a higher-dimensional,

u. s. address: 3106 hornbuckle place, durham, nc 27707

1

classical eld theory. it is well known that relativistic quantum eld theory in (3 + 1)-
dimensional minkowski space can be obtained by analytic continuation (wick rota-
tion) of the analogous statistical eld theory dened on a four-dimensional euclidean
space. in fact, this concept provides the only known mathematically rigorous de-
nition of interacting quantum eld theories. physical observables, such as vacuum
expectation value of self-adjoint operators, can be reliably calculated in the euclidean
path integral formulation of the quantum eld theory. this method has been exten-
sively used to obtain numerical solutions of many relativistic quantum eld theories.
we here show that in some cases, specically for non-abelian gauge elds, the
functional integral of the three-dimensional euclidean quantum eld theory arises
naturally as the long-distance limit of the corresponding classical gauge theory de-
ned in (3 + 1)-dimensional minkowski space. because of the general nature of the
mechanism underlying this transformation, for which we have coined the term chaotic
quantization, it is expected to work equally well in other dimensions. for example,
the four-dimensional euclidean quantum gauge theory arises as the infrared limit of
the (4 + 1)-dimensional classical gauge theory. we emphasize that the dimensional
reduction is not caused by compactication; the classical eld theory does not exhibit
periodicity either in real or imaginary time.

the mechanism discussed below can be viewed as a physical analogue of the well-
known technique of stochastic quantization [4]. in both cases, the quantum uctua-
tions arise from the stochastic noise in a higher-dimensional theory. however, chaotic
quantization diers from stochastic quantization in two essential aspects: it only ap-
plies to certain eld theories, including non-abelian gauge theories, and it allows us
to calculate plancks constant h in terms of fundamental physical quantities of the un-
derlying higher-dimensional classical eld theory. accordingly, chaotic quantization
provides a physical mechanism generating the quantum mechanics of elds and parti-
cles, while stochastic quantization is generally regarded as a convenient calculational
technique, but not as a physical principle.

2 chaoticity of classical yang-mills fields

the chaotic nature of classical non-abelian gauge theories was rst recognized twenty
years ago [5, 6]. over the past decade, extensive numerical solutions of spatially vary-
ing classical non-abelian gauge elds on the lattice have revealed that the gauge eld
has positive lyapunov exponents that grow linearly with the energy density of the
eld conguration and remain well-dened in the limit of small lattice spacing a or
weak-coupling [7, 8, 9]. more recently, numerical studies have shown that the (3 + 1)-
dimensional classical non-abelian lattice gauge theory exhibits global hyperbolicity.
this conclusion is based on calculations of the complete spectrum of lyapunov expo-
nents [10] and on the long-time statistical properties of the kolmogorov-sinai (ks)
entropy of the classical su(2) gauge theory [11].

these results imply that correlation functions of physical observables decay rapidly,

2

and that long-time averages of observables for a single initial gauge eld conguration
are identical to their microcanonical phase-space average, up to gaussian uctuations
which vanish in the long-time limit as t1/2
, where ts is the observation time. since
the relative uctuations of extensive quantities scale as l3/2, the microcanonical
(xed-energy) average can be safely replaced by the canonical average when the spa-
tial volume probed by the observable becomes large. in the following we discuss the
hierarchy of time and length scales on which this transformation occurs.

s

accoridng to the cited results, the classical non-abelian gauge eld self-thermalizes
on a nite time scale eq given by the ratio of the equilibrium entropy and the ks-
entropy, which determines the growth rate of the course-grained entropy:

eq = seq/hks .

(1)

at weak coupling, the ks-entropy for the (3 + 1)-dimensional su(2) gauge theory
scales as

hks  g2e  g2t (l/a)3 ,

(2)

where e is the total energy of the eld conguration and t is the related temperature
dened by

e = t 2z/t .

(3)

here z(t ) is the partition function of the classical gauge eld regularized by the
lattice cut-o a. the equilibrium entropy of the lattice is independent of the energy
and proportional to the number of degrees of freedom of the lattice: seq  (l/a)3.
the time scale for self-equilibration is thus given by1

eq  (g2ea3/l3)1  (g2t )1 .

(4)

when one is interested only in long-term averages of observables, it is thus suf-
cient to consider the thermal classical gauge theory on a three-dimensional spatial
lattice. note that, although we are interested only in the long-distance properties
of the quasi-thermalized eld, we have to dene the classical gauge eld on a lattice
rather than in the continuum. due to the nonlinear interactions most of the energy
contained in the initial eld conguration ultimately cascades into modes with wave
lengths near the ultraviolet cuto a, and the limit of vanishing lattice spacing a is
not well dened. without the lattice cuto, we would be unable to replace the micro-
canonical average by a thermal average, because the cascade toward the ultraviolet
would not end and no stationary limit would exist. we shall see later that the lattice
cuto a also takes on an important physical role, as it enters into the denition of
plancks constant h.

1in the convention adopted here, g is the coupling strength of the classical yang-mills theory with
dimension (energylength)1/2. this choice ensures the proper dimensionality of the yang-mills
action.

3

3 chaoticity of classical yang-mills theory

the long-distance dynamics of non-abelian gauge theories at nite temperature t is
known to reduce to the dynamics of the static chromomagnetic sector of the gauge
eld [12]. the scale beyond which this dimensional reduction is valid is given by the
magnetic length scale dmag  (g2t )1, where g is the classical gauge coupling. the
magnetic length scale is the same for the classical and the quantized gauge theories
at nite temperature. dmag is independent of the lattice cuto a. it is well recognized
that the static magnetic sector in the thermal quantum eld theory is essentially
classical in nature and depends on h only via the scale of the thermal eective gauge
coupling g(t ).

it is worth noting that in spite of many similarities between the thermal classical
eld theory and the thermal quantum eld theory, there are major dierences. the
ultraviolet properties of the quantum eld theory at nite temperature are controlled
by the thermal length scale dth  h/t , which is a basically quantum mechanical con-
cept.2 in the thermal classical eld theory, the lattice spacing a serves as ultraviolet
regulator. similarly, the electric screening length of the thermal quantum eld theory
is del  h/gt . in the thermal classical eld theory electric elds are screened on
the length scale del  qa/g2t . only the magnetic length scales are equal for classical

and quantal gauge elds. the inverse electric screening length is proportional to the
plasma frequency pl governing propagating long-wavelength modes. the damping
of these plasma modes is of the order pl  d1
mag [13], rendering the dynamics of the
thermal gauge eld purely dissipative and noisy on distances larger than dmag.

the dynamic properties of thermal non-abelian gauge elds at such long distances
have been studied in much detail [14, 15, 16]. it is now understood that the real-time
dynamics of the gauge eld at such scales can be described, at leading order, by a
langevin equation



a
t

= d  b +  ,

(5)

where d is the gauge covariant spatial derivative, b = d  a is the magnetic eld
strength, and  denotes gaussian distributed (white) noise with zero mean and vari-
ance

hi(x, t)j(x, t)i = 2t ij3(x  x)(t  t) .

(6)

here  denotes the color conductivity [17] of the thermal gauge eld which is deter-
mined by the ratio 2
pl/th of the plasma frequency pl and the damping rate th of a
thermal gauge eld excitation.

at leading logarithmic order in the quantum eld theory, the color conductivity

satises

1 

h
t

ln[dmag/del] .

(7)

2the need for this length scale in the derivation of the stefan-boltzmann radiation law motivated

planck in 1900 to postulate the existence of the quantum of action h.

4

the derivation of the langevin equation (5) for the classical thermal gauge theory
proceeds completely in parallel to that for the quantum eld theory, except that the
pl  g2t /a, and the ratio between the magnetic and electric length
plasma frequency 2
scales depends on the combination g(t a)1/2 instead of gh1/2. the separation of length
scales requires g2t a  1. the color conductivity then scales as

1  a ln[dmag/del] .

(8)

this relation implies that the color conductivity is an ultraviolet sensitive quantity,
which depends on the lattice cuto. the various relations derived in this section are
summarized in table 1, where the results for the thermal quantum eld theory are
listed in parallel with those of the classical gauge theory.

4 dimensional reduction and quantization

we will now show that an observer restricted to long distances in three-dimensional
euclidean space would interpret the dynamics of the classical gauge eld as that of a
quantum eld in its vacuum state with the planck constant

h3 = at .

(9)

the starting point of our argument is the well-established fact that the random gaus-
sian process dened by the langevin equation (5) generates three-dimensional eld
congurations with a probability distribution p [a] determined by the fokker-planck
equation




t

p [a] = z d3x



a  t

p
a

+

w
a

p [a]! .

here w [a] denotes the magnetic energy functional

w [a] = z d3x

1
2

b(x)2 .

(10)

(11)

any non-static excitations of the magnetic sector of the gauge eld, i.e. magnetic
elds b(k) not satisfying k  b = 0, die away rapidly on a time scale of order /k2,
where k denotes the wave vector of the eld excitation. for observers sensitive only to
distances much larger than dmag and times much longer than d2
mag, measurements of
the magnetic eld yield averages with the equilibrium weight given by the stationary
solution of the fokker-planck equation (10):

(12)
the three-vector bi  ijkf jk incorporates all components of the eld strength tensor
f jk in three dimensions. w/t is now identied as the three-dimensional action s3
measured in units of plancks constant h3:

p0[a] = ew [a]/t .

w/t = s3/h3 ,

(13)

5

where

s3[a] = 

1

4 z dx3z d2x f ikfik .

(14)

(15)

dimensional reasons require a rescaling of the gauge eld strength with the funda-
mental length scale

f ik = af ik .

that the lattice spacing a is the proper rescaling parameter is seen by noting that
the lattice versions of the two-dimensional and the three-dimensional integrals

z dnx  anxx

(16)

dier by a factor a. together with the relations (11), (13), and (14) this reasoning
demonstrates that h3 = at , as stated at the beginning of this section. the rescaling
of the gauge eld also xes the three-dimensional coupling constant

g2
3 =

g2
a

=

g2t
h3

,

so that

a(a + ga  a) = (a(3) + g3a(3)  a(3)) .

(17)

(18)

according to (10), an observer conned to the measurement of long-time and
long-distance averages of microscopic observables associated with the classical gauge
eld measures the same values as would an observer living in the three-dimensional
euclidean world in the presence of a quantized gauge eld in its vacuum state. it is
important to note that this correspondence is not induced by a compactication of
the minkowskian time coordinate. there is no true thermal bath of gauge elds in
the original minkowski space theory, and the quasi-thermal solution of the (3 + 1)-
dimensional classical eld theory does not satisfy periodic boundary conditions in
imaginary time.

the eective dimensional reduction found here is not caused by the discreteness
of the excitations with respect to the time-like dimension, but by the dissipative
nature of the (3+1)-dimensional dynamics. magnetic eld congurations satisfying
d  b = 0 can be thought of as low-dimensional attractors of the dissipative motion,
and the chaotic dynamical uctuations of the gauge eld around the attractor can
be consistently interpreted as quantum uctuations of a vacuum gauge eld in 3-
dimensional euclidean space.

we thus see that the mechanism of dimensional reduction discussed above is dis-
tinct from the mechanism that operates in thermal quantum eld theories. in fact,
the dimensional reduction by chaotic uctuations and dissipation does not occur in
scalar eld theories, because  even in cases that exhibit chaos, such as two quarticly
coupled scalar elds  there is no dynamical sector that survives after long-time aver-
aging. quasi-thermal uctuations generate a dynamical mass for the scalar eld(s)

6

and thus eliminate any arbitraily slow eld modes.3 in the case of gauge elds, the
transverse magnetic sector is protected by the gauge symmetry, and it is this sector
which survives the time average, without any need for ne-tuning of the microscopic
theory.

5 general considerations

it is worthwhile to review the essential ingredients of chaotic quantization. first,
the underlying classical eld theory must contain strongly coupled massless degrees
of freedom. such theories are generally chaotic at the classical level [20]. when
observations are restricted to the infrared degrees of freedom, this corresponds to a
coarse graining of the dynamical system, leading to strongly dissipative long-distance
dynamics. the coupling to the short-distance modes generates uncorrelated noise,
and the coarse-grained system obeys a dissipation-uctuation theorem [18].

second, the classical eld theory at nite temperature must have degrees of free-
dom that remain unscreened. this condition generally requires the presence of a
symmetry, such as gauge invariance. it is a reasonable expectation that such symme-
tries occur in any unied theory containing general relativity. the requirement also
provides a simple and consistent explanation for the empirical fact that all funda-
mental interactions are described by gauge elds.

our example for the chaotic quantization of a three-dimensional gauge theory in

euclidean space raises a number of questions:

1. does the principle of chaotic quantization generalize to higher dimensions, in

particular, to quantization in four dimensions?

2. can the method be extended to describe eld quantization in minkowski space?

3. what type of deviations from the standard quantum eld theory are caused by

the existence of a microscopic classical dynamics?

the rst question is most easily answered. as long as globally hyperbolic classical
eld theories can be identied in higher dimensions, our proposed mechanism should
apply. although we do not know of any systematic study of dicretized eld theories
in higher dimensions, a plausibility argument can be made that yang-mills elds
exhibit chaos in (4+1) dimensions. for this purpose, we consider the infrared limit
of a spatially constant gauge potential, as studied in refs. [5, 6, 19]. for the su(n)
gauge eld in (d + 1) dimensions in the a0 = 0 gauge, there are 3(n 2 1) interacting
components of the vector potential and 3(n 2  1) canonically conjugate momenta
(the components of the electric eld) that depend only on the time coordinate. the

3an exception may be the case where the excitation energy of the scalar eld is just right to
put the quasi-thermal eld at the critical temperature of a second-order phase transition, where
arbitraily slow modes exist as uctuations of the order parameter.

7

remaining gauge transformations and gauss law allow to eliminate (n 2  1) degrees
of freedom from each. next, rotational invariance in d dimensions permits to reduce
the number of dynamical degrees of freedom by twice the number of generators of
the group so(d), i.e. by d(d  1). this leaves a (d  1)(2n 2  2  d)-dimensional
phase space of the dynamical degrees of freedom and their conjugate momenta. for
the dynamics to be chaotic, this number must be at least three. for the simplest
gauge group su(2), this condition permits infrared chaos in 2  d  5 dimensions,
including the interesting case d = 4. higher gauge groups are needed to extend
the chaotic quantization scheme to gauge elds in d > 5 dimensions. of course,
this reasoning does not prove full chaoticity of the yang-mills eld in these higher
dimensions, it just indicates the possibility. numerical studies will be required to
establish the presence of strong chaos in these classical eld theories.

the second question is more dicult to address. a formal answer would be
that the minkowski-space quantum eld theory can (and even must) be obtained
by analytic continuation from the euclidean eld theory. any observable in the
minkowski-space theory that can be expressed as a vacuum expectation value of
eld operators can be obtained in this manner. if this argument appears somewhat
unphysical, one might consider a completely dierent approach, beginning with a
chaotic classical eld theory dened in (3+2) dimensions. field theories dened in
spaces with two time-like dimensions were rst proposed by dirac in the context of
conformal eld theory [21] and have recently been considered as generalizations of
superstring theory [22]. in that case, the reduction to one time dimension is achieved
by gauge xing.
in the present case, the physical time dimension may be dened
as the coordinate orthogonal to the total 5-momentum vector p  of the initial eld
conguration.4

in the presence of two time-like dimensions, energy becomes a two-component
vector ~e that is a part of the (d + 2)-dimensional energy-momentum vector. if we
select an initial eld conguration with energy e0~n, where ~n is a two-dimensional
unit vector, this choice denes a preferred time-like direction ~n in which the eld
thermalizes. conservation of the energy-momentum vector ensures that the total
energy component orthogonal to ~n always remains zero.
in this sense, the choice
of an initial eld conguration corresponds to a spontaneous breaking of the global
so(d,2) symmetry down to a global so(d,1) symmetry. whether this leads to an
eective quantum eld theory in (d + 1) dimensional minkowski space, remains to
be investigated.

finally, it is interesting to ask which deviations from the quantum eld theory
could be detected by a slow observer by means of very precise measurements.
clearly, an observer able to resolve the dynamics on the thermal or electric length
scales of the underlying classical eld theory would observe deviations from the di-

4in the four-dimensional case, the total 4-momentum vector p , which is assumed to be time-
like, denes the 4-velocity vector u of the thermal rest frame via the relation p  = e(t )u. the
three-dimensional euclidean quantum eld theory lives in the hypersurface orthogonal to u.

8

mensionally reduced vacuum eld theory. for a space-time volume of linear dimension
l, the amplitude of the uctuations is of the order (g2t l)2. if, as one might suspect,
the relevant microscopic length scale is of the order of the planck scale, g2t  mp ,
quantities sensitive to the uctuations around the infrared dynamics are suppressed
by (mp l)2. for presently accessible length scales, the suppression factor is at least
1034, and even smaller in low-energy precision tests of quantum mechanics. however,
in principle, tests of bells inequality in systems prepared with strong correlations on
short time and distance scales can be used to establish at least an upper bound for the
scale at which the transition from the classical dissipative dynamics to the quantum
dynamics occurs.

it is a natural question to ask whether the mechanism of chaotic quantization
outlined above corresponds to a hidden parameter theory of quantum mechanics.
the answer is obviously positive, as the microscopic state of the system in a higher
dimension is always precisely and deterministically dened. however, it is impor-
tant to realize that the impossibility of hidden parameter descriptions of quantum
mechanics is restricted to local theories, while our proposed mechanism operates in
a higher dimensional space. a local dynamical theory in more dimensions generates
fundamentally non-local eects in the lower-dimensional space. one can speculate
that the time-scale associated with dimensional reduction, (g2t )1, is the time for
the collapse of the wave function. our analysis predicts that this is the time required
to average over the noise generated by the classical dynamics and to establish the
stationary distribution of the fokker-planck equation (10).

6 summary and conclusions

let us summarize. we have shown that a homogeneously excited, classical eld
theory in four dimensions can generate a three-dimensional euclidean quantum eld
theory. whereas the classical theory appears thermal for a four-dimensional observer,
the three-dimensional observer experiences quantum elds at zero temperature. the
essential feature facilitating this transformation is that the underlying deterministic
theory contains a mechanism for information loss [3, 23, 24], here realized through its
chaotic dynamics.

we can go further and speculate that the randomness caused by this intrinsic
chaoticity of the underlying theory could generally lead to a reduction of the eective
space-time dimensionality of the theory. in our example, the dimensional reduction is
an eect of the quasi-thermal uctuations. another related, well-known phenomenon
is the dimensional reduction of spin systems in arbitrarily weak, random magnetic
elds [25], which nds its explanation in the hidden supersymmetry of the system
[26].

we note that symmetries and physical laws may arise naturally from some essen-
tially random dynamics, rather than being postulated from the beginning [27, 28, 29].
the goal of the program formulated in our example, is more restricted: microscopic

9

randomness is utilized as a foundation for large-scale physics that is described by
quantum mechanics.

it is not clear whether the mechanism presented here for non-abelian gauge elds
is also at work in general relativity. examples of chaotic behavior have been identied
in the dynamics of classical gravitational elds [30, 31]. it has been found that the
chaotic nature of the solutions may depend on the number of dimensions. a famous
case is the evolution toward the singularity in the bianchi type ix geometry, where
the chaotic oscillatory approach changes to a monotonic approach in more than 10
dimensions [32, 33].

it has not been demonstrated that chaoticity is a general property of solutions of
einsteins equations. this may not even be required, because an entirely dierent
mechanism of information loss may be at work in general relativity than in yang-
mills theory. indeed, t hooft has speculated that black hole formation may be the
mechanism operating in the case of gravity [3]. finally, our example does not contain
fermion elds. it would be interesting to extend our study to supersymmetric theories,
some of which have been shown to exhibit chaos in the infrared limit [34].

acknowledgments: this work was supported in part by a grant from the u.s. de-
partment of energy (de-fg02-96er40495), by the american-hungarian joint fund
tet (jfno. 649) and by the hungarian national science fund otka (t 019700).
one of us (b.m.) acknowledges the support by a u. s. senior scientist award from
the alexander von humboldt foundation.

appendix

here we present a qualitative analysis of the various length and time scales of a
thermal yang-mills eld in d = (d + 1) space-time dimensions, for d  2. the results
are accurate up to logarithmic corrections that arise for various quantities in some
dimensions. we decompose the eld into fourier components (suppressing vector and
color indices):

equipartition of the energy over the classical modes then implies that

a(x, t) = v 1/2z ddka(k)eikxikt .

|a(k)|2 = t 2

k

.

(19)

(20)

the presence of an external static color potential a0 induces a polarization density

pol  g2v 1z ddxa(x, t)2a0  g2a0z ddk|a(k)|2  g2t a0z ddk2

k

.

with the ultraviolet lattice cut-o k  a1, one obtains:
d2
el = pol/a0  g2t a2d .

10

(21)

(22)

the eld theory can be considered to in the weak coupling regime, when the electric
screening length is much larger than the lattice constant a. this amounts to the
condition

g2  g2t a4d = (a/del)2  1 ,

(23)

which denes the eective weak coupling parameter g of the (d + 1)-dimensional
classical yang-mills theory. with the help of this parameter, the electric screening
length can be expressed simply as del = a/g.

the coupling constant of the dimensionally reduced quantum eld theory in d 

1 = d dimensional euclidean space is given by

g2
d1h = g2a1(t a) = g2t ,

(24)

independent of the number d of space dimensions.

the transport coecient describing color conductivity  is obtained by considering
the polarization current induced by a constant electric eld e. schematically, it is
given by

jpol = g2v 1z ddxdta(x, t)2e  g2ez ddk|a(k)|2(k)1 ,

(25)

where (k) is the damping rate of a thermal eld mode. this damping rate can be
calculated in the standard way using the formula  = collnth, where coll denotes
the cross section for a thermal excitation, and nth stands for the density of hard
thermal excitations. in d spatial dimensions one nds

coll  g4t az dd1q(q2 + d2

el )2  g4t ad5d

el

.

(26)

the classical formula contains an additional factor (t a) describing the enhancement
due to the classical occupation of thermal modes of the gauge eld. the density of
thermal excitations is

nth  z ddk|a(k)|2k  t a1d .

(27)

since  does not depend on k in this approximation, we can pull it out of the integral
over k in (25) to obtain:

jpol  g2e1z ddk|a(k)|2  g2e1t a2d .

(28)

combining the expressions (2628) we nal get the desired expression for the color
conductivity:

 = jpol/e  g2a/coll  dd5
specically, in d = 4 spatial dimensions, the result is

el

(g2t )1 .

  a(g2t )3/2 .

(29)

(30)

all results are summarized, and compared to the results obtained in the (d + 1)-

dimensional thermal quantum eld theory, in table 2.

11

references

[1] for an introduction, see: m.b. green, j.h. schwarz, and e. witten, superstring

theory, cambridge university press (1987).

[2] m-theory reference, to be lled in.

[3] g. t hooft, class. quant. grav. 16, 3283 (1999); preprint hep-th/0003004.

[4] g. parisi and y.s. wu, sci. sin. 24, 483 (1981).

[5] s.g. matinyan, g.k. savvidy, and n.g. ter-arutyunyan-savvidy, sov. phys.

jetp 53, 421 (1981).

[6] t.s. biro, s.g. matinyan, and b. muller, chaos and gauge field theory (world

scientic, singapore, 1994).

[7] b. muller and a. trayanov, phys. rev. lett. 68, 3387 (1992).

[8] c. gong, phys. lett. b 298, 257 (1993).

[9] b. muller, preprint chao-dyn/9607001.

[10] c. gong, phys. rev. d49, 2642 (1994).

[11] j. bolte, b. muller, and a. schafer, phys. rev. d61, 054506 (2000).

[12] s. nadkarni, phys. rev. d27, 917 (1983); 38, 3287 (1988); phys. rev. lett. 60,

491 (1988).

[13] e. braaten and r.d. pisarski, phys. rev. d 42, 2156 (1990).

[14] d. bodeker, phys. lett. b426, 351 (1998); ibid. 559, 502 (1999).

[15] p. arnold, d.t. son, and l.g. yae, phys. rev. d59, 105020 (1999); 60, 025007

(1999).

[16] p. arnold, d.t. son, and l.g. yae, phys. rev. d55, 6264 (1997).

[17] a.v. selikhov and m. gyulassy, phys. lett. b316, 373 (1993); phys. rev. c49,

1726 (1994).

[18] c. greiner and b. muller, phys. rev. d55, 1026 (1997).

[19] g.m. asatrian and g.k. savvidy, phys. lett. a99 290, (1983).

[20] s.g. matinyan and b. muller, phys. rev. lett. 78, 2515 (1997).

[21] p.a.m. dirac, ann. math. 37, 429 (1936).

12

[22] i. bars and c. kounnas, phys. lett. b 402, 25 (1997); i. bars, phys. rev. d 62,

046007 (2000).

[23] g. t hooft, j. stat. phys. 53, 323 (1988).

[24] g. t hooft, found. phys. lett. 10, 105 (1997).

[25] y. imry and s. ma, phys. rev. lett. 35, 1399 (1975); g. grinstein, ibid. 37, 944
(1976); a. aharony, y. imry, and s. ma, ibid. 37, 1364 (1976); a.p. young, j.
phys. c 10, l257 (1977).

[26] g. parisi and n. sourlas, phys. rev. lett. 43, 744 (1979).

[27] h.b. nielsen and m. ninomiya, nucl. phys. b 141, 153 (1978).

[28] d. foerster, h.b. nielsen, and m. ninomiya, phys. lett. b 94, 135 (1980); j.

iliopoulos, d. nanopoulos, and t. tomaras, phys. lett. b 94, 141 (1980).

[29] c.d. froggatt and h.b. nielsen, origin of symmetries (world scientic, singa-

pore, 1991).

[30] deterministic chaos in general relativity, eds. d. hobill, a. burd, and a.
cooley, nato asi series b: physics, vol. 332 (plenum press, new york, 1994).

[31] n.j. cornish, preprint gr-qc/9602054; d. witt and k. schleich, preprint gr-

qc/9612017.

[32] j. demaret, y. de rop, and m. henneaux, int. j. theor. phys. 28, 1076 (1989).

[33] for an overview, see: s.g. matinyan, gr-qc/0010054.

[34] i.ya. arefeva, a.s. koshelev, p.b. medvedev, mod. phys. lett. a 13, 2481

(1998).

13

table 1: comparison of length scales in the classical and quantum yang-mills theories:
hard thermal scale dth, electric scale del, magnetic scale dmag, plasma frequency pl,
damping rate th, and color conductivity .

quantum eld theory classical eld theory

dth
del
dmag
dmag  del
2
pl
th


ht 1

h1/2(gt )1

(g2t )1
g2h  1
(gt )2/h

a

(g2t /a)1/2

(g2t )1
g2t a  1
g2t /a

g2t ln[dmag/del]

g2t ln[dmag/del]

2

pl/th

2

pl/th

table 2: characteristic scales for classical and quantized thermal yang-mills theories
in d = (d + 1) space-time dimensions: weak coupling parameter g, electric screening
length del, magnetic length scale dmag, coupling constant of the dimensionally reduced
quantum eld theory gd1, and color conductivity .

quantum eld theory classical eld theory

g2
del
dmag
g2
d1


g2t d3h4d

h/(gt )
h/(g2t )
g2t /h

dd5
el

(g2t )1

g2t a4d

a/g
a/g2
g2/a
(g2t )1

dd5
el

14

