9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

1
3

 
 

1
v
1
0
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

usitp-99-06
hep-th/9908001

the hagedorn transition, deconnement

and n = 4 sym theory

bo sundborg1

institute of theoretical physics

box 6730

s-113 85 stockholm

sweden

abstract

n = 4 super yang-mills theory supplies us with a non-abelian 4d gauge
theory with a meaningful perturbation expansion, both in the uv and in the
ir. we calculate the free energy on a 3-sphere and observe a deconnement
transition for large n at zero coupling. the same thermodynamic behaviour
is found for a wide class of toy models, possibly also including the case of non-
zero coupling. below the transition we also nd hagedorn behaviour, which
is identied with uctuations signalling the approach to the deconned phase.
the hagedorn and the deconnement temperatures are identical. application
of the ads/cft correspondence gives a connection between string hagedorn
behaviour and black hole formation.

1e-mail: bo@physto.se

1 introduction

in large n discussions of yang-mills theory the thermal deconnement transition is
accompanied by a jump in the free energy from order n 0 to order n 2. the conned
phase consists of hadrons and glueballs, which should have spectra with narrow res-
onances. models for such spectra like statistical bootstrap models or string theory,
often have densities of states rising exponentially with energy, i.e. hagedorn be-
haviour [1]. hagedorn spectra themselves give rise to singular thermodynamics at
a characteristic temperature because boltzmann suppression of high energy states
can be compensated by the sheer numbers of states.
it would be natural if this
hagedorn temperature and the deconnement temperature were the same. thorn
[2] has discussed possible alternatives but it seems that the question for the generic
4-dimensional gauge theory is too dicult to handle.

in string theory, which has hagedorn behavior at zero coupling this supposed
relation has even been used to model what might happen above the hagedorn tem-
perature [3], which for closed string theories is dicult to interpret as a true limiting
temperature, since the energy density never diverges [4]. to actually demonstrate
that the hagedorn and the deconnement temperatures are identical, and that the
thermodynamics below this critical temperature can equally well be described by
an exponential density of states or some mechanism binding otherwise free colour
charges, requires large computational power, or a very simple model.

n = 4 super-yang-mills at zero coupling on a three-sphere is simple enough
for explicit calculations, but is also smoothly related to the interacting theory. the
dimensionless coupling is an actual parameter of the theory because of conformal
invariance. although we perform an explicit calculation for this theory most of
the calculations of this paper are phrased in terms of a much more general class
of toy models. the n = 4 is however very interesting because the ads/cft
correspondence [5, 6, 7, 8] can be used to discuss gravitational and string theory in-
terpretations of all sym results, cf. sect. (7). for strong coupling gauge theory this
correspondence has been used by witten [7, 9] in the other direction, for extracting
information about gauge theory deconnement. furthermore, high and low temper-
ature limits at weak coupling, but not intermediate temperatures, are discussed in
[9]. corrections to the strong coupling results have been studied in [10, 11, 12], with
results that do not match well to ours. a possible source of the discrepancy is that
these authors consider string corrections to the metric, but not the eects of string
spectra on the thermodynamics. on the contrary, the high temperature expansion
in [13] seems to be consistent with the similarity between strong and weak coupling
results which we nd. the implications of the ads/cft correspondence for the
relation between the hagedorn transition and deconnement has been investigated
in a dierent way in [14].

we always study the large n limit of gauge theories with constituent states in
the adjoint representation of the gauge group. the other essential ingredients are
connement, and a discrete energy spectrum with a positive energy ground state for

1

the constituents. there are no interactions among the colour charges in the model
except for a singlet constraint from connement. this makes the model exactly
calculable. hopefully the results are stable to the introduction of small interaction
terms. the models we are considering are slight generalizations of singlet ideal gases
in at space [15], and two-dimensional lattice gauge theories with a wilson action
in the adjoint representation. the crucial dierence that makes us able to directly
identify the hagedorn behaviour is that we calculate the uctuations around the
leading large n result below the phase transition.

an important feature in our model is that deconnement never has to take place
on the level of states, i.e. no non-singlets have to be taken into account above the
in string language there is no string breaking above the hagedorn
transition.
transition.
instead, it seems that a nite n leads to a density of states that is
only approximately exponential, so that a suciently high temperature discloses a
number of constituent degrees of freedom which is not innite but n 2  1. there
appears to be a string exclusion principle [16] at work. perhaps this is a more general
property of deconnement.

the paper is organized as follows. in section (2) the problem of counting singlet
states is formulated and solved for general spectra of constituents. in section (3) it
is demonstrated that hagedorn behaviour results from these state spaces, and the
grand canonical partition function close to the hagedorn temperature is estimated.
partition sums for our prime example, n = 4 sym, are calculated in section (4).
the next section (5) deals with the problem of directly projecting the full grand
canonical partition function to the physical singlet states in the large n limit. the
result is used to calculate the phase transition temperature and establish the connec-
tion to hagedorn behaviour. then in section (6) there is a short discussion of the role
of unbroken symmetry under the center of the gauge group zn . in section (7) con-
nections are made with gravitational physics and we argue that the similarity with
between the present weak coupling results and wittens results at strong coupling
[7, 9] indicates that one could also discuss black holes in the ads dual of the weak
coupling theory. it is also argued that ads black hole thermodynamics is related to
hagedorn thermodynamics. finally in section (8) we state our conclusions.

2 counting single trace operators

let us assume that we have constituent degrees of freedom with discrete energy
spectra. temporarily disregarding the colour degrees of freedom and the singlet
condition we can write down partition sums b and f for constituent bosons and
fermions, in terms of the energies eb,n and ef,n for all their states,

b(x) = xn=1
f (x) = xn=1

xeb,n,

xef,n,

2

(1)

(2)

where we have dened

x  e  e1/t .

(3)

if we then assume that these elds are in the adjoint representation of su(n), they
can be represented by traceless hermitean matrices, and all gauge invariant states
can be written as products of traces of hermitean matrices, each labelled by one of
the discrete constituent states. the single-trace states

|i1, i2, . . . , ini = tr(i1i2 . . . in) |i1i |i2i . . . |ini

(4)

play the role of bound states, with the singlet condition being the only interaction we
consider. they are bosons or fermions depending on whether they contain an even
or odd number of constituent fermions. because of the trace, cyclical permutations
of the constituent-state labels give rise to the same bound state. the cyclicity may
be taken into account by thinking of bound states as necklaces of constituent
beads. for nite groups there are in general many relations between the traces.
in case of a single matrix, tr(a  1)(a  2) . . . (a  n1) = 0 gives such a
relation since sums of powers of the eigenvalues i are traces of powers of a. in the
large n limit of su(n) only two basic kinds of relations survive: tra = 0 for any
constituent state a due to tracelessness, and tr2 = 0 from the pauli principle for
fermionic constituents . the reason that the pauli principle is eective for squared
constituents but not in other products involving fermions is that only the trace of
the square forces a multiplication of identical fermion lie algebra components. in
other cases the fermions can be in dierent lie algebra directions.

the bound state partition sum may now be obtained by counting necklaces of
constituent states, weighting each energy level with the corresponding boltzmann
weight x, and nally subtracting the constituent partition sum and the sum for two
identical fermion constituents. fortunately, the necklace problem is a special case
of a class of combinatorial problems solved by polyas theorem [17]. the number of
bound states with n constituents can be found from the partition sum

(k)(zb(xk) + zf (xk))n/k, n > 2,

(5)

1

n xk|n

over divisors of n, where  is called the euler totient function. (n) is the number
of positive integers less than n which are relatively prime to n, with (1) = 1 by
denition. summing over numbers of constituents and taking due care of the special
constraints for few constituents one obtains

z(x) = (b(x) + f (x))  f (x2) +

= b(x)  f (x)  f (x2) 

(k)

1

(k)(b(xk) + f (xk))n/k

n pk|n
logh1  b(xk)  f (xk)i .

k

(6)

(7)





pn=1
pk=1

3

3 the hagedorn transition

one may see quite easily that the number of states grows exponentially with energy
if there are at least two constituent states. for n the number of factors inside a
trace, the cyclicity relation becomes less and less important for large n and can at
most give a factor 1/n. neglecting this factor the number of states grows at least as
2n, and the energy is at most ne2, where e2 is the second lowest energy. therefore
the density of states grows at least as 2e/e2.

more precisely, the partition sums (7) have lowest temperature singularities at

1 = (xh)  b(xh ) + f (xh ).

close to this point we may approximate

z(x)   log[1  (x)]  log[(xh  x) (xh)],

and obtain the contribution to the asymptotic level degeneracy

d(n) =

dx
xn+1 log[1  (x)] 

i

2 i

dx
xn+1 log[(xh  x) (xh)]

i

2 i
2i i

xn
h

 

dy
yn+1 log[1  y]

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

in case the spectrum is integrally spaced. the asymptotic density of states should
have the same hagedorn behaviour at x = xh irrespective of this simplifying as-
sumption.

because there are so many dierent states that are easily excited close to the
hagedorn temperature, the eects of identical particles in bose or fermi statistics
vanishes for the singular behaviour at this temperature. using boltzmann statistics
we then nd the the grand canonical partition function

z(x) 

1
n!



xn=1

z(x)n = ez(x) 

1

(xh  x) (xh )

(12)

close to th.

4 n = 4 super yang-mills partition sum on s3

due to conformal invariance it is simple to nd the spectrum of n = 4 sym on a
three-sphere at zero coupling. there are ambiguities in how a eld theory should be
coupled to a background curvature, although the leading long distance behaviour is
xed by the equivalence principle. for sym, the ambiguity may be xed by asking
that scalars are conformally coupled.

then one may take over results from at spacetime to s3  r by a conformal
mapping [9]. the generator of scale transformations in the at euclidean theory is

4

mapped to the hamiltonian on the sphere. because these operators are also related
by an isomorphism of the conformal group they have identical spectra. we can
conclude that energies of states on the sphere (of unit radius) are given by scaling
dimensions of operators in at spacetime. (in two dimensions this is the mapping
between the plane and the cylinder.)

on the sphere, all states have to be gauge singlets because of the gauss law
constraint and the lack of a boundary. we can then use the general procedure above
to nd the bound state partition sum and the grand canonical partition function
close to the hagedorn temperature. we only need the constituent bose and fermi
partition sums. the constituent elds, scalars, fermions and gluons, their respective
scaling dimensions and their partition sums are given in

f ield dimension




f

1
3
2
3
2
2

(1  x)4(x)

6x  6x3

8x3/2  8x5/2
8x3/2  8x5/2

6x2  8x3 + 6x4

(13)

where the higher terms in the sums arise from counting possible derivative operators
(conformal descendants). terms corresponding to equations of motion and their
derivatives have been subtracted, since they give rise to trivial correlation functions2.
for gluons we have also taken into account bianchi identities and the antisymmetry
of the eld strength. we are now ready to write down the partition sums for free
n = 4 sym at the limit n =  :

 sy m
b

(x) =

 sy m
f

(x) =

6x + 6x2  14x3

(1  x)4

16x3/2  16x5/2

(1  x)4

zsy m
b

(x) =  sy m
b
(k)





(x)   sy m

(x2)

f

xk=1

k

logh1  2 sy m

b



(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(xk)2i
(xk)#.

(xk)

(xk) +  sy m

b

(xk)2   sy m

f

zsy m
f

(x) =  sy m

f

(x) 

xk=1

(k)

k

log"1   sy m

1   sy m

b

b

(xk)   sy m
(xk) +  sy m

f

f

the bose and fermi partition sums are obtained by keeping track of whether the
states contain an even or odd number of constituent fermions. the hagedorn tem-
perature is then given by the lowest temperature singularity, which can be found
by solving eq. (8). we nd that xh  0.072. furthermore, the grand canonical
partition function approaches (12) close to th .

2one may check, most simply for a conformal scalar on s 2, that this subtraction gives the

correct counting of states.

5

all these calculations were performed at zero coupling, but one may hope that our
general toy models also capture some of the essential ingredients of the interacting
case, perhaps by renormalization of the constituent spectra.

5 the ideal gas with singlet condition

the scale of th is set by 1/r, the inverse radius of the sphere, which is the only
fundamental energy scale in the problem. thus th  0 in the at space limit,and
we seem to get a divergent free energy at any temperature! the argument for
considering only gauge singlet states breaks down in a non-compact space, but on the
other hand a singlet condition ought to make little dierence in innite volume. and
we do not really want to consider non-singlet states in a non-abelian gauge theory.
at best they are going to be extremely sensitive to turning on the interactions.

instead, the problem is due to setting n = . the free energy at zero coupling
in at space is well known, and is proportional to n 2  1. to go above the hagedorn
temperature we have to take the large n limit in a way that allows us to extract di-
vergent factors of n 2. we should also compute quantities like the free energy, which
scale simply with n, rather than the bound state partition sum, which certainly
changes with n due to trace identities, but in a much less regular fashion.

we write down the grand canonical partition function with a singlet constraint

as

zsu (n )

dg exp  
xn=1

b(xn)

n

(gn) 

(1)n f (xn)

n

(gn)!



xn=1

(19)

where g are elements of su(n) and (g) is the character of the adjoint representa-
tion. this equation can be derived in a general way by a coherent state technique
[15]. alternatively, one may check that the expression represents the proper com-
binatorics, by noting that singlets can be identied by acting with su(n) trans-
formations on the constituent states. it is enough to keep track of the eigenvalues
ri(g) of the representation matrices r(g). the rotated partition sum for bosons

n 1

(1 + xekri(g) + x2ekri(g)2 + . . .)

qi=1

qk
det(1  xek r(g))1 = exp(cid:18)pk

= qk

tr(cid:18) 
pn=1

xne

k

n r(gn)(cid:19)(cid:19)

(20)

(21)

can be projected to singlet states by integration over the group, using the orthog-
onality properties of group characters (g). taking also the fermion contribution
into account yields eq. (19).

in terms of the eigenvalues exp(ii) of g the adjoint character

(g) = 1 +  n
xm=1

eim!  n
xn=1

ein! = n  1 + 2 xm<n

cos(m  n).

(22)

6

the fact that the integrand only depends on the eigenvalues simplies the group
integral to an integral over these eigenvalues

1

n ! r
 exp  
pn=1

n

di

2 (cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
2 sin(cid:16) ij

(cid:18) 2k
2 qi6=j(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
qi=1
n (b(xn)  (1)nf (xn)) 1 +pi,j

  n
pk=1

1

i(cid:19)!

n +pi
cos (n(i  j))!! .

(23)

(24)

the sum inside the  function encodes that we are dealing with su(n) rather than
su(n)/zn . by standard large n techniques the discrete set of eigenvalues may be
replaced by an eigenvalue density  such that

(x) =

1
n

dn
dn

,

1 = z ()d.

(25)

(26)

since dierent orderings of the eigenvalues are related by weyl transformations it is
enough to consider a single ordering, which may be chosen increasing, thus making
 positive.
in the large n limit the  function in (24) becomes irrelevant unless
we are dealing with sharply peaked eigenvalue distributions which occur for very
large temperatures. for the time being we can neglect this factor. then we nd a
partition function

z(x)  z d es[],

(27)

1

n(b(xn)  (1)nf (xn)),

(28)

n (b(xn)  (1)nf (xn)) cos (n(  )) (29)

where

s[] = n 2rdrd ()k(, ; x)() +
kx(, )  log(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2 (cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
2 sin(cid:16) 

pn=1

+



1



pn=1

can be regarded as an eective action for the eigenvalue density. the stationarity
condition in a steepest decent estimate for z then gives the integral equation

0 = p.v.z d( 1

2 cot    

2 ! 

(b(xn)  (1)nf(xn)) sin (n(  ))) (30)



xn=1

for . (one does not get the integral of this equation since  satises an additional
integral constraint.) since the equation is translationally invariant in -space  
1/2 is always a solution, but there may be others with lower free energy, which
thus would appear to break the translational symmetry spontaneously. as we shall
see below, this is almost what happens for high enough temperature, but not quite.
to identify the transition point where non-trivial solutions appear, it is useful

to view the eective action as a quadratic expression in . we can regard

kx : ()  kx()  z d kx(, )()

(31)

7

as a symmetric operator. then, modulo the additional conditions on , the search
for the minimum of the free energy becomes the search for the lowest eigenvalue of
kx. there will be a transition point at a value of the temperature where the lowest
kx-eigenvalue becomes degenerate. such a point is easy to nd by fourier expanding
the kx-eigenvalue equation. the kx-eigenfunctions are found to be trigonometric
functions:

kxein =


n
kx1 = 0

(1  zb(xn) + (1)nzf (xn)) ein, n 6= 0

(32)

(33)

we nd a transition point at an x = xd = xh satisfying equation (8) determining
the hagedorn temperature.

the kx-eigenfunctions which become degenerate with the constant solution in-
dicate the nature of the transition. we have to require   0, as  is an eigenvalue
density, which should also integrate to 1. therefore, the new kx-eigenfunctions are
not acceptable as such. instead, the linear combinations

() =

1
2

(1 + a1 cos() + a2 sin()) ,

a2
1 + a2

2  1

(34)

are the minimizing solutions at the transition point. at the boundary of the solution
set we nd the solutions () = sin2( + )/, which are closest to the new kx-
eigenfunctions. apparently, at the transition it becomes energetically possible for
the density to have a zero. on the other side of the transition the density can still
not become negative, but the eigenvalue distribution can have gaps, where the
density vanishes. to solve this case, which involves new boundary conditions, a
more direct approach to the integral equation (eq. 30) is needed.

this kind of boundary problem is commonplace in large n calculations [18, 19].
a somewhat unusual feature of equation (30) is that the two-eigenvalue interaction is
non-trivial, whereas a non-trivial single-eigenvalue potential is more familiar. fortu-
nately, there is still a mathematical theory for this kind of problem [20]. essentially,
the mathematical method consists in multiplying the integral equation (30) with an
operator that is inverse to the rst, singular term, in order to get a regular equation
of fredholm type. this equation either lacks solutions or has a nite-dimensional
solution space, which may be searched for solutions to the original equation.

the higher, n > 1, fourier components of the non-singular term in the integral
equation (30) are exponentially small relative to the n = 1 term at nite tempera-
tures, and go as inverse powers of n for asymptotically high temperatures, at least
when the constituent density of states is asymptotically constant or increasing3. it
is then reasonable to neglect the higher terms and study the approximate equations
obtained by replacing the kernel kx(, ) with

k 1

+ (zb(x) + zf (x)) cos (  )

(35)

3this is the case for free eld theory in one or more spatial dimensions.

x(, )  log(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2 !(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
2 sin    

8

precisely this mathematical problem is solved in [15]. we nd the same solution,
instead, the free energy

(19) of that reference.

but also note a misprint in eq.
f =  log z above the transition reads

f>  

n 2

2 (cid:18)(x)  1 +q(x)2  (x)  log(cid:18)(x) +q(x)2  (x)(cid:19)(cid:19) + (x) (36)

we also give the solutions for the eigenvalue densities

cos(

() = 0(  )
1
)
2
1
 sin2(
2

0() = 

2 c) = 1 s1 

sin2( 1

0,

|| > c

1

(x)

c)qsin2( 1

2c)  sin2( 1

2),

|| < c

(37)

(38)

(39)

at the transition, these solutions to an approximate problem agrees with the extreme
cases of the exact solutions (34) to the exact problem. we do however only expect
qualitative and approximate agreement above the transition.
if we calculate the
eective action (29) below the transition we can also estimate the free energy

f< = (x)

(40)

which together with eqs. (36) signies a rst order large n transition at the hage-
dorn temperature.

the n 2 dependence of the high temperature phase agrees with expectations
of deconnement, and the deconnement transition takes place at the hagedorn
temperature, but eqs. (36,40) still do not represent a satisfactory state of aairs.
the large n approximation of eq. (24) does not give hagedorn behaviour.

the resolution to this puzzle is that the hagedorn and the deconnement transi-
tions can be identied, but that one has to go to next order in the large n expansion
to see the hagedorn behaviour. actually, although eq. (40) results from the leading
estimate of eq. (24) they are of subleading order in 1/n and do not give the full
n 0 contribution to thermodynamics. fluctuations in the eigenvalue density give
contributions of the same order and should also be taken into account. below th
this is remarkably easy (and above we do not have to do the calculation, if the goal
is just to nd hagedorn thermodynamics).

the integral over eigenvalue-density uctuations can only diverge at th because
of the contribution from the integral over uctuations in the eigen-directions cor-
responding to the eigenvalues that become degenerate with the low temperature
solution at th. the integral over these uctuations given in eq. (34) yields the
correction factor



1

(1  (x)) (cid:16)1  en 2(1(x))(cid:17) ,

9

(x) < 1

(41)

to the partion function, which diverges at the hagedorn transition if the large n limit
is taken before the approach to th. otherwise, the approach to the deconned
phase is fast but smooth. this is just how the integrals tell us that an innite
number of degrees of freedom are needed for a true phase transition, at nite volume
an innite n is needed. with this reservation complete agreement is found with eq.
(12), which of course was derived assuming an innite n.

6 zn symmetry

we have only associated the two phases of our model with conned and deconned
phases on the basis of the n dependence of the free energy. this is reasonable, but
it should be compared to other criteria. a polyakov loop, i.e. a wilson loop around
the compact imaginary time direction, is an order parameter for deconnement. zn
symmetry (the centre of the su(n) symmetry) acts by multiplication by a root of
unity on the polyakov loop. thus the loop has a vanishing expectation value in
the conned phase, which enjoys unbroken zn symmetry. in the deconned phase
it gets a non-zero vacuum expectation value, due to spontaneous breaking of zn
symmetry. using the ads/cft correspondence the polyakov loop has been studied
at strong coupling in [9, 21]. our simple formalism is not well suited to a calculation
of the loop, but there are alternatives.

in our uctuation calculation unbroken zn symmetry is essential to get agree-
ment with the hagedorn calculation in the conned phase. the symmetry appears
in the integration over -translations, which results in a two-dimensional integral
over uctuations, giving the correct degree of divergence. on the high temperature
side we have no similar check on the calculation. the best we can do is to judge
from the partition sum itself how zn symmetry is represented. the eigenvalue den-
sities (39) clearly break -translation symmetry, so the issue is if the partition sum
should be thought of as a sum over all possible translated minima of the eective
action and uctuations around them, or if a single minimum is selected. the sim-
ple answer is that there is no spontaneous breaking of symmetry in nite volume,
even if n is large. a more satisfactory answer is that the high temperature limit,
which in the conformal n = 4 sym theory is the same as the innite volume limit,
eventually leads to the support [2n/n + c, 2n/n  c] of the equilibrium solu-
tions for the eigenvalue densities (39) narrowing so much that there is no overlap
between densities related by zn transformations (dierent n from the  function in
(24)). even if the nite volume sum always is zn symmetric, this behaviour allows
for a decoupling of uctuations around dierent zn -related minima, which has to
happen when zn is broken spontaneously. since the high temperature phase is thus
smoothly connected to a phase with spontaneously broken zn , it makes sense to
describe it as deconned.

10

7 ads/cft motivated speculations

there is as yet no good test of the ads/cft correspondence [5, 6, 7, 8] at weak
coupling, so we cannot make strong predictions about gravitational eects. we can
however try to use the ads/cft dictionary, rst to compare with strong coupling
results obtained via the correspondence, and second to nd out what it tells us
about a dual gravitational theory, assuming that the correspondence holds also at
small t hooft coupling g2n, which means small string tension relative to the ads
curvature.

at strong coupling witten [7, 9] has used the ads/cft correspondence to dis-
cuss a large n phase transition at nite temperature. at leading order in large n
he nds a high temperature phase with free energy proportional to n 2 and a low
temperature phase where the (temperature dependent part of) the n 2 term in the
free energy vanishes. this precisely the behaviour we observe at weak coupling. it
seems that thermodynamics on s3 can have a smooth dependence on the coupling.
in the at case there is a debate about whether there is a phase transition in the
coupling [22] or not [23, 24, 25, 26, 27], and although most explicit calculations at
extreme temperatures indicate a smooth behavior, the issue does not seem to be
settled.

wittens result is obtained by associating the gauge theory behaviour with a
gravitational phase transition between an ads heat bath and an ads black hole,
found by hawking and page [28]. it is of course tempting to identify the yang-mills
thermodynamics we have found, with a similar black hole transition on the gravita-
tional side, but now in a theory of tensionless strings. interpreted in gravitational
language the n 2 dependence of the free energy translates to the ordinary 1/gn
dependence of a black hole free energy. the entropy would give an eective measure
of the horizon area of this exotic black hole.

the n 0 corrections correspond to hagedorn behaviour of tensionless strings4,
and beyond the hagedorn transition we have a black hole equilibrium state. such
a phase diagram have been proposed for non-zero string tension [29], by arguments
based on a black hole/string correspondence principle [30]. our explicit calculation
is done at vanishing gauge coupling, but since n 0 corrections in the low temperature
phase ought to be present independently of the coupling, this mechanism could give
a general conrmation of the relation between hagedorn spectra and black holes. it
might seem strange that a string hagedorn transition could occur at a scale governed
by the ads curvature rather than the string tension, but most of the important part
of the hagedorn spectrum consists of large strings, which should be more sensitive
to curvature than to the tension. a complete picture might have to await the
quantization of strings in ads5  s5 with background ramond-ramond elds.

4their spectra are governed the curvature scale rather than the string scale.

11

8 conclusions

we have noted a general mechanism in large n theories, which can be important
whenever the n 2 contribution to the free energy vanishes on one side of a phase
transition. on this side, uctuation can give an n 0 contribution which diverges at
the transition. we have done this calculation explicitly for free n = 4 super yang-
mills theory on a three-sphere, and for quite a general class of toy models. the large
n phase transition we nd is a kind of deconnement transition, in which hage-
dorn behaviour in the conned phase is identied as a low-temperature precursor of
deconnement.

assuming the ads/cft correspondence is valid also for small or vanishing t
hooft coupling, the transition has the likes of a hawking-page transition to ads
black holes, although in a string theory with vanishing tension. the n 0 correction
we have calculated should then correspond to a hagedorn contribution from an ideal
gas of these strings.

this work was stimulated by conversations with u. danielsson and h. hansson,
who are gratefully acknowledged. i also wish to thank j. grundberg, u. lindstrom
and b. nilsson for useful remarks. this work was nanced by the swedish science
research council.

references

[1] r. hagedorn, suppl. nuovo cim. 3 (1965) 147.

[2] c.b. thorn, phys. lett. 99b (1981) 458.

[3] j.j. atick and e. witten, nucl. phys. b310 (1988) 291.

[4] b. sundborg, nucl. phys. b254 (1985) 583.

[5] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231 hep-th/9711200.

[6] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.m. polyakov, phys. lett. b428 (1998) 105

hep-th/9802109.

[7] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 253 hep-th/9802150.

[8] o. aharony, s.s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri and y. oz, hep-th/9905111.

[9] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 505 hep-th/9803131.

[10] y. gao and m. li, nucl. phys. b551 (1999) 229 hep-th/9810053.

[11] k. landsteiner, mod. phys. lett. a14 (1999) 379 hep-th/9901143.

12

[12] m.m. caldarelli and d. klemm, hep-th/9903078.

[13] c.p. burgess, n.r. constable and r.c. myers, hep-th/9907188.

[14] s.k. rama and b. sathiapalan, mod. phys. lett. a13 (1998) 3137 hep-

th/9810069.

[15] b.s. skagerstam, z. phys. c24 (1984) 97.

[16] j. maldacena and a. strominger, jhep 12 (1998) 005 hep-th/9804085.

[17] g. polya and r.c. read, combinatorial enumeration of groups, graphs, and

chemical compounds (springer-verlag, new york, 1987).

[18] e. brezin, c. itzykson, g. parisi and j.b. zuber, commun. math. phys. 59

(1978) 35.

[19] d.j. gross and e. witten, phys. rev. d21 (1980) 446.

[20] n.i. muskhelishvili, singular integral equations (p. noordhof,n.v., groningen,

1953).

[21] o. aharony and e. witten, jhep 11 (1998) 018 hep-th/9807205.

[22] m. li, jhep 03 (1999) 004 hep-th/9807196.

[23] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.a. tseytlin, nucl. phys. b534 (1998) 202

hep-th/9805156.

[24] a. fotopoulos and t.r. taylor, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 061701 hep-th/9811224.

[25] m.a. vazquez-mozo, hep-th/9905030.

[26] c. kim and s. rey, hep-th/9905205.

[27] a. nieto and m.h. tytgat, hep-th/9906147.

[28] s.w. hawking and d.n. page, commun. math. phys. 87 (1983) 577.

[29] s.a. abel, j.l. barbon, i.i. kogan and e. rabinovici, jhep 04 (1999) 015

hep-th/9902058.

[30] g.t. horowitz and j. polchinski, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 6189 hep-th/9612146.

13

