3
0
0
2

 

g
u
a
3
1

 

 
 

3
v
1
1
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the hamiltonians of linear quantum fields:

i. existence theory for scalar fields

adam d. helfer

department of mathematics

university of missouri

columbia, mo 65211, u.s.a.

january 4, 2014

abstract

for linear scalar eld theories, i characterize those classical hamiltonian vector
elds which have self-adjoint operators as their quantum counterparts. as an ap-
plication, it is shown that for a scalar eld in curved spacetime (in a hadamard
representation), a self-adjoint hamiltonian for evolution along the unit timelike nor-
mal to a cauchy surface exists only if the second fundamental form of the surface
vanishes identically.

1

introduction

when does a symmetry of a classical eld theory pass over to the corresponding quantum
theory?

even for linear theories, the answer to this question is not known in the generality
one would like. for nite motions, indeed, the answer is well-known: a canonical trans-
formation of the classical phase space induces a bogoliubov transformation on the eld
operators, and this transformation is unitarily implementable if and only if the bogoli-
ubov coecients satisfy a certain square-summability condition (shale 1962). however,
the most important canonical transformations are those corresponding to evolution in
time. for these, one almost never has an explicit knowledge of the nite transformations
 getting these would involve solving the equations of motion. what one has is knowl-
edge of the generator of the transformations  the equation of motion, or equivalently
the classical hamiltonian function or vector eld. one would like to be able to read o
from this whether or not the quantum evolution will be unitarily implementable. it is this
problem which is solved, for scalar elds, in this paper. the analysis of other bose elds
is parallel. subsequent papers in this series will explore the structure of the hamiltonians
more fully, and treat fermions.

in the past few years, it has become apparent that this issue is important, because
evidence has accumulated which strongly suggests that in generic circumstances the hamil-
tonians are not self-adjointly implementable. indeed, this appears to be one of a family
of related phenomena, which at least supercially are severely pathological. they are all
local, and can be expressed as certain ultraviolet divergences.

1

the most extreme of these phenomena is that, generically, the expectations of the

energy and of the energy density are unbounded below. schematically,

lower bound of bh = (nite term) + (geometric term)() ,

where the geometric term vanishes in minkowski space but is generically non-zero. what
this means is that, at least as far as the mathematical structure of the theory is concerned,
the case of evolution along a covariantly constant timelike vector eld in minkowski space
is a highly unstable point.

(1)

it would be hard to overstate the potential signicance of this issue. it raises funda-
mental questions of stability and interpretation. for example, why do not perturbations
send the quantum eld cascading through more and more negatively energetic states,
with a corresponding release of positive-energy radiation? the expectation of the energy
density is used as a source term in semiclassical gravity, which is perhaps the most
important application of quantum eld theory in curved spacetime. (it is this theory, for
example, which predicts the loss of energy from black holes via the hawking mechanism.)
how credible is this semiclassical approximation, in view of the unboundedness-below?

these matters are at present imperfectly understood. there is a plausible resolution
for them in the case of special-relativistic quantum elds, but in the case of quantum elds
in curved spacetime, if a similar picture is to hold, we seem to have to confront quantum
uctuations in the geometry in an essential way. i shall outline this picture below. it must
be emphasized, though, that at present, even in the special-relativistic case, the picture
is one of physical plausibility. to justify (or negate) it, one needs a rm understanding
of what the mathematical structure is. the main aim of the present series of papers is to
lay the foundations of the general theory of the hamiltonians involved.

the emerging picture workers in the theory of quantum elds in time-dependent
external potentials have been aware of some of the issues raised here for some time, but
the ideas have been surprising to workers in quantum eld theory in curved spacetime.
i should like to explain here what the signicance of these issues is, and in particular
why, for quantum elds in curved spacetime, they may be of the deepest signicance. i
will also try to give a modern point of view of the state of aairs for special-relativistic
quantum elds in time-dependent external potentials.

of course, any attempt to say what picture is emerging before it has actually emerged
involves some judgments, which may not be shared with all workers. i shall comment in
particular on the relation between the view here the algebraic approach, below.

failure of unitary implementability i shall rst discuss the non-unitarities, that
is, the failure of evolution of the eld for nite times to be unitarily implementable.1
while the present papers are really concerned with the hamiltonians (that is, evolution
for innitesimal time), one should understand the signicance of the non-unitarities rst.
such an understanding has only gradually developed in the case of specialrelativistic eld
theories, and to my knowledge it has not been discussed in the case of quantum elds in
curved spacetime.

1throughout these papers, we use the conventional relativistic heisenberg picture, in which the
state vector is unchanged (except when reduction occurs) and the eld operators evolve with time. thus
probability is automatically conserved. the problematic unitarity concept is unitary implementability of
evolution. this is explained in a little more detail in section 2

2

consider for deniteness the case of quantum charged particles responding to an ex-
ternal, classical, electromagnetic eld. it is often asserted that, while there may be in-
termediate non-unitarities in this case (that is, if one only considers evolution to some
intermediate time), they are not signicant, because the smatrix is unitary.

this position is indeed tenable if all one is interested in is the smatrix, and only in
those cases when it does turn out to be unitary  typically scattering through a potential
which is turned on and o in nite time. but if one is interested in the intermediate
regime, this is not a satisfactory position. when we come to quantum elds in curved
spacetime, we almost never switch on and o the gravitational eld in nite time, so
we must face the intermediate regime.2

what happens in this intermediate regime? in special-relativistic quantum eld the-
ories, presumably the nonunitarity results from neglecting uctuations in the external
potential; when these uctuations are included, the evolution is supposed to be unitary.3
this is indeed a plausible picture, and if correct explains away the non-unitarities in
special-relativistic problems. since as we shall see in these papers, the non-unitarities
are closely linked to the unboundednessbelow, it is also plausible (but not a foregone
conclusion) that accounting for the uctuations will semi-bound the hamiltonians.

however, there is more to the story. in order to understand this, recall that for linear
eld theories the non-unitarities are determined by when the bogoliubov coecients fail to
satisfy a square-summability condition. in the most general situations, the sum involved
may diverge because of: (a) infrared problems; (b) ultraviolet problems; (c) resonance
phenomena assigning divergent weights to moderate modes. in what follows, i shall only
consider ultraviolet divergences, but similar comments could be made for the other cases.
if the evolution fails to be unitarily implementable on account of ultraviolet diver-
gences, then, with any nite ultraviolet cuto , the evolution is in fact unitarily imple-
mentable. what does this mean physically?

the answer to this can be found by examining the formulae for the quantum evo-
lution operators in terms of the bogoliubov transformations (e.g., in section 5, below).
details of this will appear elsewhere; here i shall only indicate the results. one examines
how the evolution operator u varies with the cuto , in particular, how u aects
modes of dierent frequencies. one nds that there is a critical scale 0 which can be
estimated in terms correlations of the external potential. for   0, the operator u
varies smoothly with . for   0, the restriction of u to the low-frequency sector
has a reasonably well-dened limit; however, the action on high-frequency modes varies
essentially chaotically (in a loose sense) as  is increased.

what this means is that, in the cut-o theory but for   0, qualitatively new
features appear in the evolution. while these are not, strictly speaking, non-unitarities,
they are certainly interesting.

at the moment, it is not known whether this chaotic behavior actually occurs in

2also the position is not satisfactory for investigations of quantum measurement issues, where one
wishes to take into account the facts that observers investigate only nite volumes of spacetime, and
that dierent observers can never synchronize their frames perfectly. the unitarity of the smatrix only
applies to evolution from one complete t = constant surface in minkowski space to another t = constant
one, where both t and t are inertial coordinates. thus if data are taken over a surface by several observers
who have uncertainties in synchronizing their clocks, the unitarity fails (helfer 1996).

3of course, we do not know that the evolution really is unitary, because we can only treat this theory
 full, nonlinear, quantum electrodynamics in the case of charged particles and electromagnetic elds 
perturbatively. serious workers have occasionally suggested dropping the unitarity requirement as a way
of evading the conclusions of haags theorem.

3

any physically realizable situations. if there is a scale uct at which uctuations in the
external eld must be accounted for, then the question is whether 0 can exceed uct.
if not, then the uctuations in the eld become the dominant feature before the chaotic
regime can be reached; on the other hand, if it is possible to have 0 < uct, then there
can be a regime 0 <  < uct in which eectively chaotic behavior occurs before the
external-eld approximation must be superseded. it may be that as a matter of principle
this last possibility is excluded, but at the moment this remains an open question.
it
seems most likely that insight will be gained by investigating specic physical models.

the unitarity problem for quantum fields in curved spacetime but the
most important application of the present analysis of intermediate non-unitarity is to
quantum elds in curved spacetime. in this case, it is the gravitational eld which is the
external potential. if a picture like that expected for special-relativistic theories applies,
then unitarity is restored by uctuations in the gravitational eld. it should be possible
to build on the present analysis to make precise statements about what the characters
of these uctuations must be. in other words, we may be able to use the present work
to deduce quantum characteristics of the gravitational eld, assuming unitarity still holds
in that context. it should be emphasized that these issues arise at moderate scales, far
below the planck threshold. thus we have a new line of attack on quantum gravity, one
which does not require hypotheses about the strong-gravity, planck-scale, regime.

it has been recognized for a long time that it is
relation to algebraic approaches
useful to regard quantum eld theory as constructed in two stages. first, one describes
precisely an algebra a of observables; then, one seeks a representation of this algebra on
a physically acceptable hilbert space. specifying the algebra a is rather like specifying
a group by giving its multiplication table; specifying the representation is realizing the
observables as operators on a hilbert space.

generally, by an algebraic approach to quantum eld theory, one means an approach
which starts from and emphasizes the algebra a. the most extreme form of this approach
would seek to describe physics entirely in terms of this algebra without the construc-
tion of a representation. more moderate approaches (which are common) do make use
of representations, although these representations are analogs of density matrices rather
than state vectors. (the present paper, which emphasizes the construction of satisfactory
hamiltonians acting on hilbert spaces of state vectors, would not be considered an alge-
braic approach.) one can recast quantum eld theory in such algebraic terms, and then
one has a formalism equivalent to the conventional one, and so it becomes a matter of
taste or convenience which is to be preferred.

algebraic approaches are attractive for some purposes, because they treat dierent
representations with equal facility. in particular, when quantities which are singular in
one representation may have sensible existences in other representations (such as the
candidates for hamiltonians in these papers), the algebraic approach can be a natural
way of accommodating them. indeed, the hamiltonians have natural algebraic existences,
because they are generators of symmetries of the eld algebra a.

however, precisely this feature  the algebraic approachs egalitarian treatment of
dierent representations  can be a drawback. precisely because of this, it is dicult or
impossible to see, from the algebraic structure alone, how physically preferred represen-
tations (such as the ones of interest here) are distinguished.

4

while the results of these papers could be cast in terms of the algebraic approach, the
papers goals are more naturally met in a conventional, representation-based, approach.
while the present work is very mathematical, its goals are to provide enough structural
background that it will be possible for subsequent work to develop a physical understand-
ing of the signicances of non-unitarities and ill-dened hamiltonians. these are very
much representation-based concerns, with the physically-dictated choices of representa-
tions playing a central role. thus the representational approach seems to focus most
directly on the physical issues.

i have emphasized that the point of the present papers is to lay a framework within
which the signicance of some potentially serious pathologies (non-unitarity, unbound-
edness-below of energy) can be analyzed, and i have argued that the representation-based
approach is probably more suited to this than an algebraic one. on the other hand, once
the physical signicance of the pathologies is understood, one may have to reassess what
the most appropriate formalism for the theory is. if, for example, it were to turn out that
the pathologies were not of much physical signicance, but only somehow mathematical
niceties, then it could well be that the algebraic approach would be most useful, as a
framework which can accommodate such behaviors without giving them undue weight.

the hamiltonian i shall now discuss the problematic nature of the hamiltonian.

of course, the hamiltonian is simply the derivative of the evolution operator, so all
of the comments above should apply, interpreted innitesimally, to the hamiltonian.
however, to have such an interpretation, one needs an innitesimal counterpart of the
bogoliubovshale criterion for unitary implementability, that is, a criterion for the exis-
tence of the hamiltonian as a self-adjoint operator. such criteria are provided in these
papers. we may expect these criteria to be more practically useful, for many purposes,
than that of bogoliubov and shale, since criteria in terms of the hamiltonian do not
require integration of the equations of motion.

assuming the picture suggested above (of unitarity being saved by the breakdown of
the validity of the external-eld picture) for special-relativistic theories is correct, one
would expect that the problems of ill-denition (as a selfadjoint operator) of the hamil-
tonian are resolved by the same breakdown. parallel to the question of the existence
of an eectively non-unitary regime, one has the question of whether there is a sort
of eectively non-self-adjoint regime. in other words, in a theory with cuto , the
hamiltonian will depend sensitively on  for   0. if 0 is less than the scale uct at
which the external-eld approximation breaks down, then one does have such a regime.
developments of the techniques of this paper should enable one to estimate 0 in terms
of the external eld.

the foregoing applies to the hamiltonian as the generator of evolution. however,
there are important points beyond this. these have to do with the interpretation of the
hamiltonian as an energy operator, and with negative energies.

we wish to consider not just the total hamiltonian, but the various energy operators
that can be formed from the stressenergy, by integrating it against a smooth test eld on
a four-volume. physically, these correspond to measurements of energy (or momentum,
angular momentum, etc.) in nite spatial volumes with temporal averagings as well. these
operators presumably are what gure in real experiments, since one can never measure a
total (over all space) energy. the picture that emerges from these papers, as well as from
previous work, is that (in the case of averaged energy operators), is that such averaged
hamiltonians exist as semi-bounded self-adjoint operators. but as the temporal extent of

5

the averaging is decreased: (a) the lower bounds diverge to ; and (b) the hilbert-space
domains of the operators become more sparse, having only {0} as a limit.
it should be emphasized that this behavior occurs even in the simplest cases, for in-
stance, for a kleingordon eld in minkowski space (with no external potential). consider
for deniteness such a eld, and an averaged energy operator

bh(b, b) =z bt ren

tt (t, x, y, z) b(t)b(x, y, z) dtdxdydz ,

(2)

where b(t)  0, b(x, y, z)  0 are smooth compactly-supported test functions eecting
the temporal and spatial smearing of the energy density operator; we require

z b(t) dt = 1

(3)

to treat b as an averaging. for any xed b, b, the quantity bh(b, b) is a self-adjoint

operator, bounded below. but as the function b becomes more sharply peaked at a given
time, we nd the conditions (a) and (b) of the previous paragraph. this means that there
is no idealized operator

lim

b(t)(t) bh(b, b)

(4)

(5)

representing the measure of the energy in a nite three-volume.
in other words, the
energy in a spatial volume is not a meaningful quantum observable. it is necessary to
specify the scale of the temporal averaging in order to have a well-dened self-adjoint
operator.

semiclassical gravity while many workers have recognized this point, it has not been
taken fully to heart, i think, in an important area: attempts to understand the back-
reaction of the quantum eld on spacetime. one would expect that this is determined by
the energy density operator (and more generally by the components of the stressenergy),
but we have just seen that this operator does not really exist; only averaged versions exist.
this means that one must specify the scale of the averaging before one has a well-dened
theory. in other words, the specication of the averaging scale is not just a technicality
which will sort itself out; dierent scales give dierent theories, and one needs to know if
it is possible to identify a physically plausible one for a given problem.

to be explicit, let us consider the most common starting-point for treatments of the

back-reaction of the quantum eld on spacetime, the semiclassical approximation:

rab  (1/2)rgab = 8g(cid:16)t classical

ab

ab i(cid:17) .
+ hbt ren

this equation is a natural one to write down, but is it justied?

in general, one would expect such an approximation, where the quantum elds only

couple through expectation values of an operator bo, to be valid when uctuations in bo are

negligible. it is easy to construct examples, even in newtonian gravity and non-relativistic
quantum mechanics, in which this fails. consider for instance two separated boxes, one
at r = a and the other at r = a, and a particle of mass m with probability 1/2 of being
in either box. assuming the sizes of the boxes are negligible (compared to kak), then the
gravitational potential constructed from the expectation of the energy density is



gm/2

kr  ak 

gm/2
kr + ak

,

6

(6)

whereas the correct potential is presumably a quantum superposition

gm

kr + ak(cid:29) .

(7)

1

2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

gm

kr  ak(cid:29) +

1

2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

these two states of the gravitational eld  (6) and (7)  are dierent, and that dierence
is in principle detectable in many ways. for example, an observer near one box experiences
a certain gravitational red-shift relative to innity according to (6); according to (7) she
experiences, with probability 1/2, either a much smaller or an almost doubled red-shift.4
what this example shows is that in principle it is quite possible for the semiclassical
approximation to fail, even in mild circumstances. whether this failure is signicant
or not depends on exactly what regime one hopes to apply the approximation to. it is
presumably far beyond the state of present technology to detect the dierence between
(6) and (7) with a laboratory experiment  one would need to be able to measure very
ne dierences in red-shifts with apparatuses much smaller than the scale 2kak of the
separation of the position eigenstates.
in general, for any proposed application of the semiclassical approximation, in order to
check its credibility one needs to: (a) estimate the uctuations; (b) specify the accuracy to
which spacetime is supposed to be modeled; (c) specify the time for which that model is
supposed to be valid, before the errors made in the approximation accumulate and become
signicant. in some circumstances, such as the non-relativistic example above, elementary
estimates can quickly convince one that the approximation is valid for practical purposes.
however in other circumstances this is may not be so obvious.

let us return now to the case of quantum elds in curved spacetime.

it is not

ab ) not only dominate the expectation value but actually
diverge for all hadamard states.5 this clearly raises questions about the validity of the
semiclassical approximation. it is presumably possible to answer these in many cases; it
is not possible to ignore the questions.

hard to show that as the temporal averaging tends to zero, the uctuations in bo (here
bo is a temporally-averaged bt ren
the divergent uctuations of bt ren

ab mean that equation (5) is not credible if interpreted
literally. the equation might be valid if the right-hand side were replaced by some sort of
temporal (or spacetime) average of the expectation of the stressenergy. this indeed is
presumably what happens in most everyday circumstances, where the quantum character
of the matter is negligible for the purposes of understanding its eect on spacetime.
however, the main interest of quantum eld theory in curved spacetime attaches to
those situations in which the quantum character of the elds is important.
in those
circumstances it becomes problematic to justify an equation like (5), even with a re-
interpreted right-hand side. to do this, one would have to spell out the accuracy to which
one wanted to model spacetime classically, the time for which that model should hold, and
the scale of the averaging. one would have to justify physically the averaging procedure.
these sorts of questions have been very little investigated (see however flanagan and
wald 1996 and ford and wu 1999).

whether the semiclassical approximation turns out to be valid for a given purpose or
not, careful attempts at its justication will deepen our understanding of the physics of the

4while the argument in this paragraph has been deliberately phrased to make it as homely and
unprovocative as possible, it implicitly involves quantumgravitational assumptions. for example, the
notion that the potential can be in a superposition of states implies that the potential must really be a
quantum observable.

5this follows from results in helfer (1996).

in terms of the notation of equation (8), below, the

uctuations contain a term c c



, which diverges.

7

situation, as we ask exactly what scales are important, and how do we expect the behavior
of the eld to aect the spacetime. and certainly the most interesting cases would be
those for which (5) did not hold, even with a re-interpreted right-hand side. in such cases
one would have to take into account the quantum character of the gravitational eld. it
is quite possible that such situations do exist: above, we saw that it seems necessary to
include quantum uctuations in the gravitational eld in order to restore the unitarity of
the eld theory.

negative energies much of the interest in these quantum stress-energies is on account
of the prediction of relativistic quantum eld theories that the renormalized, temporally
averaged, energy densities can be negative. thus if these stress-energies can be used as
sources for einsteins equation, one has a violation of the weak energy hypothesis, a
key assumption underlying some of the most important results in classical relativity (the
singularity theorems and the area theorem). thus the understanding of in precisely what
sense the energy densities can be negative is a key problem, on whose resolution depend
basic qualitative aspects of the behavior of spacetime.

we must bear in mind that at present there is no direct experimental evidence of
negative energy densities.6 thus the importance of having as complete a theoretical
understanding of these as possible.

formal structures to explain the foregoing more quantitatively, let us begin by writ-
ing down the formal expression for a hamiltonian operator for a linear theory:

bh = cbaba + b

baba + cbaba + c-number term .

here ba, ba are annihilation and creation operators, and b

, c are coecients (self-
adjoint and symmetric, respectively).7
 is self-adjoint, then the
denition of the hamiltonian is unproblematic; one has a structure much like that of the
hamiltonian for a free kleingordon eld in minkowski space. however, if this situation
is perturbed even slightly, diculties may appear. for example, it is easy to see that the

if c = 0 and b

(8)

more severe problems may occur.

well be violated, even if the c are uniformly small.

vacuum |0i cannot be in the domain of bh unless cc < . this condition can very
states on which bh is well-dened. this means that bh can have only a very limited

existence, and certainly cannot be the self-adjoint operator that quantum theory requires
an observable to be. these sorts of diculties are potentially very serious, as they raise the

it may be impossible to nd any normalizable

6the measurement of the casimir force is sometimes cited as such evidence, but that is a measurement
of one of the pressure components of the stressenergy, not the energy density. there is only an indirect
link between the two operators. moreover, there are two sorts of concerns about the usual prediction of
negative energy density between the plates of the casimir apparatus. the rst is that the plates have
been unphysically idealized as perfect conductors; rough estimates show that for real plates there could
be a separation-independent positive contribution to the energy density overwhelming the usual negative
energy density (helfer and lang 1999); this would not alter the predicted casimir force. second, there
may be diculties of quantum measurement theory in meaningfully ascribing a negative energy density
to the region between the plates (helfer 1998).

7the modes annihilated and created byba,ba need not be particle modes; this will be discussed further,

below. also, the formal hamiltonian (8) has been written in normal-ordered form. this is for purposes of
orientation only. in the analysis that follows, criteria are developed for determining whether the quantum
hamiltonian exists without prior assumptions about what renormalization scheme is to be used. the
second paper in this series will contain some further results, about when normal-ordering is adequate to
dene the theory.

8

question of what the operator character of the hamiltonian, and hence of the dynamics,
is. this should be contrasted with somewhat ner issues of renormalization which go

computation of casimir or ground-state energies. those ner issues presumably cannot
even be addressed until the operator character is properly understood.

to the kinematic question of what the c-number contribution to bh is, for example, the
we have seen that diculties are potentially present when c 6= 0. physically,
this indicates that evolution by the hamiltonian does not preserve the decomposition
of the eld into creation and annihilation parts. this situation occurs naturally in many
settings. most obviously, it is the situation in time-dependent external potential problems.
in particular, it is the generic case for quantum elds in curved spacetime. however, it
can also occur when there is no explicit time dependence in the theory. if one has several
linearly coupled elds, for example, in general one has c 6= 0; cases of of current interest
are the models for the quantum electromagnetic eld in dispersive dielectric media (see,
e.g., barnett 1997). and the theory of squeezing revolves precisely around hamiltonians
with c 6= 0 (loudon and knight 1987).
nature of the present paper the main theorems to be given here have characters
similar to some basic results in quantum theory, in that their general physical content
can be appreciated without pursuing the analytic technicalities of their proofs. (thus
for example, physicists use daily spectral resolutions of self-adjoint operators without
worrying about how the existence of such resolutions is proved; and one can appreciate
the sense of the stonevon neumann theorem, that canonical quantizations of mechanical
systems with nitely many degrees of freedom are unitarily equivalent, without examining
its proof.) i have written these papers so as to conne the analytic technicalities to the
proofs. i hope that the statements of the theorems will be accessible to general workers
in quantum eld theory.

there has been some previous work in this area. as mentioned earlier, shale (1962)
found the condition for a nite evolution to be unitarily implementable. analyses parallel
to shales are central to the theory of loop groups, and it is possible that the present results
may have analogs of interest there. klein (1973) investigated the case of hamiltonians,
and provided a host of counterexamples to natural conjectures. more recently, honegger
& rieckers (1996) established some results under fairly strong hypotheses on c .

the plan of the paper is this. the next section contains a brief discussion of the concept
of unitary implementability. this can be skipped by those who understand the distinction
between this sort of unitarity and that governing the state vector. section 3 contains
preliminaries, mainly the basic denitions needed to state the problem mathematically.
section 4 proves one of the two main theorems (theorem 2), characterizing which classical
hamiltonian vector elds give rise to one-parameter unitary groups on the physical hilbert
space. in section 5 (theorem 3), it is shown that each group that arises in this way is
automatically strongly continuous, and so possesses a self-adjoint generator, that is, a
quantum hamiltonian. section 6 gives as an example the case of quantum elds in curved
spacetime; it is shown (theorem 4) that evolution along the timelike unit normal to a
cauchy surface is not self-adjointly implementable unless the second fundamental form of
the surface vanishes identically. section 7 contains some comments.

the assumptions of the present paper are very general. in the next paper, i specialize
to the case where the classical hamiltonian functions are positive. then one can say much
more about the structure of the theory, and take up the question of whether the quantum
hamiltonians are bounded below. the third paper in the series will treat fermions.

9

background. a good summary of the necessary quantum eld theory, from the point
of view of this paper, will be found in walds (1994) book. the functional analysis can
be found in dunford and schwartz (1958). in section 5, i have made use of the theories
of pseudodierential and fourier integral operators, for which see treves (1980).

summary of notation. here is a summary of the notation used. unfortunately, there

are quite a few things denoted conventionally by similar symbols.

h is the space of solutions of the classical eld equations, a real hilbertable space

equipped with a symplectic form .

hc is the space h equipped with the complex structure dened by j, and so made

into a complex hilbert space.

the representation of the eld algebra acts.

h is the physical hilbert space of the quantum eld theory, that is, the space on which
k  kop is the operator norm.
k  khs is the hilbertschmidt norm.
a is the eld algebra.
a is the hamiltonian vector eld on the space of classical solutions.
a is the lie adjoint of a, that is, the derivative of conjugation by g(t) = eta.
notes. since h has no preferred inner product, i have usually been careful to emphasize
the dependence of properties on j. thus one has j-symmetric transformations, etc. the
hilbertable and hilbert spaces used here are always assumed to be separable, that is, to
have countable bases.

2 unitary implementability

the central question in this paper is, when does a group of motions on classical phase
space have a unitary counterpart on hilbert space? since most of the quantum eld-
theoretic literature does not distinguish explicitly between this sort of unitarity and that
governing the evolution of the state vector, it seems worthwhile to spell this out.

let us consider a linear quantum eld theory in the presence of a perhaps time-
dependent external potential. this is constructed in two steps. first, one denes an
algebra of elds a. these are not yet eld operators, as they do not as yet operate
on anything. rather, the algebra a is a mathematically precise way of expressing the
canonical commutation relations which any such operators will be required to have. the
second stage of the construction is the identication of the elds with specic operators
on a hilbert space, that is, the specication of a representation of the algebra a. (one
can think of the steps as analogous to rst dening a group by a multiplication table, and
then giving a realization of it as a set of matrices acting on column-vectors.) in a linear
eld theory, the algebra a is essentially determined by the classical phase space of the
theory, since the canonical quantization species the commutation relations in terms of
the poisson brackets. there are in general many inequivalent representations one might
choose for this algebra, and the question of which one is physically correct may be subtle.
for quantum elds in curved spacetime, we accept the standard point of view, that
the correct representation is a hadamard one (cf. wald 1994). this can be specied in
various equivalent ways, for example, by demanding that on a dense set of states the lead-
ing short-distance asymptotics of the two-point functions agree with those in minkowski
space. however, it is only in section 6 that the details of the hadamard form are used. be-
cause the rest of this paper has a very general mathematical perspective, the conclusions

10

depend only on the fact that the physics does determine a representation.8 thus most of
the results are phrased in terms of compatibility issues between a generator of symmetries
of a (which we wish to implement as a quantum operator) and a representation; the pre-
cise way the representation is determined gures only in section 6. (the general class of
representations we are concerned with are those given by symplectic quantization; explicit
formulae are given in section 5.5.1. for particulars of the hadamard representations, see
wald 1994; we also use formulae from helfer 1996.)

in brief, then, besides the canonical commutation relations and the eld equations,
one needs an extra input to construct a quantum eld theory: the choice of representa-
tion. in minkowski space, in the absence of xed external elds or boundary conditions
which might break the relativistic invariance, one can nd an essentially unique poincare-
invariant representation, the fock representation. however, in more general circumstances
it can be a subtle issue to determine the physically correct representation. while we shall
not need this here, it may be remarked that the choice of representation is encoded in the
(infrared and ultraviolet) asymptotics of the two-point functions.9 thus dierent represen-
tations may lead to dierent local quantum uctuations, dierent vacuum polarizabilities,
etc.

all representations considered here will have the same abstract mathematical form
as the fock representation in that they will be determined by a decomposition of the
eld operator into creation and annihilation parts, with a corresponding vacuum
state. however, the modes created and annihilated may not correspond to particles, and
may have no simple physical interpretations. likewise, the vacuum state need not be
interpretable as a physical vacuum. such representations are adequate for almost all
purposes, and more general ones can be constructed as direct sums or integrals of these.
by the evolution of the elds, we mean their change when the classical phase space is
evolved along some hamiltonian vector eld, which in our case shall always respect the
linear structure of the phase space. this evidently will determine an automorphism of the
algebra a, and one would like to identify the generator of that automorphism with the
quantum hamiltonian. however, it may happen that the automorphism is not induced by
any unitary motions of the physical hilbert space. for a one-parameter group of motions,
this means that the hamiltonian cannot be realized as a self-adjoint operator.

two points should be emphasized about this sort of nonunitarity:

 the evolution in question is that of the algebra of elds, and not that of the state
vectors. the state vectors do evolve unitarily  in fact, are unchanged in our
heisenberg picture (except when reduction occurs).

 the possibility of non-unitarily implementable evolution occurs only in quantum
eld theory. in quantum mechanics, when there are only nitely many degrees of
freedom, the stonevon neumann theorem guarantees that any two representations
of the canonical commutation relations are unitarily equivalent. a corollary of this
is that the hamiltonians in the case of elds must always be formally self-adjoint,
in a suitable sense. for any coarse graining of a quantum eld theory to nitely
many degrees of freedom will result in evolutions which are unitarily implementable.
this means that the failure of unitary implementability, or of self-adjointness, must
occur in the passage to the limit of innitely many degrees of freedom.

8more precisely, the hadamard condition determines a certain class, or folium, of representations.
9and in any additional singularities the two-point functions may have, for example on account of

boundary conditions.

11

3 preliminaries

i shall begin by indicating, for the non-experts, the meanings of the objects in the sym-
plectic treatment of the quantization of linear bose elds. those familiar with this can
skip to section 2.2 to identify the terminology and symbols used in this paper.

3.1 orientation

the usual fock construction of free eld theories in minkowski space can be generalized
to apply to linear elds responding to external potentials, in particular to elds in curved
spacetime. i shall summarize here how this is done.

let h be a real hilbertable10 space, which in applications is the space of solutions
(of a certain sobolev regularity) to the classical eld equations for a bose eld.11 this
may be either in at or curved spacetime, and external elds may be present. we
shall not explicitly discuss charged elds, but these can be treated with straightforward
modications of the present techniques. we require that there be given a symplectic
form  on h. then  determines an abstract algebra a of elds, obeying the canonical
commutation relations. the term abstract is used here to emphasize that there has been
as yet no construction of the quantum hilbert space and representation of the algebra as
operators on the space.

a particular representation (of the sort usually considered) of the eld algebra is
determined by choosing a positive complex structure, that is a map j : h  h which
preserves , satises j 2 = 1, and such that (v, jv) is positive-denite. for free elds
in minkowski space, one chooses j = i(+  ), where  are the positive- and
negative-frequency parts of . in minkowski space, then, the positive-frequency elds are
the +i eigenspace of j, and from these the fock representation is constructed in the usual
way. the same mathematical prescription for constructing a representation of a works,
however, for any positive complex structure j on any hilbertable symplectic space.

the choice of j is physically important. dierent choices of j will generally lead to

inequivalent representations of a:

theorem. (shale 1962) two positive complex structures, j1 and j2, lead to unitarily
equivalent representations of a i j1  j2 is hilbertschmidt.
(recall that an operator l is hilbertschmidt if tr ll < . note that in nite dimen-
sions, all operators are hilbertschmidt.) it turns out that, at least for linear scalar elds
in curved spacetime, there is a natural choice of j, or more properly, an equivalence
class of natural choices, in the above sense. these are characterized by having two-point
functions whose leading short-distance behavior is the same as in minkowski space (wald
1994).12 probably similar results are true for other eld equations. in this paper, though,
it will be unnecessary to examine how j is determined; it will be a datum.

since the representation will have the same mathematical structure as fock space, we
may speak of creation and annihilation operators. in general, these will have no simple
interpretation in terms of particles, but refer to some other fundamental modes (whichever
physical modes constitute the +i eigenspace of j). we may also speak of a vacuum in

10a hilbertable space is a topological vector space whose topological structure can be determined by
an inner product, but without a preferred choice of inner product. the restriction to hilbertable spaces
is made to streamline some of the analysis, and could be weakened.

11in the case of a gauge eld, the following treatment applies to gauge equivalence classes of solutions.
12this is a little bit of an oversimplication, as there may also be infrared eects.

12

this sense. in general this vacuum state has only mathematical interest, and does not
have a physical interpretation as the vacuum. it will not be invariant under a change from
one representation to a unitarily equivalent one.

now if g : h  h is a continuous linear map preserving , then g induces a change

j 7 gjg1, and so
corollary. a symmetry g of (h, ) is unitarily implementable on the representation
determined by j i j  gjg1 is hilbertschmidt.
this is simply the restatement, in the present formalism, of the well-known criterion for
bogoliubov transformations to be unitarily implementable.

suppose now one has a one-parameter group g(t) of motions of h preserving . in most
physical applications, this group is strongly continuous, meaning that for any xed v  h,
the function t 7 g(t)v is continuous. under these circumstances, there is a generator a so
that g(t) = eta. in applications, this generator is typically a partial dierential operator.
for example, for evolution in time for the kleingordon eld, one has h = {( , )} and
(9)

0

a =(cid:20)

  m2

1

0 (cid:21) ,

where  is the spatial laplacian.

3.2 denitions and notation

throughout, we shall let hc be a complex innite-dimensional separable hilbert space.
the complex inner product on hc will be denoted h,i. we shall let h be the underlying
real hilbert space. then we write j : h  h for the real-linear map given by v 7 iv,
and

(11)
then (,) is the canonical real inner product on h and  is a symplectic form on h which
is non-degenerate in that it denes isomorphisms from h to its dual. note that

(v, w) = hv, wi
(v, w) = hv, wi

(10)

(v, w) = (v, jw) .
thus any two of , j and (,) determine the third.
throughout, the real adjoint of a real-linear operator (perhaps only densely dened)
l will be denoted l. thus the dening relation is (v, lw) = (lv, w) with domain
d(l) = {w  h | (v, lw) = (lv, w) for some lw for all v  d(l)}. a useful result is
the
proposition 1. if g : h  h is a continuous linear map preserving , then g is invertible
and g1 = jgj. conversely, the adjoint of g is g = jg1j.
proof. one has

(12)

(v,jgjgw) = (v, gjgw) = (gv, jgw) = (gv, gw) = (v, w)

for all v, w  h, and similarly

(v, gw) = (gv, w) = (gv, jw) = (v, g1jw) = (v, jg1jw) .

13

denition 1. the symplectic group of h is

sp(h) = {g : h  h | g is linear, continuous and preserves } .

its elements are the symplectomorphisms.

the symplectic group does not depend on the real inner product on h (or on the
complex structure); it depends only on  and the structure of h as a hilbertable space.
it has naturally the structure of a banach group, using the operator norm to dene the
topology.

denition 2. the restricted symplectic group of hc is

sprest(hc) = {g  sp(h) | g1jg  g is hilbertschmidt} .

that this set is closed under composition and inversion is a consequence of the fact that
the hilbertschmidt operators form an ideal. there is a natural topology on sprest(hc);
see shale (1962).
(we shall not need this topology here, since we shall be concerned
exclusively with strong continuity.) note that the complex-linear and -antilinear parts of

g are g = (1/2)(cid:0)g  jgj(cid:1). thus g1jg  g is hilbertschmidt i g is.

we recall that a strongly continuous one-parameter subgroup of sp(h) is a one-
parameter subgroup t 7 g(t) such that, for each v  h, the map t 7 g(t)v is continuous.
(in general, one can also consider semigroups, dened for t  0, but as every symplecto-
morphism is invertible, in our case every semigroup extends to a group, which is strongly
continuous i the semigroup is.) according to the hilleyoshidaphillips theorem, such
groups have the form g(t) = eta, where a is a densely-dened operator on h (with cer-
tain spectral properties), and kg(t)kop  m e|c|t for some m, c  0. the spectrum of a is
conned to the strip ||  c.
we now wish to consider the action of g(t) by conjugation on certain operators. it
is not hard to see that, for any operator l of nite rank, the function t 7 g(t)lg(t)
is continuous in hilbertschmidt norm. now suppose l is a hilbertschmidt operator.
then for any  > 0, we may write l = lf + l, where lf has nite rank and klkhs < .
we then have

kg(t)lg(t)  lkhs  kg(t)lfg(t)  lfkhs + kg(t)lg(t)  lkhs

 kg(t)lfg(t)  lfkhs

+(cid:0)kg(t)kopkg(t)kop + 1(cid:1)

(13)

(14)

we may make this less than any given  > 0, as follows. assume rst |t| < 1. then
the hilleyoshidaphillips theorem bounds kg(t)kopkg(t)kop, and hence choosing  we
may make the second term as small as desired. then the rst term may be made small
by restricting |t| < . thus conjugation by g(t) is continuous at the identity on the
hilbertschmidt operators. but since conjugation is a group action, we have proved

proposition 2. let g(t) be a strongly continuous one-parameter subgroup of sp(h).
conjugation by g(t) induces a strongly-continuous oneparameter group g(t) = eta on
the space of hilbertschmidt operators on h.

(the same proof would apply for the compact operators, or those of trace class.)

14

4 characterization of generators of sprest(hc)

in this section, we shall prove the main theorem. we shall do this in two main stages. our
rst goal is to nd out what restrictions must be made on a in order that exp ta be uni-
tarily implementable for each t. we shall then show that no additional hypotheses need be
made to ensure that these unitary maps can be chosen to form a strongly-continuous one-
parameter group. thus we shall be able to conclude that, when exp ta is implementable
for each t, a hamiltonian operator exists. this nal argument is delicate, and i do not
know of any reason a priori to expect the conclusion.

we begin by introducing a function measuring the change in complex structure: let

the group law for g(t) implies a twisted law

l(t) = g(t)jg(t)  j .

if we formally dierentiate this at s = 0, we nd the dierential equation

l(s + t) = g(s)l(t)g(s) + l(s) .

here

l(t) = al(t)  l(t)a + l(0) .

the dierential equation has the formal solution

g(u)l(0) du ,

l(0) = aj  ja .
l(t) =z t

0

where

for any operator q.

g(t)q = g(t)qg(t)

we shall now show how these equations can be interpreted rigorously.

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

proposition 3. ja and aj are self-adjoint operators (on h with the inner product (,)
dened in equation (10)) with domains d(a) and jd(a) = d(aj), respectively.

proof. we have

d((ja)) = {v  h | (jaw, v) = (w, (ja)v) for all w  d(ja)} .

now, if w  d(a) = d(ja), we have

(jaw, v) = t,0(jg(t)w, jv)
= t,0(w, g(t)v)
= t,0(w, jg(t)v)
= t,0(w, jg(t)v) ,

where t,0 means /t evaluated at t = 0. the proof for aj is similar.

15

the condition d(aj) = d(ja) is the condition that d(a) be invariant under j, that
is, that the domain of a be a complex space with complex structure j. this holds for
all physical systems that have so far been studied, but there are at least mathematical
examples for which it fails.

corollary 1. the commutator [a, j] = aj  ja is naturally dened as a form

(v, [a, j]w) = (ajv, w)  (v, jaw)

on d(aj)  d(a) (or on d(a)  d(aj)). we have

(v, [a, j]w) = t,0(v, g(t)jg(t)w) = t,0(v, l(t)w)

(21)

(22)

in this case.

proof. we have

(v, g(t)jg(t)w) = (v, jg(t)jg(t)w)

= (g(t)jv, jg(t)w)
= (g(t)jv, g(t)w)

for w  d(a), we may write g(t)w = w  taw + o(t); similarly, the last line displayed
above becomes

(jv  tajv + o(t), w  taw + o(t)) = (jv, w) + t(ajv, w)  t(jv, aw ) + o(t) ,

which has the desired derivative.

and similarly:

corollary 2. the j-antilinear part of a,

exists as a j-symmetric form with domain d(a), and also with domain jd(a). the
j-linear part of a,

a = (1/2)(cid:0)a + jaj(cid:1) ,
a+ = (1/2)(cid:0)a  jaj(cid:1) ,

exists as a j-skew form on both of these domains.

we can now make sense of the integral formula for l(t).

proposition 4. the formal expression (19) for l(t) is valid in the sense of forms on
jd(a)  d(a). that is, for any v  jd(a) and w  d(a), one has

(v, l(t)w) =z t

0 (cid:8)(v, g(u)ajw)  (v, g(u)jaw)(cid:9)du .

proof. this follows by integration by parts; one has only to note that the terms can be
arranged so that this is sensible.

16

4.1 regularity of the complex structure

we show here that the function l(t), measuring the change in the complex structure, is
continuous and of at most exponential growth.

theorem 1. if g(t) is a strongly continuous one-parameter family of restricted symplectic
transformations, then the function t 7 l(t) is continuous (in the hilbertschmidt norm).
proof. we shall rst show that the function is measurable. let  be a positive real number
and l0 a xed hilbertschmidt operator. the inverse image of the ball of radius  at l0
is

{t |xj

k(cid:0)l(t)  l0(cid:1)ejk2

h < 2} ,

where ej form an orthonormal basis for h. but the sum is a pointwise-convergent sum of
non-negative continuous functions, hence lower semicontinuous, and hence measurable.
now for positive integers n, consider the sets {t  (1, 1) | kl(t)khs > n}. these form
a decreasing sequence of sets of nite measure, with intersection . thus for large enough
n the set s = {t  (1, 1) | kl(t)khs < n} has positive measure. we may similarly nd
a set t  (1, 1), symmetric about the origin, of positive measure, and with kl(t)khs
bounded on t . however then the set {t1 + t2 | t1, t2  t} will contain an interval about
the origin, and from the twisted group law and the hilleyoshidaphillips theorem we
have

kl(t1 + t2)khs  kg(t2)kopkl(t1)khskg(t2)kop + kl(t2)khs

is bounded on this interval. thus there exists an interval containing the origin on which
kl(t)khs is bounded.

we integrate the twisted group law in the form

(for t close enough to zero) over a closed interval [s0, s1] near the origin:

(23)

g(t)jg(t)  j = g(s + t)jg(s  t)  j + g(t)(cid:0)g(s)jg(s)  j(cid:1)g(t)
(s1  s0)(cid:0)g(t)jg(t)  j(cid:1) = z s1
s0 (cid:2)g(s + t)jg(s  t)  j(cid:3) ds
g(t)z s1
= z s1+t
s0+t (cid:2)g(u)jg(u)  j(cid:3) du
g(t)z s1
s0(cid:2)g(s)jg(s)  j(cid:3) ds as t  0. the second

s0 (cid:2)g(s)jg(s)  j(cid:3) ds g(t)

s0 (cid:2)g(s)jg(s)  j(cid:3) ds g(t)

the rst term of the last line tends to r s1

term does, too, since we have shown that conjugation by g(t) is strongly continuous on
the hilbertschmidt operators. thus l(t) is continuous at the origin.

finally, at any value of t, for small enough s, we have

kl(t + s)  l(t)khs = kg(t)l(s)g(t)khs  kg(t)kopkl(s)khskg(t)kop

which tends to zero as s does.

17

proposition 5. for strongly continuous one-parameter families of restricted symplectic
motions, one has

for some ,   0. (if kg(t)kop  m ec|t|, then one may choose any  > 2c.)
proof. a little algebra shows

kl(t)khs  e|t|

l(nt) =(cid:2)g((n  1)t + g((n  2)t) +  + 1(cid:3)l(t) .

from the hilleyoshidaphillips theorem, we know kg(t)kop  m ec|t| for some m  1,
c  0. thus

kl(nt)khs  nm 2e2c|nt|kl(t)khs .

for any u with |u|  1, write u = n + r where n is an integer and |r| < 1, where r has the
same sign as n. then we have

kl(u)khs = kl(n(1 + r/n))khs

 nm 2e2c|u|kl(1 + r/n)khs
 |u|m 2e2c|u|

t(2,1][1,2)kl(t)khs

sup

for |u|  1. the result now follows from elementary considerations.

we are now in a position to establish a useful property of unitarily implementable

evolutions.

proposition 6. let a be the generator of a strongly continuous one-parameter subgroup

of the restricted symplectic group. then the j-antilinear part(cid:0)(  a)1(cid:1) of its resolvent
(  a)1 is hilbertschmidt for the real part of  suciently positive, and is o() in the
hilbertschmidt topology as   +.
proof. using a subscript minus to denote j-antilinear parts, we have

(cid:0)(  a)1(cid:1) =z 

0

g(t)et dt .

a priori, this integral is known to exist only in the strong sense. however, it follows
from the previous two results that g(t) = (1/2)l(t)g(t)j is a locally integrable hilbert
schmidt-valued function and that the integral converges for the real part of  suciently
positive. multiplying by , one easily shows that the resulting integral tends to g(0) = 0
as   +.

the converse of this fails; one can easily create counterexamples by considering direct

sums of countably many two-dimensional symplectic spaces.

we close this subsection with some further properties of l and of operators derived

from it, which will be useful in what follows.

proposition 7. jl is a j-symmetric operator with spectrum strictly below unity.

18

proof. we have

where the asterisk denotes the real adjoint.

jl = jgjg1 + 1 = (g1)g1 + 1

now let us put

g = (1/2)(cid:0)g  jgj(cid:1)

(24)

for the j-linear and j-antilinear parts of g. we have jl = 2gg1, and hence gg1
is a j-symmetric operator varying continuously in hilbertschmidt norm, with spectrum
bounded strictly below 1/2.

proposition 8. for strongly continuous one-parameter families of restricted symplec-
tic motions, the quantity gg1
+  1 is a j-symmetric hilbertschmidt operator, varying
continuously with t in hilbertschmidt norm.

proof. we have

since the rst factor varies continuously in hilbertschmidt norm and the second contin-
uously in operator norm, the product varies continuously in hilbertschmidt norm.

gg1

+  1 = (gg1)(cid:2)1  gg1(cid:3)1

.

note that jl(t) = jg1jg + 1 = 2jg1gj, so g1g is also a continuous j-

symmetric hilbertschmidt operator, as is g1

+ g  1.

4.2 the characterization theorem

theorem 2. a generator a of a strongly-continuous one-parameter subgroup of sp(h) is
a generator of a strongly-continuous one-parameter subgroup of sprest(hc) i the following
condition holds: let g(t) = eta, and let g(t) = eta be the associated one-parameter group
acting on the compact operators on h by conjugation. then for any  in the resolvent
set of a, the quantity r(,a)l(0) (is dened as a limit in the space of linear forms on
d(aj)  d(a) and) is a hilbertschmidt operator.
proof. note that d(aj)  d(a) is a hilbertable space, and so will be the space of linear
forms on it.
0 g(u)l(0) du. the idea will be to integrate this against et.
however, since l(0) is only weakly dened, it will be easier to approach this integral as
a limit. consider then, for a hilbertschmidt operator b,

we have l(t) = r t
z 

0

etz t

0

g(u)b du dt = z 

0

1e(a)ub du

= 1r(,a) b

here the spectrum of a must lie in a strip |z| < 2c for some c > 0, and so the integral
converges for  suciently positive. now, as b approaches l(0) (in the space of forms
on d(aj)  d(a)), the left-hand side of this equation approachesr 
0 etl(t) dt in the
space of forms, but this integral is in fact a hilbertschmidt operator. (this follows from
proposition 5.) therefore, as b tends to l(0) as a form, the quantity 1r(,a) b tends
to a limit, which we denote 1r(,a) l(0), equal to the integral.

19

for the converse, we note that

z t

0

g(u)l(0) du = z t

0

g(u)r(,a)l(0) du + (1  g(t))r(,a)l(0) ,

and the right-hand side is hilbertschmidt in view of proposition 2.

this theorem is one of our main results. in applications, the operator a is the hamil-
tonian operator for the classical eld equations, acting on cauchy data. the complex
structure j is a pseudodierential operator whose singular part is determined by the local
structure of the eld operator. thus r(,a)l(0) can be computed by pseudodierential
operator techniques from local data. whether it exists as a hilbertschmidt operator is
in most cases easily read o simply by considering the orders of the dominant terms.

5 existence of a hamiltonian

the characterization theorem determines the conditions under which a strongly-contin-
uous one-parameter subgroup of sp(h) lies in sprest(hc). in this case, it is what one
might call pointwise unitarily implementable, that is, for each t there exists a unitary
transformation u (t) on the fock space implementing eta. (each of these transformations
is determined uniquely up to phase.) one would like to know if (with an appropriate

this is always the case.

choice of phases) we have u (t) = eitbh for a self-adjoint hamiltonian bh. it turns out that

in order to prove this, and for its own interest, we shall work out an explicit formula
for u (t). i would expect that formulas equivalent to this one (modulo phase) are known.
however, it is worth going through the analysis explicitly here, for two reasons. first,
the phase is of some interest and is technically dicult to analyze. second, we need ne
control over some of the terms in order to establish the strong continuity of u (t), and so
a careful presentation is worthwhile.

5.1 the representation

the representation (of the weyl algebra of the eld operators) is dened as follows. let
z a  hc. (we shall use an index notation when convenient.) the z a will be creation
operators, with a = /z a annihilation operators. then the state wave functions are
holomorphic functions (z a). it is sometimes convenient to distinguish between these
wave functions and the abstract state vectors |i; the two are related by

(25)
where |0zi is the vacuum state. in this equation, the terms in the power series (z a)
are thought of as creation operators.

|i = (z a)|0zi ,

the inner product is

h|i =z ehz,zidzdz .

(26)

this integral is dened as the integral of  against a promeasure; alternatively, it may
be regarded as a short-hand for the power series in the coecients of ,  it formally
determines. the normalization is xed so that the norm of (z) = 1 is unity.

20

now let g = g(t) be a symplectomorphism. it induces an action on the eld operators

which is conventionally written as

z a = a

a = a

bz b + abb
bb + abz b .

(27)

(28)

here ,  are essentially the j-linear and -antilinear parts of g(t), and are known as
bogoliubov coecients. that g(t) be a symplectomorphism is equivalent to

0 = acb
ca
b = b

a

c

c  bca
c  bcac .

(29)

(30)

note that this implies  is invertible. that g(t) lie in sprest is equivalent to requiring 
to be hilbertschmidt.

the image of the vacuum is determined by the requirement that it be annihilated by

all operators 

a, and from this one nds the state is

n exp(1/2)qabz az b
(or more precisely n exp(1/2)qabz az b|0zi), where
qab =(cid:0)1(cid:1)a
ccb

is symmetric and the normalization n has modulus

(31)

(32)

(33)
the conditions on  and  above imply that this state is well-dened (and that |n|, as
dened here, is positive).
the evolution of a general state vector may now be determined. let is write the

b  q

.

|n| =(cid:2)det(cid:0)a

ac

qcb(cid:1)(cid:3)1/2

abstract ket as

where

|i = (z)|0zi = (z )|0z i ,
|0z i = n exp(1/2)qabz az b|0zi

|0zi ,

are the vacua with respect to j and g(t)jg(t). now write, in matrix notation,

z  = z + 

= z + (t )z
= e(1/2)t z z ze(1/2)t z z ,

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)

(38)

where z = /(z). (here we have used the relations /(z) = 1 t z and t =
t .) the last line of the displayed equation is valid, for example, as an operator identity
with the exponentials dened by their formal power series, acting on polynomials, and
extends by linearity to suitable holomorphic functions. then we have

(z) = (z )n e(1/2)qabz az b

= e(1/2)t z z (z)e(1/2)t z z n e(1/2)qabz az b

.

(39)

(40)

this formula denes u (t), modulo phase. we know that it is a one-parameter projec-
tive unitary group. if we can show that this projective group is strongly continuous, and
that the phases can be chosen to make the full group strongly continuous, then we shall
be assured of the existence of a self-adjoint generator.

21

5.2 continuity of some operations

proposition 9. qab is a continuous function of t in the hilbertschmidt norm.

proof. we shall work with q

ab

, to avoid conjugating  and .

for this, we must derive the precise relation between the s, s, and g. this arises
from the canonical quantization prescription, which in our case amounts to the replace-
ment of the variables z a, za with the operators z a, a. we see that  is precisely g+,
the j-linear part of g. we can work out  from the identity

from which we nd

v az a = v aa

bz b + abv az b

abv az b = hv, gzi  hz, g+zi = hv, gzi

and thus

1a

bbcz az c = hz, (g+)1gzi .

it was shown in proposition 8 (and the comments following that proposition) that (g+)1g
is continuous in hilbertschmidt norm.

proposition 10. with the choice of phase n = |n|, the image of the j-vacuum varies
continuously with t.
proof. let |ti be the image of the vacuum at time t. then

ht  s|t  si = z |nt exp(1/2)qtabz az b  ns exp(1/2)qsabz az b|2

ehz,zidzdz

= 2  2nsnt det(i  qsqt(cid:1)1

.

since q varies continuously in hilbertschmidt norm, for any xed t, this can be made
as close to zero as desired by choosing s close enough to t.

we now turn to a similar, more general computation. the trigonometric polynomials
are dense in h. (this is the present formulation of the well-known statement that the
vacuum is a cyclic state for this representation.) we shall show that they vary continuously
with t.
proposition 11. with the choice of phase n = |n|, the image of any trigonometric
polynomial varies continuously with t.

proof. it is enough to establish this for trigonometric monomials.

for any a  h, let w (a) = exp i(a  z + a  ) be the corresponding weyl operator.
here a is a as an element of hc, and a = a is its complex conjugate. then a
trigonometric monomial is (a constant times) w (a)|0i for some a. the image of this
state at time t is

w(cid:0)g(t)a(cid:1)nt exp(1/2)qtabz az b = nt exp{(1/2)hat, ati
t )z a(cid:9) ,

t  (1/2)qtabz az b + i(ata  qtabab

+(1/2)qtabaa

t ab

22

where at = g(t)a. we nd

hs|ti = n snt det(cid:16)a

b  qtbcq

ca

s (cid:17)1

 exp(1/2)nhas, asi  hat, ati + qtabaa
 exp(1/2)h ata  qtabab

s asb i" a

s  q

t aa

t ab

ab

t + qsabaa

s ab

ab
b q
s
a

qtab

so
b #1" aa

t # .
ab
s  q
s asb
ata  qtabab

since, as s approaches t, we have as  at and qs to qt in hilbertschmidt norm, this
tends to unity as s  t.

5.3 existence theorem for the hamiltonian

we are now in a position to prove the existence of the hamiltonian.

theorem 3. if eta is a strongly-continuous one-parameter subgroup of sprest, then there
exists a self-adjoint operator bh on hilbert space, unique up to an additive constant, such
that u (t) = eitbh implements eta.
proof. with the choice of phases n = |n|, we have a projective unitary representation
u (t). the cocycle representing its deviation from a true representation is u (s)u (t)u (s
t). this can be computed by lengthy but straightforward means. in matrix notation, we
nd it is

(cid:16)det

c

(i + qtqt)(i  qs+tqs(i  qt+sqt+s)1)(cid:17)1/2

.

here the quantity whose determinant is to be taken is of the form i + t , where t varies
continuously in trace norm in s and t. from this it follows that the cocycle is continuous,
and so a continuous choice of phase is possible, making u (t) into a one-parameter unitary
group. let such a choice be made.

finally, we must show that this group is strongly continuous. since the phases vary
continuously, it is enough to show that the original, projective representation is strongly
continuous. while this could probably be done directly from the formula above, it is
probably clearer to give an indirect argument.

family of states.

in the previous subsection it was shown that u (t) is strongly continuous on a dense
(recall that now the phase has been chosen so that u (t) is a one
0 u (u)|i du
is in the domain of t,0u (t). it follows that u (t) has a densely-dened generator, which,
because u (t) is unitary, must be self-adjoint.

parameter unitary group.) for any such state |i and any t, the state (1/t)r t

there is an interesting consequence of the formulas above:

corollary 3. we have

for every t.

h0|eit h|0i 6= 0

23

this means that, for any linear unitarily implementable evolution, if the state is initially
vacuum, at any later time a quantum measurement to determine the state will have a
positive probability of nding vacuum. while this result would be trivial for the second
quantization of a one-particle hamiltonian, here the operator h need not preserve par-
ticle number, but may create or destroy pairs of particles, as the terms with quadratic
contributions in z or  enter into the evolution.

we have shown that under certain conditions a self-adjoint hamiltonian bh exists

generating a one-parameter family u (t) of unitary transformations. in the course of this
argument, we determined u (t) up to phase. it would be of interest to determine the phase.
however, here i shall only indicate that the problem is essentially one of renormalization.
we recall from the proof of theorem 3 that the cocycle u (s)u (t)u (s  t) for the

projective representation was given by

(cid:16)det

c

(i + qtqt)(i  qs+tqs(i  qt+sqt+s)1)(cid:17)1/2

after a little algebra, this can be rewritten as

.

(41)

(cid:16)det

c

s+t1

s 1

t (cid:17)1/2

.

(42)

if the determinant of  were known to exist and depend continuously on t, it would
be simple to factor this: the phase would simply be (detc )1/2. however, the present
hypotheses do not ensure that the determinant of  is dened. (we only know that  is
the identity plus a hilbertschmidt term, not a trace-class term.) thus the isolation of
the phase is more delicate. one can think of this as nding a renormalized denition of
detc .

6 scalar fields in curved spacetime

these papers were motivated by problems which arose in the theory of quantum elds
in curved spacetime.
in particu-
lar, we settle an outstanding question: is the hamiltonian for such elds selfadjointly
implementable in generic circumstances?

in this section, we apply the theory to that case.

there are already two sorts of evidence pointing to a negative answer (helfer 1996).
first, it is known that evolution in time by a nite motion is not unitarily implementable.
one might think that in this case a self-adjoint family of hamiltonians could not exist, for if
it did one could integrate it to deduce a unitary evolution, which would be a contradiction.
however, in the present, non-autonomous, situation, the domains of the hamiltonians
could be time-dependent, and so the integration might not be possible. thus the non-
unitary implementability of nite motions is not, in itself, enough to imply nonself
adjoint implementability of the hamiltonian.

the second sort of evidence comes from the formal expression for the hamiltonian.
this formal expression is known not to have any hadamard states in its domain.13
(hadamard states are in a sense the nicest test states in curved spacetime, and often one
takes as axioms that certain operators should have well-dened actions on these states.)

13i am using the term hadamard state here to mean a state vector |i in the hadamard representa-
tion, rather than, as is more common, a linear functional on the eld algebra. a more precise denition
will be given in the next footnote, after more terminology has been developed.

24

while this is some indication of a pathological structure, it does not prove that the hamil-
tonian fails to exist  the hamiltonian could be dened on some recondite domain, or its
formal expression, derived under the assumption of a certain renormalization prescription
being valid, might be incorrect. thus, the formal singularity of the hamiltonian is also
inconclusive.

we shall show however that these arguments do suggest the correct answer: the hamil-
tonian is not self-adjointly implementable. these conclusions (and somewhat broader
ones) could be deduced a bit more quickly from the results of the next paper, but we wish
to illustrate how the general structure developed here applies.

the general set-up is the following. we consider a spacetime (m, gab) which is ori-
ented, time-oriented and globally hyperbolic. global hyperbolicity ensures that relativistic
eld equations are well-posed, and is necessary to ensure that a quantum eld theory can
be constructed along conventional lines. (see wald 1994 for an outline of the construction
of the quantum eld theory.) we shall also assume that the cauchy surfaces are compact.
this is only done for technical reasons (it rules out all infrared diculties and ambiguities):
the problems we shall uncover will be manifested in the local, ultraviolet, divergences of
certain traces, and would be present in any hadamard quantization, whether the cauchy
surfaces are compact or not.

the eld equation is

(aa + m2) = 0 ,

the complex structure is determined from the hadamard two-point function, and is
a certain pseudodierential operator. if we decompose the initial data for the eld at 

and the symplectic form is (, ) =r( d   d). here  is any cauchy surface.
 (cid:21), as usual, and choose normal coordinates (in terms of the induced metric) on ,
as(cid:20) 

then one has for the symbol of j
||1

(cid:20) sym 
|| sym  (cid:21) +(cid:20)

where

2sym  = a

o(||2)

o(||1 log ||

o(||3 log ||)

o(||2)

(cid:21) ,

a||1  abab||3 ,

(43)

(44)

(45)

(46)

(cid:20)

0
s2

1

0 (cid:21) ,

with a the fourier transform variable, its norm with respect to the three-metric on  is
||, and ab the second fundamental form of  (helfer 1996). (this  is not the same as
the bogoliubov coecient.)14
we shall consider, for simplicity, evolution along the unit timelike normal to . in this

case, the operator a is

where we have put s =  + m2, with  the laplacian on the surface. this operator

is determined from the classical stressenergy

(47)
14once the complex structure j has been xed, and the representation constructed as in the previous
section, the hadamard states may be dened as follows. they are the results of applying polynomials of

= ab  (1/2)gabcc

t classical
ab

creation operators (,b) to the j-vacuum. here the creation operator b is the j-negative frequency

part of the eld, and the test functions  are required to be smooth (with compactly supported cauchy
data  a requirement that is automatically fullled here). the more common notion of a hadamard
state as a linear functional on the eld algebra essentially corresponds to a density matrix formed from
our hadamard states.

25

in the usual way.

it is convenient to make a change of basis to make a diagonal. accordingly, we shall
put  = (+) + () and  = is((+)  ()). here () are not
the positive- and
negative-frequency parts of  (which are dened using j), but are the projections of 
onto the eigenspaces of a. acting on(cid:20) (+)
a =(cid:20) is

() (cid:21), the operator a is

is (cid:21) ,

(48)

0

0

and the symbol of j is

sym j =(cid:20) i 

i (cid:21) + o(||2 log ||) .



(49)

from these equations, we may read o the symbol of g(t)jg(t), as a fourier integral
operator:

(cid:20)

i

sym (x + t)e2i||t

sym (x  t)e2i||t

i

(cid:21) ,

where  is the unit vector in the direction . one sees directly from this that g(t)jg(t)j,
for nite t, will generally be an operator of order 1, and so not hilbertschmidt. this
is a direct estimate of g(t)jg(t)  j; it is not necessary here to use the characterization
theorem.
however, it is instructive to see the connection between this and the characteriza-
tion theorem. for this we need to compute q = (  a)1aj. thus one should solve
[a, j] = q  [a, q] for q, which is a linear evolution equation for q along the vector
eld generating a. this is an autonomous system, because the coecients a and data j
are given (as operators on initial data) at .

integration of this system can be accomplished directly, or by more general formal
means. we shall take advantage of the computation for g(t)jg(t) we have already
made. we have the identity

(  a)1aj =z 
using the formula (50), we nd (  a)1aj is
r 

sym (x + t)e(2i||)t dt

2i||(cid:20)

0

0

0

r 

etetaaj dt .

0

sym (x  t)e(+2i||)t dt

0

(cid:21) .

(50)

(51)

(52)

(53)

(54)

for large enough real , the contributions from  occur in arbitrarily small neighborhoods
of t = 0, and so the leading behavior (of the upper-right term, say) is

the contribution of this term to the hilbertschmidt norm is

2i||(sym )( + 2i||)1 .
d(x)z||>>0

d3

4||2
2 + 4||2|sym |2 .

(2)3z

26

we now do the angular part of the integral. let us put sym  = ab a b/|| (cf.
equation (45)). then the angular contribution to the expression (54) is (up to radially
symmetric factors)

zs 2

abcd a b c dd2  = (4/5)abcd(abcd)

= (4/15)(cid:0)a

ab

b + 2abab(cid:1) ,

(55)

(56)

where ab is the three-dimensional euclidean metric and the parentheses on the subscripts
indicate symmetrization. this is a positive-denite symmetric form in ab, and so is
positive unless ab vanishes identically, that is, unless sym  vanishes identically.

turning to the radial integral, since  is of order 1, this is ultraviolet divergent unless
 vanishes identically. inspecting the form of sym  (equation 45), we see that this would
require ab to vanish identically. thus we have proved:

theorem 4. let (m, gab) be an oriented, time-oriented, globally hyperbolic spacetime
with compact cauchy surfaces. consider the quantum eld theory of a scalar eld subject
to the equation

(aa + m2) = 0

in a hadamard representation. let  be a particular cauchy surface, and a the operator
generating evolution along the unit normal determined by the usual classical stressenergy,
equation (47). if the second fundamental form of  does not vanish identically, then a in
not self-adjointly implementable.

in the set of cauchy surfaces, those with vanishing second fundamental forms consti-
tute a thin set in any reasonable topology. indeed, the class of globally hyperbolic space
times admitting a cauchy surface with vanishing second fundamental form is arguably a
thin set in any reasonable topology. (in the case of zero classical stressenergy, these are
spacetimes which possess time-reection symmetry.) we may say that generically a is
not self-adjointly implementable.

more generally, one would conjecture that a hamiltonian a corresponding to evolution
along a vector eld va at  would not be self-adjointly implementable unless va satised
killings equation (restricted to ) (cf. helfer 1996, p. l133).

we close with a comment about the conformally coupled massless eld

with its new, improved stressenergy

(aa + (1/6)r)  = 0

t classical
ab

= (2/3)ab  (1/6)gabcc  (1/3)ab
+ (1/18)r2gab  (1/6)2rab .

(57)

(58)

the eld equation here agrees with that of the massless case of the ordinary scalar eld in
cases where r = 0; in particular, in minkowski space. but the evolution of the eld data as
generated by the stressenergy is dierent, because the evolutions are determined by the

poisson brackets of the elds with the energy integralsr tabadb, and the dierent stress

energies yield dierent integrals. (one way of viewing this is that the new, improved
 to account for  having
stressenergy contains terms which correct the evolution of
conformal weight 1.)

27

one can analyze the conformally coupled eld in a manner completely parallel to that
for the ordinary scalar eld. i shall not give the details of the computations here. one
nds that the operator a is then no longer given by equation (46), but has correction
terms which are

(cid:20) 0

0

0 (2/3)a

a (cid:21) + lower-order terms .

(59)

these turn out to cancel the highest-order pure-trace contributions of ab to g(t)jg(t)
j, and we wind up with

theorem 5. let (m, gab) be an oriented, timeoriented, globally hyperbolic spacetime
with compact cauchy surfaces. consider the quantum eld theory of a conformally coupled
scalar eld (with eld equation 57) in a hadamard representation. let  be a particular
cauchy surface, and a the operator generating evolution along the unit normal determined
by the new, improved stressenergy, equation (58). if the second fundamental form of
 is not pure trace, then a in not self-adjointly implementable.

7 comments

the results of this paper were outlined in the introduction, and no summary will be given
here. rather, this section contains a few technical comments.

the two main general results in this paper are theorem 2, which establishes which
classical hamiltonian vector elds generate motions which are implementable on the quan-
tum hilbert space by unitary transformations, and theorem 3, which shows that when
such unitary implementation is possible a quantum hamiltonian necessarily exists.

the latter result is gratifying physically, in that it means a certain type of pathology
is absent. (the pathology would be that each classical canonical transformation in the
one-parameter family would have a unitary implementation, but that it would not be
possible to choose this family of unitary motions with strong enough continuity properties
to guarantee the existence of a self-adjoint generator.) however, at least the present
argument for this is rather delicate (one has just enough convergence to establish it).
it would be worthwhile to nd a simple argument to replace it.

in some sense, the lesson of theorem 2 is that what is important is not so much the
generator a of the classical motions (that is, the hamiltonian vector eld), as its lie
adjoint a = [a,]: one needs

(60)

(a  )1aj

the origin (that is, r||<a de()aj, where de() is the spectral measure) was hilbert

to be hilbertschmidt (for suciently large ) in order that a be self-adjointly imple-
mentable. if a were known to have a spectral representation, then this criterion would
amount to saying that, in terms of its spectral resolution, the quantity aj projected near
schmidt, and that j projected near innity was. in other words, the complex structure
j should have certain asymptotics in terms of the spectral resolution of a.
we shall see in the sequel that classically positive hamiltonians have hamiltonian
vectors which are necessarily spectral operators (and hence a is spectral). however, in
more general circumstances, this need not be the case. for example, take the phase space
to be the countable direct sum n{(pn, qn)  r2} of two-dimensional phase spaces. the
hamiltonian function will be

h = p1q2 + p2q3 + 

28

(61)

so that the induced canonical transformation is, in block form with respect to the (q, p)
decomposition

(62)

0
0

1
0

0
1




0
0
. . .

0
0

0
0 0
1
0 0
0 1 0 0




. . .





(blank places are occupied by zeroes). this decomposes into two shift operators, which
are the well-known to be non-spectral (dunford & schwartz 1971). (we remark that this
operator is not only bounded but contractive: kavk  kvk, where k  k is the standard l2
norm.)

it is a pleasure to thank members of the university of missouri
acknowledgments
columbia mathematics department, especially peter casazza, nigel kalton, yuri latush-
kin and stephen montgomerysmith, for helpful conversations; and paul robinson for a
useful electronic exchange.

references

[1] barnett, s. m. in: reynaud, s., giacobino, e. and zinnjustin, j. (eds.) ecole dete
de physique theorique, les houches lxiii: fluctuations quantiques. amsterdam and
new york: elsevier 1997.

[2] bloch, f. and nordsieck, a.: phys. rev. 52, 5459 (1937).

[3] bogoliubov, n. n.: zurn. eksp. teor. fiz. 34, 73 (1958); english translation sov.

phys. jetp1, 51 (1958).

[4] dunford, n. and schwartz, j. t.: linear operators, part i. new york et al.: wiley

1958.

[5] dunford, n. and schwartz, j. t.: linear operators, part iii. new york et al.: wiley

1971.

[6] flanagan, e. e. and wald, r. m.: phys. rev. d54, 623383 (1996).

[7] ford, l. h. and roman, t. a.: phys. rev. d55, 2082 (1997).

[8] ford. l. h. and wu, c.-h.: phys. rev. d60, 104013 (1999).

[9] helfer, a. d.: class. quant. grav. 13, l129134 (1996).

[10] helfer, a. d.: class. quant. grav. 15, 1169 (1998).

[11] helfer, a. d. and lang, a. s. d.: j. phys. a32, 193749 (1999).

[12] honegger, r. and rieckers, a. j.: math. phys. 37, 42924309 (1996).

29

[13] klein, a.: trans. a.m.s. 181, 439456 (1973).

[14] loudon, r. and knight, p. l.: j. mod. optics 34, 709759 (1987).

[15] shale, d.: trans. a.m.s. 103, 149167 (1962).

[16] treves, f.: introduction to pseudodierential and fourier integral operators (two

volumes). new york: plenum 1980.

[17] wald, r. m.: quantum eld theory in curved spacetime and black hole thermody-

namics. chicago: university press 1994.

30

