9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
8

 

 
 

1
v
2
5
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

cgpg-99/8-2
hep-th/9908052

noncommutative regularization

for the practical man

eli hawkins

center for gravitational physics and geometry

the pennsylvania state university, university park, pa 16802

e-mail: mrmuon@gravity.phys.psu.edu

abstract. it has been proposed that the noncommutative geometry of the fuzzy
2-sphere provides a nonperturbative regularization of scalar eld theories. this
generalizes to compact kahler manifolds where simple eld theories are regular-
ized by the geometric quantization of the manifold.

in order to permit actual calculations and the comparison with other regulariza-
tions, i describe the perturbation theory of these regularized models and propose
an approximation technique for evaluation of the feynman diagrams. i present
example calculations of the simplest diagrams for the 4 model on the spaces s2,
s2  s2, and cp2.

this regularization fails for noncompact spaces; i give a brief dimensional anal-
ysis argument as to why this is so. i also discuss the relevance of the topology of
feynman diagrams to their ultra-violet and infra-red divergence behavior in this
model.

1. introduction

it is generally expected that in a full description of quantum gravity the geom-
etry of space-time at small scales will not resemble that of a manifold. the nature
of this quantum geometry is one of the fundamental issues in the search for a
quantum theory of gravity.

one argument for quantum geometry is that quantum eld theories give our
best descriptions of microscopic physics, yet they must be regularized in order to
yield meaningful predictions. the trouble being that quantum eld theory suf-
fers from ultra-violet divergences due to physical processes occurring at arbitrar-
ily large momenta, or equivalently, arbitrarily small distances. some fundamental
regularization that xes these divergences can probably be interpreted as a modi-
cation of geometry at extremely short distances, perhaps even such that the con-
cept of arbitrarily small distances is meaningless.

another argument extends heisenbergs classic gedankenexperiment in support
of the uncertainty relations. the observation of structures at very small distances
requires radiation of very short wavelength and correspondingly large energy. at-
tempting to observe a sufciently small structure would thus require such a high
concentration of energy that a black hole would be formed and no observation

1

2

eli hawkins

could be made. if this is so, then distances below about the plank scale are unob-
servable  and thus operationally meaningless.

if short distances are meaningless, then perhaps precise locations are as well.
this suggests the possibility of uncertainty relations between position and posi-
tion, analogous to the standard ones between position and momentum; this has
been argued on physical grounds (see [7], or [10] for a review) and from string the-
ory (see [19]). an uncertainty relation between, say, x-position and y-position,
would mean that the x and y coordinates do not commute. since coordinates
are just functions on space(-time) this suggests that the algebra of functions on
space(-time) might not be commutative (see [7]). that is the fundamental idea of
noncommutative geometry.

in noncommutative geometry (see [4]), familiar geometric concepts (metric, mea-
sure, bundle, etc.) are reformulated in an entirely algebraic way. this allows the
generalization of geometry by replacing the algebra of functions on space with a
noncommutative algebra. it may be that such a noncommutative generalization of
ordinary geometry can describe the true quantum geometry of space-time.

as i will explain, noncommutativity is no guarantor of regularization (see also
[9, 2]). in this paper, i will discuss a specic class of noncommutative geometries
which do have the requisite regularization property. these models are not phys-
ically realistic; they generalize euclidean (space) rather than lorentzian (space-
time) geometry (a sin shared by lattice models) and they are not gauge theories.
however, it is plausible that more realistic models may share some of the charac-
teristics of these ones.

although regularization in these geometries is quite manifest, a toolkit for coax-
ing actual predictions from eld theory there has been lacking. my aim here is to
present an approximation technique for eld theory calculations in this regular-
ization. this will show the leading order effects of noncommutativity on quantum
eld theory.

1.1. noncommutative geometry. the existing theory of noncommutative geome-
try (see [4]) is largely inspired by the so-called gelfand theorem. according to this
theorem, there is an exact correspondence between commutative c-algebras and
locally compact topological spaces. for any locally compact topological space, the

any commutative c-algebra can be realized in this way.

algebra of continuous functions vanishing at is a commutative c-algebra, and

this suggests that c-algebras in general should be considered as noncommuta-
tive algebras of continuous functions, and thus that the category of c-algebras
is the category of noncommutative topologies. the next step is to go from non-
commutative topology to noncommutative geometry; the most versatile noncom-
mutative version of a riemannian metric is given by a dirac operator.

on an ordinary manifold, taking the commutator of the dirac operator, d :=

ijj, with a differentiable function gives

[d, f] = ijfj.

noncommutative regularization

3

taking the norm of this gives k[d, ]k = kfk; thus, the dirac operator can de-
tect the maximum slope of a function. from this, a construction for the distance
between two points can be obtained (see [4]). this shows that the dirac operator
contains all information of the riemannian metric. it also knows which functions
are differentiable, smooth, lipschitz, etc.

a c-algebra with a dirac operator thus constitutes a noncommutative rie-
mannian geometry. using a couple of additional structures, it is possible to char-
acterize noncommutative riemannian manifolds axiomatically (see [5]). unfortu-
nately, it is only known how to do this for what amounts to metrics of positive
denite signature. this does not allow for the noncommutative generalization of
space-time.

another problem with these noncommutative manifolds is that they do not tend
to regularize quantum eld theory. a variation of noncommutative geometry that
does have this property is matrix geometry (see [18, 11]). in matrix geometry, every
structure has only nite degrees of freedom. unfortunately, there is no axiomatic
characterization of matrix geometries, as for noncommutative manifolds.

the problem of characterizing noncommutative space-time is daunting (see [12]).
the trouble is that the analytic properties of the dirac operator which are essential
in the positive-denite case are not there in space-time. with everything nite, all
analytic considerations evaporate in the case of matrix geometry, suggesting that
the problem of noncommutative space-time might be solvable once matrix geom-
etry is better understood.

most existing applications of noncommutative geometry to physics have con-
cerned connes-lott models. in these (with the question of space-time deferred) a
simple type of noncommutative manifold provides an interesting interpretation of
the standard model of particle physics. in particular, the higgs eld and gauge
bosons are unied.

here, i am pursuing a different way of applying noncommutative geometry to
physics. i am following [18, 11] and exploring the regularization effects of matrix
geometry.

1.2. summary. i will begin in sec. 2 by discussing what it takes to regularize quan-
tum eld theory and describing the geometric quantization construction that is the
basis of my approach.

in sec. 3, i discuss how to construct the action functional in this regularization,
in slightly greater generality than has previously been discussed explicitly. this
is followed by a brief speculation on convergence when the regularization is re-
moved. perturbation theory in this regularization has not been described in detail
before; i present this in sec. 3.3.

in sec. 4, i explain (heuristically) how the infra-red and ultra-violet cutoff scales
in particular, the ultra-violet

are balanced around the noncommutativity scale.
cutoff only exists when there is an infra-red cutoff.

in sec. 5, i describe the weyl quantization of at space and the effect of this on
quantum eld theory, giving a geometric algorithm for the modication. this is

4

eli hawkins

a prelude to the main result of this paper. i present, in sec. 6, an approximation
technique for perturbative calculations in this regularization.

i illustrate exact and approximate calculations with a few examples in sec. 7, and

in sec. 8, i discuss the effect on noncommutativity on degrees of divergence.

2. regularization

a euclidean quantum eld theory can be dened by a path integral over the
space of classical eld congurations. given an action functional s[], the vacuum
expectation value of some functional, f[ ^], of the quantum elds is dened by

z  h0|f[ ^]|0i :=z

f[]es[]d,

(2.1)

where the partition function, z, is a normalizing factor such that h0|1|0i = 1. the
celebrated divergences which plague quantum eld theory are primarily due to
the fact that the space of classical eld congurations, , is innite-dimensional;
this leaves the functional integral measure d formal and awkwardly ill-dened.
in the usual treatment of quantum eld theory, perturbative feynman rules are
derived from the formal path integral. unfortunately, these feynman rules typi-
cally lead to innite results. in order to get meaningful results from computations,
the feynman rules are usually regularized ad hoc. this is quite effective for pertur-
bative calculations since the details are independent of the choice of regularization.
however, reality is not a perturbation. physical phenomena such as quark con-
nement are not reected in strictly perturbative theories. a complete descrip-
tion of reality will presumably involve a nonperturbative regularization. in a eu-
clidean quantum eld theory, a nonperturbative regularization is implemented at
the level of the path-integral rather than perturbation theory. one approach to
regularization is to replace the original space of eld congurations with some
nite-dimensional approximation; this essentially guarantees a nite theory.

if  is a single scalar eld on a compact manifold, m, then the space of eld
congurations is the algebra of smooth functions, c(m). where algebra goes,
other structures will surely follow; for this reason, and simplicity, i shall largely
restrict attention to a scalar eld. to regularize, we would like to approximate
c(m) by a nite dimensional algebra. the standard approach is to use the algebra
of functions on some nite set of points  a lattice  which approximates m.
unfortunately, a lattice is symmetrys mortal enemy. if the space m possesses a
nontrivial group of isometries, it would be desirable to preserve these as symme-
tries in the regularized theory; but for instance, in a lattice approximation to s2, the
best possible approximation to the so(3)-symmetry is the 60-element icosahedral
group.

2.1. geometric quantization. we can maintain much greater symmetry with non-
commutative approximating algebras. geometric quantization provides a method
of constructing noncommutative approximations.

noncommutative regularization

5

as the name suggests, geometric quantization was originally intended as a sys-
tematic mathematical procedure for constructing quantum mechanics from clas-
sical mechanics. geometric quantization applies to a symplectic manifold (origi-
nally, phase space) with some additional structure (a polarization). the termi-
nology of quantization is unfortunate here, since i am concerned with quantum
eld theory. insofar as geometric quantization goes here, the manifold is not to be
interpreted as phase space, the hilbert spaces are not to be interpreted as spaces of
quantum-mechanical states, and the algebras do not consist of observables. in this
paper, quantization and quantum have nothing to do with each other.

here i shall use geometric quantization with a complex polarization. for a
compact kahler manifold, m, this generates a sequence of nite-dimensional ma-
trix algebras an which approximate the algebra c(m) in a sense that i shall ex-
plain below.
a kahler manifold is simultaneously a riemannian, symplectic, and complex
manifold. these structures are compatible with each other, such that raising one
index of the symplectic 2-form, , with the riemannian metric gives the complex
structure1 j. i shall assume, for a length r (roughly, the size of m), that the inte-
gral of 
2r2 over any closed 2-surface is an integer; this implies the existence of a
line bundle (1-dimensional, complex vector bundle), l, with a connection  and
curvature r2. if m is simply connected, then l is unique.

there is also a unique berwise, hermitian inner product on l compatible with
the connection. given two sections ,    (m, l), their inner product is a function
  c(m). compatibility with the connection means that for smooth sections,
d( ) =    + . using the berwise inner product, we can construct a
global inner product,

h | i :=zm

 .

(2.2)

it is an elementary property of any kahler manifold that the riemannian volume
form can also be written in terms of the symplectic form as  = n
n! , where 2n =
dim m.

a holomorphic section of l is one satisfying the differential equation j =
i|j = i|i. the space of holomorphic sections hol(m, l)

i, or in index notation jj
is nite dimensional, and the inner product, (2.2), makes it a hilbert space.

with this notation and structure, i can now present the geometric quantization
construction. the tensor power bundle ln is much like l; it is a line bundle
with an inner product, but with curvature nr2. as n increases, the spaces of
holomorphic sections are increasingly large, nite-dimensional hilbert spaces,

hn := hol(m, ln).

1a 2-index tensor such that ji

jjj

k = i
k.

6

eli hawkins

the dimension of hn grows as a polynomial in n (given by the riemann-roch
formula, eq. (4.1)). the algebra an is now dened as

an := end hn;

that is, the space of c-linear maps from hn to itself  in other words, matrices
over hn. the inner product on hn gives an an involution (hermitian adjoint)

the collection of algebras {an} alone knows nothing of m. in order to connect
an with m, we will need a structure such as the toeplitz quantization map tn :

a 7 a; this makes an a nite-dimensional c-algebra.
c(m)  an. for any function f  c(m), the matrix tn(f) is dened by giving

its action on any   hn. since  is a section of ln, the product f is also a
(not necessarily holomorphic) section of ln. using the inner product (2.2) we can
project f orthogonally back to hn and call this tn(f). this implicitly denes
tn.

if m were a phase space then tn(f) would be interpreted as the quantum ob-
servable, ^f, corresponding to f. the toeplitz maps have the important property of
being approximately multiplicative; that is, for any two continuous functions on m,

ktn(f)tn(g)  tn(fg)k = 0.

lim

n

according to rieffel [21], quantization should be expressed in terms of a con-
tinuous eld of c-algebras. a continuous eld a of c-algebras over a compact
topological space b is essentially a vector bundle whose bers are c-algebras (see
[6, 16]). the space of continuous sections  (b, a) is a c-algebra. for every point
b  b, the evaluation map from  (b, a) onto the ber over b is a -homomorphism
(a c-algebra map). the product of a continuous function on b with a continuous
section of a is again a continuous section of a. a continuous eld of c-algebras
is completely specied by describing its base space, its bers, and which sections
are continuous.

the geometric quantization of m leads to a natural continuous eld of c-alge-
bras, a. the bers of a are each of the algebras an and c(m). this is one algebra
for every natural number n  n = {1, 2, . . . }, plus one extra. the notion is that the
sequence of algebras a1, a2, a3, . . . tends toward c(m), so the natural topology

is the limit of any increasing sequence. the eld a is implicitly dened by the
requirement that for every f  c(m), there exists a section t (f)   ( ^n, a) whose

for the base space is the one-point compactication ^n = n  {}, in which 
evaluation at n is tn(f) and at is f.
the existence of this continuous eld is the sense in which the algebra an ap-
proximates c(m), but we can do better than this. there is a sense in which an
approximates the algebra of smooth functions c(m). as i discussed in [15], the
eld a has a further structure as a sort of smooth eld of c-algebras.
obviously, our base space, ^n is not a manifold. however, there is a reasonable
notion of smooth functions on ^n. we can identify ^n with the homeomorphic set
3, . . . , 0}  r, and dene the smooth functions c( ^n) as those which are
{1, 1
2, 1

noncommutative regularization

7

restrictions of smooth functions on r. equivalently, a smooth function on ^n is one
which can be approximated to arbitrary order by a power series in n1.
the smooth structure of a is given by a dense -subalgebra ( ^n, a)   ( ^n, a)
of smooth sections. the product of a smooth function on ^n with a smooth section
of a is again a smooth section of a. the evaluation of any smooth section at is a
smooth function on m. the algebra ( ^n, a) is essentially dened by the condition
that any smooth function f  c(m) gives a smooth section t (f)  ( ^n, a).

2.2. coadjoint orbits. some of the simplest spaces to work with are homoge-
neous spaces  those such that any point of m is equivalent to any other point
under some isometry. in a homogeneous space with semisimple symmetry group,
g, we can do many calculations by simply using group representation theory. the
homogeneous kahler manifolds with semisimple symmetry group are the coadjoint
orbits.

a coadjoint orbit of a lie group, g, is simply a homogeneous space that is nat-
urally embedded in the dual space, g, of the lie algebra, g, of g. the coadjoint
orbits of g are classied by positive weight vectors of g. weight vectors are natu-
rally embedded in g, and corresponding to the weight vector  is its g-orbit o,
the set of images of  under the action of elements of g.

in the case of g = su(2), the space g = su(2) is 3-dimensional, and the coad-
joint orbits are the concentric 2-spheres around the origin. the weight, , is simply
a positive number, the radius.

the geometric quantization of a coadjoint orbit is especially simple and respects
the action of the symmetry group, g. the hilbert space, hn, constructed in the
geometric quantization of o carries an irreducible representation of g. namely,
the representation with highest weight n.

in the case of su(2), the hilbert space, hn, carries the representation of spin n
2 .
the algebras are again dened by an := end hn. again, we need to tie these
together into a smooth eld, a, of c-algebras. in the case of a coadjoint orbit, this
can be done by using the lie algebra structure rather than the toeplitz quantization
maps.

lets briey consider what can be said about a, given only the collection of al-
gebras {an}. the restriction of a to n  ^n is a rather trivial continuous eld; since
n is discrete, any section is continuous. a section of a over n is nothing more than
a sequence of matrices, one taken from each an. the bounded sections of a over
n (norm-bounded sequences) form a c-algebra. so, you see, we already knew the
restriction of a to n.

since hn carries a g-representation, there is a linear map g  end hn = an,

taking lie brackets to commutators. because the representation is irreducible, the
image of g is enough to generate the entire associative algebra an. in fact, an can
be expressed in terms of generators and relations based on this.

let {ji} be a basis of self-adjoint generators of the complexied lie algebra, gc.
the jis can be thought of as sections of a over n, but they are unbounded sections,
because their norms diverge linearly with n. we can get bounded sections by

8

eli hawkins

dividing by n. the operators n1ji are noncommutative embedding coordinates
for the coadjoint orbit, o, of radius kk. i would like to work with a coadjoint
orbit of radius r, so i dene

xi :=

r

kkn

ji.

(2.3)

we can construct  ( ^n, a) as the c-subalgebra of bounded sections of a over n that
is generated by the xis. this implicitly denes a as a continuous eld.

the algebra an can be expressed in terms of the generators ji or xi and three
types of relations. in the su(2) case, the jis are the three standard angular mo-
mentum operators, and xi = 1

2rn1ji.

the rst relations are the commutation relations that dene the lie algebra.
in the su(2)-case, these are [j1, j2] = ij3 and cyclic permutations thereof.
in
terms of the xis these relations have a factor of n1 on the right hand side, as
[x1, x2] = i
xis commute.

2rn1x3. in the limit of n  , the relations simply become that the
2(cid:0) n
2 + 1(cid:1), or in terms of

the second relations are casimir relations. these enforce that the various casimir
operators have the correct eigenvalues. in the su(2)-case, there is only one inde-
pendent casimir, the quadratic one. the relation is j2 = n
the xis, x2 = r2(1 + 2n1).

the third relations are the serre relations. these enforce nite-dimensionality.
in the su(2)-case, this can be expressed as (j1 + ij2)n+1 = 0. the serre relations
are equivalent to the requirement that an is a c-algebra, and become redundant

polynomial relations which determine the relevant coadjoint orbit.

the xis commute and satisfy x2 = r2. clearly, this does generate the algebra of

only a few facts about the smooth structure of a will be needed later. speci-
cally, the xis and n1 are smooth sections, and any smooth section vanishing at

in the n limit.
heuristically at least, in the case of su(2), as n  , the relations become that
functions on s2 of radius r. in general, as n  , the xis commute and satisfy
n = is a multiple of n1.
for a single real scalar eld,   c(m), the general, unregularized action func-

3. the regularized action

tional is

(3.1)

s[] :=zm(cid:2) 1

2()2 + 1

2m22 + v()(cid:3) ,

where  is the volume form on m, and v is a lower-bounded polynomial self-
coupling. complex conjugation on c(m) corresponds to the adjoint on an, so our
approximation to the space of real functions on m will be the subspace as.a.
n  an
of self-adjoint elements. to construct the regularized theory, we need a regularized
action dened on as.a.

n that approximates (3.1).

noncommutative regularization

9

lets be precise about what it means to approximate an action functional in this

way. we need a sequence of action functionals, sn : as.a.
to the unregularized action s. this is nontrivial to dene because these are func-

n  r, which converge
tionals on different spaces. let   ( ^n, a) be an arbitrary, self-adjoint, smooth
section, and denote its evaluations as n  an; the sequence {n} can be consid-
 c(m, r). my denition for
ered to converge well to the smooth function 

convergence of {sn} is simply that for any such ,
].
sn(n) = s[


lim

the normalized trace on an approximates the normalized integral on m. that

several ingredients are needed to construct a regularized action. the simplest
is the product. it is the most elementary property of geometric quantization that
multiplication in c(m) is approximated by multiplication in an.
is, for any a  ( ^n, a),
etran 

the unregularized kinetic term can be written in terms of the laplacian,  =

 + o1(n).

1

vol mzm

a

tr an
tr 1

=

n



2, using the elementary identity,

 ().

zm
()2 =zm
vol(m)etr(cid:2) 1

2 ()(cid:3) ,

mimicking this, we can safely write the regularized kinetic term as

since in fact, any quadratic functional can be written in this form.

in the coadjoint orbit case, which i will mainly discuss, the laplacian is simply a
multiple of the quadratic casimir operator. however, the discussion in this section
will apply equally to any kahler manifold for which a suitable approximate lapla-
cian can be constructed. for this reason, i will write the approximate laplacian as
 until a more explicit form is required for examples.

the regularized action approximating (3.1) is (using tr 1 = dim hn)

sn() =

vol m
dim hn

2 () + 1

tr(cid:2) 1

2m22 + v()(cid:3) .

(3.2)

this regularized action was originally formulated by grosse, klimck, and presnaj-
der [11] in the special case of s2; however, the corresponding perturbation theory
has not previously been discussed in detail.

3.1. the commutative limit. using the action, (3.2) we can now dene the regu-
larized theory using a path integral formula,

z  h0|f( ^)|0i :=zas.a.

n

f()esn ()d.

(3.3)

10

eli hawkins

this is formally identical to eq. (2.1), but it differs in that it is not merely a for-
mal expression. the measure d is simply the lebesgue measure on the nite-
dimensional vector space as.a.
n . because sn() increases at least quadratically in
all directions, eq. (3.3) is nite for all polynomial functionals f.

in the standard lattice regularization, it is necessary to verify that a theory is suf-
ciently well behaved in the continuum limit as the regularization is removed.
the limit of removing the regularization in the present case is the commutative

convergence in the commutative limit should be.

limit, n  . at this stage, it is not entirely clear what the correct denition of

certainly, renormalization is necessary. that is, the bare mass, m, and coupling
constants (the coefcients in v) must depend on n, and the eld  must also be
renormalized by an n-dependent factor. some condition of convergence is then
applied to the sequence of renormalized, regularized theories.

a plausible form of the convergence condition is in terms of the one-particle

irreducible generating functionals, n. these are functions n : as.a.
rived from the path-integral.
if the generating functionals are renormalized so
that n(0) = 0, then the condition may be that for any smooth, self-adjoint section

n  r, de-
  ( ^n, a), with evaluations n  an, the sequence {n(n)} is convergent.

the derivation of feynman rules from the path integral can now proceed in es-
sentially the standard, heuristic way (see, e. g., [20]), except that now it is not just
a formal calculation.

3.2. greens functions. before we can discuss perturbation theory on a noncom-
mutative space, we must rst understand what greens functions are from an al-
gebraic perspective. i begin in greater generality than just a scalar eld.

in general, the space of classical eld congurations, , need not be a vector
space. such is the case for nonlinear -models. however, for a free eld theory, 
is always a vector space. since we are going to apply perturbation theory about a
free eld theory, we must assume that  is a vector space here.

a greens function is the vacuum expectation value of a product of elds. an
expectation value of a quantum eld ^ is an element of the space of classical eld
congurations, , since ^ is thought of as a quantum eld valued in . an ex-
pectation value of a product of two elds is an element of the (real) tensor product
  . carrying on like this, we see that a k-point greens function is an element
of the real tensor power k. the use of real tensor products here is actually not
restrictive; for a complex eld, , a real tensor product will include all possible
combinations of  and its conjugate eld.

actually, i am overoptimistically allowing a great deal to fall into the ambiguity
in a tensor product of innite dimensional spaces. in the case of a real scalar eld,
 = c(m, r), so the tensor product    should intuitively be a space of func-
tions of two points on m. indeed, a 2-point greens function for a scalar eld is
a function of two points; however, it has a singularity where the points coincide.
this shows that the tensor product needs to be interpreted liberally. fortunately

noncommutative regularization

11

this issue is irrelevant to the case at hand. once  is nite-dimensional, there is no
ambiguity in the tensor product.

in discussing divergences, one deals primarily with one-particle-irreducible
(1pi) greens functions. these can be constructed as derivatives of an r-valued
generating functional on . this shows immediately that a k-point, 1pi greens
function is a linear map from k to r. one-particle-irreducible greens functions
thus live in the dual space of the corresponding ordinary greens functions.

because of the coefcient in front of the action, there are powers of (in the case
of (3.2)) c = vol m
coming from the vertices and propagators. if, instead of setting
dim hn
h = 1, we had kept explicit factors of h, then the combination hc multiplying the
action would be the only appearance of h in the functional integral. this means
that the overall power of c for a feynman diagram is the same as the overall power
of h  namely, the number of loops plus 1.

actually, implicit in most action functionals is an inner product on . this
means that  can be more or less naturally identied with a subspace of  in
general, and with all of  when it is nite-dimensional.

this inner product on  tends to suffer an ambiguity of normalization. the most
natural inner product of two functions is given by multiplying them and integrat-
ing. the most natural inner product on an is given by multiplying matrices and
taking the trace. unfortunately, these inner products disagree when we pair 1 with
itself. in c(m) that gives vol m; in an it gives dim hn. we must correct the inner
product on an by a factor of c, for consistency with that on functions.

the natural form of the 1pi greens functions is not actually the most useful
normalization for comparison with the results of standard perturbation theory.
in practice, we deal with ordinary feynman diagrams in momentum space. the
quantities we usually deal with are not the momentum-space greens functions
themselves, but have an overall, momentum-conserving -function divided out.

consider 2-point greens functions in a scalar theory. in momentum space, with
the -function divided out, these are simply functions of a single momentum. mul-
tiplying two such functions in momentum space corresponds to convolution of
greens functions. in this normalization, a 2-point greens function is a convolu-

tion operator; that is a linear map  .

in general, a k-point 1pi greens function in this normalization is a linear map

(k1)
our amplitudes by c. this simplies the feynman rules slightly, so that the overall
power of c is now simply the number of loops.

 . in the regularized theory, this change simply amounts to dividing

3.3. noncommutative feynman rules. ill now specialize to the theory given by
the action (3.2), although most of the considerations are more general. as usual,
the action splits into a free part (the rst two terms) and an interaction part (the v
term). the free part gives the propagator ( + m2)1; each monomial of v() gives
a vertex whose valence is the degree of the monomial.

a vertex of valence r essentially represents the trace of a product of r matrices.
the term corresponding to a standard feynman diagram is a sum of terms with

12

eli hawkins

figure 1. doubled diagram for the propagator.

different orderings of the products. it is convenient to represent these subterms di-
agrammatically. for each vertex, the multiplicands correspond to incoming edges.
because only the cyclic order matters in a trace, we only need to indicate a cyclic
order to the edges. this is easily done graphically by drawing the vertex in the
plane. the order of multiplication is indicated by the counterclockwise order of
the attached edges. the distinct terms are thus labeled by framings of the feyn-
man diagram in the plane.

in ordinary quantum eld theory involving a real eld, there are symmetry fac-
tors to deal with. the contribution of a given diagram is divided by the number
of its symmetries. in this case there is an additional type of combinatorial factor
present. since a given ordinary feynman diagram corresponds to several framed
diagrams, these framed diagrams are weighted by coefcients adding up to 1. de-
termining these coefcients is a matter of enumerating the cyclic orientations of all
vertices, and sorting the resultant framings into equivalence classes.

to express the exact feynman rules, it is convenient to adapt the notation in-
vented by t hooft for discussing the large n limit of u(n)-gauge theories (see
[22, 3]). in that diagrammar, the gluon propagator is represented by a double line
(two directed lines in opposite directions). an outgoing arrow indicates an upper
index and an ingoing arrow indicates a lower index. the way lines are connected
indicates how indices are contracted. in these diagrams, the two lines of a gluon
propagator do not touch. this is appropriate, since they really have nothing to
do with each other. the propagator is not just invariant under u(n), but under 2
separate actions of u(n) corresponding to the 2 separate edges.

in the present context, however, the notation needs to be modied. the propa-
gator is not invariant under arbitrary unitary transformations; it is only invariant
under the isometries of m (if there are any). the two lines of the propagator are
thus no longer independent, and i indicate this by linked double lines as shown in
fig 1.

the upper indices (outgoing arrows) are factors of hn, while the lower indices
(ingoing arrows) are factors of h
n thus
gives an upper and a lower index, or an incoming and an outgoing arrow. figure 2
shows a more complicated doubled diagram. note that no distinction is made
between overcrossings and undercrossings.

n  an  hn  h

n. each factor of as.a.

a reader might reasonably question that this is truly a regularization of real
scalar eld theory. after all, the subspace as.a.
n  an is not closed under multi-
plication, so why should these feynman rules respect this subspace? the issue is
whether the greens functions are self-adjoint, in the obvious sense for elements
of a tensor power of an. in fact, a given (framed) feynman diagram may not be
self-adjoint. however, its adjoint is the mirror-image diagram, which is another

noncommutative regularization

13

figure 2. a nontrivial doubled diagram.

framing of the same diagram and therefore contributes to the same greens func-
tion. this makes the greens functions themselves self-adjoint, order-by-order in
perturbation theory.

4. scales

this is a convenient point at which to introduce some further notation. there
are three different length scales that are pertinent to quantum eld theory on a
quantized, compact space, and there are parameters characterizing each of these
scales.

i have already introduced the length r. this characterizes the overall size of the
manifold m. it is relevant to quantum eld theory as the infra-red cutoff scale; that
is, there do not exist modes of wavelength more than about r.

the second parameter,  := r2

n , characterizes the scale of noncommutativity.
as i have mentioned (sec. 2.1), geometric quantization was originally intended
as a tool for deriving quantum mechanics from classical mechanics, so there is an
analogy between some constructions here and in that problem. in this analogy, 
corresponds to h. like a classical phase space, the kahler manifold m has a pois-
son bracket. the poisson bracket of two differentiable functions on m is dened as
{f, g} := ijf|ig|j, where the poisson bivector, , is in turn the inverse of the symplec-
tic form in the sense that ijkj = i
k. the analogy continues with commutation
relations,

[tn(f), tn(g)] = itn({f, g}) + o2(),

or heuristically,

[f, g]  i{f, g}.

note that  has the dimensions of an area; this balances the two derivatives occur-
ring in the poisson bracket.

14

eli hawkins

in quantum mechanics, noncommutativity of observables leads to uncertainty
relations. likewise, noncommutativity here should intuitively lead to uncertainty
relations between coordinates (roughly, something like x y & ). this suggests
that the best that we can specify a point is to an uncertainty of the order 1/2 in all
directions. naively, we might conclude from this that m is broken up into cells
of this size and that the noncommutativity effects an ultraviolet cutoff at the mass
scale 1/2, but this is not so.

actually, if we divide m into cells of size about 1/2, then the number of cells
will be about dim hn. using the fact that the todd class, td t m is equal to 1 plus
higher degree cohomology classes, the riemann-roch formula shows,

dim hn =zm

td t m  e



2 =

vol m
(2)n

+ o1n().

(4.1)

this shows that these cells correspond to the degrees of freedom of hn rather than
of the scalar eld.

but what is the ultra-violet cutoff scale really? the number of degrees of freedom
associated to a scalar eld is dim an = (dim hn)2, so the volume belonging to each
degree of freedom is

vol m

(dim hn)2 

(2)2n
vol m

r(cid:17)2n
(cid:16) 

.

the length scale of this cutoff is thus of the order /r = r/n, or as a mass (inverse
length),

m :=

n
r

.

the noncommutativity scale set by  is the geometric mean between the infra-
red and ultra-violet scales. if we attempt to remove the infra-red cutoff (decom-

pactify the space) by sending r   without  diverging, then we must let
m  . in other words, if the infra-red cutoff is taken away, then the ultra-violet

cutoff goes away. this implies that noncommutativity only achieves an ultra-violet
cutoff in the presence of an infra-red cutoff! that will be proven in sec. 5.2.

this is in marked contrast to lattice regularization. for one thing, an unbounded
lattice can certainly achieve an ultra-violet cutoff. in a lattice, there is a sharply
dened minimum separation between points (the lattice spacing); this is also the
scale of the ultra-violet cutoff. on a quantized space, there is a fuzzy minimum
observable distance, but this is much larger than the length scale of the ultra-violet
cutoff.

5. flat space

just because a computation is well-dened and possible in principle, doesnt
necessarily mean it is easy or practicable. doing exact calculations on coadjoint
orbits requires working with representations of the symmetry group. while this is
better than working on a space with no symmetry at all, it is not as easy as working

noncommutative regularization

15

on at space. for at space, calculations in quantum eld theory are considerably
simplied by the fact that momentum space is a vector space.

locally, any manifold looks like at space. topologically, this is the very def-
inition of a manifold. geometrically, this is the content of einsteins principle of
equivalence. if we are concerned with issues of small-scale physics (like renor-
malization) then it would be nice to do calculations in the simplied setting of at
space and not worry about the global structure of our manifold.

the heuristic arguments of sec. 4 have already indicated that things are not so
simple. we cannot ignore global structure, because ultra-violet regularization is
dependent upon the global property of compactness. nevertheless, i will intro-
duce in sec. 6 an approximation technique which takes advantage of the local re-
semblance to at space.

before i can describe this approximation i must discuss at space itself. speci-
cally, i will discuss quantized at space, which does not have the effect of regular-
izing quantum eld theory, but does modify it in a relevant way.

5.1. quantized at space. if we zoom in around any point of a symplectic (or
even poisson) manifold, then it will resemble a at, afne space, with a poisson
bracket determined by a constant poisson bivector, , as

{f, g} = ijf|ig|j.

although the symplectic case is what we are really interested in, there is no need
to assume that  is nondegenerate in this section.

a tensor product of two functions on the at space rn is naturally regarded as
a function on rn  rn. the multiplication map m is equivalent to the diagonal
evaluation map,

so that m(f  g) = fg. if we regard  as a second order differential operator on
rn  rn, then the poisson bracket can be expressed as

m : c0 (rn  rn) c0 (rn),

with this notation, the weyl product corresponding to  is dened as

{f, g} = m  (f  g).

f  g := m  ei
i
2

= fg 

2 (f  g)
2
8

{f, g} 

ijklf|ikg|jl + . . . .

(5.1)

if we treat this as simply a formal power series in , then  is an associative prod-
uct. the space c(rn)[[]] is dened to consist of formal power series in  whose
coefcients are smooth functions on rn. the formal deformation quantization al-
gebra a(rn) is c(rn)[[]] with the product .

unfortunately, if we insert an arbitrary pair of smooth functions into eq. (5.1),
the series will typically diverge. fortunately, there is a sufciently large space of
functions for which  does converge, that we can construct a sensible, concrete
quantization of rn from this.

16

eli hawkins

p + q

p

q

figure 3. momentum space triangle.

the archetypal functions for which eq. (5.1) is convergent are plane-wave func-

tions. the weyl product of two plane-wave functions is simply

eipx  eiqx = ei 

2

{p,q}ei(p+q)x,

(5.2)

using the shorthand {p, q} := ijpiqj since this combination will occur frequently.
this notation is justied by the fact that if we think of p and q as linear functions on
rn, then {p, q} really is their poisson bracket. the good subalgebra ag  a(rn)
consists of those functions whose dependence on  is entire, and whose fourier
transforms (on rn) are compactly supported.

ag is algebraically closed, and consists of convergent power series in , so we can
actually assign  a concrete value. the mathematically sanctioned way to assign
 a concrete value, 0, is to quotient ag by the ideal generated by   0. the
quotient algebra ag/(  0) can then be completed to a c-algebra. this is the
concrete weyl quantization of rn at 0. this is the same algebra that would be
obtained by geometric quantization.

if we tried to construct the concrete weyl algebra directly from a, we would
have failed because the ideal generated in a by   0 is all of a. the quotient
a/(  0) is thus trivial.

5.2. field theory on quantized rn. we can construct perturbative quantum eld
theory on quantized rn. the derivation of feynman rules is formally the same
as on a quantized compact space; because of noncommutativity, we still have to
distinguish cyclic orderings of edges around vertices. however, there will again
be divergent feynman diagrams which demand regularization; thus justifying the
claim that ultra-violet regularization is contingent upon infra-red regularization.

in terms of momentum space, the feynman rules for vertices are modied by
momenta dependent phase factors. these can be understood geometrically.
in
momentum space, which is dual to the position space rn, the bivector  becomes
a 2-form. the 1
2{p, q} in eq. (5.2) is precisely the ux of  through the triangle
formed by p and q (see fig. 3). for a valence r vertex draw an r-sided polygon in
momentum space such that the difference of the ends of a side is equal to the in-
going momentum of the corresponding propagator line. momentum conservation
requires that the momenta add up to 0, which ensures that the polygon is closed.
decomposing the polygon into triangles shows that the phase associated to the
vertex is  times the ux of  through the polygon. note that this polygon is
only xed modulo an overall translation.

noncommutative regularization

17

figure 4. a planar feynman diagram and its dual graph.

in conventional euclidean real scalar eld theory, the amplitudes are real; the
same is true here. we must again remember to sum over all framings of a feynman
diagram. the phases lead to cosines of products of momenta.

if the evaluation of a feynman diagram involves phases depending on inter-
nal momenta, then the resulting oscillatory integral may give a nite result where
there once was a divergence. however, consistent with the heuristic argument

about m in sec. 4, this will not eliminate all divergences.

planar diagrams remain just as divergent as those for commutative rn. the fol-
lowing proof is equivalent to that already given by filk [9]; however, i interpret
it geometrically rather than in terms of special graph-topological properties of
cocycles.

consider a planar feynman diagram  , such as that shown in fig. 4. we can con-
struct a dual polygonalization (2-dimensional cw-complex)  . this has a vertex
for each open space in the planar rendering of  , including both spaces enclosed by
internal edges and spaces between external edges. the edges of   are in one-to-
one correspondence with the edges of  . the 2-cells (polygons) of   correspond to
the vertices of  . just as for a single vertex, we can embed   in momentum space
so that the separation between adjacent vertices of   is the momentum associated
to the connecting edge. equivalently, we can construct a polygon for each vertex
of  (as above) and t these together. the total phase associated to  is then given
by the total ux of  through all polygons of  . however,  is a constant 
and thus closed  differential form, so the the ux only depends on the shape
of the boundary of   in momentum space. thus, the phase only depends on the
momenta of the external lines. indeed the phase is the same as if the external lines
entered a single vertex.

18

eli hawkins

a generalization of this construction to non-planar diagrams will be employed

in sec. 8.

6. the deformation approximation

6.1. deformation quantization. the deformation quantization of rn in sec. 5.1 is
the archetype of a more general construction (see [23] for overview). in the formal
deformation quantization of a manifold m, the product  is a formal power series
in  whose terms are bidifferential operators on m (as in eq. (5.1)). just as for at

space, the algebra a(m) is equivalent as a vector space to the space, c(m)[[]],

of formal power series in  with smooth functions as coefcients.

in general, a deformation quantization can always be constructed to t

[f, g] = i{f, g} mod 2,

for any poisson bracket on m; see [17].

a deformation quantization can also be derived from a geometric quantization.
geometric quantization can be loosely thought of as making the product of func-
tions on m variable (dependent on ); the corresponding deformation quantiza-
tion is the result of asymptotically expanding the product as a power series in .
as i explained in [15], this algebra can be constructed from the smooth eld of
c-algebras, a, given by geometric quantization.

the parameter  is itself a smooth function on ^n and vanishes at the point n =

. in fact, any smooth section of a which vanishes at  is a multiple of . the
space of smooth sections which vanish to order j at  is thus j( ^n, a); this is
a 2-sided ideal. in the quotient algebra ( ^n, a)/j+1 (the algebra of jets about
), the variability of the product is preserved to order j. these quotient algebras

naturally form an algebraic inverse system. taking the algebraic inverse limit gives
the deformation quantization algebra corresponding to a,

a(m) = lim

 ( ^n, a)/j.

6.2. reconstruction. we have just seen how to construct a deformation quantiza-
tion from the geometric quantization. in sec. 5.1, i described the opposite process
 reconstructing the geometric quantization from a deformation quantization 
in the case of at space. this involved a good subalgebra ag  a(rn). it may
or may not be possible to make an analogous construction in all cases, but it can
be done for coadjoint orbits. in this section i will describe a good subalgebra of
a(o).

let a be the smooth eld given by geometric quantization of the coadjoint or-

bit o. the sections dened in eq. (2.3) are smooth sections, xi  ( ^n, a).

since smooth sections form an algebra, any product of xis, or linear combina-
tion thereof, is also a smooth section. such sections form a subalgebra i denote

noncommutative regularization

19

poly( ^n, a), the polynomial sections. since this is a subalgebra of the smooth sec-
tions, there is, for each j, a natural homomorphism

the kernel of this is just j+1poly( ^n, a), which vanishes as j. when the j

limit is taken, (6.1) becomes a natural, injective homomorphism,

poly( ^n, a) ( ^n, a)/j+1.

(6.1)

poly( ^n, a)  a.

thus, poly( ^n, a) is a subalgebra of both  ( ^n, a) and a.
a(o) with c(o)[[]] as a vector space, poly( ^n, a) corresponds to c[o, ], the

space of polynomials in  whose coefcients are polynomial functions on o. this
is the good subalgebra i wanted.

in the identication of

in a,   r2/n is invertible, so the ideal it generates is all of a; thus we cannot
assign  a concrete value in a. on the other hand, the functions of  in poly( ^n, a)
are all polynomials; therefore,   r2/n is not invertible and generates a nontrivial
ideal in poly( ^n, a). we can meaningfully take the quotient algebra,

a

n := poly( ^n, a)/(  r2/n).

in terms of the generators and relations representation of an in sec. 2.2, the
n is what we get by discarding the serre relations. there is

quotient algebra a
therefore a natural surjective homomorphism

e : a

n an.

(6.2)

by characterizing the kernel of e, we can effectively reconstruct the geometric
quantization from the deformation quantization. as a g-representation, a
n is in-
distinguishable from the space of polynomial functions on o; this is the direct
sum of all irreducible g-representations appearing in c(o). in an, this lattice of
irreducible representations is cut off; an is nite-dimensional. the kernel of e is
spanned by those g-representations which occur in c(o), but not in an.

this is the key to doing approximate calculations. imagine that r is very large. if
we sit at some point of o, then the region around us appears very close to the at
space r2n (where 2n = dim o). we would like to describe the geometric quan-
tization of o in this approximation, but the geometric quantization of the non-
compact space r2n is very different from that of compact o. their deformation
quantizations, however, are similar, because the deformation quantization product
is constructible locally from bidifferential operators. the geometric quantization of
o can be approximated using the weyl quantization of r2n, and an approximation
for the cutoff on representations. i refer to this as the deformation approximation

6.3. cutoff shape. if we are concerned with some eld theory on a quantized
coadjoint orbit then we would like to exploit the deformation approximation and
the relationship with at space in order to approximate the values of feynman
diagrams for large n. to accomplish this, we must characterize the kernel of the
surjective homomorphism e in (6.2) in terms of momentum space.

20

eli hawkins

consider the case of s2. as an su(2)-representation, c(s2) contains all the irre-
ducible representations of integer spin. on the other hand, an is the direct sum of
representations of integer spin  n. the kernel of e consists of those representa-
tions of su(2) which are contained in c(s2) but not an. that means modes whose
spin exceeds n. the laplacian on s2 with radius r is  = r2j2, so the eigenvalue
on a spherical harmonic with spin l is r2l(l + 1). it is thus possible to characterize
ker e in terms of the laplacian: ker e is spanned by the eigenfunctions of  with
eigenvalue greater than r2n(n + 1)  m2.

now take the at space approximation. in terms of momentum space, an eigen-
value of  is simply the magnitude-squared of a momentum vector. modes with
momentum greater than m belong to the kernel of e. we can approximate the al-
gebra an by the weyl product on r2, with modes of momentum greater than m
set to 0.

as i have said, geometric quantization can be thought of as a modication of the
product. in the feynman rules, products occur at the vertices. ab initio, one might
expect that the feynman rules for the deformation approximation would differ
from the at space feynman rules only at the vertices. however, it is actually more
convenient to shift some of the modication to the propagators. in the deformation
approximation for s2, the product of a sequence of plane-wave functions is equal
to their weyl product, if all the momenta have magnitude  m, otherwise the
product is 0. in terms of the feynman rules, this translates into restricting (cutting
off) momentum integration to the region in which all momenta have magnitude
 m.

in general, the cutoff can be more complicated. momenta are restricted to some
region of size m. this shape of the cutoff depends on the particular coadjoint
orbit being considered, although it is signicantly limited by symmetry. in our ap-
proximation of zooming in around one point of o, there is still a symmetry group
of rotations about that point (isotropies). momentum space carries a representa-
tion of the isotropy group, and the cutoff must be invariant under this. this is a
difference with lattice regularization; that is much more arbitrary because features
of the cutoff are not constrained by symmetry; here, there is no arbitrariness.

as examples, i shall consider the coadjoint orbits of dimension  4. there are
really only three of these: s2, s2  s2, and cp2. for s2 we have just seen that the
cutoff shape is d2, a disc of radius m, which is the only convex shape allowed
by symmetry anyway. for s2  s2, the cutoff shape derives from that of s2 and is
clearly d2d2. for cp2, the cutoff can again be characterized by the laplacian; it is
d4, a ball of radius m. again, this is the only convex shape allowed by symmetry.

6.4. feynman rules. the feynman rules in the deformation approximation are a
modication of those for quantized at space. the cutoff is implemented by mod-
ifying the propagator. i summarize the feynman rules here.

noncommutative regularization

21

figure 5. planar, one-loop propagator correction.

for each internal edge carrying momentum p, there is a propagator

s(p) =

m(p)
p2 + m2,

(6.3)

where m is a step function, equal to 1 inside the cutoff and 0 outside.

to each independent closed loop in the diagram, there is an integration over the
corresponding momentum and a factor of (2)2n, where 2n is the dimension of
the space.

a diagram may contain vertices of valence r if the potential, v, contains a mono-
mial of degree r. to each such vertex there is a coupling constant factor coming
from the coefcient of the monomial. there is also a phase factor given by the ux
of  through a polygon in momentum space formed by the momenta entering
the vertex. as always, the momenta entering a vertex add up to 0.

as with the exact feynman rules, there are combinatorial factors coming from

the symmetries of the diagram, and from the numbers of alternative framings.

7. examples

as examples, i shall consider (in progressively diminishing detail) the evalua-
tion of some one-particle-irreducible feynman diagrams for the 4 model on quan-
tized coadjoint orbits of small dimension.

in this case, the potential is v() = 

4!4, so all vertices are of valence 4 and carry

a factor of .

on a coadjoint orbit, the cutoff laplacian can be expressed in terms of the ap-
propriately normalized quadratic casimir operator as  = r2j2. this has the
insurpassable property that tn(f) = tn(f). the propagator is thus

1

r2j2 + m2.

7.1. planar propagator correction. the rst diagram to consider is the planar, 1-
loop propagator correction, fig. 5. ordinarily, this diagram would have a symme-
try factor of 1
2. however, only 2 out of 6 framings are equivalent to this diagram.
therefore, there is an overall combinatorial factor of 1
6.

22

eli hawkins

figure 6. doubled version of fig. 5.

this is about the only diagram that can easily be evaluated exactly. the doubled
diagram is shown in fig. 6. notice that the bottom line is detached from the rest
of the diagram; this shows that the diagram factorizes as the tensor product of the
identity on h
n with some linear map from hn to hn. this must be g-invariant,
and since hn is an irreducible g-representation, this map must be proportional to
the identity. in other words, the diagram must evaluate to a number.

to determine this number, close up the upper part of fig. 6 and divide by dim hn
(a circle) to normalize. the factor of dim hn cancels the factor from the feynman
rules. closing up the diagram amounts to taking a trace. the exact evaluation is
thus

m =



6 vol m

tran(cid:0)r2j2 + m2(cid:1)1

.

now turn to the deformation approximation. because the diagram is planar, the
phase factor can only depend on external momenta, but because there is only one
external momentum, there is no phase factor. indeed, the diagram is independent
of the external momentum  it is simply a number, as in the exact evaluation. in
the deformation approximation,

m .
=



6(2)2nz m(p) d2np
p2 + m2 .

7.1.1. s2. for the exact evaluation, it remains to calculate the trace of the propaga-
tor (r2j2 + m2)1. this is an su(2)-invariant linear operator on the algebra an. as
an su(2) representation, an is the direct sum of the irreducible representations of
integer spin 0 through n. the spin l subspace has dimension 2l + 1, and on that
subspace the quadratic casimir reduces to j2 = l(l + 1). using vol s2 = 4r2, the
exact evaluation is

m =



6  4r2

r2l(l + 1) + m2

2l + 1

nxl=0
l(l + 1) + m2r2.

2l + 1

=



24

nxl=0

(7.1)

noncommutative regularization

23

however, this is precisely the (n + 1)-part midpoint approximation to the integral



24z n+1

0

2t

t2 + m2r2  1
4

dt =



24

ln"1 +

(n + 1)2
m2r2  1

4# .

now evaluate fig. 5 in the deformation approximation. the momentum cutoff

is a disc of radius m. this gives

m .
=

=



6(2)2z|p|m
12z m



0

d2p

p2 + m2

p dp

p2 + m2

=



24

ln(cid:20)1 +

m2

m2(cid:21) .

(7.2)

(7.3)

in order for the deformation approximation to be valid, we must assume that
r1  m  m. this means simply that the compton wavelength (the distance,
m1, determined by the bare mass) should be much smaller than the universe and
that m should be much smaller than the cutoff mass. we need not assume that
m is smaller than the noncommutativity scale. using the formula for the leading
correction to the midpoint approximation, we can nd the leading order correction
to (7.3); this is



24(cid:18) 1

3m2r2

+

2

n(cid:19) .

so, in this case, the deformation approximation indeed converges if we take r, n
.

7.1.2. cp2. as an su(3)-representation, the algebra an decomposes into a direct
sum of irreducible subspaces numbered 0 through n. the l subspace has dimen-
sion (l + 1)3, and the quadratic casimir reduces to j2 = l(l + 2). for cp2 of circum-
ference 2r, the volume is vol cp2 = 8r4.

the exact evaluation of fig. 5 is,

m =



6  82r4

(l + 1)3

r2l(l + 2) + m2

nxl=1
n+1xj=0

=



482r2

j3

j2 + m2r2  1

.

(7.4)

as i have said, the momentum cutoff for cp2 is a ball of radius m. so, in the

deformation approximation,

m .
=

=



d4p

6(2)4z|p|m
962(cid:20)m2  m2 ln(cid:18)1 +

p2 + m2



=

0



482z m
m2(cid:19)(cid:21) .

m2

the resemblance to eq. (7.4) is hopefully apparent.

p3 dp

p2 + m2

(7.5)

24

eli hawkins

p

figure 7. non-planar, one-loop propagator correction.

figure 8. doubled version of fig. 7.

7.1.3. s2  s2. here, the exact evaluation is the double sum,

m =



962r4

nxj,k=0

(2j + 1)(2k + 1)

r2j(j + 1) + r2k(k + 1) + m2.

the cutoff shape is the more complicated d2  d2. this gives the deformation

approximation as,

m .
=

=

=





d4p

p2 + m2

6(2)4zd2 d2
964z|p|mz|q|m
962(cid:20)(cid:0)2m2 + m2(cid:1) ln(cid:18)1 +



d2p d2q

p2 + q2 + m2

=



242zz m

0

pq dp dq

p2 + q2 + m2

m2

m2 + m2(cid:19)  m2 ln(cid:18)1 +

m2

m2(cid:19)(cid:21) .

(7.6)

this demonstrates the effect of the cutoff shape. for m  m, the results of eq.s
(7.5) and (7.6) differ by a factor of 2 ln 2. the only reason for this difference is the
nontrivial cutoff shape for s2  s2.

7.2. nonplanar propagator correction. the only nonplanar 1-loop propagator cor-
rection is shown in fig. 7. this is equivalent to all 4 out of 6 other framings of the
original diagram; so, the combinatorial factor is 1
3. the doubled diagram is shown
in fig. 8. observe that fig. 8 is really just the bare propagator (fig. 1 on p. 12) with

noncommutative regularization

25

the lines rearranged. the evaluation of fig. 8 is /3 vol m times the propagator
with the hns exchanged.

because this is a nonplanar diagram, there is a nontrivial phase factor. this
makes the evaluation more interesting. with external momentum p, it is (again
using the brace notation of eq. (5.2))

m .
=

=



3(2)2nzcutoff
3(2)2nzcutoff



ei{p,q}d2nq

p2 + m2
eipqd2nq
p2 + m2

=

=



3(2)n

s( jp)



3(2)n

s(p),

(7.7a)

(7.7b)

where s is the fourier transform of the cutoff propagator (6.3) and j is the complex
structure (a 
2-rotation). equation (7.7a) is independent of any details of the prop-
agator; eq. (7.7b) used rotational invariance. it seems that rearranging lines in the
doubled diagram corresponds to rotating by j and taking a fourier transform.

7.2.1. s2. since the propagator is su(2)-invariant, it can be written as a linear com-
bination of projectors on irreducible representations. the rearranged version is
also invariant and can also be so decomposed. calculating the rearrangement
comes down to transforming between these two decompositions. the coefcients
for this transformation are the famous 6-j symbols (see [1]).

since the value of this diagram is an invariant linear operator on an, it can most
conveniently be described by giving its eigenvalues on the irreducible subspaces
of an. the evaluation of fig. 8, acting on the spin l subspace is

m =



12

nxj=0

(cid:12) j n/2 n/2
l n/2 n/2 (cid:13)

1

j(j + 1) + m2r2.

this corresponds to evaluating with external momentum, p, of magnitude |p| 
r1l.

following eq. (7.7b), the deformation approximation for fig. 8 is,

m .
=

=



122z|q|m
6z m



0

q2 + m2

eipqd2q
q2 + m2

q j0 (q|p|) dq

.

if we take m  while keeping  xed, then this becomes a hyperbolic bessel

function, 
6k0 (m|p|). this has a logarithmic singularity at p = 0, and falls off ex-
ponentially for large p. aside from p = 0, it is nite. this means that this diagram,
unlike the previous, planar diagram, is actually regularized by noncommutativity
alone.

26

eli hawkins

p1

p2

q

p4

p3

figure 9. a nonplanar vertex correction.

7.2.2. cp2. the deformation approximation gives,

m .
=

=



484z|q|m
122|p|z m



eipqd4q
q2 + m2

q2j1(q|p|) dq

q2 + m2

.

0

if we take m, this becomes

122|p| k1(m|p|). as in 2 dimensions, this falls
off exponentially. the singularity is of the form |p|2, which is rather mild in 4
dimensions.

m

7.3. vertex correction. there are several distinct framings of the one-loop vertex
correction diagram. one of these is shown in fig. 9. the external momenta are all
incoming; the internal momentum q is directed counterclockwise. by momentum
conservation, p1 + p2 + p3 + p4 = 0.

the phase associated to this diagram can be split into two factors. the rst,
[{p1 ,p2 }+{p3 ,p4 }] is the same as for a bare vertex with the external edges oriented in

i
2

e
this way. the second factor is ei{p1 ,q}.

except for the combinatorial factors, the evaluation of fig. 9 in the deformation

approximation is
2

(2)2n

i
2

e

[{p1 ,p2 }+{p3 ,p4 }]z s(q)s(p1 + p2  q)ei{p1 ,q} d2nq.

(7.8)

s(p) again denotes the cutoff propagator (6.3). note that this essentially amounts
to a fourier transform of the product of propagators. in four dimensions, the 1-

loop vertex correction is divergent, but if we take m   with  xed then (7.8)

remains nite except at p1 = 0

8. divergences

lets consider how these amplitudes diverge when regularization is removed.
actually, since there are both infra-red and ultra-violet cutoffs (controlled by r

noncommutative regularization

27

and m), there are many possible ways to remove the cutoffs, one-by-one or simul-
taneously.

as i have said, what has been described is far from a realistic physical model.
despite this, we can optimistically juxtapose this model with reality and hope that
some properties of the model are pertinent to reality. the kind of noncommuta-
tivity considered here has not yet been noticed in experiments. this means that
the noncommutativity scale set by  is, at best, about the smallest length scale ex-
plored by current experiments. on the other hand, r should be something like
the size of the universe  a far larger scale, so n must be very large. this shows
that the cutoff mass, m should be well beyond the scale of  and thus far beyond
the reach of experiments. the approximation relevant to physical predictions of

noncommutativity is thus the limit of m   with  xed. note that this means
simultaneously taking r  ; in other words, we remove the ultra-violet and

infra-red cutoffs in unison. in this limit, the quantized compact space becomes, at
least formally, quantized at space. we should thus expect this limit of eld theory
to be described by eld theory on quantized at space.

as i have claimed, and the above examples have corroborated, nonplanarity of
a feynman diagram tends to decrease its degree of divergence. in the standard
regularizations, the ultra-violet divergences are associated with the loops in the

feynman diagram. it appears that the divergences when m   with  xed are

associated more closely with the loops in the doubled diagram  index loops, in
the terminology of t hooft [22]. the number of index loops is always less than or
equal to the number of loops in the original diagram.

although an arbitrary framed feynman diagram,  , may not t into the plane,
it will always t onto some oriented surface. such a surface, , can be constructed
systematically by lling in a 2-cell for each line in the doubled diagram. it will
have the topology of a riemann surface with at least one puncture; each external
leg of  ends at a puncture.

our rst example, fig. 5, is planar; thus  is the plane (equivalently, a sphere
with 1 puncture). for both figs 7 and 2,  is a torus with 1 puncture. for fig. 9, 
is a sphere with 2 punctures.

by construction, an index loop is always contractible in . we can make this
more precise using homology. the group h2() is trivial because  is not closed;
the group h1(,  ) is trivial because  is obtained from  by attaching 2-cells. in-
serting these facts into the long exact sequence for the pair (,  ), gives the short
exact sequence,

0 h2(,  ) h1( ) h1() 0.

the group h2(,  ) is generated by the 2-cells in  that do not touch punctures;
these are in one-to-one correspondence with the index loops. the group h1( )
classies the loops of . the group h1() classies incontractible loops in . these
are all free groups, so the sequence splits (unnaturally). the loops of  can there-
fore be divided into index loops and incontractible loops of .

28

eli hawkins

consider some loop  in  which is incontractible in , and examine what hap-
pens when we integrate over the momentum, p, circulating around . if we leave
the momenta in  otherwise xed2, then the part of the phase which depends on p
will be of the form ei{q,p}, where q is a linear combination of the other momenta
in . in fact, q is the momentum owing across . the other part of the feynman
integrand depending on p is the product of propagators on the edges of ; each of
these has the form ([p + l]2 + m2)1. taking the integral over p effectively means
taking the fourier transform of this product of propagators. the result may have

an integrable singularity at q = 0 (an infra-red divergence because r  ), but

is otherwise nite, and falls of exponentially. this means that integration over p
does not contribute to the ultra-violet divergence; moreover, if q is also an internal
momentum, then integration over q will not contribute to the divergence either.

the other important limit is the commutative limit. this is when r is xed,

but   0 and m  . in light of the deformation approximation, it appears

that the behavior in this limit will be very much like that of the most elementary
regularization, a simple momentum cutoff.

9. generalizations

9.1. complex scalar eld. for a single, complex scalar eld, the general u(1)-
invariant action is

s[] :=zm(cid:2)()  () + m2 + p()(cid:3) ,

where p is some real polynomial, lower bounded on the positive axis.

(9.1)

the standard perturbation theory for this complex scalar eld is not much differ-
ent from that of the real eld. every edge of a feynman diagram is now directed,
and each vertex must have an equal number of ingoing and outgoing edges.

the regularized action corresponding to this is a simple generalization of the
real case. the only new ingredient is the fact that complex conjugation in c(m)
corresponds to the hermitian adjoint in an. the regularized version of (9.1) is

sn() :=

vol m
dim hn

tr(cid:2)() + m2 + p()(cid:3) .

(9.2)

in every product inside the trace in eq. (9.2),  alternates with . as a con-
sequence, in the framed diagrams, ingoing and outgoing edges alternate around
each vertex. except for this restriction, the feynman rules for the complex eld are
formally the same as for a real eld.

this restriction has an interesting interpretation in terms of the doubled dia-
gram. there are really two types of lines in the doubled diagram, those on the left
of a directed edge in the original diagram, and those on the right. the restriction
is simply that left edges only connect to left edges and right to right.

2that is, x all the momenta in  and then add p at each edge of .

noncommutative regularization

29

9.2. twisted elds. so far, i have only discussed topologically trivial scalar elds.
a section of a nontrivial vector bundle is not a function, so sections of a vector
bundle are not approximated by the algebra an. as i have argued in [13, 14], the
noncommutative generalization of a vector bundle is a (nitely generated, pro-
jective) module of an algebra, so the geometric quantization of a vector bundle
should be a module of an. for the matrix algebra an = end hn, any module is
of the form, vn = hom(fv
n, hn), a space of linear maps from some vector space to
hn. i present a general construction in [14]. in the simplest case  a holomorphic
vector bundle  fv

n := hol(m, ln  v ); this generalizes hn := hol(m, ln).

the simplest action for a nontrivial vector eld is a trivial generalization of (9.1),
although it requires a berwise, hermitian inner product on v. the action is simply

(9.1) with   (m, v) and inner products understood between successive s

and s.

for the regularized elds, the inner product on v leads to an inner product on
n; because of this, for   vn, we can dene the product  to be an element of
fv
an. the regularized action for a nontrivial eld is just (9.2) with   vn.

in the doubled diagrams, the left and right lines are now truly distinct. left lines
n. the complex scalar eld really just

correspond to hn; right lines correspond to fv
wanted to be twisted.

there is not much to be said about topologically nontrivial elds in the defor-
mation approximation. from a local perspective, a nontrivial vector bundle is just

a vector bundle with a xed background gauge eld. in the limit as r  , this

gauge eld vanishes.

9.3. fermions. fermi statistics do not pose any particular obstacle in this regular-
ization scheme. however, the kinetic terms for fermion action functionals may
be more difcult to construct than that for bosons. whereas constructing a cutoff
laplacian is elementary on coadjoint orbits, it is less obvious how to deal with the
dirac operator.

even on s2, there may be trouble. when the spinor bundle on s2 is quantized by
my prescription, the left and right chiral subspaces have different dimensions. this
means that there does not exist a cutoff dirac operator which both anti-commutes
with the chirality operator (5) and has no kernel. in fact, the difference of the
dimensions of the left an right subspaces grows linearly with n; so, if we require
the dirac operator to anti-commute with the chirality operator, then the size of the

kernel will diverge as n.

lems at all, remains to be seen.

whether these problems can be circumvented, or whether they are really prob-

10. prospects

in all this i have largely dwelt on the regularization effects of noncommutativity.
however, if there are effects of noncommutativity which are directly detectable by
experiment, then these will probably be tree-level effects.

30

eli hawkins

in eld theory on quantized at space, the phase factors from different framings
add up to a sum of cosines of products of momenta. this can, for instance, cause
the amplitudes for processes with certain combinations of momenta, to vanish.

it is plausible that this sort of behavior may go beyond this simple, euclidean,
it may be the experimental signature of noncommutativity.

scalar eld model.
clearly, further work is required.

acknowledgments. this paper is essentially my thesis in physics at penn. state; i would
thus like to thank the members of my committee: lee smolin, abhay ashtekar, shyamoli
chauduri, and paul baum. this material is based upon work supported in part by nsf
grant phy95-14240, by a gift from the jesse phillips foundation, and by the eberly research
fund of the pennsylvania state university.

references

[1] carter, j., flath, d., saito, m.: the classical and quantum 6j-symbols. princeton:

princeton university press, 1995.

[2] chaichian, m., demichev, a., pre snajder, p.: quantum eld theory on noncommutative

space-times and the persistence of ultraviolet divergences. e-print, hep-th/9812180.

[3] coleman, s.: aspects of symmetry. cambridge: cambridge university press, 1985.
[4] connes, a.: noncommutative geometry. new york: academic press, 1994.
[5] connes, a.: gravity coupled with matter and the foundation of non-commutative geometry.

e-print, hep-th/9603053. commun. math. phys. 128, 155-176 (1996).

[6] dixmier, j.: c-algebras. amsterdam: north holland, 1982.
[7] doplicher, s., fredenhagen, k., roberts, j. e.: the quantum structure of space-time at the

plank scale and quantum elds. commun. math. phys. 172, 187 (1995).

[8] feynman, r.: what do you care what other people think? p. 17. w. w. norton, 1988.
[9] filk, t.: divergencies in a eld theory on quantum space. phys. lett. b 376 (1996) 5358.
[10] garay, l. j.: quantum gravity and minimum length. e-print, gr-qc/9403008. int. j. mod. phys.

a10, 145 (1995).

[11] grosse, h., klim cik, c., pre snajder, p.: towards finite quantum field theory in noncom-

mutative geometry. e-print, hep-th/9505175. int. j. theor. phys. 35, 231244 (1996).

[12] hawkins, e.: hamiltonian gravity and noncommutative geometry. e-print: gr-qc/9605068.

commun. math. phys. 187, 471489 (1997).

[13] hawkins, e.: quantization of equivariant vector bundles. e-print, q-alg/9708030. commun.

math. phys. 202, 517546 (1999).

[14] hawkins, e.: geometric quantization of vector bundles. e-print, math.qa/9808116.
[15] hawkins, e.: the correspondence between geometric quantization and formal deformation quan-

tization. e-print, math.qa/9811049.

[16] kirchburg, e., wassermann, s.: operations on continuous bundles of c-algebras. math.

ann. 303, 677697 (1995).

[17] kontsevich, m.: deformation quantization of poisson manifolds i. e-print, q-alg/9709040.
[18] madore, j.: fuzzy physics. ann. phys. 219, 187198 (1992).
[19] li, m., yoneya, t.: d-particle dynamics and the space-time uncertainty relation. e-print,

hep-th/9611072. phys. rev. lett. 78 12191222 (1997).

[20] pokorski, s.: gauge field theories. cambridge: cambridge university press, 1987.
[21] rieffel, m. a.: quantization and c-algebras. contemp. math. 167, 6797 (1994).
[22] t hooft, g.: a planar diagram theory for strong interactions. nucl. phys. b72 (1974) 461473.
[23] weinstein, a.: deformation quantization. seminaire bourbaki, vol. 1993/94. asterisque

no. 227 (1995), exp. no. 789, 5, 389409.

