cern-th-99-219
su-itp-99/38
lbnl-44031

logarithmic unication from symmetries
enhanced in the sub-millimeter infrared 

nima arkanihamed, savas dimopoulos+,

and john march-russell

 department of physics, university of california, berkeley, ca 94530
theory group, lawrence berkeley national lab, berkeley, ca 94530

+ physics department, stanford university, stanford, ca 94305

 theory division, cern, ch-1211, geneva 23, switzerland

abstract

in theories with tev string scale and sub-millimeter extra dimen-
sions the attractive picture of logarithmic gauge coupling unication
at 1016 gev is seemingly destroyed.
in this paper we argue to the
contrary that logarithmic unication can occur in such theories. the
rationale for unication is no longer that a gauge symmetry is restored
at short distances, but rather that a geometric symmetry is restored
at large distances in the bulk away from our 3-brane. the apparent
running of the gauge couplings to energies far above the string scale
actually arises from the logarithmic variation of classical elds in (sets
of) two large transverse dimensions. we present a number of n = 2
and n = 1 supersymmetric d-brane constructions illustrating this
picture for unication.

9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
1
2

 

 
 

1
v
6
4
1
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

supported in part by the doe under grant de-ac03-76sf00098, the nsf under grant
phy-95-14797 and by the alfred p. sloan foundation. email: nima@thwk1.lbl.gov,
savas@leland.stanford.edu, j@marchrussell.org

1 replacing the desert with the bulk

it has recently been realized that the fundamental scales of gravitational and
string physics can be far beneath the conventional energies of 1017  1018
gev. this can be accomplished if n spatial dimensions of size  r are much
larger than the fundamental planck/string scales  ms. at distances much
larger than r, the weakness of gravity can be understood from gauss law,
which relates the eective 4d planck scale to the fundamental scale via

m 2

pl  rnm 2+n

s

(1)

the original motivation was to bring the fundamental scales close to the weak
scale, in order to solve the hierarchy problem [1, 2, 3, 4]. putting ms  tev,
the radius r ranges from  mm for n = 2 to  (10mev)1 for n = 6. these
large dimensions are not in conict with experiment if the sm interactions
are conned to a 3-brane in the extra dimensions.

perhaps the most surprising aspect of this framework is that, despite its
profound modications of physics at both sub-millimeter and tev scales, it is
experimentally viable, non-trivially surviving laboratory, astrophysical and
cosmological constraints [3]. the last year has also seen the growing realiza-
tion that the large space in the extra dimensions replaces the old ultraviolet
desert as the new arena in which to address other outstanding mysteries of
the standard model, such as the origin of avor and absence of fcncs [5],
small neutrino masses [6], and proton stability [3, 5, 8]. the dynamics of
the bulk also plays an important role in the early universe cosmology of this
framework[9].

one important and general lesson has been that there are new, intrinsi-
cally higher-dimensional mechanisms for generating small parameters in the
four dimensional theory, the smallness of which are not guaranteed by sym-
metries of the low energy theory. instead, higher dimensional locality can
guarantee that interactions between elds separated in the extra dimensions
are suppressed.
in this way, if symmetries are broken at o(1) on distant
branes, with the breaking transmitted to our brane by massive bulk elds,
the breaking can be exponentially small on our wall [5]. in another context,
this eect helps alleviate the susy avor problem in models of wall to wall
susy breaking [7]. as another example, proton decay can be suppressed if
quarks and leptons are slightly split in the extra dimensions [8].

in order to go further in making this framework as compelling as the stan-
dard picture with the string scale  1018 gev and low-energy supersymmetry
(susy) breaking, two important theoretical issues must be addressed:

 why are the radii of the extra dimensions so large compared to the

string scale?

 what about gauge coupling unication?

1

in this paper, we will focus on the issue of gauge coupling unication [10],
and argue that the picture of logarithmic gauge coupling unication may still
emerge in string theory with a low string scale and large extra dimensions.
as we will see, this provides another illustration of the way in which the bulk
can mimic physics associated with the old desert. most of the formal results
we discuss below are well known in the literature on d-brane constructions of
gauge theories [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19], although we will be interested
in going beyond the decoupling limit. what we wish to point out is the
possible application of these results to phenomenology.

there have recently been a number of papers addressing the possibility of
running far above the string scale [20, 21, 22]. running the couplings above
the string scale is however not enough, we need a reason for the couplings
to unify far above the string scale. this is challenging because in string
theory, the couplings usually unify at the string scale. we will argue that
the new rationale for unication far above the string scale can be an enhanced
geometrical symmetry at large distances away from our 3-brane in the bulk.
we also further clarify the conditions under which the couplings can run
above the string scale in d-brane congurations with n = 2 and n = 1
supersymmetry.

2 logarithmic running from the infrared

there are two remarkable features of the usual picture of gauge coupling uni-
cation in supersymmetric extensions of the standard model: rst that the
couplings unify at all, and second that they unify so close to the string/planck
scale. of course, given the precision with which the couplings have been mea-
sured, the near miss of the unication and string scales is usually considered
a problem, but at zeroth order it is remarkable that the naive scales of gauge
and gravitational unication are so close to each other. for the moment,
we will ignore the dierence between the gut and planck scales, and will
return to this point later.

of course, we have not actually measured the gauge couplings at energies
approaching the gut scale; all we know is that the measured strength of
the gauge couplings 1
at low energy satisfy, to high accuracy, the relation

i

1
i (tev) = 1

0 

bi
2

log(cid:18) mpl
tev(cid:19) .

(2)

can this relationship possibly be reproduced in a theory with a low string
scale ms  tev and large extra dimensions? in particular, we wish to
reproduce the picture of logarithmic gauge coupling unication, as opposed

approaches to gauge coupling unication with power-law running have been discussed

in [11].

2

to power-law unication [10]. even if power-law running explains why the
couplings unify, it can not explain why the unication appears to happen so
close to the planck scale. put another way, suppose that instead of unifying
at  1016 gev, the couplings were found to unify at 108 gev; power-law
running could still accommodate this. the link between the unication scale
and the gravitational scale in eqn.(2) would then be wholly accidental. we do
not wish to view this link as an accident, and will therefore try to reproduce
eqn.(2) in the context of theories with large extra dimensions.

of course naively, once we hit the (low) string scale ms, we cant continue
to run past the tev scale using the rges of the 4-dimensional eective eld
theory, and there is no source for a uv logarithm of magnitude log(mpl/ms).

in particular, scattering experiments performed at s  ms no longer see

just a gauge theory on our brane decoupled from the full set of string modes
and from the bulk degrees of freedom, so there is no sense in speaking of usual
qft running at these scales. however, the usual mpl does exist as a physical

scale; it is set by the size of the bulk. in units where ms = 1, mpl  vbulk.

so, if the gauge coupling on our brane can have logarithmic sensitivity to
the volume of the bulk, there is a hope that the correct magnitude logarithm
is available. notice that the source of the logarithm in this picture is an
infrared eect.

under what conditions can quantities on the brane depend on the size of
the bulk [21]? clearly, the brane must couple to light elds that can propa-
gate in the bulk in order to have any sensitivity to the volume of the extra
dimensions. gravity is one model-independent eld that must propagate in
all n large extra dimensions. there may be other light elds as well, which
can propagate in some of the large dimensions. let us collectively refer to
the light bulk elds as . since the branes act as coherent sources for , they
set up a  prole in the bulk which is the same as that of a point source for
 in the t directions transverse to the source branes that  propagates in.
the precise nature of the dependence of brane quantities on the volume of
the bulk then depends on the  propagators in t dimensions: for t > 3, the
greens functions fall of as r2t so there is only power suppressed sensitivity
to vbulk. for t = 2 the propagator is a logarithm and this is precisely what we
are looking for. finally, for t = 1 there can be power ir divergences (which
can have interesting physical consequences see e.g. [23]), but which are not
of interest to us here.

we are thus lead to consider theories with light elds which can eectively
propagate in two transverse dimensions. for simplicity, in the rest of this
paper we will assume that there are only two large dimensions, although we
emphasize that this is not a necessity. our picture is summarized in fig. 1.
the gauge coupling on our brane (evaluated at the cuto  ms) is the
vacuum expectation value of some bulk eld smeared out over a region of size
 ls = m 1
s around our brane (as a consequence of the non-trivial form-factor

3

others

act as sources 
for 

   

in the bulk

r

us)(

= exp(( us) )

    us



mm

figure 1: the picture for running from the infrared. the gauge coupling on
our brane is determined by the value of a bulk eld  evaluated at the position
of our brane. other branes in the bulk a distance r >> m 1
away act as
sources for , and if the transverse co-dimension relative to the source brane
is 2, then the value of  on our brane can be logarithmically sensitive to r.
in principle, this logarithmic prole of  can mimic eld theoretic running
to an energy scale rm 2

s far above the string scale.

s

of the brane):

1(ms) = e(us).

(3)

however, the presence of other branes far away in the bulk can modify the
value of  evaluated on our brane as compared to the value 0 asymptotically
far away;

(4)

(5)

c
2
for two extra dimensions, r2ms  mpl, so

e(us) = e0 

log(rms).

log(rms) = log(cid:18)mpl
ms (cid:19) ,

and therefore the correct magnitude logarithm between the weak and grav-
itational scales is indeed present in the theory. in fact, for two large extra
dimensions, the phenomenological constraints are tight enough to force ms
at least up to  50 tev. then, the logarithm log(mpl/ms) is closer to the
desired log(mgu t /tev), although accurate predictions must of course also
then take into account the usual qft running between mz and ms. another
natural possibility is that the distant branes are not maximally removed from
us in the extra dimensions, so that r is somewhat smaller.

note that we are not restricted to a total of n = 2 large dimensions where
gravity propagates. for instance, suppose we have n = 4 large dimensions,
and we are located at the intersection of two orthogonal 5-branes. fields

4

that live on the 5-brane propagate in eectively 2 large dimensions and can
vary logarithmically. if the proles on the two 5-branes are identical we can
expect to obtain a logarithm 2 log(rms) log(mp l/ms), where we have
used m 2
s . clearly this idea generalizes to n = 6 extra dimensions
as well.

p l  r4m 6

the fact of logarithmic variation is not enough however.

in order to
reproduce the correct running of the gauge coupling, the coecient c in
eqn.(5) must equal the  function coecient of the gauge theory localized
on our brane. at rst sight, such an equality seems unlikely. after all, c
is determined by the way in which the distant branes couple to the light
bulk elds; why should this be related to the  function of the gauge group
localized on our wall? this seems to require a miracle.

3 ir running from n = 2 d-brane construc-

tions

precisely such a miracle is, however, well known to occur in stringy brane
constructions of gauge theories with 8 supercharges. a simple example is
provided by the gauge theories living on d3 branes probing the geometry of
parallel d7/o7 congurations [16]. (see fig. 2) let the d7/o7 planes ll out
the 1,..,7 directions and the d3 brane ll out 1,..,3, and dene w = x8 + ix9
labeling the space transverse to the 7 branes. specically, put an o7 plane
at w = 0, and place 4 d7 branes at wi (i = 1, .., 4). with 4 d7s, the total rr
charge and tension of the d7/o7 branes cancel, so that for |w|  , all the
bulk elds approach constant asymptotic values; in particular the complex
coupling  = a + ie of the type iib string approaches ie() at innity.
now, put a single d3 brane at w. this conguration leaves 8 supercharges
invariant, and the resulting gauge theory living on the d3 brane is n = 2 in
four dimensions. when all the branes sit on top of each other, the resulting
gauge theory living on the d3 brane is an sp(1) = su(2), n = 2 gauge
theory, with the vector multiplet coming from the 3-3 strings and 4 massless
hypermultiplets from the 3-7 strings. this theory is conformal; the one loop
beta function coecient is b = 0. this statement has a counterpart from
the long-distance gravity point of view: with wi = 0 all the rr charges
and tensions of the branes cancel against the orientifold, so that there is no
variation of the bulk elds in transverse space. now suppose we move f of the
d7 branes very far away, i.e. |wi| = r  ls. the resulting gauge theory now
has (4  f ) hypermultiplets and beta function b = f . now the tensions and
rr charges no longer cancel locally, and there will some variation of the light
bulk elds, although of course asymptotically for |w|  r the elds approach
their xed values at innity. it is straightforward to calculate the prole for
 set up by this conguration of 7 branes. we are in fact only interested in

5

=x + ix8

9


1

2


3

d7 sources

s

| |=

i

r>>l

 d3 brane probe


4
=0

d7 & o7  sources

-

~mm

figure 2: an n = 2 susy example where the bulk sugra equations re-
produce the (3+1)-d qft holomorphic gauge coupling running on a probe
d3 brane located at w. source d7 branes are located at positions wi in the
w = x8 + ix9 plane, and an o7 orientifold plane is located at w = 0. at
long distances  r the total rr charge and tension of these d7/o7 branes
cancel and there is no variation in the bulk elds. in this gure we have
moved f = 3 of the d7 branes far away from the d3 and o7 brane, and so
from the d3-brane gauge theory perspective 3 n = 2 hypermultiplets gain a
large mass m = rm 2
s .

the long-distance behavior away from the branes (i.e. only the logarithms),
so the full f theory computation [24] is not needed for our purposes. the
result is nd

 (w) =  () +

i

2   4
xi=1

log(w  wi)  4 log(w)! .

(6)

this in fact directly follows from the fact that the seven branes act as vortex
solutions for the axion a = ( ). this result precisely matches what we
expect for the eld theory running of the gauge theory with hypermultiplets
of mass wim 2
s . the amazing thing of course is that this result of the long-
distance gravity theory (which is valid for |wi|  ls) reproduces the naive
extrapolation of the eld theory running, despite the fact that the eld theory
description is valid only for |wi|  ls.
why does this happen? how can a classical supergravity calculation re-
produce the (quantum) running in a gauge theory? that classical gravity

from the full f -theory result the non-perturbative correction to this result can easily
be extracted. they are negligibly small for a theory that has fundamental coupling of
order the usual gut coupling.

6

eects are equivalent to quantum gauge theory eects is a consequence of
closed/open string duality in string theory: the world-sheet that represents
a tree-level closed string exchange between the well separated branes can
also be interpreted, via a re-labeling of 1 and 2 on the string worldsheet,
as a 1-loop open string diagram of states on the branes that correspond to
strings stretched between the branes. this is illustrated in fig. 3. however,
this alone is not enough to explain our miracle. at long distances, the tree-
level closed string diagram is indeed well approximated by supergravity, but
closed/open duality only tells us that this is equal to the full one-loop open
string calculation, which sums both the lowest string excitations (which are
the eld-theory degrees of freedom) as well as all the massive open string
excitations whose mass depends on ms.
in order for the eld theory and
gravity calculations to agree, it must be that sum over massive string exci-
tations gives no corrections to  . in the case of theories where the lightest
stretched string states preserve 8 supercharges, this is in fact guaranteed by
bps considerations [16, 22]. the lightest states are bps states with mass
and (ns-ns) charge both linearly increasing with the string length (m = q).
the supersymmetry multiplets that these bps states ll-out are n = 2 rep-
resentations, while the excited strings with oscillator contributions to their
mass are not bps (m > q) and group themselves into n = 4 multiplets,
and therefore do not correct  .

notice that it is crucial here that the eld theory is superconformal at
the origin of moduli space |wi| = 0, and that moving the branes away to
non-zero |wi| is a soft breaking of the superconformal symmetry: the heavy
hypermultiplets of mass |wi|m 2
s act as regulators for the low energy eld
theory, and the eld theory is nite by itself. ordinarily, low-energy eld
theory computations have logarithmic divergences which are cuto by the
softness of string theory at the string scale. if we are able to ignore string
oscillators, it had better be that the eld theory yields nite answers by itself.
the expression eqn.(6) is valid when the two transverse dimensions, x8,9
to the d7/o7 planes are non-compact. for realistic models we are interested
in compactifying the two transverse dimensions with a large size r in order to
reproduce the usual 1/r2 law for gravity at long distances, so let us consider
what happens with this model when the two transverse dimensions to the 7
branes are compactied on a large torus with equal radii r. first note there
is no obstruction to compactication since the total rr charge and tensions
of the 7 branes cancel. for simplicity, we put the d3 brane at the origin, the
o7 at w = wo and the d7s at w = wdi. we can enforce periodic boundary
conditions by including (same sign) image charges for the o7 (d7i)s located
at (m + in)r + wo(di) with m, n integers. it is then important to check that
the eect of these image charges is a small perturbation on top of what we
have seen in the non-compact limit. this must be the case as long as the
o7/d7s are suciently far from the edges of the torus, i.e. as long as

7

our brane

source brane

 2

 1

1-loop diagram for massive stretched open

string state m = rm

2
str

closed string tree exchange well approx. by sugra when r>>l str

figure 3: the general picture describing the duality between 1-loop open
string and tree-level closed string diagrams. the worldsheet coordinates for
the string are 1 and 2. if 1 is taken to be the worldsheet time coordinate
then this diagram represents the exchange of a closed string state between
our brane and a source brane in the bulk. if the separation r of the branes
is large rs  1, then this amplitude is well approximated by the (classical)
bulk supergravity solution in the presence of the brane source. on the other
hand, if 2 is taken to be the worldsheet time coordinate then this diagram
represents the 1-loop contribution of a massive stretched open-string to the 2-
point function of our brane-localized theory. in special cases (described in the
text) only the zero-mode stretched string state contributes, the higher string
oscillator states canceling, and the usual qft beta-function is reproduced.

8

|wo|/r,|wdi|/r  1. indeed, the exact expression for  evaluated at the
position of the d3 brane is

 (0) =  () +

i
2



4

xm,n=

xi=1

log  m + in + wdi
r ! .

r
m + in + wo

(7)

the term with m = n = 0 is just the piece we already have in the non-
compact limit, and it is trivial to taylor expand the remaining contribution
to nd the shift

(8)

 (0) = cxi


r !4
 |wdi|


(cid:18)wo

r (cid:19)4


where c is an o(1) numerical factor. we expect this correction to hold in any
realization of our logarithmic running scenario, since it takes into account
the correct green function on the compact space. already, for (|w|/r)  1/3
this correction is beneath the percent level and will be irrelevant in any
potentially realistic model given the accuracy to which the sm couplings
have been measured.

it is also instructive to consider what happens when only one of the
transverse dimensions is compactied on a circle of radius r. at distances
|w|  r, there is eectively only one transverse dimension, and  varies
linearly with |w| rather than logarithmically. this is simply reected in
the eld theory: the 3-7 strings can wind n times around the compact
dimension, giving a tower of (bps) winding states with masses n/r which
are fundamental hypermultiplets under the su(2) gauge group. including
the eect of this entire tower of states changes logarithmic to power-law
running in the eld theory. of course in eld theory we must include in
the running not only these states, but all states lighter than the uv cuto
|w|m 2
s . however, as before the excited string oscillator states are non-bps
and form themselves in eective n = 4 susy multiplets. in the cases where
the string excitations make no contribution to coupling renormalization, we
can do a eld theory calculation, keeping all the eld theory states lighter
than the eld theory uv cuto, despite the fact that this cuto is far above
the string scale.

this example illustrates that it is indeed possible that eld theory run-
ning into the uv is exactly reproduced by logarithmic variation of bulk
elds in the ir. however, there are two important issues to be addressed in
moving towards more realistic theories:

 how crucial is n = 2 susy? are there n = 1 models with the same

property?

 it is not enough to reproduce the correct running for the couplings;
what is the rationale for the gauge couplings to appear to unify at mpl?

9

this latter question is quite serious and we will address it rst.

it is
easy to see that the usual argument for unication in string theory must be
lost in the picture we are discussing. the standard reason for unication
is that there is a single eld, the dilaton, whose vacuum expectation value
sets the gauge couplings for all gauge group factors, enforcing equal gauge
couplings at the string scale. in the present case with a low string scale, if
the gauge couplings of the sm gauge groups living on our wall are set by
a single bulk eld , then no matter what other sources  has, the gauge
couplings are still guaranteed to unify at the string scale, which is now 
tev! moreover, we cant have our branes, on which the sm gauge group is
realized, signicantly separated from each other in the bulk since this would
lead to e.g., very massive (3, 2) states under su(3) su(2). thus we cannot
realize dierent values of the low-energy sm gauge couplings from evaluating
a single bulk eld at dierent points in the bulk. an obvious way around this
is if the dierent gauge couplings i are given by the vacuum expectation
values of dierent bulk elds i. but then why should we have unication?
clearly a new rationale is needed.

4 unication from symmetries in the bulk

we now give an example of n = 2 theories where the gauge couplings unify
and the rationale for unication is a geometric symmetry of the brane congu-
ration in the far ir. these are based on the hanany-witten [13] construction
of n = 2 theories which we briey review here. in the simplest set up there
are two ns5 branes, lling out 12345 and localized at x7,8,9 = 0, with one
located at x6 = 0 and the other at x6 = l. suspended between them are nc
d4 branes located at x4,5,7,8,9 = 0 lling out 123 and spanning x6 = 0  l.
in the absence of the ns5 branes, the gauge theory living on the d4 branes
is a (4+1)-d gauge theory with 16 supercharges. the boundary conditions
of the d4 branes ending on the ns5 branes reduces the susy down to 8
supercharges, and at long distances compared to l the theory is a (3+1)-d
gauge theory with 8 supercharges, which is an n = 2 u(nc) gauge theory.
the (3+1)-d gauge coupling is given by reduction from (4+1) to (3+1)-d

1
(3+1) = l1

(4+1) = lmss

1.

(9)

moving the positions of the d4s corresponds to moving along the coulomb
branch (adjoint higgsing) of the u(nc) gauge theory. further suspending
semi-innite nf d4 branes o the ns5 branes, located at x4 + ix5 = vi, i =
1, .., nf adds nf hypermultiplets of mass m 2
s |vi|, coming from the 4-4 strings
stretching between the semi-innite and nite length d4 branes.
the d4 branes ending on the ns5 branes are under tension and therefore
bend the ns5 brane in the x6 direction. the end-points of the d4 branes are

10

three dimensional, and so are of co-dimension 2 inside the ns5s. therefore
we expect that this bending will be logarithmic. it is well known [14] that
this bending encodes the  function of the n = 2 gauge theory. to see this
physically, imagine rst attaching nc semi-innite d4 branes on either side
of the ns5 branes x4,5 = 0 (similar to the picture of fig. 4). clearly, the force
on each of the ns5 branes cancel from the left and the right, and so there is
no bending of the ns5 branes: let us denote the distance between the ns5
branes as l0. reecting the non-bending ns5s, we have an n = 2 u(nc)
gauge theory with 2nc hypermultiplets, which is conformal. now consider
moving some of the semi-innite d4s away from the origin; for simplicity
move all nc of the ones on the left and nc  nf of the ones on the right a
distance r away. the resulting gauge theory near x4,5 = 0 is n = 2 u(nc)
with nf hypermultiplets, which has one-loop beta function b0 = (2nc  nf ).
now that the forces on the ns5s no longer cancel locally, they will bend.
however, at distances  r, the net bending will cancel and they will still
asymptote to being parallel and a distance l0 apart. we can then sensibly
ask for the distance l between the ns5 branes, at x4,5 = 0, as a function of
the asymptotic distance l0 and r; the answer is

l = l0 

(2nc  nf )s

2

log (r/ls) .

(10)

it is easy to understand the sign and dependence on nc, nf in the above: the
d4s pull on the ns5s, so they are closer to each other at x4,5 = 0; the d4s
between the ns5s pull each of them inward by an amount proportional to
nc while the d4s on the outside pull outward by nf , so that the net pull is
proportional to (2nc  nf ).
of the gauge theory at x4,5 = 0 varies with r as

using the relation eqn.(9), we nd that the value of the gauge coupling

(3+1) = 1
1

s 

(2nc  nf )

2

log (r/ls) .

(11)

this is precisely the running expected only keeping eld theory states.
in qft language, at energies far above rm 2
s the theory is conformal and the
coupling doesnt run, its value being given by s. beneath the mass of the
(2nc  nf ) hypermultiplets, the theory runs exactly according to eqn.(11).
once again, the (2nc  nf ) d4 branes that have been moved away act as
regulators of the theory left behind. from the long-distance, gravity point
of view they serve as ir regulators, canceling the variation of bulk elds so
they asymptote to well-dened values in the deep ir. from the gauge theory
point of view, the low-energy theory has been embedded inside a softly broken
superconformal theory; the massive hypermultiplets coming from the distant
d4s regulate the low-energy theory, and the superconformality of the full
theory ensure a well-dened value of the gauge coupling in the deep uv.

11

l
0

l
0

l
0

45

789

6

su(3)

su(3)

su(3)

.

.

.

.   .   .

ns5

1

ns5

2

ns5

3

ns5

1

figure 4: a toy n = 2 theory with unication far above the string scale
based on the hanany-witten set-up. the thick lines are ns5 branes and the
thin ones are d4 branes. the 6 direction is compactied on a circle, which
we indicate by periodically repeating the conguration. the gauge group is
su(3)3 with hypermultiplets transforming as (3, 3, 1) + (1, 3, 3) + (3, 1, 3).
the ns5s are equally spaced so the three gauge couplings are identical. the
forces on the ns5s due to the d4s cancel locally so there is no bending of
the ns5s.

we can now present our toy example of unication. we will compactify
the x6 direction on a circle , and place 3 ns5s equally spaced on the circle as
in fig. 4. in the supersymmetric limit, there are no forces between the ns5s
and we could place them with any relative spacing we please, but for the
moment let us place them in the most symmetrical arrangement. between
each of the ns5s suspend 3 d4 branes. the theory is then n = 2 su(3)3
with hypermultiplets in the (3, 3, 1) + (1, 3, 3) + (3, 1, 3) representation. this
particle content is an n = 2 version of trinication. in the limit where all
the d4s sit at x4,5 = 0, all the forces on the ns5 cancel and they do not
bend. again, reecting this, the n = 2 theory is conformal. let us now
take one of the d4s between ns52,3 and two between ns53,1 a distance r
away as in fig. 5. the resulting gauge theory at the origin has gauge group
su(3)su(2)u(1), with hypermultiplets in the (3, 2, 0)+(3, 1,)+(1, 2,)
representation. this is qualitatively similar to a one generation mssm, ex-
cept the hypercharges are wrong and the theory is n=2. nevertheless, we
can ask about gauge coupling unication in this toy world. the forces on the
ns5s no longer cancel locally so they will bend locally as in fig. 5. how-

for simplicity, we will not compactify any of the other spatial dimensions. even
though we do not recover 4d gravity at long distances, doing this allows us to most clearly
illustrate the picture for gauge coupling unication far above the string scale.

12

l
0

l
0

l
0

su(3)

su(2)

.

.

.

l
3

l
2

u(1)

l
1

.   .   .

r

ns5

1

ns5

2

ns5

3

ns5

1

figure 5: moving some of the d4s a distance r away leaves an su(3) 
su(2) u(1) gauge group living on the remaining branes. the forces on the
ns5s no longer cancel locally and they bend. we see that l3 < l2 < l1, so
g3 > g2 > g1.

ever, at distances much larger than r, the splitting between the d4s can
not be resolved and the ns5s atten out and continue to be equally spaced.
we know that the bending precisely reproduces the eld theory running in
these models. the only question is what the deep uv value is for the gauge
coupling. because we have arranged for the ns5s to be equally spaced in
the deep ir, in the eld theory this corresponds to the boundary condition
that the couplings unify at the large mass scale rm 2
s . the rationale for uni-
cation at a scale far above the string scale is a geometrical z3 symmetry of
the brane conguration at large distances. while the usual picture for uni-
cation invokes enhanced symmetries at short distances, here the rationale for
unication is an enhanced geometrical symmetry of the brane construction
viewed from large distances in the bulk (fig. 6).

notice that this model realizes the general possibility we mentioned earlier
for evading the equality of gauge couplings at the string scale. at distances
larger than the radius of the s1, we only see that we have the two large
dimensions x4,5. the three gauge couplings of su(3)  su(2)  u(1) are
then indeed given by the values of three bulk elds corresponding to the
inter-ns5 brane distances, and this interpretation gives us the geometric
rationale for unication.

but why should the ns5 branes be placed symmetrically around the cir-
cle? we can not fully answer this question until we address susy breaking;
nevertheless, we can at least state some reasonable dynamical assumptions
that generate the desired outcome. if susy is broken only on some branes,
then the bulk will still be highly supersymmetric, and we can expect the

13

l
0

l
0

l
0

.

.

.

r

.   .   .

ns5

1

ns5

2

ns5

3

ns5

1

figure 6: the conguration of fig. 5 viewed from afar. the ns5s atten
out and the z3 geometrical symmetry of the original brane conguration is
regained at large distances in the bulk. this provides a rationale for the
apparent unication of the gauge couplings at a scale much higher than the
string scale

brane bending to remain unchanged. on the other hand, there will now be
forces between the ns5 branes, and the z3 symmetric conguration will at
least be an extremum of the energy; we need this extremum to be a local
minimum.

it is amusing to think about experimental signatures of this toy model.
since the gauge theory becomes eectively (4+1)-d at energies above l1,there
will be kk excitations at this scale. but then why do we continue to get log
(as opposed to power law) running? the reason is that the 16 supercharges
of the theory on the d4s was broken to 8 supercharges by the boundary
conditions imposed by their ending on the ns5s. in (3+1)-d language, we
started with an n = 4 particle content which in n = 2 language consists of
a vector multiplet v and a hypermultiplet  both in the adjoint representa-
tion. the boundary conditions are free for the v and xed for  at x6 = 0, l.
this projects out the zero mode of  but leaves that of v , so the massless
spectrum is n = 2. but the massive modes group themselves into n = 4
multiplets, and therefore make no contribution to the  function. there are
three dierent kk towers for each of the su(3), su(2) and u(1) factors,
corresponding to the three strips between the ns5s. the kk masses then
come in the ratio

m3 : m2 : m1 = 3 : 2 : 1,

(12)

so this would be a smoking-gun signature of this framework for unication
in this world.

14

5 n = 1 models

we now turn to the issue of whether n = 1 models can be constructed
where the eld-theory running is reproduced by supergravity. we do not
have a general set of rules for when this is guaranteed to happen, but will
present a class of models which work. first of all, a good place to look are
brane constructions of n = 1 theories which are superconformal at the origin
of moduli space. the superconformality guarantees that the eld theory
calculation of the running can be nite all by itself without requiring string
theory to cut it o, so that there is at least a hope that string oscillators
can be ignored in the tree-level close string/1-loop open string comparison.
perhaps the simplest possibility is to consider orbifolds of n = 2 models.
indeed, orbifolds of the hanany-witten construction were considered in [15].
dening u = x4 + ix5 and v = x8 + ix9; the zm orbifold considered in [15]
is u  u, v  1v with m = 1. suspending nm d4s between the
ns5s, the action of the orbifold group zm on the chan-paton indices of the
u(nm) gauge group is

a  1a,  = diag(cid:16)1n , 1n ,   , m 11n(cid:17) .

(13)

the resulting theory is an n = 1 su(n)m theory with chiral content given
by (n, n , 1,   , 1) + cyclic permutations.
by lifting this conguration into m theory, ref.[15] demonstrates explic-
itly that the bending of the ns5 branes reproduces the beta function of the
n = 1 theory. we wish to observe that this can be seen on general grounds
and suggests a perhaps wide class of n = 1 models with this feature. we
nd it convenient again to add regulator branes to the system to ensure zero
asymptotic bending in the ir and niteness in the uv. in the present case,
we add nm semi-innite d4s on each of the ns5 branes and then orbifold.
the resulting n = 1 theory is an orbifold of the nite n = 2 su(nm)
theory with 2nm hypermultiplets, and is easily seen to be a superconformal
n = 1 theory. now, we move some of the regulator branes away from u = 0,
which takes them away from the orbifold xed point (of course we have to
move d4s and their images together, so they move in groups of m). we can
now ask what prole for the bulk elds is set up by these regulator branes.
the crucial point is that since they are away from the xed point, they cant
act as sources for twisted sector elds, and therefore they set up exactly the
same prole as the same conguration before the orbifold! therefore, the
supergravity part of the calculation is unmodied. on the other hand, as
is now well known [18], all correlation functions of an orbifolded eld theory
(the daughter theory) agree with the theory before orbifolding (the par-
ent theory), at the level of planar diagrams, up to a re-scaling by a factor
of ||l where l is the number of loops, and || = m is the order of the

15

discrete orbifold group. this result, together with the fact that the super-
gravity calculation is unaltered by the orbifold, allows the resulting n = 1
theory to inherit the equality between supergravity bending and eld-theory
running from the n = 2 theory, as we now show. (we also note that in the
case where not all branes can be moved away from the xed point, the gauge
theory running is still reproduced, at least in the n = 2 case [19], by the
bulk supergravity equations.)

first of all, the gauge couplings g2

p and g2

d of the parent and daughter

theories are related as

m
g2
d

=

1
g2
p

.

(14)

note that this implies that the thooft couplings of the theories are identical.
this can most easily be seen by moving the n branes (together with all the
m images) away from the origin. since all branes are away from the xed
point, there is no local way to distinguish the daughter theory from the parent
theory with the same brane conguration. from the daughter theory point
of view, the su(n)m group has been higgsed to a single su(n), with gauge
coupling 1/g2
d. the same gauge conguration in the parent theory
higgses su(nm) to su(n)m with gauge coupling 1/g2
p. but the
gauge coupling of each factor of this su(n)m must be exactly the same as
that of the su(n) of the daughter theory, where the m factors of the group
in the parent theory are interpreted as mirrors of the daughter gauge group.
therefore, we must have 1/g2

2 and eqn.(14) follows.

1 = m/g2

2 = 1/g2

1 = 1/g2

now, we know that the gauge coupling of the parent theory runs from

the ir according to the beta function bp

1
g2
p

=

1
p(0) 
g2

bp
82 log(r/ls).

(15)

since the bending is unchanged by the orbifold, we also know for the daughter
theory that

(16)

m
g2
d

=

m
d(0) 
g2

bp
82 log(r/ls).

in order for this to reproduce the eld theory running for the daughter
theory it must be that the beta function coecient of the daughter theory
bd satises bp = mbd. but this is an immediate consequence of the orbifold
inheritance results quoted above. in particular, the one-loop beta function
diagrams are all planar, so the beta function of each each factor of the daugh-
ter theory bd is related to the parent theory bp as

bd =

bp
m

(17)

this is trivial to see in the present case: bp = 2nm and bd = 2n.

16

this suggests that the correct running can be obtained for a wide class
of n = 1 theories. one starts with n = 2 models where supergravity is
guaranteed to reproduce the eld theory running, and orbifolds the theory
down to n = 1. if the regulator branes are moved away from the orbifold
xed point, the n = 1 theory can inherit the equality between supergravity
and eld theory running from the n = 2 theory.

another possibility is that the supergravity does not reproduce the n = 1
running, but that the mismatch comes in complete su(5) multiplets, that
is, the mismatch is identical for 1
1,2,3. this would preserve gauge coupling
unication.
it is easy to construct a toy example that works in this way.
going back to the hanany-witten set up, we can add nf parallel d6 branes
between the ns5 branes. when the d6s ll out 123789, n = 2 susy is still
preserved and the 4-6 strings give nf hypermultiplets. the bending of the
ns5 branes still reproduces the -function of the eld theory, the contribution
of the nf hypermultiplets in the supergravity description being understood
as follows: the d6 branes are the largest objects in the system and set up
a gravity and dilaton prole in the 456 space transverse to them, where the
d6s sit at the origin.
in this transverse space, the ns5s ll out a plane
45, and extremizing the ns5 brane action in the gravity/dilaton prole of
the d6 brane causes logarithmic bending in the 6 direction, with the correct
coecient to equal the nf contribution of nf hypermultiplets.
now consider rotating the d6s so they are parallel to the ns5 branes, i.e.
they ll out 123457. it is simple to check the conditions on the supercharges
imposed by this brane conguration, and discover that only n = 1 susy is
left unbroken. the particle content is still the same as in the n = 2 theory,
but the superpotential interaction between the adjoint in the vector multiplet
and the hypermultiplets hh is switched o, so the interactions only respect
n = 1. in this conguration, however, the d6 branes do not bend the ns5s
in the 6 direction; they are parallel to them! the nc d4s ending on the
ns5s still bend them inward by 2nc, so the bending is proportional to 2nc
while the  function is still (2nc  nf ). therefore the supergravity does not
reproduce the eld theory running in this case. however consider inserting
nf of these d6s between each pair of ns5s in our trinication model from
the previous section. now each of the su(3), su(2) and u(1) factors have
nf extra hypermultiplets added, whose contribution is not reected in the
ns5 bending. but the extra contribution to the eld theory beta function is
nf for all gauge group factors, so unication is preserved.

note that in the n = 2 conguration the d6s can not be placed between the ns5s
on a compact s 1 of a xed radius, exactly because of the bending they induce. in our
n = 1 set-up, however, they cause no bending and can be included.

17

6 physical couplings and threshold corrections

so far we have focused on the analogue of 1-loop running of the gauge
coupling coming from the ir. what about higher-order corrections?

what we have actually been computing is the logarithmically enhanced
contribution to the holomorphic coupling of the low energy susy gauge
theory. of course, the precise way in which the brane thickness regulates
the value of the gauge coupling on our brane gives a threshold correction in
matching to the low-energy theory. however, all of these corrections are due
to local physics close to the brane, where the string coupling is weak, and are
not logarithmically enhanced by the size of the bulk. we do not expect them
to be more important than e.g. the (unknown but small) mssm threshold
corrections. therefore, our 1-loop expression is an excellent approximation to
the holomorphic gauge couplings of the low-energy theory. of course, these
are not the physical gauge couplings; the physical couplings are determined
by re-scaling all the elds of the low-energy theory to go back to canonical
normalization [26], and are given by the shifman-vainshtein relation

1
g2
ph

+

2t2(a)

82

log (gph) =

1
g2

h xi

2t2(i)
82 log (zi) ,

(18)

where zi is the wavefunction renormalization of the ith matter multiplet
in the low-energy theory. in eld theory, all the higher loop running of the
coupling is contained in the log(gph) and log(zi) terms in the above, giving
the nsvz -function.
in our case, we expect that the zi are themselves
determined by the vacuum expectation value of a logarithmically varying
bulk eld so that

zi = 1 

ci
82 log (r/ls) ,

(19)

with ci some constants coming from the supergravity solution. we do not
know whether any miracles can guarantee that this expression reproduces the
gauge theory result, although since z is not holomorphic this seems doubt-
ful. nevertheless, because only log(zi) enters in the physical coupling, these
corrections should be of the same order of magnitude as two-loop running in
the eld theory, and are also small.

7 discussion

we have seen that the correct eld-theoretic running of the couplings may
naturally be reproduced by the logarithmic variation of light elds in the deep
ir. however, a new rationale for unication near the 4-d gravitational scale is
required. we presented a toy model where unication is linked to a geometric
symmetry of the brane conguration in the deep ir. this correspondence
between uv eects in the gauge theory and ir eects in the gravitational

18

theory gives a fascinating re-interpretation of what we learn from rges. we
normally think that we are limited to doing experiments at low energies, but
the renormalization group allows us to extrapolate the couplings to much
shorter distances, providing an indirect window to this remote realm. our
toy examples illustrate that sometimes this interpretation can be misleading.
the fundamental short distance need not be remote at all, it could even
be as low as a few tev. on the other hand, we are then conned to a
3-brane, and can not probe large distances in the transverse space away
from our brane.
in our examples, the rges, reinterpreted as the result
of logarithmic variation of bulk elds, provide an indirect window into this
new remote realm a millimeter removed in the extra dimensions.
in the
old picture, the world look asymmetrical at large distances but symmetries
emerge at short distances. in the new picture, the world close to our brane
looks asymmetrical but symmetries emerge when we look at large distances
in the bulk.

we comment in passing that the ideas presented here can also be used
to provide controllable power-law unication with only one transverse di-
mension. the uv sensitivity of usual power-law unication becomes ir
sensitivity in this picture, but since the ir physics is well-determined in any
given model this can be controlled.

finally, in asymptotically free gauge theories, we are used to generating
energy scales much smaller than the uv cuto by dimensional transmuta-
tion. the gauge coupling becomes strong at a scale  exponentially smaller
than the cuto and interesting physics happens.
in the standard theories
with large string scale, we expect that some susy gauge theory goes strong
and triggers susy breaking far beneath the string scale, which stabilizes an
exponentially large hierarchy between the electroweak and string scale. a
similar phenomenon can in principle occur with low string scale and large
extra dimensions. suppose that there is a non-asymptotically free gauge
group living on some collection of branes. then, the bulk eld setting the
gauge coupling becomes strong exponentially far away in the bulk. this
dimensional transmutation in the bulk naturally generates an ir scale ex-
ponentially larger than the string scale.
it is tempting to speculate that
this scale could determine an exponentially large eective compactication
radius. more generally, logarithmic variation of elds in the bulk could force
the theory into strong coupling exponentially far away in the extra dimen-
sions, and interesting physics can happen. if an exponentially large radius
can be generated in this way, we would have a true solution to the hierarchy
problem, just as compelling as the standard picture in generating the various
disparate scales observed in nature.

acknowledgments: jmr wishes to thank the stanford university the-
ory group for their generous hospitality during the main stages of this work,

19

and both sd and jmr thank the aspen center for physics for providing a
rewarding environment during the completion of this work. we would like to
thank ignatios antoniadis, eva silverstein, and especially martin schmaltz,
matt strassler and angel uranga for useful discussions. nah is partially
supported by the doe under grant de-ac03-76sf00098 and the nsf un-
der grant phy-95-14797, and jmr is supported in part by the alfred p.
sloan foundation.

references

[1] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. lett. b429,

(1998) 263.

[2] i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys.

lett. b436, (1998) 257.

[3] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, hep-ph/9807344.

[4] r. sundrum, hep-ph/980734;

n. arkani-hamed,
hep-th/9809124.

s. dimopoulos

and

j. march-russell,

[5] n. arkani-hamed and s. dimopoulos, hep-ph/9811353.

[6] n. arkani-hamed, et al, hep-ph/9811448;

other ideas were suggested by k. dienes, e. dudas, t. gherghetta,
hep-ph/9811428.

[7] l. randall and r. sundrum, hep-th/9810155.

[8] n. arkani-hamed and m. schmaltz, hep-ph/9903417.

[9] n. kaloper, hep-th/9811141;

g. dvali and s.h-h tye, hep-ph/9812483;
n. arkani-hamed et al, hep-ph/9903224, hep-ph/9903239.

[10] k. dienes, e. dudas and t. gherghetta, phys. lett. b436, (1998)

55;nucl. phys. b537 (1999) 47;
d. ghilencea and g. ross, hep-ph/9809217.

[11] h. georgi and s. glashow, phys. rev. lett. 32 (1974) 438;

h. georgi, h. quinn and s. weinberg, phys. rev. lett. 33 (1974) 451;
s. dimopoulos and h. georgi, nucl. phys. b193 (1981) 150;
s. dimopoulos, s. raby and f. wilczek, phys. rev. d24 (1981) 1681.

20

[12] see for example:

j. polchinski, tasi lectures on d-branes, hep-th/9611050;
c. bachas, lectures on d-branes, hep-th/9806199;
a. giveon and d. kutasov, brane dynamics and gauge theory,
hep-th/9802067.

[13] a. hanany and e. witten, nucl. phys. b492 (1997) 152;

hep-th/9611230.

[14] e. witten, nucl. phys. b500 (1997) 3; nucl. phys. b507 (1997) 658.

[15] j. lykken, e. poppitz and s. trivedi, phys. lett. b416 (1998) 286,

hep-th/9708134.

[16] m. douglas and m. li, hep-th/9604041;

c. bachas and c. fabre, nucl. phys. b476 (1996) 418.

[17] a. hanany, m. strassler and a. uranga, hep-th/9803086.

[18] s. kachru and e. silverstein, phys. rev. lett. 80 (1998) 4855,

hep-th/9802183;
m. bershadsky,
b523 (1998) 59, hep-th/9803076;
m. bershadsky and a. johansen, nucl. phys. b536 (1998) 141,
hep-th/9803249.

and c. vafa, nucl. phys.

z. kakushadze

[19] a. karch, d. lust and d. smith, hep-th/9803232.

[20] c. bachas, hep-ph/9807415.

[21] i. antoniadis and c. bachas, hep-th/9812093.

[22] i. antoniadis, c. bachas and e. dudas, hep-th/9906039;

l. e. ibanez, hep-ph/9905577;
e. halyo, hep-ph/9905577.

[23] l. randall and r. sundrum, hep-ph/9905221, hep-th/9906064;

m. goberashvili, hep-ph/9812296.

[24] e. bergshoe, et al., nucl. phys. b470 (1996) 113;

c. vafa, nucl. phys. b469 (1996) 403;
a. sen, nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 562.

[25] i. antoniadis, phys. lett. b246 (1990) 377;

i. antoniadis and k. benakli, phys. lett. b326 (1994) 69;
i. antoniadis, k. benakli and m. quiros, phys. lett. b331 (1994) 313.

[26] m.a. shifman and a.i. vainshtein, nucl. phys. b359 (1991) 571; n.

arkani-hamed and h. murayama, hep-th/9707133.

21

