iassns-hep-99/74

hep-th/9908142

9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
0
3

 

 
 

3
v
2
4
1
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

string theory and noncommutative geometry

nathan seiberg and edward witten

school of natural sciences

institute for advanced study

olden lane, princeton, nj 08540

we extend earlier ideas about the appearance of noncommutative geometry in string theory

with a nonzero b-eld. we identify a limit in which the entire string dynamics is described

by a minimally coupled (supersymmetric) gauge theory on a noncommutative space, and

discuss the corrections away from this limit. our analysis leads us to an equivalence

between ordinary gauge elds and noncommutative gauge elds, which is realized by a

change of variables that can be described explicitly. this change of variables is checked by

comparing the ordinary dirac-born-infeld theory with its noncommutative counterpart.

we obtain a new perspective on noncommutative gauge theory on a torus, its t -duality,

and morita equivalence. we also discuss the d0/d4 system, the relation to m -theory in

dlcq, and a possible noncommutative version of the six-dimensional (2, 0) theory.

8/99

1. introduction

the idea that the spacetime coordinates do not commute is quite old [1]. it has been

studied by many authors both from a mathematical and a physical perspective. the theory

of operator algebras has been suggested as a framework for physics in noncommutative

spacetime  see [2] for an exposition of the philosophy  and yang-mills theory on a

noncommutative torus has been proposed as an example [3]. though this example at rst

sight appears to be neither covariant nor causal, it has proved to arise in string theory in a

denite limit [4], with the noncovariance arising from the expectation value of a background

eld. this analysis involved toroidal compactication, in the limit of small volume, with

xed and generic values of the worldsheet theta angles. this limit is fairly natural in the

context of the matrix model of m -theory [5,6], and the original discussion was made in

this context. indeed, early work relating membranes to large matrices [7], has motivated

in [8,9] constructions somewhat similar to [3]. for other thoughts about applications of

noncommutative geometry in physics, see e.g. [10]. noncommutative geometry has also

been used as a framework for open string eld theory [11].

part of the beauty of the analysis in [4] was that t -duality acts within the non-

commutative yang-mills framework, rather than, as one might expect, mixing the modes

of noncommutative yang-mills theory with string winding states and other stringy ex-

citations. this makes the framework of noncommutative yang-mills theory seem very

powerful.

subsequent work has gone in several directions. additional arguments have been

presented extracting noncommutative yang-mills theory more directly from open strings

without recourse to matrix theory [12-16]. the role of morita equivalence in establishing

t -duality has been understood more fully [17,18]. the modules and their t -dualities have

been reconsidered in a more elementary language [19-21], and the relation to the dirac-

born-infeld lagrangian has been explored [20,21]. the bps spectrum has been more

fully understood [19,20,22]. various related aspects of noncommutative gauge theories

have been discussed in [23-32]. finally, the authors of [33] suggested interesting relations

between noncommutative gauge theory and the little string theory [34].

large instantons and the  expansion

our work has been particularly inuenced by certain further developments, including
the analysis of instantons on a noncommutative r4 [35]. it was shown that instantons on
a noncommutative r4 can be described by adding a constant (a fayet-iliopoulos term)

1

to the adhm equations. this constant had been argued, following [36], to arise in the
description of instantons on d-branes upon turning on a constant b-eld [37], 1 so putting

the two facts together it was proposed that instantons on branes with a b-eld should be

described by noncommutative yang-mills theory [35,38].

another very cogent argument for this is as follows. consider n parallel threebranes of

type iib. they can support supersymmetric congurations in the form of u (n ) instantons.

if the instantons are large, they can be described by the classical self-dual yang-mills

equations.
if the instantons are small, the classical description of the instantons is no
longer good. however, it can be shown that, at b = 0, the instanton moduli space m in
string theory coincides precisely with the classical instanton moduli space. the argument
for this is presented in section 2.3. in particular, m has the small instanton singularities
that are familiar from classical yang-mills theory. the signicance of these singularities

in string theory is well known: they arise because an instanton can shrink to a point and
escape as a 1-brane [39,40]. now if one turns on a b-eld, the argument that the stringy
instanton moduli space coincides with the classical instanton moduli space fails, as we will

also see in section 2.3. indeed, the instanton moduli space must be corrected for nonzero b.

the reason is that, at nonzero b (unless b is anti-self-dual) a conguration of a threebrane
and a separated 1-brane is not bps,2 so an instanton on the threebrane cannot shrink
to a point and escape. the instanton moduli space must therefore be modied, for non-

zero b, to eliminate the small instanton singularity. adding a constant to the adhm

equations resolves the small instanton singularity [41], and since going to noncommutative
r4 does add this constant [35], this strongly encourages us to believe that instantons with

the b-eld should be described as instantons on a noncommutative space.

this line of thought leads to an apparent paradox, however.

instantons come in

all sizes, and however else they can be described, big instantons can surely be described
by conventional yang-mills theory, with the familiar stringy  corrections that are of
higher dimension, but possess the standard yang-mills gauge invariance. the proposal in

[35] implies, however, that the large instantons would be described by classical yang-mills

equations with corrections coming from the noncommutativity of spacetime. for these two

1 one must recall that in the presence of a d-brane, a constant b-eld cannot be gauged away

and can in fact be reinterpreted as a magnetic eld on the brane.

2 this is shown in a footnote in section 4.2; the congurations in question are further studied

in section 5.

2

viewpoints to agree means that noncommutative yang-mills theory must be equivalent to

ordinary yang-mills theory perturbed by higher dimension, gauge-invariant operators. to

put it dierently, it must be possible (at least to all orders in a systematic asymptotic

expansion) to map noncommutative yang-mills elds to ordinary yang-mills elds, by

a transformation that maps one kind of gauge invariance to the other and adds higher

dimension terms to the equations of motion. this at rst sight seems implausible, but we

will see in section 3 that it is true.

applying noncommutative yang-mills theory to instantons on r4 leads to another

puzzle. the original application of noncommutative yang-mills to string theory [4] involved
toroidal compactication in a small volume limit. the physics of noncompact r4 is the

opposite of a small volume limit! the small volume limit is also puzzling even in the case

of a torus; if the volume of the torus the strings propagate on is taken to zero, how can

we end up with a noncommutative torus of nite size, as has been proposed? therefore, a

reappraisal of the range of usefulness of noncommutative yang-mills theory seems called

for. for this, it is desireable to have new ways of understanding the description of d-

brane phenomena in terms of physics on noncommuting spacetime. a suggestion in this

direction is given by recent analyses arguing for noncommutativity of string coordinates

in the presence of a b-eld, in a hamiltonian treatment [14] and also in a worldsheet

treatment that makes the computations particularly simple [15]. in the latter paper, it

was suggested that rather classical features of the propagation of strings in a constant

magnetic eld [42,43] can be reinterpreted in terms of noncommutativity of spacetime.

in the present paper, we will build upon these suggestions and reexamine the quan-

tization of open strings ending on d-branes in the presence of a b-eld. we will show

that noncommutative yang-mills theory is valid for some purposes in the presence of any

nonzero constant b-eld, and that there is a systematic and ecient description of the

physics in terms of noncommutative yang-mills theory when b is large. the limit of a

torus of small volume with xed theta angle (that is, xed periods of b) [4,12] is an exam-
ple with large b, but it is also possible to have large b on rn and thereby make contact
with the application of noncommutative yang-mills to instantons on r4. an important

element in our analysis is a distinction between two dierent metrics in the problem. dis-

tances measured with respect to one metric are scaled to zero as in [4,12]. however, the

noncommutative theory is on a space with a dierent metric with respect to which all
distances are nonzero. this guarantees that both on rn and on tn we end up with a

theory with nite metric.

3

organization of the paper

this paper is organized as follows. in section 2, we reexamine the behavior of open

strings in the presence of a constant b-eld. we show that, if one introduces the right

spacetime noncommutative.

variables, the b dependence of the eective action is completely described by making
in this description, however, there is still an  expansion
with all of its usual complexity. we further show that by taking b large or equivalently by
taking   0 holding the eective open string parameters xed, one can get an eective
description of the physics in terms of noncommutative yang-mills theory. this analysis

makes it clear that two dierent descriptions, one by ordinary yang-mills elds and one by

noncommutative yang-mills elds, dier by the choice of regularization for the world-sheet

theory. this means that (as we argued in another way above) there must be a change of

variables from ordinary to noncommutative yang-mills elds. once one is convinced that

it exists, it is not too hard to nd this transformation explicitly: it is presented in section

3. in section 4, we make a detailed exploration of the two descriptions by ordinary and

noncommutative yang-mills elds, in the case of almost constant elds where one can use

the born-infeld action for the ordinary yang-mills elds.

in section 5, we explore the

behavior of instantons at nonzero b by quantization of the d0-d4 system. other aspects

of instantons are studied in sections 2.3 and 4.2. in section 6, we consider the behavior of

noncommutative yang-mills theory on a torus and analyze the action of t -duality, showing

how the standard action of t -duality on the underlying closed string parameters induces

the action of t -duality on the noncommutative yang-mills theory that has been described

in the literature [17-21]. we also show that many mathematical statements about modules

over a noncommutative torus and their morita equivalences  used in analyzing t -duality

mathematically  can be systematically derived by quantization of open strings. in the

remainder of the paper, we reexamine the relation of noncommutative yang-mills theory

to dlcq quantization of m -theory, and we explore the possible noncommutative version

of the (2, 0) theory in six dimensions.

conventions

we conclude this introduction with a statement of our main conventions about non-

commutative gauge theory.

for rn with coordinates xi whose commutators are c-numbers, we write

[xi, xj] = iij

4

(1.1)

with real . given such a lie algebra, one seeks to deform the algebra of functions on rn
to a noncommutative, associative algebra a such that f  g = f g + 1
2 iijif jg + o(2),
with the coecient of each power of  being a local dierential expression bilinear in f and

g. the essentially unique solution of this problem (modulo redenitions of f and g that

are local order by order in ) is given by the explicit formula

f (x)  g(x) = e

i

2 ij 
i



j f (x + )g(x + )(cid:12)(cid:12)==0 = f g +

i
2

ijif jg + o(2).

(1.2)

this formula denes what is often called the moyal bracket of functions; it has appeared

in the physics literature in many contexts, including applications to old and new matrix
theories [8,9,44-46]. we also consider the case of n  n matrix-valued functions f, g. in
this case, we dene the  product to be the tensor product of matrix multiplication with
the  product of functions as just dened. the extended  product is still associative.

the  product is compatible with integration in the sense that for functions f , g that
vanish rapidly enough at innity, so that one can integrate by parts in evaluating the

following integrals, one has

z tr f  g =z tr g  f.

(1.3)

here tr is the ordinary trace of the n  n matrices, andr is the ordinary integration of

functions.

for ordinary yang-mills theory, we write the gauge transformations and eld strength

as

ai = i + i[, ai]
fij = iaj  jai  i[ai, aj]
fij = i[, fij],

where a and  are n  n hermitian matrices. the wilson line is

w (a, b) = p eir a

b

a,

(1.4)

(1.5)

where in the path ordering a(b) is to the right. under the gauge transformation (1.4)

w (a, b) = i(a)w (a, b)  iw (a, b)(b).

(1.6)

for noncommutative gauge theory, one uses the same formulas for the gauge transfor-
mation law and the eld strength, except that matrix multiplication is replaced by the 

product. thus, the gauge parameterb takes values in a tensored with n  n hermitian

5

matrices, for some n , and the same is true for the components bai of the gauge eld ba.

the gauge transformations and eld strength of noncommutative yang-mills theory are

thus

bbbai = ib + ib  bai  ibai b
bfij = ibaj  jbai  ibai  baj + ibaj  bai
bb
fij = ib  bfij  ibfij b.

the theory obtained this way reduces to conventional u (n ) yang-mills theory for   0.
because of the way that the theory is constructed from associative algebras, there seems

to be no convenient way to get other gauge groups. the commutator of two innitesimal

gauge transformations with generators b1 and b2 is, rather as in ordinary yang-mills
theory, a gauge transformation generated by i(b1 b2 b2 b1). such commutators are

nontrivial even for the rank 1 case, that is n = 1, though for  = 0 the rank 1 case is

the abelian u (1) gauge theory. for rank 1, to rst order in , the above formulas for the

gauge transformations and eld strength read

(1.7)

(1.8)

bbbai = ib  klkblbai + o(2)
bfij = ibaj  jbai + klkbailbaj + o(2)
bbbfij = klkblbfij + o(2).

finally, a matter of terminology: we will consider the opposite of a noncommutative

yang-mills eld to be an ordinary yang-mills eld, rather than a commutative one.

to speak of ordinary yang-mills elds, which can have a nonabelian gauge group, as being

commutative would be a likely cause of confusion.

2. open strings in the presence of constant b-field

2.1. bosonic strings

in this section, we will study strings in at space, with metric gij, in the presence
of a constant neveu-schwarz b-eld and with dp-branes. the b-eld is equivalent to a

constant magnetic eld on the brane; the subject has a long history and the basic formulas

with which we will begin were obtained in the mid-80s [42,43].

we will denote the rank of the matrix bij as r; r is of course even. since the compo-
nents of b not along the brane can be gauged away, we can assume that r  p + 1. when
our target space has lorentzian signature, we will assume that b0i = 0, with 0 the time

6

direction. with a euclidean target space we will not impose such a restriction. our dis-
cussion applies equally well if space is r10 or if some directions are toroidally compactied
with xi  xi + 2ri. (one could pick a coordinate system with gij = ij , in which case the
identication of the compactied coordinates may not be simply xi  xi + 2ri, but we
will not do that.) if our space is r10, we can pick coordinates so that bij is nonzero only
for i, j = 1, . . . , r and that gij vanishes for i = 1, . . . , r, j 6= 1, . . . , r. if some of the coordi-
nates are on a torus, we cannot pick such coordinates without aecting the identication
xi  xi + 2ri. for simplicity, we will still consider the case bij 6= 0 only for i, j = 1, . . . , r
and gij = 0 for i = 1, . . . , r, j 6= 1, . . . , r.

the worldsheet action is

1

s =

4z(cid:0)gijaxiaxj  2ibijabaxibxj(cid:1)
4z

gijaxiaxj 

bijxitxj,

i

2z

1

=

(2.1)

where  is the string worldsheet, which we take to be with euclidean signature. (with

lorentz signature, one would omit the i multiplying b.) t is a tangential derivative

along the worldsheet boundary . the equations of motion determine the boundary

conditions. for i along the dp-branes they are

gijnxj + 2ibijtxj(cid:12)(cid:12) = 0,

(2.2)

where n is a normal derivative to . (these boundary conditions are not compatible with
real x, though with a lorentzian worldsheet the analogous boundary conditions would be

real. nonetheless, the open string theory can be analyzed by determining the propagator

and computing the correlation functions with these boundary conditions. in fact, another

approach to the open string problem is to omit or not specify the boundary term with b

in the action (2.1) and simply impose the boundary conditions (2.2).)

for b = 0, the boundary conditions in (2.2) are neumann boundary conditions. when
b has rank r = p and b  , or equivalently gij  0 along the spatial directions of the
brane, the boundary conditions become dirichlet; indeed, in this limit, the second term in
(2.2) dominates, and, with b being invertible, (2.2) reduces to txj = 0. this interpolation
from neumann to dirichlet boundary conditions will be important, since we will eventually
take b   or gij  0. for b very large or g very small, each boundary of the string
worldsheet is attached to a single point in the dp-brane, as if the string is attached to

7

a zero-brane in the dp-brane. intuitively, these zero-branes are roughly the constituent

zero-branes of the dp-brane as in the matrix model of m -theory [5,6], an interpretation

that is supported by the fact that in the matrix model the construction of dp-branes

requires a nonzero b-eld.

our main focus in most of this paper will be the case that  is a disc, corresponding

to the classical approximation to open string theory. the disc can be conformally mapped

to the upper half plane; in this description, the boundary conditions (2.2) are

where  = /z,  = /z, and im z  0. the propagator with these boundary conditions
is [42,43]

(2.3)

gij(  )xj + 2bij( + )xj(cid:12)(cid:12)z=z = 0,
hxi(z)xj(z)i =  hgij log|z  z|  gij log |z  z|
z  z
z  z

ij log

2

1

1

g + 2b(cid:19)ij

+ gij log|z  z|2 +
=(cid:18)
gij =(cid:18)
gij = gij  (2)2(cid:0)bg1b(cid:1)ij,
g + 2b(cid:19)ij
ij = 2(cid:18)

= (2)2(cid:18)

g + 2b

1

a

s

1

+ diji.

(2.4)

(2.5)

g

1

g  2b(cid:19)ij

,

1

g + 2b

b

1

g  2b(cid:19)ij

,

here

where ( )s and ( )a denote the symmetric and antisymmetric part of the matrix. the
constants dij in (2.4) can depend on b but are independent of z and z; they play no
essential role and can be set to a convenient value. the rst three terms in (2.4) are man-

ifestly single-valued. the fourth term is single-valued, if the branch cut of the logarithm

is in the lower half plane.

in this paper, our focus will be almost entirely on the open string vertex operators

and interactions. open string vertex operators are of course inserted on the boundary of
. so to get the relevant propagator, we restrict (2.4) to real z and z, which we denote 
and . evaluated at boundary points, the propagator is

hxi( )xj()i = gij log(  )2 +

i
2

ij(  ),

(2.6)

where we have set dij to a convenient value. ( ) is the function that is 1 or 1 for positive
or negative  .

8

the object gij has a very simple intuitive interpretation: it is the eective metric seen
by the open strings. the short distance behavior of the propagator between interior points
on  is hxi(z)xj(z)i = gij log |z  z|. the coecient of the logarithm determines the
anomalous dimensions of closed string vertex operators, so that it appears in the mass shell

condition for closed string states. thus, we will refer to gij as the closed string metric.
gij plays exactly the analogous role for open strings, since anomalous dimensions of open
string vertex operators are determined by the coecient of log(  )2 in (2.6), and in
this coecient gij enters in exactly the way that gij would enter at  = 0. we will refer

to gij as the open string metric.

the coecient ij in the propagator also has a simple intuitive interpretation, sug-

gested in [15]. in conformal eld theory, one can compute commutators of operators from

the short distance behavior of operator products by interpreting time ordering as operator

ordering. interpreting  as time, we see that

[xi( ), xj( )] = t(cid:0)xi( )xj()  xi( )xj( +)(cid:1) = iij.

(2.7)

that is, xi are coordinates on a noncommutative space with noncommutativity parameter

.

consider the product of tachyon vertex operators eipx( ) and eiqx(). with  > ,

we get for the leading short distance singularity

eipx( )  eiqx()  (  )2gij piqj e 1

2 iij piqj ei(p+q)x() + . . . .

(2.8)

if we could ignore the term (  )2pq, then the formula for the operator product would
reduce to a  product; we would get

eipx( )eiqx()  eipx  eiqx().

(2.9)

this is no coincidence. if the dimensions of all operators were zero, the leading terms of
operator products o( )o() would be independent of    for   , and would give
an ordinary associative product of multiplication of operators. this would have to be the
 product, since that product is determined by associativity, translation invariance, and
(2.7) (in the form xi  xj  xj  xi = iij).

of course, it is completely wrong in general to ignore the anomalous dimensions;

they determine the mass shell condition in string theory, and are completely essential to
the way that string theory works. only in the limit of   0 or equivalently small

9

momenta can one ignore the anomalous dimensions. when the dimensions are nontrivial,
the leading singularities of operator products o( )o() depend on    and do not give
an associative algebra in the standard sense. for precisely this reason, in formulating open

string eld theory in the framework of noncommutative geometry [39], instead of using the
operator product expansion directly, it was necessary to dene the associative  product
by a somewhat messy procedure of gluing strings. for the same reason, most of the present
paper will be written in a limit with   0 that enables us to see the  product directly
as a product of vertex operators.

b dependence of the eective action

however, there are some important general features of the theory that do not depend

on taking a zero slope limit. we will describe these rst.

consider an operator on the boundary of the disc that is of the general form
p (x, 2x, . . .)eipx, where p is a polynomial in derivatives of x, and x are coordinates
along the dp-brane (the transverse coordinates satisfy dirichlet boundary conditions).
since the second term in the propagator (2.6) is proportional to (  ), it does not con-
tribute to contractions of derivatives of x. therefore, the expectation value of a product
of k such operators, of momenta p1, . . . , pk, satises

* kyn=1

pn(x(n), 2x(n), . . .)eipnx(n)+g,
j (nm)* kyn=1
2pn>m

pn
i ij pm

= e i

pn(x(n), 2x(n), . . .)eipnx(n)+g,=0

(2.10)

,

where h. . .ig, is the expectation value with the propagator (2.6) parametrized by g and
. we see that when the theory is described in terms of the open string parameters g

and , rather than in terms of g and b, the  dependence of correlation functions is very

simple. note that because of momentum conservation (pm pm = 0), the crucial factor

exp 

i

2 xn>m

pn
i ijpm

j (n  m)!

(2.11)

depends only on the cyclic ordering of the points 1, . . . , k around the circle.

the string theory s-matrix can be obtained from the conformal eld theory correlators

by putting external elds on shell and integrating over the  s. therefore, it has a structure
inherited from (2.10). to be very precise, in a theory with n  n chan-paton factors,

10

consider a k point function of particles with chan-paton wave functions wi, i = 1, . . . , k,
momenta pi, and additional labels such as polarizations or spins that we will generically
call i. the contribution to the scattering amplitude in which the particles are cyclically
ordered around the disc in the order from 1 to k depends on the chan-paton wave functions

by a factor tr w1w2 . . . wk. we suppose, for simplicity, that n is large enough so that
there are no identities between this factor and similar factors with other orderings. (it is

trivial to relax this assumption.) by studying the behavior of the s-matrix of massless
particles of small momenta, one can extract order by order in  a low energy eective
action for the theory. if i is an n  n matrix-valued function in spacetime representing
a wavefunction for the ith eld, then at b = 0 a general term in the eective action is a

sum of expressions of the form

z dp+1xdetgtrn11n2 2 . . . nk k.

(2.12)

here ni is, for each i, the product of ni partial derivatives with respect to some of the
spacetime coordinates; which coordinates it is has not been specied in the notation. the

indices on elds and derivatives are contracted with the metric g, though this is not shown

explicitly in the formula.

now to incorporate the b-eld, at xed g, is very simple:

if the eective action is

written in momentum space, we need only incorporate the factor (2.11). including this
factor is equivalent to replacing the ordinary product of elds in (2.12) by a  product. (in
this formulation, one can work in coordinate space rather than momentum space.) so the

term corresponding to (2.12) in the eective action is given by the same expression but
with the wave functions multiplied using the  product:

z dp+1xdetgtrn1 1  n22  . . .  nk k.

(2.13)

it follows, then, that the b dependence of the eective action for xed g and constant b

can be obtained in the following very simple fashion: replace ordinary multiplication by
the  product. we will make presently an explicit calculation of an s-matrix element to
illustrate this statement, and we will make a detailed check of a dierent kind in section 4

using almost constant elds and the dirac-born-infeld theory.

though we have obtained a simple description of the b-dependence of the eective

action, the discussion also makes clear that going to the noncommutative description does
it has an 

not in general enable us to describe the eective action in closed form:

11

expansion that is just as complicated as the usual  expansion at b = 0. to get a
simpler description, and increase the power of the description by noncommutative yang-
mills theory, we should take the   0 limit.
the   0 limit

for reasons just stated, and to focus on the low energy behavior while decoupling
the string behavior, we would like to consider the zero slope limit (  0) of our open
string system. clearly, since open strings are sensitive to g and , we should take the limit
  0 keeping xed these parameters rather than the closed string parameters g and b.

so we consider the limit

1

  
2  0
gij    0

for i, j = 1, . . . , r

with everything else, including the two-form b, held xed. then (2.5) become

gij

gij

for i, j = 1, . . . , r
otherwise

for i, j = 1, . . . , r
otherwise

b g 1

(2)2(cid:0) 1

gij =( 1
b(cid:1)ij
gij =(cid:26)(2)2(bg1b)ij
ij =(cid:26)(cid:0) 1
b(cid:1)ij

0

for i, j = 1, . . . , r
otherwise.

(2.14)

(2.15)

clearly, g and  are nite in the limit. in this limit the boundary propagator (2.6) becomes

hxi( )xj(0)i =

i
2

ij( ).

(2.16)

in this   0 limit, the bulk kinetic term for the xi with i = 1, . . . , r (the rst term in
(2.1)) vanishes. hence, their bulk theory is topological. the boundary degrees of freedom

are governed by the following action:

i

2z



bijxitxj.

(2.17)

(a sigma model with only such a boundary interaction, plus gauge xing terms, is a

special case of the theory used by kontsevich in studying deformation quantization [47],

if one regards (2.17) as a one-dimensional
as has been subsequently elucidated [48].)
action (ignoring the fact that xi( ) is the boundary value of a string), then it describes the

motion of electrons in the presence of a large magnetic eld, such that all the electrons are

12

in the rst landau level. in this theory the spatial coordinates are canonically conjugate
to each other, and [xi, xj] 6= 0. as we will discuss in section 6.3, when we construct the
representations or modules for a noncommutative torus, the fact that xi( ) is the boundary
value of a string changes the story in a subtle way, but the general picture that the xi( )

are noncommuting operators remains valid.

with the propagator (2.16), normal ordered operators satisfy

: eipixi( ) : : eiqixi(0) := e i

2 ij piqj ( ) : eipx( )+iqx(0) :,

(2.18)

or more generally

: f (x( )) : : g(x(0)) :=: e

i

2 ( )ij



xi ( )



xj (0) f (x( ))g(x(0)) :,

(2.19)

and

where

lim
0+

: f (x( )) : : g(x(0)) :=: f (x(0))  g(x(0)) :,

f (x)  g(x) = e

i

2 ij 
i



j f (x + )g(x + )(cid:12)(cid:12)==0

(2.20)

(2.21)

is the product of functions on a noncommutative space.

as always in the zero slope limit, the propagator (2.16) is not singular as   0.
this lack of singularity ensures that the product of operators can be dened without a

subtraction and hence must be associative. it is similar to a product of functions, but on

a noncommutative space.

the correlation functions of exponential operators on the boundary of a disc are

*yn

eipn

i xi(n)+ = e i

2pn>m

pn
i ij pm

j (nm)(cid:16)x pn(cid:17) .

(2.22)

because of the  function and the antisymmetry of ij, the correlation functions are un-

changed under cyclic permutation of n. this means that the correlation functions are
well dened on the boundary of the disc. more generally,

*yn

fn(x(n))+ =z dxf1(x)  f2(x)  . . .  fn,

(2.23)

which is invariant under cyclic permutations of the fns. as always in the zero slope limit,
the correlation functions (2.22), (2.23) do not exhibit singularities in  , and therefore there

are no poles associated with massive string states.

13

adding gauge fields

background gauge elds couple to the string worldsheet by adding

iz d ai(x) xi

(2.24)

to the action (2.1). we assume for simplicity that there is only a rank one gauge eld;

the extension to higher rank is straightforward. comparing (2.1) and (2.24), we see that a
constant b-eld can be replaced by the gauge eld ai =  1
2 bijxj, whose eld strength is
f = b. when we are working on rn, we are usually interested in situations where b and

f are constant at innity, and we x the ambiguity be requiring that f is zero at innity.

naively, (2.24) is invariant under ordinary gauge transformations

because (2.24) transforms by a total derivative

ai = i

z d ai(x) xi =z d i xi =z d  .

(2.25)

(2.26)

however, because of the innities in quantum eld theory, the theory has to be regularized

and we need to be more careful. we will examine a point splitting regularization, where

dierent operators are never at the same point.

then expanding the exponential of the action in powers of a and using the transfor-

mation law (2.25), we nd that the functional integral transforms by

z d ai(x) xi z d 

(2.27)

plus terms of higher order in a. the product of operators in (2.27) can be regularized in

a variety of ways. we will make a point-splitting regularization in which we cut out the
region |  | <  and take the limit   0. though the integrand is a total derivative,
the  integral contributes surface terms at    = . in the limit   0, the surface
terms contribute

z d : ai(x( )) xi( ) : :(cid:0)(x())  (x( +))(cid:1) :
= z d : (ai(x)      ai(x))  xi :

(2.28)

here we have used the relation of the operator product to the  product, and the fact that
with the propagator (2.16) there is no contraction between  x and x. to cancel this term,

14

we must add another term to the variation of the gauge eld; the theory is invariant not

under (2.25), but under

bbai = i + i  bai  ibai  .

(2.29)

this is the gauge invariance of noncommutative yang-mills theory, and in recognition of

that fact we henceforth denote the gauge eld in the theory dened with point splitting

ordinary or noncommutative gauge elds depends on the choice of regulator.

have preserved the standard gauge invariance of open string gauge eld, so whether we get

regularization as ba. a sigma model expansion with pauli-villars regularization would
we have made this derivation to lowest order in ba, but it is straightforward to go to
higher orders. at the n-th order in ba, the variation is
n! z ba(x(t1)) . . . ba(x(tn))t(x(t))

(n  1)!z ba(x(t1)) . . . ba(x(tn1))(cid:16)  ba(x(tn))  ba  (x(tn))(cid:17) ,

where the integration region excludes points where some ts coincide. the rst term in

(2.30)

in+1

in+1

+

(2.30) arises by using the naive gauge transformation (2.25), and expanding the action to

in+1

and . the rst term can be written as

n-th order in ba and to rst order in . the second term arises from using the correction
to the gauge transformation in (2.29) and expanding the action to the same order in ba
n! xj z ba(x(t1)) . . . ba(x(tj1))ba(x(tj+1)) . . . ba(x(tn))(cid:16)ba  (x(tj))    ba(x(tj))(cid:17)

(n  1)!z ba(x(t1)) . . . ba(x(tn1))(cid:16)ba  (x(tn))    ba(x(tn))(cid:17) ,

making it clear that (2.30) vanishes. therefore, there is no need to modify the gauge

(2.31)

in+1

=

transformation law (2.29) at higher orders in ba.

let us return to the original theory before taking the zero slope limit (2.14), and

examine the correlation functions of the physical vertex operators of gauge elds

these operators are physical when

v =z   xeipx

  p = p  p = 0,

15

(2.32)

(2.33)

where the dot product is with the open string metric g (2.5). we will do an explicit

calculation to illustrate the statement that the b dependence of the s-matrix, for xed g,
consists of replacing ordinary products with  products. using the conditions (2.33) and
momentum conservation, the three point function is

(cid:10)1  xeip1x(1) 2  xeip2x(2) 3  xeip3x(3)(cid:11) 

(cid:0)1  2p2  3 + 1  3p1  2 + 2  3p3  1 + 2p3  1p1  2p2  3(cid:1)
 e i

j (12)+p2

j (23)+p3

j (31)).

i ij p2

i ij p3

i ij p1

2 (p1

(1  2)(2  3)(3  1)

(2.34)

1

this expression should be multiplied by the chan-paton matrices. the order of these

matrices is correlated with the order of n. therefore, for a given order of these matrices
we should not sum over dierent orders of n. generically, the vertex operators (2.32)
should be integrated over n, but in the case of the three point function on the disc, the
gauge xing of the sl(2; r) conformal group cancels the integral over the  s. all we need
to do is to remove the denominator (1  2)(2  3)(3  1). this leads to the amplitude

(cid:0)1  2p2  3 + 1  3p1  2 + 2  3p3  1 + 2p3  1p1  2p2  3(cid:1)  e i

2 p1

i ij p2
j .

(2.35)

the rst three terms are the same as the three point function evaluated with the

action

(2.36)

(2.37)

where gs is the string coupling and

2

3p

()

gjj 

4(2)p2gsz detggii

tr bfij  bfij  ,
bfij = ibaj  jbai  ibai  baj + ibaj  bai

is the noncommutative eld strength. the normalization is the standard normalization

in open string theory. the eective open string coupling constant gs in (2.36) can dier
from the closed string coupling constant gs. we will determine the relation between them

gauge invariance of (2.36) is slightly more subtle than in ordinary yang-mills theory.

action. this term vanishes for   0 (and in any event is absent for superstrings).

shortly. the last term in (2.35) arises from the (ba)3 part of a term bf 3 in the eective
since under gauge transformations bbf = i  bf  ibf  , the gauge variation of bf  bf is
not zero. but this gauge variation is   (ibf  bf )  (ibf  bf )  , and the integral of this

vanishes by virtue of (1.3). notice that, because the scaling in (2.14) keeps all components
of g xed as   0, (2.36) is uniformly valid whether the rank of b is p + 1 or smaller.

16

the three point function (2.34) can easily be generalized to any number of gauge

elds. using (2.10)

*yn

n  xeipnx(n)+g,

= e i

2pn>m

pn
i ij pm

j (nm)*yn

n  xeipnx(n)+g,=0

.

(2.38)

this illustrates the claim that when the eective action is expressed in terms of the open
string variables g,  and gs (as opposed to g, b and gs),  appears only in the  product.
the construction of the eective lagrangian from the s-matrix elements is always

subject to a well-known ambiguity. the s-matrix is unchanged under eld redenitions

in the eective lagrangian. therefore, there is no canonical choice of elds. the vertex
operators determine the linearized gauge symmetry, but eld redenitions ai  ai+fi(aj)
can modify the nonlinear terms. it is conventional in string theory to dene an eective

action for ordinary gauge elds with ordinary gauge invariances that generates the s-

matrix. in this formulation, the b-dependence of the eective action is very simple:

it

is described by everywhere replacing f by f + b. (this is manifest in the sigma model

approach that we mention presently.)

we now see that it is also natural to generate the s-matrix from an eective action

written for noncommutative yang-mills elds. in this description, the b-dependence is

again simple, though dierent. for xed g and gs, b aects only , which determines the
 product. being able to describe the same s-matrix with the two kinds of elds means
that there must be a eld redenition of the form ai  ai + fi(aj), which relates them.
this freedom to write the eective action in terms of dierent elds has a counterpart

in the sigma model description of string theory. here we can use dierent regularization

schemes. with pauli-villars regularization (such as the regularization we use in section

2.3), the theory has ordinary gauge symmetry, as the total derivative in (2.26) integrates

to zero. additionally, with such a regularization, the eective action can depend on b and
f only in the combination f + b, since there is a symmetry a  a + , b  b  d,
for any one-form . with point-splitting regularization, we have found noncommutative

gauge symmetry, and a dierent description of the b-dependence.

the dierence between dierent regularizations is always in a choice of contact terms;

theories dened with dierent regularizations are related by coupling constant redeni-

tion. since the coupling constants in the worldsheet lagrangian are the spacetime elds,

the two descriptions must be related by a eld redenition. the transformation from

17

ordinary to noncommutative yang-mills elds that we will describe in section 3 is thus

an example of a transformation of coupling parameters that is required to compare two

dierent regularizations of the same quantum eld theory.

in the   0 limit (2.14), the amplitudes and the eective action are simplied. for

this limit. more generally, using dimensional analysis and the fact that the  dependence
is only in the denition of the  product, it is clear that all higher dimension operators

example, the bf 3 term coming from the last term in the amplitude (2.35) is negligible in
involve more powers of . therefore they can be neglected, and the bf 2 action (2.36)

becomes exact for   0.

the lack of higher order corrections to (2.36) can also be understood as follows. in the

limit (2.14), there are no on-shell vertex operators with more derivatives of x, which would

correspond to massive string modes. since there are no massive string modes, there cannot

be corrections to (2.36). as a consistency check, note that there are no poles associated

with such operators in (2.22) or in (2.38) in our limit.

all this is standard in the zero slope limit, and the fact that the action for   0

reduces to bf 2 is quite analogous to the standard reduction of open string theory to ordinary

yang-mills theory for   0. the only novelty in our discussion is the fact that for b 6= 0,
we have to take   0 keeping xed g rather than g. even before taking the   0
limit, the eective action, as we have seen, can be written in terms of the noncommutative

variables. the role of the zero slope limit is just to remove the higher order corrections to

bf 2 from the eective action.

it remains to determine the relation between the eective open string coupling gs
which appears in (2.36) and the closed string variables g, b and gs. for this, we examine
the constant term in the eective lagrangian. for slowly varying elds, the eective

lagrangian is the dirac-born-infeld lagrangian (for a recent review of the dbi theory see

[49] and references therein)

ldbi =

1

gs(2)p()

p+1

2 pdet(g + 2(b + f )).

the coecient is determined by the dp-brane tension which for b = 0 is

therefore

tp(b = 0) =

1

gs(2)p()

.

p+1

2

l(f = 0) =

1

gs(2)p()

p+1

2 pdet(g + 2b).

18

(2.39)

(2.40)

(2.41)

above we argued that when the eective action is expressed in terms of noncommutative

gauge elds and the open string variables g,  and gs, the  dependence is entirely in the
 product. in this description, the analog of (2.39) is

1

gs(2)p()

l(bf ) =

p+1

2 qdetg + 2bf ,

and the constant term in the eective lagrangian is

(2.42)

(2.43)

(2.44)

l(bf = 0) =
det(g + 2b)(cid:19) 1

detg

2

therefore,

gs = gs(cid:18)

1

gs(2)p()

p+1

2

detg.

detg(cid:19) 1
= gs(cid:18) detg

4

= gs(cid:18) det(g + 2b)

detg

2

(cid:19) 1

,

where the denition (2.5) of g has been used. as a (rather trivial) consistency check, note

that when b = 0 we have gs = gs. in the zero slope limit (2.14) it becomes

gs = gsdet(2bg1)

1

2 ,

(2.45)

where det denotes a determinant in the r  r block with nonzero b.

the eective yang-mills coupling is determined from the bf 2 term in (2.42) and is

3p

2

1
g2
y m

=

()

(2)p2gs

=

2

3p

()

(2)p2gs(cid:18) det(g + 2b)

detg

2

(cid:19) 1

.

(2.46)

using (2.45) we see that in order to keep it nite in our limit such that we end up with a

quantum theory, we should scale

3p

4

gs  
gs  

3p+r

4

.

(2.47)

note that the scaling of gs depends on the rank r of the b eld, while the scaling of

gs is independent of b. the scaling of gs just compensates for the dimension of the
yang-mills coupling, which is proportional to p  3 as the yang-mills theory on a brane is
scale-invariant precisely for threebranes.

if several d-branes are present, we should scale gs such that all gauge couplings of
all branes are nite. for example, if there are some d0-branes, we should scale gs  

3
4

19

(p = r = 0 in (2.47)). in this case, all branes for which p > r can be treated classically,

and branes with p = r are quantum.

if we are on a torus, then the limit (2.14) with gij  0 and bij xed is essentially the
limit used in [4]. this limit takes the volume to zero while keeping xed the periods of b.
on the other hand, if we are on rn, then by rescaling the coordinates, instead of taking
gij  0 with bij xed, one could equivalently keep gij xed and take bij  . (scaling
the coordinates on tn changes the periodicity, and therefore it is more natural to scale
the metric in this case.) in this sense, the   0 limit can, on rn, be interpreted as a
large b limit.

it is crucial that gij is taken to zero with xed gij . the latter is the metric appearing
in the eective lagrangian. therefore, either on rn or on a torus, all distances measured

with the metric g scale to zero, but the noncommutative theory is sensitive to the metric

g, and with respect to this metric the distances are xed. this is the reason that we end

up with nite distances even though the closed string metric g is taken to zero.

2.2. worldsheet supersymmetry

we now add fermions to the theory and consider worldsheet supersymmetry. without

background gauge elds we have to add to the action (2.1)

i

4z(cid:16)gijij + gij

i



j(cid:17)

and the boundary conditions are

j

gij(j  

) + 2bij(j + 

j

)(cid:12)(cid:12)z=z = 0

(2.48)

(2.49)

( is not the complex conjugate of ). the action and the boundary conditions respect

the supersymmetry transformations

xi = i(i + 
i = xi

i

)

i



= xi,

(2.50)

in studying sigma models, the boundary interaction (2.24) is typically extended to

la = iz d(cid:0)ai(x) xi  ifijij(cid:1)

20

(2.51)

with fij = iaj  jai and

i =

1
2

(i + 

i

) =(cid:18)

1

g  2b

g(cid:19)i

j

j.

(2.52)

the expression (2.51) seems to be invariant under (2.50) because its variation is a

total derivative

z d(cid:0)ai(x) xi  ifij ij(cid:1) = 2iz d  (aii).

(2.53)

however, as in the derivation of (2.28), with point splitting regularization, a total derivative

such as the one in (2.53) can contribute a surface term. in this case, the surface term is
obtained by expanding the exp(la) term in the path integral in powers of a. the
variation of the path integral coming from (2.53) reads, to rst order in la,

iz dz d(cid:0)ai xi( )  ifij ij( )(cid:1)(cid:0)2i  akk()(cid:1) .

(2.54)

with point splitting regularization, one picks up surface terms as    + and   ,
similar to those in (2.28). the surface terms can be canceled by the supersymmetric

variation of an additional interaction termr d ai  ajij( ), and the conclusion is that

with point-splitting regularization, (2.51) should be corrected to

iz d(cid:16)ai(x) xi  ibfij ij(cid:17)

(2.55)

with bf the noncommutative eld strength (2.37).

once again, if supersymmetric pauli-villars regularization were used (an example of

an explicit regularization procedure will be given presently in discussing instantons), the

more naive boundary coupling (2.51) would be supersymmetric. whether ordinary or

noncommutative gauge elds and symmetries appear in the formalism depends on the

regularization used, so there must be a transformation between them.

2.3. instantons on noncommutative r4

as we mentioned in the introduction, one of the most fascinating applications of
noncommutative yang-mills theory has been to instantons on r4. given a system of n
parallel d-branes with worldvolume r4, one can study supersymmetric congurations in
the u (n ) gauge theory. (actually, most of the following discussion applies just as well if r4

21

is replaced by tn  r4n for some n.) in classical yang-mills theory, such a conguration
is an instanton, that is a solution of f + = 0. (for any two-form on r4 such as the yang-
mills curvature f , we write f + and f  for the self-dual and anti-self-dual projections.)
so the objects we want are a stringy generalization of instantons. a priori one would

expect that classical instantons would be a good approximation to stringy instantons only
when the instanton scale size is very large compared to . however, we will now argue
that with a suitable regularization of the worldsheet theory, the classical or eld theory

instanton equation is exact if b = 0. this implies that with any regularization, the stringy

and eld theory instanton moduli spaces are the same. the argument, which is similar
to an argument about sigma models with k3 target [50], also suggests that for b 6= 0,
the classical instanton equations and moduli space are not exact. we have given some

arguments for this assertion in the introduction, and will give more arguments below and

in the rest of the paper.

at b = 0, the free worldsheet theory in bulk

s =

1

4z(cid:16)gijaxiaxi + igijij + igij

i



j(cid:17)

(2.56)

actually has a (4, 4) worldsheet supersymmetry. this is a consequence of the n = 1
in fact, we
worldsheet supersymmetry described in (2.50) plus an r symmetry group.
have a symmetry group so(4)l acting on the i and another so(4)r acting on 
. we
can decompose so(4)l = su (2)l,+  su (2)l,, and likewise so(4)r = su (2)r,+ 
su (2)r,. su (2)r,+, together with the n = 1 supersymmetry in (2.50), generates an
n = 4 supersymmetry of the right-movers, and su (2)l,+, together with (2.50), likewise
generates an n = 4 supersymmetry of left-movers. so altogether in bulk we get an
n = (4, 4) free superconformal model. of course, we could replace su (2)r,+ by su (2)r,
or su (2)l,+ by su (2)l,, so altogether the free theory has (at least) four n = (4, 4)
superconformal symmetries. but for the instanton problem, we will want to focus on just

i

one of these extended superconformal algebras.

now consider the case that  has a boundary, but with b = 0 and no gauge elds

j

coupled to the boundary. the boundary conditions on the fermions are, from (2.49),
j = 
. this breaks so(4)l  so(4)r down to a diagonal subgroup so(4)d =
su (2)d,+  su (2)d, (here su (2)d,+ is a diagonal subgroup of su (2)l,+  su (2)r,+,
and likewise for su (2)d,). we can dene an n = 4 superconformal algebra in which
the r-symmetry is su (2)d,+ (and another one with r-symmetry su (2)d,). as is usual

22

for open superstrings, the currents of this n = 4 algebra are mixtures of left and right
currents from the underlying n = (4, 4) symmetry in bulk.
now let us include a boundary interaction as in (2.51):

la = iz d(cid:0)ai(x) xi  ifijij(cid:1) .

(2.57)

the condition that the boundary interaction preserves some spacetime supersymmetry is
that the theory with this interaction is still an n = 4 theory. this condition is easy
to implement, at the classical level. the i transform as (1/2, 1/2) under su (2)d,+ 
su (2)d,. the fijij coupling in la transforms as the antisymmetric tensor product of
this representation with itself, or (1, 0) (0, 1), where the two pieces multiply, respectively,
f + and f , the self-dual and anti-self-dual parts of f . hence, the condition that la be
invariant under su (2)d,+ is that f + = 0, in other words that the gauge eld should be an
instanton. for invariance under su (2)d, we need f  = 0, an anti-instanton. thus, at
the classical level, an instanton or anti-instanton gives an n = 4 superconformal theory,3
and hence a supersymmetric or bps conguration.

to show that this conclusion is valid quantum mechanically, we need a regularization
that preserves (global) n = 1 supersymmetry and also the so(4)d symmetry. this
can readily be provided by pauli-villars regularization. first of all, the elds xi, i, 
,
together with auxiliary elds f i, can be interpreted in the standard way as components
of n = 1 superelds i, i = 1, . . . , 4.

to carry out pauli-villars regularization, we introduce two sets of superelds ci and
ei, where ei are real-valued and ci takes values in the same space (r4 or more generally
tn  r4n) that i does, and we write i = ci  ei. for ci and ei, we consider the
following lagrangian:

i

l =z d2xd2(cid:0)dcidci(cid:1) z d2xd2(cid:0)deidei + m 2(ei)2(cid:1) .

(2.58)

this regularization of the bulk theory is manifestly invariant under global n = 1 super-
symmetry. but since it preserves an so(4)d (which under which all left and right fermions
in c or e transform as (1/2, 1/2)), it actually preserves a global n = 4 supersymmetry.
3 our notation is not well adapted to nonabelian gauge theory. in this case, the factor ela

in the path integral must be reinterpreted as a trace tr p exph(cid:0)iai xi + fijij(cid:1) where the

exponent is lie algebra valued. this preserves su (2)d, if f  = 0.

23

this symmetry can be preserved in the presence of boundaries. we simply consider
free boundary conditions for both ci and ei. the usual short distance singularity is absent
in the i propagator (as it cancels between ci and ei). now, include a boundary coupling

to gauge elds by the obvious superspace version of (2.51):

la = iz d d ai()di = iz d(cid:0)ai(x) xi  ifijij(cid:1) .

(2.59)

classically (as is clear from the second form, which arises upon doing the  integral), this
coupling preserves su (2)d,+ if f + = 0, or su (2)d, if f  = 0. because of the absence of
a short distance singularity in the  propagator, all feynman diagrams are regularized.4

hence, for every classical instanton, we get a two-dimensional quantum eld theory with
global n = 4 supersymmetry.

if this theory ows in the infrared to a conformal eld theory, this theory is n = 4
superconformal and hence describes a conguration with spacetime supersymmetry. on
the other hand, the global n = 4 supersymmetry, which holds precisely if f + = 0,
means that any renormalization group ow that occurs as m   would be a ow
on classical instanton moduli space. such a ow would mean that stringy corrections

generate a potential on instanton moduli space. but there is too much supersymmetry

for this, and therefore there is no ow on the space; i.e. dierent classical instantons

lead to distinct conformal eld theories. we conclude that, with this regularization, every

classical instanton corresponds in a natural way to a supersymmetric conguration in string

theory or in other words to a stringy instanton. thus, with this regularization, the stringy
instanton equation is just f + = 0. since the moduli space of conformal eld theories is

independent of the regularization, it also follows that with any regularization, the stringy

instanton moduli space coincides with the classical one.

turning on b

now, let us reexamine this issue in the presence of a constant b eld. the boundary

condition required by supersymmetry was given in (2.49):

(gij + 2bij)j = (gij  2bij)

j

.

(2.60)

4 in most applications, pauli-villars regularization fails to regularize the one-loop diagrams,
because it makes the vertices worse while making the propagators better. the present problem

has the unusual feature that pauli-villars regularization eliminates the short distance problems

even from the one-loop diagrams.

24

to preserve (2.60), if one rotates i by an so(4) matrix h, one must rotate 

i

with

a dierent so(4) matrix h. the details of the relation between h and h will be explored

below, in the context of point-splitting regularization. at any rate, (2.60) does preserve
a diagonal subgroup so(4)d,b of so(4)l  so(4)r, but as the notation suggests, which
diagonal subgroup it is depends on b.

the pauli-villars regularization introduced above preserves so(4)d, which for b 6= 0
does not coincide with so(4)d,b. the problem arises because the left and right chiral
fermions in the regulator superelds ei are coupled by the mass term in a way that breaks
so(4)l  so(4)r down to so(4)d, but they are coupled by the boundary condition in a
way that breaks so(4)l  so(4)r down to so(4)d,b. thus, the argument that showed
that classical instanton moduli space is exact for b = 0 fails for b 6= 0.

this discussion raises the question of whether a dierent regularization would enable
us to prove the exactness of classical instantons for b 6= 0. however, a very simple
argument mentioned in the introduction shows that one must expect stringy corrections
to instanton moduli space when b 6= 0. in fact, if b+ 6= 0, a conguration containing
a threebrane and a separated 1-brane is not bps (we will explore it in section 5), so
the small instanton singularity that is familiar from classical yang-mills theory should be
absent when b+ 6= 0.

it has been proposed [35,38] that the stringy instantons at b+ 6= 0 are the instantons

g. in this theory, the condition for a gauge eld to leave unbroken half of the linearly

product. we can now make this precise in the   0 limit. in this limit, the eective

of noncommutative yang-mills theory, that is the solutions of bf + = 0 with a suitable 
action is, as we have seen, bf 2, with the indices in bf contracted by the open string metric
realized supersymmetry on the branes is bf + = 0, where the projection of bf to selfdual and

antiselfdual parts is made with respect to the open string metric g, rather than the closed
string metric g. hence, at least in the  = 0 limit, bps congurations are described by
noncommutative instantons, as has been suggested in [35,38]. if we are on r4, then, as

shown in [35], deforming the classical instanton equation bf + = 0 to the noncommutative
instanton equation bf + = 0 has the eect of adding a fayet-iliopoulos (fi) constant term

to the adhm equations, removing the small instanton singularity5. the adhm equations

5 actually, it was assumed in [35] that  is self-dual. the general situation, as we will show
at the end of section 5, is that the small instanton singularity is removed precisely if b+ 6= 0, or
equivalently + 6= 0.

25

with the fi term have a natural interpretation in terms of the dlcq description of the

six-dimensional (2, 0) theory [37], and have been studied mathematically in [41].

what happens if b 6= 0 but we do not take the   0 limit? in this case, the stringy
instanton moduli space must be a hyper-kahler deformation of the classical instanton
moduli space, with the small instanton singularities eliminated if b+ 6= 0, and reducing to
the classical instanton moduli space for instantons of large scale size if we are on r4. we

expect that the most general hyper-kahler manifold meeting these conditions is the moduli

space of noncommutative instantons, with some  parameter and with some eective metric
on spacetime g.6

details for instanton number one

though we do not know how to prove this in general, one can readily prove it by
hand for the case of instantons of instanton number one on r4. the adhm construction

for such instantons, with gauge group u (n ), expresses the moduli space as the moduli
space of vacua of a u (1) gauge theory with n hypermultiplets h a of unit charge (times a
copy of r4 for the instanton position). in the   0 limit with non-zero b, there is a fi
term. if we write the hypermultiplets h a, in a notation that makes manifest only half the
supersymmetry, as a pair of chiral superelds aa, ba, with respective charges 1, 1, then
the adhm equations read

aaba = c.

xa
|aa|2 xa

xa

|ba|2 = .

(2.61)

one must divide by aa  eiaa, ba  eiba. here c is a complex constant, and  a
real constant. c and  are the fi parameters. the real and imaginary part of c, together

with , transform as a triplet of an su (2) r-symmetry group, which is broken to u (1)

(rotations of c) by our choice of writing the equations in terms of chiral superelds. to
determine the topology of the moduli space m, we make an su (2)r transformation (or a
judicious choice of aa and ba) to set c = 0 and  > 0. then, if we set ba = 0, the aa,

modulo the action of u (1), determine a point in cpn ; the equationpa aaba = 0 means
that the ba determine a cotangent vector of cpn , so m is the cotangent bundle t cpn .
6 the eective metric on spacetime must be hyper-kahler for supersymmetry, so it is a at
metric if we are on r4 or tn r4n, or a hyper-kahler metric if we are bold enough to extrapolate
the discussion to a k3 manifold or a taub-nut or ale space.

26

the second homology group of m is of rank one, being generated by a two-cycle in
cpn . moduli space of hyper-kahler metrics is parametrized by the periods of the three

covariantly constant two-forms i, j, k. as there is only one period, there are precisely

three real moduli, namely , re c, and im c.

hence, at least for instanton number one, the stringy instanton moduli space on r4,

for any b, must be given by the solutions of bf + = 0, with some eective metric on

spacetime and some eective theta parameter. it is tempting to believe that these may be

the metric and theta parameter found in (2.5) from the open string propagator.

noncommutative instantons and n = 4 supersymmetry

we now return to the question of what symmetries are preserved by the boundary
condition (2.60). we work in the   0 limit, so that we know the boundary couplings
and the gauge invariances precisely. the goal is to show, by analogy with what happened

for b = 0, that noncommutative gauge elds that are self-dual with respect to the open
string metric lead to n = 4 worldsheet superconformal symmetry.

it is convenient to introduce a vierbein ei

(et is the transpose of e) or gij =pa ei

local lorentz frame in spacetime

a for the closed string metric thus g1 = eet
a. then, we express the fermions in terms of the

aej

i = ei

aa, 

i

= ei

aa.

(2.62)

the so(4)l  so(4)r automorphism group of the supersymmetry algebra rotates these
four fermions by   h and   h. the boundary conditions (2.60) breaks so(4)l 
so(4)r to a diagonal subgroup so(4)d,b dened by

h = e1

1

g  2b

(g + 2b)ehe1

1

g + 2b

(g  2b)e.

(2.63)

in terms of  and , the boundary coupling of the original fermions (2.55) becomes

tetg

1

g + 2bbf

1

g  2b

ge.

(2.64)

we have used (2.52) to express  in terms of , and (2.62) to express  in terms of .

under so(4)d,b, this coupling transforms as

tetg

1

g + 2bbf

1

g  2b

ge  thtetg

27

1

g + 2bbf

1

g  2b

geh,

(2.65)

and the theory is invariant under the subgroup of so(4)d,b for which

etg

1

g + 2bbf

1

g  2b

ge = htetg

1

g + 2bbf

1

g  2b

geh.

(2.66)

in order to analyze the consequences of this equation, we dene a vierbein for the open

string metric by the following very convenient formula:

e =

1

g  2b

ge.

(2.67)

to verify that this is a vierbein, we compute

eet =

1

g  2b

g

1

g + 2b

=

1

g + 2b

g

1

g  2b

= g1.

(2.68)

in terms of e, (2.66) reads

etbf e = htetbf eh.

(2.69)

selfdual, or anti-selfdual, with respect to the trivial metric of the local lorentz frame. this

for this equation to hold for h in an su (2) subgroup of so(4)d,b, etbf et must be
is equivalent to bf being selfdual or anti-selfdual with respect to the open string metric g.
hence an n = 4 superconformal symmetry, if bf + = 0 or bf  = 0 with respect to the open

thus, we have shown that the boundary interaction preserves an su (2) r symmetry, and

string metric.

3. noncommutative gauge symmetry vs. ordinary gauge symmetry

we have by now seen that ordinary and noncommutative yang-mills elds arise from

the same two-dimensional eld theory regularized in dierent ways. consequently, there

must be a transformation from ordinary to noncommutative yang-mills elds that maps

the standard yang-mills gauge invariance to the gauge invariance of noncommutative yang-

mills theory. moreover, this transformation must be local in the sense that to any nite

order in perturbation theory (in ) the noncommutative gauge elds and gauge parameters

are given by local dierential expressions in the ordinary elds and parameters.

at rst sight, it seems that we want a local eld redenition ba = ba(a, a, 2a, . . . ; )
of the gauge elds, and a simultaneous reparametrization b =b(, , 2, . . . ; ) of the

gauge parameters that maps one gauge invariance to the other. however, this must be

relaxed. if there were such a map intertwining with the gauge invariances, it would follow

28

that the gauge group of ordinary yang-mills theory is isomorphic to the gauge group of

noncommutative yang-mills theory. this is not the case. for example, for rank one, the

ordinary gauge group, which acts by

is abelian, while the noncommutative gauge invariance, which acts by

ai = i,

ai = i + i  ai  iai  ,

(3.1)

(3.2)

is nonabelian. an abelian group cannot be isomorphic to a nonabelian group, so no

redenition of the gauge parameter can map the ordinary gauge parameter to the noncom-

mutative one while intertwining with the gauge symmetries.

what we actually need is less than an identication between the two gauge groups. to
do physics with gauge elds, we only need to know when two gauge elds a and a should
be considered gauge-equivalent. we do not need to select a particular set of generators of
the gauge equivalence relation  a gauge group that generates the equivalence relation7.

gauge equivalence relation, even though the two gauge groups are dierent.

what this means in practice is as follows. we will nd a mapping from ordinary

has the following further property. suppose that two ordinary gauge elds a and a are
equivalent by an ordinary gauge transformation by u = exp(i). then, the corresponding

in the problem at hand, it turns out that we can map a to ba in a way that preserves the
gauge elds a to noncommutative gauge elds ba which is local to any nite order in  and
noncommutative gauge elds ba and ba will also be gauge-equivalent, by a noncommutative
gauge transformation by bu = exp(ib). however,b will depend on both  and a. ifb were
since b is a function of a as well as , we do not get any well-dened mapping between

a function of  only, the ordinary and noncommutative gauge groups would be the same;

the gauge groups, and we get an identication only of the gauge equivalence relations.

note that the situation that we are considering here is the opposite of a gauge theory

in which the gauge group has eld-dependent structure constants or only closes on shell.

this means (see [51] for a fuller explanation) that one has a well-dened gauge equivalence

7 faddeev-popov quantization of gauge theories is formulated in terms of the gauge group,
but in the more general batalin-vilkovisky approach to quantization, the emphasis is on the

equivalence relation generated by the gauge transformations. for a review of this approach, see

[51].

29

relation, but the equivalence classes are not the orbits of any useful group, or are such

orbits only on shell. in the situation that we are considering, there is more than one group

that generates the gauge equivalence relation; one can use either the ordinary gauge group

or (with ones favorite choice of ) the gauge group of noncommutative yang-mills theory.

finally, we point out in advance a limitation of the discussion. the arguments in

section 2 (which involved, for example, comparing two dierent ways of constructing an
 expansion of the string theory eective action) show only that ordinary and noncom-
mutative yang-mills theory must be equivalent to all nite orders in a long wavelength

expansion. by dimensional analysis, this means that they must be equivalent to all nite

always work nonperturbatively. indeed, the small instanton problem discussed in section

orders in . however, it is not clear that the transformation between a and ba should
2.3 seems to give a situation in which the transformation between ba and a breaks down,

presumably because the perturbative series that we will construct does not converge.

3.1. the change of variables

once one is convinced that a transformation of the type described above exists, it is

not too hard to nd it. we take the gauge elds to be of arbitrary rank n , so that all elds
and gauge parameters are n  n matrices (with entries in the ordinary ring of functions
or the noncommutative algebra dened by the  product of functions, as the case may be).

gauge elds that are gauge-equivalent are mapped to noncommutative gauge elds that

ba(a) +bbba(a) = ba(a + a),

we look for a mapping ba(a) andb(, a) such that
with innitesimal  and b. this will ensure that an ordinary gauge transformation of a
by  is equivalent to a noncommutative gauge transformation of ba byb, so that ordinary
are likewise gauge-equivalent. the gauge transformation laws  and bb
the end of the introduction. we rst work to rst order in . we write ba = a + a(a) and
b(, a) =  + (, a), with a and  local function of  and a of order . expanding
kl(klai +laik)+o(2). (3.4)
ai(a+a)ai(a)ii[, ai]i[, ai] = 
in arriving at this formula, we have used the expansion fg = f g+ 1
2 iijif jg+o(2), and
have written the o() part of the  product explicitly on the right hand side. all products

(3.3) in powers of , we nd that we need

1
2

30

(3.3)

were dened at

in (3.4) are therefore ordinary matrix products, for example [, ai] = ai  ai, where
(as  is of order ), the multiplication on the right hand side should be interpreted as
ordinary matrix multiplication at  = 0.

equation (3.4) is solved by

bai(a) = ai + ai(a) = ai 
b(, a) =  + (, a) =  +

1
kl{ak, lai + fli} + o(2)
4
1
ij{i, aj} + o(2)
4

(3.5)

bfij = fij +

where again the products on the right hand side, such as {ak, lai} = ak  lai + lai  ak

are ordinary matrix products. from the formula for ba, it follows that

kl (2{fik, fjl}  {ak, dlfij + lfij}) + o(2).

1
4

(3.6)

these formulas exhibit the desired change of variables to rst nontrivial order in .

by reinterpreting the above formulas, it is a rather short step to write down a dif-

ferential equation that generates the desired change of variables to all nite orders in .

consider the problem of mapping noncommutative gauge elds ba() dened with respect
to the  product with one choice of , to noncommutative gauge elds ba( + ), dened
for a nearby choice of . to rst order in , the problem of converting from ba() to
ba( + ) is equivalent to what we have just solved. indeed, apart from associativity, the

only property of the  product that one needs to verify that (3.5) obeys (3.3) to rst order
in  is that for any variation ij of ,

ij 

ij (f  g) =

i
2

ij f

xi 

g
xj

(3.7)

at  = 0. but this is true for any value of , as one can verify with a short perusal of the
explicit formula for the  product in (1.2). hence, adapting the above formulas, we can

 is varied, to describe equivalent physics:

write down a dierential equation that describes how ba() and b() should change when
bai() = kl 
b() = kl 
bfij() = kl 

kl(cid:2)bak  (lbai + bfli) + (lbai + bfli)  bak(cid:3)
kl(cid:20)2bfik  bfjl + 2bfjl  bfik  bak (cid:16)bdlbfij + lbfij(cid:17)
(cid:16)bdlbfij + lbfij(cid:17)  bak(cid:21).

kl bai() = 
klb() =
klbfij () =

kl (k  al + al  k)
1
4

1
4

1
4

(3.8)

31

on the right hand side, the  product is meant in the generalized sense explained in the
introduction: the tensor product of matrix multiplication with the  product of functions.
this dierential equation generates the promised change of variables to all nite orders in

. to what extent the series in  generates by this equation converges is a more delicate

question, beyond the scope of the present paper. the equation is invariant under a scaling
operation in which  has degree 2 and a and /x have degree one, so one can view the
expansion it generates as an expansion in powers of  for any a, which is how we have

derived it, or as an expansion in powers of a and /x for any .

the dierential equation (3.8) can be solved explicitly for the important case of a rank

one gauge eld with constant bf . in this case, the equation can be written

(the lorentz indices are contracted as in matrix multiplication).

boundary condition bf ( = 0) = f is
from (3.10) we nd f in terms of bf

we can also write these relations as

bf = bf bf

1

f.

1 + f 

bf =
f = bf
bf 

1


= 

.

1

1  bf

1

( 1

 + f )

.

(3.9)

its solution with the

(3.10)

(3.11)

(3.12)

we see that when f = 1 we cannot use the noncommutative description because bf
has a pole. conversely, f is singular when bf = 1, so in that case, the commutative

description does not exist. using our identication in the zero slope limit (or in a natural
regularization scheme which will be discussed below)  = 1
b , equations (3.10), (3.11) and
(3.12) become

1

1

b + f

bf = b
f = bf
b  bf
bf  b = b

1

32

b + f

f,

b

(3.13)

(3.14)

(3.15)

b.

and

so an ordinary abelian gauge eld with constant curvature f and neveu-schwarz two-form

eld b is equivalent to a noncommutative gauge eld with  = 1/b and the value of bf as

in (3.13). when b + f = 0 we cannot use the noncommutative description. it is natural

that this criterion depends only on b + f , since in the description by ordinary abelian

gauge theory, b and f are mixed by a gauge symmetry, with only the combination b + f

being gauge-invariant.

application to instantons

another interesting application is to instantons in four dimensions. we have argued in

section 2.3 (following [35,38]) that a stringy instanton is a solution of the noncommutative

instanton equation

ij = 0.

bf +

we can evaluate this equation to rst nontrivial order in  using (3.6). since kl{ak, dlfij+
lfij}+ = 0 if f +
ij = 0, to evaluate the o() deviation of (3.16) from the classical instan-
ton equation f +
ij = 0, we can drop those non-gauge-invariant terms in (3.6). we nd that
to rst order in , the noncommutative instanton equation can be written in any of the

(3.16)

(3.17)

following equivalent forms:

0 =f +

ij +

=f +

ij 

=f +

ij 

+ o(2)

1

1

2(cid:0)kl{fik, fjl}(cid:1)+
detg
(fef )+

1
8
1
4

rstufrsftugikgjl(+)kl + o(2)
ij + o(2).

here g is the open string metric, which is used to determine the self-dual parts of f and
in (3.17), we used the facts that f  = o(1) and f + = o(), along with various
.
identities of so(4) group theory. for example, in evaluating (kl{fik, fjl})+ to order ,
one can replace f by f . according to so(4) group theory, a product of any number

of anti-selfdual tensors can never make a selfdual tensor, so we can likewise replace  by
+. so(4) group theory also implies that there is only one self-dual tensor linear in +
and quadratic in f , namely +(f )2, so the o() term in the equation is a multiple of
this. to rst order in , we can replace (f )2 by (f )2  (f +)2, which is a multiple of
fef =
rstufrsftu; this accounts for the other ways of writing the equation given

in (3.17).

2detg

1

33

in (3.17), we see that to rst order, the corrections to the instanton equation depend
only on + and not ; in section 5, we explore the extent to which this is true to all
orders.

more freedom in the description

what we have learned is considerably more than was needed to account for the results

of section 2. in section 2, we found that, using a point-splitting regularization, string theory

with given closed string parameters g and b can be described, in the open string sector,

by a noncommutative yang-mills theory with  given in eqn. (2.5). there must, therefore,

exist a transformation from commutative yang-mills to noncommutative yang-mills with

that value of .

in our present discussion, however, we have obtained a mapping from ordinary yang-

mills to non-commutative yang-mills that is completely independent of g and b and hence

allows us to express the open string sector in terms of a noncommutative yang-mills theory

with an arbitrary value of . it is plausible that this type of description would arise if one

uses a suitable regularization that somehow interpolates between pauli-villars and point-

splitting.

what would the resulting description look like? in the description by ordinary yang-

mills elds, the eective action is a function of f + b, and is written using ordinary

multiplication of functions. in the description obtained with point-splitting regularization,

(2.5). if one wishes a description with an arbitrary , the variable in the action will have

in the description with the canonical value of  in (2.5). the most optimistic hypothesis is

the eective action is a function of bf , but the multiplication is the  product with  in
to somehow interpolate from f + b in the description by ordinary yang-mills elds to bf
of the eective action is completely captured by replacing bf by

that there is some two-form , which depends on b, g, and , such that the  dependence

(3.18)

using the appropriate -dependent  product, and using an appropriate eective metric g
and string coupling gs.

bf + ,

we propose that this is so, with g, gs, and  determined in terms of g, b, and  by

the following formulas, whose main justication will be given in section 4.1:



+

1

g + 2b

1

g + 2

= 

2

gs = gs(cid:18) det(g + 2)
det(g + 2b)(cid:19) 1

2

1
g+2b  

1

2 )(g + 2b)i 1

2

= gs

deth(

34

(3.19)

.

in the rst equation, g and  are determined because they are symmetric and antisym-

metric respectively. the second equation is motivated, as in (2.44), by demanding that for

f = bf = 0 the constant terms in the lagrangians using the two set of variables are the

we will show in section 4 that for slowly varying elds  governed by the dirac-born-

same.

infeld action  such a general description, depending on an arbitrary , does exist. the

rst equation in (3.19) has been determined because it is the unique formula compatible

with the analysis in section 4.1. we will also see in section 3.2 that a special case of the

transformation in (3.19) has a natural microscopic explanation in noncommutative yang-

mills theory. we do not have a general proof of the existence of a description with the

properties proposed in (3.18) and (3.19). such a proof might be obtained by nding a

regularization that suitably generalizes point-splitting and pauli-villars and leads to these

formulas.

a few special cases of (3.19) are particularly interesting:

(1)  = 0. here we recover the commutative description, where g = g, gs = gs and

 = b.

(2)  = 0. this is the description we studied in section 2.
(3) in the zero slope limit with xed g, b and , we take g = g(0) + o(2), b =
2 ) (we assume for simplicity that the rank of b is

b(0) + b(1) + o(2) and  = o(
maximal, i.e. r = p + 1). expanding the rst expression in (3.19) in powers of  we

1

nd

1

g  2 1

g



1
g



1

+ o() = 

+

2

(2)3

+

2
1
b(0) g(0) 1

2b(0) 
b(0) g(0) 1

b(0) 



(2)2



2

equating the dierent orders in  we have

 =

1
b(0) + o()

b(0)

1

b(0) g(0) 1
b(0) b(1) 1

1

b(0) + o().

(3.20)

(3.21)

(2)2

b(0) 1

(2)2

g = 

 = b(0) +
gs = gsdet(cid:18) 2





b(0) 1

g(0) b(0) + o()
g(0) b(1) 1
g(0)(cid:19) 1

b(0) 1

2

(1 + o()) ,

g(0) b(0) + o()

35

which agree with our zero slope values (2.15), (2.45) (except the new value of ). the

freedom in our description is the freedom in the way we take the zero slope limit; i.e.
in the value of b(1). it aects only the value of . for example, for b(1) = 0 we have
 = b(0), and for b(1) =
b(0) g(0) we have  = 0, as in the discussion
in section 2. the fact that there is freedom in the value of  in the zero slope limit

(2)2 g(0) 1



has a simple explanation.

in this limit the eective lagrangian is proportional to

tr(bf + )2 = tr(bf 2 + 2bf + 2). the  dependence aects only a total derivative

term and a constant shift of the lagrangian. such terms are neglected when the

eective lagrangian is derived, as in perturbative string theory, from the equations of

motion or the s-matrix elements.

(4) we can extend the leading order expressions in the zero slope limit (3.21) (again in
the case of maximal rank r = p + 1) with b(1) = 0 to arbitrary value of , away from

the zero slope limit, and nd

 =

1
b

1
g

b

g = (2)2b
 = b,

(3.22)

which satisfy (3.19). with this choice of  the string coupling (3.19) keeps its zero

slope limit value (2.45)

gs = gsdet(2bg1)

1

2 .

(3.23)

in the next subsection, we will see that the existence of a description with these values

of the parameters is closely related to background independence of noncommutative

yang-mills theory. these are also the values for which the pole in bf (f ), given in

(3.10), occurs at f + b = 0 as in (3.13).

3.2. background independence of noncommutative yang-mills on rn

in the language of ordinary yang-mills theory, the gauge-invariant combination of b
and f is m = 2(b +f ). (the 2 is for later convenience.) the same gauge-invariant
eld m can be split in dierent ways as 2(b + f ) or 2(b + f ) where b and b
are constant two-forms. given such a splitting, we incorporate the background b or b as
a boundary condition in an exactly soluble conformal eld theory, as described in section

2. then we treat the rest of m by a boundary interaction. as we have seen in section 2

36

and above, the boundary interaction can be regularized either by pauli-villars, leading to

ordinary yang-mills theory, or by point splitting, leading to noncommutative yang-mills.

in the present discussion, we will focus on noncommutative yang-mills, and look at
the background dependence. thus, by taking the background to be b or b, we should

get a noncommutative description with appropriate  or , and dierent bf s. note the

contrast with the discussion in sections 2 and 3.1: here we are sticking with point-splitting
regularization, and changing the background from b to b, while in our previous analysis,
we kept the background xed at b, but changed the regularization.

we make the following remarks:

(1) if we are on a torus, a shift in background from b to b must be such that the
dierence bb obeys dirac quantization (the periods of bb are integer multiples
of 2) because the ordinary gauge elds with curvatures f and f  each obey dirac
quantization, so their dierence f  f  does also. such quantized shifts in b are
elements of the t -duality group.

(2) even if we are on rn, there can be at most one value of b for which the noncommu-

tative curvature vanishes at innity. thus, if we are going to investigate background

independence in the form proposed above, we have to be willing to consider noncom-

mutative gauge elds whose curvature measured at innity is constant.

(3) this has a further consequence. since the condition for bf to vanish at innity will

not be background independent, there is no hope for the noncommutative action as

we have written it so far, namely,

1
g2

y m z dnxggikgjltrbfij  bfkl

to be background independent. even the condition that this action converges will not

be background independent. we will nd it necessary to extend the action to

(3.24)

(3.25)

1
g2

y m z dnxggikgjl(bfij  1

bl =

kl ),

ij )(bfkl  1

which will be background independent. the constant we added corresponds to  =
1 in (3.18). it is easy to see that with this value of  equation (3.19) determines
 = b1, g = (2)2bg1b as in (3.22). it is important that even though the
expressions for  and g are as in the zero slope limit (2.15), in fact they are exact

even away from this limit as they satisfy (3.19).

37

note that these remarks apply to background independence, and not to behavior

under change in regularization. (change in regularization is not particularly restricted by

being on a torus, since for instance (3.8) makes perfect sense on a torus; leaves xed the

condition that the curvature vanishes at innity; and does not leave xed any particular

lagrangian.) note also that in the description of open strings by ordinary gauge theory,

the symmetry of shift in b (keeping xed b + f ) is made at xed closed string metric

g, so we want to understand background independence of noncommutative yang-mills at

xed g.

remark (1) above makes it clear that morita equivalence must be an adequate tool

for proving background independence, since more generally [4,17-21], morita equivalence

is an eective tool for analyzing t -duality of noncommutative yang-mills theory. we will
here consider only background independence for noncommutative yang-mills on rn, and

not surprisingly in this case the discussion reduces to something very concrete that we can

write down naively without introducing the full machinery of morita equivalence.

we will consider rst the case that the rank r of  equals the dimension n of the space,

so that  is invertible. (the generalization is straightforward and is briey indicated below.)

the gauge elds are described by covariant derivatives

di =


xi  iai,

(3.26)

where the ai are elements of the algebra a generated by the xi (tensored with n  n
matrices if the gauge eld has rank n ). we recall that a is dened by the relations
[xi, xj] = iij .

the /xi do not commute with the xs that appear in ai, and this is responsible for
the usual complexities of gauge theory. the surprising simplication of noncommutative

yang-mills theory is that this complexity can be eliminated by a simple change of variables.

we write

where

and

di = i  ici,

i =


xi + ibijxj

ci = ai + bijxj.

38

(3.27)

(3.28)

(3.29)

the point of this is that the i commute with the xi. hence, the curvature bfij = i[di, dj]

is simply

bfij = i[i, j]  i[ci, cj]
bfij = bij  i[ci, cj].

(3.30)

(3.31)

or more explicitly

now we are almost ready to explain what background independence means. the ci
are given as functions of the xi, and as such they are elements of an algebra a that depends
on . however, as an abstract algebra, a only depends on the rank of , and because no
derivatives of c appear in the formula for the curvature, we can treat the ci as elements
of an abstract algebra. for example, we can take any xed algebra [ya, yb] = itab, a, b =
1, . . . , n with tab being any invertible antisymmetric tensor. then, picking a vierbein f k
a ,
a ya,
such that jk = f j
and regard the ci as functions of ya. we make no such transformation of the xi that
appear in the denition of i. thus, the covariant derivatives are

b tab, we write the xk that appear in the argument of ci as xk = f k

af k

di = i  ici(ya) =


xi + ibijxj  ici(ya).

(3.32)

because [i, xj] = 0, we can make this change of variables for the internal xs that appear
as arguments of ci, without touching the xs that appear explicitly on the right hand side
of (3.32), and without changing the formula for the curvature. there is no analog of this

manipulation in ordinary yang-mills theory.

one is now tempted to dene background independence by varying ij, and its inverse
ij  i[ci, cj], we

bij, while keeping xed ci(ya). then, writing (3.31) in the form bfij = 1

see that under this operation

nij = bfij  1

ij = i[ci, cj]

(3.33)

is invariant. however, this operation, taken with xed open string metric g, does
not leave xed the action (3.25), since g depends on : g = (2)2bg1b =
(2)21g11.
instead, we want to vary  while keeping xed the components
of ci in a xed local lorentz frame. if ea
i
j ), then a vierbein for g is ea

is a vierbein for the closed string metric g (so
i = 2bijej

i ca. now we
can formulate background independence: it is an operation in which one varies , keeping

a. we write ci = ea

gij =pa ea

i ea

xed g and ca.

39

it is easy to see now that

q = bf   ,

gikgjltr (bfij  1

ij )  (bfkl  1

kl )

is invariant under this operation. with gil = (2)2ijgjkkl, this follows from
(3.33) and the fact that ijcj is background independent. background independence
of (3.34) is equivalent to the form of gij and the fact that the quantity dened by
qil = iij [cj, ck]kl, or more simply

(3.34)

(3.35)

is background independent.

express q in terms of the equivalent ordinary abelian gauge eld that could be used in an

in the rank one case, for constant bf , we can via (3.15)

alternative description of the same physics. we nd simply

q = 

1

b + f

.

(3.36)

this is a satisfying result; it says that in this case the background independent object

q dened with point-splitting regularization and noncommutative yang-mills theory is a

function of the background independent object b + f found with pauli-villars regular-

ization and ordinary yang-mills theory. it also shows that we should not try to use the

noncommutative description if b + f = 0 where q is innite, and we should not try to

expand around q = 0, where b + f is innite.

for background independence of the action (3.25), background independence of (3.34)

is not quite enough. we need, in addition, that the measure

dnxg
g2
y m

(3.37)

should be background independent. this will tell how g2

y m must transform under the
change of background. since the action density is most naturally written as a function of
a ya
the ys, we should convert the integration measure to an integral over y. from xk = f k
btab = kl, we get dnx = dny det(f ) = dny det/det t. we also have g =
and f k
(2)21g1 so detg = (2)2n(det)2detg. so the measure is

a f l

dny(2)ndetg
detdet t
g2
y m

40

.

(3.38)

so gy m must transform under a change in  in such a way that g2

y mdet is invariant.
y m  gs this means that gs/detb is invariant. this is clearly the case for the

2 as determined in (3.23). this means that under a shift

since g2
value of gs = gsdet(2bg1)
in the b-eld,

1

(with b a constant antisymmetric tensor), which induces

b  b = b + b

   = 

1

1 + b

,

we require

gy m  gy m = gy m (det(1 + b))

1

4 .

(3.39)

(3.40)

(3.41)

if we are on a torus, we require b to have periods that are integer multiples of 2, and then

(3.39) is a special case of a t -duality transformation. the transformation (3.41) is in this

situation a special case of the t -duality transformations of noncommutative yang-mills,

as analyzed in [4,17-21]; in section 6 (see equation (6.14)), we derive this formula from the

standard t -duality transformations of closed strings and the mapping from closed string

to open string parameters.

finally, let us consider the more general case that  might have rank r < n. the
algebra then has a center generated by n  r coordinates, which we can call x1, . . . , xnr.
 is only invertible in the space of xnr+1, . . . , xn. we let bij be a partial inverse of ij,
with bij zero unless i, j > n  r, and bijjk = i
k for i, r > n  r. a construction just
as above, dening i and ci by the same formulas, gives now invariance under change of
background, as long as one preserves the center of the algebra and the rank of . but

otherwise, one can change  as one pleases.

4. slowly varying fields

the purpose of the present section is to do some explicit calculations verifying and

illustrating our theoretical claims. we have argued that the same open string theory

eective action can be expressed in terms of either ordinary yang-mills theory or noncom-

mutative yang-mills theory. in the description by ordinary yang-mills, the b-dependence

is described by replacing everywhere f by b + f . in the description by noncommutative

yang-mills, the b-dependence is entirely contained in the dependence on b of the open

41

string metric g, the open string eective coupling gs, and the  dependence of the  prod-
uct. we have also argued in section 3.1 that there must exist a continuous interpolation

between these two descriptions with arbitrary .

to compare these dierent descriptions, we need a situation in which we can compute

in all of them. for this we will take the limit of slowly varying, but not necessarily small,

gauge elds of rank one. the eective action is [42,43] the dirac-born-infeld (dbi) action.

we will compare the ordinary dbi action as a function of the closed string metric and

coupling and b + f , to its noncommutative counterpart, as a function of the open string

metric and coupling and bf +.8 after proving the equivalence between them and exploring

the zero slope limit in section 4.1, we specialize in section 4.2 to the case of four dimensions,

and compare the respective bps conditions  the stringy generalization of the instanton

equation.

4.1. dirac-born-infeld action

for slowly varying elds on a single dp-brane, the eective lagrangian is the dirac-

born-infeld lagrangian

ldbi =

1

gs(2)p()

p+1

2 pdet(g + 2(b + f )).

(4.1)

we discussed in section 2 the normalization and the fact that b + f is the gauge invariant

combination.

we have argued in section 2 that the eective lagrangian of the noncommutative

g, , and gs given in (2.5) and (2.45), the dependence on  is only in the  product.

gauge elds ba must be such that when expressed in terms of the open string variables
therefore, for slowly varying bf it is

(4.2)

p+1

1

bldbi =

gs(2)p()

2 qdet(g + 2bf ).

we also proposed in section 3.1 that there is a more general description with an arbitrary
 and parameters g, , gs determined in (3.19)

1



+

1

g + 2b

g + 2

= 

2

det(g + 2b)(cid:19) 1
gs = gs(cid:18) det(g + 2)

2

= gs

deth(

1
g+2b  

1

2 )(g + 2b)i 1

2

(4.3)

.

8 the comparison cannot be made just using the formula (3.13) for constant f , since as we
will see, terms in (3.8) of the general form af contribute in the analysis. it is necessary to
integrate by parts in comparing the dbi actions, and one cannot naively treat f as a constant.

42

under the assumption of (3.18), the eective action in these variables should be

1

gs(2)p()

bldbi =

p+1

2 qdet(g + 2(bf + ))

(4.4)

we will here demonstrate that in the limit of slowly varying elds, (4.1), (4.2), and (4.4)

are all equivalent.

in particular, this will verify the equivalence of (4.1) and (4.2), for

which we gave an a priori explanation in section 2, it will give (along with the special

case considered in section 3.2) our main evidence that there exists a description with an

and gs must be given by the formulas in (4.3).

obtained in string theory after dropping such terms, there is no reason to keep some of

products can be regarded as  products. if instead we treat them as ordinary products,

arbitrary  and bf shifted as in (3.18), and it will show that in such a description g, ,
in all of the above formulas, we can expand bldbi in powers of bf and all the resulting
our answer will dier by terms including derivatives of bf . since the dbi lagrangian is
them but not others. therefore, we will ignore all such derivatives of bf and regard the
in the denition of bf .
the elds ba(a) given in (3.6), the two lagrangians are related as
ldbi = bldbi + total derivative + o(f ).

products in the expansion of (4.4) as ordinary products, i.e. the  dependence will be only

we want to show that using the change of variables (4.3) and the transformations of

the dierence in total derivative arises from the fact that the action is derived in string

theory by using the equations of motion or the s-matrix elements, which are not sensitive

to such total derivatives. furthermore, the eective lagrangian in terms of ba is gauge

invariant only up to total derivatives, and we will permit ourselves to integrate by parts
and discard total derivatives. the o(f ) term in (4.5) is possible because these two
lagrangians are derived in string theory in the approximation of neglecting derivatives of

f , and therefore they can dier by such terms.

for  = 0, the change of variables (4.3) is trivial and so is (4.5). therefore, in order

to prove (4.5) it is enough to prove its derivative with respect to  holding xed the closed

string parameters g, b, gs and the commutative gauge eld a. in other words, we will
show that this variation of the right hand side of (4.5) vanishes.

in order to keep the equations simple we will set 2 = 1; the  dependence can be
easily restored on dimensional grounds. in preparation for the calculation we dierentiate

43

(4.5)

(4.3) holding g, b and gs xed, and express the variation of g,  and gs in terms of the
variation of :

g +  = (g + )(g + )

gs =

1
2

gstr

1

g + 

(g + ) =

1
2

gstr(g + ) =

1
2

gstr,

(4.6)

where g and  are symmetric and antisymmetric respectively. we also need the variation

of bf with respect to . equation (3.8) can be written as

1

bfij () = kl(cid:20)bfikbfjl 

2bak(lbfij + bdlbfij)(cid:21) + o(bf ).

(4.7)

1
2

1

gs

since we are going to ignore derivatives of bf , we replaced the  products with ordinary
products. we kept, however, the  products in the denitions of bf and in bdlbfij. similarly,
we kept the explicit derivative and covariant derivative of bf since they multiply bak, and
can become terms without derivatives of bf after integration by parts.
we are now ready to vary bldbi (4.4):
(g + bf + )(cid:21)
(cid:20)
(cid:20) 1
det(g + bf + )
det(g + bf + )
g + bf + 
(cid:20)tr(g + ) + tr
2bak(lbfij + bdlbfij)(cid:19)# + o(bf )
kl(cid:18)bfikbfjl 
(cid:20)tr

2(cid:21) =
det(g + bf + )
g + bf + (cid:19)ji
+(cid:18)
det(g + bf + )
g + bf + bf bf + trbf(cid:21) + o(bf ) + total derivative

g + bf + 
g + bf + bf (g + )

(g + )(g + )

gs
gs

tr

gs
1

gs

gs

1
2

1
2

1
2

tr

=

=

+

1

1
2

1
2

1

1

1

1

where in the third step we used

ldet(g + bf + )
bdldet(g + bf + )

1

1

1

1
2

2 =

= o(bf ) + total derivative,
g + bf + (cid:19)ji
2(cid:18)
det(g + bf + )
g + bf + (cid:19)ji bdlfij + o(lbfbdlbf ),
2(cid:18)
det(g + bf + )
kl(lbak + bdlbak) = klbflk.

lbfij,

2 =

1
2

44

1

1

1

to integrate by parts, and then we used

(4.8)

(4.9)

(4.10)

this completes the proof of (4.5) and of our change of variables (3.19).

in fact, we rst found the change of variables (3.19) by demanding that (4.5) is

satised. it is, however, quite nontrivial that there exists a change of variables like (3.19)

for which (4.5) is satised. this depends on our relation between the commutative and

the noncommutative gauge elds (4.7) and on the particular form of the dbi lagrangian.

one could actually use this computation to motivate the dbi lagrangian as the only

lagrangian for which (4.5) is true.

even though we proved (4.5) for every value of the parameters, it is instructive to

examine it in various limits, comparing the commutative and the noncommutative sides of

(4.5) explicitly. some of the technical aspects of these comparisons are similar to the cal-

culation in (4.8), but they are conceptually dierent. rather than varying the description

by changing  for a xed background (xed g, b and gs), here we will use a description
with  = 0 and will vary the background. we will perform two computations. the rst
will be for small b and the second will be in the zero slope limit. the reader who is not
interested in the details could jump to section 4.2.

comparison for small b

first, we consider the comparison for small b. in this regime, the open string variables

g = g  (2)2bg1b
 = (2)2g1bg1 + o(b3)
gs = gs(cid:0)1  ()2tr(g1b)2 + o(b4)(cid:1) .

since  is small for small b, we begin by expanding (4.2) in powers of . the change

of variables in the rank one case

(4.11)

(4.12)

are

leads to

det(g + 2bf )

= det(g + 2f )

1

2 = det(cid:2)gij + 2(cid:0)fij + kl (fikfjl  aklfij ) + o(2)(cid:1)(cid:3) 1

2

1

1

kl (fikfjl  aklfij) + o(2)#

bfij = fij + kl (fikfjl  aklfij) + o(2)
2"1 + (cid:18)
2(cid:20)1  tr
2(cid:20)1 

g + 2f(cid:19)ji

g + 2f

g + 2f

f f +

4

1
2

tr

1

1

1

trf + o(2)(cid:21) + total derivative

gg + o(2)(cid:21) + total derivative,

(4.13)

= det(g + 2f )

= det(g + 2f )

1

1

45

where in the second step we used (4.9) and then integrated by parts, and in the third step

we used tr g = 0. using (4.11), to rst order in b, we nd as expected

1

gs(2)p()

p+1

2

det(g + 2f )

1

2(cid:18)1 + tr

1

g + 2f

b(cid:19)

bldbi =

+ o(b2) + total derivative =
=ldbi + o(b2) + total derivative.

(4.14)

to extend this comparison to order b2, we would need to use (3.8) to determine the

order 2 terms in (4.12). however, since the order 2 terms in (4.12) involve three factors

of f or terms which become three factors of f after integration by parts, we can compare

the b2f 2 terms in the two lagrangians without needing the corrections to (4.12).

we use the identity for antisymmetric m

det(1 + m )

1

2 = 1 

1
4

trm 2 

1
8

trm 4 +

1

32(cid:0)trm 2(cid:1)2

+ o(m 6)

(4.15)

to write the dbi lagrangian density as

ldbi =

=

2

p+1

detg
gs(2)p()

p+1

+ o((b + f )6)(cid:3)

2 (cid:2)1  ()2tr(g1(b + f ))2  2()4tr(g1(b + f ))4
(cid:0)tr(g1(b + f ))2(cid:1)2
2 (cid:2)  tr(g1f )2  2()2tr(g1f )4 +

()4
+
()2detg
gs(2)p()
 8()2trg1b(g1f )3 + 2()2tr(g1f )2trg1f g1b
 8()2tr(g1b)2(g1f )2 + ()2tr(g1b)2tr(g1f )2
+ constant + total derivative + o(b3, bf 5, b2f 4)(cid:3),

()2

2

(cid:0)tr(g1f )2(cid:1)2

(4.16)

where in the last step we used the fact that

2tr(g1bg1f )2 (cid:0)trg1bg1f(cid:1)2

46

= total derivative.

(4.17)

similarly,

bldbi =

detg
gs(2)p()

2

p+1

=

+ o(bf 6)(cid:3)

2 (cid:2)1  ()2tr(g1bf )2  2()4tr(g1bf )4
(cid:16)tr(g1bf )2(cid:17)2
2 (cid:2)  tr(g1f )2  2()2tr(g1f )4 +

()4
+
()2detg
gs(2)p()
 8()2trg1b(g1f )3 + 2()2tr(g1f )2trg1f g1b
 8()2tr(g1b)2(g1f )2 + ()2tr(g1b)2tr(g1f )2
+ constant + total derivative + o(b3, bf 5, b2f 4)(cid:3)
=ldbi + total derivative + o(b3, bf 5, b2f 4),

()2

p+1

2

where we have used (4.12) and (4.11).

this demonstrates explicitly that

bldbi = ldbi + total derivative + o(b3f 3, b2f 4).

comparison in the zero slope limit

(cid:0)tr(g1f )2(cid:1)2

(4.18)

(4.19)

we now turn to another interesting limit  our zero slope limit.

in this limit the

entire string eective lagrangian becomes quadratic in bf . the same is true for the dbi

lagrangian

bldbi =

3p

2

()

4(2)p2gs
+ total derivative + constant + higher powers of .

detggimgjnbfij  bfmn

(4.20)

ignoring the total derivative and the constant we can set  = 0.

if we take the zero slope limit, and f is slowly varying, then we can get a description
either using ordinary gauge elds and the dbi lagrangian ldbi , or using noncommutative

we work on a single euclidean p-brane with b of rank r = p + 1, and for simplicity we
2  0.

gauge elds using the bf 2 lagrangian (4.20).
consider the metric gij = ij. we are interested in the zero slope limit, i.e.   
expanding the dbi action density in powers of , we nd
m(cid:19)2

8 |pf(m )|(cid:18)tr


2|pf(m )|tr

1
(2)p()

ldbi =

1
m

2

+

p+1

1

1

(4.21)

2 gs |pf(m )| +
m 2 + o(3)(cid:19) ,

1

2
4 |pf(m )|tr



47

where

m = 2(b + f ).

(4.22)

the absolute value sign arises from the branch of the square root in (4.1). since m is

antisymmetric, the second and third terms vanish. the rst term is a constant plus a total
derivative in spacetime, which we ignore in this discussion. in the limit   0, the leading
term is

ldbi = 

4(2)

2
2 ()2gs|pf(b + f )|tr

p+3

1

(b + f )2

(4.23)

+ total derivative + constant + higher powers of .

our general discussion above shows that the lagrangian (4.23) must be the same as

the bf 2 lagrangian (4.20). we now verify this explicitly in a power series in f .

we dene three auxiliary functions

f (b, f ) = |pf(b + f )|tr

q(b, f, ) =(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)pf(cid:18)b + f + 

h(b, f ) = 4

q


1

1

b(cid:19)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

( = 0)  q( = 0)tr

1
b2 .

(b + f )2  |pfb|tr

1
b2

(4.24)

q and therefore also all its derivatives with respect to  are total derivatives in spacetime.

in particular, h(b, f ) is a total derivatives in spacetime. expanding f (b, f ) in powers of

f we nd

f (b, f ) =h(b, f ) + |pfb|tr(cid:18) 1

 2|pfb|tr(cid:18) 1

b

f

1
b2 f

b2 f
1

1

1

b2 f(cid:19) +
b2 f(cid:19) + o(f 4).

2|pfb|tr(cid:18) 1

b

f(cid:19) tr(cid:18) 1

b2 f

1

b2 f(cid:19)

(4.25)

if bf is small, the bf 2 action can be expressed in terms of ordinary gauge elds. in the

rank one case (3.6) becomes

bfij = fij + kl (fikfjl  aklfij) + o(f 3).

(4.26)

here in asserting that the corrections are o(f 3), we consider two derivatives or two powers
of a (or one of each) to be equivalent to one power of f . substituting (4.26) in (4.20) we

48

nd

()

3p

2

4(2)p2gs

3p

2

3p

()

4(2)p2gs

detggimgjnbfij  bfmn =

detg(cid:2)gimgjnfijfmn
detg(cid:2)tr(cid:0)g1f g1f(cid:1) + 2tr(cid:0)f f g1f g1(cid:1)

+2gimgjnkl (fikfjl  aklfij) fmn(cid:3) + total derivatives + o(f 4)
tr (f )(cid:0)f g1f g1(cid:1)(cid:21) + total derivatives + o(f 4).

4(2)p2gs

()



1
2

=

2

(4.27)
for gij = ij with b of rank r = p + 1, we nd from (2.15) that g = 1(2)2b2
|pfb|. using these formulas,

b and gs = gs(cid:16) 2

 (cid:17) p+1

(which is nite as   0),  = 1
with (4.25) and (4.27), we get

2

3p

2

()

4(2)p2gs

ldbi =

detggimgjnbfijbfmn+total derivatives+constant+o(f 4). (4.28)
it conicides with the zero slope limit of bldbi , which is simply bf 2 (we have checked it

we conclude that the zero slope limit of ldbi is the nonpolynomial action (4.23).

explicitly only up to terms of order f 4).

4.2. supersymmetric congurations

now we will specialize to four dimensions (though some of the introductory remarks

are more general) and analyze supersymmetric congurations, the stringy instantons.

we recall rst that, in general, a dp-brane preserves only half of the supersymmetry

of type ii superstring theory. in an interpretation [52] that actually predates the d-brane

era, this means the theory along the brane has spontaneously broken (or nonlinearly

realized) supersymmetry along with its unbroken (or linearly realized) supersymmetry.
for example, in the extreme low energy limit, the theory along a threebrane is the f 2

theory. its minimal supersymmetric extension in four dimensions is obtained by adding
a positive chirality photino eld ,9 with its cpt conjugate   of opposite chirality.

9 we recall that so(4) decomposes as su (2)+ su (2). a positive chirality spinor transforms
as (1/2, 0), while a negative chirality spinor transforms as (0, 1/2). our conventions are such that

a selfdual antisymmetric tensor transforms as (1, 0) and an anti-selfdual one as (0, 1). the full low

energy d3-brane action has additional elds and supersymmetries beyond those discussed here,

but we do not expect them to aect the particular issues we will address.

49

the linearly realized or unbroken supersymmetry acts by the standard formulas

 =

  =

1

2

1

2

m +

ij ij

 

mij ij 

  ,

(4.29)

(4.30)

where we have included a b-eld, and written the standard formula in terms of m (dened
 are spinor indices
in (4.22)) rather than f . as usual, ij = 1
of respectively positive and negative chiralities. the nonlinearly realized or spontaneously
broken supersymmetry of the f 2 theory acts simply by

2(cid:2)i, j(cid:3), while ,  and ,

 =

2
4

,   =

2
4

.

(4.31)

here  and  are constants, and we have chosen a convenient normalization.

one of the many special properties of the dbi theory is that [53] it has in four

dimensions a supersymmetric extension that preserves not only the linearly realized super-

symmetry  many bosonic theories have such a supersymmetric version  but also, what is

much more special, the nonlinearly realized supersymmetry. the transformation law of the

photino under the linearly realized supersymmetry is unchanged from (4.29) in going to

the dbi theory. the nonlinearly realized supersymmetries, however, become much more

complicated. the generalization of (4.31) is

trm 2 + (pfm )2# 

+ o(4)(cid:21) ,

 =

=

=

  =

=

=

1

1

2
2

4(cid:20)2  pfm +qdetij(ij + mij)(cid:21) 
4"2  pfm +r4 
4(cid:20)pfm + |pfm| + 2 4|pfm|  trm 2
4(cid:20)2 + pfm +qdetij(ij + mij)(cid:21) 
4"2 + pfm +r4 
4(cid:20)pfm + |pfm| + 2 4|pfm|  trm 2

4|pfm|

4|pfm|

2
2

1

1

1

1

trm 2 + (pfm )2# 

+ o(4)(cid:21) .

(4.32)

(4.33)

in both (4.32) and (4.33), the rst two formulas for  are taken directly from [53], and
the last is an expansion in small  aimed at taking the by now familiar   0 limit.

50

when b = 0 and we expand around f = 0, the supersymmetry (4.29), (4.30) is

realized linearly, while the supersymmetry of (4.32) and (4.33) is spontaneously broken

and is realized nonlinearly. in expanding around any constant b, there is always a linear
combination of the  and  supersymmetries that is unbroken. however, this combination
depends on b. to see why, consider an open string ending on the threebrane, and let 

and  be the left and right-moving worldsheet fermions. in reection from the end of the

string, we get  = r(b) where r(b) is a rotation matrix that can be found from (2.49)

to be

r(b) =(cid:0)1  2g1b(cid:1)1(cid:0)1 + 2g1b(cid:1) .

(4.34)

let ql and qr be the spacetime supersymmetries carried by left and right-moving world-

sheet degrees of freedom in type ii superstring theory. (because we are mainly focusing

now on threebranes, we are in type iib, and ql and qr both have the same chirality.) a
general supersymmetry of the closed string theory is generated by 
lql, with
constants l, r. reection at the end of the open string breaks this down to a subgroup

rqr, + 

with

l = r(b)r,

(4.35)

where now of course the rotation matrix r(b) must be taken in the spinor representation.

here we see explicitly that which supersymmetries are unbroken depends on b, though
the number of unbroken supersymmetries is independent of b.10

we can easily match the stringy parameters l, r with the parameters ,  of the

supersymmetrized dbi action. we have (up to possible inessential constants)

 = l + r,  = l  r.

(4.36)

in fact,  can be identied with l + r as the generator of a supersymmetry that is
unbroken at b = 0. and  can be identied with l  r as being odd under a z2
10 we can also see explicitly that a system of a three-brane with a b-eld and a separated
1-brane is only supersymmetric if b+ = 0, as asserted in the introduction. the supersymmetry

left unbroken by the 1-brane obeys l = 0123r, where 0123 is the four-dimensional chirality

operator. at b = 0, this is compatible with (4.35) for spinors of 0123 = 1, the expected result

that the 1-brane (like an instanton) preserves the supersymmetry of positive chirality. if we now

turn on b 6= 0, compatibility with (4.35) fails unless r(b) = 1 for states of 0123 = 1, that is,
unless b+ = 0.

51

symmetry that acts by   , f  f in the eld theory, and by reversal of worldsheet
orientation in the string theory.

now, specializing again to four dimensions, we want to identify the unbroken super-
symmetry in the   0 limit, which we temporarily think of as the limit with g xed and
b  . here we meet the interesting fact that there are two inequivalent zero slope limits
in four dimensions. for nondegenerate b with all eigenvalues becoming large, we get from
(4.34) that r(b)  1 in the vector representation for b  . but the element 1 of
the vector representation can be lifted to spinors in two dierent ways: as a group element
that is 1 on positive chirality spinors and 1 on negative chirality spinors, or vice-versa.
starting from r(b) = 1 (on both vectors and spinors) at b = 0, what limit we get for
b   depends on the sign of pf(b). in fact, the limit of r(b) is, in acting on spinors,
(4.37)

r(b)  0123  sign(pf(b)).

to prove this, it is enough to consider the special case that b is selfdual or anti-selfdual.
if b is selfdual, then from (4.34), r(b)  su (2)+ and is identically 1 on negative chirality
spinors, and hence approaches 1 for b   on positive chirality spinors. for b anti-
selfdual, we get the opposite result, leading to (4.37).

there is no loss of essential generality in assuming that we want to study instantons, or

anti-selfdual gauge elds, for which the unbroken supersymmetry generators are of positive
chirality. in this case, (4.37) reduces to r(b) = sign(pf(b)). (4.36) tells us that the
unbroken supersymmetry is  when r(b) = 1 and  when r(b) = 1. we conclude,
then, that for instantons, when b   with pf(b) > 0, the unbroken supersymmetry
is the one that at b = 0 is nonlinearly realized, while for b   with pf(b) < 0, the
unbroken supersymmetry is the one that is linearly realized at b = 0. for anti-instantons,

the two cases are reversed. we shall see this dierence both in the discussion below, based

on the supersymmetric dbi action of [53], and in section 5 in the analysis of the d0/d4

system, which will also lead to an alternative intuitive explanation of the dierence.

bps states of supersymmetric born-infeld

we assume that we are in four dimensions with b of rank four. instead of taking b 
, it is equivalent, of course, to take the metric to be gij = ij and take   0 with the
two-form b-xed. using trm 2 = tr(m)2 +tr(m +)2 and 4pfm = tr(m)2tr(m +)2,
the equations (4.32) and (4.33) become in this limit

 = 

1

2

(cid:26) pfm + o(2)

2 tr(m +)2

4pfm + o(4)

for pfm < 0
for pfm > 0

(4.38)

52

  =

1

2

(cid:26) pfm + o(2)

2 tr(m )2

4pfm + o(4)

for pfm > 0
for pfm < 0 .

(4.39)

for f = 0 and constant b, the unbroken supersymmetries are a linear combination

of the original unbroken supersymmetries (4.29) and (4.30) with the supersymmetries

described in the last paragraph. the parameters of the unbroken supersymmetries obey

 = c+

ij ij

 

1

  

 = cij ij 
2pfb b+
for pfb < 0
8pfb
2tr(b+)2 b+ for pfb > 0

c+ =(
c =( 1
2pfb b
for pfb > 0
 8pfb
2tr(b)2 b for pfb < 0.

(4.40)

(4.41)

(4.42)

(4.43)

the dichotomy between the two cases described above is visible here in the dependence
of the   0 limit on the sign of pf(b). 11 now we want to consider bps congurations
on r4, with constant b and f approaching zero at innity. since f  0 at innity, an
unbroken supersymmetry must be of the form (4.42) or (4.43). without loss of generality,

we examine the condition for instantons, congurations that leave invariant the positive

chirality supersymmetry (4.42). the condition for this to be so is

m + =(cid:26) c+pfm

c+2 tr(m +)2

4pfm

for pfb < 0
for pfb > 0

(4.44)

with the appropriate constants c+ in the two cases (4.42). this choice of c+ guarantees

that the equations are satised at innity, where f vanishes. it turns out that these two

equations are the same, and we get one condition regardless of the sign of pfb, namely

m + =

b+

2pfb

pfm

(4.45)

11 the relation to the discussion surrounding (4.37) is somewhat obscured by the fact that we
have done the scaling with   0 rather than b  , as assumed in the discussion of (4.37).
taking b to innity with gij, , and  xed is equivalent to   0 with b-xed and a nontrivial
scaling of  and . to compare most directly to the discussion surrounding (4.37), if one takes
b   with xed , then according to (4.42) and (4.43), in the limit one has c  tending to zero
or innity depending on the sign of pf(b). here c  0 means that the unbroken supersymmetry

is generated by  (the generator of the original linearly realized supersymmetry) and c  
means that the unbroken supersymmetry is generated instead by .

53

or equivalently, since m = 2(b + f ),

f + =

b+
8pfb

ijkl(2bijfkl + fij fkl).

(4.46)

the reduction of (4.44) to (4.45) is clear enough, using (4.42), if pf(b) < 0. for pf(b) > 0,

one must work a bit harder. by taking the trace squared of (4.44) in the case pf(b) > 0, one
gets tr(m +)2 = tr(c+)24(tr(m +)2)2/16pf(m )2, or tr(m +)2 = 16pf(m )2/4tr(c+)2.
using this together with the formula in (4.42) for c+ when pf(b) > 0, one nally arrives
at (4.45) also for pf(b) > 0.

the fact that the bps condition ends up being the same (even though the unbroken

supersymmetry is completely dierent) for pf(b) > 0 or pf(b) < 0 looks rather miraculous

from the point of view of the supersymmetric dbi theory. however, in noncommutative

independent of the sign of the pfaan.

metric; this condition, when mapped to commutative gauge theory by (4.12), is manifestly

gauge theory, the bps condition is that bf should be anti-selfdual in the open string
to compare (4.46) to bf + = 0 in greater detail, it is convenient to consider the vierbein

e of (2.67). since here we set gij = ij , and we are only interested in the limit   0, we
have


2

1
b

e = 

,

(4.47)

which is nite in the limit. given any antisymmetric tensor , such as b or f , denote
its selfdual projection relative to the open string metric g = (eet)1 by +
g (as before,
we write simply + and b+ for the selfdual projections of  in the closed string metric
g). we have, for example, f +
g = (et)1(etf e)+e1, the idea being that to compute
f +
g , we rst map f to a local orthonormal frame by f  etf e, then take the ordinary
selfdual projection, and then map back to the original frame using the inverse vierbein.
antisymmetric bi-vectors like 1
b are treated similarly except that we use (et)1 instead
b , we rst

et. since the vierbein is proportional to 1

derive a useful identity. we do that in a frame where b has special form:

b(cid:1)+
g = e(cid:0)e1 1
of e, so(cid:0) 1

then, for any

b (et)1(cid:1)+
b =
f =

0
b1
0
0

b1
0
0
0
0
0
0 b2

0
0
b2
0

 .

0
f12
f13
f12
0
f23
f13 f23
0
f14 f24 f34

54

f14
f24
f34
0



(4.48)

(4.49)

we nd

(cid:18) 1

bt f

1

b(cid:19)+

=

=



1
2

f23
f13
f34
0

+



1
b2
2

f34

1
b2
1

f12
0

1

b1b2

f24  1
f14

b1b2
1

b1b2

0
 1
 1

b1b2
1

b2
1

b1b2



1

f12
f24
f23  1

b1b2

b1b2

 1
b1b2
f14
0
f13  1

0

f34

b2
2
f12 + 1
b2
2

1
b2
1

0

b2
1

 1
 1

b1b2
1

b1b2

b2
2

f12  1
f34
(f24  f13)
(f23 + f14)  1

b1b2

1

b1b2

1

b1b2

 1

b1b2

(f24  f13)  1
(f14 + f23)

b1b2
1

b1b2

(f23 + f14)
(f13  f24)
f34 + 1
f12
b2
1

1
b2
2

f12

0



0

(f14 + f23)
(f13  f24)  1
f34  1
b2
b2
2
1
2 (cid:19)
1
0
0
(cid:18) b1 + b2
0
0
0
1
0
0
0 1
0

0
1
0
0



= 

1

b1b2

f + +

b2f12 + b1f34

b2
1b2
2

1

pfb

= 

f + +

ijklbijfkl
4(pfb)2 b+.

we conclude that

(cid:18) 1

bt f

1

b(cid:19)+

1

pfb

= 

f + +

ijklbijfkl
4(pfb)2 b+

(4.50)

(4.51)

for any antisymmetric b, not necessarily of the form (4.48). using the explicit form of e

in the present case (4.47) and equation (4.51), one computes

f +

b+

g = (et)1(cid:0)etf e(cid:1)+
g = (et)1(cid:0)etbe(cid:1)+
b(cid:19)+
g(cid:18) 1

g = (et)1(cid:18)e1 1

g

b

e1 = pfe(et)1(cid:18)f + +

e1 = pfe(et)1b+e1,

b+
4pfb

ijklbijfkl(cid:19) e1,

(et)1(cid:19)+

e1 = 

detg
pfb

(4.52)

b+
g,

where the second equation is derived by substituting b for f in the rst equation, and the

third equation is derived by writing e and g in terms of b and using the second equation.

using (4.52) equation (4.46) becomes

f +
g = 

1

8pfb

b+

gijklfijfkl =

1

8detg

b(cid:19)+
g(cid:18) 1

g

gijklfijfkl =

which is the same as (3.17).

1
4

g+

ggfef ,

(4.53)

we note that the   0 limit of the dirac-born-infeld action (4.23) has an innite
power series expansion in f , but the condition for a bps conguration (4.46) or (4.53) is

55

polynomial in f and in . since the action (4.1) and the supersymmetry transformation

laws (4.29), (4.32) are exact when derivatives of f are neglected, the same is true in
the limit   0. therefore, the action (4.23) and the bps condition (4.46) or (4.53)
are exact when such derivatives are neglected. we matched the action (4.23) with the

noncommutative action (2.36) and the bps condition (4.53) with the noncommutative

bps condition (3.17) at leading order in f , but it is now clear that (4.53) should agree

with (3.17) to all orders in f , if derivatives of f are neglected.

classical solution of (4.53)

we conclude this section with a computation that is really only oered for enter-

tainment, as there is no solid basis for interpreting it. nekrasov and schwarz [35] found,

using the noncommutative adhm equations, an explicit rank one solution (with instanton

number one) of the noncommutative instanton equation bf + = 0 on r4. what makes this

interesting is that the corresponding equation f + = 0 in ordinary rank one (abelian)
gauge theory has no such smooth, nite action solution on r4.

it is amusing to ask whether one can nd the noncommutative rank one solution as a

classical solution of dbi theory. there is no reason to expect this to work, since the elds

in the rank one instanton are not slowly varying, and on the contrary it cannot work, since

a nonsingular abelian gauge eld with f = 0 at innity cannot have a nonzero value of

the instanton number

zr4

d4xfef .

it is nonetheless interesting to see how far we can get. we will see that the result is as

good as possible: the solution we will nd of (4.53) has the mildest possible singularity

compatible with a nonzero value of (4.54), and in particular has a milder singularity than
an analogous solution of the linear equation f + = 0.

the equation we wish to solve is

(4.54)

(4.55)

ij = +
f +

ij(fef )

for an abelian gauge eld in four dimensions, where  is given in (4.53) in terms of b.

we take fef = 4(f12f34 + f14f23 + f13f42). there is no loss of essential generality in

assuming that the nonzero components of  are 12 = 34 = 1.

56

the noncommutative solution obtained in [35] is invariant under the u (2) subgroup
of so(4) that leaves xed  (or b+). so we look for a solution of (4.55) with the same

symmetry. up to a gauge transformation, we can take

ai = ijxjh(r)

(4.56)

where r = ppi(xi)2. since this is the most general u (2)-invariant ansatz, it must be

compatible with the equations.

we compute

1 + x2
3 + x2

2)  h/r
4)  h/r

f12 = 2h  (x2
f34 = 2h  (x2
f13 = f24 = (x1x4  x2x3)  h/r
f23 = f14 = (x2x4 + x1x3)  h/r

with h = dh/dr. it follows that

the only nontrivial component of the equation is the 1-2 component, which becomes

(4.57)

(4.58)

(4.59)

(4.60)

(4.61)

fef = 8(2h2 + hhr).
4h  rh = 16(2h2 + hhr)

or

hence the solution is

r

d
dr

(h + 8h2) = 4(h + 8h2).

h + 8h2 = cr4

for some constant c. note that h  r4 for r  , which is the correct behavior for this
partial wave (dipole) in abelian gauge theory, while h  r2 for r  0, which is the
singularity of the solution. since

z d4xfef =162z 

=  82 lim
r0

0

r3dr(cid:0)2h2 + hhr(cid:1) = 82z 

0

(r4h2) = 2c,

dr

d

dr(cid:0)r4h2(cid:1)

(4.62)

the behavior near r = 0 is exactly what is needed to give the solution a nite and nonzero
instanton number. this contrasts with the solution of the linear equation f + = 0 with the
same symmetry; in that case, h  1/r4 near r = 0, and the instanton number is divergent.

57

5. d-branes and small instantons in the presence of constant b field

as we mentioned in the introduction, one of the most interesting applications of

noncommutative yang-mills theory has been to instantons, especially small instantons

[35,38]. noncommutative yang-mills has been related to the possibility of adding a fayet-

iliopoulos term to the adhm equations, a possibility also seen [37] in the study of small

instantons via d-branes. in this section, we will reexamine the d-brane approach to small
instantons in the context of the   0 limit (2.14) with xed open string parameters.

for this, we have to study the d(p  4)-dp system for some p  3. the rst case,
p = 3, has the advantage that quantum noncommutative super yang-mills is apparently

well-dened in four dimensions, since it seems that in general the deformation to nonzero

 does not change the renormalization properties of yang-mills theory [54-61]. if so, the

structure we will nd in the small instanton problem for pf(b) < 0 must be already

contained in the bf 2 theory in the small instanton regime. however, the d0-d4 system is

richer, because one has the chance to study the quantum mechanics on instanton moduli

space, so we will focus on this. (it takes in any case only relatively minor modications of
the formulas to convert to d(p  4)-dp for other p.)

for simplicity, we set gij = ij. we consider a d0-brane embedded in the d4-brane.
the eective hamiltonian for this case governs possible deformations to a d0-brane outside

the d4-brane or a non-small instanton in the d4-brane. the boundary conditions on the

0-4 open strings are

x0(cid:12)(cid:12)=0, =  x1...9(cid:12)(cid:12)=0 =  x5...9(cid:12)(cid:12)= = gijxj + 2ibij xj(cid:12)(cid:12)= = 0

for i = 1 . . . 4. we bring b to a canonical form

b =



2

0
b1
0
0

b1
0
0
0
0
0
0 b2

0
0
b2
0

 .

(5.1)

(5.2)

we will eventually be interested in the limit (2.14) with nite b and hence with |bi| 
1/2. because of the mass shell condition p2/2 = n , where p is the momentum in the
time direction common to the d0 and d4, and n is the worldsheet hamiltonian for the

string oscillators, we see that states of nite (spacetime) energy must have

n   

1
|b|

58

(5.3)

for   0. excitations with higher energy than this are not part of the limiting theory
obtained in the zero slope limit.

as in section 4.2, the qualitative properties of the   0 limit will depend on the sign of
pf(b). for large b, the boundary conditions (5.1) become dirichlet boundary conditions at

both ends. those are the boundary conditions of both a supersymmetric d0-d0 system,

and a nonsupersymmetric d0-d0 system. we will see that for pf(b) > 0, the d0-d4

system behaves like d0-d0, and for pf(b) < 0, it behaves like d0-d0. intuitively, this

is because the induced instanton number on a d4-brane with a b-eld is proportional to
2r pf(b), so the d4-brane carries d0 charge if pf(b) < 0, and d0 charge if pf(b) > 0.
 1

we dene z1 = x1 + ix2, z2 = x3 + ix4 and express the boundary conditions on xi as

a boson z with boundary conditions (5.4) has a mode expansion

 zi(cid:12)(cid:12)=0 = zi + bi zi(cid:12)(cid:12)= = 0
 zi(cid:12)(cid:12)=0 = zi  bi zi(cid:12)(cid:12)= = 0.
z = ixn (cid:16)e(n+)( +i)  e(n+)(i)(cid:17) n+
z = ixn (cid:16)e(n)( +i)  e(n)(i)(cid:17) n+

n  

n + 

with

e2i = 

1 + ib
1  ib

,

0   < 1.

(5.4)

(5.5)

(5.6)

with a euclidean worldsheet, z is not the complex conjugate of z because the boundary
conditions (2.2) are not compatible with real x1,2,3,4. with lorentzian signature,  = it

and  is the complex conjugate of  in (5.5).

we nd

1

 

b

 1
2 + b
1  1



b

for b  
for b  0
for b  +

(5.7)

so  changes from 0 to 1 as b changes from minus innity to innity. the complex boson

ground state energy is

e() =

1
24 

1

2(cid:18) 

1

2(cid:19)2

.

(5.8)

it is invariant under   1  , as it should be because this exchanges the oscillators of z
with those of z in (5.5).

59

we are interested in the spectrum of the 0-4 strings. in the r sector the ground state

energy is zero, and we nd massless fermions. in the ns sector the ground state energy is

et = 3e(0)+e(1)+e(2)e(0)3e(1/2)e(|11/2|)e(|21/2|)+e(1/2), (5.9)
where the rst term is from x0,5...9, the second and third from z1,2, and the fourth from
the bosonic ghosts. the other terms arise from the corresponding fermions, whose energies
dier by 1

2 from the corresponding bosons  they are n  |  1

2|. from (5.9) we nd

the four lowest energy states are the ground state and three states obtained by acting
2| on the ground state. their

1

1

1

et = 

2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) +(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2 
2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:19) .
2(cid:18)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)1 
with the fermion creation operators with energies |i  1
energies are
2(cid:19) .
2(cid:18)2 
2(cid:19) 
2(cid:18)1 


of these the states with energies

1

1

1

1

(5.10)

(5.11)

(5.12)

(5.13)

e+
 = 

1
2

(1 + 2  1)

have one sign of (1)f , while those with energies

e
 = 

1
2

(1  2) ,

have the opposite sign. the gso projection projects out one of these pairs. which pair

is being projected out depends on whether we study d0-branes or anti-d0-branes. (this

is a general feature of d-brane physics, exploited for instance in [62]: strings ending on

d0-branes or d0-branes have the same boundary condition but opposite gso projection.)
we use the conventions that for d0-branes we keep the states with energies e+
 and for
anti-d0-branes the states with energies e
 . with this choice, a d0-brane has instanton
number +1.

for d0-branes

e+
 = 

1
2

(1 + 2  1)  

1

2

b1 + b2

 (cid:12)(cid:12) 1

b1
+ 1
b2

1
b1

+ 1

b2(cid:12)(cid:12)

for b1, b2  0
for |bi|   with pf(b) > 0
for |bi|   with pf(b) < 0 .

(5.14)

for small bi, a tachyon appears, meaning that turning on a small b 6= 0 perturbs the
small instanton problem, adding a fayet-iliopoulos term to the adhm equations. this is

60

in keeping, at least qualitatively, with the proposal in [37] that the b-eld should add this

term to the low energy physics. the tachyon mass squared is small for small bi, so the d0-
d4 system is almost on shell and gives a reliable description of small instanton behavior

in this range. for generic bi , there is still a tachyon in the d0-d4 system, suggesting that
the instanton moduli space has no small instanton singularity, but since the tachyon mass

squared is not small, the d0-d4 system is signicantly o shell, and it is hard to use it for

a quantitative study of instantons.

now let us consider the   0 limit, or more precisely the two cases of |bi|  ,

with pf(b) > 0 or pf(b) < 0. here we may hope for a more precise description.

for pf(b) > 0, the d0-d4 system is tachyonic. the tachyon mass squared, in units

of 1/, is of order 1, since e+
tachyon mass squared is actually that of the standard d0-d0 tachyon, and we interpret the

 is of order 1, so the tachyon mass is of order 1/. the

tachyon to mean that the d0 can annihilate one of the induced d0-branes in the d4, along

the lines of [62]. thus, the d0-d4 system is an excitation of the d4 system. its excitation

energy is much too big to obey (5.3). in fact, the tachyon mass squared gives an estimate

of the excitation energy required to deform a d4-brane to a d0-d4 system (with an extra
induced d0-brane in the d4), so this excitation energy corresponds to n = |e+
|  1.
thus, although the d0-d4 system is a possible excitation of string theory, it is not one
of the excitations of the d4-brane that survives in our favorite   0 limit (2.14) of the
open string theory. hence, in particular, the d0-d4 system is not part of the physics that

will be described by the bf 2 theory if pf(b) > 0. and instanton moduli space of the bf 2

theory should have no small instanton singularity (which would be governed presumably

by a d0-d4 system) if pf(b) > 0. this last statement is in agreement with the analysis

in [35], where  (and hence b) was assumed to be self-dual, and the instanton moduli

space was found, using a noncommutative adhm transform, to have no small instanton

singularity.

for pf(b) < 0, the situation is completely dierent. there is still a tachyon for
generic b, but n = |e+
|  1/|b|  , which means that (5.3) is obeyed. hence, for
pf(b) < 0, the d0-d4 still represents (for generic b) an excitation of the d4-brane with

a positive excitation energy, but the energy of this excitation scales correctly so that it
survives as part of the limiting theory for   0. hence, the d0-d4 system is part
of the physics that the limiting bf 2 theory should describe. moreover, if pf(b) < 0, it

is possible to have b+ = 0, in which case, since b1 = b2, the tachyon mass squared
in this particular case, the d0-d4 system is supersymmetric and bps and
vanishes.

61

should represent a point on noncommutative instanton moduli space. thus, the moduli

space of noncommutative instantons should have a small instanton singularity precisely if
b+ = 0. the small instantons at or very near b+ = 0 should be described by the d0-d4

system and the associated adhm equations; in this description, the fayet-iliopoulos term
vanishes, and the small instanton singularity appears, if b+ = 0.

let us now examine the excitation spectrum of the d0-d4 system for negative pf(b)
as |bi|  . as we will see, this system has, in addition to the ground state, excited
states that are also part of the limiting theory for   0. we assume, without loss of
generality, that b1 > 0 and b2 < 0 (their product is negative because pf(b) is negative).
therefore 1  1  1

and 2   1

b1

b2

.

before the gso projection, the lowest energy state |0i has energy

e
 = 

1
2

(1  2)  

1
2

+

1
2b1 

1

2b2

.

(5.15)

four low energy states that survive the gso projection are obtained by acting on |0i
with the lowest oscillators of the fermionic partners of zi and zi , whose energies are
1  1
four states have energies

, 1
2  2  1

, 3
2  1  1

. the resulting

2  1

2  1

2 + 1
b1

2 + 1
b2

b1

b2

, 2 + 1

2  1
  (cid:18) 1

2  1
2b2(cid:19)

+

1

e+

2b1
3
2b1 
1
2b1 

1

3

e+
1 
e+
2 

(5.16)

.

2b2

2b2

six more states are obtained by acting on |0i with the lowest oscillators of the fermionic
partners of x0,5...9, whose energy is 1

2 . these states have energy

e+
i 

1
2b1 

1

2b2

for i = 0, 5 . . . 9.

(5.17)

of these ten states the lowest are the rst two, which have already been mentioned above.
the other eight states have larger energies, but since they have n = e  1/|b|  , they
obey (5.3) and survive as part of the limiting quantum mechanics for   0.

we can also act on any one of these states with an arbitrary polynomial in the lowest
bosonic creation operator in z1 and in z2, whose energies are 1  1  1
and 2   1
.
these states again have low enough energy to survive in the   0 limit. of the states

b2

b1

62

just described, some will obey the physical state conditions, and some will be projected

out of the spectrum.

the existence of this large number of light states can be simply understood as follows.
for innite |bi| with negative pf(b), our string is eectively stretched between two d0-
branes. one d0-brane has a xed position at the origin, but the second d0-brane can be

anywhere in the d4 (since a d4 with a strong b eld of pf(b) < 0 contains a continuous

distribution of d0s). the uctuation in position of the second d0-brane are given by
the n = 0 bosonic oscillators in (5.5). note that for n = 0, as |b|   or   0, the
exponential factor (exp((n + )( + i))  exp((n + )(  i))) /(n + ) in (5.5) becomes
a simple linear function of , describing a straight string connecting the d0-brane at the

origin with an arbitrary point in the d4. the uctuation in the free endpoint of the

straight string is governed by an eective hamiltonian which is that of a charged particle

in a magnetic eld in its lowest landau level.

in section 6, we revisit these low-lying

excitations (and their analogs in other cases) and use them to construct modules for the

ring of functions on a noncommutative space.

we would like to interpret the low lying d0-d4 excitation spectrum that we have

found as corresponding to small uctuations around a point-like instanton. in ordinary

yang-mills theory, the uctuations about an instanton solution are given by eigenfunctions

of a small uctuation operator that one might describe as a generalized laplacian. the
eigenfunctions depend on all four coordinates of r4. in noncommutative yang-mills theory,

the uctuations about an instanton should be described by a noncommutative analog of

a laplace operator. we do not know how to explicitly describe the appropriate operator
directly, especially in the small instanton limit. but we believe that near b+ = 0, for

perturbing around a small instanton, its spectrum is given by the states we have just

described in the d0-d4 system. these states are naturally regarded as functions of just

two of the four spacetime coordinates, something which at least intuitively is compatible

with noncommutativity of the spatial coordinates. for instance, charged particles in a

constant magnetic eld in the rst landau level have wave functions that are functions of

just half of the coordinates. in fact, their wave functions are the functions of two bosons

we found above.

quantitative analysis of fi coupling

let us consider the more general case of k d4-branes and n d0-branes. the eective

theory of d0-branes has eight supersymmetries. from the 0-0 strings, we get a u (n )

63

gauge group and (in a language making manifest half of the supersymmetry) two chiral

superelds x and y in the adjoint representation of u (n ). quantization of the 0-4 strings

gives two chiral superelds q and p in the fundamental of u (n ). their lagrangian includes

a potential proportional to

trn(cid:0)[x, x] + [y, y ] + qq  pp  (cid:1)2

+(cid:12)(cid:12)[x, y ] + qp(cid:12)(cid:12)2o ,

(5.18)

where  is an fi term, determined by the existence of a tachyon mass in quantizing the 0-4

strings. in fact, for nonzero  the spectrum of the theory at the origin includes a tachyon,

which should match the tachyon found in the 0-4 spectrum (at least when  is small and

the d0-d4 system is almost stable). the space of zeros of the potential (5.18) does not

include the origin in this case. this means that the pointlike instanton, corresponding to
x = y = q = p = 0, does not exist when  6= 0.

comparing (5.18) at x = y = q = p = 0 with the analysis above of the energy of 0-4

strings, we see that for bi  0 the spectrum of the theory is consistent with

(5.19)

ij b+ij.

 =  1

2   1

 2  b+
we are more interested in the limit |bi|   1
2  . for positive pf(b), the tachyon mass
squared m2 =  e+
2 diverges, signaling a strong instability and leading us
to propose that in the   0 limit, for pf(b) = 0, the small instanton is not part of the
physics described by the bf 2 theory. for negative pf(b) the tachyon mass squared
g(cid:12)(cid:12)
4(cid:12)(cid:12)+
m2 = 

1
2|1 + 2  1|  

scales correctly so that this tachyon, and the d0-d4 system whose instability it describes,

b2(cid:12)(cid:12) = 

(2)2(detg) 1

1

2(cid:12)(cid:12) 1

b1

e+


(detg)

1
4

= 

1

+

can be part of the physics described by the bf 2 theory. in (5.20), we used (4.52) to express
m2 in terms of |+

g|, where

this relation leads us to identify the fi term

(5.20)

(5.21)

(5.22)

g|2 = trg+

gg+
g.

(cid:12)(cid:12)+

g|.

 (cid:12)(cid:12)+

the space of zeros of (5.18) is, according to [35], the moduli space of instantons on
noncommutative r4. our identication of  in terms of the b-eld and hence as the

noncommutativity parameter  gives an independent derivation of this fact.

64

to (cid:12)(cid:12)+

the moduli space of instantons depends only on , which in our limit is proportional
g|. this means that if +
g = 0, the moduli space of noncommutative instantons is
not deformed from its value at  = 0, and includes the singularity of point-like instantons.
when g 6= 0 but +
g = 0, the underlying space is noncommutative, and the instanton
solutions depends on , but the moduli space of instantons is independent of .

the removal of the small instanton singularity for generic  seems, intuitively, to be
in accord with the idea that the spacetime coordinates do not commute for  6= 0, and
hence an instanton cannot be completely localized. however, this line of thought cannot
be pushed too far, since the small instanton singularity is present for + = 0.

since b+ induces negative d0-brane charge and instantons are d0-branes, we found

an instability when the d0-branes are point-like that prevents them from separating from

the d4-branes. this suggests a relation between the problem of instantons on a noncom-

mutative space and k-theory.

instanton moduli space depends only on +

by now we have seen several indications that the moduli space of noncommutative
instantons depends only of +, not . one indication is that the explicit equation (3.17)
describing the rst noncommutative correction to the instanton equation (for small  or
f ) depends only on +. also, by determining the fi term from the d0-d4 system, we
have just obtained a more general argument that the moduli space depends only on +
g.
we now want to show that this conclusion can actually be obtained using the methods

in [35] for direct analysis of noncommutative instantons via the adhm construction. in
eect, this gives a direct mathematical argument for identifying the fi term with +
g. (in
our terminology, the analysis in [35] is done in the open string metric g  the right metric

for the bf 2 action that they work with  and in extending their reasoning below, we work

entirely in this metric. we will work in coordinates in which the metric g is ij.)

given any ij on r4, we can always pick a complex structure on r4, with complex

coordinates z0 and z1, such that the nonzero commutators are

[z0, z0] = 0
[z1, z1] = 1.

(5.23)

this can be done in such a way that the instanton equation says that bf 2,0 = bf 0,2 = 0
(that is, the (2, 0) and (0, 2) parts of bf vanish) and bf00 +bf11 = 0. (the complex structure

with these properties is the one for which the metric g is kahler, and  is of type (1, 1).)

65

in the study of noncommutative instantons in [35], only the case 0 = 1 = /2 (or in
other words  = 0) was considered. but it is straightforward to repeat the computation
in greater generality and show that the moduli space only depends on the sum 0 + 1, or
in other words it only depends on +. the key step in [35] is the verication of the second
part of eqn. (3.6) of that paper (namely zz = zz), where the  s and s were dened
earlier in their eqn. (2.2). the classical adhm construction is formulated in eqn (2.1)

of [35], with r = c = 0, and assumes that the zs commute. if one wants to turn on
nonzero s, one can (by a rotation) assume that c = 0 and turn on only r. the basic
idea in [35] is that if r 6= 0, one can compensate for this by letting the zs and zs no
longer commute. it is shown in this paper that in verifying the key equation zz = zz,
a c-number term coming from the commutator of a z and a z can cancel the contribution

of r. indeed, the term coming from the [z, z] commutators is in general [z0, z0] + [z1, z1],
in particular, the
so the value of r that one needs depends only on the sum 0 + 1.
moduli space of noncommutative instantons, as determined from the adhm construction,

only depends on the sum  = 0 + 1, as we wished to show.

although the moduli space only depends on , the instanton solutions themselves

(whose construction is explained in [35]) depend on both 0 and 1. indeed, the components
of the instanton connection take values in an algebra that depends on both 0 and 1, so
(there is a notion of background
it is hard to compare gauge elds for dierent s.

independence for noncommutative gauge elds, which we discuss in section 3.2, but it

involves a transformation that adds a constant to the curvature measured at innity, so it
is not directly relevant to comparing instantons on r4 with dierent values of the s.)

6. noncommutative gauge theory on a torus

in this section we consider d-branes compactied on a p-torus tp in our usual limit of
  0 with the open string parameters g,  xed. surprisingly, the eective eld theory

based on the bf 2 action inherits the t -duality symmetry of the underlying string theory.

this is surprising because without the b-eld, the eective theory based on the f 2 action

is not invariant under t -duality.

this t -duality appeared in the mathematical literature as morita equivalence of dif-

ferent modules.

in the physics literature it was explored in [4,17-21] using the dlcq

description of m-theory. we will devote section 6.1 to deriving this duality using our point

of view. it will not involve the dlcq description of m-theory, but instead, will use the

66

zero slope limit. (in section 7 we will explain how these two approaches are related.) a

crucial element of our discussion will be the dierence between the closed string parameters

g, b and gs and the open string parameters g,  and gs.

it is important that unlike t -duality of string theory, which is the reason for t -duality

of these theories, here we do not relate a theory on a torus to a theory on the dual torus. in

particular, we do not have the standard exchange of momentum modes and winding modes.

since we are studying open strings there are no winding modes. instead, in open string

theory t -duality has the eect of changing the dimensionality of the d-branes. therefore,

this t -duality acts on the d-brane charges. it changes the rank of the gauge elds and

their topological charges.

in subsections 6.2-6.4, we will interpret many mathematical results about construction

of modules over a noncommutative torus and morita equivalences between them in terms

of standard techniques of quantizing open strings.

6.1. t -duality

we start by deriving the t -duality of the theories using our point of view. we consider
dp-branes on t p parametrized by xi  xi+2r with the closed string metric g. the periods
of the b eld are (2r)2b and this motivates us to express the noncommutativity in terms
of the dimensionless matrix  = 1

2r2 .

the so(p, p, z) t -duality group is represented by the matrices

where a, b, c and d are p  p matrices with integer entries. t satises

d(cid:19) ,
t =(cid:18) a b

c

1

0(cid:19) ,

t t(cid:18) 0 1

1 0(cid:19) t =(cid:18) 0

1

and therefore

t acts on

cta + atc = 0

dtb + btd = 0

ctb + atd = 1.

e =

r2


(g + 2b)

67

(6.1)

(6.2)

(6.3)

(6.4)

and the string coupling gs as [63]

e = (ae + b)

1

ce + d

detg(cid:19) 1
gs = gs(cid:18) detg

4

.

using (6.3), (6.4) and (6.5)

g =


2r2 (e + (e)t) =

1

(ce + d)t g

1

ce + d

,

and (6.6) becomes

gs =

gs

det(ce + d) 1

2

.

(6.5)

(6.6)

(6.7)

(6.8)

we are interested in the action of t on the open string parameters g,  and gs.
for simplicity we ignore the more general variables (3.19) including . the role of  in

t -duality was elucidated in [21]. using

and (6.3) we nd

g =

similarly

e

2

r2 (cid:18) 1
2(cid:18) 1

1

e 

 =

where [ ]a denotes the antisymmetric part. finally,

= (a + be1)g(a + be1)t.

1

a + be1(cid:21)a

1
e

=


r2 g1 + 

1

1

+

(e)t(cid:19)1
(e)t(cid:19) =(cid:20)(c + de1)
r2 e(cid:17)
det(cid:16) 
detg 
gs = gs
gs = gs(cid:2)det(a + be1)(cid:3) 1

1
2

2 ,

(6.9)

(6.10)

,

(6.11)

(6.12)

(6.13)

transforms to

and therefore

detg

g2
s

is t -duality invariant. from (6.13) we nd the transformation law of

the yang-mills gauge coupling

gy m = gy m(cid:2)det(a + be1)(cid:3) 1

4 ,

68

(6.14)

in the zero slope limit with nite r we have e1   and (6.10), (6.11), (6.14) become

g = (a + b)g(a + b)t

 = (c + d)

1

a + b

gy m = gy m [det(a + b)]

1
4

(6.15)

(it is easy to check using the antisymmetry of  and the relations (6.3) that  is antisym-
metric). these transformation rules have already appeared in the mathematical literature.

in the physics literature they appeared in [4,17-21]. our expressions (6.15) are similar to

those in these papers but dier by a  d and b  c; i.e. by conjugation by t =(cid:18) 0

in section 7 we will explain the origin for this dierence.

0(cid:19).

1

1

we note that the transformation of the metric g is unlike the typical t -duality trans-

formation of a metric (like (6.7)). since it is linear in g, for every t -duality transformation
the transformed metric g scales like the original metric g. if one of them scales to zero,
so does the other one; for example, there is no transformation which maps g to g1.
although for closed strings there are transformations which map momentum modes to

winding modes, this is not true for the open strings we consider; yet the theory is t -

duality invariant!

if some of the components of  are rational, they can be transformed to zero. for ex-
ample, if  = d1c, where c and d have integer entries, there is a t dual description with

 = 0. it is given by t =(cid:18) a b

d(cid:19) with appropriate a and b.  vanishes because (using

(6.3)) a + b = a bd1c = (dt)1 is invertible. this also guarantees that the transformed
metric g = d1g(d1)t and yang-mills coupling constant gy m = gy m (detd) 1
4 are -
nite. in this case the noncommutative theory with nonzero  is t dual to a commutative

c

theory. the volume of the torus of this dual commutative theory is smaller by a factor of

detd relative to the original torus. more generally, if only some of the components of 

are rational some of the coordinates could be transformed to commuting coordinates.

there is another point we should mention about the case with rational . then, there

exist t -duality transformations for which (6.15) is singular. in particular, for a + b = 0

the transformed g vanishes and the transformed  diverges. one way to understand it

is to rst use a t -duality transformation, as above, to transform to  = 0. then, all the

transformations with a = 0 are singular. they include the transformation with a = d = 0,

b = c = 1 which can be referred to as t -duality on all sides of the torus. more generally,

69

if only some of the components of  are rational, there exist t -duality transformations to

 with innite entries and to g with vanishing eigenvalues. we conclude that when  is

rational not all the so(p, p; z) duality group acts.

this discussion becomes more clear for the simplest case of the two torus. then, the t -
duality group is so(4, 4; z) = sl(2, z)sl(2, z). one sl(2, z) factor acts geometrically
on g leaving , gy m and the volume v of the torus with the metric g unchanged. the

other sl(2, z) acts as

v  = v (a + b)2

 =

c + d
a + b

gy m = gy m (a + b)

1

2 ,

(6.16)

c

c

d

1

2 are nite.

an sl(2, z) matrix. we again see that when  = c/d is rational it can be transformed

where now , a, b, c and d are numbers, rather than matrices as above, and(cid:18) a b
to  = 0 by an sl(2, z) transformation(cid:18) a b
however, the transformation(cid:18) c

d(cid:19) is
d(cid:19) with appropriate a and b. for such a

a b(cid:19) does not act regularly.

transformation a + b = 1/d, and therefore v  = v /d2 and gy m = gy m /d

the fact that for rational  = c/d the theory is equivalent to another theory on
a commutative torus whose volume is smaller by a factor of d2 can be understood as
follows. before the t -duality transformation the torus is parametrized by xi  xi + 2r.
the algebra of functions on the torus is generated by ui = eixi/r, which satisfy u1u2 =
e2iu2u1. the t -duality transformation does not act on the complex structure of the
torus but aects its volume. this can be achieved by rescaling the two coordinates xi
such that the identication is xi  xi + 2r/d, thus reducing the volume by a factor of d2.
i . they satisfy

now the algebra of functions on the torus is generated by eui = eixid/r = u d
eu1eu2 = e2id2eu2eu1 = eu2eu1; i.e. the new torus is commutative.

we stress that this transformation to an ordinary theory on another torus is unrelated

to the transformation to ordinary gauge elds we exhibited in section 3, which exists also
on rn and on a torus for any , not necessarily rational. the transformation in section

3 does not act on the space the theory is formulated on  if the theory is formulated on a

torus, this transformation maps us to another theory formulated on the same torus. this

transformation also does not change the rank of the gauge group, but it converts the simple

bf 2 action to a complicated non-polynomial action. the transformation we discuss here

70

for rational  acts on the torus, changes the rank of the gauge group and maps the simple

bf 2 to a simple f 2 action.

one might be concerned that because of the special properties of the zero slope limit

with rational  the noncommutative theory behaves in a discontinuous fashion as a function

of . furthermore, for generic g and b their map into the fundamental domain varies
ergodically in the zero slope limit12. however, these discontinuities aect only the closed

strings, which decouple in the limit. the open string parameters g,  and gs transform

smoothly under t duality. correspondingly, the open string dynamics varies smoothly

with  for xed g in the zero slope limit.

6.2. modules over a noncommutative torus

our goal in the rest of this section is to construct and analyze directly from quan-
tization of open strings a natural class of representations for the algebra a of functions
on a noncommutative torus. mathematically, representations of a ring are usually called

modules. we will aim to understand in physical terms the usual mathematical construc-

tions [65,66,4,17] of projective modules over a noncommutative torus, and the morita

equivalences between them, which [4,17-20] are intimately related to t -duality.

for simplicity, we will discuss bosonic strings. (incorporating supersymmetry does
not aect the ring a and so does not alter the modules.) consider a p-brane wrapped
on the torus. the ground states of the p-p open strings are tachyons. for every function
f on tp, there is a corresponding tachyon vertex operator of . in the limit   0, the
dimensions of the of s vanish. the operator product algebra of the of s reduces, as we
have seen in section 2, to the -product of functions on tp, essentially

of (t)  og(t)  ofg(t),

for t > t.

(6.17)

a p-p open string has a world-sheet with topology  = i  r, where r is a copy of
the real line parametrizing the proper time, and i = [0, ] is an interval that parametrizes
the string at xed time. the algebra a of tachyon vertex operators can be taken to act at
either end of the open string. operators acting on the left of the string obviously commute
with those acting on the right, and the open string states form a bimodule for aa. by a
bimodule for a product of rings a a, we mean a space that is a left module for the rst
12 this fact was mentioned in [64], where the role of noncommutative geometry was anticipated.

71

factor a, and a right module for the second factor a, with the two actions commuting13.
that the strings are a left module for the rst factor and a right module for the second

can be seen as follows. the interaction of open strings with the b-eld comes from a term

i

2z



abbijaxibxj = 

i

2z{0}r

bijxi dxj
dt

+

i

2z{}r

bijxi dxj
dt

.

(6.18)

the relative minus sign between the two boundary terms in (6.18) means that if for vertex
operators inserted on {0}  r, (6.17) holds with some given , then for operators inserted
on {}  r, the same ope holds with  replaced by . changing the sign of  is
equivalent to reversing the order of multiplication of functions, so if the conventions are

such that (6.17) holds as written for vertex operators inserted at the left end of the string,

then for operators inserted at the right end we have

of (t)  og(t)  ogf (t),

if t > t.

(6.19)

comparing to the denition in the footnote, we see that the open string states form a left
module for a acting on the left end of the open string, and a right module for a acting
on the right end of the open string.

in the limit   0, the excited string states decouple, and we can get an a  a
bimodule m by just taking the open string ground states. in fact, this module is simply
a free module, that is m = a, since the open string ground states are a copy of a.

we can construct many other left modules for a as follows. consider an arbitrary
boundary condition  for open strings on tp with the given open string parameters g and
. (physically,  is determined by a collection of dq-branes for q = p, p  2, . . ..) then
consider the p- open strings, that is the strings whose left end is on a xed p-brane and
whose right end obeys the boundary condition . the p-p algebra a acts on the p- open
string ground states for any given , giving a left module m for a. in section 6.3, we will
construct the usual projective left modules for a in this way. in section 6.4, we examine
theoretical issues connected with this construction.

13 a left module for a ring a is a set m on which a acts, obeying a condition that will be stated
momentarily. for a  a and m  m , we write am for the product of a with m. the dening

property of a left module is that for a, b  a and m  m , one has (ab)m = a(bm). in the case

that m is a right module, the action of a on m is usually written on the right: the product of

a  a with m  m is written ma. the dening property of a right module is that m(ba) = (mb)a.

72

6.3. construction of modules

we turn now to detailed description of the modules. for brevity of exposition, we
will concentrate on modules over a noncommutative t2. the generalization to tp does
not involve essential novelty for the type of modules we will construct, which are obtained
from constant curvature connections over an ordinary torus. (for p  4, there should be
additional modules constructed from instantons, but we are not able to describe them very

concretely.)

the constructions all start with ordinary actions for open strings on an ordinary t2,
in the presence of a b-eld, with twobrane boundary conditions on the left end of the string

and varying boundary conditions on the right. we consider four cases for the boundary

conditions on the right of the open string: (i) twobrane boundary conditions; (ii) zerobrane

boundary conditions; (iii) open strings ending on a twobrane with m units of magnetic

ux; and nally (iv) the general case of open strings ending on a system of n twobranes

with m units of magnetic ux. quantization of the open strings will give standard modules
over a noncommutative t2. these modules have been described and used in section 3.2
of [4], and reconsidered in [19-21].

(i) twobrane boundary conditions

naively, the limit   0 can be taken by simply dropping the kinetic energy term
from the open string action. this leaves only boundary terms, which are determined by
the interaction with the b-eld. we describe the torus by angular coordinates xi, i = 1, 2,
with 0  xi  2, and we describe the open string worldsheet by functions xi(,  ), where
 is the proper time and , which ranges from 0 to , parametrizes the position along the

open string. if we set xi = xi(0,  ), exi = xi(,  ), then the boundary terms in the action

become

i

(6.20)

lb = 

i

2z dtbijxi dxj

dt

+

2z dtbijexi dexj

dt

.

if these were the only variables and lb the full action, then x1 would be the canonical

phase space would be a copy of t2  t2. this cannot be the full answer since (t2 being

conjugate of x2  and similarly ex1 and ex2 would be canonically paired  so the classical
compact) the quantization would be inconsistent unlessr b is an integral multiple of 2.

in fact, as we will now see, the phase space is t2  r2.

we must remember the string connecting the two endpoints. the ordinary kinetic

energy of the string is

lk =

1

4z

73

gijaxiaxj.

(6.21)

here we recall that in the   0 limit with xed open string metric, gij is of order ()2, so
lk formally vanishes. for a given set of endpoints, the contribution to the energy coming
in each homotopy

minimum involve modes with mass squared of order 1/. since we are not interested in
such high energy excitations, we can ignore the uctuations and identify the phase space as

from lk is minimized by a string that is a geodesic from xi to exi.
class of paths from xi to exi, there is a unique geodesic. the uctuations around the
consisting of a pair of points xi andexi together with a straight line (or geodesic) connecting

them. (we can also reach this conclusion by just formally setting  = 0 and dropping lk
completely. then there is a gauge invariance under arbitrary variations of xi(,  ) keeping
the endpoints xed. we can use this gauge invariance to x a gauge in which xi(,  ) is a

geodesic.)

now we write

xi = yi +

1
2
1
2

si

si.

(6.22)

exi = yi 

here yi is t2-valued, but si is real-valued. in fact, yi is the midpoint of the geodesic from

xi to exi, while the real-valuedness of si enables us to keep track of how many times this

geodesic wraps around t2.

the symplectic structure derived from lb is

 = bdx1  dx2  bdex1  dex2 = b(cid:0)ds1  dy2  ds2  dy1(cid:1) ,

where we set b12 = b. in canonical quantization, we can take the yi to be multiplication
operators, and identify the si as the canonical momenta:

(6.23)

s1 = 
i
s2 =
b


y2 = 2i

i
b

y1 = 2i


y2

y1 .

(6.24)

here we have set as in the discussion of t -duality  = 1/2b. (since we are studying a
two dimensional situation,  like b is a number.) the physical hilbert space thus consists
of functions on an ordinary t2, with coordinates yi. the algebra a of functions on the
noncommutative t2 is generated by

u1 = exp(ix1) = exp(iy1  (/y2)),
u2 = exp(ix2) = exp(iy2 + (/y1)).

(6.25)

74

they obey

u1u2 = e2iu2u1.

the commutant of a is generated by

eu1 =exp(iex1) = exp(iy1 + (/y2))
eu2 =exp(iex2) = exp(iy2  (/y1)).

eu1eu2 = e2ieeu2eu1

these operators obey

with

e = .

(6.26)

(6.27)

(6.28)

(6.29)

the relative minus sign between  and e means, as we have explained in section 6.2, that

the open strings are an a  a bimodule (left module for the rst factor, acting at  = 0,
and right module for the second factor, acting at  = ). the formulas that we have
arrived at are standard formulas for a free a  a bimodule.

(ii) zerobrane boundary conditions

now, without changing the boundary conditions at  = 0, we replace the boundary

conditions at  =  by zerobrane boundary conditions. for example, we can place the

zerobrane at the origin and take the boundary condition at  =  to beexi = 0. the phase

space therefore consists now of a point xi on t2 together with a geodesic from that point to
xi = 0. a shift xi  xi + 2ni (with integers ni) acts freely on the phase space, changing
the winding number of the geodesic. we can forget about the geodesic if we consider the
xi to be real-valued.

the phase space is thus a copy of r2 with symplectic form

to quantize, we can take x2 to be a multiplication operator and

 = b dx1  dx2.

x1 = i

1
b


x2 = 2i


x2 .

hence, the algebra a of functions on the noncommutative t2 is generated by

u1 = exp(ix1) = exp(2/x2)
u2 = exp(ix2),

75

(6.30)

(6.31)

(6.32)

again obeying

u1u2 = e2iu2u1.

the commutant of the ui is generated by

eu1 =exp(ix1/) = exp(2/x2)
eu2 =exp(ix2/).

we note that unlike ui which are invariant under xi  xi + 2, eui are not invariant under

this shift. yet, they are valid operators on our hilbert space because xi are points in r2,
rather than in t2. these operators obey

(6.33)

(6.34)

(6.35)

(6.36)

where

eu1eu2 = e2ieeu2eu1,

1


.

e =

the formulas are again standard, and the interpretation is as follows [4]. with twobrane

boundary conditions, the vertex operators at  =  generate, as we saw above, a non-
commutative torus with  = . the t -duality transformation that converts twobranes
to zerobranes acts on  by   1/, giving us a noncommutative torus a with

noncommutativity parameter e = 1/ = 1/.

in physical terms, the algebra a is the algebra of ground state 0-0 strings acting on
the 2-0 open strings at  = . the relevant 0-0 strings are open strings that wind on a

geodesic around the torus, starting and ending at the origin. that these open strings in the

small volume limit generate the algebra of a noncommutative torus was the starting point

[4,12,13] in applications of noncommutative yang-mills theory to string theory. from the

point of view of the present paper, the statement can be justied by computing the opes

of the 0-0 open strings, which are equivalent by t -duality to the opes of 2-2 tachyon

vertex operators. we studied the 2-2 opes in section 2.1.

(iii) (1, m) boundary conditions

now we consider a more general case: an open string that at  = 0 has the same

twobrane boundary conditions as before while at  =  it terminates on a twobrane that

carries m units of zerobrane charge. the zerobrane charge can be incorporated by placing

76

(6.38)

(6.40)

1 + m

e =

on the twobrane in question a magnetic eld of constant curvature m/2. the boundary

terms in the action become now

lb = 

i

2z dtbijxi dxj

dt

+

i

2z dt(cid:16)bij +

m
2

ij(cid:17)exi dexj

dt

(here ij is an antisymmetric tensor with 12 = 1.) the symplectic structure is

.

(6.37)

 = bdx1  dx2 (cid:16)b +

m

2(cid:17) dex1  dex2.

while the algebra acting at  = 0 is a noncommutative torus with  = 1/2b, the
algebra acting at  =  is now a noncommutative torus a with

1

2b + m

.

(6.39)

e =

no essentially new computation is required here; the algebra at  =  is determined in the

usual way in terms of the boundary conditions at  = . (at m = 0, we had in (i) above

e =  = 1/2b; replacing b by b + m/2 gives (6.39).) we can write this as



where  =  is the noncommutativity parameter we found in (i) above for the algebra at

 = . e is obtained from  by the t -duality transformation that maps (1, 0) boundary

conditions (twobrane charge 1 and zerobrane charge 0) to (1, m). in fact, in the zero area

limit, the modular parameter  = 2b + i(area) reduces to  = 2b. the modular

transformation that maps (1, 0) to (1, m) is

which in terms of  = 1/2b is

2b  2b + m,

 



1 + m

.

(6.41)

(6.42)

of course, we can also construct explicitly the a  a bimodule by quantizing the
open strings. (the details are a bit lengthy and might be omitted on rst reading.) for

this, we set

xi = yi + si

exi = yi + (1 + )si,

77

(6.43)

yi  t2 and si real-valued. if
m
2

then the symplectic form in these variables has no ds1  ds2 term, and reads
dy1  dy2.

 + (b +

m
2

2

 = (cid:16) m

m

2(cid:17) = 0,
2 + (2 + 1)(cid:16)b +
)(cid:17)(cid:0)ds1  dy2  ds2  dy1(cid:1) 

m
2

a further rescaling

with

gives

si = wti

1

m

w =

2  +(cid:0)b + m
2(cid:1)
 = dt1  dy2  dt2  dy1 

m
2

dy1  dy2.

(6.44)

(6.45)

(6.46)

(6.47)

(6.48)

(6.50)

because there is no dt1dt2 term, the yi commute and can be represented by multiplication
operators. the remaining commutators can be represented by taking t1 = id/dy2,
t2 = id/dy1, where

(cid:20) d

dy1 ,

d

dy2(cid:21) = i

m
2

.

(6.49)

hence, the hilbert space is the space of sections of a line bundle over t2 with rst chern
class m. the algebra a that acts at  = 0 is generated by
d

u1 = exp(ix1) = exp(cid:18)iy1  w
u2 = exp(ix2) = exp(cid:18)iy2 + w

dy2(cid:19)
dy1(cid:19) ,

d

and using the above formulas, one can verify that u1u2 = exp(2i)u2u1, with as usual
 = 1/2b. one can similarly describe the algebra a that acts at  = .

we can pick a gauge in which

d
dt1 =
d
dt2 =


t1

t2 + i

m
2

t1,

(6.51)

with wave functions obeying (t1, t2 + 2) = (t1, t2), (t1 + 2, t2) = eimt2

(t1, t2). in
, where fk(t1 + 2) = fk+m(t1). the

this gauge, we expand (t1, t2) =pkz fk(t1)eikt2

78

fks can thus be grouped together into m functions f0(t1), . . . , fm1(t1) of a real variable
t1. this leads to the description of the module used in [4].

(iv) (n, m) boundary conditions

the general case of this type is to consider an open string that terminates at  = 0

on a twobrane, and at  =  on a cluster of n twobranes with zerobrane charge m. we

call this a cluster of charges (n, m). for simplicity, we suppose that m and n are relatively

prime.

such a cluster can be described as a system of n twobranes that bear a u (n) gauge

bundle e with a connection of constant curvature m/2n. the center of u (n) is u (1),

and the curvature of e lies in this u (1). nonetheless, e cannot be obtained by tensoring

a u (1) bundle with a trivial u (n) bundle, because the rst chern class of the u (1) bundle

would have to be m/n, not an integer. this leads to some complications in the direct

description [19] of the module derived from e.

however, e, and the open string hilbert space that comes with it, is naturally de-

scribed by an orbifolding procedure. we let bt2 be obtained from t2 by an n2-fold cover,
obtained by taking an n-fold cover in each direction. (so bt2 is described with the same
coordinates x1, x2 as t2, but they have period 2n.) when pulled back to bt2, e has a
central curvature with mn dirac ux units. in particular, on bt2, we can write e = l v ,
to get from bt2 to t2, we must divide by the symmetries ti : xi  xi + 2, i = 1, 2.

where l is a u (1) line bundle with rst chern class mn, and v is a trivial u (n) bundle,
with trivial connection.

these symmetries act on the bundle l, but in their action on l they do not commute. if
they commuted in acting on l, then after dividing by the group generated by the ti, l
would descend to a line bundle over the original t2 of rst chern class m/n, a contradiction
as this is not an integer. rather than t1 and t2 commuting in their action on l, we have

t1t2 = t2t1e2im/n.

(6.52)

to get translation operators that do commute, we let w1 and w2 be elements of u (n),
regarded as constant gauge transformations of v , that obey

then the operators

w1w2 = w2w1e2im/n.

t1 = t1w1, t2 = t2w2

79

(6.53)

(6.54)

do commute. by imposing invariance under the ti, the bundle l  v on bt2 descends to

the desired u (n) bundle e over t2.

now, let us construct the algebras that act at the two ends of the string. at  = 0,

the boundary coupling is just



i

2z d b(cid:18)x1 dx2

d (cid:19) .
d  x2 dx1

(6.55)

there are no n  n matrices to consider, so after descending to t2, the algebra a of
tachyon operators at  = 0 is generated simply by ui = exp(ixi), with the usual algebra
u1u2 = e2iu2u1, with  = 1/2b.

life is more interesting at  = . before orbifolding, with the target space understood

i

m

2z d(cid:16)b +

as bt2 so that the xi have periods 2n, the boundary couplings are
2n(cid:17)(cid:18)ex1 dex2
d (cid:19) .
d ex2 dex1
we have included the central curvature of l. the algebra of functions of the exi at  = 
is generated, before orbifolding, by yi = exp(iexi/n) with

y1y2 = y2y1exp(2i/n2(2b + m/n)).

(6.57)

(6.56)

here we have shifted b  b + m/2n in the usual formula (which at  =  has a phase
exp(2i) = exp(i/b)), and also taken account of the fact that the exponent of yi is n
times smaller than usual. since we assume that m and n are relatively prime, the algebra
of n n matrices is generated by w1 and w2. hence, the yi and the wi together generate
the algebra of operators that can act on the open string ground states at  = . however,

for the orbifolding, we want to consider the subalgebra of operators that commute with
the ti. it is generated by

where b is an integer such that mb is congruent to 1 mod n, or in other words there exists
an integer a with

equivalently,

1 = an  mb.

p =(cid:18) n m
a(cid:19)

b

80

(6.59)

(6.60)

2

eu1 =y1w b
eu2 =y2w b

1

(6.58)

1
n2

e =
e =

(6.61)

(6.62)

is an element of sl(2, z). the eui obey eu1eu2 = exp(2ie)eu2eu1, with

1

2b + (m/n) 

mb2
n

.

using (6.59) and  =  = 1/2b, this is
a + b
m + n

modulo z.

this shows that the algebra a that acts at  =  is the algebra of a noncommutative

of charges (1, 0) to a brane cluster of charges (n, m).

the a  a bimodule can be described explicitly by quantizing the open strings. in

torus, with e obtained from  by a t -duality transformation that maps a brane cluster
fact, before orbifolding, it arises from open strings on bt2 that end at  =  on a cluster

with brane charges (1, nm). the module with this boundary condition was described in
(iii) above, and the general case follows by dividing by zn  zn. we will omit details.

a few loose ends

we conclude this subsection by clearing up a few loose ends.

the modules we have constructed are all called projective modules mathematically.
(an a module m is called projective if there is another a module n such that m  n
is equivalent to a direct sum of free modules.) we have constructed all of our modules

(except the module of 2-0 strings) starting with a complex line bundle or vector bundle
over an ordinary commutative t2, which determines the boundary conditions at the  = 
end. given a complex vector bundle e over t2, there is a complex bundle f such that
e  f is trivial. this is the starting point of complex k-theory; it means that the space
of sections of e is a projective module for the ring of functions on the commutative t2.
from this it follows that the modules over the noncommutative t2 obtained by quantizing

open strings are likewise projective. from this point of view, the 2-0 module needs special

treatment, because it is not determined by a vector bundle at the  =  end. however,

the 2-0 module is determined by a boundary condition at  =  that is associated with an
element of k(t2), so it still leads to a projective module [17].

to an a module m (e) determined by e (which is a bundle over t2 or in the ex-
ceptional case a k-theory element of t2), we can associate the chern classes of e in
h(t2, z). this natural topological invariant corresponds to (m ) in the language of
[17]. it is related to but diers from the -dependent chern character in noncommuta-

tive geometry, which we will not try to elucidate in a physical language.

81

6.4. theoretical issues

in this subsection, we will make contact with mathematical approaches [4,17-21] to t -

duality of noncommutative yang-mills theory on a torus via morita equivalence of algebras,

and then we will discuss how this language can be extended, to some extent, to open string

eld theory.

let  be any boundary condition for open strings on tp, in the zero slope limit
with xed open string parameters. the - ground states form an algebra a. for any
other boundary condition  that can be introduced in the same closed string theory, let

m, denote the open string tachyon states with  boundary conditions on the left and 
boundary conditions on the right. it is an a  a bimodule.

a is the commutant of a in this module, and vice-versa. this means that the set
of operators on m, that commute with a is precisely a, and vice-versa. that a
and a commute is clear from the fact that they act at opposite ends of the open strings.
that they commute only with each other follows from the fact that, as was clear in the

construction of the modules, together they generate the full algebra of observables in the

string ground states. as usual in quantum mechanics, this full algebra of observables acts

irreducibly on m,.

there is an interesting analogy between the present open string discussion and rational

conformal eld theory. consider, for example, the wzw model in two dimensions on a

closed riemann surface, with target space a lie group g. as long as one considers the
full closed string theory, this model has ordinary g  g symmetry. quantum groups arise
if one tries to factorize the model into separate left and right-moving sectors. likewise,

for open strings, the full algebra of operators acting on the string ground states, namely
a  a, acts irreducibly on the quantum mechanical (ground state) hilbert space m,,
which as we have seen in the introduction to this section can be naturally realized in terms

of ordinary functions (or sections of ordinary bundles) over an ordinary torus. a quantum

torus arises if one attempts to focus attention on just one end of the open string, and to
interpret just a (or a) geometrically.

morita equivalence

for any two boundary conditions  and , there is a natural correspondence between
a modules that are obtained by quantizing open strings, and the analogous a modules.
indeed, there is one of each for every boundary condition ; thus, the correspondence is
m,  m,. this natural one-to-one correspondence between (projective) modules for

82

two rings is called mathematically a morita equivalence. in fact, the - and - open
strings give bimodules m, and m, for a  a and a  a. using m, one can
dene a map from left a modules to left a modules by

n  m, a n,

(6.63)

for every left a module n , with the inverse being l  m, a l for a left a
module l. in physical terms, if n is of the form m, for some , then the map from
m,  n = m,  m, to m, (which coincides with m, a m,) is just the
natural string vertex combining an - open string and a - open string to make an
- open string. in other words, an - state with vertex operator o and a - state
with vertex operator o is mapped to an - state with vertex operator given by the
product lim  o( )o(). this gives a well-dened map from m,  m, to m,
because the dimensions of the operators vanish, and it can be interpreted as a map from
m, a m, to m, because of associativity of the operator product expansion, which
states that (oo)o = o(oo) for any - vertex operator o.

relation to t -duality

now, we will make a few remarks on the relation between morita equivalence and

t -duality, as exploited in [4,17-21]. first we need to understand the mathematical notion
of a connection on a module m over a noncommutative algebra a. if a is the algebra
of a noncommutative torus, generated by ui = exp(ixi), with u1u2 = e2iu2u1, then
according to the standard mathematical denition used in the above-cited papers, such a

connection is supposed to be given by operators

di =


xi  iai,

(6.64)

where one requires that the ai commute with the uj. if m is a module m,, constructed
from - open strings (for some ), then this denition means that the ai are elements of
a. physically, to describe strings propagating with such a connection, we must perturb
the open string worldsheet action by adding a boundary perturbation at the  end, without
modifying the action at the  end14.

14 this mathematical denition diers from a more naive physical notion, adopted in most of
this paper, which is that if the gauge elds are elements of a , then we say we are working on

the torus whose algebra of functions is a.

83

now we can see morita equivalence of noncommutative gauge elds (a more precise

notion than morita equivalence of modules), in the sense dened and exploited in [17]. this
asserts that gauge theory over a in the module m, is equivalent to gauge theory over
a in the module m,. in fact, to do gauge theory over a in the module m,, we add
a boundary perturbation at the  end; likewise, to do gauge theory over a in the module
m,, we add a boundary perturbation at the  end. by using in the two cases the same
boundary perturbation at the  end, we get the equivalence between gauge theory over a
and gauge theory over a that is claimed mathematically. if a and a are algebras of
functions on noncommutative tori, then these must be t -dual tori (as proved in [4,17,19,21]

and in section 6.3). conversely, any pair of t -dual tori can be boundary conditions in the

same closed string eld theory. so this gives the t -duality of noncommutative yang-mills

theory on dierent tori as described mathematically.

let w be a t -duality transformation and suppose that  = w1. a special case
of what was just said is that gauge theory over a with the module m, is equivalent
to gauge theory over aw1 with the module mw1,. acting with t -duality on the
boundary conditions at both ends of the string is certainly a symmetry of the full string
theory (even before taking a zero slope limit). this operation transforms aw1 back to
a while transforming mw1, to m,w. so it follows that gauge theory over a with
module m, is equivalent to gauge theory over a with module m,w. thus we can, if
we wish, consider the t -duality to leave xed the torus a and act only on the commutant
a. this alternative formulation of how the t -duality acts is more in line with the naive
notion of gauge theory on a noncommutative torus mentioned in the last footnote.

regardless of which approach one takes, the key simplication that causes the bf 2

action to be invariant under t -duality, while the conventional f 2 yang-mills action is not,

is that in the zero slope limit, one can consider independent t -duality transformations at

the two ends of the open string, in this way dening a transformation that leaves the torus

xed and acts only on the quantum numbers of the gauge bundle.

relation to open string field theory

in all of this discussion, we have considered a  product constructed just from the string
ground states, in the limit   0. it is natural to ask whether one can dene a more
general  product that incorporates all of the string states. the only apparent way to do
this is to use the  product dened by gluing open strings in the noncommutative geometry
approach to open string eld theory [39]. this  product can be introduced for open strings

84

dened with any boundary condition in any closed string conformal eld theory. consider
in at r26, with b = 0, taking free
the case of oriented bosonic open string theory.
(neumann) boundary conditions for the open strings, one gets a  product (considered in
[39]) whose   0 limit is the ordinary commutative multiplication of functions on r26.
what if we repeat the same exercise with a constant nonzero b-eld? using the relation of
the  product of open strings to the operator product algebra, in this situation the string
eld theory  product reduces in the zero slope limit to the  product of noncommutative
yang-mills theory on r26. (if instead of neumann boundary conditions for open strings,

one takes p-brane boundary conditions for some p < 25, one gets instead noncommutative

yang-mills on the p-brane worldvolume.) thus, noncommutative yang-mills theory can be

regarded as a low energy limit of string eld theory. this gives an interesting illustration of

the open string eld theory philosophy, though it remains that the open string eld theory

does not seem particularly useful for computation (being superseded by the bf 2 action).

the discussion of morita equivalence of algebras makes sense in the full generality of

open string eld theory. keeping xed the closed string conformal eld theory, let  be
any possible boundary condition for the open strings. then the  product of the - open
strings (keeping all of the excited open string states, and without any zero slope limit) gives
an algebra a. for any other boundary condition , the - open strings give an aa
bimodule m, that by the same construction as above establishes a morita equivalence
between a and a. this morita equivalence gives a natural equivalence between the k-
theory of a and that of a. presumably, in type ii superstring theory (in an arbitrary
closed string background) the d-brane charge takes values in this k-theory  generalizing

the relation of d-brane charge to ordinary complex k-theory in the long distance limit

[67,68].

7. relation to m-theory in dlcq

motivated by the spectrum of bps states, connes, douglas and schwarz [4] proposed

that m-theory compactied on a null circle (dlcq)

x =

1
2

(x0  x1)  x + 2r

(7.1)

with nonzero cij leads to noncommutative geometry. this suggestion was further ex-
plored in [19]. here, we will examine this problem in more detail from our perspective.

85

the compactication on a null circle needs a careful denition. here we will dene it
as a limit of a compactication on a space-like circle in the (x0, x1) plane which is almost
null [69,70]. its invariant radius r will eventually be taken to zero. in order to study this

system we follow the following steps:
(1) we boost the system to bring the space-like circle to be along x1.
(2) we scale the energy such that energies of order one before the boost remain of order

one after the boost.

(3) we scale the transverse directions and momenta in order to let them aect the energy

as before the boost.

(4) we interpret the system with the small circle as type iia string theory.

(5) if the original system is also compactied on a spatial torus, we perform t -duality on

all its sides.

after this sequence of steps we nd a system which typically has a smooth limit as 

is taken to zero. this limit was rst discussed in [71] and later in the context of this

denition of the matrix model [5] in [72,70]. we will now follow these steps for the case
of compactication on a null circle with constant nonzero cij.

we consider m-theory compactied on the null circle (7.1). we assume that the metric
is g+ = 1, gi = 0, but the metric in the transverse directions gij can be arbitrary. if the
transverse space includes a torus, we identify the transverse coordinates as xi  xi + 2ri.
it is important that we keep all the parameters of the m-theory compactication xed.
we hold the planck scale mp, the metric g and the identication parameters ri xed of
order one as we let   0.

since x is compact in the dlcq, the time coordinate is x+. therefore, the hamil-
tonian, which is the generator of time translation, is p+ = p . the parameter r in (7.1)
can be changed by a longitudinal boost. therefore, the dependence of various quantities

on r is easily determined using longitudinal boost invariance. in particular, the dlcq

hamiltonian is of the general form

p  = p+ = rm 2

p f(cid:18)ximp,

rcij
m 2
p

,

c+ij
rm 4

p(cid:19) ,

(7.2)

for some function f (we suppress the transverse momenta p  1/x). the dependence on
the planck scale mp was determined on dimensional grounds. the system is invariant under
translation along the null circle. the corresponding conserved charge, the longitudinal

momentum, is

p = p + =

n
r

.

86

(7.3)

the hilbert space is split into sectors of xed n . since r can be changed by a boost, the
way to describe the decompactication of the null circle is to consider the limit n  ,
r   with xed p.

as we said above, we view this system as the   0 limit of a compactication on a
space-like circle of invariant radius r. since we plan to take  to zero, we will expand

various expressions below in powers of  keeping only the terms which will be of signicance.
the hamiltonian is also changed to p+ + p, so that it does not generate translations
along the space-like circle.

we now perform step (1) above and boost the system such that the circle is along the
x1 direction. we denote the various quantities after the boost with the subscript . the
generator of time translation, p,0 receives a large additive contribution from p, = n
r ,
which we are not interested in. therefore, we consider the new hamiltonian

h = p,0 

n
r

= rm 2

p f(cid:18)ximp,

rc,ij

m 2
p

,

c,+ij
rm 4

p(cid:19) .

c,ij are related to cij by a boost
1


c,ij =

cij,

c,+ij = c+ij .

(7.4)

(7.5)

one of the consequences of the large boost is that energies which were originally of

order one are now very small. this is clear from (7.4) where there is an explicit factor of 

in front of the hamiltonian. in order to focus on these low energies, we perform step (2)
above and scale the energy by 1
 . we do that by replacing the system with planck scale

mp with a similar system with planck scale

then, the new hamiltonian

is of order one.

1


m 2
p .

p =

fm 2
eh = rfm 2

p f = rm 2
p f

(7.6)

(7.7)

in order to keep the dependence on x and c as it was before the scaling of mp,
we should follow step (3) above and also scale them such that the arguments of f are

unchanged:

eh = rm 2

p f exifmp,

87

rec,ij
fm 2

p

p! .
, ec,+ij
rfm 4

(7.8)

that is

exi = xi mp
fmp

= xi

1

2 ,

ec,ij = c,ijfm 2

p
m 2
p

= cij

1
2 ,

ec,+ij = c,+ijfm 4

p
m 4
p

= c+ij

1


.

(7.9)

we now move to step (4) above and interpret this system, m-theory on a spatial circle

of radius r, as type iia string theory. the parameter n is now interpreted as the number

of d0-branes. the string theory parameters are

1
p r

=

1
m 3
p r

1

2 ,



e 

fm 3

and there is a nonzero b-eld

egs  (fmpr)

rcij



3

2 = (m 2

p r2)

3

4 ,

(7.10)

(7.11)

eb,ij =

z

our various changes of variables that just as the periods of c around a three cycle including

(the contribution of c+ij to eb is negligible for small ). we note as a consistency check of
the null circle are of order one, so are the periods of eb around a two cycle e(2)

we now move to step (5) above. if the target space includes a torus t p,exi is identied

e(2) eb  1.
withexi + 2eri, whereeri = ri
gij  1. therefore, the volume of the torus ev = (detg)
to dp-branes. after the transformation, the new coordinatesbxi are identied as

let the rank of eb be r  p (r is even). for simplicity we assume that ebij is nonzero

changes of variables and remained as it was in the original m-theory problem of order one,

only for i, j = 1, . . . , r. we now perform t -duality on this torus converting the d0-branes

2 . the metric on the torus was not changed by our various

2qi 2eri  

(7.12)

2 .

p

1

1

1
p rri .
m 3

with

the new metric and b-eld are

bxi bxi + 2bri
bri = e
eri 
hence, the periods ofbxi are of order one.
bgij =(cid:18)
g + 2eeb(cid:19)sij n 
=
(cid:18)
g + 2eeb(cid:19)aij
2e(cid:18)
bbij =

88

for i, j = 1, . . . , r
otherwise

(2e)2eb(cid:19)ij  1

1

0

1

1

1

1

for i, j = 1, . . . , r

otherwise.

(7.13)

(7.14)

(7.15)

therefore, the new volume of the torus is bv = (detbg)

coupling is

3p+r

1
2

1

2qi 2bri  

r

2 , and the new string

(7.16)

2  

4

.

bgs =egsbv
ev 1

this is exactly the limit studied above in (2.14) and (2.47), which leads to quantum

yang-mills with nite coupling constant on a noncommutative space with nite volume.

more explicitly, we can determine the metric g, the noncommutativity parameter  and

the yang-mills coupling using (2.15) and (2.46), and the expressions for bg, bb and bgs in

(7.15) and (7.16):

gij = gij,

ij =

cij
rm 6
p

,

g2
y m 

m 6
p r3
p r)pv
(m 3

,

(7.17)

where v = (detg)

few comments:

1

2qi 2ri is the volume of the original torus. we would like to make a

(1) the reason the indices in the left hand side and the right hand side of these equations

do not seem to match is because the torus we end up with is dual to the original torus

of the underlying m theory.

(2) it is important that all these quantities are independent of  and hence the limit   0

leads to a well dened theory.

(3) the expressions for g and gy m are as in the case without the c eld [6,72,70].
(4) even though in the zero slope limit of string theory  = 1

b , our various changes of
variables lead to   c indicating that the behavior of the theory is smooth for c
near zero.

(5) the dlcq limit   0 is clearly smooth in c in the theory of the d0-branes. the

(6) the discussion of t -duality in [4,17-21] is in terms of the d0-branes and the torus with

parameters (7.17) depend smoothly on c.

t -duality transformation to the dp-branes leads to the metricbg and string coupling
bgs, which do not depend smoothly on c. however, the noncommutative yang-mills
coordinates ex and metriceg. the discussion in section 6 is in terms of the torus with
coordinatesbx and metricbg. hence, the expressions for the t -duality transformations
the two tori t =(cid:18) 0

0(cid:19); i.e. they are related by a  d and b  c.

on g,  and gy m dier by conjugation by the t -duality transformation which relates

(7) for p  4 the parameters in (7.17) including the yang-mills coupling are nite, but
the theory is not likely to make sense, as it is not renormalizable [54-61]. for c = 0

1

1

89

(r = 0) this follows from bgs  , which forces the use of strongly coupled string

theory leading to the (2, 0) theory for p = 4 [73,74] and the little string theory for

p = 5 [74,34]. this suggests that also for nonzero c there exist new consistent theories

for which noncommutative yang-mills theory is the low energy approximation.

8. noncommutative version of the six dimensional (2, 0) theory

so far we have been studying open strings ending on d-branes in the presence of a

b-eld yielding a generalization of the ordinary gauge theory on d-branes. it is natural to

ask whether the discussion can be extended to m5-branes in m-theory in the presence of a

c eld, or perhaps even to ns5-branes in string theory with background rr elds. this

could lead to a generalization of the (2, 0) six dimensional eld theory and the enigmatic

little string theory [34].

there are several reasons to expect that such generalizations exist. first, reference

[37] proposed a dlcq description of a deformation of the (2, 0) eld theory in terms of

quantum mechanics on the deformed moduli space of instantons. this was motivated as a

regularization of the (2, 0) theory in which the small instanton singularities are absent. a

similar two-dimensional eld theory in that target space could lead to a deformation of the

little string theory. the second reason for the existence of these theories is the fact that

the 4+1 and 5+1 dimensional noncommutative yang-mills theories are not renormalizable
[54-61]. yet, they arise, as in section 7, in the dlcq description of m-theory on t4
and t5. it is natural to ask then whether they can be embedded in consistent theories

without gravity. in the commutative case the supersymmetric yang-mills theory in ve

dimensions can be embedded in the six-dimensional (2, 0) theory and the six-dimensional

gauge theory can be embedded in the little string theory. therefore, we are led to look

for generalizations of these theories in which the noncommutative gauge theories can be

embedded.

we want to study m5-branes in a background c-eld in an appropriate limit.

in
r11 a constant c-eld can be gauged away. but in the presence of m5-branes it leads to

a constant h-eld at innity. this is similar to the fact that a constant b-eld can be

gauged away but it leads to a constant background f in the presence of d-branes. there

is, however, a crucial dierence between these cases. the constant background f on d-

branes is arbitrary. here, however the background h satises an algebraic constraint (for

90

example, when h is small it is selfdual), and therefore only half of its degrees of freedom

can be specied.

we start by analyzing the constraints on h on a single m5-brane in r6. there is no
completely satisfactory covariant lagrangian describing the dynamical twoform b on the

m5-brane. we can use either a non-covariant lagrangian [75] or covariant equations of

motion [76]. here we will follow the latter approach.

the background h eld transforms as 10  10 under the six-dimensional lorentz
it can be written as h = h + + h, where h + is selfdual (10 of the lorentz

group.
group), and h is anti-selfdual (10 of the lorentz group). out of h + we can form

iklh +jkl
ih +
ljk

k j

i = h +
uijk = k l
d = k j
i k i
j.

(8.1)

which transform as 20 (kij is a traceless symmetric tensor), 10 (uijk is an anti-selfdual
threeform) and 1 (d is a scalar). for slowly varying h the equation of motion express
h in terms of h +

h =

1

f (d)

u,

(8.2)

where u is the anti-selfdual form in (8.1) and f (d) is a function of the scalar d in (8.1),

which is given implicitly by

d = 6f (d)2 1 

22m 3
p
f (d) 1

2 ! .

(8.3)

in (8.3), we take the solution which continuously interpolates between f (0) = 8m 6

p and

limd f (d) =q d

6 .

we are looking for constant h solutions. for simplicity, we start with the metric
gij = ij = (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1) (we will later scale it). up to a lorentz transformation, the
nonzero components of the generic15 h satisfying (8.2) are

h012 = h0, h345 = h

(8.4)

15 by taking a limit as h, h0  0 while boosting, one can get a nongeneric constant h solution
of (8.2) which in a suitable coordinate system takes the form h012 = h125 = h034 = h345 = h
with any constant h. for this solution k 0
5 = 4h2, u = d = 0. it is
selfdual both in the subspace spanned by x0, x5, and in the subspace spanned by x1, x2, x3, x4.
therefore, it is possible that this solution is relevant to the discussion in [37], which was based on

0 = k 5

0 = k 0

5 = k 5

such a selfdual tensor.

91

with a relation between h0 and h. these nonzero values of h break the so(5, 1) lorentz
group to so(2, 1)  so(3). using 012345 = 1 we nd

345 = 

1
2

h +
012 = h +
k 0
0 = k 1

(h  h0),
3 = k 4

2 = k 3
1 = k 2
1
4

(h  h0)3, d =

4 = k 5

1
5 = 
2
(h  h0)4.

3
2

u012 = u345 =

then equation (8.2) determines the relation between h0 and h

h2
0  h2 + m6

p h2

0h2 = 0.

for a given h, we have to take the solution

h0 = 

h
p h2) 1

2

(1 + m6

(h  h0)2,

(8.5)

(8.6)

(8.7)

(for an anti-m5-brane we have the opposite sign in (8.7)). for small h we have h0  h
and h  0, i.e. h is selfdual. for large h we have h0  m 3
p and h is dominated by its
spatial components h345 = h.

we are looking for a limit in which the theory in the bulk of spacetime decouples.

it should be such that after compactication on a circle, the low energy theory will be

invariant radius r to ve dimensions. the resulting ve-dimensional theory includes a

in order to motivate
the appropriate limit, we examine a compactication of the theory on a spacelike s1 of

the ve-dimensional bf 2 theory we found in the zero slope limit.
gauge eld with fij =h dxkhijk, whose dynamics is controlled for slowly varying elds by
the dbi action ldbi qdet(g + 1
ef =  (ldbi /f ), where ( ) denotes a dual in ve dimensions. the six-dimensional
equation (8.2) states that ef = h with indices in the ve noncompact dimensions.

let us examine various dierent compactications:

f ). the magnetic dual of f is the threeform

(1) the compactication is along a circle in the subspace spanned by x3,4,5. it can be
taken, without loss of generality, to be along x5. here the background h we study

2rm 3
p

leads to magnetic eld of rank two f34 = 2rh and a three-form ef012 = h0. the limit
h   leads to ef of order one.

(2) the compactication is along a circle in the subspace spanned by x0,1,2. it can be
taken without loss of generality to be along x1. here the background h we study

92

leads to electric eld f02 = 2rh0 and a three-form ef345 = h. in the limit h  

the electric eld reaches its critical value. it is satisfying that the large magnetic eld

and the critical electric eld limits of the ve-dimensional theory are the same limit

in six dimensions. also, the six-dimensional equation of motion (8.2) guarantees that

the ve-dimensional electric eld cannot exceed its maximal value.

(3) the compactication is along a circle, which can be brought using a boost along x1,2
to the subspace spanned by x1,2,3,4,5. it can be taken to be along x1 and x5. this leads
to a background magnetic eld of rank two f34  h and an electric eld f02  h0.
there is also a background three form.

(4) the generic compactication along a spacelike circle which is not of the form (3)

above, can be taken, using the so(2, 1)  so(3) freedom, to be in the x0,5 plane,

(x0, x5)  (x0, x5) + 2r(a,p1 + a2)
r (ax0 + 1 + a2x5), it is

for some constant a. or in terms of the boosted and rescaled coordinates ex0 =
1 + a2x0 + ax5,ex5 = 1

(8.9)

(8.8)

(ex0,ex5)  (ex0,ex5) + (0, 2).

we will use these new coordinates and will drop the tilde over x0,5. then, the metric is

we are interested in the zero slope limit in which

gij = (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, r2) and the background h eld is h012 = h01 + a2, h034 = ha,
h125 = h0ar, h345 = hr1 + a2. the ve-dimensional theory has background mag-
netic eld of rank four f12 = 2rh0a, f34 = 2rh1 + a2, there is no background
electric eld, and there is a background three-form ef034 = ah, ef012 = 1 + a2h0.
f  g and f is held xed with
rank four. the nonlinearity of the equation of motion (8.2) imposes restrictions on possible
scalings. since we want gij = ij for i, j = 1, 2, 3, 4, but keep g00 = 1, g55 = r2, we
should scale mp  1/2 and change h to h012 = h01 + a21/2, h034 = ha1/2,
h125 = h0ar1/2, h345 = hr1 + a21/2. our desired scaling m 2
p  1/2
and gs  (rmp)3/2  3/4 is reproduced with g55 = r2  2. in order to keep fij xed we
should also have a = 1/2. then, the background threeform eld ef is of order 1/.

we conclude that we analyze the theory with

s = 2rm 3

1

2rm 3
p

gij = ij ,
h012  h01, h034  h1, h125  h0r1, h345  hr1

g00 = 1, mp  1/2,

g55 = r2  2,

(8.10)

93

compactied on x5  x5 + 2. in terms of the null coordinates x = 1
2 (x0  rx5), the
dominant components of h are h12  2h01, h34  2h1, while h+ij are of order
one.

we would like to make a few comments:

(2) h+ij  hij in the limit. this fact has a simple reason.

(1) hij  1, buth dxhij  1 is a nite, generic rank four twoform.
limit with f0i = 0 the lagrangian qdet(g + 1

0ijklfkl. hence h0ij  r1h5ij , and h is dominated by its hij components.
(3) the limit of the ve-dimensional theory is the same as a dlcq compactication of the

f )  pff . therefore, ef0ij 

in the the zero slope

2rm 3
p

six-dimensional theory. this fact is consistent with the way this theory was derived
in section 7 by starting with m-theory in dlcq on t4. in the last step we performed
t -duality to convert the theory to a ve dimensional eld theory. but because of the

t -duality symmetry of the noncommutative gauge theories, we must have the same

limit as before the t -duality transformation.
this discussion motivates us to examine the theory in r6 with

gij = ij ,

g55 = 2,

g00 = 1, mp = a1/2,

h012 = h011 + , h034 = h1, h125 = h0, h345 = h1 + 
0  h2 + a6h2
h2

h, h0, a, xi = xed

0h2 = 0,

  0,

for

(8.11)

(the subleading terms in h012 and h345 are needed in order to satisfy (8.2)). we note that
in the limit h012 and h034 diverge like 1. in terms of null coordinates x = 1
2 (x0  x5),
(8.12)

h,

h12  2h01, h34  2h1, h+12 
i.e. hij are taken to innity and h+ij are of order one.

it is not clear to us whether the limit (8.11) of m-theory with m5-branes exists. what

1
2

h0, h+34 

1
2

we showed is that this limit satises the equation of motion on the m5-branes (8.2), and
that after compactication on s1 it leads to d4-branes in the zero slope limit, i.e. to ve
dimensional noncommutative yang-mills with the

therefore, if this theory can be embedded in a consistent theory within m-theory, it must

1
g2

y m bf 2 lagrangian with nite gy m .

come from the limit (8.11).

acknowledgements

we have beneted from discussions with o. aharony, m. berkooz, g. moore and a.

schwarz. the remarks in the concluding paragraph of section 6.4 were stimulated by a

discussion with g. segal. this work was supported in part by grant #de-fg02-90er40542

and grant #nsf-phy-9513835.

94

references

[1] h.s. snyder, quantized space-time, phys. rev. 71 (1947) 38; the electromagnetic

field in quantized space-time, phys. rev. 72 (1947) 68.

[2] a. connes, noncommutative geometry, academic press (1994).
[3] a. connes and m. rieel, yang-mills for noncommutative two-tori, in operator
algebras and mathematical physics (iowa city, iowa, 1985), pp. 237 contemp. math.
oper. alg. math. phys. 62, ams 1987.

[4] a. connes, m. r. douglas, and a. schwarz, noncommutative geometry and matrix

theory: compactication on tori, jhep 9802:003 (1998), hep-th/9711162.

[5] t. banks, w. fischler, s.h. shenker and l. susskind, m-theory as a matrix model:

a conjecture, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 5112, hep-th/9610043.

[6] t. banks, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 67 (1998) 180 hep-th/9710231; d. bigatti and

l. susskind, review of matrix theory, hep-th/9712072.

[7] b. de wit, j. hoppe and h. nicolai, on the quantum mechanics of supermem-

branes, nucl. phys. b305 (1988) 545.

[8] j. hoppe, membranes and integrable systems, phys. lett. b250 (1990) 44.
[9] d.b. fairlie, p. fletcher and c.k. zachos, trigonometric structure constants for
new innite-dimensional algebras, phys. lett. 218 (1989) 203; innite dimen-
sional algebras and a trigonometric basis for the classical lie algebras, journal of
math. phys. 31 (1990) 1088.

[10] a. h. chamseddine and j. froehlich, some elements of connes nc geometry,
and space-time geometry, in: chen ning yang, a great physicist of the twentieth
century, c. s. liu and s.-t. yau (eds.), intl. press, boston 1995; j. froehlich and
k. gawedzki, conformal field theory and geometry of strings, in: proc. of the
conference on mathematical quantum theory (vancouver b.c. 1993), j. feldman,
r. froese and l. rosen (eds.), centre de recherche mathematiques-proc. and lecture
notes, vol. 7, p. 57 (1994), ams publ; a. h. chamseddine and j. froehlich, j. math.
phys. 35 (1994) 5195; j. froehlich, o. grandjean and a. recknagel, supersymmetry,
nc geometry and gravitation, proc. of les houches summer school 1995, a.
connes, k. gawedzki and j. zinn-justin (eds.), elsevier 1998.

[11] e. witten, noncommutative geometry and string field theory, nucl. phys. b268

(1986) 253.

[12] m. r. douglas and c. hull, d-branes and the noncommutative torus, jhep

9802:008,1998, hep-th/9711165.

[13] y.-k. e. cheung and m. krogh, noncommutative geometry from 0-branes in a

background b field, nucl. phys. b528 (1998) 185.

[14] c.-s. chu and p.-m. ho, noncommutative open string and d-brane, nucl. phys.
b550 (1999) 151, hep/th9812219; constrained quantization of open string in back-
ground b eld and noncommutative d-brane, hep-th/9906192.

95

[15] v. schomerus, d-branes and deformation quantization, jhep 9906:030 (1999),

hep-th/9903205.

[16] f. ardalan, h. arfaei and m.m. sheikh-jabbari, mixed branes and m(atrix) the-
ory on noncommutative torus, hep-th/9803067; noncommutative geometry from
strings and branes, jhep 02, 016 (1999) hep-th/9810072; dirac quantization of
open strings and noncommutativity in branes, hep-th/9906161.

[17] a. schwarz, morita equivalence and duality, nucl. phys. b534 (1998) 720, hep-
th/9805034; m.a. rieel and a. schwarz, morita equivalence of multidimensional
noncommutative tori, math.qa/9803057; m.a. rieel, j. di. geom. 31 (1990)
535; quant-ph/9712009.

[18] a. astashkevich, n. nekrasov and a. schwarz, on noncommutative nahm trans-

form, hep-th/9810147.

[19] b. morariu and b. zumino, super-yang-mills on the noncommutative torus, hep-
th/9807198; d. brace and b. morariu, a note on the bps spectrum of the matrix
model, jhep 02, 004 (1999) hep-th/9810185; d. brace, b. morariu, and b. zumino,
dualities of the matrix model from t duality of the type ii string, nucl. phys.
b545 (1999) 192, hep-th/9810099; t duality and ramond-ramond backgrounds
in the matrix model, nucl. phys. b549 (1999) 181, hep-th/9811213.

[20] c. hofman and e. verlinde, u duality of born-infeld on the noncommutative two
torus, jhep 9812:010 (1998), hep-th/9810116; gauge bundles and born-infeld
on the noncommutative torus, nucl. phys. b547 (1999) 157, hep-th/9810219.

[21] b. pioline and a. schwarz, morita equivalence and t -duality (or b versus , hep-

th/9908019.

[22] a. konechny and a. schwarz, bps states on noncommutative tori and dual-
ity, nucl. phys. b550 (1999) 561, hep-th/9811159; supersymmetry algebra and
bps states of super-yang-mills theories on noncommutative tori, phys. lett.
b453 (1999) 23, hep-th/9901077; 1/4 bps states on noncommutative tori, hep-
th/9907008.

[23] p. ho and y. wu, noncommutative geometry and d-branes, phys. lett. b398
(1997) 52, hep-th/9611233; p.-m. ho, y.-y. wu and y.-s. wu, towards a noncom-
mutative geometric approach to matrix compactication, phys. rev. d58 (1998)
026006, hep-th/9712201; p. ho, twisted bundle on quantum torus and bps states
in matrix theory, phys. lett. b434 (1998) 41, hep-th/9803166; p. ho and y. wu,
noncommutative gauge theories in matrix theory, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 066003,
hep-th/9801147

[24] m. li, comments on supersymmetric yang-mills theory on a noncommutative

torus, hep-th/9802052.

[25] t. kawano and k. okuyama, matrix theory on noncommutative torus, phys.

lett. b433 (1998) 29, hep-th/9803044.

96

[26] f. lizzi and r.j. szabo, noncommutative geometry and space-time gauge symme-
tries of string theory, hep-th/9712206; g. landi, f. lizzi and r.j. szabo, string
geometry and the noncommutative torus, hep-th/9806099; f. lizzi and r.j. szabo,
noncommutative geometry and string duality, hep-th/9904064.

[27] r. casalbuoni, algebraic treatment of compactication on noncommutative tori,

phys. lett. b431 (1998) 69, hep-th/9801170.

[28] m. kato and t. kuroki, world volume noncommutativity versus target space non-

commutativity, jhep 03 (1999) 012 hep-th/9902004.

[29] d. bigatti, noncommutative geometry and super-yang-mills theory, phys. lett.

b451 (1999) 324, hep-th/9804120.

[30] d. bigatti and l. susskind, magnetic fields, branes and noncommutative geome-

try, hep-th/9908056.

[31] a. hashimoto and n. itzhaki, noncommutative yang-mills and the ads / cft

correspondence, hep-th/9907166.

[32] j.m. maldacena and j.g. russo, large n limit of non-commutative gauge theo-

ries, hep-th/9908134.

[33] y.e. cheung, o.j. ganor, m. krogh and a.y. mikhailov, instantons on a noncom-

mutative t4 from twisted (2,0) and little string theories, hep-th/9812172.

[34] n. seiberg, phys. lett. b408 (1997) 98, hep-th/9705221.
[35] n. nekrasov and a. schwarz, instantons on noncommutative r4 and (2,0) super-

conformal field theory, commun. math. phys. 198 (1998) 689, hep-th/9802068.

[36] m.r. douglas and g. moore, d-branes, quivers, and ale instantons, hep-

th/9603167.

[37] o. aharony, m. berkooz, and n. seiberg, light cone description of (2,0) super-
conformal theories in six-dimensions, adv. theor. math. phys. 2:119 (1998), hep-
th/9712117.

[38] m. berkooz, nonlocal eld theories and the noncommutative torus, phys. lett.

b430 (1998) 237, hep-th/9802069.

[39] e. witten, small instantons in string theory, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 541, hep-

th/9511030.

[40] m. douglas, branes within branes, hep-th/9512077.
[41] h. nakajima, resolutions of moduli spaces of ideal instantons on ir4, in topology,

geometry and field theory, (world scientic, 1994).

[42] e.s. fradkin and a.a. tseytlin, nonlinear electrodynamics from quantized strings,

phys. lett. 163b (1985) 123.

[43] c. g. callan, c. lovelace, c. r. nappi, s. a. yost, string loop corrections to
beta functions, nucl. phys. b288 (1987) 525; a. abouelsaood, c. g. callan, c.
r. nappi and s. a. yost, open strings in background gauge fields, nucl. phys.
b280 (1987) 599.

97

[44] a. dhar, g. mandal, and s. r. wadia, nonrelativistic fermions, coadjoint orbits
of w, and string field theory at c = 1, hep-th/9207011, w coherent states
and path-integral derivation of bosonization of non-relativistic fermions in one
dimension, hep-th/9309028, string field theory of two dimensional qcd: a
realization of w algebra, hep-th/9403050.

[45] d. b. fairlie, t. curtright, and c. k. zachos, integrable symplectic trilinear interac-
tions for matrix membranes, phys. lett. b405 (1997) 37, hep-th/9704037; d. fairlie,
moyal brackets in m -theory, mod. phys. lett. a13 (1998) 263, hep-th/9707190;
matrix membranes and integrability, hep-th/9709042.

[46] c. klimcik, gauge theories on the noncommutative sphere, commun. math. phys.

199 (1998) 257, hep-th/9710153.

[47] m. kontsevich, deformation quantization of poisson manifolds, q-alg/9709040.
[48] a. s. cataneo and g. felder, a path integral approach to the kontsevich quan-

tization formula, math.qa/9902090.

[49] a.a. tseytlin, born-infeld action, supersymmetry and string theory, to appear
in the yuri golfand memorial volume, ed. m. shifman, world scientic (2000), hep-
th/9908105.

[50] t. banks and n. seiberg, nonperturbative innities, nucl. phys. b273 (1986) 157.
[51] m. henneaux, lectures on the antield-brst formalism for gauge theories,
nucl. phys. b (proc. suppl.) 18a (1990) 47; m. henneaux and c. teitelboim, quan-
tization of gauge systems (princeton university press, 1992).

[52] j. hughes and j. polchinski, partially broken global supersymmetry and the su-

perstring, nucl. phys. b278 (1986) 147.

[53] j. bagger and a. galperin, a new goldstone multiplet for partially broken super-

symmetry, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 1091, hep-th/9608177.

[54] t. filk, divergencies in a field theory on quantum space, phys. lett. b376 (1996)

53.

[55] j.c. varilly and j.m. gracia-bondia, on the ultraviolet behaviour of quantum
elds over noncommutative manifolds, int. j. mod. phys. a14 (1999) 1305, hep-
th/9804001.

[56] m. chaichian, a. demichev and p. presnajder, quantum field theory on non-
commutative space-times and the persistence of ultraviolet divergences, hep-
th/9812180; quantum field theory on the noncommutative plane with e(q)(2)
symmetry, hep-th/9904132.

[57] c.p. martin and d. sanchez-ruiz, the one loop uv divergent structure of u(1)
yang-mills theory on noncommutative r4, phys. rev. lett. 83 (1999) 476, hep-
th/9903077.

[58] m.m. sheikh-jabbari, renormalizability of the supersymmetric yang-mills theories

on the noncommutative torus, jhep 06 (1999) 015, hep-th/9903107.

98

[59] t. krajewski and r. wulkenhaar, perturbative quantum gauge fields on the non-

commutative torus, hep-th/9903187.

[60] s. cho, r. hinterding, j. madore and h. steinacker, finite field theory on non-

commutative geometries, hep-th/9903239.

[61] e. hawkins, noncommutative regularization for the practical man, hep-th/9908052.
[62] a. sen, tachyon condensation on the brane-antibrane system, hep-th/9805170.
[63] a. giveon, m. porrati and e. rabinovici, target space duality in string theory,

phys. rept. 244 (1994) 77, hep-th/9401139.

[64] g. moore, finite in all directions, hep-th/9305139.
[65] a. connes, c-algebres et geometrie dierentielle, c. r. acad. sc. paris 290 (1980)

559.

[66] m. rieel,  vector bundles over higher dimensional noncommutative tori, 
proc. conference operator algebras, connections with topology and ergodic the-
ory, lecture notes in math. 1132 (springer-verlag, berlin, heidelberg, 1985) 456.

[67] r. minasian and g. moore, k theory and ramond-ramond charge, jhep

9711:002 (1997), hep-th/9710230.

[68] e. witten, d-branes and k theory, jhep 9812:019 (1998), hep-th/9810188.
[69] s. hellerman and j. polchinski, unpublished.
[70] n. seiberg, why is the matrix model correct? phys. rev. lett. 79 (1997) 3577,

hep-th/9710009.

[71] m. douglas, d. kabat, p. pouliot, and s. shenker, d-branes and short distances in

string theory, nucl. phys. b485 (1997) 85, hep-th/9608024.

[72] a. sen, d0-branes on tn and matrix theory, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998)

51, hep-th/9709220.

[73] m. rozali, phys. lett. b400 (1997) 260, hep-th/9702136.
[74] m. berkooz, m. rozali and n. seiberg, phys. lett. b408 (1997) 105, hep-th/9704089.
[75] m. perry and j.h. schwarz, interacting chiral gauge elds in six-dimensions and

born-infeld theory, nucl. phys. b489 (1997) 47, hep-th/9611065.

[76] p.s. howe, e. sezgin and p.c. west, covariant eld equations of the m-theory ve-
brane, phys. lett. b399 (1997) 49, hep-th/9702008; the six-dimensional selfdual
tensor, phys. lett. b400 (1997) 255, hep-th/9702111.

99

