9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
0
3

 

 
 

1
v
7
9
1
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

quantization of gauge theory for gauge dependent operators


xiang-song chena,b

, wei-min suna, fan wanga, amand faesslerb

adepartment of physics and center for theoretical physics, nanjing university, nanjing 210093, china

binstitute for theoretical physics, university of tuebingen, auf der morgenstelle 14, d-72076 tuebingen, germany

(august 1999)

based on a canonically derived path integral formalism, we demonstrate that the perturbative
calculation of the matrix element for gauge dependent operators has crucial dierence from that for
gauge invariant ones. for a gauge dependent operator o() what appears in the feynman diagrams
is not o() itself, but the gauge-transformed one o(), where  characterizes the specic gauge
transformation which brings any eld variable into the particular gauge which we have adopted to
quantize the gauge theory using the canonical method. the study of the matrix element of gauge
dependent operators also reveals that the formal path integral formalism for gauge theory is not
always reliable.

pacs number: 11.15.-q

ever since the emergence of nucleon spin problem, the
matrix element of gauge dependent operators has aroused
great interest [1]. this is because the conventional under-
standing of gluon spin, gluon and quark orbital angular
momentum all corresponds to gauge dependent opera-
tors. when studying these operators, people have natu-
rally adopted the same calculation scheme as for gauge
invariant ones, however some quite contradictory results
were obtained [2]. in this paper, by quantizing the gauge
theory from the very beginning, we demonstrate that the
perturbative calculation rules for gauge dependent oper-
ators have nevertheless critical dierence from those for
gauge invariant ones. by doing so we also reveal that the
highly formal path-integral formalism for gauge theory is
not always reliable.

the theory we start with is the classical su(n) or u(1)
gauge theory. we adopt the well-dened canonical quan-
tization approach to quantize it. due to gauge freedom,
we must specialize a gauge at rst. here we choose the
most convenient axial gauge

n  a = 0,

(1)

where a is the gauge potential, n is an arbitrary but xed
constant four-vector. now we can apply the standard
canonical quantization procedure and obtain the com-
mutation relations and the quantum hamiltonian. but
instead of going further to use the operator method to
derive the feynman rules, we use the so obtained quan-
tum hamiltonian to derive the path-integral expression
for the vacuum expectation value of an arbitrary operator
o(), where  denotes collectively the gauge and mat-
ter elds. after the standard procedure which can be
found in textbooks [3], we can write up to an irrelevant
normalization factor

the notations are standard. this expression is rigor-
ous and applies to both abelian and non-abelian gauge
theory [4]. moreover, we have no requirement for the
operator o. it can be either gauge dependent or gauge
invariant. however, eq. (2) is non-perturbative and not
yet perturbatively applicable. to derive the rules for per-
turbative calculation, we use the faddeev-popov trick by
multiplying eq. (2) with the identities

1 = f (a, )z [d](f (a)  ),
1 = z [d]g[],

(3a)

(3b)

where f and g are two arbitrary functions (or in general
functionals), [d] is the invariant measure of the gauge
group, a is the result of a after a gauge transformation
characterized by . f is usually called the gauge x-
ing function, for example we can take our original axial
gauge form f (a) = na. accidentally, it is apparent that
by this method we can transit to an arbitrary gauge by
choosing arbitrary f and g (this point will be explained
further later).

multiplying (2) with (3a) and (3b), we get

z(o) = z [d][d][d]eiso(n  a)

f (a, )(f (a)  )g[].

(4)

now make the transformation

 1 ,

(5)

z(o)  hoivac = z [d]eiso()(n  a).

(2)

note that [d], s, and f (a, ) are gauge invariant, and
integrate over , we get

present address

1

z(o) = z [d]eisf (a, f (a)g(f (a))

z [d](1

o)(n 1

a)

(6)

the second line in eq. (6) gives up to an irrelevant

constant factor [5]

0 o,

where 0 is the specic function of a which satises

n 0 a = 0.

so we obtain the aimed expression

z(o) = z [d]eis(0 o)f (a, f (a))g(f (a)).

(7)

(8)

(9)

by choosing a gaussian type of g, and introduce the
ghost eld to treat the faddeev-popov determinant f ,
one can straightforwardly derive feynman rules from eq.
(9).

we note very importantly that what appears in this
nal expression is 0o instead of o itself. this will give
critical dierence for gauge invariant and non-invariant
operators.

first we look at the gauge invariant operator: 0o

equals o. now eq. (9) becomes

z(o) = z deisof (a, f (a))g(f (a)).

(10)

so we see that starting from a canonical quantization in
the specic axial gauge, we nally arrive at an expression
independent of the original gauge condition! for instance
the gauge a2 = 0 or a3 = 0 lead to the same eq. (10).
this states that the greens function of gauge invariant
operators are gauge independent.

for gauge dependent operators, however, 0o does not
equal o. so the perturbative calculation of the greens
function for gauge dependent operators is not a straight-
forward generalization of that for gauge invariant ones.
instead, we encounter an additional complication of al-
ways having to apply a gauge transformation to the op-
erator before inserting it into the feynman diagrams.

it should be remarked that in eq.

(9) only the op-
erator o suers such a gauge transformation, the other
eld variables such as those in the action remain the ordi-
nary form. accordingly, in the perturbative calculations,
only the external vertex corresponding to o should be
the gauge transformed one, while the feynman rules for
the internal vertices and propagators generated from the
expansion of the eective action are still the ordinary
ones.

we note that in eq. (9) 0 is universally given by eq.
(8). however, the form of f and g can be arbitrary, i.e.
the feynman rules can be arbitrary but they give the
same nal results. one may wonder why eq. (9) takes

such an apparently peculiar form, especially why must
we apply a transformation to o and why 0 still takes
the form in eq.
(8) even after we have transitted to
another gauge by choosing an f (a) dierent from n  a.
we explain below that this actually has deeper physical
reasons behind.

due to the extra degree of gauge freedom, we have to
x a gauge to do quantization. and such a gauge choice
will naturally leave traces on the considered operator
o and also on the subsequent formalism, such as the
to-be-derived quantum hamiltonian and feynman rules.
indeed, dierent gauges lead to dierent form of quantum
hamiltonian. or to say, the form of quantum hamilto-
nian is gauge dependent. furthermore, if we stick to the
operator method to calculate the greens functions, the
original gauge choice will go throughout to manifest in
the feynman rules. however the gauge invariance prin-
ciple commands that we must in the end show all the
physical observables to be independent of the original
gauge we chose in quantization. within the canonical
operator method, such a demonstration is essentially a
direct proof of the equivalence of feynman rules derived
in dierent gauges, and will necessarily involve us in a de-
tailed analysis of the feynman diagrams. this was done
for qed by feynman [6] and for yang-mills theory by
cheng and tsai [7].

in contrast,

instead of demonstrating gauge invari-
ance at the level of feynman diagrams, the advantage
of path-integral formalism is that we can already get rid
of the original gauge condition at an intermediate stage
before deriving the feynman rules. (to be equivalent to
the canonical formalism, our path-integral expression is
derived by the operator method using the canonically-
derived quantum hamiltonian.) the crucial step is that
(2), in which what appears is the
we can obtain eq.
original gauge invariant classical action s.
(this can
be done at least in the axial gauge, in which the quan-
tum hamiltonian takes a relatively simpler form, than,
say, in the coulomb gauge.) now, the subsequent pro-
cedure in eqs. (4)-(6) is essentially converting n  a into
n  a = n  a = (f (a)  ) by coordinate transfor-
mation, then integrating over  with a weight-functional
g[]. the f (a, ) is nothing but the jacobian of this
coordinate transformation, which due to the compact-
ness of the gauge group can be chosen gauge invariant.
this step is mathematically trivial, and by it alone we
are still in the original axial gauge, but now expressed
as n  a = 0. however, since [d], f (a, ), and
critically the action s() are gauge invariant, we can
changed their  back to . now we are in another ar-
bitrarily chosen gauge (f (a)   = 0), and can commit
an arbitrary weight g[] to each . therefore, the free-
dom to choose arbitrary f and g is a consequence of
the gauge invariance of s in eq. (2). namely, despite
the appearance of an explicit (n  a), the original gauge
condition n  a has essentially disappeared out in eq. (2)
(apart from o()), because we can convert n  a into an
arbitrary form by changing a to a but leave the a else-

2

where unaltered. therefore later on when we convert g
and f into an eective action and expand it to derive
feynman rules, we already know for sure that these feyn-
man rules are equivalent to each other, without having
to study the details of feynman diagrams. this is the
convenient path-integral method of demonstration that
gauge theory still reserves gauge invariance after quanti-
zation. namely, the trace of the original gauge choice
has disappeared out in the nal feynman rules.

however, the trace left on the considered operator
o by the original gauge condition will not disappear, if
o is not gauge invariant. and such a trace should be
visible no matter whatever tricks we play. indeed, in
the original expression eq. (2), the gauge condition is
enforced by the delta function. and after we adopted
the faddeev-popov trick to transit to an arbitrary gauge
xing form g(f (a)), this g(f (a)) no longer enforce the
original gauge condition on o [8], however we get a gauge
transformation on o characterized by 0. in fact, by the
denition in eq. (8), the role of 0 on o is nothing but
bringing it to the initial axial gauge in which we start the
canonical quantization.

in one word, once we start with the expression eq.
(2), which is obtained by canonical quantization in the
axial gauge, the subsequent calculation will exhibit such
a gauge condition anyhow, unless the considered operator
o is gauge invariant. and no matter what kind of gauge
xing functions f and g we choose to derive the feyn-
man rules, the nal matrix element we obtain should be
the same (as long as the faddeev-popov trick is justied)
and should be regarded as the result in the original axial
gauge; the freedom of choosing feynman rules for calcu-
lation is simply because the quantized gauge theory still
reserves gauge invariance, as was demonstrated by the
path-integral formalism. if we want to study what the
matrix element of a gauge dependent operator would be
in another gauge, we have to begin the initial canonical
quantization in that gauge (which might not necessarily
lead to a simple form like eq. (2)). merely adopting the
faddeev-popov trick to shift the form of f and g only
changes the gauge for feynman rules (which are equiva-
lent in dierent gauges), but not the gauge for the whole
matrix element.

for example, the conventional understanding of quark
or electron orbital angular momentum corresponds to the
gauge dependent operator

gauge except for the gauges in which we know how to do
canonical quantization.

in the usual discussion of gauge theory with path-
integral approach, people sometimes simply ignore the
gauge freedom and write down a formal expression as if
all eld variables were independent:

z(o) = z [d]eiso().

(12)

then by following the same steps as from eqs. (4) to (6),
we can get

z(o) = z [d]eisf (a, f (a)g(f (a))

z [d](1

o).

(13)

dierent from eq. (6), we dont have delta function in
the second line to pick up a specic  as a function of a.
the  here is purely an integration variable independent
of the eld variable. if o is gauge invariant and hence
1

o = o, the innite integration r [d] factorizes out

as an irrelevant normalization factor, so we get the same
perturbatively applicable expression as what we obtained
by starting with strict canonical quantization,

z(o) = z [d]eisof (a, f (a)g(f (a)).

(14)

since eq. (14) can be derived from the same eq. (12)
for arbitrary f and g, this formally states that z(o) is
independent of f and g up to an irrelevant constant fac-
tor, or to say, the feynman rules in dierent gauges are
equivalent. this is again the same conclusion as we dis-
covered by starting with well-dened canonical method.
however, we remark that such a formal procedure of
starting with the ill-dened innite expression eq. (12)
is not always reliable. such unreliability simply often
does not manifest for gauge invariant operator, but can
be seen by studying gauge dependent operators. gener-
ally speaking, when o is gauge dependent we are unable
to arrive at the perturbatively applicable expression eq.
(14) from eq. (12). but there are some exceptions. for
instance we take the product of electron eld at dierent
points:

~lq = z d3x(cid:18)~x 

1
i

~(cid:19) .

(11)

o will be

o = (x)(y).

o = ei(x)i(y)(x)(y).

(15)

(16)

whether ~lq gives gauge invariant matrix element in a nu-
cleon helicity eigenstate will determine whether quarks
orbital contribution to nucleon spin is meaningful. ac-
cording to our above discussion, we cannot calculate ~lqs
matrix element as we do for the gauge invariant opera-
tors such as quark spin. actually we dont really know at
all the expression of ~lqs matrix element in an arbitrary

therefore when x 6= y, (x)(y) is gauge dependent.
however, we see in eq. (13) that the gauge transformed
phase factor ei(x)i(y) can be absorbed into the irrel-
evant integration over . therefore we can obtain the
same expression for z((x)(y)) as for gauge invari-
ant operators, and would conclude that z((x)(y))
can be calculated with the usual feynman rules in an

3

arbitrary gauge and is gauge independent! this however
contradicts the results obtained by starting with the well-
dened canonical quantization. and in fact, we known
that the fermion two point function is gauge dependent.
a toy model demonstration of how such error arises can
be found in ref. [9].

by some more delicate tricks, the authors in ref.
[10] adopted the above formal path-integral formalism to
demonstrate that if we use the same calculation rules as
for gauge invariant operators, the gauge dependent quark
orbital angular momentum operator will give gauge inde-
pendent matrix element for a nucleon helicity state. this
however is refuted by explicit 1-loop calculations [11].

finally, we mention that cheng and tsai [12] has
ever pointed out that the feynman rules derived via the
fadeev-popov approach often exhibit singularities (for
example in the coulomb and axial gauges). such singu-
larities must be dealt with care, otherwise at the two-loop
level of non-abelian gauge theory the feynman rules in
the coulomb, covariant, and axial gauges derived via the
fadeev-popov approach will be inconsistent with each
other [12].

in summary, we demonstrated that the calculation of
the matrix element of gauge dependent operators is not a
straightforward generalization of that for gauge invariant
ones, and must be carefully derived from the very begin-
ning of gauge theory quantization. we must distinguish
the eects of initial gauge choice (in quantization) on the
feynman rules and on the studied operator or matrix
element. feynman rules in dierent gauge are demon-
strated to be equivalent but the gauge condition on the
studied operator might bring non-trivial dierence. the
formal path-integral formalism of starting with an ill-
dened innite expression, which often gives correct re-
sults for gauge invariant operators, is however not always
reliable, as can be seen by studying the matrix element
of gauge dependent operators.

note added: we call the interested readers attention
to a most recent paper by hoodbhoy and ji [13]. we got
quite some inspiration from [13] in developing this paper,
however our opinions towards gauge theory quantization
are rather dierent from that in [13].

acknowledgments

one of the authors (xsc) would like to thank the in-
stitute for theoretical physics, university of tuebingen
for hospitality. this work was supported by the daad
and the china national natural science foundation un-
der grant no. 19675018.

[1] for a review of the spin problem and related topics, see,
e.g., h.y. cheng, int. j. mod. phys. a 11, 5109 (1996).
[2] p. hoodbhoy, x. ji, and w. lu, phys. rev. d 59, 074010

(1999); and references therein.

[3] see, e.g., s. weinberg, the quantum theory of fields:
sections 9.6, 15.4 (cambridge university press, new
york, 1995 (vol. i), 1996 (vol. ii)).

[4] in the simple case of qed, quantization in the coulomb
gauge can also lead to such a compact form. see section
9.6 of ref. [3].

[5] this is the advantage of the axial gauge. for a general
f (a) the integration of (f (a)) over  usually acquires
an a-dependent determinant factor, except in the u(1)
case.

[6] r.p. feynman, phys. rev. 101, 769 (1949): section 8.
[7] h. cheng and e.c. tsai, chin. j. phys. 25, 95 (1987).
[8] it should be reminded that in the generally called axial
gauge in perturbative calculations: f (a) = n  a and
g[] = exp( i
before we take the limit   0. so we must still use the
gauge transformed operator 0 o in the process of calcu-
lation, and take the limit   0 in the end. this does
not necessarily give the same rusult as using o from the
beginning.

2 r d4x2(x)), n  a is not forced to zero

[9] x.s. chen, w.m. sun and f. wang, j. phys. g (to be
published); the formalism in this paper and in ref. [10]
is taken from ref. [3], it is essentially a reverse of the
procedure from eq. (12) to eq. (14).

[10] x.s. chen and f. wang, hep-ph/9802346.
[11] the calculations in ref. [2] are for colored quark and do
not meet the requirement in ref. [10], however the calcu-
lations in qed (which meet the requirement in ref. [10])
are analogous and give similar gauge dependent results
(x.s. chen and f. wang, unpublished).

[12] h. cheng and e.c. tsai, phys. rev. lett. 57, 511 (1986).
[13] p. hoodbhoy and x. ji, hep-ph/9908275.

4

