cu-tp-903

hep-th/9908097

9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
3
1

 

 
 

1
v
7
9
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

massive monopoles and massless monopole clouds1

erick j. weinberg

department of physics, columbia university

new york, ny 10027, usa

abstract

magnetic monopole solutions naturally arise in the context of spontaneously bro-
ken gauge theories. when the unbroken symmetry includes a non-abelian sub-
group, investigation of the low-energy monopole dynamics by means of the moduli
space approximation reveals degrees of freedom that can be attributed to massless
monopoles. these do not correspond to distinct solitons, but instead are mani-
fested as a cloud of non-abelian eld surrounding one or more massive monopoles.
in these talks i explain how one is led to these solutions and then describe them in
some detail.

1 introduction

one-particle states arise in the spectra of weakly coupled quantum eld theories in two rather

dierent ways. by quantizing the small oscillations about the vacuum, one nds the states, with

a characteristic mass m, that correspond to the quanta of the fundamental elds of the theory. it

may also happen that the classical eld equations of the theory possess localized solutions with

energies of order m/, where  is a typical small coupling of the theory; these soliton solutions also

give rise to particles in the quantum theory. at rst sight, these two classes of particles appear

quite dierent: the former seem to be point particles with no internal structure, while the latter

are extended objects described by a classical eld prole (r).

however, these distinctions are not quite so clearcut. on the one hand, in an interacting theory

even the fundamental point particles can be viewed as having a partonic substructure that evolves

with momentum scale according to the dglap equations. on the other, one can analyze the

behavior of the soliton states in terms of the normal modes of small uctuations about the soliton.

the modes in the continuum part of the spectra can be interpreted as scattering states of elementary

1talks delivered at the international workshop on mathematical and physical aspects of nonlinear field theories,

seoul, korea, february 1998

1

quanta in the presence of the soliton; there may also be discrete eigenvalues corresponding to quanta

bound to the soliton. this leaves only a small number of zero frequency modes whose quantization

entails the introduction of the collective coordinates that may be viewed as the fundamental degrees

of freedom of the soliton.

these considerations suggest that the particle states built from solitons and those based the

elementary quanta do not dier in any essential way. indeed, it can happen that states that appear

as elementary quanta in one formulation of the theory correspond to solitons in another. the

classic example of this is the correspondence between the sine-gordon model and the thirring

model [1]. of more immediate relevance to my talks is the conjecture by montonen and olive [2]

that certain theories possess an exact electromagnetic duality relating magnetically charged solitons

and electrically charged elementary quanta.

if there is such a duality, then one would expect the classical solutions to display particle-like

properties. in particular, one would expect the classical solutions with higher charges to have a

structure consistent with an interpretation in terms of component solitons of minimal charge. this

is indeed found to be the case in many theories. however, in the course of studying magnetic

monopoles in the context of larger gauge groups [3, 4], kimyeong lee, piljin yi, and i found [5]

that in some theories there are classical solutions that do not quite t this picture. as i will explain

below, there is a sense in which these solutions can be understood as multimonopole solutions con-

taining both massive and massless magnetic monopoles. while the massive components are quite

evident when one examines the classical solutions, the massless monopoles appear to lose their indi-

vidual identity and merge into a cloud of non-abelian elds. because these massless monopoles

can be viewed as the duals to the massless gauge bosons of the theory, a better understanding of the

nature of these unusual solutions may well provide deeper insight into the properties of non-abelian

gauge theories.

in these talks i will explain how one is led to these solutions and then describe them in some

detail. i begin in the next section by reviewing some general properties of magnetic monopoles.

in sec. 3, i describe the bogomolny-prasad-sommereld, or bps, limit [6] and its application to

multimonopole solutions in an su (2) gauge theory. the extension of these results to larger gauge

groups is discussed in sec. 4. the treatment of low-energy monopole dynamics by means of the

moduli space approximation is discussed in sec. 5, while the actual determination of some moduli

space metrics is described in sec. 6. the theories where one actually encounters evidence of massless

monopoles are those in which the unbroken gauge symmetry has a non-abelian component. these

are discussed in sec. 7. explicit examples of solutions in which the massless monopoles appear

2

to condense into a non-abelian cloud are described in secs. 8 and 9. section 10 contains some

concluding remarks.

2 magnetic monopoles

in the absence of sources, maxwells equations display a symmetry under the interchange of electric

and magnetic elds. this suggests that there might also be a symmetry in sources, and that in

addition to the familiar electric charges there might also be magnetically charged objects, usually

termed magnetic monopoles, that act as sources for magnetic elds. a static monopole with

magnetic charge qm would give rise to a coulomb magnetic eld

bi =

qm
4

ri
r2 .

(2.1)

in the canonical treatment of the behavior of charged particles in a magnetic eld, either

classically or quantum mechanically, it is most convenient to express the magnetic eld as the curl
of a vector potential ai. for the magnetic eld of eq. (2.1), a suitable choice is

ai = ij3

qm
4

rj
r

(1  cos )

sin 

.

(2.2)

note that this is singular along the negative z-axis. this dirac string singularity is an inevitable

consequence of trying to express a eld with nonvanishing divergence as the curl of a potential;

any potential leading to eq. (2.1) will have a similar singularity along some curve running from the

position of the monopole out to innity. physically, this singularity is a diculty only if it actually

observable.

in classical physics, where only the magnetic eld, and not the vector potential, is

measurable, it causes no problem. however, there are quantum mechanical interference eects that

are sensitive to the quantity

u = exp(cid:20)ieic aidli(cid:21)

(2.3)

where e is the electric charge of some particle and the integration is around any closed curve. if c
is taken to be an innitesimal closed curve in a region where ai is nonsingular, u is clearly equal
to unity. on the other hand, if the integral is taken around an innitesimal closed curve encircling

the dirac string, u is not equal to unity, and the string is thus observable, unless the magnetic

charge obeys the dirac quantization condition2

2i am assuming units in which h = 1; otherwise there is a additional factor of h on the right hand side.

qm =

4

e (cid:18) n
2(cid:19)

(2.4)

3

for some integer n.

if we want the string to be unobservable, this condition must hold for all

possible electric charges. this is only possible if all electric charges are integer multiples of some

minimum charge for which eq. (2.4) is satised. thus, the existence of a single monopole in the

universe would be sucient to explain the observed quantization of electric charge.

there is an alternative approach that avoids the appearance of string singularities [7]. instead,

one introduces two gauge patches, one excluding the negative z-axis and one excluding the positive

z-axis, and in each one chooses a vector potential that is nonsingular in that region. in the overlap

of the two regions, the two vector potentials can dier only by the gauge transformation that relates

the two patches. in order that this gauge transformation be single-valued in the overlap region,

eq. (2.4) must hold.

one can always incorporate magnetic monopoles into a theory with electrically charged parti-

cles simply by postulating a new species of fundamental particles. however, it turns out [8] that

monopoles are already implicit in many theories with electrically charged fundamental elds. in

these theories, the classical eld equations have localized nite energy solutions with magnetic

charge that correspond to one-particle states of the quantized theory. although topological argu-

ments are usually used to demonstrate the existence of these solutions, their existence and many

of their features can in fact be understood on the basis of energetic arguments alone [9].

to begin, note that the coulomb magnetic eld eq. (2.1) has a 1/r2 singularity at the origin. in

contrast to the dirac string, this a true physical singularity, as can be seen by noting that it leads
to a 1/r4 divergence in the energy density e = 1
2 b2. this singularity must somehow be tamed if
nite energy classical solutions are to exist. one approach might be to replace the point magnetic

charge by a charge distribution, but the dirac quantization condition forbids such continuous charge

distributions in theories with both electric and magnetic charges.

however, there is another possibility for removing the divergence. when placed in a magnetic
eld, a magnetic dipole d acquires an energy d  b. thus, the singular energy density in the
magnetic eld might be cancelled by introducing a suitable (singular) distribution of magnetic

dipoles. this idea can be implemented by introducing a complex vector eld w with electric
charge e and a magnetic dipole density d = iegw  w, with g a real constant that for the
moment can be taken to be arbitrary. since we want there to be a lower bound on the energy, the

energy density must also contain terms of higher order in d. in particular, adding a term d2/2
allows the 1/r4 divergence of the energy density to be cancelled if |w|  1/r near the origin.

since we want the w eld to be localized within a nite region, the energy density should
w|w|2. however, this would give a 1/r2 contribution to e near

contain a mass term of the form m 2

4

the origin. this singularity can be eliminated by allowing the w mass to be dependent on some

spatially varying eld . in particular, let us assume that mw = g, where g is a constant and
the scalar eld potential v () is minimized by  = v 6= 0. finiteness of the energy then implies
that at large distances   v and mw 6= 0, but at r = 0 both  and mw can be taken to vanish.
provided that the contribution from the gradients of the elds introduce no additional singularities

(which can be arranged), the energy density will then be nonsingular everywhere.

an energy density of the sort described here can be obtained from a lagrangian density of the

form

l = 

1
4

(f  iegw 

 w)2 

1
2|dw  dw|2 + g22|w|2 

1
2

()2  v ()

(2.5)

where d =  + iea and f = a  a are the electromagnetic covariant derivative and
electromagnetic eld strength. a solution of the resulting euler-lagrange equations that carries

unit magnetic charge (i.e., qm = 4/e) can be obtained by introducing the ansatz

sin 

rj
er
u(r)

(1  cos )
ai = ij3
i
er h1  ei cos (1  cos )i
2
w1 = 
1
u(r)
er h1 + ei sin (1  cos )i
2
w2 =
i
2
 = h(r) .

u(r)
er

ei sin 

w3 =

(2.6)

substitution of this ansatz into the euler-lagrange equations leads to a pair of coupled second

order ordinary dierential equations that can be solved numerically to yield a nite energy solution.

however, that the dirac string singularity still remains.

a very important special case is obtained by setting g = 2 and g = e. with this choice of

parameters, the theory described by eq (2.5) is in fact an su (2) gauge theory in disguise. let us
t a and a triplet higgs eld   at a by
dene the components of an su (2) gauge eld a  aa
a3
 = a

 = w,

 + ia2

a1

a = a3(r)

(2.7)

where the t a are the generators of su (2). the lagrangian (2.5) can then be rewritten in the form

here

l = 

1
4

tr f 2

 +

1
2

tr (d)2  v () .

d =  + iea

5

(2.8)

(2.9)

is the non-abelian covariant derivative and

f = a   a + ie[a, a ]

(2.10)

is the eld strength with magnetic components bi = (1/2)ijkfjk and electric components ei = foi.

for deniteness, let us assume that the potential is of the form

v () = 

2
2

tr 2 +


4

(tr 2)2 .

(2.11)

if 2 < 0, the classical energy has a minimum at  = 0 that preserves the su (2) symmetry. the

spectrum of the quantum theory includes three massless gauge bosons and three massive scalars

with equal masses. if instead 2 > 0, there is a family of physically equivalent degenerate minima
0 = 2/  v2; the vacuum manifold of such minima can be identied with the coset
space su (2)/u (1) = s2. in each of these vacuum states the su (2) symmetry is spontaneously

given by tr 2

broken to the u (1) subgroup that leaves 0 invariant; this u (1) subgroup may be identied with

electromagnetism. after quantization of the theory, the small uctuations about the vacuum lead

to a spectrum of elementary particles that includes a massless photon, an electrically neutral higgs

scalar with mass 2, and a pair of vector bosons with mass ev and electric charges e.

in describing either the vacuum or congurations that are small perturbations about the vac-

our ansatz for the monopole solution corresponds to a vacuum with a

uum, it is most natural to take the orientation of the higgs eld to be uniform in space; indeed,
0 = va3. however, the
orientation of the higgs eld is gauge-dependent quantity that need not be uniform. in particular,

by applying a spatially varying su (2) gauge transformation (with a singularity along the negative

z-axis), we can bring our monopole solution into the manifestly nonsingular radial gauge form

j = jak rk

aa
a = rah(r) .

1  u(r)

er

at large-distances the resulting magnetic eld

ba

i =

1
e

rira
r2 + o(1/r3)

(2.12)

(2.13)

is parallel to  in internal space, showing that it lies in the unbroken electromagnetic subgroup.
in any nite energy solution, the higgs eld must approach one of the minima of v () as r  
in any xed direction. hence, for any nonsingular solution the higgs conguration gives a map

from the s2 at spatial innity into the vacuum manifold su (2)/u (1). any such map corresponds

to an element of the homotopy group 2(su (2)/u (1)) = z and can therefore be assigned an

6

integer topological charge n. while the vacuum solutions correspond to the identity element

with n = 0, the radial gauge monopole solution gives a topologically nontrivial map with n = 1. in

fact, one can show that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the magnetic charge and the

topological charge, with a nonsingular su (2) conguration of total magnetic charge qm = 4n/e

having topological charge n. although magnetic charges that are half-integer multiples of 4n/e

are allowed by the dirac quantization condition, they cannot be obtained from nonsingular eld

congurations.

3 the bps limit

an especially interesting special case, which i will assume for the remainder of these talks, is known

as the bogomolny-prasad-sommereld, or bps, limit [6]. it can be motivated by considering the

expression for the energy of a static conguration with magnetic, but not electric, charge. assuming

for the moment that a0 vanishes identically, we have

tr b2

i +

e = z d3x(cid:20) 1
= z d3x(cid:20) 1

2

2

1
2

tr (di)2 + v ()(cid:21)

tr (bi  di)2 + v ()  tr bidi(cid:21) .

(3.1)

with the aid of the bianchi identity dibi = 0 the last term on the right hand side may be rewritten

as a surface integral over the sphere at spatial innity:

z d3xtr bidi = z d3xi(tr bi) = z dsitr bi  qm v .

(3.2)

(the normalization of qm implied by the last equality agrees with that of eq. (2.1).) substituting

this back into the previous equation yields the bound

e = qm v +z d3x(cid:20) 1

2

 |qm|v .

tr (bi  di)2 + v ()(cid:21)

(3.3)

the bps limit is obtained by dropping the contribution of v () to the energy. this can be
done most simply by letting 2  0,   0, with v2 = 2/ held xed. it can also be obtained
by considering the extension of this theory to a yang-mills theory with extended supersymmetry.

the latter approach is particularly attractive from a physical point of view, and can be formulated

in such a way that the bps limit is preserved by higher order quantum corrections.

now recall that any static conguration that is a local minimum of the energy is a stable solution

of the classical equations of motion. because the magnetic charge is quantized, any conguration

7

that saturates the lower bound in eq. (3.3) will be such a solution. with v () absent, the conditions

for saturation of this bound are the bps equations

bi = di .

(3.4)

(i have assumed here, and henceforth, that qm  0; the extension to the case qm < 0 is obvious.)
one can easily verify by direct substitution that any solution of the rst-order bps equations is

indeed a solution of the second-order euler-lagrange equations.

this result can easily be extended to the case of dyons, solutions carrying not only a magnetic

charge qm but also a nonzero electric charge

qe = v1z dsitr ei .

the bound on the energy is generalized to

with the minimum being achieved by congurations that satisfy

e  vqq2

m + q2
e

bi = cos di

ei = sin di

d0 = 0

(3.5)

(3.6)

(3.7)

with  = tan1(qe/qm ).

an attractive feature, which was in fact one of the original motivations for the bps approxima-

tions, is that it is possible to obtain a simple analytic expression for the singly charged monopole

solution. by a rescaling of elds and distances the gauge coupling e can be set equal to unity;

for the remainder of these talks i will assume that this has been done. the solutions can then be

written as [6],

v

1

aa

j = jak rk(cid:20)
r(cid:21)
sinh(vr) 
1
a = ra(cid:20)v coth(vr) 
r(cid:21) .

(3.8)

note that the higgs eld does not approach its asymptotic value exponentially fast, but instead has

a 1/r tail. this is because the absence of a potential term makes the higgs eld massless. since a

massless scalar eld carries a long-range force that is attractive between like objects, this raises the

possibility that the magnetic repulsion between two bps monopoles might be exactly cancelled by

their mutual scalar attraction, thus allowing for the existence of static multimonopole solutions.

8

in fact, it turns out that such solutions  indeed continuous families of solutions  exist for all

values of qm .

the actual construction of these multimonopole solutions is a dicult, but fascinating, problem.

for the moment, i will simply concentrate on the problem of counting the number of physically

meaningful parameters, or collective coordinates, needed to specify these solutions. each of these

corresponds to a zero frequency eigenmode (a zero mode) in the spectrum of small uctuations

about a given solution. however, there are also an innite number of zero modes, corresponding to

local gauge transformations of the solution, that do not correspond to any physically meaningful

parameter. to eliminate these, a gauge condition must be imposed on the elds.

i will start with the zero modes about the solution with unit magnetic charge. the elimination

of the gauge modes is particularly transparent if we work in the singular string gauge of eq. (2.7)

where 1 = 2 = 0. this leaves only a u (1) gauge freedom that can be xed by imposing,
e.g, the electromagnetic coulomb gauge condition   a = 0. explicit solution of the zero mode
equations then shows that there are precisely four normalizable zero modes about the solution.

three of these correspond to innitesimal spatial translations of the monopole; the corresponding

parameters are most naturally chosen to be the spatial coordinates of the center of the monopole.

the fourth zero mode corresponds to a spatially constant phase rotation of the massive vector eld,
w(r)  eiw(r). since this mode is in fact a gauge mode that has no eect on gauge-invariant
quantities, one might think that it should be discarded as unphysical. the justication for not doing

so comes from considering the eect of allowing the collective coordinates to be time-dependent.

in the case of the translation modes, this gives a solution with nonzero linear momentum. for the

gauge mode, allowing the phase  to vary linearly in time produces a dyon solution that carries an

electric charge proportional to d/dt.

although explicit solution of the zero mode equations suces for the case of unit magnetic

charge, where the monopole solution is known explicitly, index theory methods are needed to count

the zero modes about solutions with higher charges [10]. each zero mode consists of perturba-

tions aj and  that can be viewed as three-component vectors transforming under the adjoint

representation of su (2). since these preserve the bps equations, they must satisfy

0 = (bj  dj)

= dj  aj  jkldkal .

(3.9)

(here dj = j + aj and aj and  are 3  3 anti-hermitian matrices in the adjoint representation
of su (2).) these must be supplemented by a gauge condition that eliminates the unwanted gauge

9

modes. a convenient choice is the background gauge condition

0 = djaj + 

(3.10)

which is equivalent to requiring that the perturbation be orthogonal, in the functional sense, to

all normalizable gauge modes. the number of collective coordinates is just equal to the number of

linearly independent normalizable solutions of eqs. (3.9) and (3.10).

if we dene [11]

 = i + ijaj

(3.11)

where i is the unit 2  2 matrix and the j are the pauli matrices, eqs. (3.9) and (3.10) can be
combined into the single dirac-type equation

0 = (ijdj + i)  d .

(3.12)

we must remember, however, that two solutions  and i that are linearly dependent as solutions

of eq. (3.12) actually correspond to linearly independent solutions of the original bosonic equations

(3.9) and (3.10). the number of collective coordinates is thus actually twice the number of linearly
independent normalizable zero eigenmodes of d.

note that if (r) is a solution of eq. (3.12), then so is

(r) = (r)u

(3.13)

where u is any 2  2 unitary matrix. this fact, which be of importance later, implies that number
of normalizable zero eigenmodes of the bosonic equation must be a multiple of four.

the next step is to dene

i(m 2) = tr

m 2

dd + m 2  tr

m 2

dd + m 2

where m is an arbitrary real number and

is the adjoint of d. the quantity

d = ijdj  i

i = lim

m 20i(m 2)

(3.14)

(3.15)

(3.16)

is then equal to the number of zero eigenvalues of dd minus the number of zero eigenvalues of
dd. using the fact that the unperturbed solution obeys the bps equations, one nds that

dd = d2

j + 2jbj + 2

10

dd = d2

j + 2 .

(3.17)

the second equation shows that dd is a positive operator with no normalizable zero modes. since
every normalizable zero mode of d is also a normalizable zero mode of dd, and conversely, i would
clearly give the desired counting of zero modes if it were not for the fact that these operators have

continuous spectra extending down to zero.

the contribution from these continuous spectra can be written as

m 20z
icontinuum = lim

d3k
(2)3

m2

k2 + m 2 [dd(k)  dd(k)]

(3.18)

where o(k) is the density of continuum eigenstates of an operator o. this contribution can be
nonzero only if these density of states factors are singular near k = 0. for the case at hand, one can

show that this is not the case. the essential idea is that such singularities are determined by the
large r behavior of the potential terms in the operators. since dddd = 2jbj, the potentially
dangerous behavior is associated with the long-range behavior of the magnetic eld. but, up to

exponentially small corrections, the long-range part of the bj lies in the unbroken u (1) subgroup

and so does not act on the massless components of the elds, which also lie in this u (1). since
only these latter elds have spectra that extend down to zero, icontinuum vanishes.

having eliminated the continuum contribution, let us now turn to the evaluation of i. for this
purpose it is convenient to adopt a pseudo-four-dimensional notation and dene a four-vector v

with components vj = aj for j = 1, 2, 3 and v4 = . because this is actually a three-dimensional
space, 4 = 0 and so d4 = . similarly, gij = fij while gi4 = g4i = di. finally, the dirac
matrices

k = (cid:18) 0 ik
0 (cid:19)

ik

4 = (cid:18) 0

i

i

0(cid:19)

5 = (cid:18) i

0

0

i(cid:19)

all anticommute with each other and all have square equal to unity.

with these denitions, we can write

d = (cid:18) 0
d

d
0 (cid:19)

(3.19)

(3.20)

(3.21)

and hence

i(m 2) = tr 5

m 2

(  d)2 + m 2 = z d3xhx|tr 5

m

  d + m |xi .

(here tr indicates a functional trace, while tr denotes a trace over dirac and su (2) matrix indices.)

the integrand in the last expression can be written as the three-dimensional divergence of the

current

ji =

1

2 z d3xhx|tr 5i

1

  d + m |xi = 

1

2z d3xhx|tr 5i(  d)

1

(  d)2 + m 2|xi

(3.22)

11

and so

where the surface integral in the last term is over the sphere at spatial innity.

i(m 2) = z d3xiji(x) = z dsiji(x)

(3.23)

we now write

1

(  d)2 + m 2 =

1

d2 + 2 + m 2 +

1

d2 + 2 + m 2 (cid:18) i

2

 g(cid:19)

1

d2 + 2 + m 2 + 

(3.24)

where d2 = djdj and the dots represent terms of order g2 or higher that vanish at least as
fast as 1/r4 at spatial innity. when this expansion is substituted into the expression for ji, the

contribution from the rst term vanishes after the trace over dirac indices is performed. the

remaining terms give

i
xiji = 
2
i
2hx|

=

1

1

i xitrhx|d

1

d2 + 2 + m 2 g

1

d2 + 2 + m 2|xi + o(x4)

2 + 2 + m 2 x  b

2 + 2 + m 2|xi + o(|x|3)

(3.25)

where the trace is now only over su (2) indices.

the evaluation of this last expression is most transparent if we work in the singular string
gauge. if the magnetic charge is qm = 4n, then asymptotically   vt 3, and x  b  (n/x2)t 3
and one nds that

it follows that

xiji =

n

2x2

v

v2 + m 2

+ o(|x|3) .

i(m 2) = 2n

v

v2 + m 2

(3.26)

(3.27)

and that the number of linearly independent normalizable zero modes of the original bosonic prob-

lem is

2i = 4n .

(3.28)

a priori, one might have expected that classical solutions with higher charges could lead to new

types of magnetically charged particles. eq. (3.28), together with the fact that the bps energy

is strictly proportional to the magnetic charge, suggests that this is not the case.

instead, all

higher charged solutions should be viewed as being multimonopole solutions composed of n > 1

unit monopoles, each with three translational and one u (1) degree of freedom.3 in the quantum

theory, these solutions would thus correspond to multiparticle states.

3as was the case with the unit monopole, there is only a single gauge mode that is not eliminated by the gauge
condition; this corresponds to a simultaneous u (1) rotation of all the monopoles. the modes corresponding to relative
u (1) rotations are not simply gauge transformations of the underlying solution.

12

it is useful at this point to review the spectrum of particles in this theory. quantization of the

small uctuations of the fundamental elds yielded two particles, the photon and the higgs scalar,

that have neither electric nor magnetic charge and that in the bps limit are both massless. it also
gave two massive vector particles, with electric charges e, no magnetic charge, and mass ev. in
addition to these we have the monopole and antimonopole, with no electric charge, magnetic charges
4/e, and mass (4/e)v. a curious feature of this spectrum is that the pattern of masses and
charges remains the same under the interchanges e  4/e and qe  qm . there is a mismatch in
spin, since the monopole and antimonopole are spinless, while the vector bosons have spin one, but

this can be remedied by enlarging the theory so that it has n = 4 extended supersymmetry [12];

once this is done, the elementary electrically charged particles and the magnetically charged bps

soliton states form supermultiplets with corresponding spins. these facts suggest that this duality

symmetry, which exchanges solitons and elementary particles, and weak and strong coupling, might

in fact be an exact symmetry of the theory, as was rst conjectured by montonen and olive [2].

4 monopoles in theories with larger gauge groups

this analysis can be extended to the case of a yang-mills theory with an arbitrary simple gauge

group g of rank r and dimension d and a higgs eld  transforming under the adjoint repre-

sentation. to begin, recall that the generators of the lie algebra of g can be chosen to be r

commuting generators ha that span the cartan subalgebra, together with a number of generators
e associated with the d  r root vectors  that are dened by the commutation relations

[e, hj] = je .

(4.1)

the asymptotic value of the higgs eld in some xed reference direction can always be chosen

to lie in the cartan subalgebra. it thus denes an r-component vector h through the relation

0 = h  h .

(4.2)

the unbroken gauge symmetry is the subgroup g that leaves 0 invariant. the maximal symmetry

breaking occurs if h has nonzero inner products with all the root vectors, in which case the unbroken

subgroup is the u (1)r generated by the cartan subalgebra.

if instead some of the roots are

orthogonal to h, then these form the root lattice for a non-abelian group k of rank k < r and the
unbroken symmetry is u (1)rk  k.

at large distances, f must commute with the higgs eld. hence, along the same direction

used to dene h, the asymptotic magnetic eld may be chosen to also lie in the cartan subalgebra

13

and to be of the form

bi = g  h

ri
r2 + o(r3) .

the generalized quantization condition on the magnetic charge then becomes [13]

eigh = i .

(4.3)

(4.4)

i will begin by considering the case of maximal symmetry breaking. because 2(g/u (1)r ) =
1(u (1)r) = z r, there are r topologically conserved charges. these can be identied in a partic-

ularly natural fashion by recalling that a basis for the root lattice can be chosen to be a set of r

simple roots a with the property that all other roots are linear combinations of simple roots with

coecients that are either all positive or all negative. there are many possible choices for this

basis. however, a unique set of simple roots can be specied by requiring that

h  a  0

(4.5)

for all a. if all of the elds are in the adjoint representation, the quantization condition (4.4) then

reduces to the requirement that

where a

 = a/2

g = 4xa



naa

a and the integers na are are the topological charges.

the bps mass formula is easily extended to this case. one nds that

m = g  h = xa

na(cid:18) 4

e

h  a(cid:19)  xa

nama .

(4.6)

(4.7)

the methods used to count the zero modes about su (2) solutions can also be applied here
[14]. as before, there is no continuum contribution icontinuum because the long-range part of the
magnetic eld lies in the cartan subalgebra and so does not act on the massless elds, which also
lie in the cartan subalgebra. the calculation of i proceeds very much as before until one gets to
eq. (3.27), which is replaced by

i(m 2) =

1

4 x

(  h)(  g)
[(  h)2 + m 2]1/2 =



1

2x

(  h)(  g)
[(  h)2 + m 2]1/2 .

(4.8)

here the rst sum is over all roots , while the prime on the second sum indicates that it is to

be taken only over the positive roots (those that are positive linear combinations of simple roots).
taking the limit m 2  0 gives

i =



1

2x

  g = 2xa



na x

  a

! .

14

(4.9)

in the sum inside the parentheses, the contributions from the roots other than a cancel, so that
the sum is just a  a

 = 1. hence, the number of normalizable zero modes is

2i = 4xa

na .

(4.10)

it was argued above that the su (2) solutions with higher magnetic charge should be under-

stood as being composed of a number of unit monopoles. the mass formula and the zero mode

counting suggest that the higher charged solutions in the present case should also be understood

as multimonopole solutions. now, however, there are r dierent species of fundamental monopoles,

with the ath fundamental monopole having mass ma, topological charges nb = ab and four degrees

of freedom. classical solutions corresponding to these fundamental monopoles can be constructed

by appropriate embeddings of the su (2) solution. any root  denes an su (2) subgroup of of g

with generators

1

(e + e)

t1() =

22
i
t2() = 
22
t3() =   h .

(e  e)

(4.11)

if we denote by as

i (r; v) and s(r; v) the unit su (2) monopole with higgs expectation value v,

then the embedded solution

ai(r) =

(r) =

3

3

xs=1
xs=1

as
i (r; h  a)ts(a)

s(r; h  a)ts(a) + (h  h  

a )  h

(4.12)

gives the fundamental monopole corresponding to the root a.

it has the expected mass and

topological charges and four zero modes, three corresponding to translational degrees of freedom
and the fourth to a phase angle in the u (1) generated by a  h.

as an example, consider the case of su (3) broken to u (1)  u (1) by an adjoint representation
higgs eld that can be represented by a traceless hermitian 3 3 matrix. let 0 be diagonal, with
its eigenvalues decreasing along the diagonal. with this convention, the su (2) subgroup dened
by 1 lies in the upper left 2  2 block. embedding the su (2) monopole in this block gives a
solution with a mass m1, topological charges na = (1, 0), and four zero modes. after quantization,

there is a family of monopole and dyon one-particle states corresponding to this solution. similarly,
2 denes an su (2) subgroup lying in the lower right 2  2 block. using this subgroup for the

15

embedding gives a solution with mass m2, topological charges (0, 1), and again four zero modes.

this, too, corresponds to a particle in the spectrum of the quantum theory.

there is a third su (2) subgroup, lying in the four corner matrix elements, dened by the

composite root 1 + 2. using this subgroup to embed the su (2) monopole also gives a spherically

symmetric bps solution, with mass m1 + m2 and topological charges (1, 1). however, eq. (4.10)

(as well as explicit solution of the zero mode equations) shows that there are not four, but eight

zero modes. hence, this embedding solution is just one out of a continuous family of two-monopole

solutions;

in contrast to the two fundamental solutions, it can be continuously deformed into

a solution containing two widely separated fundamental monopoles.

it does not lead to a new

particle in the spectrum of the quantum theory, but instead corresponds to a two-particle state.

let us now consider this result in the light of the montonen-olive duality conjecture. although

this conjecture was rst motivated by the spectrum of the su (2) theory, it is natural to test it with

larger gauge groups. the elementary particle sector of the theory contains a number of massless

particles, carrying no u (1) charges, that are presumably self-dual. there are also six massive vector

bosons, one for each root of the root diagram, that carry electric-type charges in one or both of the
unbroken u (1)s. the duals of the 1 and 2 vector bosons are clearly the one-particle states
corresponding to the 1- and 2-embeddings of the su (2) monopole and antimonopole solutions.
one might have thought that the duals of the vector bosons corresponding to (1 + 2) would
be obtained from the (1 + 2)-embedding solutions, but we have just seen that these do not

correspond to single-particle states. some other state must be found if the duality is to hold. the

most likely candidate would be some kind of threshold bound state [15]. to explore this possibility,

we need to understand the interactions of low-energy bps monopoles. this can be done by making

use of the moduli space approximation, to which i now turn.

5 the moduli space approximation

the essential idea of the moduli space approximation [16] is that, since the static multimonopole

solutions are all bps, the time-dependent solutions containing monopoles with suciently small

velocities should in some sense also be approximately bps.4

to make this more precise, let {abps

(r, z), bps(r, z)} be a family of static, gauge-inequivalent
bps solutions parameterized by a set of collective coordinates zj. the moduli space approximation

i

is obtained by assuming that the elds at any xed time are gauge-equivalent to some conguration

4here velocities should be understood to include not only spatial velocities but also the time derivatives of the

u (1) phases. thus, we are considering slowly moving dyons with small (and possibly zero) electric charges.

16

in this family, so that they can be written as

a0(r, t) = 0
ai(r, t) = u 1(r, t)abps
(r, t) = u 1(r, t)bps(r, z(t))u ((r, t) .

i

(r, z(t))u ((r, t)  iu 1(r, t)iu ((r, t)

their time derivatives are then of the form

ai = zj" ai
 = zj" 

zj

zj

+ dij#  zjjai
+ [, j]#  zjj

(5.1)

(5.2)

where the gauge function j(r, t) arises from the time derivative of u (r, t). these are constrained

by gausss law, which takes the form

0 = df 0 + [, 0] = di ai + [, ]

= zj (dijai + [, j]) .

(5.3)

because they arise from variation of a collective coordinate, the quantities jai and j form a

zero mode about the underlying solution bps solution. the gausss law constraint shows that

they obey the background gauge condition eq. (3.10).

with a0 identically zero, the lagrangian of the theory can be written as

l =

1

2z d3rtrh a2

i + 2 + b2

i + di2i .

(5.4)

since for elds obeying the ansatz (5.1) the conguration at any xed time is bps, the contribution

of the last two terms to the integral is just the bps energy determined by the topological charge.

this is a time-independent constant that has no eect on the dynamics and so can be dropped.

the remaining terms then give an eective lagrangian

where

lms =

1
2

gij(z) zi zj

gij(z) = z d3r [iakjak + ij] .

(5.5)

(5.6)

thus, the full eld theory dynamics for low energy monopoles has been reduced to a problem

involving a nite number of degrees of freedom. if one views gij(z) as a metric for the moduli space

spanned by the collective coordinates, the dynamics described by lms is simply geodesic motion

on the moduli space.

17

6 determining the moduli space metric

actually determining the moduli space metric is a nontrivial matter. to apply eq. (5.6) directly

one needs to know the zero modes, whereas we do not in general even know the underlying solution.

however, some more indirect approaches can sometimes be brought to bear on the problem.

first, gibbons and manton [17] showed how one could obtain the metric for the region of

moduli corresponding to widely separated monopoles. they pointed out that, since the moduli

space metric determines the low energy dynamics, the metric can be inferred if this dynamics is

known. the only long-range interactions between widely separated monopoles are those mediated

by massless elds. these are the electromagnetic interactions and an interaction due to the massless

higgs eld. the lagrangian describing the interactions between moving point electric and magnetic

forces is well known, while that for the scalar force is easily worked out. to obtain the metric, these

must be expanded up to terms quadratic in the velocities and the electric charges. a legendre

transformation must then be used to replace the electric charges by the time derivatives of the

corresponding phase angles. apart from a constant term, the result is a lagrangian, of the form of

eq. (5.5), from which the metric can be read o directly. for the case of many su (2) monopoles,

each with mass m and magnetic charge g and with positions xi and phase angles i, this gives

ds2 =

1
2

mijdxi  dxj +

g4
2(4)2 (m 1)ij(di + wik  dxk)(dj + wjl  dxl)

(6.1)

where

and

mii = m xk6=i

mij =

g2

4rij

g2

4rik

,

if i 6= j,

wii = xk6=i

wij = wij

wik,

if i 6= j,

(6.2)

(6.3)

with rij the distance between the ith and jth monopoles and wij the value at xi of the dirac vector

potential due to the jth monopole, dened so that

i  wij(xi  xj) = 

xi  xj

r3
ij

.

(6.4)

the extension of this result to the case of maximal symmetry breaking of an arbitrary sim-

ple group g is quite simple. for a collection of fundamental monopoles, with the ith monopole

18

corresponding to the simple root i, we need only replace eqs. (6.2) and (6.3) by

g2

i  
4rik

k

mii = mi xk6=i
i  
4rij

mij =

g2

j

and

with mi = g 

i  h.

wii = xk6=i
i  

wij = 


i  
j wij

kwik,

,

if i 6= j,

if i 6= j,

(6.5)

(6.6)

although the derivation of these expressions was only valid in the region of moduli space

corresponding to widely separated monopoles, one might wonder whether the asymptotic metric

could be exact. for the case of two su (2) monopoles, several considerations show that it cannot

be. the matrix m of eq. (6.2) reduces to

m =   m  g2

g2
4r

4r

g2
4r

4r ! .

m  g2

(6.7)

the determinant of this matrix vanishes at r = g2/2m, implying a singularity in the metric,

despite the fact that there is no reason to expect any type of singular behavior near this value of

the intermonopole distance. furthermore, we know that there is a short-range force, carried by the

massive vector bosons, that was ignored in the derivation of the metric. if one works in a singular

gauge in which the higgs eld orientation is uniform in space, this interaction is proportional to the

gauge-invariant quantity re[w

(1)w(2)] where w(1) and w(2) are the massive vector elds of the
two monopoles. because these fall exponentially with distance from the center of the monopole,

their overlap, and hence the interaction, falls exponentially with the intermonopole separation.

neither of these objections apply when the two monopoles are fundamental monopoles associ-

ated with dierent simple roots of a large gauge group. the simple roots have the property that

their mutual inner products are always negative. the resulting sign changes in m eliminate the

zero of the determinant and make the asymptotic metric everywhere nonsingular. in addition, the
quantity characterizing the interactions carried by the massive vector elds is now re[trw

(1)w(2)],

which vanishes when the two monopoles arise from dierent simple roots.

this, of course, is not sucient to show that the asymptotic metric is exact. to do this, we

rst note that the coordinates for the moduli space can always be chosen so that three specify the

19

position of the center-of-mass of the monopoles and a fourth is an overall u (1) phase. the moduli

space metric can then be written in the factorized form

m = r3   r1  mrel

d

!

(6.8)

where the factors of r3 and r1 are associated with the center-of-mass coordinates and the overall
u (1) phase, while mrel is the metric on the subspace spanned by the relative positions and phases.
the factoring by the discrete group d arises from diculties in globally factoring out an overall

u (1) phase.

mrel has several important properties. first, it must have a rotational isometry reecting the
fact that the interactions among an assembly of monopoles are unaected by an overall spatial

rotation of the entire assembly. second, the su (2) relations among the zero modes shown in

eq. (3.13) imply that the moduli space metric must be hyper-kahler5 [18]. finally, the relative
moduli space for a collection of n monopoles is 4(n  1)-dimensional. hence, we are seeking a
four-dimensional hyper-kahler manifold with a rotational isometry. there are four such [18]:

1) flat four-dimensional euclidean space

2) the eguchi-hanson manifold [19]

3) the atiyah-hitchin manifold [18]

4) taub-nut space

the rst of these would imply that there were no interactions at all between the monopoles, and
so is clearly ruled out if 1  2 6= 0. the eguchi-hanson metric has the wrong asymptotic behavior
for large intermonopole separation, and so can be ruled out. at large r (but not at small r) the

atiyah-hitchin metric approaches the two-monopole asymptotic metric with m given by eq. (6.2).

it thus describes the moduli space for two su (2) monopoles (or for two identical monopoles in

a larger group), but not that for two distinct monopoles. the only remaining possibility is the

taub-nut metric. this not only agrees at large r with the asymptotic metric, but is in fact equal

to it everywhere. thus, for the case of two distinct fundamental monopoles the asymptotic metric

is in fact exact [3, 20, 21].

if a collection of more than two monopoles includes two corresponding to the same simple

root, then the asymptotic metric develops a singularity when these approach each other. however,

this metric is everywhere nonsingular if the monopoles are all distinct. it is therefore natural to

conjecture that for this case also the asymptotic metric is exact [4]. proofs of this conjecture have

been given by chalmers [22] and by murray [23].

5a metric is hyper-kahler if it possess three covariantly constant complex structures that also form a quaternionic

structure and if it is pointwise hermitian with respect to each.

20

let us now briey return to the issue of duality in the theory with su (3) broken to u (1)u (1).
as noted above, duality is expected to hold only if the theory has an extended supersymmetry, which

means that the low-energy fermion dynamics must be included. it turns out that these fermions

will give rise to a supermultiplet of threshold bound states if and only if there is a normalizable

harmonic form on the relative moduli space [24]. having determined the metric for this moduli

space metric, one can easily verify that such a harmonic form exists, and hence that the test of the

duality conjecture is met [3, 20].

7 nonmaximal symmetry breaking

let us now turn to the case of non-maximal symmetry breaking, where the gauge symmetry g
is spontaneously broken to k  u (1)rk. as in the case of maximal symmetry breaking, we can
require that inner products of the simple roots with h be all non-negative. it is useful to distinguish

between those for which this inner product is greater than zero and those for which it vanishes.

i will continue to denote the former by a, and will label the latter, which form a set of simple

roots for k, by i. in contrast with the previous case, the condition on the inner products with h

does not uniquely determine the set of simple roots. instead, there can be many acceptable sets,

all related by weyl reections of the root diagram that result from global gauge transformations

by elements of k.6

the quantization condition on the magnetic charge now takes the form

(7.1)

g = 4
xa

naa

qjj

 +xj


 .

as in the case of maximal symmetry breaking, the integers na are the topological charges, one for

each u (1) factor of the unbroken group. they are gauge-independent, and thus independent of the

choice of the set of simple roots. the qj must also be integers, but they are neither topologically

conserved nor gauge-invariant. we will see that there is an important distinction to be made

between the case where

g  j = 0 ,

all j,

(7.2)

and that where some of the g  j are nonzero. (note that these do not in general correspond to
vanishing or nonvanishing qj.) in the former case, the long-range magnetic elds are purely abelian

with only u (1) components, whereas in the latter the conguration has a non-abelian magnetic

charge. we will see that there are a number of pathologies associated with the latter case.

6consider, for example, the case of su (3) broken to su (2)  u (1). if one set of simple roots is denoted by  and

, with the latter being a root of the unbroken su (2), then another acceptable set is given by  +  and .

21

the bps mass formula takes the same form as before,

but with the sum running only over the indices corresponding to simple roots that are not orthogonal

m = xa

nama

(7.3)

to h.

the zero mode counting proceeds as before, but with some complications [25]. first, the

continuum contribution cannot be immediately discarded, since the massless elds cannot all be

brought into the cartan subalgebra. because of this, there can be a singularity in the density of
states factor that is strong enough to give a nonzero icontinuum if dd  dd contains order 1/r2
terms that act on elds lying in the unbroken non-abelian subgroup k. this will be the case

whenever there is a net non-abelian magnetic charge. explicit solution of the zero mode equations
in some simple cases shows that the number of zero modes is not equal to the expression for 2i
given below, implying that there is indeed a nonvanishing continuum contribution. this diculty

does not arise when eq. (7.2) is satised.

second, the expression for i is more complicated. the same procedures as used before again

lead to

2i = lim

m 20

1

x



(  h)(  g)

[(  h)2 + m 2]1/2

with the prime indicating that the sum is only over positive roots. now, however, the contribution

from the roots orthogonal to h (i.e., those of the subgroup k) vanishes even for nite m 2 and
so gives no contribution to the limit. as a result, the expression for 2i is in general much less
simple than before. but, again, matters simplify if the asymptotic magnetic eld is purely abelian.

because the roots of k are now all orthogonal to g, they would not have contributed in any case,

and the methods used for the case with maximal symmetry breaking yield

(7.4)

(7.5)

2i = 4
xa

na +xj

qj
 .

as was noted earlier, the qj are not gauge-invariant. however, when g is orthogonal to all of the
k, the sum appearing on the right-hand side of eq. (7.5), and hence 2i, is gauge-invariant.

the diculties with applying index theory when there is a non-abelian magnetic charge are

related to other known diculties with such solutions. since the unbroken gauge group acts non-

trivially on these, one would expect to nd gauge zero modes, analogous to the u (1) modes of

the maximally symmetric case, whose excitation would lead to chromodyons, objects with non-

abelian electric-type charge. instead, one nds that these modes are non-normalizable and that

22

the expected chromodyon states are absent [26]. this can be traced to the fact that the existence

of the non-abelian magnetic charge creates an obstruction to the smooth denition of a set of

generators for k over the sphere at spatial innity; i.e., one cannot dene global color [27].

it is instructive to return to the su (3) example considered in sec. 4, but with the last two
eigenvalues of 0 taken to be equal so that the unbroken group is su (2) u (1). while n1 remains
a topological charge, n2 must be replaced by the nontopological integer q1. the rst fundamental
monopole solution of the maximally broken case, obtained by embedding in the upper left 2  2
block, is still present with a nonzero mass. as before, it has three translational zero modes and

a u (1) phase mode. there are no other normalizable zero modes, even though the solution is
not invariant under the unbroken su (2), and even though eq. (7.4) gives 2i = 6. embedding in
the lower right 2  2 block, which previously gave a second fundamental monopole, is no longer
possible. indeed, if one starts with the maximally broken case, and follows the behavior of the

second fundamental monopole as the last two eigenvalues of 0 approach one another, one nds

that its mass tends to zero, its core radius tends to innity, and the elds at any xed point approach

their vacuum value. finally, the embedding in the corner matrix elements, which previously gave a

solution with eight zero modes that was naturally understood to be a two-monopole solution, now

gives a solution that is gauge-equivalent to the rst fundamental monopole and hence has only four

zero modes. in all three of these cases the magnetic charge has a non-abelian component.

eqs. (7.3) and (7.5) are consistent with the idea that even for non-maximal symmetry breaking

one should interpret all solutions  or at least those with purely abelian magnetic charges  in

terms of a number of component fundamental monopoles. however, there are clearly two quite

dierent kinds of fundamental monopoles. the massive monopoles corresponding to the a carry

u (1) magnetic charges and appear to have four associated degrees of freedom. they can be realized

as classical solitons, even though the latter may not be unique, as the su (3) example shows. the

remaining fundamental monopoles, corresponding to the j, would have to be massless. indeed,

the duality conjecture would lead us to expect to nd massless magnetically charged states that

would be the duals of the massless gauge bosons of the unbroken non-abelian subgroup. the

diculty is that, precisely because they are massless, these monopoles cannot be associated with

any localized classical solutions. to learn more about them, we must examine multimonopole

solutions containing both massive and massless components.

the pathologies associated with non-abelian magnetic charges suggest that this is best done

by concentrating on congurations that obey eq. (7.2). this should not impose any real physical

restriction, since the additional monopoles needed to cancel any non-abelian charge can be placed

23

at an arbitrarily large distance.
breaking as a limit of maximal symmetry breaking in which one or more of the h  
as we will see, it appears that the moduli space for the maximally broken case behaves smoothly in

it also turns out to be useful to treat non-maximal symmetry

a tend to zero.

this limit, with the limit of its metric being the metric for the non-maximally case. although some of

the fundamental monopoles become massless in this limit and no longer have corresponding soliton

solutions, their degrees of freedom of these massless monopoles are still evident in the low-energy

moduli space lagrangian.

8 an so(5) example

a particularly simple example [5] for illustrating this arises with the gauge group so(5), whose

root diagram is shown in fig. 1 with the simple roots labeled  and . consider the solutions

whose magnetic charge is such that

g = 4 ( + ) .

(8.1)

with h as in fig. 1a, the symmetry breaking is maximal and there is an eight-parameter family

of solutions composed of two monopoles, of masses m and m respectively. because the two
monopoles correspond to dierent simple roots, the moduli space metric is known from the results





h





h









(a)

(b)

figure 1: the root diagram of so(5). with the higgs vector h oriented as in (a) the

gauge symmetry is broken to u (1)  u (1), while with the orientation in (b) the breaking is to
su (2)  u (1).

of sec. 6. if instead h is perpendicular to , as in fig. 1b, the unbroken gauge group is su (2)u (1),
with the roots of the su (2) being . these are both orthogonal to g, so eq. (7.2) is satised and

24

eq. (7.5) tells us that there is again an eight-parameter family of solutions. it turns out that these

solutions, which are spherically symmetric, can be found explicitly [28]. this makes it possible to

determine the background gauge zero modes and then use eq. (5.6) to obtain the moduli space
metric directly. the result can then be compared with the m  0 limit of the rst case.

i will begin by describing the su (2)  u (1) solutions. three of its eight parameters give
the location of the center-of-mass. four others are phase angles that specify the su (2)  u (1)
orientation. (all elements of the unbroken group act nontrivially on the solution.) this leaves only

a single parameter, which i will denote by b, whose signicance can be found by examining the

detailed form of the solutions. to write these we need some notation. let t() and t() be dened

as in eq. (4.11) and let

m =

i

q2 (cid:18) e e
e (cid:19) .

e

(8.2)

any adjoint representation so(5) eld p can then be decomposed into parts that are respectively

singlets, triplets, and doublets under the unbroken su (2) by writing

p = p(1)  t() + p(2)  t() + tr p(3)m .

with this notation, the solutions can be written as

aa

i(1) = aimrma(r)

aa

i(2) = aimrmg(r, b)

ai(3) = if (r, b)

a
(1) = rah(r)

a
(2) = rag(r, b)

(3) = iif (r, b)

(8.3)

(8.4)

where a(r) and h(r) are the same as the coecient functions in the su (2) bps monopole solution

given in eq. (3.8) and

f (r, b) =

v

8 cosh(vr/2)

l(r, b)1/2

g(r, b) = a(r)l(r, b)

l(r, b) = [1 + (r/b) coth(vr/2)]1

(8.5)

(8.6)

with

and v = h  .

the parameter b, which has dimensions of length, can take on any positive real value. it only

enters into the doublet and triplet components of the elds, and then only through the function

l(r, b). while the doublet elds decrease exponentially fast outside the monopole core, the triplet

elds have long-range components whose character is determined by b. for 1/v < r < b these

25

fall as 1/r, resulting in a coulomb magnetic eld appropriate to a non-abelian magnetic charge.

at larger distances, however, the vector potential falls as 1/r2, implying a eld strength falling as

1/r3 and thus showing that the magnetic charge is purely abelian. thus, one might view these
solutions as being composed of a massive monopole, with a core of radius  1/v, surrounded by a
non-abelian cloud of radius  b that cancels the non-abelian part of its charge.

in order to obtain the moduli space metric from eq. (5.6), we need the background gauge zero

modes about these solutions. an innitesimal variation with respect to b gives one zero mode, which

turns out to already be in background gauge. the three su (2) modes can then be obtained from

this by a transformation of the type shown in eq. (3.13). the translational and u (1) modes could

also be obtained in the usual fashion. however, we do not need to do so, since the corresponding

parts of the metric can be inferred from the bps mass formulas for monopoles and dyons. the

result of all this is

ds2

su (2)u (1) = m dx2 +

162
m

d2 + k" db2

b

+ b(cid:16)d2 + sin2 d2 + (d + cos d)2(cid:17)#

(8.7)

where m is the monopole mass, x is the location of the center of the monopole,  is the u (1)

phase, and , , and  are the three angles specifying the su (2) orientation of the solution. the

coecient k is a constant whose value is unimportant for our purposes.

this should be compared with the two-monopole moduli space metric when the symmetry is
broken to u (1) u (1). let m = m + m and  = mm /m denote the total mass and reduced
mass of the system. after transformation into center-of-mass and relative variables, the metric

given by eq. (6.1) takes the form

ds2

u (1)u (1) = m dx2

cm +

162
m

d2

tot +(cid:18) +
r(cid:19)1

k

+k2(cid:18) +

k

r(cid:19)hdr2 + r2(d2 + sin2 d2)i

(d + d cos d)2 .

(8.8)

here xcm species the position of the center-of-mass, r,  and  are the spherical coordinates

specifying the relative positions of the two monopoles, tot and  are overall and relative u (1)
phases, and k is the same constant as in eq. (8.7). we are interested in the limit where m  0
with m held xed. in this limit the reduced mass  vanishes, and the metric becomes

ds2

u (1)u (1) = m dx2

cm +

162
m

d2

tot + k" dr2

r

+ r(cid:16)d2 + sin2 d2 + (d + cos d)2(cid:17)# .

(8.9)

this is exactly the same metric as in eq. (8.7), but with a dierent notation: b replaced by r,

and , , and  replaced by , , and , respectively. thus, the moduli space metric behaves

smoothly in the limit where the unbroken symmetry becomes non-abelian, with the number of

26

degrees of freedom being conserved. however, the interpretation of these coordinates undergoes

a curious change. in particular, as one of the monopoles becomes massless, its position becomes

somewhat ambiguous. while the separation r goes over into the cloud radius b, which has a denite

gauge-invariant meaning, the directional angles  and  are replaced by two global su (2) gauge

phases. hence, two solutions with the same intermonopole separation but dierent values for  and

 are physically distinct as long as the -monopole remains massive, but become gauge-equivalent

when m = 0.

9 more complex examples

further insight into the nature of the massless monopoles and the non-abelian cloud can be obtained

by considering some more complex solutions that arise in su (n ) gauge theories. the asymptotic

value of the adjoint higgs eld in some xed direction can be brought into the form

0 = diag (tn , tn 1, . . . , t1)

(9.1)

with t1  t2  . . .  tn . the set of simple roots picked out by eq. (4.5) then generate the su (2)
subgroups that lie in 2  2 blocks along the diagonal and the magnetic charge is given by

g  h = 4 diag (nn 1, nn 2  nn 1, . . . , n1  n2,n1) .

(9.2)

if the tj are all unequal, the symmetry breaking is maximal, to u (1)n 1, and the nj are the
topological charges. here i will be primarily interested instead in the case where the middle n  2
eigenvalues of 0 are equal and the unbroken group is u (1)  su (n  2)  u (1). as explained
previously, i will focus on congurations in which the asymptotic magnetic eld is purely abelian
and commutes with all elements of the unbroken su (n  2); i.e., congurations for which the
middle n  2 eigenvalues of g  h are all equal.

all choices for the {nj} that satisfy this condition can be written as combinations of three

irreducible solutions7:
1) nj = j  1, so that

2) nj = n  j  1, so that

g  h = 4 diag ((n  2),1,1, . . . ,1, 0) .

g  h = 4 diag (0, 1, 1, . . . , 1,(n  2)) .

(9.3)

(9.4)

7the existence three types of irreducible solutions can be understood by noting that the states corresponding
to the two species of massive monopoles in this theory transform under the (n  2)-dimensional fundamental and
antifundamental representations of su (n  2). an su (n  2) singlet can be formed from n  2 fundamentals, n  2
antifundamentals, or from a fundamental and an antifundamental.

27

3) nj = 1 for all j, leading to

g  h = 4 diag (1, 0, 0, . . . , 0,1) .

(9.5)

(note that the moduli space metric for this case can be obtained from the results of sec. 6; the

metrics for the rst two cases are not known.)

congurations of the rst type can be viewed as containing n  2 massive and (n  2)(n  3)/2
massless monopoles, with the massive monopoles all corresponding to the last simple root. eq. (7.5)
shows that they depend on 2(n  1)(n  2) parameters. of these, 4(n  2) presumably specify the
positions and u (1) phases of the massive monopoles. specifying the su (n  2) orientation of the
conguration requires another dim [su (n  2)] = (n  2)2  1 parameters. hence, the remaining
(n  3)2 parameters describe gauge-invariant aspects of the non-abelian cloud, showing that it is
possible for this cloud to have considerably more structure than it did in the so(5) example of the

previous section.

congurations of the second type also contain (n  2)(n  3)/2 massless and n  2 massive

monopoles, but now with the latter corresponding to the rst simple root.

finally, congurations of the third type contain two massive monopoles (one of each massive
species), together with n  3 massless monopoles. there are 4(n  1) parameters in all, 8 of which
specify the positions and u (1) phases of the massive monopoles. one might have expected to nd
an additional (n  2)2  1 parameters associated with the unbroken su (n  2), as in the previous
cases. except for the simplest nontrivial case, su (4) broken to u (1)  su (2)  u (1), there are
clearly not enough parameters. the explanation is that, as we will see more explicitly below, any

conguration of this type for gauge group su (n ) with n > 4 can be obtained by an embedding of
an su (4) solution. as a result, there are only dim [su (n  2)/u (n  4)] = 4n  13 global gauge
parameters. there is but a single remaining parameter, which is associated with the non-abelian

cloud.

having explicit expressions for the solutions in these cases would clearly be quite helpful for

understanding the nature and characteristics of the non-abelian cloud. such expressions are not

known for the rst two cases. however, solutions for the third case can be obtained explicitly, as i

will now describe, by making use of nahms construction of the bps monopole solutions [29].

the fundamental elements in nahms approach [30] are a triplet of matrices ta(t) that satisfy

a set of nonlinear ordinary dierential equations. these then dene a set of linear dierential

equations for another set of matrices, v(t, r), from which the spacetime elds a(r) and (r) can be

readily obtained. i will now describe the details of this construction for the case of a gauge group

28

su (n ).

the eigenvalues tj of 0 divide the range t1  t  tn into n  1 intervals. on the jth interval,
tj < t < tj+1, let k(t)  nj, where nj is given by eq. (9.2). the matrices ta(t) are required to have
dimension k(t)  k(t). in addition, whenever two adjacent intervals have the same value for k(t),
there are three matrices j, of dimension k(tj)  k(tj), dened at the interval boundary tj. these
matrices are required to obey the nahm equation,

dta
dt

=

i
2

abc[tb, tc] +xj

(j)a(t  tj) .

(9.6)

where the sum in the last term is understood to only run over those values of j for which the j
are dened. having solved this equation, one must next nd a 2k(t)  n matrix function v(t, r)
and n -component row vectors sj(r) obeying the linear equation

0 = (cid:20)

d
dt

+ (ta + ra)  a(cid:21) v +xj

a
jsj(t  tj)

together with the orthogonality condition

i = z dt vv +xj

s
j sj .

in eq. (9.7), aj is a 2k(tj)-component row vector obeying

a
jaj = j    i(j)0i

(9.7)

(9.8)

(9.9)

with (j)0 chosen so that the above matrix has rank 1. finally, spacetime elds obeying the bps

equations are given by

 = z dt t vv +xj
2z dthvv  v vi 

i

i

2 xj hs

tjs

j sj

jsj  s

j sji .

a = 

(9.10)

(9.11)

i will consider the case where the nj are all equal to unity, so k(t) = 1 over the entire range
and there are an j and an sj for each value of j from 2 through n  1. to begin, i will assume
that the tj are all dierent, so that there are n  1 distinct massive monopoles, although i will
soon turn to the case with unbroken u (1)  su (n  2)  u (1) symmetry. eq. (9.6) is solved by
the piecewise constant solution

t(t) = xj ,

tj < t < tj+1 ,

(9.12)

29

where the xa have a natural interpretation as the positions of the individual monopoles. the aj of

eq. (9.9) are simply two-component row vectors that may be taken to be

aj = q2|xj  xj1|(cid:16)cos(/2)ei/2, sin(/2)ei/2(cid:17)

(9.13)

where  and  specify the direction of the vector j = xj1  xj.

next, we must nd a 2  n matrix v(t) and a set of n -component row vectors sk (k =
2, 3, . . . , n  1) that satisfy eq. (9.7). to do this, let us rst dene a function fk(t) for each interval
tk  t  tk+1, with

f1(t) = e(tt2)(rx1)
fk(t) = e(ttk)(rxk )fk1(tk) ,

k > 1 .

(9.14)

these are dened so that at the boundaries between intervals fk(tk) = fk1(tk). an arbitrary

solution of eq. (9.7) can then be written as

va(t) = fk(t)a
k ,

tk < t < tk+1 ,

(9.15)

where the k (1  k  n  1) are a set of n -component row vectors. the discontinuities at the
interval boundaries must be such that

k = k1 + [fk(tk)]1

k a

ksk .

the normalization condition eq. (9.8), takes the form

with

i =

n 1

xj=2

s
j sj +

n 1

xk=1

k

nkk

nk = z tk+1

tk

dt f 

k(t)fk(t) .

(9.16)

(9.17)

(9.18)

these equations do not completely determine the k. this indeterminacy reects the fact that
eq. (9.7) is preserved if v and the sk are multiplied on the right by any n  n unitary matrix
function of r; this corresponds to an ordinary spacetime gauge transformation. a convenient choice

is to take two columns of v, say v1 and v2, to be continuous. this can be done by setting sa

k = 0

for a = 1, 2 and choosing

a
k = n 1/2a ,

a = 1, 2 ,

(9.19)

with n = pk nk and the a being the two-component objects 1 = (1, 0)t and 2 = (0, 1)t.

orthogonality of the other columns of v with the rst two, as required by eq. (9.8), then implies

30

that

n 1

nk
k

(9.20)

0 =

xk=1

where here and below greek indices are assumed to run from 3 to n . together with the discontinuity
eq. (9.16), this uniquely determines the 
an equation for the s
k ,

k . substituting the result back into eq. (9.17) then gives

n 1

 =

xi,j=2

s
i

[ij + aimija

j]s
j

(9.21)

where the mij are matrices, constructed from the nk and the fk(tk), whose precise form is not
important for our purpose. after solving this equation for the s
the 

k , one can then work back to obtain
k and thus v, and then substitute into eqs. (9.10) and (9.11) to obtain the spacetime elds.
now let us specialize to the case of unbroken u (1) su (2) u (1) symmetry. the middle n  2
eigenvalues of 0 are now degenerate, and so all but the rst and last intervals in t vanish. because

the fk(tk) are all equal to unity, the discontinuity equation for the k becomes

k = k1 + a

ksk .

(9.22)

in addition, the matrices mij in eq. (9.21) no longer depend on i and j, but instead are all equal

to a single matrix m .

when the symmetry breaking was maximal, the monopole positions entered both through

the functions fk(t) and through the aj. now however, with the middle intervals having zero

width, the positions associated with the massless monopoles enter only through the aj. but these

now appear in eqs. (9.21) and (9.22) only in the combination pj a

consequence. consider two sets of monopole positions xk and xk with identical positions for the

j . this fact has a striking

js

massive monopoles, but with the massless monopoles constrained only by the requirement that

aj = wjkak, where w is any (n  2)  (n  2) unitary matrix. if s
the rst set of positions, then s

j = wjks

k is a solution for the transformed set.

j is a solution of eq. (9.21) for

this implies that the positions of the massless monopoles are not all physically meaningful

quantities. this result was anticipated by the parameter counting done earlier in this section,

which indicated that there should be a single gauge-invariant quantity characterizing the non-

abelian cloud. this quantity can be identied by noting that these transformations leave invariant

xj

a

jaj = xj (cid:2)j    ij 0i(cid:3) = (x1  xn 1)   +

n 1

xj=2 |xj  xj1| .

(9.23)

the rst term on the right hand side is determined by the positions of the massive monopoles, while

the second is just the sum of the distances between successive massless monopoles. the latter can

31

be used to dene a cloud parameter b by

2b + r =

n 1

xj=2 |xj  xj1|

(9.24)

where r is the distance between the massive monopoles.

the subsequent analysis can be simplied by using a transformation of this type to choose a

canonical set of massless monopole positions in which x2 is located on the straight line dened by
x1 and xn 1 at a distance b from x1, while the remaining n  3 massless monopoles are located
at xn 1. once this choice is made, one is rather naturally led to choose a solution for the sk, and

hence for the k and v, such that the resulting expressions for the spacetime elds have nontrivial
components only in a 4  4 block. thus, as promised earlier, the solutions can all be obtained by
embeddings of su (4)  u (1)  su (2)  u (1) solutions.

the fact that the solutions for arbitrary su (n ) can be obtained from the su (4) solution

underscores the diculties in pinning down the massless monopoles. when viewed as an su (4)

solution, the conguration contains a single massless monopole, but when it is interpreted as an
su (n ) solution there are n  3 massless monopoles. thus, not only the positions, but even the
number of massless components is ambiguous.

these su (4) solutions have some features that are reminiscent of the so(5) solutions discussed

in the previous section. the elds can be decomposed into pieces that transform as triplets,

doublets, and singlets under the unbroken su (2). only the rst two depend on b, and then only
through a single function l, which is now a 2 2 matrix. also, the triplet and doublet components
of the higgs eld are given in terms of the same spacetime functions as the corresponding gauge

eld components, just as was the case with the so(5) solution.

the detailed form of these solutions [29] is rather complex. however, some insight into the

nature of the non-abelian cloud can be obtained by examining the asymptotic behavior of the
elds well outside the cores of the massive monopoles. consider rst the case b  r.
distances yl and yr from a point r to the two massive monopoles are both much less than b, the

if the

higgs eld and magnetic eld can be written in the form

t4  1

2yr

0

t2 + 1
2yr

0

0

(r) = u 1

1 (r)





0

0

0

0

0

0

t1 + 1
2yl





u1(r) + 

(9.25)

0

0

2yl

t2  1
0

32

b(r) = u 1

1 (r)

u1(r) + 

(9.26)

where u1(r) is an element of su (4) and the dots represent terms that are suppressed by powers of

r/b, yl/b, or yr/b. these are the elds that one would expect for two massive monopoles, each of

whose magnetic charges has both a u (1) component and a component in the unbroken su (2) that
corresponds to the middle 2  2 block. if instead y  (yl + yr)/2  b,

(r) = u 1

2 (r)





0

0

0

t1 + 1
2y

u2(r) + o(b/y2)

(9.27)





b(r) = u 1

2 (r)

u2(r) + o(b/y3) .

(9.28)

yr
2y2

r

0

0  yr

2y2

r

0

0

0

0

0

0

yl
2y2

l

0

0

0

0  yl

2y2

l









0

t2

0

0

0

0

t2

0

0 0

0 0

0 0

2y

t4  1
0

0

0

y
2y2

0

0

0





0

0

0





0 0  y

2y2

thus, at distances large compared to b the non-abelian part of the coulomb magnetic eld is

cancelled by the cloud, in a manner similar to that which we saw for the so(5) case.

in the opposite limit, b = 0, the solutions are essentially embeddings of su (3)  u (1)  u (1)

solutions. at large distances, one nds that

t4  1

2yr

0

+ 1
2yr

2yl

t2  1
0

(r) = u 1

3 (r)





0

0

t2

0

0

0

0

t1 + 1
2yl

u3(r)

(9.29)





b(r) = u 1

3 (r)

u3(r) .

(9.30)

0

0

0





yr
2y2

r

0

0

0

0

0

yl
2y2

l  yr

2y2

r

0

0

33

0

0

0

0

0

0

0  yl

2y2

l





viewed as su (3) solutions, the long-range elds are purely abelian. viewed as su (4) solutions, the

long-range part is non-abelian in the sense that the unbroken su (2) acts nontrivially on the elds.

however, because of the alignment of the elds of the two massive monopoles, the non-abelian

part of the eld is a purely dipole eld that falls as r/y3 at large distances.

10 concluding remarks

i have shown in these talks how one is naturally led to a class of multimonopole solutions that

contain one or more massive monopoles, similar to those found in the su (2) gauge theory, sur-

rounded by a cloud, of arbitrary size, in which there are nontrivial non-abelian elds. analysis of

the moduli space lagrangian that governs the low-energy monopole dynamics suggests that these

clouds can be understood in term of the degrees of freedom of massless monopoles carrying purely

non-abelian magnetic charges.

there remain many open questions relating to these massless monopoles. first, it would clearly

be desirable to obtain additional solutions containing non-abelian clouds. particularly useful would

be solutions with charges such that the cloud depends on more than a single gauge-invariant

parameter, and solutions containing more than a single cloud. experience with the solutions

described in sec. 9 suggests that, as a rst step, it might be feasible to attack the simplied

problem of determining the cloud structure for a given set of massive monopole positions. from

the more physical viewpoint, one would like to use these solutions to gain further insight in the

properties of non-abelian gauge theories. the massless monopoles clearly seem to be the duals

of the massless gauge bosons. hence, one should be able to nd some kind of correspondence

between the behavior of the non-abelian clouds and that of the gauge bosons. understanding this

correspondence in detail remains an important challenge.

this work was supported in part by the u.s. department of energy.

references

[1] s. coleman, phys. rev. d 11, 2088 (1975).

[2] c. montonen and d. olive, phys. lett. 72b, 117 (1977).

[3] k. lee, e.j. weinberg and p. yi, phys. lett. b 376, 97 (1996).

[4] k. lee, e.j. weinberg and p. yi, phys. rev. d 54, 1633 (1996).

34

[5] k. lee, e.j. weinberg and p. yi, phys. rev. d 54, 6351 (1996).

[6] e.b. bogomolnyi, sov. j. nucl. phys. 24, 449 (1976); m.k. prasad and c.m. sommereld,

phys. rev. lett. 35, 760 (1975); s. coleman, s. parke, a. neveu and c.m. sommereld, phys.

rev. d 15, 544 (1977).

[7] t.t. wu and c.n. yang, nucl. phys. b107, 365 (1976).

[8] g t hooft, nucl. phys. b79, 276 (1974); a. m. polyakov, jept lett. 20, 194 (1974).

[9] k. lee and e.j. weinberg, phys. rev. lett. 73, 1203 (1994).

[10] e.j. weinberg, phys. rev. d 20, 936 (1979).

[11] l.s. brown, r.d. carlitz, and c. lee, phys. rev. d 16, 417 (1977).

[12] h. osborn, phys. lett. 83b, 321 (1979).

[13] p. goddard, j. nuyts and d. olive, nucl. phys. b125, 1 (1977); f. englert and p. windey,

phys. rev. d 14, 2728 (1976).

[14] e.j. weinberg, nucl. phys. b167, 500 (1980).

[15] a. sen, phys. lett. b329, 217 (1994).

[16] n.s. manton, phys. lett. 110b, 54 (1982).

[17] g.w. gibbons and n.s. manton, phys. lett. b356, 32 (1995).

[18] m.f. atiyah and n.j. hitchin, the geometry and dynamics of magnetic monopoles, princeton

univ. press, princeton (1988); phys. lett. 107a, 21 (1985); phil. trans. r. soc. lon. a315,

459 (1985).

[19] t. eguchi and a.j. hanson, ann. phys. 120 (1979) 82.

[20] j.p. gauntlett and d.a. lowe, nucl. phys. b472, 194 (1996).

[21] s.a. connell, the dynamics of the su (3) charge (1,1) magnetic monopoles, university of

south australia preprint.

[22] g. chalmers, multi-monopole moduli spaces for su (n ) gauge group, itp-sb-96-12, hep-

th/9605182.

35

[23] m.k. murray, j. geom. phys. 23, 31 (1997).

[24] e. witten, nucl. phys. b202, 253 (1982).

[25] e.j. weinberg, nucl. phys. b203, 445 (1982).

[26] a. abouelsaood, phys. lett. 125b, 467 (1983); p. nelson, phys. rev. lett. 50, 939 (1983).

[27] p. nelson and a. manohar, phys. rev. lett. 50, 943 (1983); a. balachandran, g. marmo,

m. mukunda, j. nilsson, e. sudarshan and f. zaccaria, phys. rev. lett. 50, 1553 (1983); p.

nelson and s. coleman, nucl. phys. b237, 1 (1984).

[28] e.j. weinberg, phys. lett. b119, 151 (1982).

[29] e.j. weinberg and p. yi, phys. rev. d 58, 046001 (1998).

[30] w. nahm, phys. lett. 90b, 413 (1980); w. nahm, in monopoles in quantum eld theory, n.

craigie et al. eds. (world scientic, singapore, 1982); w. nahm, in group theoretical methods

in physics, g. denardo et al. eds. (springer-verlag, 1984).

36

