9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
3

 

 
 

1
v
1
2
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

new concepts in particle physics from solution

of old problem

bert schroer

institut fur theoretische physik

fu-berlin, arnimallee 14, 14195 berlin, germany

presently: cbpf, rua dr. xavier sigaud, 22290-180 rio de janeiro, brazil

schroer@cbpfsu1.cat.cbpf.br

july 1999

abstract

this is a survey on recent progress in the understanding of some pro-
found issues concerning the relation between on- and o-shell concepts in
local quantum physics. proofs for special situations have already appeared
in previous publications.

this present frame build on modular localization is wide enough to
cover such disparate looking issues as d=1+1 factorizing theories, holo-
graphic images of qft and scanning of higher dimensional qft by fam-
ilies of chiral conformal theories.

the present theory has common historical roots with the (old) string
theory. but in contrast to string theory these new structures are primarily
used as new tools in constructing models of local quantum particle physics
i.e. they are not placed exclusively to the realm of quantum matter in
curved spacetime.

the new framework is within an algebraic setting of local quantum
physics which de-emphasizes eld-coordinatizations in favor of nets of al-
gebras and relations between dierent nets, i.e. it is the same framework in
which rehren recently proved the ads(1,d)conf(1,d-1) isomorphism (the
maldacena conjecture). the constructive use of modular theory strength-
ens this eld-coordinate-free viewpoint and allows to give a very precise
formulation of the older more eld theoretic holographic conjecture of t
hooft (related to light cone behavior) which thereby becomes on the one
hand a valuable tool of particle physics and on the other hand deeply
related to a new mathematical theory of modular inclusions and mod-
ular intersections which in fact was discovered in.conjunction with such
physical problems.

comparisons with string theory can be found in the last section.
this survey is a preliminary account to be of use in the ongoing dis-

cussion and in its present form will not be submitted for publication.

1

1 introduction

theoretical physicist, contrary to mathematicians, rarely return to their old
unsolved problems; they rather prefer to replace them by new inventions. the
content of the present article on some new concepts in particle physics is an
exception. the old problems it addresses and partially solves are those of the
relation between o-shell and on-shell quantities in local quantum physics1.

the most prominent of on-shell quantities is the s-matrix of a local qft,
whereas elds and more general operators describing localized situations (in
the algebraic setting belonging to local subalgebras) are o-shell.
in this
paper we will have to consider a new kind of operators which, as a result of
their weak semiinnite (wedge-like) localization and their close relation to the
s-matrix, are to be considered as on-shell. this new operators are essential
for our new approach which avoids pointlike elds at the beginning and starts
with generators of wedge-localized algebra. besides these two extremes there are
intermediate possibilities where on-shell and o-shell aspects appear together as
bilinear forms on scattering vector states i.e. matrix elements of local operators
a (pointlike elds or bounded operators localized in smaller than wedge regions,
i.e. dierent from new operators) sandwiched between incoming and outgoing
multiparticle scattering states (in terms of feynman graphs one leg is o-shell)

out hq1, ...qn1, qn |a| pn, pn1, ...p1iin

(1)

which we will call (generalized) formfactors.

the s-matrix whose matrix elements result from the previous formula for
a = 1, is the observable of particle physics par excellence, although strictly
speaking only (inclusive) cross sections are directly measured, a fact which is
especially important if interactions between zero mass particles leads to infrared
problems. however most of our physical intuition about causality and charge
ows in spacetime is based on (o-shell) local elds or local observables, the
new on-shell elds are somewhat more hidden.

the old problems on which there has been signicant recent progress are

related to the following questions

 does a physically admissable s-matrix fullling unitarity, crossing sym-
metry and certain analytic properties needed in its formulation, have an
underlying (unique) local qft? this one may call the inverse problem of
qft associated with scattering.

 is there a constructive procedure in which, similar to the d=1+1 bootstrap-
formfactor program for factorizing models, the generalized formfactors

1we will often use the name local quantum physics (lqp) instead of qft [1], if we
have in mind the physical principles of qft implemented by dierent concepts than those of
the various quantization formalisms (canonical, quantization via path integrals etc.) which
most of the readers are familiar with from the various textbooks. to the extend that the
reader does not automatically identify qft with those formalisms, he may without danger of
misunderstandings continue to use the good old name qft.

2

(which contain the s-matrix as a special case) enter as important con-
structive elements? in particular can one formulate such a constructive
approach in a conceptually intrinsic manner i.e. without any quantization
parallelism to classical eld theory and without the use of eld coordina-
tizations?

remark 1 the most profound on-shell property which was discovered in the
60ies is crossing symmetry. it is deeper than tcp-symmetry which is in turn
the deepest among all presently known bona de pure quantum non-noetherian
symmetries. in fact it is a kind of individual tcp-transformation which eects
only one particle in the multiparticle incoming ket conguration and carries it
to the outgoing bra conguration as an antiparticle. in spite of its name it is
not a quantum theoretical (wigner) symmetry, since that process involves an
on-shell analytic continuation. for a formfactor we have
out hq1, ...qn1, qn |a| pn, pn1, ...p1iin

(2)

= out hp1,q1, ...qn1, qn |a| pn, pn1, ...p2iin

where the analytic continuation is carried out in the wedge-associated rapidity
parametrization by a i-shift:    + i, and the bar denotes the antiparticle.
the diculties in interpretation and conceptual placement of this relation (of
which outside of perturbation theory rigorous information of sucient general-
ity are scarce) mirrors the lack of its complete understanding and is somewhat
vague, but most physicist agree that it should be viewed as the on-shell shadow
of einstein causality. one of the results of the new conceptual framework pre-
sented here is a sharpening of interpretation in terms of wedge localization.

after having given a glimpse of our physical motivation, we now sketch
our main mathematical tool for physical problems of (quantum) localization:
(tomitas) modular theory of von neumann algebras. these, tools which for
the rst time claried the on-o-shell relation and in particular the position of
on-shell crossing symmetry with o-shell einstein causality [2], were not avail-
able at the time of the invention of the dual model by veneziano. the original
motivation for the dual model proposal was to shed some light on the role of
crossing symmetry outside of perturbation theory in the hope was that this
model may have typical properties of strongly interacting s-matrices. the orig-
inal motivation, namely the understanding of crossing symmetry in the elusive
on/o shell problem was soon forgotten and chews pure s-matrix approach,
which tried to cleanse all o-shell notions from particle physics, slowly became
the rst failed attempt2 at a theory of everything (except gravity). the dual
model was on its ascend and soon developed into (the old) string theory as a

2in retrospect it appears certainly the most successful among all failed theories in this
century. many useful concepts as e.g. weinbergs ideas on eective interactions resulted from
reading on-shell s-matrix properties back into o-shell qft. it left an impressive imprint on
particle physics.

3

kind of o-shell extension. an important formal enrichment on this way was vi-
rasoros observation that the higher-dimensional on-shell dual formalism could
be streamlined by the use of an auxiliary o-shell two-dimensional conformal
eld formalism.

as all speculations about possibly dierent paths which history may have
taken, the question of what would have happened if the on/o shell issue would
have been solved at the time of the dual model is interesting and futile at the
same time. although we will postpone all comparisons to the last section, the
learned reader will nd many concepts resembling ideas which came from recent
string theory already before we get there.

the present line of research directly addresses the old problems with new
physical concepts and mathematical tools. the main new tool is described in
the following [3].

denition 2 a von neumann algebra a (weakly closed operator sub-algebra
of the full algebra b(h) on a hilbert space h) is in standard position with
respect to a vector   h, denoted as (a, ), if  is a cyclic and separating
vector for a. in this situation tomita denes the following involutive antilinear
but unbounded operator (the tomita involution s)

sa := a

(3)

its closability property (as physicists we use the same notation for the closure)
is the prerequisite for the polar decomposition

s = j

1
2

(4)

where the angular part j (the modular involution) is antiunitary with j 2 = 1
and  is unbounded positive and therefore leads to a unitary group it.

theorem 3 (tomita  1965, with signicant simplications from takesaki):
the modular involution maps a on its von neumann commutant a in h (anal-
ogy to tcp acting on the observable algebra localized in a wedge):

adj  a = a

the unitary it denes a modular automorphism group by

adit  a = a
(analogy to a dynamical law for the algebra).

(5)

(6)

the fear of an unprepared physicist in front of such a powerful and nontrivial
mathematical theorem is somewhat mitigated by the remark that three physicist
(haag, hugenholtz and winnink) were led to a closely related independent
discovery in their pursuit of conceptual quantum statistical mechanics done

4

directly in the thermodynamic limit [1]. as everybody knows the quantum
adaptation of the gibbs representation formula

hav i(v )



=

trehv av

trehv

av  algebra of box  qantization

(7)

ceases to make sense3 for innite volume although the weak convergence i.e. the
convergence in the sense of states on algebras (instead of state vectors in hilbert
space) is secured under very mild assumptions [1]. the three named authors
found out that the intrinsic gns-construction, i.e. the canonical construction
of a cyclic representation (a) in a hilbert space h, and a reference vector
  h with

hai = (, (a) )

(8)

elevates the so-called kms-condition4 to a very fundamental attribute of a ther-
mal state on an algebra a. this kms property then merged with tomitas mod-
ular theory and in this form entered connes characterization of certain invariant
properties of foleii of states on a c-algebra. in the 70ies haag and collaborators
were able to derive the kms condition directly from stability properties under
local deformations and pusz and woronowicz found a direct route to the second
law of thermodynamics [1]. a nice derivation of the kms thermal property and
an explanation of its stability in the context of the still ongoing ads-conformal
qft discussion has been presented in [4].

the relation with the locality (or einstein causality) concept of qft was
made around 1975 in a series of papers by bisognano and wichmann [1]. spe-
cializing to wedge algebras generated by wightman elds aw (w ) (the subscript
w stands for wightman), they proved the following theorem

theorem 4 the tomita modular theory for the wedge algebra and the vacuum
state vector (aw (w ), ) yields the following physical identications

it = u (w (2t))
j = t cp  u (rx())

(9)

here w denotes the boost which leaves the wedge invariant. if we choose
the standard t-x wedge then the rotation which aligns the tcp with tomitas
j is a rotation around the x-axis by an angle .

now i come to my own contributions which are of a more recent vintage
[8]. they result from the desire to invert the bisognano-wichmann theorem
i.e. to use tomitas modular theory for the actual construction (and classica-
tion) of wedge algebras belonging to interacting theories with the aim to use

3in a box the bounded below hamiltonian aquires a discrete spectrum and eh is of trace

class ( = e



1

2 h is h.s.), a property which is lost in the innite volume limit.

4this analytic property was used by kubo, martin and schwinger as a trick which substi-

tutes the calculation of gibbs traces with some easier analytic boundary problem.

5

a net of wedge algebras in order to obtain a net of compactly localized (e.g.
double cone) algebras. the latter are known to contain all physical properties
of local quantum physics and, if desired, can also be coordinatized by pointlike
elds. in order to achieve this one uses the helping hand of the powerful lsz or
haag-ruelle scattering theory which follows from the net structure. here one
makes the same assumption as in the old-fashioned kramers-kronig dispersion
approach to particle physics, namely the existence of a mass gap. with this one
immediately realizes that, whereas the connected part of the poincare group
is the same as that of the free incoming theory, the disconnected part and the
modular involution j carry the full interaction

it
w = it
jw = sscjw,in

w,in =: eikt

(10)

since we do not want to temper with historically grown notations, we have
added a subscript to the s-matrix ssc in order to distinguish it from tomitas
s. the modular hamiltonian k dened in the rst equation has always sym-
metric instead of one-sided spectrum. the last relation is nothing but the
tcp-transformation law of the s-matrix rewritten in terms of modular objects
associated with the wedge algebra. the above role of the s-matrix as a kind of
relative modular invariant of the wedge algebra (relative to the free one) is to-
tally characteristic for local quantum physics; it has no counterpart in qm. it is
this semilocal new aspect of the invariant s-matrix (together with the global
scattering aspect which it has in every particle theory) which as we will see
below, opens the gate for a new realm of particle physics far away from the var-
ious quantization approaches and the qft-formalisms of the text books, such
as interaction picture, time-ordered functions, euclidean functional integrals etc.
but to achieve this, one needs one more concept which has no counterpart in the
old quantum eld theory, i.e. with is totally hidden from quantization. this
is the existence of polarization-f ree generators (pfgs) of the wedge algebra.
it is deeply related to the vacuum structure of qft, which was rst observed in
the old days heisenberg, euler and weisskopf. their observations transposed
into a modern lqp context suggest that any compactly localized operator ap-
plied to the vacuum generates clouds of pairs of particle/antiparticles, unless
the system is free i.e. without interactions (in which case a one-particle vector is
obtained by applying the free eld). more specically it leads to the impossibil-
ity of having a local generation of pure one-particle vectors unless the system is
interaction-free. in this respect the situation can be viewed as a generalization
of the jost-schroer theorem for pointlike elds (see streater-wightman [5]). in
fact, as i learned from detlev buchholz, the smallest region for which this con-
clusion cannot be proven is the wedge. the following notion uses this lack of
no-go theorem for strict one particle creation and lls it with a rich physical
content [8].

denition 5 let t(w) be the space of schwartz test functions with support
in the wedge w. we call a set of operators f labelled by f  t (w ) which

6

create one particle state vectors (in an interacting theory) without polarization
contributions:

f ( f ) = 1  particle vector

(11)

polarization free (wedge) generators or pfgs.

it is easy to see that the wedge localization and the standardness of (a(w ), )

allows the formal way of writing

f ( f ) = z f (x)f (x)dd+1x
f (x) = z (cid:0)z(p)eipx + z (p)eipx(cid:1) ddp

2

z(p) = 0 = z(p)

(12)

(13)

with z(p) being on-shell operators with a more complicated structure than mo-
mentum space free particle structure. the eld theoretic notation f (x) should
be handled with great care; unlike for pointlike elds, the x is not the position
of a spacetime localization but only a label on which poincare transformations
act in such a way that the generating family for w is taken into one for the
poincare transformed wedge. it is the constructive use of such nonlocal objects
which is responsible for the disappearance of the ultraviolet divergency problem
and together with it the short-distance aspects of the renormalization problem.
this is a vast generalization of the observation that these problems are absent
in the d=1+1 bootstrap-formfactor program for factorizing models.

since according to the previous remarks pfgs do not exist (nontrivially)
for smaller localization regions o  w, and since they are physically uninter-
esting for regions larger than w, we omit the w from the pfg terminology.
they generalize the free eld structure into a controllable nonlocal direction
with interactions, i.e. they are auxiliary quantities in the construction of local
theories which exist all the time in the original hilbert space which is also the
living space of the more local operator algebras which they generate. with other
words, although they are nonlocal (semilocal in the sense of wedge localization)
and in some sense contain a cut-o aspect, these properties are not ad hoc,
and as a consequence no limiting process for cuto removal is required. their
existence is crucial for the linkage of the particle physics crossing symmetry
with the thermal and entropical aspects of qft which were rst noticed in the
bekenstein-hawking-unruh properties of killing horizons in black hole physics.
these classical thermal properties in cst have a quantum counterpart in
which bifurcated killing horizons are substituted by surfaces of minkowski space
localization regions e.g. the light cone surface of a double cone. in fact the ge-
ometric killing symmetry in the quantum setting passes to the (geometrically)
hidden quantum symmetry dened by the modular group corresponding to the
concrete situation. in unruhs case of a wedge region or in the analogous case
of conformal matter enclosed in a double cone, the hidden quantum symmetry

7

passes to the one described by a killing vector associated with the lorentz- or
conformal- group.

we have organized this survey as follows. the next section reviews and
illustrates the eld-coordinate-free approach for interaction-free theories and in
d=1+1 factorizing model. in the latter case the zamolodchikov-faddeev algebra
emerges in a natural way (without having been put in) and the z-f operators
for the rst time acquire a spacetime interpretation in connection with the new
pfg generators of wedge algebras. the presentation of polarization-free wedge
generators is extended to systems which are not factorizing i.e. theories with
on-shell (real in addition to virtual) particle creation in section 3.

after a brief introduction of the aqft framework in section 4, the fth sec-
tion introduces the light cone restriction and holography in terms of associated
chiral conformal eld theories. there we also discuss the problem of undoing
such maps (the blow up property) in terms of scanning a higher dimensional
qft by a fanned (gefaecherte) family of chiral conformal theories. the mathe-
matical technology used in this section is one of the most powerful which aqft
presently is able to oer (theory of modular inclusions and intersections).

in the sixth section we take up the problem of associating entropy for local-
ized matter. the previous association of chiral conformal theories to realistic
higher dimensional models oers the identication the relevant degrees of free-
dom (i.e. those which matter for the entropy) with those of the associated much
simpler chiral theories. in the same section we also review rehrens presentation
[6] of the ads-conformal eld theory isomorphism which is a more special and
simpler kind of holography (no modular inclusions and intersections are needed)
which happens through a conformal theory attached at the boundary at innity
rather than at the light cone. in contradistinction to the previous holography
connected to a horizon (light ray holography), the ads situation is less use-
ful for a constructive approach in (cst) qft, but, as pointed out by rehren,
serves as an illustration par excellence for the necessity and the power of the
eld coordinate-free concept of aqft. the last section nally tries to confront
our approach with string theory and explain (without much success) why the
latter has led to so many similar structures. actually the dierences, especially
those on the issue of the still elusive quantum gravity, are more interesting than
the similarities. the enigmatic power of these dierences may in the long run
turn out to determine the future path of particle physics.

this presentation is a survey of published and also of new results. i plan to
defer most proofs and more detailed mathematical background to a second and
third paper.

2 systems without interactions and factorizing

models

in trying to bring readers with a good knowledge of standard qft in contact
with some new (and old) concepts in algebraic qft (aqft) without sending

8

him back with a load of homework, i face a dicult problem. let us for the time-
being put aside the intrinsic logic, which would ask for a systematic presentation
of the general framework, and let us instead try to maneuver in a more less ad
hoc way.

in a pedestrian approach the problem of constructing nets of interaction free
systems from wigners one particle theory may serve as a nice pedagogical ex-
ercise. since wigners representation theory (we only need irreducible positive
energy representations) was the rst totally intrinsic quantum theory without
any quantization parallelism to classical particle theory, it is reasonable to ex-
pect in general that, if we nd the right concepts, we should be able to avoid
covariant pointlike elds altogether and rather delegate them to in certain cases
convenient coordinatizations of local observables similar to the intrinsic formu-
lation of dierential geometry which of course does not restrict the usefulness of
specically adjusted coordinates. this is indeed possible [8]. by using a spatial
variant of tomitas theory (i.e. by dening a kind of tomita s on the wigner
representation space without a von neumann algebra), one obtains a real closed
subspace hr(w ) of the wigner space h of multi-component momentum space
wave functions as a say +1 eigenspace of an operator s in h where s is dened to
be the i continued boost (obtained by the functional calculus associated with
the spectral theory) multiplied by the one-particle version of the j-reection
(for which one only needs to extend the wigner representation to include the
disconnected poincare transformations) which again yields an unbounded anti-
linear involution [8]. the substitute for the von neumann commutant in this
spatial case is the symplectic (or real orthogonal complement of hr(w ) in h.
it turns out that this situation is standard in a spatial sense

hr(w ) + ihr(w ) is dense in h
hr(w )  ihr(w ) = {0}

(14)

as in the algebraic case, the modular formalism characterizes the localization
of subspaces, but is not able to distinguish individual elements in that subspace
(particular covariant x-space wave functions or testing functions with particular
support properties inside an x-space wedge). there is a good physical reason
for that because as soon as one tries to do that, one has to leave the unique
wigner (m,s) representation framework and pick a particular representation by
selecting one specic intertwiner among the innite set of u and v intertwin-
ers which link the unique wigner (m,s) representation to the countably innite
many covariant possibilities. with other words, one is in the framework ex-
plained in the rst volume of weinbergs book [7]. any forthcoming selection
of covariant description, vis. by invoking euler-lagrange equations and the
existence of a lagrangian, may be convenient for doing computations or as a
mnemotechnical device for classifying polynomial interaction densities, but is
not demanded as an intrinsic attribute of physics. in the above spatial modular
manner, the uniqueness of the (m,s) wigner theory can be transported directly
to the qft and results in uniqueness of the local net. if we would have taken
the conventional route via interwiners and local elds, then we would have been

9

forced to use borchers construction of equivalence classes in order to see that
the dierent free elds associated with the (m,s) representation with the same
momentum space creation and annihilation operators in fock space are just dif-
ferent generators of the same coherent families of local algebras i.e. yield the
same net. this would be analogous to working with particular coordinates in
dierential geometry and then proving at the end that the objects of interests
are invariant and therefore independent of coordinates.

on the mathematical side we meet for the rst time the modular machine
which is capable to encode informations about spacetime geometry into the
more technical looking domain properties of operators. this is achieved by
those strange antilinear tomita involutions s which are unbounded and which
create via their domain properties a host of antiunutary mirror transformations
and modular automorphisms with (sometimes only partial) manifest geometric
meaning.

it is amusing that this spatial modular formalism in wigner space also pre-
empts the particle statistics by producing a mismatch in the case of half-integer
spin between the real symplectic (orthogonal) complement and the result of a
geometric -rotation of the wedge into its opposite. the functorial way of asso-
ciating modular localized subalgebras with real subspaces of wigner space only
uses (exponentiated weyl-like in case of integer spin) momentum space creation
and annihilation operators related to the fockspace extension by forming ten-
sor products of wigner spaces; nowhere one is forced to use individual pointlike
elds.

of course we cannot use these nets in order to compute those interaction
densities to be used in a stuckelberg-bogoliubov causal perturbation theory;
this standard perturbative approach only works with pointlike elds. proofs
that the same physics could have been obtained in terms of dierent free eld
coordinatizations (rewriting the interaction polynomials) tend to be quite in-
volved.

the implementation of interactions in the framework of nets requires a rad-
ical rethinking of the formalism, even if we are only interested in perturbative
aspects of the nets. in order to get a clue, let us rst ask a less general question.
there is a class of theories in d=1+1 which are factorizing in the sense of the
multiparticle s-matrix which commutes with the incoming number operator nin

[ssc, nin] = 0

(15)

let us be very unsophisticated and try to implement the idea of a relativistic
particle pair interaction via an ansatz (assuming a situation of selfconjugate
particles) in on-shell rapidity variables

z()z() = u (  )z()z()
z()z () = v (  )z ()z() + (  )

(16)

with the -structure determining the remaining commutation relations. to-
gether with z() = 0 we can express all correlation functions of the would be
f(f)s in terms of us and vs. for this we have to relate the n-fold application

10

of z ()s to the vacuum to scattering states. we do this by dening one natu-
ral order say n > .... > 1 for which the zs are dened to create an n-particle
in-state vector. for any other permutation the state vector is then determined
by the above ansatz. in rapidity variables we can use the more appropriate
notation

f ( f ) =

1

2zc

z()f ()

(17)

where c is a path consisting of the upper/lower rim of a i-strip with the real
-axis being the upper boundary. whereas the on-shell value of the fourier
transform f () of f is analytic in this strip, the relation z(  i) := z () is
an abbreviation (since operators are never analytic in spacetime labels!) which
however inside expectation values becomes coherent in notation with their mero-
morphic properties

we suspect the fs to be pfgs and a for a proof (as a result of modular
theory) we only have to check the kms property for the f-correlation functions
with the modular generator being the innitesimal boost k. the fact that in
contrast to the one-sided spectrum of the hamiltonians in the gibbs formula,
the spectrum of k is two-sided is encouraging. the desired kms-property for
the wedge reads

df ( fn)...f ( f1)e =df ( f 2i

1

)f ( fn)...f ( f2)e

(18)

where the superscript 2i indicates the imaginary rapidity translation from the
lower to the upper rim of the kms strip.

a rather straightforward calculation based on the previously explained rules

for the zs yields the following result

theorem 6 ([8][9]) the kms-thermal aspect of the wedge algebra generated by
the pfgs is equivalent to the crossing symmetry of the s-matrix

a(w ) := alg {f (f ); suppf  w}  v = u  s

furthermore the possible crossing symmetric poles in the physical strip of s will
be converted into intermediate composite particle states in the gns hilbertspace
associated with the state dened by the correlations on the a(w )-algebra. the
latter commutes with its geometric opposite a(w opp) in case of a(w opp) =
a(w ) = adja(w ). a sucient condition for this is the existence of a parity
transformation whose action on a(w ) equals the commutant a(w ).

in more physical terms we may say that the wedge structure of factorizing
models is that of a relativistic qm. the bound state picture is part of this and
leads to nontrivial matrix elements of products of fs, in the simplest case

dp, b(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f ( f2)f ( f1)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) e  f2( + ib)f1(  ib)

(19)

11

with ib being the imaginary rapidity related to the bound state mass. for
a detailed treatment which includes the bound state problem we refer to a
forthcoming paper.

the kms computation can be immediately extended to formfactors i.e.
mixed correlation functions containing in addition to fs one generic opera-
tor a  a(w ) so that the previous calculation results from the specialization
a = 1. this is because the connected parts of the mixed correlation function
is related to the various formfactors (1) obtained by the dierent ways of dis-
tributing n+m particles in and out states. these formfactors are described
by dierent boundary values of one analytic master function which is in turn
related to the various forward/backward on shell values which appear in one
mixed a-f correlation function. the upshot of this is that such an a must be
of the form

a =x 1

n!zc

...zc

an(1, ...n) : z(1)...z(n) :

(20)

where the an are various formfactors of a whose dierent in-out distributions
of momenta correspond to the dierent contributions to the integral from the
upper/lower rim of the strip bounded by c which are related by crossing.

the quantum mechanical picture is completely lost in the next step: the

construction of the double cone algebras as intersections of shifted wedges

a(ca)

: = a(w opp

a
2

)  a(w a
2 )

ca = w opp

a

2  w a

2

(21)

intuitively the operators in double cone algebras are expected to behave like
pointlike elds: applied to the vacuum they create the full interacting polariza-
tion cloud structure. to see that this is so, we perform a lightlike translation of
the wedge into itself by letting it slide along the upper light ray by the amount
given by the lightlike vector e+. we obtain an inclusion of algebras and an
associated relative commutant

a(we+ )  a(w )
a(we+ )  a(w )

(22)

the intuitive picture is that the relative commutant lives on the e+ part of the
light ray since these are the only points inside w which are spacelike to the
interior of the shifted wedge. this relative commutant subalgebra is part of
the above double cone algebra, but it is much easier to compute. one only has
to take a generic operator in the wedge algebra which formally can be written
as a power series (20) in the generators and [8][9] nd those operators which
commute with the shifted fs

[a, u (e+)f (f )u (e+)] = 0

(23)

since the shifted fs are linear expressions in the zs, the nth order polyno-
mial contribution to the commutator comes from only two adjacent terms in a

12

namely from an+1 and an1 which correspond to the annihilation/creation term
in f. the size of the shift gives rise to a paley-wiener behavior in imaginary
direction, whereas the relation between an+1 and an1 is identical to one of
smirnovs axioms [10]. it is referred to as the kinematical pole structure be-
cause it relates the residua of certain poles on the lower boundary of the strip
to the formfactor an1 with two less particles. its consequences are well-known,
for ssc 6= 1 the series cannot break o. this means that the compactly local-
ized operators in the relative commutant (and, as can be shown those localized
in double cones) comply with the vacuum polarization picture of interactions.
hence the modular approach leads to a dichotomy of real particle creation (ab-
sent in factorizing models) in the pfgs and in the aspect of wedge localization
versus the full qft virtual particle structure of the vacuum5 if tested with more
local operators. in some sense the wedge is the best compromise between the
particle/eld point of view. since it is left invariant by an appropriate l-boost,
the algebra contains enough operators in order to resolve at least vacuum and
one-particle states which cannot be resolved from the remaining states in any
algebra with a lesser localization. in the next section we will argue that this
is not a freak of factorizing models, whereas in a later section we will reveal
the less pedestrian aspects of light cone subalgebras and holography. as should
be expected on the basis of the previous pedestrian approach, the holography
aspect will be important in the modular construction of qfts because it del-
egates certain properties to those of simpler theories. in the above pedestrian
calculation the nontriviality of the local qft is equivalent to the property that
the double cone algebra is dierent form a multiple of the identity, which in turn
follows from the nontriviality of the much simpler relative commutant associated
to the light ray.

it is worthwhile to emphasize two aspects which already are visible from
this pedestrian considerations. one is the notion of quantum localization as
compared to the more classical localization in terms of test function smearing
of pointlike elds. the wedge localization of the pfgs cannot be improved by
choosing smaller supports of test functions inside the wedge; the only possibility
is to intersect algebras. in that case the old generators become useless e.g. in the
description of the double cone algebras, the latter has new generators. related
to this is that the short distance behavior looses its dominating role. if one does
not use eld-coordinatizations it is not even clear what one means by the short
distance behavior of a theory, short distance behavior of what object? there is
no short distance problem of pfgs since they have some natural cuto (to the
extend that the use of such words which are lled with old meaning is reasonable
in the new context). intersection of algebras does not give rise to short distance
problems in the standard sense of this word. an explicit construction of pont-
like eld coordinates from algebraic nets is presently only available for chiral
conformal theories [11]. it produces elds of arbitrary high operator dimension,
and as a result of its group theoretical techniques it also does not suer from

5the deeper understanding of the virtual vacuum structure (or the particle content of say
state vectors obtained by application of a double cone localized operator to the vacuum) is
presumably hidden in the modular groups of double cone algebras.

13

short distance problems. this feature of the modular approach clearly has an
interesting but non-understood relation to similar claims in string theory, which
also does not seem to be threatened by ultraviolet problems. .

3 pfgs in presence of real particle creation

for models with real particle creation it is not clear at all how to construct
pfgs. the quantization approach of the books does not give any clue of how
to obtain such nonlocal noncommutative objects. in order to get some clue we
rst look at d=1+1 theories which do not have any transversal extension to
wedges. from the previous discussion we take the idea that we should look for
a relation between the ordering of rapidities and the scattering operator. we x
the state vector of n z s applied to the vacuum for the natural order to be an
incoming n-particle state. the totally mirrored order should then be a vector
obtained by applying the full s-matrix to the incoming n-particle vector. if the
particles are bosons, the order in the incoming operators on which s is applied
does not matter. but what should we do for the remaining permutations? we
should end up with a prescription which for factorizing systems agrees with the
old one. some thinking reveals that the right prescription consists in writing
the given permutation in terms of nonoverlapping mirror permutations. this
leads to a unique representation of each permutation. let us explain this in a
pedestrian fashion by writing some explicit formulas for n=2,3,4

z (2)z (1)  h(2, 1)a(2)a(1) + h(1, 2)sa(2)a(1) (24)
here h denotes the characteristic function of the respective orders and s is the
action of the s-matrix on the respective incoming particle state vector to the
right. dierent from the situation in the previous section, this action creates a
vector with a complicated incoming particle content having components to all
particle numbers. the constant in front is (as in the statictics consideration)
chosen so that the resulting vector is normalized. the next formula has six
terms
z (3)z (2)z (1)  h321a(3)a(2)a(1) + h312s21a(3)a(2)a(1)

23a(3)a(2)a(1) + h213s321  s
an s-matrix with only two indices acts on the tensor product of two particles
leaving the third one unchanged, an operation which only is meaningful if the
two particles have adjacent rapidities in that ordering. to avoid any confusion,
we have supplies a three particle subscript to the full s-matrix. for n=4 there is
the new possibility of having two two-particle ss acting on two nonoverlapping
pairs of in-particles, before the action of either the identity or the full s-matrix
is applied.

the inner products of these vectors are those of the various summands which
contribute to the -integral together with the f -wave functions. the f ( f ) six-

14

+h231s32a(3)a(2)a(1) + h123s321a(3)a(2)a(1)
+h132s321  s

12a(3)a(2)a(1)

(25)

point correlation function is made up from such inner products. these corre-
lation functions contain integrands with o-diagonal inclusive contributions as
e.g. from the last term in (25)

3, 

2, 

(cid:10)

(26)

1(cid:12)(cid:12) s321  s

12 |3, 2, 1i

as well as on-diagonal products of rapidity -functions. the graphical represen-
tation of this o-diagonal term consists of an inverted two-particle interaction
s
12 which only acts on the rst two particles |2, 1i in the tensorproduct fol-
lowed by the full s-matrix acting on the tensor product vector |3i s
12 |2, 1i
in which 2, 1 are just labels of a complicated multiparticle vector (which has
components to all particle numbers) whereas the 3-particle which remained a
spectator in the rst interaction. in a graphical representation the two ss are
linked by a thick line (the dot in (26)) which corresponds to the inclusive summa-
tion over all intermediate states. these inclusive processes are here o-diagonal
whereas the standard ones in cross sections are diagonal.

for the next state vector created by the application of the product of four
pfg creation operators we will not write down all 24 contributions for the
dierent possible -orderings. rather we will list the nonoverlapping structures
which correspond to the nondiagonal inclusive terms

a(4)a(3)a(2)a(1)
s  a(4)a(3)a(2)a(1)
(z (4)z (3)z (2))  a(1)
(z (4)z (3))  (z (2)z (1))
s  (z (4)z (3)z (2))  a(1)
s  (z (4)z (3))  (z (2)z (1))

the rst, second, fourth and last class contains only one vector, the third and
fth class contain 10=2(6  1) elements (the dash on the bracket denotes
omission of the identity contribution which was already taken into account in the
rst term). these 24 contributions correspond to the 24 dierent -orderings.
the scalar products of such vectors with their own kind depending on 
i produce
24 terms and their complex conjugates where the diagonal scalar products make
up the full identity contribution (-orders arbitrary). the folklore crossing
(because of its incomplete derivation and formal intuitive understanding) links
e.g. 3 3 with 2 4. these type of crossing relations are sucient in order
to show that the correlation functions of f ( f ) = rc z(i)f (i)di satisfy the
thermal kms condition. in relating p-space rapidity integrands to the kms
property of wedge-localized generators, the denseness of the strip analytic f ()
wave functions in hilbert space is important. in order to avoid a terminology
which may prejudice the precise future content, it may be advisable to use the
name modular crossing for that property of the s-matrix kernels which is
equivalent to the kms property of the wedge-localized algebra i.e. to that of
the correlations of the f ( f ) generators. the hope is of course that modular
crossing may turn out to be the same (or rather a precise form) as standard

15

crossing. is what we get by reading backward the thermal kms property (which
expresses wedge localization) into momentum rapidity space. the so-obtained
modular crossing is also expected to explain in physical terms (and give the
precise form of) the analyticity aspects called by the somewhat nebulous word
maximal analyticity in the times of chews s-matrix approach.

the representation of general permutations in terms of nonoverlapping mir-
ror permutations and their use in the construction of the rapidity space inte-
grands of the correlation functions of pfgs f ( f ) can be easily generalized to
arbitrary n, a task which we will leave to the reader. at the end we obtain a
system of correlations fullling positivity (as a result that all representations
of state vectors take place in a fock space) and therefore dening a state on
a -algebra generated by the f ( f ). the generalization to higher dimensions
involve more care in the choice of the test function space due to the transversal
extension of wedges and will not be discussed here.

having sketched the construction of wedge algebras via the correlation func-
tions of their pfg generators, one may ask the question of whether this on-shell
eld theoretic construction of a(w ), which is just the rst step in a construc-
tion of the local double cone nets, sheds any new light on the old s-matrix
program (which is after all among all failed theories of this century the most
impressive one concerning the pieces of ideas it left behind). in order to an-
swer that question, one would have to nd out precisely at what place the
perturbative version of chews on-shell program stopped. even though i was
around at that time (but not working on s-matrix theory), it is very dicult for
me to unearth the reason where and why the perturbative version of the pure
s-matrix program failed. as far as i have been able to reconstruct from old
papers from pre-internet times, the perturbative attempts was able to produce
an on-shell crossing symmetric one loop representation for s (using the crossing
symmetric tree approximation as an input). it seems to me that it failed (or
rather got confused by overlapping integration problems) on two loops since i
was not able to nd an acceptable on-shell two-loop representation in the old
papers. i would appreciate any helpful hint on this problem of the history of
on-shell perturbation. i have some reasons to believe that the modular ideas
for wedge localization may now ll this gap in due time. if this happens, one
would have a perturbation theory directly for nets without eld coordinatiza-
tions. the success of the d=1+1 bootstrap-formfactor program for factorizing
models yields s-matrices and formfactors which for models with a continuous
coupling are analytic around g=0. the more local o-shell quantities however
(i.e. pointlike eld operators or operators from algebras belonging to bounded
regions) are radically dierent since they involve virtual particle polarization
clouds which formally may be represented by innite series in the on shell fs
similar to the factorizing d=1+1 case of the previous section. the analytic sta-
tus of these quantities is presently not known; it may well turn out that they are
only borel summable or (in the general non-factorizable case even) worse. the
on-shell/o-shell dichotomy of the modular approach for the rst time allows to
localize where the nonanalyticity at zero arises.

16

a solution of these problems, even if limited to some new kind of perturbation
theory (perturbation theory of local nets, without pointlike elds), should also
shed some light on the question of how to handle theories involving higher spin
particles, which in the standard o-shell causal perturbation theory lead to short
distance non-renormalizability. a very good illustration of what i mean is the
local quantum physics of massive spin=1 vectormesons. here the coupling of
covariant elds obtained by covariantizing the wigner particle representation
theory in the sense of the previous section will not be renormalizable in the
sense of short distance power counting. in the standard perturbative approach
the ghosts are necessary to lower the operator dimension of the interaction
densities (free eld polynomials) w (x), which as a result of the free vectormeson
dimension dima = 2, are at least 5, down to the value 4 permitted by the
renormalization requirements in a d=1+3 causal perturbative approach [12].
since the ghosts are removed at the end, the situation is akin to a catalyzer in
chemistry: they do not appear in the original question and are absent in the nal
result (without leaving any intrinsic trace behind). in theoretical physics the
presence of such catalyzers should be understood as indicating that the theory
wants to be analyzed on a deeper level of local quantum physics i.e.
further
away from quantization and quasiclassics.

4 the aqft framework

after our pedestrian presentation of the wedge algebra approach it is time to
be more systematic and precise. for noninteracting free system the conversion
of the rather pedestrian spatial nets of real subspaces of the wigner space of
momentum space (m.,s) wave functions into a interaction-free net in fock space
produces with the following three properties which continue to hold in the pres-
ence of interactions. they have been explained in many articles [14] and a book
[1] and my main task here is their adjustment to the main problems of this
survey.

1. a net of local (c- or von neumann) operator algebras indexed by classical

spacetime regions o

o  a(o)

without loss of generality the regions o maybe restricted to the poincare
covariant family of general double cones and the range of this map may be
described in terms of a concrete operator algebra in hilbert space for which
the vacuum representation 0 may be taken i.e. a(o)  0(a(o)). the
geometrical and physical coherence properties as isotony: a(o1)  a(o2)
)  a(o) are then evident co-
for o1  o2 and einstein causality: a(o
herence requirements. here we use the standard notation of aqft: the
dash superscript on the region denotes the causal disjoint and on the von
neumann algebra it stands for the commutant within b(h) where h is the



17

ambient space (here the representation space of the vacuum representa-
tion). einstein causality can be interpreted as an a priori knowledge about
some with a(o) commensurable observables in the sense of von neumann.
this causality property suggests the question if complete knowledge about
) = a(o) is possible. it turns out that this is in-
commensurability a(o
deed the generic behavior of vacuum nets called haag duality. the cases of
violation of this duality are of particular interest since they can be related
to a very fundamental intrinsic characterization of spontaneous symme-
try breaking, thus vastly generalizing the nambu-goldstone mechanism
which was abstracted from quantization.



2. poincare covariance and spectral properties.

g  p  g automorphism

g(a(o)) = a(o)

is unitarily implements in the vacuum representation

u (g)au (g) = g(a)
a  a(o)

the unitaries for the translations have energy-momentum generators which
full the relativistic spectrum (positive energy) condition, symbolically
specu (a)  v  (the forward light cone)

3. the phase space structure of local quantum physics or the nuclearity

property.

remark 7 the precise fomulation of the third property is somewhat involved
and will be presented after the following remarks on the rst two structural
properties. since in the formulation of the net one may work without loss of
generality with von neumann algebras [1], the rst question is what type in the
murray-von neumann-connes-haagerup classication occurs. there is a very
precise answer for wedges (which may be considered as double cones at innity).
as a result of the existence of a one-sided translation into a wedge, the wedge
algebras a(w ) turn out to be a factor of type iii1. this implies in particular
that the algebra has properties which take it far away from the structure of qm
(factors of type i). such algebras do not have pure states or minimal projec-
tors, rather all faithful states on such algebras are thermal i.e. obey the kms
condition which makes them similar to states appearing in cst with bifurcated
horizons as in hawking-unruh situations (but more quantum.i.e. without the
classical geometric killing vector aspects of horizons). also in the case of the
wedge and double cone algebras the modular ow near the boundary becomes
asymptotically geometric and killing-like (in the wedge case it is even globally
geometric). the origin of the thermal aspects are primarily on the local quan-
tum physics side and not on the cst gravity side; the black hole has a natural

18

localizing horizons (or one created by the cosmological theater of the dear lord),
whereas the horizons of e.g.
localizing double cones algebras are constructs of
the human mind which serve to test the content of lqp.

the nuclearity requirement results from the idea to obtain a local quantum
physical counterpart of the phase space of qm in a box. the famous nite
number of degrees of freedom law per unit cell of qm phase space results from
limiting the discrete box spectrum by a cut-o in energy. as rst suggested by
haag and swieca [1], the corresponding lqp counterpart, based on the causally
closed double cone analogue of the quantization box in schrodinger qm, points
into the direction of a weakly innite number; according to their estimates
this set of state vectors was compact in hilbert space. subsequent renements of
techniques revealed that this set is slightly smaller namely nuclear, and exact
calculations with interaction-free theories demonstrated that the lqp situation
also cannot be better than nuclear.

the best way to understand this issue is to follow the motivating footsteps of
haag and swieca. they, as many other physicists at that time (and as contem-
porary philosophers of nature), were attracted by the intriguing consequences
of the of the so-called reeh-schlieder property of qft

p(o) = h, cyclicity of 

a  p(o), a = 0 = a = 0 i.e.  separating

(27)

which either holds for the polynomial algebras of elds or for operator alge-
bras a(o). the rst property, namely the denseness of states created from the
vacuum by operators from arbitrarily small localization regions (e.g. a state
describing a particle behind the moon6 and an antiparticle on the earth can be
approximated inside a laboratory of arbitrary small size and duration) is totally
unexpected from the global viewpoint of general qt. in the algebraic formula-
tion this can be shown to be dual to the second one (in the sense of passing to
the commutant), in which case the cyclicity passes to the separating property of
 with respect to a(o). referring to its use, the separating property is often
called the state vector-eld relation. the mathematical terminology is to say
that the pair ( a(o),) is standard. the large enough commutant required
by the latter property is guarantied by causality (the existence of a nontrivial
o) and shows that causality is again responsible for the unexpected property.
of course the claim that somebody causally separated from us may provide
us nevertheless with a dense set of states is somewhat queer if one thinks of the
tensor factorization properties of ordinary schrodinger qm with respect to an
inside/outside separation via a subsystem box.

if the naive interpretation of cyclicity/separability in the reeh-schlieder the-
orem leaves us with a feeling of science ction (and as already mentioned, also

6this weird aspect should not be held against qft but rather be taken as indicating that
localization by a piece of hardware in a laboratory is also limited by an arbitrary large but
nite energy, i.e.
in qm one
obtains genuine localized subspaces without energy limitations.

is a phase space localization (see subsequent discussion).

19

has attracted a lot of attention in philosophical quarters), the challenge for a
theoretical physicist is to nd an argument why, for all practical purposes, the
situation nevertheless remains similar to qm. this amounts to the fruitful ques-
tion namely which among the dense set of state vectors can be really produced
with a controllable expenditure (of energy); a problem from which haag and
swieca started their investigation. in qm this question is not that interesting
and urgent, since the localization at a given time via support properties of wave
functions leads to a tensor product factorization of inside/outside so that the in-
side state vectors are evidently never dense in the whole space and the particle
behind the moon paradox does not occur.

later we will see that most of the very important physical and geometrical
informations are encoded into features of dense domains, in fact the aforemen-
tioned modular theory is explaining this deep relation between operator domains
of the tomita ss and spacetime geometry. the individuality of the various s-
operators is only the dierence in domains, they always do the same thing in
their domains namely map a to a for all a  a(o).
for the case at hand the reconciliation of the paradoxical aspect of the reeh-
schlieder theorem with common sense has led to the discovery of the physical
relevance of localization with respect to phase space in lqp, i.e. the understand-

ing of the size of degrees of freedom in the set: (notation h =r edpe)

pea(o) is compact

pea(o) or eha(o) is nuclear

(28)

(29)

the rst property was introduces way back by haag and swieca [1] whereas
the second more rened statement (and similar nuclearity statements involving
modular operators of local regions instead of the global hamiltonian) which is
saturated by qft and easier to use, is a later result of buchholz and wichmann
[13].
it should be emphasized that the lqp degrees of freedom counting of
haag-swieca, which gives an innite but still compact set of localized states is
dierent from the qm niteness of degrees of freedom per phase used in entropy
calculations of string theory.

the map a(o)  eha(o) is only nuclear if the mass spectrum of
lqp is not too accumulative in nite mass intervals e.g.
in particular innite
towers of equal mass particles are excluded (which then would cause the strange
appearance of a maximal hagedorn temperature). the nuclearity assures that
a qft, which was given in terms of its vacuum representation, also exists in a
thermal state. an associated nuclearity index turns out to be the counterpart
of the quantum mechanical gibbs partition function [14] [1] and behaves in an
entirely analogous way.

the peculiarities of the above degrees-of freedom-counting are very much
related to one of the oldest exotic and at the same time characteristic aspects
of qft, namely vacuum polarization. as rst observed by heisenberg, the
partial charge:

qv =zv

j0(x)d3x = 

20

(30)

diverges as a result of uncontrolled vacuum particle/antiparticle uctuations
near the boundary. for the free eld current it is easy to see that a better de-
nition involving test functions, which smoothens the behavior near the boundary
and takes into account the fact that the current is a 4-dim distribution which
has no restriction to equal times, leads to a nite expression. the algebraic
counterpart is the so called split property, namely the statement [1] that if
one leaves between say the double cone (the inside of a relativistic box) ob-
servable algebra a(o) and its causal disjoint (its relativistic outside) a(o) a
collar (geometrical picture of the relative commutant) o
a(o)  a(o1), o  o1 , properly

1  o, i.e.

(31)

then it is possible to construct in a canonical way a type i tensor factor n which
extends in a fuzzy manner into the collar a(o)  a(o1) i.e. a(o)  n 
a(o1). with respect to n the hilbert space factorizes i.e. as in qm there are
states with no uctuations (or no entanglement) for the smoothened opera-
tors in n . whereas the original vacuum will be entangled from the box point
of view, there also exists a disentangled product vacuum on n . the algebraic
analogue of heisenbergs smoothening of the boundary is the construction of a
this factorization of the vacuum with respect to a suitably constructed type i
factor algebra which uses the collar extension of a(o). it turns out that there is
a canonical, i.e. mathematically distinguished factorization, which lends itself
to dene a natural localizing map  and which has given valuable insight into
an intrinsic lqp version of noethers theorem [1], i.e. one which does not rely
on any parallelism to classical structures as is the case with quantization. it is
this split inclusion which allows to bring back the familiar structure of qm
since type i factors allow for pure states, tensor product factorization, entangle-
ment and all the other properties at the heart of standard quantum theory and
the measurement process. however despite all the eorts to return to structures
known from qm, the original vacuum retains its thermal (entanglement) prop-
erties with respect to all localized algebras, even with respect to the fuzzy (no
precise boundary within the collar) localized n .
formulas for standard split inclusions [15]

let us collect in the following some useful mathematical denitions and

denition 8 an inclusion  = (a,b, ) of factors is called standard split if
the collar a  b as well as a,b together with  are standard in the previous
sense, and if in addition it is possible to place a type i factor n between a
and b.

in this situation there exists a canonical isomorphism of ab to the tensor
product a b which is implemented by a unitary u () : h  h1 h2 (the
localizing map) with

u ()(ab)u () = a b
a  a, b  b

21

(32)

this map permits to dene a canonical intermediate type i factor n (which
may dier from the n in the denition)

n := u ()b(h1)  1u ()  b  b(h)

(33)

it is possible to give an explicit formula for this canonical intermediate algebra in
terms of the modular conjugation j = u ()ja  jbu () of the collar algebra
(a  b, ) [15]

n = a  jaj = b  jbj

(34)

the tensor product representation gives the following equivalent tensor prod-

uct representation formulae for the various algebras

a  a  1
b  1  b
n  b(h)  1

(35)

as explained in [15], the uniqueness of u () and n is achieved with the help
of the natural cones p(ab) and p(ab). these are cones in hilbert
space whose position in h together with their facial subcone structures pre-
empt the full algebra structure on a spatial level. the corresponding marvelous
theorem of connes goes far beyond the previously mentioned state vector/eld
relation of the reeh-schlieder theorem.

returning to our physical problem, we have succeeded to nd the right ana-
logue of the qm box. contrary to the causally closed local type iii algebras
with their sharp light cone boundaries (quantum horizons), the fuzzy box
type i factor n permits all the structures we know from qm: pure states,
inside/outside tensor factorization, (dis)entanglement etc. in fact the original
vacuum is highly entangled in the tensor product description (however there
also exists a disentangled product vacuum on n), the modular group of the
state  |a b represented in the tensor product cone p(a b) is not the
tensorproduct of those of a and b, but the modular conjugation is really equal
to ja jb (since the restriction  |a bis faithful!). note also that the restric-
tion of the product state    to b or b is not faithful resp. cyclic on the
corresponding vectors and therefore the application of those algebras to the
representative vectors  yields projectors (e.g. p = u ()b(h1) 1u ()).
since the fuzzy box algebra n is type i, we are allowed to use the usual
trace formalism based on the density matrix description, i.e. the vacuum state
can be written as a density matrix  on n. we know that if we restrict to
the collar subalgebra or to a we have for a  a
(, a) = tra

(36)

but this is not sucient to determine . if we would be able to compute the
unitary representer it
n of the modular group of the pair (n, ) then we

22

know also  = z 1n , z = trn . the fuzzy box entropy may be directly
read o as the von neumann entropy lntrn . the above nuclearity index in
the limit of o  rd can be shown to coalesce with fuzzy box entropy with
the expected standard volume divergence factor times a nite number which
depends on the quantum matter and remains nite. a computation from rst
principles appears feasible with the help of the holographic property which we
will explain in section 6.

it is clear from the preceding remarks that the point of departure for the
concept of local entropy discussion should be this fuzzy qm-like box. indeed the
known estimates of the entropy of this box between o and o1 with o   (in
such a way that the collar diameter is kept unchanged), leads to a kinematical
divergent spacetime volume factor times a dynamical quantum matter contribu-
tion to the nuclearity index (as a lower bound). the holographic property of the
next section allows to transfer this innite volume limit on subsystems of the
global algebra to limits of sequences of nite double cones which converge from
the inside (with shrinking collar size) to a xed double cone with the inverse
collar size replacing the large volume limit. even more, the nuclearity index end
hence the dynamical part of a localized entropy density may be computed in
terms of data of an associated chiral conformal theory on the lightray (section
6).

5 modular inclusions and intersections, holog-

raphy

one of the oldest alternative proposals for canonical quantizations is the so
called light ray or light front quantization. the trouble with it is that it inherits
the short distance diseases from the canonical quantization (which only makes
sense for superrenormalizable interactions but not for strictly renormalizable
ones which lead to innite multiplicative renormalizations).
it also develops
some additional problems. if one considers it as a quantization procedure, one
looses the connection with local qft; in the presence of interactions none of
the papers on light cone quantization has spelled out how to obtain a local qft
by whatever procedure (take 4
2 as an example). if on the other hand one uses
the idea of light cone restriction of local elds, one already faces a little problem
for free elds (which has been handled by dening suitable test function spaces
by dimock [16]) similar to the problem of zero mass scalar bosons in d=1+1.
the problems one faces with such restrictions in the presence of interactions
are most clearly visible in the case of noncanonical conformal elds which are
sums over products of chiral blocks acting on dierent sectors. such local eld
coordinates have no reasonable nite restriction, although purely chiral ones
do.
in case of massive noncanonical elds it is even more dicult to decide
which eld coordinatizations are good for restrictions and which are not.
in
such a case one is well-advised to use the net description of the previous section
because it does the reprocessing of bad into good ones automatically if one uses

23

the right tools in order to make the light cone idea precise. in d=1+1 the right
tools are those which allow to derive nontrivial consequences from the shifted
wedge inclusions of the previous section. one rst denes an abstract modular
inclusion in the setting of von neumann algebras. there are several types of
inclusions which have received mathematical attention7. an inclusion of two
factors n  m is called (+ halfsided) modular if the modular group it
m for
t<0 transforms n into itself (compression of n )

adit

mn  n

(37)

mn is dense in m (or that tit

assuming that tadit
mn =c1), our modular
inclusion denes a k-system. this means in particular that the two modular
groups it
n generate a two parametric group of (translations, dilations)
in which the translations have positive energy. let us now look at the relative
commutant [17].

m and it

let (n  m, ) be modular with non trivial relative commutant. then
look at the subspace (n   m)  h. the modular groups to n and m leave
m, t < 0 maps n   m into itself by the inclusion
invariant this subspace: it
being modular. look at the orthogonal complement of (n   m)  h. this
orthogonal complement is mapped into itself by it
m for positive t. let  be in
that subspace, then

(cid:10), it

m(n   m)(cid:11) = 0 f or t > 0.

(38)

analyticity in t then gives the vanishing for all t.
due to takesaki theorem we can restrict m to (n   m) using a condi-

tional expectation to this subspace. then

(n   m)  m|(n m)

(39)

is a modular inclusion on the subspace dened above. n also restricts to that
subspace and this restriction is obviously in the relative commutant of (n  
m)  m|(n m) . moreover using arguments as above it is easy to see that the
restriction is cyclic w.r.t.  on this subspace. therefore we arrive at a modular
standard inclusion i.e. a two-sided k-system

(n|(n m)  m|(n m), )

(40)

standard modular inclusions are isomorphic to chiral conformal eld theories.
this theorem and its extension to modular intersections leads to a wealth of
physical applications in qft, in particular in connection with hidden symme-
tries symmetries which are of purely modular origin and have no reading back
as arising from quantized noether currents. the modular techniques unravel
structures which cannot (or have not) be seen in terms of eld coordinatizations.

7in addition to the split inclusion of the previous section, there are the famous jones
inclusions whose charateristic property is the existence of conditional expectations. their
domain in particle physics is charge fusion and internal symmetry.

24

holography and problems of degrees of freedom counting (phase space in lqp)
as well as the issue of localization entropy are other examples.

let us briey look at applications to d=1+1 massive theories. it is clear that
in this case we should use the two modular inclusions which are obtained by
sliding the (right hand) wedge inside itself (m  ma , where m is our previous
a(w )) by applying an upper/lower lightlike translation a and forming the
relative commutant (the size of a is irrelevant)

m(i)  m

a  m

(41)

where the notation indicates that the localization of m(i) is thought of as the
piece of the upper/lower light ray between the origin and the endpoint of the a
lightlike translation. by viewing this relative commutant as a lightlike limiting
case of a spacelike shift of w into itself (and using haag duality), on obtains
the interval i as a limit of a double cone. the net obtained by applying the
modular transformation it
m to the m(i) via its ad action is a chiral net with
total algebra

fm [t

it
w (m(i))  m,

(42)

struction, see the appendix below. since this net is chiral, it cannot create the
full space from the vacuum. rather the cyclically generated space is a genuine

where we used the modular standard inclusion (m(i)  fm, ) for the con-
subspace with projector p. since the modular group of (fm, ) is obtained
m to ph, the projection is associated with a conditional

from restricting it
expectation of the algebra

e(m) = pmp = fm

(43)

although the two-dimensional conformal theory lives in the tensor-product
space of the two chiral theories on the upper/lower light ray, the two chiral
components constructed in the present way do not commute and do not gener-
ate m.
the chiral conformal theory attached to the light ray is in one important
sense dierent from a chiral conformal theory as a tensor factor in a two-
dimensional conformal world. it remembers its position in h and with respect
to the original massive theory. the opposite light cone translation acts on it
in a nontrivial way and with the help of this action one can reconstruct the
original massive theory (48). because of the transversal extension this is not
possible for higher dimension. there one needs a family of chiral conformal
theories which is obtained from modular intersections. this is obtained by
applying l-boosts which tilt the wedge around one of its light rays, so that
the transversal degeneracy of the modular inclusion is destroyed. in this way
one obtains a fan-like ordered (gefaecherte) family of wedges corresponding to
a family of chiral conformal theories whose relative position within the original
hilbert space contains all the informations which are necessary in order to re-
construct the original (massive) theory. this inversion operation of the family

25

of holographic chiral images is similar to a tomographic scanning of the original
theory. of for a brief description of this construction we refer to [9][17]. a more
detailed and rigorous account will be given in a future paper.

there is another much more special kind of holography in which an isomor-
phism of a massive qft in d+1 dimensions to a conformal d-dimensional theory
is in the focus of interest. this isomorphism appears in rehrens solution [6] of
maldacenas conjecture [18][19] about a holographic relation of quantum matter
in a (d+1)-dimensional anti de sitter spacetime with that in a d-dimensional
conformal qft. this peculiar special case of holography, which despite its ab-
sence of susy most probably was not on t hoofts mind [20], is apparently of
importance within the development of string theory. within the present aqft
setting its main interest is that it requires the eld-coordinatization free point
of view in its strongest form: whereas in the lightray holography one could still
think of using clever lightray adapted pointlike eld-coordinatizations, this pos-
sibility does not exist in the ads holography which takes place at the boundary
at innity! this is a result of the weird einstein causality structure of the ads
curved spacetime which lacks the property of global hyperbolicity. at this point
one is nolens volens driven into the aqft conceptual framework of nets with
isomophism between algebras which are labeled by geometrically maps between
regions. the understanding of this phenomenon is enhanced if one starts from
an imagined (because it contains two time-like coordinates) d+2 dimensional
qft linearly associated with the conformal symmetry group so(d,2) which
was already useful in handling the conformal compactication. since the ads
reading of conformal qft is very similar, let us have a brief look. the so(d,2)
group is associated with the d+2 dim. metric

gab =


g

1

+1




for the conformal compactication one considers the d+1 dim. submanifold

(44)

(45)

md+1 =(cid:8) = (, 5, 6)  rd+2 : 2 = 0, 6 > 0(cid:9)

i.e. the d+1 dim. surface of a d+2 dim. forward light cone. the parametrization
 = (sin ,~, 5, cos ) together with the identication of conformally compacti-
ed minkowski space

t =

~x =

sin

5 + cos

~

5 + cos

(46)

gives the compactication formula in terms of a periodic time  and the fact
that e =(~, 5) is a unit vector. in fact one obtains the well-known periodic
embedding of minkowski space m into m = sd1  r which is known to have
a causal structure.. for a single copy we have

m = {(e,  ) : cos + 5 > 0, <  < }

(47)

26

in the relation to ads one does not use the surface of the light cone in (45) ,
but rather a hyperboloid in the forward light cone. we leave the verication
that this causes more havoc with einstein causality than the previous lightlike
parametrization to the reader. the causality problems comes under control if
one gives up the idea of a map between points and uses instead the wedge/double
cone spacetime indexing of the nets of aqft a la rehren. the ads-conformal
isomorphism uses a boundary at innity rather than the lightray in the case
of the previous holography. from our constructive use of holography there
is not much to be gained (outside the indicated pedagogical lesson) by this
isomorphism since the higher conformal eld theories are as dicult as their
non-conformal counterparts.

at this point it may be helpful to remind the reader that the resolution
of the einstein causality paradox in conformal qft which consists in noting
that would be conformally invariant theories as the e.g. massless thirring
model, where charged elds violate huygens principle and hence lead to appar-
ent causality confusions (through the possibility of linking the timelike region in
m by global conformal transformations via lightlike innity to spacelike events),
led (already 10 years before the famous bpz paper8) to the appearance of the
conformal blocks in a decomposition theory with respect to the center of the
global conformal group [21]. with other words, genuinely interacting local elds
tend be reducible under the global conformal group and decompose into nonlocal
but irreducible conformal blocks. the knowledge of these irreducible compo-
nents is equivalent to a the description of a eld on the many sheeted covering
which is local in the sense of the causality structure of the covering space. ac-
cording to the expectations in [4][6] there should be a similar decomposition
theory with respect to nets on ads with a certain subclass of interacting the-
ories being given in terms of conformal block objects by inverting the rehren
isomorphism [2].

6 the entropy problem in lqp

the presentation of thermal aspects of modular localization versus the heat bath
setting would be incomplete without the incorporation of entropy. in fact in
the case of a black hole metric with its classical killing symmetry, the analogy
of the behavior of the black hole surfaces with the entropy of heat bath systems
rst observed by bekenstein was the basis of hawkings great discovery about
the thermal behavior of quantum matter enclosed behind black hole horizons.
in this setting it is not really necessary to directly confront the problem of
entropical behavior of enclosed quantum matter, rather one may understand a
large amount of facts about black holes via the classical metric and analogies
with thermodynamics. this elegant hiding of quantum matter behind the size
of the black hole surface led t hooft in more recent times to formulate a new
quantum principle: the holographic principle. he did not think in terms of

8but not yet to the discovery of minimal models! only the d=1+1 exponential bose elds

with abelian braid group statistics were known during the 70ies .

27

string theory (nor of its inexorable mr. hyde-like susy companion) but rather
of quantum matter in qft behind a bifurcate killing horizon.

in section 4 we have dened localization entropy, but we were not able to
compute it. the holographic reduction of the degrees of freedom in the previous
section in terms of a chiral conformal eld theory and the nontrivial action
of families of poincare transformations suggests that the dynamical aspect of
localization entropy is entirely determined by that holographic reduction i.e. by
a chiral conformal eld theory. for simplicity let us look at the scenario for a
localization entropy calculation for a double cone o in a two-dimensional world.
a holographic representation of this algebra a(o) may be written as

a(o) = alg
[ai

o = i+  i

a (a(i+))


(48)

where i are the two bounding lightray intervals (localization horizons) of the
double cone. the dynamical entropy content resides in the chiral algebra a(i+)
whereas the i in the action of the opposite light cone translation just con-
tributes a kinematical length factor. it is sucient to compute the entropy for
a unit interval since one expects additivity. the unit length interval i+ in turn
may be approximated by a sequence of smaller intervals i (n)
+ which converge
from the inside against i+. according to our split inclusion discussion in section
4, this leads to a sequence of canonical fuzzy type i interval algebras with de-
creasing collar size. each single one has a nite entropy but the scale invariance
gives a 1
 diverging factor for decreasing collar size. therefore the localization
entropy is expected to be divergent as

1  const(c, ..)

(49)

where the dynamical constant depends on the matter content of the chiral the-
ory, i.e. on the central term of the energy momentum tensor and possibly other
quantities which are necessary for the characterization of the chiral observable
algebra. putting everything together, we expect a divergent entropy for a two-
dimensional theory of the form

entropy(a(o), ) 

1
 |o|  const(c, ..)

(50)

where |o| is the size of the surface. since we have not nished the calculation
at the time of writing, this scenario and its higher dimensional counterpart does
not yet have the same status as the other parts of this survey.

the divergence of localization entropy belongs to the rigorous aspects of
this scenario. this follows already from the rmly established hypernite von
neumann type iii1 nature of (sharply) local algebras. this kind of ultraviolet
divergence is intrinsic and cannot be disposed of.

on the other hand the entropy a la bekenstein which one expects to see on
the side of the classical metric is nite. so it appears that the gravitational

28

aspect of entropy cannot be reconciled with that of quantum matter behind
horizon. the solution of this problem (if there is one) appears to point into the
direction of that elusive quantum gravity. to see this, one should notice that
the above chiral matter entropy is a quantity which refers to an equivalence
class of theories. namely all theories which in the holographic reduction on the
light ray (the bifurcated horizon) lead to the same chiral theory will be members
of this class. if the horizons are killing horizons in curved spacetime, the class
contains families of metric which coalesce on the horizon. this then would bring
us close to a situation discussed by carlip [22], although the details in particular
the treatment of boundaries would be dierent9. as far as i can see this is the
only conservative idea of how possibly the elusive quantum gravity could leave
an imprint on cst+quantum matter enclosed behind a horizon. the string
explanation may be more elegant, but one is asked to accept a large number of
prescriptions and assumptions which have no good physical interpretations and
have not been confronted with those successful principles on which qft has
had its greatest triumph.

7 comparison with old string theory

a comparison with string theory can be most eciently handled by analyzing
the ow of modular ideas from the point of view of on-shell s-matrix theory
combined with o-shell qft and comparing it with that of string theory via
the old dual model (learn how to connect these boxes in latex)

(cid:18) qf t, causality

of f shell

(cid:19)

(cid:18) modular ideas
wedge localization (cid:19)
...




p f g wedge  generators
constructive approach

to a(w )

(cid:19)




conf ormal f ormalism

old string representation
high spacetime dimensions

dual model

onshell
...

(cid:18) s  matrix, crossing








reinterpretation of old

string f ormalism by upward jump

by upward jump by 15 orders

quantum gravity?

...


...

9in particular it is unclear how the ultraviolet divergent part of the localized matter entropy
gets lost on the uctuating metric side (or why only the nite fuzzy box part appears on
the metric side).

29





modular inclusion

modular intersections

chiral holography

chiral f amily and scanning
 conf (1, d  1)
ads(1, d)
cst, no quantum gravity

iso









change of f ormalism

dif f erental geometry & topology

rich quasiclassical structures
branes and big latin letters

holography, m aldacena conjecture

attempted qg  interpretation





remark 9 the above ow diagram requires some comments. the old s-matrix
theory of the 60ies is a common point of departure for string theory and modular
localization theory. the tomita modular theory as well as haag-hugenholz-
winnink (independent) discovery of the thermal physical aspects of that theory
were found in the middle of the 60ies whereas the discovery of the modular
structure of algebras generated by wightman elds in wedges by bisognano and
wichmann10 was made around 1975. its inversion for constructive use in qft
is a very recent discovery starting around 1996. the modular inclusion and
intersection theory (and its application to holography) is of an even more recent
vintage.

on the string side the story starts with the construction of the dual model as
a special illustration of nonperturbative aspects of on-shell crossing symmetry by
veneziano followed by a formal observation of virasoro about the existence of an
underlying o-shell conformal formalism in d=1+1. the interpretation in the
sense of the old string theory was suggested by this new formalism as a kind of
o-shell reading. both inventions, although motivated by the on-shell s-matrix
program drifted gragually away from the original problem of clarifying the physics
of on-shell crossing symmetry as a on-shell relic of o-shell einstein causality.
even though there are and have been serious doubts of whether the dual model
s-matrix construction is an admissable s-matrix in the sense of qft, there is
equally no convincing argument that the stringiness of the old dual model (the
degenerate towers containing innitely many particles) is an intrinsic feature
which is stable under perturbations in the genus of the model or whether they
rather become resonances in the second riemann sheet with only a nite set of
stable particles left behind. in the last case the concept of stringiness may have
been lost because there is no theorem that a local qft outside the perturbative
approach could not describe such a resonance situation. all evidence points
towards string theory having left the setting of the eld theoretic on-shell/o-
shell issue, even if one ignores the strong desire of string theorist to create
a new realm dierent from qft. the biggest separation from local quantum
physics was however the quantum gravity interpretation in the change from old
to new string theory which demanded to slide up the energy scale to the planck
mass. this was the most revolutionary (violent) happening, never before in
the history of physics had a new theory come into being by pushing an old one
upward by 15 orders of magnitude! the later enrichment of the formalism by
a dierential geometric structures and the more recent addition of branes and
m-theory seems to be not quite as radical as the quantum gravity step.

10special aspects of this relation were already found before by eckmann and osterwalder.

30

the logical and historical ow in each column is downward, the only cross-
wise connection is between the s-matrix box and the box containing the pfg
generators of wedge algebras.

the many common ideas of both theories from ultraviolet-niteness up to
holography are startling and should not be dismissed as accidents; the common
origin in the deep on/o shell problem (which remained after chews s-matrix
approach was abandoned) forbids such a view. but since the string theory
did not produce an intrinsic conceptual framework, it is presently not possible
to make a qualied comparison. mathematical-aesthetical ideas to introduce
string-localized objects on the basis of generalizations from pointlike to string-
like contrast sharply with the conceptual stringency and conservative philosophy
underlying aqft. to be sure, semiinnite strings are also appearing in aqft
as e.g. the necessary localizations of charge carrying objects in d=1+2 which
maintain braid group statistics on einstein causal observable algebras. these
are extremely conservative strings which owe their existence to the extended
realization of an old principle: einstein causality. in order to prove these state-
ments and construct models one of course has to go outside the lagrangian
quantization framework, since the latter is only consistent with fermi/bose re-
alizations of representations of einstein causal nets.

despite the conceptual remoteness there is an amazing closeness of nontrivial
resulting properties between the noncommutative nonperturbative modular ap-
proach and the more quasiclassical geometric structures of string theory (based
on analogous quantization ideas as lagrangian qft). connected with the joint
notion of holography is the appearance of a common group theoretical substruc-
ture of poincare covariance in which the galileian transformations appear as ex-
act symmetries. in susskinds formal considerations based on light-front quan-
tization [24], this galilei property enters via the dynamics along null-directions,
whereas in the modular approach one observes that there are d=1+3 two 8-
dimensional subgroups related by a antiunitary reection [25]. they contain a
transversal 2-parametric galileian group of velocity transformations related to
the two ways of tilting in the modular intersection situation. but perhaps the
most spectacular coincidence is the apparent absence of ultraviolet problems in
both theories. one is of course tempted to blame this on the common histori-
cal cradle of crossing symmetric s-matrix theory. but since there have been so
many inventions on the string side, the issue may not be quite as simple. as
was already mentioned, up to date it is not even completely clear whether the
dual model after unitarization denes an admissable s-matrix in the sense of
section 3, or whether through its invention the umbilical cord to the on/o shell
problem was cut already at the very rst step and an o-shell realm dierent
from local quantum physics was created.

what contributes to the high drama in the comparisons of the two chain
of ideas is the signicant dierence in most concepts. the modular approach
being entirely noncommutative, real-time eld theoretic, and remote from quan-
tization and quasiclassical structures, has no obvious way of incorporating e.g.
quasiclassical klein-kaluza ideas of conversion of spacetime into inner symme-

31

tries. this is because inner symmetry arises in aqft through the conversion
of para-statistics into fermi-bose statistics +multiplicities which form the sub-
strate on which inner symmetries act (the doplicher-roberts theorem of aqft
[23]). no intrinsic denition or criterion of whether a eld theory is the klein-
kaluza projection of a higher dimensional is known. aqft is simply not able
to use such quasiclassical ideas. whereas the applicability of modular concepts
is independent of spacetime dimensions, the more quasiclassical geometric for-
malism of string theory needs the well-known high spacetime dimensions. from
the modular point of view based on nets of von neumann algebras it would seem
that the quasiclassical dierential geometric methods and the high spacetime
dimensions are perhaps related, since quasiclassical structures like mean eld
approximations tend to become exact in high spacetime dimensions. but such
an argument appears a bit too slick even if one adopts the generous attitude
which string theory has with respect to quasiclassical structures.

another point of signicant dierence is supersymmetry. whereas for string
theory this has developed into a condition sine qua non, this structure is math-
ematically consistent but physically highly suspicious in aqft. despite the
beautiful contribution of haag lopujanski and sohnius to this issue [1], aqft
has not been able to attribute a clearcut physical aim to this symmetry. it does
not play any role in the extraction of internal symmetries from the superselection
theory of aqft [23], nor does it play any essential role in the rigorous construc-
tion of low-dimensional models (e.g. the tricritical ising model); it seems to be
present for its own sake, like an accidental symmetry. indeed its behavior under
thermalization by a heat bath [26] (collapse instead of spontaneous breaking
of symmetry) lends additional weight to this suspicion. in the present modular
localization framework, one even looses the ultraviolet niteness argument in its
favor. in order to shed some further light on this confusing situation it would be
nice to have an explicit look at the lowest nontrivial order of gauge invariant cor-
relation functions in n=4 supersymmetric gauge theories. nontrivial conformal
invariant 4-dim. correlations are sensational, even in lowest order perturbation
theory, in particular gauge invariant low order 4-point conformal functions. in
the literature one only nds calculations on beta-functions and nowhere lowest
order gauge invariant correlation functions.

the tendency of mystication as it becomes visible in the string theoretic
interpretation of the letter m, is totally alien to aqft. to be sure, the extremely
deep use of tomitas modular theory also adds an air of mystery11 (to aqft,
but there is no doubt of where to look and what to do in order to de-mystify
this situation in due time.

one attractive feature of string theory is the ease in which consistency checks
of intuitive conjectures may be carried out by dierential geometric and analytic
methods. in fact this is precisely the reason why string theory enjoys such a
great popularity. even if one remains aware of its physical weaknesses, one
cannot fail to be impressed by the richness of apparently consistent ideas and

11in the sense of still missing physical intuition and mathematical understanding for e.g.

modular groups of double cones.

32

its mathematical wealth. in fact, although the holography ideas in section 5
can be traced back to t hooft, it was string theory which very soon picked
up the challenge and most of us became acquainted with this concept through
the fantastic number of string theoretic publications on this subject ( 150
per month). on the other hand string theory has great diculties to convert
its ndings into particle physics. in fact in its 30 years of existence (since the
invention of the dual model) there has been no lasting contribution to physics.
the new local quantum physical framework of this survey can not match the
number string theoretical ideas and the speed with which they are unfolding.
actually the word new hides its extremely conservative character. the only new
aspect is in the new concepts which are used to explore the old principles and
problems. if anything, the relation to the causality and spectral principles are
even stronger than in the old days of feynman type qft. its strong relation
to these principles does however not mean that it has any commitment to the
formalism of quantization. as a result of its conservative attitude aqft shuns
inventions and favors discoveries.

the present interests in common ideas as e.g. holography and related prop-
erties, together with signicant structural dierences and conceptual clashes
on the other hand raises the hope that new physics could emerge from the
confrontation of these two heirs of the deep on/o shell problem in the old
qft/s-matrix relation.

references

[1] r. haag, local quantum physics, springer 1992

[2] b. schroer, modular theory and eyvind wichmanns contributions to mod-

ern particle physics theory, hep-th/9906071 and referinces therein

[3] h.-j. borchers, on the revolutionization of quantum field theory by

tomitas modular theory, university of goettingen preprint, april 1999

[4] d. buchholz, m. florig and s.j. summers, hawking-unruh temperature

and einstein causality in anti-de sitter space-time, hep-th/9905178

[5] r.f. streater and a.s. wightman, pct, spin and statistics and all that,

benjamin 1964

[6] k.-h. rehren, algebraic holography, hep-th/9905179

[7] s. weinberg, the quantum theory of fields, i, cambridge university press

1995

[8] b. schroer, modular wedge localzation and the d=1+1 formfactor pro-

gram, in print, scheduled to appear in annals of physics 275, (1999)

[9] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, modular constructions of quantum field

theories with interactions, hep-th/9812251

33

[10] f. a. smirnov, int.j. mod. phys. a4, (1989) 156. our operator notation
is more close to m. yu lashkevich, sectors of mutually local fields in
integrable models of quantum field theory, hep-th/9406118, see also m.
karowski, h. babujian, a. fring and a.zapletal, nucl.phys. b538 (1999)
535

[11] k. fredenhagen and joerss, comm. math. phys. 176, (1996), 541

[12] duetsch and b. schroer; massive vectormesons and gauge theory, hep-

th/9906089

[13] d. buchholz and e. h. wichmann, commun. math. phys. 106, (1986) 321

[14] d. buchholz, current trends in axiomatic quantum eld theory, hep-

th/9811233

[15] s. doplicher and r. longo, invent. math. 75, (1984) 493

[16] j. dimock, locality in free string theory, mp arc 99-31

[17] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, looking beyond the thermal horizon:
hidden symmetries in chiral models, hep-th/9901031, to be published in
rev. in math. phys.

[18] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, (1998) 231

[19] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, (1998) 253

[20] g. t hooft, in salam-festschrift, a. ali et al. eds., world scientic 1993,

284

[21] b. schroer and j. a. swieca, phys.rev. d 10, (1974) 480, b. schroer , j.
a. swieca and a. h. voelkel, phys. rev. d 11, (1975), 1509, see also: b.
schroer, principles of general quantum field theory versus new intuition
from model studies, an essay dedicated to the memory of jorge andre
swieca (1936-1980), in: the algebraic theory of superselection sectors,
introduction and recent results, page 573-604, ed. daniel kastler, world
scientic 1990

[22] s. carlip, black hole entropy from conformal field theory in any di-

mension, hep-th/9812013, and references therein.

[23] s. doplicher and j. e. roberts, commun. math. phys. 131, (1990) 51

[24] l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36, (1995) 6377

[25] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, modular constructions of quantum field
theories with interactions, hep-th/9812251, to be published in rev. math.
phys.

[26] d. buchholz and i. ojima, nucl. phys. b 498, (1997) 228

34

