0
0
0
2

 

b
e
f
8
2

 

 
 

3
v
1
0
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

usitp-99-06
hep-th/9908001

the hagedorn transition, deconnement

and n = 4 sym theory

bo sundborg1

institute of theoretical physics

box 6730

s-113 85 stockholm

sweden

abstract

n = 4 super yang-mills theory supplies us with a non-abelian 4d gauge
theory with a meaningful perturbation expansion, both in the uv and in the
ir. we calculate the free energy on a 3-sphere and observe a deconnement
transition for large n at zero coupling. the same thermodynamic behaviour
is found for a wide class of toy models, possibly also including the case of non-
zero coupling. below the transition we also nd hagedorn behaviour, which
is identied with uctuations signalling the approach to the deconned phase.
the hagedorn and the deconnement temperatures are identical. application
of the ads/cft correspondence gives a connection between string hagedorn
behaviour and black holes.

1e-mail: bo@physto.se

1 introduction

in large n discussions of yang-mills theory the thermal deconnement transition is
accompanied by a jump in the free energy from order n 0 to order n 2. the conned
phase consists of hadrons and glueballs, which should have spectra with narrow res-
onances. models for such spectra like statistical bootstrap models or string theory,
often have densities of states rising exponentially with energy, i.e. hagedorn be-
haviour [1]. hagedorn spectra themselves give rise to singular thermodynamics at
a characteristic temperature because boltzmann suppression of high energy states
can be compensated by the sheer numbers of states.
it would be natural if this
hagedorn temperature and the deconnement temperature were the same. thorn
[2] has discussed possible alternatives but it seems that the question for the generic
4-dimensional gauge theory is too dicult to handle. pisarski has also argued that
a second order deconnement transition at innite n implies a hagedorn spectrum
[3].

in string theory, which has hagedorn behavior at zero coupling, this supposed
relation has even been used to model what might happen above the hagedorn tem-
perature [4], which for closed string theories is dicult to interpret as a true limiting
temperature, since the energy density never diverges [5]. furthermore, the vanishing
of an eective temperature-dependent string tension at the hagedorn temperature
has been naturally associated with deconnement [6, 7, 8]. still, until now explicit
calculations covering the full range below, close to, and above the transition has been
missing. to actually demonstrate that the hagedorn and the deconnement temper-
atures are identical, and that the thermodynamics below this critical temperature
can equally well be described by an exponential density of states or some mechanism
binding otherwise free colour charges, requires large computational power or very
simple models, as those studied in the present paper.

n = 4 super-yang-mills at zero coupling on a three-sphere is simple enough
for explicit calculations, but is also smoothly related to the interacting theory. the
dimensionless coupling is an actual parameter of the theory because of conformal
invariance. although we perform an explicit calculation for this theory most of
the calculations of this paper are phrased in terms of a much more general class
of toy models, including free gauge theories with adjoint matter on spheres. for
asymptotically free theories our calculation should be directly relevant in the limit of
small radius (implying small coupling). note that zero gauge coupling is understood
in this paper as meaning free dynamics, but with a global colour neutrality constraint
on the states. the rationale for this constraint is that it is present for any nonzero
coupling due to gauss law on a compact manifold. thus it ought to be kept in
taking a smooth free limit.

the n = 4 theory is particularly interesting because the ads/cft correspon-
dence [9, 10, 11, 12] can be used to discuss gravitational and string theory inter-
pretations of all sym results, cf. sect. (7). for strong coupling gauge theory this
correspondence has been used by witten [11, 13] to extract information about gauge

1

theory deconnement from a gravitational phase transition found by hawking and
page [14]. high and low temperature limits at weak coupling, but not intermediate
temperatures, are also discussed in [13]. corrections to the strong coupling results
on the sphere have been studied in [15, 16, 17]. on the basis of these corrections
it has been claimed that the hawking-page phase transition disappears at small
coupling [15, 17], whereas the result of the present paper is that there is a similar
phase transition also at zero coupling. a possible source of the discrepancy is that
these authors consider string corrections to the action and the metric, but not the
eects of string spectra on the thermodynamics, which by the maldacena conjecture
ought to be automatically represented by the gauge theory calculation. in contrast,
the high temperature expansion considered in [18] seems to be consistent with the
similarity between strong and weak coupling results which we nd. the implications
of the ads/cft correspondence for the relation between the hagedorn transition
and deconnement has been investigated in a dierent way in [19].

we always study the large n limit of gauge theories with constituent states in
the adjoint representation of the gauge group. the other essential ingredients are
connement, and a discrete energy spectrum with a positive energy ground state for
the constituents. there are no interactions among the colour charges in the model
except for a singlet constraint from connement. this makes the model exactly
calculable. hopefully the results are stable to the introduction of small interaction
terms. the models we are considering are slight generalizations of singlet ideal
gases in at space studied by skagerstam [20], and two-dimensional lattice gauge
theories with a wilson action in the adjoint representation. the crucial dierence
that makes us able to directly identify the hagedorn behaviour is that we include
the uctuations around the leading large n result below the phase transition.

an important feature in our model is that deconnement never has to take place
on the level of states, i.e. no non-singlets have to be taken into account above the
in string language there is no string breaking above the hagedorn
transition.
transition.
instead, it seems that a nite n leads to a density of states that is
only approximately exponential, so that a suciently high temperature discloses a
number of constituent degrees of freedom which is not innite but proportional to
n 2  1. there appears to be a string exclusion principle [21] at work. perhaps this
is a more general property of deconnement. in any case, our models are explicit
examples demonstrating how thermodynamics of colour neutral states may display
deconned properties.

the paper is organized as follows. in section (2) the problem of counting singlet
states is formulated and the solution is found for general spectra of constituents.
in section (3) it is demonstrated that hagedorn behaviour results from these state
spaces2, and the grand canonical partition function close to the hagedorn temper-
ature is estimated. partition sums for our prime example, n = 4 sym on s3, are

2after completing this work i realized that similar but simpler toy models giving hagedorn
behaviour are discussed by gao and li [15]. however, in their simplied models it is impossible to
nd the relation to a rst order large n transition.

2

calculated in section (4). the details of the n = 4 results are not used elsewhere in
the paper, but since we have not found them in the literature, we write them down
explicitly. the next section (5) deals with the problem of directly projecting the
full grand canonical partition function to the physical singlet states in the large n
limit. the technique we use is known before (see for example [20]), and an approxi-
mate leading order result can almost be taken literally from this reference. by also
pointing out the role of large n uctuations we can however establish our main new
result: in the systems under study, the deconnement transition is accompanied by
hagedorn behaviour with the same critical temperature. then in section (6) there
is a short discussion of the role of unbroken symmetry under the center of the gauge
group zn . in section (7) connections are made with gravitational physics and we
argue that the similarity with between the present weak coupling results and wit-
tens results at strong coupling [11, 13] indicates that one could also discuss black
holes in the ads dual of the weak coupling theory. it is also argued that ads black
hole thermodynamics is related to hagedorn thermodynamics. finally in section (8)
we state our conclusions.

2 counting single trace operators

let us assume that we have constituent degrees of freedom with discrete energy
spectra. temporarily disregarding the colour degrees of freedom and the singlet
condition we can write down partition sums b and f for constituent bosons and
fermions, in terms of the energies eb,n and ef,n for all their states,

b(x) = xn=1
f (x) = xn=1

xeb,n,

xef,n,

(x) = b(x) + f (x)

where we have dened

x  e  e1/t .

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

if we then assume that these elds are in the adjoint representation of su(n), they
can be represented by traceless hermitean matrices, and all gauge invariant states
can be written as products of traces of hermitean matrices, each labelled by one of
the discrete constituent states. the single-trace states

|i1, i2, . . . , ini = tr(i1i2 . . . in) |i1i |i2i . . . |ini

(5)

play the role of bound states, with the singlet condition being the only interaction we
consider. they are bosons or fermions depending on whether they contain an even
or odd number of constituent fermions. because of the trace, cyclical permutations
of the constituent-state labels give rise to the same bound state. the cyclicity may

3

be taken into account by thinking of bound states as necklaces of constituent
beads. for nite groups there are in general many relations between the traces.
in case of a single matrix, tr(a  1)(a  2) . . . (a  n1) = 0 gives such a
relation since sums of powers of the eigenvalues i are traces of powers of a. in the
large n limit of su(n) only two basic kinds of relations survive: tra = 0 for any
constituent state a due to tracelessness, and tr2 = 0 from the pauli principle for
fermionic constituents . the reason that the pauli principle is eective for squared
constituents but not in other products involving fermions is that only the trace of
the square forces a multiplication of identical fermion lie algebra components. in
other cases the fermions can be in dierent lie algebra directions.

the bound state partition sum z(x) may now be obtained by counting necklaces
of constituent states, weighting each energy level with the corresponding boltzmann
weight x, and nally subtracting the constituent partition sum and the sum for two
identical fermion constituents. fortunately, the necklace problem is a special case
of a class of combinatorial problems solved by polyas theorem [22]. the number of
bound states with n constituents can be found from the partition sum

(k)(b(xk) + f (xk))n/k, n > 2,

(6)

1

n xk|n

over divisors of n, where  is called the euler totient function. (n) is the number
of positive integers less than n which are relatively prime to n, with (1) = 1 by
denition. summing over numbers of constituents we obtain

z(x) = (b(x) + f (x))  1

2f (x2) +

= b(x)  f (x)  1

2f (x2) 

(7)

(8)





pn=1
pk=1

1

(k)(b(xk) + f (xk))n/k

n pk|n
logh1  b(xk)  f (xk)i ,

k

(k)

where the order of summation has been changed and the sum over products of k has
been performed in the last line. the rst three negative terms are there to cancel
unphysical traces of single operators and two identical fermions.

3 the hagedorn transition

one may see quite easily that the number of states grows exponentially with energy
if there are at least two constituent states. for n the number of factors inside a
trace, the cyclicity relation becomes less and less important for large n and can at
most give a factor 1/n. neglecting this factor the number of states involving only
the two lowest energy constituents grows at least as 2n, and the energy is at most
ne2, where e2 is the second lowest energy. therefore the density of states grows at
least as 2e/e2.

more precisely, the partition sums (8) have lowest temperature singularities at

1 = (xh)  b(xh ) + f (xh ).

(9)

4

close to this point we may approximate

z(x)   log[1  (x)]   log[(xh  x) (xh)],

and from

z(x) =

d(n)xn



xn=1

(10)

(11)

and residue calculus we obtain the contribution to the asymptotic level degeneracy

d(n) =

i

dx
xn+1 log[1  (x)] 

2 i
2i i

xn
h

 

dy
yn+1 log[1  y]

i

2 i

dx
xn+1 log[(xh  x) (xh)]

(12)

(13)

in case the spectrum is integrally spaced. the asymptotic density of states should
have the same hagedorn behaviour at x = xh irrespective of this simplifying as-
sumption.

because there are so many dierent states that are easily excited close to the
hagedorn temperature, the eects of identical particles in bose or fermi statistics
vanishes for the singular behaviour at this temperature. using boltzmann statistics
we then nd the the grand canonical partition function

z(x) 

1
n!



xn=1

z(x)n = ez(x) 

1

(xh  x) (xh )

(14)

close to th.

4 the n = 4 super yang-mills partition sum on

s3

the results above are quite general, and the arguments in section (5) establishing
a connection between hagedorn behaviour and deconnement in small volumes do
not depend on the details of the partition sums. nevertheless, because of the special
importance of n = 4 sym we include in this section an explicit calculation of its
free partion sums on a sphere, which we have not found elsewhere in the literature.
readers who are not interested in these details may skip this section.

due to conformal invariance it is simple to nd the spectrum of n = 4 sym on a
three-sphere at zero coupling. there are ambiguities in how a eld theory should be
coupled to a background curvature, although the leading long distance behaviour is
xed by the equivalence principle. for sym, the ambiguity may be xed by asking
that scalars are conformally coupled.

then one may take over results from at spacetime to s3  r by a conformal
mapping [13]. the generator of scale transformations in the at euclidean theory is

5

mapped to the hamiltonian on the sphere. because these operators are also related
by an isomorphism of the conformal group they have identical spectra. we can
conclude that energies of states on the sphere (of unit radius) are given by scaling
dimensions of operators in at spacetime. (in two dimensions this is the mapping
between the plane and the cylinder.)

on the sphere, all states have to be gauge singlets because of the gauss law
constraint and the lack of a boundary. we can then use the general procedure above
to nd the bound state partition sum and the grand canonical partition function
close to the hagedorn temperature. we only need the constituent bose and fermi
partition sums. the constituent elds, scalars, fermions and gluons, their respective
scaling dimensions and their partition sums are given in

f ield dimension




f

1
3
2
3
2
2

(1  x)4(x)

6x  6x3

8x3/2  8x5/2
8x3/2  8x5/2

6x2  8x3 + 6x4

(15)

where the factor (1  x)4 in (x) arises from counting possible derivative operators
(conformal descendants). terms corresponding to equations of motion and their
derivatives have been subtracted, since they give rise to trivial correlation functions3.
the gluon sum is somewhat more complicated and we write it down explicitly to
demonstrate the procedure:

6x

(1  x)4 

2x4

(1  x)4 

8x3

(1  x)3 .

(16)

the three terms signify derivates of the six components of the eld strength, a
subtraction of derivatives of f and  f vanishing by antisymmetry, and
nally a subtraction of derivatives of the equations of motions and the bianchi
identities (note from the denominator of the last term that it eectively includes
derivatives in only three directions, so as not to subtract again terms vanishing
automatically by antisymmetry). we are now ready to write down the partition
sums for free n = 4 sym at the limit n =  :



(k)
2k

logh1  2 sy m

b

(xk) +  sy m

b

(xk)2   sy m

f

(xk)2i



xk=1

3one may check, most simply for a conformal scalar on s 2, that this subtraction gives the

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

 sy m
b

(x) =

 sy m
f

(x) =

6x + 6x2  14x3 + 6x4

(1  x)4
16x3/2  16x5/2

(1  x)4

zsy m
b

(x) =  sy m

b

(x) 

1
2

 sy m
f

(x2)

correct counting of states.

6

zsy m
f

(x) =  sy m

f

(x) 

(k)
2k



xk=1

log"1   sy m

1   sy m

b

b

(xk)   sy m
(xk) +  sy m

f

f

(xk)

(xk)#.

(21)

the bose and fermi partition sums are obtained by keeping track of whether the
states contain an even or odd number of constituent fermions. note that the sum
of these terms reproduces eq. (8). the hagedorn temperature is then given by the
lowest temperature singularity, which can be found by solving eq. (9). we nd that
xh  0.072. furthermore, the grand canonical partition function approaches (14)
close to th.

all these calculations were performed at zero coupling, but one may hope that our
general toy models also capture some of the essential ingredients of the interacting
case, perhaps by renormalization of the constituent spectra.

5 the ideal gas with a singlet condition

the scale of th is set by 1/r, the inverse radius of the sphere, which is the only
fundamental energy scale in the problem. thus th  0 in the at space limit,
and we seem to get a divergent free energy at any temperature! the argument for
considering only gauge singlet states breaks down in a non-compact space, but on the
other hand a singlet condition ought to make little dierence in innite volume. and
we do not really want to consider non-singlet states in a non-abelian gauge theory.
at best they are going to be extremely sensitive to turning on the interactions.

instead, the problem is due to setting n = . the free energy at zero coupling
in at space is well known, and is proportional to n 2  1. to go above the hagedorn
temperature we have to take the large n limit in a way that allows us to extract di-
vergent factors of n 2. we should also compute quantities like the free energy, which
scale simply with n, rather than the bound state partition sum, which certainly
changes with n due to trace identities, but in a much less regular fashion.

we write down the grand canonical partition function with a singlet constraint

as

zsu (n )

dg exp  
xn=1

b(xn)

n

(gn) 

(1)n f (xn)

n

(gn)!



xn=1

(22)

where g are elements of su(n) and (g) is the character of the adjoint representa-
tion. this equation can be derived in a general way by a coherent state technique,
as in [20]. alternatively, one may check that the expression represents the proper
combinatorics, by noting that singlets can be identied by acting with su(n) trans-
formations on the constituent states. it is enough to keep track of the eigenvalues
ri(g) of the representation matrices r(g). the rotated partition sum for bosons

(1 + xekri(g) + x2ek ri(g)2 + . . .)

qk qi=1

= qk

det(1  xek r(g))1 = exp(cid:18)pk

tr(cid:18) 
pn=1

xne

k

n r(gn)(cid:19)(cid:19)

(23)

(24)

7

can be projected to singlet states by integration over the group, using the orthog-
onality properties of group characters (g). taking also the fermion contribution
into account yields eq. (22).

in terms of the eigenvalues exp(ii) of g the adjoint character

(g) = 1 +  n
xm=1

eim!  n
xn=1

ein! = n  1 + 2 xm<n

cos(m  n).

(25)

the fact that the integrand only depends on the eigenvalues simplies the group
integral to an integral over these eigenvalues

1

n ! r
 exp  
pn=1

n

di

2 (cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
2 sin(cid:16) ij

2 qi6=j(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
qi=1
n (b(xn)  (1)nf (xn)) 1 +pi,j

1

  n
pk=1

(cid:18)2k +pi

i(cid:19)!

cos (n(i  j))!! .

(26)

(27)

the terms with k 6= 0 in the sum of  functions encode that we are dealing with
su(n) rather than su(n)/zn . by standard large n techniques the discrete set of
eigenvalues may be replaced by an eigenvalue density  such that

() =

1
n

dn
dn

,

1 = z ()d.

(28)

(29)

since dierent orderings of the eigenvalues are related by weyl reections it is enough
to consider a single ordering, which may be chosen increasing, thus making  positive.
in the large n limit the  function in (27) becomes irrelevant unless we are dealing
with sharply peaked eigenvalue distributions which occur for very high temperatures.
for the time being we can neglect this factor. then we nd a partition function

z(x)  z d es[],

(30)

where

s[] = n 2rdrd ()kx(, )() +
kx(, )  log(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2 (cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
2 sin(cid:16) 

pn=1

+



1



pn=1

1

n (b(xn)  (1)nf (xn)),

(31)

n (b(xn)  (1)nf (xn)) cos (n(  )) (32)

can be regarded as an eective action for the eigenvalue density. the stationarity
condition in a steepest decent estimate for z then gives the integral equation

0 = p.v.z d( 1

2 cot   

2 ! 



xn=1

(b(xn)  (1)nf(xn)) sin (n(  ))) ()

(33)

8

for . (one does not get the integral of this equation since  satises an additional
integral constraint.) since the equation is translationally invariant in -space  
1/2 is always a solution, but there may be others with lower free energy, which
thus would appear to break the translational symmetry spontaneously. as we shall
see below, this is almost what happens for high enough temperature, but not quite.
to identify the transition point where non-trivial solutions appear, and to prepare
for our identication of hagedorn behaviour, it is useful to view the eective action
as a quadratic expression in . we can regard

kx : ()  kx()  z d kx(, )()

(34)

as a symmetric operator. then, modulo the additional conditions on , the search
for the minimum of the free energy becomes the search for the lowest eigenvalue of
kx. there will be a transition point at a value of the temperature where the lowest
kx-eigenvalue becomes degenerate. such a point is easy to nd by fourier expanding
the kx-eigenvalue equation. the kx-eigenfunctions are found to be trigonometric
functions:

kxein =


n
kx1 = 0

(1  b(xn) + (1)nf (xn)) ein, n 6= 0

(35)

(36)

we nd a transition point at an x = xd = xh satisfying equation (9) determining
the hagedorn temperature.

the kx-eigenfunctions which become degenerate with the constant solution in-
dicate the nature of the transition. we have to require   0, as  is an eigenvalue
density, which should also integrate to 1. therefore, the new kx-eigenfunctions are
not acceptable as such. instead, the linear combinations

() =

1
2

(1 + a1 cos() + a2 sin()) ,

a2
1 + a2

2  1

(37)

are the minimizing solutions at the transition point. at the boundary of the solution
set we nd the solutions () = sin2( + )/, which are closest to the new kx-
eigenfunctions. apparently, at the transition it becomes energetically possible for
the density to have a zero. on the other side of the transition the density can still
not become negative, but the eigenvalue distribution can have gaps, where the
density vanishes. to solve this case, which involves new boundary conditions, a
more direct approach to the integral equation (eq. 33) is needed.

this kind of boundary problem is commonplace in large n calculations [23, 24].
a somewhat unusual feature of equation (33) is that the two-eigenvalue interaction is
non-trivial, whereas a non-trivial single-eigenvalue potential is more familiar. fortu-
nately, there is still a mathematical theory for this kind of problem [25]. essentially,
the mathematical method consists in multiplying the integral equation (33) with an
operator that is inverse to the rst, singular term, in order to get a regular equation

9

of fredholm type. this equation either lacks solutions or has a nite-dimensional
solution space, which may be searched for solutions to the original equation.

the higher, n > 1, fourier components of the non-singular term in the integral
equation (33) are exponentially small relative to the n = 1 term at nite tempera-
tures, and go as inverse powers of n for asymptotically high temperatures, at least
when the constituent density of states is asymptotically constant or increasing4. it
is then reasonable to neglect the higher terms and study the approximate equations
obtained by replacing the kernel kx(, ) with

k 1

x(, )  log(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2 !(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
2 sin   

+ (b(x) + f (x)) cos (  ) .

(38)

precisely this mathematical problem is solved in [20]. we nd the same solution,
instead, the free energy

(19) of that reference.

but also note a misprint in eq.
f =  log z above the transition reads

f>  

n 2

2 (cid:18)(x)  1 +q(x)2  (x)  log(cid:18)(x) +q(x)2  (x)(cid:19)(cid:19) + (x) (39)

we also give the solutions for the eigenvalue densities

cos(

() = 0(  )
1
)
2
1
 sin2(
2

0() = 

2 c) = 1 s1 

sin2( 1

c)qsin2( 1

2c)  sin2( 1

2),

0,

|| > c

1

(x)

|| < c

(40)

(41)

(42)

at the transition, these solutions to an approximate problem agrees with the extreme
cases of the exact solutions (37) to the exact problem. we do however only expect
qualitative and approximate agreement above the transition.
if we calculate the
eective action (32) below the transition we can also estimate the free energy

f< = (x)

(43)

which together with eqs. (39) signies a rst order large n transition at the hage-
dorn temperature.

the n 2 dependence of the high temperature phase agrees with expectations
of deconnement, and the deconnement transition takes place at the hagedorn
temperature, but eqs. (39,43) still do not represent a satisfactory state of aairs.
the large n approximation of eq. (27) does not give hagedorn behaviour.

the resolution to this puzzle is our main message. the hagedorn and the decon-
nement transitions can be identied, but one has to go to next order in the large

4this is the case for free eld theory in one or more spatial dimensions.

10

n expansion to see the hagedorn behaviour. this scenario was sketched for string
theory in [4], but here we can see concretely the natural appearance of hagedorn
behaviour in large n eld theory. (the possibility of such behaviour was discussed
already by thorn in [2].) actually, although eq. (43) results from the leading es-
timate of eq. (27) they are of subleading order in 1/n and do not give the full
n 0 contribution to thermodynamics. fluctuations in the eigenvalue density give
contributions of the same order and should also be taken into account. below th
this is remarkably easy (and above we do not have to do the calculation, if the goal
is just to nd hagedorn thermodynamics).

the integral over eigenvalue-density uctuations can only diverge at th because
of the contribution from the integral over uctuations in the eigen-directions cor-
responding to the eigenvalues that become degenerate with the low temperature
solution at th. the integral over these uctuations given in eq. (37) yields the
correction factor



1

(1  (x)) (cid:16)1  en 2(1(x))(cid:17) ,

(x) < 1

(44)

to the partion function, which diverges at the hagedorn transition if the large n limit
is taken before the approach to th. otherwise, the approach to the deconned
phase is fast but smooth. this is just how the integrals tell us that an innite
number of degrees of freedom are needed for a true phase transition, at nite volume
an innite n is needed. with this reservation complete agreement is found with eq.
(14), which of course was derived assuming an innite n.

6 zn symmetry

we have only associated the two phases of our model with conned and deconned
phases on the basis of the n dependence of the free energy. this is reasonable, but
it should be compared to other criteria. a polyakov loop, i.e. a wilson loop around
the compact imaginary time direction, is an order parameter for deconnement. zn
symmetry (the centre of the su(n) symmetry) acts by multiplication by a root of
unity on the polyakov loop. thus the loop has a vanishing expectation value in the
conned phase, which enjoys unbroken zn symmetry. in the deconned phase it gets
a non-zero vacuum expectation value, due to spontaneous breaking of zn symmetry.
using the ads/cft correspondence the polyakov loop has been studied at strong
coupling in [13, 26]. our simple formalism is not well suited to a calculation of the
loop, but there are alternatives.

in our uctuation calculation unbroken zn symmetry is essential to get agree-
ment with the hagedorn calculation in the conned phase. the symmetry appears
in the integration over -translations, which results in a two-dimensional integral
over uctuations, giving the correct degree of divergence. on the high temperature
side we have no similar check on the calculation. the best we can do is to judge

11

from the partition sum itself how zn symmetry is represented. the eigenvalue den-
sities (42) clearly break -translation symmetry, so the issue is if the partition sum
should be thought of as a sum over all possible translated minima of the eective
action and uctuations around them, or if a single minimum is selected. the sim-
ple answer is that there is no spontaneous breaking of symmetry in nite volume,
even if n is large. a more satisfactory answer is that the high temperature limit,
which in the conformal n = 4 sym theory is the same as the innite volume limit,
eventually leads to the support [2n/n + c, 2n/n  c] of the equilibrium solu-
tions for the eigenvalue densities (42) narrowing so much that there is no overlap
between densities related by zn transformations (dierent n from the  function in
(27)). even if the nite volume sum always is zn symmetric, this behaviour allows
for a decoupling of uctuations around dierent zn -related minima, which has to
happen when zn is broken spontaneously. since the high temperature phase is thus
smoothly connected to a phase with spontaneously broken zn , it makes sense to
describe it as deconned.

7 ads/cft motivated speculations

there is as yet no good test of the ads/cft correspondence [9, 10, 11, 12] at weak
coupling, so we cannot make strong predictions about gravitational eects. we can
however try to use the ads/cft dictionary, rst to compare with strong coupling
results obtained via the correspondence, and second to nd out what it tells us
about a dual gravitational theory, assuming that the correspondence holds also at
small t hooft coupling g2n, which means small string tension relative to the ads
curvature.

at strong coupling witten [11, 13] has used the ads/cft correspondence to
discuss a large n phase transition at nite temperature. at leading order in large
n he nds a high temperature phase with free energy proportional to n 2 and a low
temperature phase where the (temperature dependent part of) the n 2 term in the
free energy vanishes. this precisely the behaviour we observe at weak coupling. it
seems that thermodynamics on s3 can have a smooth dependence on the coupling.
in the at case there is a debate [27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32] about whether there is a
phase transition in the coupling or not, and although most explicit calculations at
extreme temperatures indicate a smooth behavior, the issue does not seem to be
settled.

wittens result is obtained by associating the gauge theory behaviour with a
gravitational phase transition between an ads heat bath and an ads black hole,
found by hawking and page [14].
it is of course tempting to identify the yang-
mills thermodynamics we have found with a similar black hole transition on the
gravitational side, but now in a theory of tensionless strings (zero t hooft coupling).
interpreted in gravitational language the n 2 dependence of the free energy translates
to the ordinary 1/gn dependence of a black hole free energy. the entropy would

12

give an eective measure of the horizon area of this exotic black hole.

the n 0 corrections correspond to hagedorn behaviour of tensionless strings5,
and beyond the hagedorn transition we have a black hole equilibrium state. such
a phase diagram have been proposed for non-zero string tension [33], by arguments
based on a black hole/string correspondence principle [34]. our explicit calculation
is done at vanishing gauge coupling, but since n 0 corrections in the low temperature
phase ought to be present independently of the coupling, this mechanism could give
a general conrmation of the relation between hagedorn spectra and black holes. it
might seem strange that a string hagedorn transition could occur at a scale governed
by the ads curvature rather than the string tension, but most of the important part
of the hagedorn spectrum consists of large strings, which should be more sensitive
to curvature than to the tension. a complete picture might have to await the
quantization of strings in ads5  s5 with background ramond-ramond elds.

8 conclusions

we have noted a general mechanism in large n theories, which can be important
whenever the n 2 contribution to the free energy vanishes on one side of a phase
transition. on this side, uctuation can give an n 0 contribution which diverges
at the transition. we have done this calculation explicitly for free n = 4 super
yang-mills theory on a three-sphere, and for quite a general class of toy models.
the large n phase transition we nd is a kind of deconnement transition, in which
hagedorn behaviour in the conned phase is identied as a low-temperature pre-
cursor of deconnement. this new mechanism appears to be suciently general to
potentially apply to more physical theories.

for asymptotically free gauge theories on s3 we expect a similar behaviour in the
limit of small radius since the coupling should vanish in this limit. wittens results
on the strong t hooft coupling limit of the n = 4 theory suggests that vanishing
coupling may not be necessary for this kind of phase transition. still, the large
volume limit of the thermodynamics of asymptotically free gauge theories should
be qualitatively dierent since it will depend on a scale  which is not present for
n = 4. it is obviously of great interest investigate this case6.

assuming the ads/cft correspondence is valid also for small or vanishing t
hooft coupling, the transition has the likes of a hawking-page transition to ads
black holes, although in a string theory with vanishing tension. the n 0 correction
we have calculated should then correspond to a hagedorn contribution from an ideal
gas of these strings.

5their spectra are governed the curvature scale rather than the string scale.
6supergravity solutions that could correspond to nite temperature non-conformally invariant

eld theories have recently been studied in [35].

13

this work was stimulated by conversations with u. danielsson and h. hansson,
who are gratefully acknowledged. i also wish to thank j. grundberg, u. lindstrom
and b. nilsson for useful remarks. this work was nanced by the swedish science
research council.

references

[1] r. hagedorn, suppl. nuovo cim. 3 (1965) 147.

[2] c.b. thorn, phys. lett. 99b (1981) 458.

[3] r.d. pisarski, phys. rev. d29 (1984) 1222.

[4] j.j. atick and e. witten, nucl. phys. b310 (1988) 291.

[5] b. sundborg, nucl. phys. b254 (1985) 583.

[6] r.d. pisarski and o. alvarez, phys. rev. d26 (1982) 3735.

[7] p. olesen, phys. lett. 160b (1985) 408, nucl. phys. b267 (1986) 539.

[8] p. salomonson and b. skagerstam, nucl. phys. b268 (1986) 349.

[9] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231 hep-th/9711200.

[10] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.m. polyakov, phys. lett. b428 (1998) 105

hep-th/9802109.

[11] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 253 hep-th/9802150.

[12] o. aharony, s.s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri and y. oz, hep-th/9905111.

[13] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 505 hep-th/9803131.

[14] s.w. hawking and d.n. page, commun. math. phys. 87 (1983) 577.

[15] y. gao and m. li, nucl. phys. b551 (1999) 229 hep-th/9810053.

[16] k. landsteiner, mod. phys. lett. a14 (1999) 379 hep-th/9901143.

[17] m.m. caldarelli and d. klemm, hep-th/9903078.

[18] c.p. burgess, n.r. constable and r.c. myers, hep-th/9907188.

[19] s.k. rama and b. sathiapalan, mod. phys. lett. a13 (1998) 3137 hep-

th/9810069.

[20] b.s. skagerstam, z. phys. c24 (1984) 97.

14

[21] j. maldacena and a. strominger, jhep 12 (1998) 005 hep-th/9804085.

[22] g. polya and r.c. read, combinatorial enumeration of groups, graphs, and

chemical compounds (springer-verlag, new york, 1987).

[23] e. brezin, c. itzykson, g. parisi and j.b. zuber, commun. math. phys. 59

(1978) 35.

[24] d.j. gross and e. witten, phys. rev. d21 (1980) 446.

[25] n.i. muskhelishvili, singular integral equations (p. noordhof,n.v., groningen,

1953).

[26] o. aharony and e. witten, jhep 11 (1998) 018 hep-th/9807205.

[27] m. li, jhep 03 (1999) 004 hep-th/9807196.

[28] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.a. tseytlin, nucl. phys. b534 (1998) 202

hep-th/9805156.

[29] a. fotopoulos and t.r. taylor, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 061701 hep-th/9811224.

[30] m.a. vazquez-mozo, hep-th/9905030.

[31] c. kim and s. rey, hep-th/9905205.

[32] a. nieto and m.h. tytgat, hep-th/9906147.

[33] s.a. abel, j.l. barbon, i.i. kogan and e. rabinovici, jhep 04 (1999) 015

hep-th/9902058.

[34] g.t. horowitz and j. polchinski, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 6189 hep-th/9612146.

[35] s. nojiri and s.d. odintsov, hep-th/9906216.

15

