fractional statistics and chern-simons field

theory in 2+1 dimensions

avinash khare

institute of physics, sachivalaya marg,

bhubaneswar 751005, india.

email: khare@iopb.res.in

abstract
the question of anyons and fractional statistics in eld theories in 2+1
dimensions with chern-simons (cs) term is discussed in some detail. argu-
ments are spelled out as to why fractional statistics is only possible in two
space dimensions. this phenomenon is most naturally discussed within the
framework of eld theories with cs term, hence as a prelude to this discus-
sion i rst discuss the various properties of the cs term. in particular its
role as a gauge eld mass term is emphasized.
in the presence of the cs
term, anyons can appear in two dierent ways i.e. either as soliton of the
corresponding eld theory or as a fundamental quanta carrying fractional
statistics and both approaches are elaborated in some detail.

9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
4

 

 
 

1
v
7
2
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

* to be published in insa (indian national science academy) book 2000

1

1 introduction

many of us have wondered some time or the other if one can have nontrivial
science and technology in two space dimensions; but the usual feeling is that
two space dimensions do not oer enough scope for it. this question, to the
best of my knowledge, was rst addressed in 1884 by e.a. abbot in his satir-
ical novel flatland [1]. the rst serious book on this topic appeared in 1907
entitled an episode of flatland [2]. in this book c.h. hinton oered glimpses
of the possible science and technology in the atland. a nice summary of
these two books appeared as a chapter entitled flatland in a book in 1969
edited by martin gardner [3]. inspired by this summary, in 1979 a.k. dewd-
ney [4] published a book which contains several laws of physics, chemistry,
astronomy and biology in the atland. however, all these people missed one
important case where physical laws are much more complex, nontrivial and
hence interesting in the atland than in our three dimensional world. i am
referring here to the case of quantum statistics. in last two decades it has
been realized that whereas in three and higher space dimensions all parti-
cles must either be bosons or fermions (i.e. they must have spin of nh or
(2n + 1)h/2 with n=0,1,2,... and must obey bose-einstein or fermi-dirac
statistics respectively), in two space dimensions the particles can have any
fractional spin and can satisfy any fractional statistics which is interpolating
between the two. the particles obeying such statistics are generically called
as anyons [5]. in other words, if one takes one anyon slowly around the other
then in general the phase acquired is exp(i). if  =0 or  (modulo 2)
then the particles are bosons or fermions respectively while if 0 <  <  then
the particles are termed as anyons.

from our experience with fermions and bosons it is well known that the
question of spin and statistics can be properly handled only within the for-
malism of relativistic quantum eld theory. thus it is of interest to enquire
if one can also understand the ideas of anyons and fractional statistics within
the formalism of relativistic quantum eld theory. this is the issue that we
would like to discuss in this article.

before i go into the details, one might wonder if our discussion is merely
of academic interest? the answer to the question is no.
in fact it is a
surprising fact that two, one and even zero dimensional experimental physics
is possible in our three-dimensional world. this is because of the third law
of thermodynamics, which states that all the degrees of freedom freeze out

2

in the limit of zero temperature, it is possible to strictly conne the electrons
to surfaces, or even to lines or points. thus it may happen that in a strongly
conning potential, or at suciently low temperatures, the excitation energy
in one or more directions may be much higher than the average thermal
energy of the particles, so that those dimensions are eectively frozen out. of
course, even then, at the basic level, the fundamental particles are certainly
fermions or bosons. however, the most direct and appropriate discussion of
the low energy behavior of a material is usually in terms of the quasi-particles.
the hope is that at least in some of these cases the quasi-particles could be
anyons. this hope has in fact been realized in the case of the fractionally
quantized hall eect where the quasi-particles are believed to be charged
vortices i.e. charged anyons [6]. recent experiments [7] seem to conrm the
existence of fractionally charged excitations and hence indirectly of anyons.
the plan of the article is the following. in sec.ii, i rst spell out as to
why fractional statistics is only possible in two space dimensions. it turns
out that the phenomenon of fractional statistics is most naturally discussed
within the framework of eld theories with cs term. as a prelude to this
discussion, in sec.iii, i discuss the various properties of the cs term.
in
particular its role as a gauge eld mass term and its behavior under the
discrete transformations of parity (p) and time-reversal (t) is emphasized.
in the presence of the cs term, anyons can appear in two dierent ways (i.e.
either as soliton of the corresponding eld theory or as fundamental quanta
carrying fractional statistics) and both approaches are elaborated in some
detail in the next three sections. the charged vortex solutions in abelian
higgs model with cs term are obtained in sec.iv, and it is pointed out that
these charged vortices represent the rst relativistic model for (extended)
charged anyons.
i also construct the charged vortex solutions in pure cs
theory in both the relativistic and the non-relativistic settings. in sec.v, i
discuss an example of neutral relativistic anyons by considering the soliton
solutions in the cp 1 model with the hopf term which is one of the avtars of
the cs term. finally, in sec.vi, i elaborate upon the other approach in which
fundamental elds of theories with cs term themselves carry fractional spin
and obey fractional statistics.

3

2 why anyons in only two dimensions?

before we come to the question of fractional statistics, it might be worthwhile
to understand as to why unlike in three and higher space dimensions, the
eigenvalue of the spin angular momentum operator can take any fractional
value in units of h. the point is that the spin in two dimensions diers
fundamentally from the spin in higher dimensions. this is because whereas
in three and higher space dimensions, the spin angular momentum algebra
is non-commutative i.e.

[si, sj] = ihijksk ;

i, j, k = 1, 2, 3

(1)

in two space dimensions, it is a trivial commutative algebra since only one
generator (say s3) is available which obviously commutes with itself. as a
result, there is no analogue of the quantization of the angular momentum,
which arises in three and higher space dimensions from the nonlinear com-
mutation relation (1). here ijk is the completely antisymmetric tensor.

now, in relativistic quantum eld theory, there is a deep and profound
connection between the spin and the statistics i.e. particles with half integer
spin are fermions, satisfying fermi-dirac statistics, while those with integer
spin are bosons, satisfying bose-einstein statistics. this immediately sug-
gests that in two dimensions the particles may exhibit fractional (i.e. any)
statistics. in a remarkable paper leinaas and myrheim [8] showed that this
is indeed so. before we come to a proper discussion about the statistics, it is
worth clarifying as to what exactly one means by quantum statistics. in most
text books on statistical mechanics, the term quantum statistics refers to
the phase picked up by a wave function when two identical particles are in-
terchanged, i.e, under the permutation of the particles. but this is slightly
misleading and has been correctly criticized in the literature [9]. if the par-
ticles are strictly identical, the word permutation has no physical meaning
since a given conguration and the one obtained by the permutation of the
particle coordinates are merely two dierent ways of describing the same
particle conguration. the term quantum statistics actually refers to the
phase that arises when two particles are adiabatically transported giving rise
to the exchange. in this book, we shall be concentrating on this denition of
quantum statistics. it is a coincidence that in three and higher dimensions,
the two denitions, based on the permutation and the adiabatic exchange of

4

two particles, coincide, but in two dimensions the two denitions give very
dierent answers.

the key reason for the fractional statistics in two dimensions is the prin-
ciple of indistinguishability of identical particles. it is one of the most im-
portant characteristics of quantum mechanics (vis a vis classical mechanics)
and it has profound physical consequences. the principle is in fact older
than quantum mechanics.
it was introduced by john willard gibbs even
in classical statistical mechanics to resolve the famous gibbs paradox. even
though this principle has been with us for a very long time, unfortunately,
its full signicance was not appreciated till 1977 and that is how one missed
the possibility of fractional statistics in two dimensions for all these years.

following leinaas and myrheim [8], let us enquire about the conguration
space of a system of identical particles ? normally one considers the full
phase space in statistical mechanics but it turns out that conguration space
is enough for this discussion. suppose one particle space is x. then what is
the conguration space of n identical particles ? the naive answer is x n ,
which, even though true locally, is not correct globally. why? the reason is,
since the particles are strictly identical, hence there is no distinction between
the points in x n that dier only in the ordering of the particle coordinates.
for example, consider the point

x = (x1, x2, ..., xn )

(2)

in x n where xi  x for i = 1, 2, ..., n. now consider another point x in x n
which is obtained from x by the permutation p of the particle indices i.e.

x = p (x) = (xp 1(1), ..., xp 1(n )) .

(3)

clearly, both describe the same physical conguration of the system. thus
the true conguration of the n-particle system is not x n but it is the space
x n /sn which is obtained by identifying points in x n that represent the
it is obtained from x n by dividing out
same physical conguration, i.e.
by the action of the symmetry group sn . note that sn is a discrete, nite
group obtained by permutation of n identical particles. as a result, the space
x n /sn is locally isomorphic to x n except at its singular points. however,
the global properties of the two spaces are very dierent. whereas x n
has only regular points when x is regular, those points in x n /sn which
correspond to a coincidence of the positions of two or more particles are in

5

fact singular points of x n /sn . thus to calculate the conguration space of
identical particles, such singular points must be excluded by say hard-core
constraint so that we can determine if two particles have been exchanged
or not. this of course does not make much dierence classically. however,
in the quantum case the global properties of the conguration space are of
deep signicance and this results in the possibility of fractional statistics. it
is worth emphasizing that this is the crux of the whole matter and it is this
fact which was missed for about fty years!

it turns out that the removal of such singular point in two space dimen-
sions makes the space multiply connected while for three and higher space
dimensions it is still doubly connected. that is why, in two dimensions it
is possible to dene paths that wind around the origin an arbitrary number
of times counted with orientation. as a consequence, when one quantizes
a system of identical particles then one can show that in two dimensions it
is possible to consistently assign any value to the phase arising due to the
exchange of two identical particles. since in two dimensions one can distin-
guish the clockwise winding from the anti-clockwise winding, hence without
any loss of generality one can assign the phases e+i and ei respectively, in
the case of the anti-clockwise and the clockwise windings.

at this point, it may be worthwhile to mention few key properties of

anyons.

1. anyons must necessarily violate the discrete symmetries of parity (p)
and time reversal (t) if 0 <  <  since the clockwise and the anti-
clockwise windings have dierent phase factors.

2. anyons are sort of in between the bosons and the fermions i.e. the
repulsion between two anyons in the ground state monotonically in-
creases as  goes from 0 to  with there being no repulsion between
two bosons. thus, in a sense, anyons are closer to the fermions than
to the bosons since all of them will satisfy a generalized form of pauli
exclusion principle.

3. it turns out that whereas the permutation group which is at the heart
of the bose-einstein and the fermi-dirac statistics, it is the braid group
which is at the heart of the fractional statistics. in particular, whereas
there are two one dimensional representations of the permutation group

6

(the identical one and the alternating one, corresponding to the bose-
einstein and fermi-dirac statistics respectively), the braid group ad-
mits a continuous parameter family of one dimensional representations
which one usually identies with the parameter  which characterizes
fractional statistics.

4. is there a relation between the anyonic statistics and the parastatistics
? the answer is no. they are built on two dierent structures i.e.
whereas the parastatistics corresponds to the higher dimensional rep-
resentation of the permutation group while anyons correspond to the
one dimensional representation of the braid group.

quantum statistics in one dimension
since we have been talking about the possible quantum statistics in var-
ious dimensions, hence it may be worthwhile to also talk about the various
possibilities in one dimension. recall that the notion of the spin does not
exist in one dimension since there is no axis to rotate about in that case.
similarly the concept of the quantum statistics is not uniquely dened in one
dimension since the position of two particles cannot be interchanged without
their passing through one another. as a result, the intrinsic statistics is in-
extricably mixed up with the local interactions. in fact this ambiguity is at
the heart of the bosonization technique which allows the same particle to be
represented alternatively by a boson or a fermion eld. if, however, statistics
is dened in terms of the exclusion principle rather than the exchange of
identical particles, then it is possible to dene quantum statistics in even one
dimension [10].

3 introduction to chern-simons term

we now want to understand how anyons occur in eld theory. it turns out
that this is possible provided the cs term or its incarnation, the hopf term
are present. it may therefore be worthwhile to rst introduce the cs term
(in 2+1 dimensions) and discuss its various properties [11].

what is chern-simons term?
consider the lagrangian density for classical electrodynamics in 3+1 di-

7

mensions as given by

l = 

1
4

ff  + (id  m)

(4)

where f = a  a and d =   iea is the covariant derivative.
this lagrangian is invariant under the local gauge transformation

(x)  eie(x)(x) , a(x)  a(x) + (x) .

(5)

similarly, for massless fermions (m=0), this lagrangian is also invariant un-
der the (global) chiral transformation

(x)  ei5(x) , a(x)  a(x) .

(6)

the naive expectation was that, these two symmetries i.e. the gauge and
the chiral symmetries, which are valid at the classical level, will continue
to hold good even in the quantum theory. as a consequence, one expected
that the vector and the axial vector currents j =  and j5
 = 5
which are conserved at the classical level, will continue to remain conserved
even in the quantum theory.
it has however, been shown that this is not
so. there is no regularization which can simultaneously preserve both these
symmetries at the quantum level. because of the unexpected result, it was
called an anomaly at that time (and unfortunately even today it is called
so), even though the correct name should have been quantum mechanical
symmetry breaking. remarkably, the entire eect comes only from one loop
diagram and two and higher loops do not contribute to the anomaly.
in
view of our strong faith in the gauge symmetry, one therefore says that it is
the chiral symmetry which is broken by the one loop quantum corrections.
in particular, there is a gauge singlet (axial) anomaly in any even dimen-
sion, (2n) so that the divergence of the gauge singlet axial current, even for
massless fermions, is non-zero and proportional to the corresponding chern-
pontryagin (cp) density p2n in that (even) dimension 2n i.e.

j5

(x)  p2n .

(7)

it is also well known that the cp density can always be written as a total
divergence

p2n =  ,  = 0, 1, 2, ..., 2n  1 .

(8)

8

the object , for a particular value of  (say  = 2n-1) naturally lives in
odd (2n  1) dimensions and is known as the cs density in that dimension.
thus, whereas the cp density lives in even space-time dimensions, the cs
density lives in odd space-time dimensions. for example, the gauge singlet
anomaly in 3+1 dimensional quantum electrodynamics is given by

j5

 =

e2
2

f f  =

e2


(af )

so that the abelian cs term in 2+1 dimensions is given by

jcs = z lcs d3x  z d3x af  .

(9)

(10)

throughout this book we shall mainly be concerned with this cs term or
its non-abelian generalization. let us therefore discuss in some detail the
various properties of this term.

gauge invariant mass term
let us consider pure electrodynamics in the presence of the chern-simons

term in 2+1 dimensions [12, 13]

l = 

1
4

ff  +


4

fa .

(11)

since the mass dimension of a is 1/2, hence it follows that the parameter 
has the dimension of mass. the eld equation following from this lagrangian
can be written as

(g +

)f = 0

(12)

1


where f is the dual eld strength which is a vector in 2+1 dimensions i.e.

f =

1
2

f  ; f = 

f  .

(13)

we thus nd that, unlike the cp term which has only a nontrivial topol-
ogy but no dynamics (being a total divergence), the cs term has nontrivial
topology as well as dynamics in it. on operating by (g  1
) to eq.
(12), we get

(2 + 2)f = 0

(14)

which clearly shows that the gauge eld excitations are massive with the
gauge eld mass  being the coecient of the cs term. we have thus shown

9

that the cs term when added to the maxwell term, acts as the gauge invari-
ant gauge eld mass term. it is worth adding that this remarkable property
of having a gauge invariant mass term for the gauge eld in the action itself
is very special to 2+1 dimensions.

behavior under c, p, and t
let us consider the behaviour of the cs term as well as the dirac la-

grangian

ld = i(  m)

(15)

under the discrete transformations c (charge conjugation), p (parity) and t
(time reversal). here,  is a two component spinor with mass m(> 0) and the
mass dimension of  is 1. we use the following two-dimensional realization
of the dirac algebra

0 = 3 , 1 = i1 , 2 = i2 ,

 = g  i ; g = diag.(1,1,1)

where i are the usual pauli matrices.

it is easily shown that under charge conjugation

cac 1 = a , cc 1 = 1+

(16)

(17)

(18)

so that the action is invariant under c. on the other hand, under parity
transformation, the gauge and the fermi elds transform as follows

p a0,2(t, r)p 1 = a0,2(t, r) , p a1(t, r)p 1 = a1(t, r) ,

p (t, r)p 1 = 1(t, r) .

(19)

(20)

note that in 2+1 dimensions, the parity transformation is somewhat unusual
i.e. r = (x, y), r = (x, y) (or (x,y)). on the other hand, (x,y)
corresponds to rotation (and not space reection). as a result, we nd that
the mass terms for both the fermi and the gauge elds (i.e. m and the
cs term) are not invariant under parity. similarly, time-inversion changes
the signs of both the mass terms since

t a0(t, r)t 1 = a0(t, r) , t a(t, r)t 1 = a(t, r) ,

t (t, r)t 1 = 2(t, r) .

10

(21)

(22)

thus, both the cs term as well as the fermion mass term, m are non-
invariant under p as well as t . however, they are invariant under the com-
bined operation p t and hence the cp t symmetry is still valid. note that
in 3 + 1 dimensions though, m is invariant under p, c and t separately.
finally, let us talk about the photon spin. one can show that the cs
photon spin is 1(1) if cs mass  > 0(< 0) while the spin of the massless
photon is zero. further, in either case, the photon has only one degree of
freedom.

coleman - hill theorem
it turns out that because of the p and t violating but gauge invariant cs
term, the most general form for the vacuum polarization tensor consistent
with lorentz and gauge invariance is more general than in other dimensions
i.e.

(k) = (k2g  kk)1(k2)  ik2(k2) .

(23)

note that the second term on the right hand side is odd under p and t .
it is clear that any p and t violating interaction will contribute to 2(k2).
for example, the fermion mass term which violates both p and t , does
contribute to 2(k2) at one loop. remarkably enough, it was discovered that
at two loops, however, there is no contribution to 2(0) and hence to chern-
simons mass [11]. inspired by this result, coleman and hill [14] have in fact
proved under very general conditions that 2(0) receives no contribution from
two and higher loops in any gauge and lorentz invariant theory including
particles of spin 1 or less (an open question is whether this is also valid for
higher spin theories, specially spin-3/2). they only require that the matter
elds be massive so that one does not have to worry about the infrared
problems. further, they also assume that no part of the free electro-magnetic
lagrangian density is hiding in the matter part of the lagrangian. it may
be noted that their result is valid even for non-renormalizable interactions in
the presence of the gauge and lorentz invariant regularization.

coleman and hill also claimed that at one loop, the only contribution
to 2(0) can come from the fermion loop. this is, however, incorrect. in
particular, there is no reason why p and t violating interactions involving
spin-0 or spin-1 particles should not contribute to 2(0) at one loop.
in
fact, it has been shown that the parity violating spin-0 [15] as well as spin-1
interactions [16] do contribute to 2(0) at one loop.

magneto-electric eect

11

there are many crystals in nature like chromium oxide, which show the
magneto-electric eect i.e., they also get magnetically polarized in an electric
eld and electrically polarized in a magnetic eld [17, 18]. it is well known
that this eect depends upon having a cp -asymmetric medium. mathemat-
ically, the signal for the magneto-electric eect in 2+1 dimensions is that the
relation between the excitation elds d and h and e and b is modied to

di = (e)

ij ej + (em)

i b ; h = (m)b + (me)

i ei .

(24)

i

i

and (me)

it has been shown [19] that the vacuum of the 2 + 1 dimensional quantum
electrodynamics with cs term also shows the magneto-electric eect.
in
particular, it has been shown that both (em)
are non-zero and
proportional to ki2(k2). of course this is not really surprising if one re-
members that the cs term violates the discrete symmetries p and t .
chern-simons term by spontaneous symmetry breaking
we have seen above that the cs term provides mass to the gauge eld.
now, usually the gauge eld mass is generated by spontaneous symmetry
breaking; hence it is worth enquiring whether the cs term can also be gen-
erated by spontaneous symmetry breaking. the answer to the question is
yes [20]. this is because, unlike other dimensions, in the 2 + 1 case, one can
have a more general denition of the covariant derivative. in particular, it is
easily seen that

d = (  iea  igf )

(25)

also transforms as a covariant derivative, since the eld strength f  by itself
is gauge invariant. obviously, the same thing is also true for a spin-0 charged
scalar eld. now consider the following generalized abelian higgs model in
2 + 1 dimensions

l = 

1
4

ff  +

1
2

(d)(d)  (|  |2 a2)2

(26)

where the generalized covariant derivative is as given by eq. (25). on ex-
panding the term 1

2(d)(d), we have

1
2

(d)(d) =

( + iea)(  iea) +

1
ff  |  |2
2
+ig f(  ) + eg(a)a |  |2

g2
4

(27)

12

so that if  acquires a nonzero vacuum expectation value then the abelian
cs term is generated from the last term of this equation. clearly a similar
mechanism should also work for the non-abelian case, but technically it is a
tougher problem since one also has to generate the non-linear term.

lorentz invariance from gauge invariance
one of the remarkable properties of the abelian cs term is that in this
case the lorentz invariance of the action automatically follows from the gauge
invariance. in contrast, notice that the most general form of the gauge in-
variant maxwell lagrangian in classical electrodynamics in 3 + 1 dimensions
is

(28)
it is only the demand of the lorentz invariance which tell us that a = 1
(in the 2 + 1 case, b is a pseudo scalar but the same argument is still valid).
on the other hand, if one writes the cs action as

l = e2 + ab2 .

ics = z d3x[ijeiaj + aba0] ,

(29)

then the demand of the invariance of ics under the gauge transformation
a  a +  xes a and uniquely gives us the cs action which is auto-
matically also lorentz invariant.

quantization of chern-simons mass
let us now discuss the cs term in the non-abelian gauge theories. we
shall mention only those properties which are special to the non-abelian cs
term. to begin with, notice that the non-abelian cs term has an extra term
compared to the abelian case i.e.

i (cs)
na =



4 z d3x  tr(fa 

2
3

aaa)

(30)

where a and f are matrices

a = gt aaa

 ; f = gt af a

 = a  a + [a, a] .

(31)

here, t a are the representation matrices of the gauge group g satisfying

[t a, t b] = f abct c

(32)

where f abc are the structure constants of the group. in the case of su(2),
t a =  a/2i.

13

let us now consider a non-abelian gauge theory with the chern-simons

term as given by

lna =

1
2g2 tr(f f) 


2g2 tr(fa 

2
3

aaa)

(33)

as in the abelian case, it is easily shown that the cs term provides a gauge
invariant gauge eld mass .

as in the abelian case, the non-abelian cs lagrangian density changes
by a total derivative under an innitesimal local gauge transformation so
that the corresponding action is invariant under such a gauge transformation.
however, the cs action is not invariant under nite (also called homotopically
non-trivial, or those which are not continuously deformable to the identity)
gauge transformations as given by

a  u 1au + u 1u .

(34)

as a result, one nds that the action corresponding to the lagrangian (33)
transforms as follows

ina  ina + z d3x  tr(cid:18)[a(u)u 1](cid:19)



3 z d3x  tr(cid:20)(u)u 1(u)u 1(u)u 1(cid:21) .

+

(35)

let us consider those gauge transformations which tend to the identity

at temporal and spatial innity so as to avoid a convergence problem i.e.

u(x) x i .

(36)

it is now easily seen that the gauge eld dependent surface integral in eq.
(35) vanishes. however, the last term in the integral is non-zero.
it can
be converted to a surface integral once the integrand is rewritten as a total
derivative. this can be made manifest by using an explicit parameterization
for u. for example, in the case of su(2) (more generally, we choose su(2)
sub-group of the gauge group g; for reasons that will be clear soon), one
can make use of the exponential parameterization u(x) = exp(iaa(x)).
in this way one can show that under large gauge transformations, ina is not
invariant but transforms as

ina  ina +

82
g2 (u)

14

(37)

where

(u) =

1

242 z d3x  tr(cid:20)(u)u 1(u)u 1(u)u 1(cid:21)

(38)

is the winding number of the gauge transformation u. in particular, if the
gauge group g is such that the third homotopy group of g is non-trivial i.e.

3(g) = z

(39)

where z is the additive group of integers, then under these so called large
gauge transformations, the action transforms as

ina  ina +

82
g2 m

(40)

where m is an integer. note in particular, that eq.
(39) is true for any
gauge group g of which su(2) is a sub-group. however, in the path integral
formulation, the action itself may or may not be gauge invariant but, it is
the exponential of the action (exp(iina)) which should be gauge invariant. in
this way we conclude that the non-abelian gauge theory with the cs term
does not make sense in 2 + 1 dimensions unless the cs mass  is quantized
[13] in units of g2/4 i.e. (n = 0,1,2, ...)

82
g2 = 2n or  =

g2
4

n .

(41)

this mass quantization is reminiscent of the famous dirac quantization in
the case of magnetic monopole. an important question to address is whether
the quantization condition (41) is respected by the quantum corrections. this
issue was considered by pisarski and rao [21] for the case of a pure gauge
theory (i.e. without any matter eld). they found that the quantization is
indeed preserved to one loop; however, the integer on the right hand side of
eq. (41) is shifted by n in case the gauge group g = su(n). subsequently,
it has been shown that there are no further corrections from two and higher
loops in the limit of the pure cs gauge theory [22].

how does the quantization condition modify in the presence of the matter
elds? it has been shown that so long as the scalar eld does not break the
non-abelian gauge symmetry, then the quantization condition remains un-
altered. the massive fermions, of course, modify the quantization condition

15

[21] ; the right hand side of eq. (41) being shifted by mf
|mf |tr, where tr is
the casimir generator for the gauge group g (i.e. tr(t at b) = abtr), in
case the fermions are in the fundamental representation of the gauge group
g. thus the quantization is preserved so long as tr is an integer.

much more interesting is the case of partial (spontaneous symmetry)
breaking of a non-abelian gauge symmetry. in this case it has been shown
that if the non-abelian gauge symmetry su(n) is spontaneously broken
to say su(m)  u(1) (or even several u(1)s), then the one-loop radiative
correction to the right hand side of the quantization condition (41) [23] arises
purely from the unbroken non-abelian sector in question, the orthogonal
u(1) sector makes no contribution. this implies that the coecient of the
cs term is a discontinuous function over the phase diagram of the theory.

parity anomaly
is our entire discussion about the cs term merely of academic interest ?
put dierently, some one might argue that since the cs term violates both
the parity and the time reversal invariance symmetries, why should one, in
the rst place, add such a term to the action ? the answer to this question,
at least in the non-abelian gauge theories, is that even if one does not add
the cs term to the action at the tree level, it is automatically generated by
the one loop radiative corrections due to the so called parity anomaly [24].
in particular, consider the action

i[a, ] = z d3x(cid:20) 1

2g2 tr(ff ) + i(  iea)(cid:21)

(42)

for an odd number of massless doublet of fermions in the fundamental repre-
sentation coupled to su(2) gauge elds (more generally any gauge group g
of which su(2) is a sub-group so that eq. (39) is satised; and the fermions
are required only to be in the fundamental representation).

this action is invariant under the gauge transformations (both large and
small) as well as the discrete transformations of parity (p) and time reversal
invariance (t). however, the eective action ief f [a], obtained by integrating
out the fermionic degrees of freedom, violates one of the two symmetries. in
other words, there is no regularization which can simultaneously maintain
the invariance of ief f [a] under the large gauge transformations as well as p
and t . in view of the tremendous success of the gauge principle, one usually
maintains the gauge invariance at the cost of the parity and the time reversal
invariance by simply adding the cs term to the action (alternately one can

16

also regulate it by using the p and t violating pauli-villars regularization).
in this way, one nds that the cs term is induced by the radiative corrections
even if it is absent at the tree level. this is very similar to the way the cp
term is induced in even dimensions due to the gauge singlet (chiral) anomaly.

topological field theory
one of the most remarkable property of the cs action is that it depends
only on the antisymmetric tensor  and not on the metric tensor g.
as a result, the cs action in the at and the curved space is the same.
hence, the cs action, in both the abelian and the non-abelian cases, is an
example of the topological eld theory [25]. it might be mentioned here, that
the topological eld theories give a natural framework for understanding the
jones polynomials of the knot theory in terms of three dimensional terms.
further, these theories have shed new light on conformal eld theories in two
space-time dimensions.

finally, the gravitational chern-simons term has also been considered [13]
and shown to have some remarkable properties. in particular, whereas the
massless einstein theory in 2 + 1 dimensions is trivial, it acquires a propagat-
ing, massive, spin-2 degree of freedom when the cs term is present. further,
even though this topological term has third time derivative dependence, yet
the theory is ghost-free and unitary and one has a consistent quantum theory.
the contribution of the topological mass term to the eld equations also has
a natural geometric signicance: it is the three dimensional analogue of the
weyl tensor.

4 charged vortex as anyon in field theories

in the last section, we have discussed in detail the various properties of the
cs term. in this section, we demonstrate the most dramatic eect of this
term i.e. the existence of charged vortex solutions thereby providing us with
a relativistic model for the charged (extended) anyons.

before we discuss the charged vortex solutions, it might be worthwhile to
mention how such solutions were historically discovered. a long time ago,
abrikosov [26] wrote down the electrically neutral vortex solutions in the
ginzburg-landau theory which is a mean-eld theory of superconductivity.
subsequently, these vortices were experimentally observed in the type-ii su-
perconductors. nielsen and olesen [27] rediscovered these solutions in the

17

context of the abelian higgs model which is essentially a relativistic gen-
eralization of the ginzburg-landau theory. these people were looking for
string-like objects in relativistic eld theory. it turns out that these vortices
have nite energy per unit length in 3 + 1 dimensions (i.e. nite energy in
2 + 1 dimensions as the vortex dynamics is essentially conned to the x-y
plane), quantized ux, but are electrically neutral and have zero angular mo-
mentum. subsequently, julia and zee [28] showed that the so(3) gerogi-
glashow model which admits thooft-polyakov monopole solution, also ad-
mits its charged generalization i.e. the dyon solution with nite energy and
nite, non-zero, electric charge.
it was then natural for them to enquire
whether the abelian higgs model, which admits neutral vortex solutions
with nite energy (in 2+1 dimensions), also admits its charged generaliza-
tion or not. in the appendix of the same paper, julia and zee discussed this
question and showed that the answer is no i.e. unlike the monopole case, the
abelian higgs model does not admit charged vortices with nite energy and
nite and non-zero electric charge. more than ten years later, samir paul
and i [29] showed that the julia-zee negative result can be overcome if one
adds the cs term to the abelian higgs model. in particular, we showed that
the abelian higgs model with cs term in 2+1 dimensions admits charged
vortex solutions of nite energy and quantized, nite, noether charge as well
as ux. as an extra bonus, it was found that these vortices also have non-
zero, nite angular momentum which is in general fractional. this strongly
suggested that these charged vortices could in fact be charged anyons which
was subsequently rigorously shown by frohlich and marchetti [30].

strictly speaking, what one has obtained are the charged soliton solutions
and not the vortex solutions, but because of the close connection with the
neutral vortex solutions, one has continued to call them as charged vortices
rather than charged solitons.

consider an abelian higgs model with cs term as given by

l = 

1
4

ff  +

1
2

(d)(d)  c4(|  |2 

c2
2c4

)2 +


4

f a

(43)

where  is the chern-simons mass,  denotes complex scalar eld and d
is the covariant derivative i.e.

d = (  iea) .

(44)

18

here , a as well as the gauge coupling constant e have mass dimension of
1/2 while c4 and c2 have mass dimensions of 1 and 2 respectively. in order
to obtain the charged vortex solutions, let us consider the following ansatz

a(x, t) = ec0

(g(r)  n)

r

, (x, t) = c0f (r)ein, a0(x, t) = c0h(r)

(45)

where g(r), h(r), f (r) are the dimension-less elds, r is the dimension-less
length, while c0 has mass dimension of 1/2 i.e.

r = ec0, c0 = qc2/2c4 .

(46)
note that  and  are related to x and y by  = x2 + y2 and tan = y/x.
it turns out that even though the lagrangian (43) has so many parameters,
the dynamics essentially depends on two dimension-less variables,  and 
dened by

the eld equations which follow from here are

 = q8c4/e2,  = /ec0 .

g(r) 

1
r

h(r) +

g(r)  gf 2 = rh(r)
1
r
f (r) 

h(r)  hf 2 =
g2f
r2 +

g(r)

2
2


r

f (1  f 2) = f h2

f (r) +

1
r

(47)

(48)

(49)

(50)

where g(r)  dg(r)/dr. the corresponding eld energy can be shown to be
(1f 2)2(cid:21) (51)

rdr(cid:20) 1
r2 (

g2f 2
r2 +

en = c 2

)2+h2f 2+

dh
dr

0 z 

0

)2+(

)2+(

dg
dr

2
4

df
dr

several remarks are in order at this stage.

1. as expected, in the limit h = 0 (i.e. a0 = 0) and  = 0 (i.e.  = 0)
the eld equations reduce to those of the neutral vortex case. from the
gauss law eq. (49) it also follows that if  (i.e. ) is non-zero, then
a0 must also be non-zero thereby justifying the ansatz (45).

19

2. the boundary conditions for nite energy solutions are

lim
r

f (r) = 1, h(r) = 0 = g(r)

lim
r0

f (r) = 0, g(r) = n, h(r) = 

(52)

(53)

where  is an arbitrary number while n = 0,1,2...

.

3. from these boundary conditions it immediately follows that the mag-

netic ux is quantized in units of 2/e i.e.

  z bd2x = 

2

e z 

0

rdr(

1
r

dg
dr

) =

2n

e

.

(54)

it may be noted that even for the neutral vortices, the ux is quantized
in units of 2
e . the underlying reason for the ux quantization is same
in both the cases i.e. both are topological objects with the underlying
boundary conditions being such that there is a non-trivial mapping
from the space time to the group manifold i.e. 1(u(1)) = z, with z
being the set of integers, forming a group under addition.

4. from the gauss law eq. (49), it then follows that these vortices also
have a non-zero and nite noether charge which is quantized in units
of 2/e. this is easily seen by noting that in terms of the electric and
the magnetic elds, the gauss law equation can be written as

  e + b = 

(55)

where  is the noether charge density. on integrating both sides of
this equation, it then follows that

q  z d2x = z bd2x =

2

e

n .

(56)

note that r  ed2x = 0, since, because of the higgs mechanism, both

e and b fall o exponentially at long distances. this is probably for
the rst time that the quantization of the noether charge has followed
from purely topological considerations. in a sense, relation (56) can be
looked upon as the (2+1)-analogue of the witten eect [31]. let us
recall the work of witten who had shown that in the presence of the

20

cp and t violating cp term, the thooft-polyakov monopole acquires
electric charge whose fractional part is proportional to the coecient
of the cp term.
it must however be remembered that whereas the
witten eect is purely a quantum mechanical eect, in our case, the
vortices acquire a non-zero charge at the classical level itself due to the
presence of the cs term.

5. it is also clear from here that in the abelian higgs model (without the
cs term), one cannot have vortices having simultaneously the nite
energy as well as the nite, non-zero noether charge. the point is, in
the absence of the cs term, the gauss law eq. (55) gives on integration

q  z  d2x = z   e d2x .

(57)

the only way q can be non-zero and nite is if there is a non-zero
contribution to the integral around r  0 i.e. if e  1/r as r  0. but
in that case, the electrical eld energy r e2d2x diverges logarithmically
[28].

6. the energy-momentum tensor t for this model can be obtained by
varying the curved space form of the action with respect to the metric

t =

1
2

(d)(d) +

1
2

(d)d  g(l 


4

f a)

(58)

where the lagrangian l is as given by eq. (43). note that the cs term,
being independent of the metric tensor g, does not contribute to the
energy momentum tensor t. using this t and the eld equations,
the angular momentum carried by the charged vortices can be shown
to be

j  z d2x ij xitoj = 

nq
2e

= 


e2 n2 = 

q
4

.

(59)

thus, unlike the neutral vortices, the angular momentum of the charged
vortices is non-zero and is solely determined by their charge and ux.
besides, the angular momentum of n superimposed charged vortices is
n2 and not n times the angular momentum of a single vortex. fur-
ther, since the cs mass  is not quantized in the abelian case, hence
this angular momentum j can in general take any fractional value.
this strongly suggests that these charged vortices are charged anyons.

21

frohlich and marchetti [30] have in fact rigorously proved that these
charged vortices are charged anyons. in particular, they constructed
quantum one vortex operator and then evaluated the phase acquired
when one such vortex is slowly taken round the other. they also show
that the charged vortices cannot be localized in bounded regions but are
localized in space-like cones in three-dimensional minkowski space-time
[32]. unfortunately their treatment is rather involved and is beyond
the scope of this pedagogical article. thus the solitons of the abelian
higgs model with the cs term provides us with a relativistic eld the-
ory model for the extended charged anyons.

7. the magnetic moment of these vortices can be computed by using the
eld equations and one can show that, whereas for the neutral vortices
it is equal to the ux (= 2n/e), the charged ones acquire an extra
contribution

kz  z (r  j)z d2x =

2n

e

+

2

e z 

0

rh(r)dr .

(60)

unusual higgs mechanism
one must now solve the eld eqs. (48) to (50) and show the existence
of the charged vortex solutions. to date, no analytic solution has been ob-
tained of these eld equations. however, it is easily seen that for large r, the
asymptotic values of the gauge and the higgs elds are reached exponentially
fast

g(r) = rer + ... , h(r) = 

r

f (r) = 1 + er + ...

er + ... ,

(61)

(62)

where  and  are dimension-less constants while the dimension-less vector
meson mass  is given by

 = s1 +

2
4 


2

.

(63)

however, it has subsequently been shown that the solution with + does not
exist for all r.

22

on noting that the eld eqs. (48) to (50) are invariant under r  r, it
is easily shown that the behavior of the gauge and the higgs elds around r
= 0 is given by

g(r) = n + 1r2 + o(r4) , h(r) =  + 1

r2
2

+ o(r4) ,

f (r) = 2r|n| + o(r|n|+2) .

(64)

(65)

detailed numerical work has subsequently conrmed the existence of the
radially symmetric charged vortex solutions with these boundary conditions
[34]. these correspond to n superimposed vortices. the qualitative be-
haviour of the charged vortex solution which follows from here is as follows
: the magnetic eld b decreases monotonically from its non-zero value at
the core of the vortex (r = 0) to reach zero as r   with the penetration
length 1/, while the higgs eld increases from zero at the origin to its
vacuum value at innity with coherence length 1/. finally, the electric eld
e which is radial, vanishes both at r = 0 and r =  reaching the maximum
in between at some nite r. it is worth pointing out that as in the quantum
hall eect, for the charged vortex solutions too, e( e) is at right angles
to j( j) and both in turn are at right angles to b.
for the
gauge elds a and a0? this is because of the unusual nature of the higgs
mechanism in 2 + 1 dimensions in the presence of the cs term. notice that
in our case both the maxwell and the cs terms are present and in addition
there is also higgs mechanism in operation. clearly such a theory must still
propagate only two massive modes. as has been shown in [35], in this case
lquad corresponds to proca equation with the cs term. it propagates a self-
dual eld with two distinct cs type masses and that corresponding to each
mass there is one (p and t violating) propagating mode. further, the two
masses (in dimension-less form ) are precisely  as given by eq. (63) thereby
explaining the reason for the occurrence of two asymptotic solutions .

why did one obtain two asymptotic solutions for g and h, i.e.

vortex-vortex interaction
one of the most interesting question is whether these charged vortices
can be observed experimentally in some planar system. in this context recall
that the neutral (abrikosov) vortices have been experimentally seen in type-
ii superconductors. this can be understood from the fact that whereas
the vortex-vortex interaction is repulsive in the type-ii region ( > 1), it is

23

attractive in the type-i region of superconductivity. it is thus of great interest
to study the charged vortex-vortex interaction and to see when is it repulsive.
this has been done both in the perturbation theory (in the cs mass) and by
the variational calculation [34], and in both cases one nds that the charged
vortex-vortex interaction is more repulsive than the corresponding neutral
case with the extra repulsion coming from the electric eld of the charged
vortex. for example, when the cs mass is small, then on expanding the
charged n-vortex elds in terms of the corresponding neutral vortex elds it
has been shown that

en(, )  ne1(, ) = en(, 0)  ne1(, 0) +

(n2  n)

4

2 + o(4)

(66)

so that the charged vortex-vortex interaction is always more repulsive than
the corresponding neutral case. for example, for  = 0.5, one nds that the
charged vortex-vortex interaction is repulsive even for  > 0.45 (note that in
the neutral case the interaction is repulsive only if  > 1).

non-abelian charged vortex solutions
it is clearly of considerable interest to enquire whether the charged vortex
solutions obtained above can be embedded in non-abelian gauge theories
with the cs term. the rst obvious question is whether such vortices could be
topologically stable or not. it is easily seen that if g is the gauge group of the
non-abelian gauge theory and h is the sub-group under which the vacuum
remains invariant after spontaneous symmetry breaking, then topologically
non-trivial vortices are possible only if

1(g/h) 6= 0 .

(67)

in the case of su(n) gauge theories, it turns out that no z-vortices are possi-
ble. however, zn -vortices are possible in case h is zn since 1(su(n)/zn ) =
zn . it turns out that at least n higgs multiplets are required so that the
vacuum is invariant under zn [36]. as a result, only one non-trivial charged
vortex is possible in the case of su(2) gauge theory with ux  = 2/g,
charge q =  = 2/g, and angular momentum j = q/4 = /g2
where g is the gauge coupling constant. but since the cs mass  is quantized
in non-abelian gauge theories having su(2) as its sub-group i.e.

 =

g2
4

n, n = 0,1,2, ...

24

(68)

and hence the vortex charge is gn/2 i.e. it is quantized in units of g/2 while
the angular momentum is quantized in units of 1/4 i.e. j = n/4. this is
remarkable as it strongly suggests that if the usual spin-statistics connection
is valid then whereas the abelian charged vortex is an anyon with any phase
factor, the non-abelian (su(2)) charged vortex can only be a semion, a
fermion or a boson.

relativistic pure chern-simons vortices
we have obtained above the charged vortex solutions in case the gauge
part of the abelian higgs model consists of both the maxwell and the cs
term. it may be of some interest to enquire whether the abelian higgs model
with pure cs term can also admit charged vortex solutions. this question
is specially relevant in the context of condensed matter systems since in the
long wave length limit, the cs term having one derivative dominates over
the maxwell term which has two derivatives. it turns out that the answer to
the question is yes [37].

in the absence of the maxwell term and with the same rotationally sym-
metric ansatz as in eq. (45), it follows from eqs. (48) and (49) that the
gauge eld equations are already of rst order. however, eq. (50), for the
higgs elds, is still a coupled second order equation. we now show that in
case one replaces the standard double well 4-type potential by the following
6-type potential [38]

v (|  |) =

e4
0 )2
82 |  |2 (|  |2 c 2

(69)

then even the higgs eld satises a rst order equation. it is worth pointing

out here that whereas a higgs potential of the type pi ci |  |i with 0 
i  4 is renormalizable in 3 + 1 dimensions, pi ci |  |i with 0  i  6 is

renormalizable in 2 + 1 dimensions.

when the maxwell term is absent and the higgs potential is as given by

(69), the vortex energy (51) can be rewritten as

en = c 2

0 z 

0

rdr(cid:20)(f  

1
r

f g)2 + f 2[h 

(1  f 2)

2

]2 

1
r

d
dr

[(1  f 2)g](cid:21). (70)

this gives a rigorous lower bound on the energy in terms of the ux

en  c 2

0 [g(0)  g()]  

1
2

ec 2

0 

(71)

25

f (r) = 
hf 2


= 

f g

1
r
1
22 f 2(1  f 2).

(72)

(73)

since the nite energy consideration requires that f 2g vanish at both the ends.
this bound is saturated when the following self-dual rst order equations are
satised

1
r



g(r) =

it is easily checked that these rst order equations are consistent with the
second order eld eq. (50). one can in fact decouple these coupled rst
order equations and show that the higgs eld f must satisfy the following
un-coupled second order equation

f (r) +

1
r

f (r) 

f 2(r)

f

+

1
22 f 3(1  f 2) = 0 .

(74)

several comments are in order at this stage.

1. these self-dual equations are similar to those of the nielsen-olesen

(neutral) self-dual vortices (which are valid only if  = 1).

2. whereas the lagrangian for the self-dual neutral vortex case (i.e. la-
grangian (43) with  = 0 and  = 1) is the bosonic part of a n = 1
supersymmetric theory [40], the lagrangian for the self-dual charged
vortex case (i.e. the lagrangian (43) with the maxwell term being ab-
sent and the higgs potential being as given by eq. (69)) is the bosonic
part of a n = 2 supersymmetric theory [41].

3. the 4-potential as given in eq. (43) and the 6- potential as given
by eq. (69) represent very dierent physical situations. for example,
whereas the 4-potential corresponds to the case of the second order
c , the 6-potential as given in eq. (69)
phase transition with t < t ii
corresponds to the case of rst order phase transition with t = t i
c [42].

4. the nature of higgs mechanism when only chern-simons term is present
is somewhat unusual [39]. one nds that in the limit e2  ,   ,
with their ratio xed, the mass m+ decouples from the theory. thus in
the case of the pure cs term, one nds that after the higgs mechanism,
the gauge eld is massive and propagates one mode.

26

let us now discuss the most remarkable property of the self-dual eqs.
(72) and (73). in particular, since the higgs potential (69) has degenerate
minima at |  |= 0 and |  |= c0, hence, it turns out that at the self-
dual point, one can simultaneously have both the topological and the non-
topological charged vortex solutions.
it is worth pointing out that at the
time of this discovery, no other self-dual system was known which exhibited
this remarkable property.

topological self-dual solutions
the topological, self dual charged vortex solutions satisfy the same bound-
ary conditions as given by eqs. (52) and (53) with   h(r = 0) = 1/22.
note that the upper (lower) sign corresponds to n > 0(< 0). as a result,
the ux , the noether charge q, and the angular momentum j of these
charged vortices are again as given by eqs. (54), (56) and (59) respectively
while the energy of these charged vortices is c 2
0 | n | . from now onwards,
we shall conne our discussion to the case of n > 0 i.e. those corresponding
to the upper choice of sign. solution with n < 0 are related to these by the
transformation g  g, f  f .
a countable innite number of sum rules have been derived [43] and using
the rst two, it has been proved that the magnetic moment of the topological,
self-dual charged n-vortex is given by [44]

kz = 2n(n + 1)

2
e

.

(75)

note that for the neutral n-vortex, kz =  = 2n/e.

no analytic topological self dual charged vortex solution has been ob-
tained as yet. however, one can show that all the elds approach their
asymptotic values exponentially fast. it may be note that at the self-dual
point, the vector and the scalar meson masses are equal. further, whereas
for the maxwell-cs case, the magnetic eld is maximum at the core of the
vortex (r  0), for the pure cs vortices, the magnetic eld is zero at the
core of the vortex and is concentrated in a ring surrounding the vortex core.

non-topological self-dual solutions
since |  |= 0 as well as |  |= c0 are degenerate minima of the higgs
potential (69), hence it turns out that one could also have non-topological
in this case, the nite energy
self-dual charged vortex solutions [44, 45].
considerations demand the following boundary conditions
f (r) = 0 , g(r) =  ,  > 0

lim
r

(76)

27

lim
r0

lim
r0

f (r) = 0 , g(r) = n for n 6= 0
f (r) =  , g(r) = 0 for n = 0

(77)

(78)

where  is an arbitrary number while (+) is for n > 0(< 0). as a result,
the ux, the charge, the energy and the angular momentum of these vortices
for (n > 0) are

 =

j =

(n + ) , q =  =

2
e

e2 (2  n2) , e = c 2

2

e

(n + ) ,

0 (n + ) .

(79)

note that unlike the topological case, the angular momentum is no more
equal to q/4. here  is a positive number but how much is it? the
niteness of energy requires that  > 1 but otherwise  seems to be com-
pletely arbitrary. however, it is not so and we now show [46] that  satises
a rigorous lower bound of   n + 2. to this end, consider the self-dual
eq. (73). on integrating both sides of this equation and using boundary
conditions (76) to (78), one obtains (for n > 0)

z 

0

dg
dr

rdrf 2(1  f 2) > 0 .
similarly, on using eqs. (72) and (73) we have on integration

dr = n +  =

0

1

22 z 

z 

0

g

dg
dr

dr =

1
2

(2  n2) = 

1

22 z 

0

r2f (1  f 2)

df
dr

dr .

(80)

(81)

on integrating by parts and using the fact that r2f 2 and r2f 4 vanish as
r   (note f (r)  r with  > 1 as r  ), we then have

rdr(f 2 
on combining the two sum rules, we then have

(2  n2) =

0

1

2 z 

1
2

f 4) .

( + n)(  n  2) =

1

22 z 

0

rdrf 4  0

(82)

(83)

which gives us a rigorous lower bound on  i.e.   n + 2. it turns out that
this bound is never saturated in the relativistic case. however, as we shall

28

see below, it is indeed saturated in the case of the non-relativistic self-dual
non-topological charged vortices. it may be noted here that there is however
no upper bound on . we thus conclude that the ux of the relativistic
non-topological vortices must necessarily be greater than 4(n + 1)/e. more
remarkable is the fact that whereas the angular momentum of the topological
vortices is always negative and proportional to n2, the angular momentum
of the non-topological vortices, on the other hand, is necessarily positive and
in general is not proportional to n2. further, the magnetic moment of the
non-topological vortices has also been computed analytically by using the
sum rules and shown to be negative [46]

kz = 

22

e

( + n)(  n  1) < 0 .

(84)

note that the magnetic moment of the topological vortices is on the other
hand always positive.

are these non-topological vortices stable or do they decay to the charged
scalar meson ? this question has been discussed [47] and it has been shown
that as far as the decay to the scalar meson is concerned, these non-topological
solitons are at the edge of their stability. in particular, using e and q as
given by eq. (79) and noting that the mass m of the scalar particle in the
symmetric vacuum is e2c2
0/2, it follows that e = mq/e. thus the stability
does not impose any upper bound on the charge of the non-topological soli-
ton. no analytic solutions of eqs. (72) and (73) have been obtained as yet in
the non-topological self-dual case. however, the behavior of the elds near
r  0 and for large r is easily obtained. in particular, using the boundary
conditions (76) to (78), it is not dicult to show that for r  , the n = 0
vortex solution has the behavior

g(r) =  +

f (r) =

g0
(r/) 

g2
0

4(  1)(r/)22 + o((r/)4+4)
8(  1)2(r/)32 + o((r/)5+4) .

g3
0

(85)

(86)

on the other hand, as r  0, while f (0) is not constrained, g(0) must vanish
so as to have a non-singular solution. thus for the n = 0 non-topological
vortex, the magnetic eld (g(r)/r) is maximum at the core of the vortex
(r = 0) and falls o with a power law fall o as r  . note, however,

29

that the magnetic eld for the topological cs vortices is zero at the core,
and is maximum in a ring surrounding the core of the vortex.

finally, let us consider the behavior of the n 6= 0 (we as usual consider
n > 0) non-topological self-dual charged vortex solutions. it is easily shown
that these solutions are hybrids of the two previous cases i.e.
their large
distance behavior is the same as those of the n = 0 non-topological charged
vortex solutions as given by eqs. (85) and (86). on the other hand their short
distance behavior is the same as those of the self-dual topological charged
vortex solutions. thus for n 6= 0 non-topological vortices, the magnetic eld
vanishes at the core of the vortex and falls o with a power law fall o as
r  .
it is worth pointing out that since the 6-potential as given by eq. (69)
has two disconnected but degenerate vacua at |  |= 0 and |  |= c0, hence,
apart from the charged vortex solutions, they also possess one dimensional
domain wall solutions [45, 42].

so far, we have only discussed the self-dual rotationally symmetric cs vor-
tices. however, the self-dual solutions can in fact be obtained even without
choosing the rotationally symmetric n-vortex ansatz (45). further, rigorous
arguments have subsequently been given for the existence of the self-dual
topological [48] and non-topological [49] charged vortex solutions even when
the vortices are not superimposed on each other but lie at arbitrary positions
in the plane. let us note an interesting fact about the angular momentum of
these charged vortices. for example, whereas the angular momentum of the
n superimposed topological vortices is n2 times that of a single vortex, the
angular momentum of the n topological vortices (each of which has unit vor-
ticity) which are well separated from each other, is only n times the angular
momentum of the single vortex. however, the energy, ux and the charge of
the n vortices in both the cases is the same. thus we see that whereas the
energy, ux and charge, are the global quantities, the angular momentum of
a conguration depends on the local behavior.

a zero-mode analysis of the spectrum of small uctuations [45] around
the self-dual vortices indicates that whereas the number of zero modes in the
case of the topological self-dual vortices is 2n, in the non-topological case,
the same number is 2n + 2[] where [] denotes the integer part of . in
the topological case, this number is identied with the number of parameters
required to describe the location of the n vortices while the counting is less
clear in the non-topological case.

30

interaction between self-dual cs vortices
the slow motion of the abelian self-dual cs vortices has been analyzed
[50] using mantons technique [51]. in this approach, one constructs an ef-
fective quantum mechanical lagrangian (not density) which describes the
uctuations about the static self-dual classical congurations and not sur-
prisingly, one obtains a statistical interaction term. further one also obtains
a term corresponding to the velocity dependent magnus force. it turns out
that this force is in fact necessary in order to have correct spin-statistics
relation.

self-dual charged vortices have also been obtained in the original 4-type
model itself by adding a neutral scalar eld to eq. (43) and changing the
4-potential suitably [53].

finally, semi-local self-dual cs vortices have been obtained in an abelian
higgs model with pure cs term [52] and with su(n)global  u(1)local sym-
metry. the interesting point is that the semi-local vortices, even though
topologically trivial, are stable under small perturbations due to the gradi-
ent energy term.

non-relativistic chern-simons vortices
let us now discuss the non-relativistic limit of the abelian higgs model
with the pure cs term. the lagrangian density for the abelian higgs model
with pure cs term is given by

1
2

l =

(d)(d) +


4

f a 

e4
8c42 |  |2 (|  |2 c 2

0 )2 ,

(87)

where the higgs potential is as given by eq. (69). here we write all the factors
of the velocity of light c explicitly since we are considering the non-relativistic
limit of a relativistic theory. let us rst note that the quadratic term in the
higgs potential denes the mass through its coecient m2c2/2. comparison
with eq. (87) shows that c 2
0 must have the value c 2
0 = (2 |  | mc3)/e2 so
that the lagrangian density (87) can be rewritten as

l =
+

ie
h

1
2c2 | (t 
me2
2c |  | |  |4 

a0) |2 
e4
8c42 |  |6 +

1
2 | d |2 

m2c2

2

|  |2


4

f a .

(88)

the non-relativistic limit (c  ) now proceeds in the standard manner.

31

on writing the mode expansion of the scalar eld  as

 =

1

m(cid:20)eimc2t  + eimc2t (cid:21)

(89)

and substituting it in eq. (88), dropping all terms that either oscillate as
c   or are sub-leading in powers of c, the matter part of the lagrangian
density can be shown to be

l = id0 

1
2m | d |2 +

e2

2mc |  |

2 +


4

f a .

(90)

here  =  is the matter density of particles and we have dropped the
anti-particle part from the lagrangian density (i.e. we are working in the
zero anti-particle sector) by setting  = 0 since the particle and the anti-
particle parts are separately conserved. the remarkable fact is that one now
has an attractive quartic (2) self-interaction. this non-relativistic model
can be looked upon either as a non-relativistic classical eld theory or as
a second quantized n-body problem with 2-body attractive delta-function
interaction.

the euler-lagrangian equations of motion which follow from the la-

grangian density (90) are

1
2m



d2  

e2

mc |  | | 2 |   id0 = 0
f = 

j 

1


(91)

(92)

where j   (, ~j) is a lorentz covariant notation for the conserved non-
relativistic charge and current densities i.e.

 =| 2 |, j k = 

ih2
2m

[dk  (dk)] .

(93)

the eld eqs. (91) and (92) are together termed as the planar gauged nonlin-
ear schrodinger equations. the gauge eld eq. (92) can also be re-expressed
as



(94)

e


b  f12 =

32

ei  fi0 = 

e
c

ikjk .

(95)

from here, we immediately obtain the fundamental relation between the
noether charge q and the magnetic ux  i.e. q = . as in the relativistic
case, it is easily checked that the second order eld eqs. (91) and (92) are
solved by eq. (94) and the self-dual ansatz

in the case of the static solutions with a0 chosen as

dj = ijkdk

a0 = 

e

2mc |  |2 .

here we have made use of the following factorization identity

d2 = dd 

e
c

f12 .

(96)

(97)

(98)

we now show that the self-dual eqs. (94) and (96) can be solved com-
pletely and explicitly. on writing the complex eld  as  = ei1/2 the
self-duality eq. (96) yields the vector potential

ai = i 

c
2e

ijj ln 

(99)

which is valid away from the zeros of . on inserting this form of a into the
other self-dual eq. (94) yields the famous liouville equation

2 ln  = 

2e2
c |  |



(100)

which is known to be integrable and completely solvable and which must
be solved away from the zeros of . it is worth noting that with our sign
conventions, we have the liouville equation with the correct sign in that only
such an equation has real, positive, regular solutions. the most general such
solution is known to be given by

 =

c |  || f (z) |2
e2[1+ | f (z) |2]

33

(101)

where f (z) is any holomorphic function and z = rei. explicit radially
symmetric solutions may be obtained by taking f (z) = (z/z0)n. the corre-
sponding self-dual charge density is

 =

4 |  | n2c

e2r2
0

(r/r0)2(n1)

[1 + (r/r0)2n]2

(102)

which behaves like r2(n1) as r  0 while as r  , it behaves like r22n.
thus  is regular at the origin if n  1. from eq. (99) it then follows that
as r  0, the vector potential behaves as

ai(r)  i 

c(n  1)

e

ij

xj
r2

(103)

it is singular at r = 0. this singularity is removed if we choose  =

i.e.
c(n  1)/e. thus the prole of the self-dual  eld is given by

(r) =

2nq|  | c

er0

(r/r0)n1

[1 + (r/r0)2n]

ei(n1).

(104)

on requiring that  be single valued, we then nd that n must be an integer,
and for  to have decaying behavior as r  , we require that n must be
positive.

several comments are in order at this stage.

1. integrating  as given in (102) over all space yields n (the total number
of particles) and hence the ux (in view of eq. (94)). we obtain  =
(4cn/e) with n = 1,2,... which means that this conguration carries
an even number of ux units. this is in contrast to the relativistic
case where the ux unit need not necessarily be even. further, note
that unlike the relativistic non-topological case, here the lower bound
on ( n + 2) is saturated. as has been shown [55], this is because of
the special inversion symmetry of the liouville equation. in particular,
notice that the liouville equation is invariant under the transformations

r  1/r,   , (r)  (1/r) = r4(r) .

(105)

as a result, the behavior of  at innity is uniquely determined by its
behavior at the origin thereby xing  = n + 2.

34

2. it is worth pointing out the q,  and j for the non-relativistic charged
vortices are the same as those for the relativistic non-topological charged
vortices as given by eq. (79) provided one chooses  = n + 2 (note
that in the non-relativistic case, n = 1, 2, ... while n = 0,1,2,... in the
relativistic case).

3. the radially symmetric solution (104) was obtained by choosing the
holomorphic function f (z)  (z)n and corresponds to n solitons su-
perimposed at the origin with common scale factor r0. the most gen-
eral solution corresponding to n separated solitons may be obtained by
taking

n

f (z) =

xi=1

i

(z  zi)

(106)

where 2n real parameters zi describe the location of the solitons and
2n real parameters i correspond to the scales and the phases of the
solitons. thus the solution depends on 4n parameters. using an index
theory calculation [56] it has been shown that this is the most general
solution.

5 cp 1 solitons with hopf term

in this section we discuss the extended (neutral) anyon solutions in relativistic
eld theories. historically, such solutions were rst written down in the case
of o(3) -model with hopf term in 2+1 dimensions [57]. unfortunately, in
this case, the hopf term cannot be written down as a local function of the
basic elds of the theory. therefore, we shall discuss the essentially equivalent
example of the cp 1 model with the hopf term since in this case the hopf
term can be written down as a local function of the basic elds of the theory
[58].

the action for the cp 1 model in 2+1 dimensions is given by

i = z d3x (dz)(dz)

(107)

where dz  (  ia)z with z = (z1, z2) being a complex vector fullling
| z |2= 1. note that a here does not represent independent degrees of

35

freedom, but is entirely determined in terms of z(x) through the constraint
equation

the action (107) is invariant under the local u(1) transformations

a = iz z .

za(x)  za(x)ei(x), a(x)  a(x) + (x) .

(108)

(109)

as is well known, the cp 1 model admits self-dual soliton solutions. to
obtain them, let us rst note that the eld equation is obtained by extremiz-
ing the action (107) with respect to z(x) subject to the constraint | z |2= 1.
this constraint is best introduced in the variational formalism by using a la-
grangian multiplier i.e. one extremizes i +r d3x(x)(zz  1). the resulting

eld equation is

(dd + )z = 0 .

(110)
the lagrange multiplier (x) is eliminated by using  = zz = zddz.
let us now consider the static solutions. in this case, the eld equation (110)
reduces to

the energy of a static solution as obtained from the action (107) is clearly

2z  (z  2z)z = 0 .

(111)

e = z (diz)(diz)d2x ,

i = 1, 2 .

(112)

finiteness of energy requires that as r | x | , diz  iz  iaiz = 0.

let us start from the topological inequality which follows from

(cid:20)(diz)  iij(djz)(cid:21) (cid:20)diz  iikdkz(cid:21)  0 .

(113)

because of the constraint | z |2= 1, this inequality can be re-expressed in the
form
(114)

(diz)  (diz)  ij(diz)  (djz)

so that the energy is bounded from below by the topological charge q i.e.
e  2 | q |, where

q = 

i

2 z d2x ij(diz)  (djz) .

(115)

36

in any q-sector, the energy reaches its minimum when the elds minimize
the energy in that sector and satisfy the rst order self dual eld equation

diz = i ijdjz .

(116)

note that the solutions of eq. (116) automatically solve the second order
eld eq. (111) while the converse need not be true.

the most general solution for z can be written down in terms of (anti)

holomorphic function 

z =

1

q1+ |  |2(cid:18) 
1(cid:19).

(117)

these solutions are characterized by the energy e = 2 | q | where q is as
given by eq. (115). one can in fact dene a topological current j 

j  = 

i
2

(dz)(dz)

(118)

which is conserved by construction, and the topological charge q as given

above, is related to it by q = r j 0d2x. one can easily show that for the
soliton solutions, q is just the winding number i.e. q clearly describes the
homotopy of the mapping s2  s2.
the following gauge invariant action

since j  is the topological conserved current, hence one can clearly add

ih = z d3x


2

aj 

(119)

to the original action (107) . this action is nothing but the hopf term which
is related formally to the cs term since from eqs. (108) and (118) it follows
that

aj  =

af .

(120)

1
4

note however that here a is not an independent gauge eld but is entirely
determined in terms of z(x) through the constraint eq. (108). as a result,
unlike the cs term, the hopf term is locally a total divergence and hence
does not contribute to the equations of motion.

note that unlike the cs term, the hopf term has no dynamics. besides,
for the cp 1 soliton solutions (which are time independent solutions of the

37

equations of motion), the hopf term is identically zero because of the time
derivative and the relationship (108). thus the way the hopf term imparts
fractional spin and statistics to the soliton is similar to that in quantum me-
chanics but it is very dierent than the way the cs term imparts fractional
spin and statistics. in particular, since the hopf density is a total divergence,
hence the hopf action can be expressed in terms of the surface terms, namely
two integrals at the initial and nal times so that in the path integral formal-
ism, the contribution of this action is essentially in terms of the phases of the
initial and the nal wave functions. since the conguration space in ques-
tion is multi-connected, the hopf action depends on the homotopy classes of
the path and, therefore, the converted phases are multi-valued which in turn
gives rise to the fractional spin (= /2) and the solitons obey fractional
statistics characterized by  [57, 58].

6 anyons as elementary eld quanta

in this section we enquire whether one can construct local quantum eld
theories where the fundamental elds represent the creation and annihilation
of anyons. let us consider a complex bosonic non-relativistic matter eld
(x, t) of mass m (of course a similar discussion can also be done for the
fermionic matter eld). let us minimally couple it to an abelian gauge eld
a with a cs kinetic term [5, 59]

s = z d3x[i+d0 +

1
2m

+(d2

1 + d2

2) +


2

aa]

(121)

where d =   iea is the covariant derivative. for simplicity, in this
section we shall set h = c = 1. on varying the action with respect to a, we
obtain

2e

where the current j  is explicitly given by

f =

j 

(122)

(123)

  j 0 = + , j k =

1

2mi

[+dk  (dk)+] .

here  and j are the number density and the current density operators
respectively which satisfy the continuity equation t + .j = 0. as seen in

38

previous sections, eq. (122) is a remarkable relation indicating that the cs
eld strength is completely determined by the particle current. even more
remarkable is the fact that the gauge potential a itself is not an independent
degree of freedom.

let us consider the  = 0 component of eq. (122)

b =

e




(124)

where b =   a is the cs magnetic eld. this equation is clearly the
second quantized version of the gauss law constraint obtained in the last
two chapters (except that whereas in those cases  was the charge density,
here  is the matter density, hence the extra factor of e in eq. (124) compared
to those cases). now, in the weyl gauge iai = 0. hence, one can invert
eq. (124) without any ambiguity and solve for the vector potential a. we
obtain

ai(x) = ij 

xj(cid:18) e

 z d2yg(x  y)(y)(cid:19)

where g is the two-dimensional green function

whose solution is well known to be

2g(x  y) = (x  y)

g(x  y) =

1
2

ln(p | x  y |)

where p is an arbitrary scale. thus ai can be written as

ai(x) = ij 

xj(cid:20) e
2 z d2y

e

= 

2 z d2y ln | x  y | (y)(cid:21)


xi (x  y)(y)

where  is the winding (polar) angle i.e.

(x  y) = arctan(

x2  y2
x1  y1 ) .

(125)

(126)

(127)

(128)

(129)

note that while writing the second line of eq.
cauchy-riemann equations

(128), we have used the

ij 

xj ln | x  y | = 


xi (x  y) .

(130)

39

it is worth pointing out that ij 

thus one has to supplement eqs.
prescription. one such prescription is

xj g(x  y) is ill-dened at x = y.
(126) and (127) with a regularization

ij 
xj g(x)  ij 

xj ga(x)

where the regulated green function g(a)(x) is

g(a)(x) =

1

a z d2y(

1
2

ln | x  y |)ey2/a .

this has the desired property that

while for any a

g(a)(x) = g(x) =

lim
a0

1
2

ln | x |

lim
x0

ij 

xj g(a)(x) = 0

(131)

(132)

(133)

(134)

so that once eq. (132) is systematically used, all ambiguities are eliminated.
if one is now allowed to move the derivative operator outside the integral
(128), then one could express a as a gradient. however, (x  y) is a multi
valued function. hence one must rst x a branch-cut in the y-plane starting
at x so as to make it single-valued. no matter what choice is made for this
cut, the resulting range of integration of y will depend on x and hence extra
contributions are produced in moving /xi outside the y integral. thus, in
general one can not write

a(x) = 

e

2x(cid:20)z d2y(x  y)(y)(cid:21) .

(135)

so that in general a is not a pure gauge and hence it cannot be removed by
a gauge transformation. however, in the special case when (y) is a sum of
-functions, a(x) is indeed a pure gauge. such a situation arises in the case
of non-relativistic localized point particles [59]. let us assume that in the
context of our non-relativistic model (121) too, (y) is a sum of -functions
in which case the cs gauge eld a is entirely determined by the matter
conguration i.e.  and j.

thus, in the case of localized densities, a(x) = (x) i.e. the cs eld
is a pure gauge and hence it can be removed by the gauge transformation

40

a  a
 = a +  = 0. thus, under such a singular transformation,
covariant derivatives turn into ordinary derivatives, and the action (121)
becomes

(136)

1
2m
where the new matter eld  is dened as

s = z d3x(cid:20)i +0

 +

+(2

1 + 2

2) (cid:21)

(x) = eie(x)(x) , +(x) = +(x)eie(x) .

(137)

the above action (136) is that of a free, complex, non-relativistic, scalar eld
. however, we now show that such a eld does not obey the conventional
commutation relations as satised by .

we can quantize the action (121) by imposing the equal-time commuta-

tion relations for the bosonic eld 

[(x, t), +(y, t)] = (x  y)

[(x, t), (y, t)] = 0 = [+(x, t), +(y, t)] .

(138)

(139)

since the gauge eld a is a function of the number density operator (=
+), hence the commutator of a and  is not trivial. in fact using eqs.
(128) and (138) we obtain

[ai(x, t), (y, t)] = 

e


ij 

xj g(x  y)(y) .

(140)

on using the regularized green function as given by eq. (132), it then follows
by using eq. (134) that [ai(x, t), (x, t)] = 0. this is interesting because it
means that there are no ordering ambiguities in the quantum theory as given
by eq. (121).

one can now show that when  obeys ordinary commutation relations,

 obeys

(x, t) (y, t) = ei (y, t) (x, t)

(141)
i.e. the matter eld  obeys anyonic commutation relations of statistics  (=
e2/2). if instead, we make a cut along the negative x-axis, then we would
obtain a phase factor (ei), opposite to that in eq. (141). proceeding in
the same way, it is easily shown that if x 6= y then

(x, t) +(y, t) = ei +(y, t) (x, t).

(142)

41

it must however be noted that for x = y, the phase proportional to  vanishes
and hence the canonical commutation relations remain unchanged.

some clarication is called for at this stage. what one has shown is
that the elds (x, t), (y, t) satisfy anyonic commutation relations with the
phase factor e+i or ei depending on how we make the cut. however,
this is not enough. what is really required is that the phase of the wave
function changes both by + and  in response to which way we braid in
interchanging x and y. no one has been able to show this so far. in fact, what
we have shown above is the best that one can achieve with local operators
, +. local information, like initial and nal positions of particles, is simply
not sucient to code the braiding, where we also have to specify which way
the particles passed around each other in interchanging their positions. as
i see it, the only way to take care of this problem in this formalism is to
choose such a denition of the multi-valued function  which will make  a
non-local operator.

summarizing, it appears that within the non-relativistic eld theory for-
malism, anyons can only be described by non-local operators, which are hard
to deal with. if one insists on a local formulation, then one has to hide the
statistics in an interaction with a cs eld.

there is no doubt that ideally the various eects of fractional spin, such
as the spin-statistics theorem should be understood only in a full edged
relativistic quantum eld theory. however, relatively little is known in this
respect. the point is, if the fundamental elds are to carry fractional spin,
they must carry a multi-valued irreducible representation of so(2, 1). this
is because, a rotation of 2 does not leave the wave function invariant, but
rather, it multiplies it by a phase e2ij. we then have the following two
options.

the rst option is that we dene innite component elds and from them
construct one particle dynamics by imposing equations of motion that satisfy
the requirement that one-particle states provide multi-valued poincare equa-
tions. the most dicult part is the derivation of an action that reproduces
these equations of motion. this requires handling a nonlocal theory and no
one really knows how to quantize such a theory.

the second option is to work with multi-valued elds by adding the cs
term to the action and essentially repeat what we have done above for the
non-relativistic case. thus, instead of the non-relativistic model (121), one
could consider a relativistic eld theory, say a complex scalar eld theory,

42

coupled to an abelian gauge eld with a cs kinetic energy term (and no
maxwell term). coming back to complex elds, one again wants to know if
one can construct local quantum eld theory where the fundamental elds
represent the creation and annihilation of anyons. on proceeding exactly as
in the nonrelativistic case, one again obtains eq. (124). however, now the
particles are not point particles but are extended objects, hence (y) cannot
be a sum of delta functions. thus it is not possible to write a as a pure
gauge and hence it cannot be removed by a gauge transformation. thus, it
is not at all clear whether in the relativistic case the only eect of the gauge
eld is to endow the particle with arbitrary spin or if residual interactions
are also present. a similar problem also arises in models which emerge from
the relativistic theory in the non-relativistic limit. in particular, one obtains
dierent results depending on which limit is taken rst i.e. the size of the
extended object going to zero vis-a-vis the regulator parameter going to zero.
attempts have been made to tackle these problems by quantizing the theory
with cs term on a lattice with or without the maxwell term. so far, these
attempts have met with only a limited success.

thus it is fair to say that, so far we do not have a model in relativistic local
quantum eld theory where the fundamental (non-interacting) eld quanta
are themselves anyons. in fact it appears unlikely that one can obtain a sim-
ple, local (relativistic) lagrangian for anyons. this is because, even in 2 + 1
dimensions, spin has to be an integer or half-integer for local elds. on the
other hand, fractional spin is admissible for elds which carry charges asso-
ciated with gauge symmetries (with accompanying ux integrals at innity)
which are typically localizable only in space-like cones [32, 30]. this is what
happens for example, when one generates fractional spin by coupling point
particles to a cs gauge eld which has non-trivial long-ranged properties.

references

[1] e.a. abbot, flatland (princeton univ. press, new edition, 1991).

[2] c.h. hinton, an episode of flatland (1907).

[3] m. gardner, in the unexpected hanging and other mathematical di-

versions, ed. m. gardner (simon and schuster 1969).

43

[4] a.k. dewdney, two dimensional science and technology, j. recreate.
math. 12 (1979) 16 ; for a short summary of the book see m. gardner,
sci. ame., july issue (1980) 18.

[5] for the details see for example, a. khare, fractional statistics and

quantum theory (world scientic, singapore, 1997).

[6] r.b. laughlin, phys. rev. lett. 50 (1983) 1395.

[7] for a popular readable account see a. khurana, phys. today 43(1)

(1990) 19.

[8] j.m. leinaas and j. myrheim, nuovo cim. b37 (1977) 1.

[9] r. mirman, nuovo cim. b18 (1973) 110.

[10] f. haldane, phys. rev. lett. 67 (1991) 937.

[11] for a detailed review of various properties see for example, a. khare,
fort. der. physik 38 (1990) 507 ; proc. indian natn. sc. acad. a61
(1995) 161.

[12] w. siegel, nucl. phys. b156 (1979) 135; j. schonfeld, nucl. phys. b185
(1981) 157; r. jackiw and s. templeton, phys. rev. d23 (1981) 2291;
c.r. hagen, ann. phys.n.y.) 157 (1984) 342.

[13] s. deser, r. jackiw and s. templeton, phys. rev. lett. 48 (1982) 975;

ann. of phys. 140 (1982) 372.

[14] s. coleman and b. hill, phys. lett. b159 (1985) 184.

[15] a. khare, r.b. mackenzie and m.b. paranjape, phys. lett. b343

(1995) 239.

[16] c. r. hagen, p.k. panigrahi and s. ramaswami, phys. rev. lett. 61

(1988) 389.

[17] l.d. landau and e.m. lifshitz, electrodynamics of continuous media,

second edition (pergamon press, oxford 1963).

[18] t.h. odell, the electrodynamics of magneto-electric media (north-

holland, amsterdam, 1970).

44

[19] a. khare and t. pradhan, phys. lett. b231 (1989) 178.

[20] s.k. paul and a. khare, phys. lett. b193 (1987) 253, b196 (1987)

e571.

[21] r.d. pisarski and s. rao, phys. rev. d32 (1985) 2081.

[22] g. giavarini, c.p. martin and f. ruiz ruiz, nucl. phys. b381 (1992)

222.

[23] a. khare, r.b. mackenzie, p.k. panigrahi and m.b. paranjape, phys.
lett. b355 (1995) 236; l. chen, g. dunne, k. haller and e. lim-
lombridas, phys. lett. b348 (1995) 468.

[24] a.n. redlich, phys. rev. lett. 52 (1984) 18 ; phys. rev. d29 (1984)
2366; a. j. niemi and g.w. semeno, phys. rev. lett. 51 (1983) 2077.

[25] a.s. schwarz, lett. math. phys. 2 (1978) 247; e. witten, comm. math.

phys. 121 (1989) 351.

[26] a.a. abrikosov, sovt. phys. jetp 5 (1957) 1174.

[27] h.b. nielsen and p. olesen, nucl. phys. b61 (1973) 45.

[28] b. julia and a. zee, phys. rev. d11 (1975) 2227.

[29] s.k. paul and a. khare, phys. lett. b174 (1986) 420; b177 (1986)

e453.

[30] j. frohlich and p.a. marchetti, comm. math. phys. 121 (1989) 177.

[31] e. witten, phys. lett. b86 (1979) 283.

[32] d. buchholz and k. fredenhagen, comm. math. phys. 84 (1982) 1.

[33]

[34] l. jacobs, a. khare, c.n. kumar and s.k. paul, int. j. mod. phys. a6

(1991) 3441.

[35] s.k. paul and a. khare, phys. lett. b171 (1986) 244.

45

[36] h.j. de vega and f.a. schaposnik, phys. rev. lett. 56 (1986) 2564 ;
phys. rev. d34 (1986) 3206; c.n. kumar and a. khare, phys. lett.
b178 (1986) 395, b182 (1986) e415; phys. rev. lett. 59 (1987) 377 ;
phys. rev. d36 (1987) 3253.

[37] d.p. jatkar and a. khare, phys. lett. b236 (1990) 283.

[38] j. hong, y. kim and p.y. pac, phys. rev. lett. 64 (1990) 2230; r.

jackiw and e.j. weinberg, phys. rev. lett. 64 (1990) 2234.

[39] s. deser and z. yang, mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 2123.

[40] p. di vecchia and s. ferrara, nucl. phys. b130 (1977) 93.

[41] c. lee, k. lee and e.j. weinberg, phys. lett. b243 (1990) 105.

[42] s.n. behera and a. khare, pramana (j. phys., india) 15 (1980) 245.

[43] a. khare, phys. lett. b277 (1992) 123.

[44] a. khare, phys. lett. b255 (1991) 393.

[45] r. jackiw, k. lee and e.j. weinberg, phys. rev. d42 (1990) 3488.

[46] a. khare, phys. lett. b263 (1991) 227.

[47] d.p. jatkar and a. khare, j. phys. a24 (1991) l1201; d. bazeia, phys.

rev. d43 (1991) 4074.

[48] r. wang, comm. math. phys. 137 (1991) 587.

[49] j. spruck and y. yang, comm. math. phys. 149 (1992) 361.

[50] s.k. kim and h. min, phys. lett. b281 (1992) 81.

[51] n. manton, phys. lett. b110 (1982) 54 ; phys. lett. b154 (1985) 397.

[52] a. khare, phys. rev. d46 (1992) r 2287.

[53] c. lee, k. lee and h. min, phys. lett. b252 (1990) 79.

[54] r. jackiw and s-y. pi, phys. rev. lett. 64 (1990) 2969 ; phys. rev.

d42 (1990) 3500.

46

[55] s.k. kim, w. namgung, k.s. soh and j.h. yee, phys. rev. d46 (1992)

1882.

[56] s.k. kim, k.s. soh and j.h. yee, phys. rev. d42 (1990) 4139.

[57] f. wilczek and a. zee, phys. rev. lett. 51 (1983) 2250.

[58] y.-s. wu and a. zee, phys. lett. b147 (1984) 325 ; a.m. din and w.

j. zakrzewski, b146 (1984) 341.

[59] see for example, a. lerda, anyons: quantum mechanics of particles
with fractional statistics, lecture notes in phys. m14 (springer-verlag,
berlin 1992) and references therein.

47

