mpi/pht-98-57
hep-th/9908188

renormalization of non-semisimple gauge models

with the background field method

pietro antonio grassi1

max-planck-institut fur physik, (werner-heisenberg-institut)

fohringer ring 6, 80805, munich, germany

abstract

we study the renormalization of non-semisimple gauge models quantized in the t hooft-
background gauge to all orders. we analyze the normalization conditions for masses and couplings
compatible with the slavnov-taylor and ward-takahashi identities and with the ir constraints.
we take into account both the problem of renormalization of ckm matrix elements and the prob-
lem of cp violation and we show that the background field method (bfm) provides proper
normalization conditions for fermion, scalar and gauge eld mixings. we discuss the hard and the
soft anomalies of the slavnov-taylor identities and the conditions under which they are absent.

9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
8
2

 

 
 

1
v
8
8
1
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1e-mail:pgrassi@mppmu.mpg.de

1

introduction

the standard model (sm) [1] is the widely accepted quantum field theory (qft) describing the
physics of elementary particles up to the tev scale. as any interacting, local qft in four space-time
dimensions it has a singular high energy limit leading to uv divergences in perturbative calculations.
the removal of these divergences through the process of renormalization can be achieved in various
ways and hence it is important to keep control of possible inconsistencies and ambiguities accom-
panying such procedures. the most satisfactory way to do so, is to put up a system of axioms of
renormalization theory, with the aim to characterize the result through physical requirements. this
approach to the problem, motivated by development of axiomatic qft, led to a rather satisfactory
framework [2] culminating in the work of epstein and glaser [3]. however, this unfortunately does
not exhaust the problem of renormalization for the sm, since it involves the introduction of various
unphysical elds required for the explicitly local formulation of gauge theories, whose decoupling
in physical processes has to be guaranteed for the renormalized theory. also this problem found
a satisfactory solution in the form of certain symmetry relations [4], the slavnov-taylor identities
(sti) expressing the brst invariance of the theory. in order to construct a renormalized perturba-
tive series satisfying these identities the most natural strategy is to nd an explicit brst invariant
regularization and subtraction procedure. despite many attempts in the past no really satisfactory
such method is known to the author. hence it oers itself to make recourse again to the axiomatic
approach and try to construct a brst invariant renormalized perturbation series making use of the
full freedom allowed by the axioms of renormalization theory. this strategy, known as algebraic
renormalization (since the result is characterized by the symmetry relations pertaining to some lie
algebra), advocated mainly by the brs school ([4], [5] [6], [7]) will be adopted in the present
work. although this strategy may seem unduly complicated for practical purposes, it is the only
one surpassing unresolved consistency problems of all the hitherto proposed invariant regulariza-
tions. in fact, combined with ecient strategies to determine the required non-invariant counter
terms, it may turn out that algebraic renormalization is a liable method for the sm or even its
generalizations like its supersymmetric extension.

as a rst case, the algebraic renormalization [8] has been applied to the renormalization of the
abelian higgs-kibble model. this models describes some aspects of the sm, namely the spontaneous
symmetry breaking, and it was the rst example of gauge theory handled with the brst formalism
[4].

the essential results of those papers were to establish a formalism independent of the regulari-
zation and based on the locality and lorentz invariance to proof the renormalizability of the gauge
theories and the unitarity of the s-matrix. later, the formalism was generalized to non-abelian gauge
group in [4, 6, 9] and [10]. however, up to now, although the main problems of the renormalization
of the sm [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16] are solved, some peculiar feature of physical interesting models are
not yet taken into account, in particular we want to recall

1. the ir problems of o-shell greens functions. they have been recently examined in [16].

2. the cp violation and the renormalization of the mixing. although these are well known from
phenomenological point of view, a complete (algebraic renormalization) analysis is still missing.

3. unstable particles.

in this paper we use the word minimal

in order to distinguish the eld content of the sm from
that of its extensions like the two higgs doublets model (2hdm) [18], the minimal supersymmet-

1

ric standard model (mssm) [17], the grand unied theory (gut) su (5) models [19] and their
supersymmetric versions.

however, in order to easily generalize our results for the sm, we shall use a general framework
as long as possible and we shall specify the equations when the features of a particular model
are considered. we, therefore, examine a non-semisimple gauge model with spontaneous symmetry
breaking coupled to scalar elds and to chiral fermion elds. this comprises eld mixings such as the
fermion mixing, scalar mixing and the system as the photon and the z 0 vector boson; furthermore
we do not require the p and c discrete symmetries, but only the hermiticity, locality and covariance
which imply the cp t invariance. in this general framework the mass eigenstates do not coincide
with the gauge eigenstates and the mass matrices are only semi-denite positive.

the invariance under the local gauge transformations essentially guarantees the consistency be-
tween a covariant formalism for relativistic quantum elds and the physical degrees of freedom
of vector particles. however for quantization purposes, it is necessary to choose a gauge which
breaks this invariance and introduces new unphysical ghost elds. the gauge xing procedure is
conveniently realized a la brst [4] requiring the invariance of the theory under the brst trans-
formations [5]. at the quantum level this invariance ensures the decoupling of unphysical states
for the physical fock space, guaranteeing the unitarity of the scattering operator and the gauge
independence of the physical observables (see [4, 5]).

regarding the choice of gauge xing the background-t hooft type [16, 20, 21, 22, 23] is found to
be particularly convenient for the sm. in that case, in fact, the s  matrix computed whit the bfm
is completely dened in terms of (background) gauge invariant greens functions [24]. moreover
the background gauge invariance, implemented at the quantum level by means of ward-takahashi
identities (wti), provides very useful constraints on the possible counterterms (cp violating coun-
terterms, renormalization of the mixings [25, 26] and wave function renormalizations (w.f.r.)).

as is well known the quantization of gauge models can be consistently performed if the tree
level brst symmetry can be implemented at the quantum level and it is not anomalous.
in a
general case two kinds of anomaly candidates could be present: the hard anomalies characterized
by local operators with the highest dimension and the soft anomalies [6, 27] with operators of lower
dimension. in the case of the adler-bardeen-jackiw anomaly [28] a candidate for hard anomalies
the non-renormalization theorem [9] and the fermion content of the sm ensures the vanishing of
its coecients. the other hard candidates are ruled out by introducing new constraints as will be
discussed later and, in absence of hard anomalies, the callan-symanzik equation guarantees the
vanishing of soft ones [6, 16, 27]. however some of the candidates for the soft anomalies can also
be ir dangerous (ir anomalies), i.e. the counterterms which can remove them can produce ir
divergence. this means that their coecient must vanish and we will check this explicitly in the
sec. 4.2. it turns out that as a consequence of normalization conditions and of the invariances of
the model the ir anomalies can be excluded in the case of the sm and for extended models.

besides ir problems the normalization conditions play a prominent role in dening the quantum

theory and require a separate discussion. our analysis is divided into three steps.

first, we solve the symmetry constraints in order to single out the free parameters of the models
without taking into account the ir constraints. this allows us to dene the space of free parameters
independently of the basis chosen for the elds (e.g. it appears convenient to work in the basis of
gauge eigenstates because, in that case, the result is already available in the literature [6, 10]).

second, we establish a set of normalization conditions which is compatible with the symmetry
constraints and which ensures the particle content of the model (denition of the physical states).
much emphasis is posed on the ir normalization conditions which are relevant in order to ensure

2

the absence of ir anomalies. concerning the normalization conditions, we study the problem of
the renormalization of the mixing angles for fermions (ckm) and we propose a scheme to x the
mixing angles among scalars in the case of extended models (2hdm, mssm etc.). this is based
on the study of the cohomology classes with background elds and, subsequently, by imposing the
background gauge invariance through the wti. the latter implements severe constraints on the
renormalization of mixings. third, we check the absence of ir anomalies.

regarding the normalization conditions and the choice of counterterms we have to take into
account the cp violation.
it arises only from the complex yukawa couplings [29], but new uv
divergent cp-odd greens functions as for instance the mixed two-point function for the higgs h
and the would-be-goldstone boson g0 [30] and the cp-odd tadpoles [31]) appear at higher orders.
these new divergences require new counterterms and new normalization conditions. in the paper
we analyze the cp-odd counterterms and cp-odd anomalies. the number of cp-odd counterterms2
and their normalization conditions are considerable reduced by using the wti for the background
gauge invariance. on the other side the wti are not enough to ensure the absence of cp-odd
anomalies. the problem is solved by a further functional identity, the abelian antighost equation
(aae) [32], which guarantees the cancellation of the anomaly coecients order-by-order.

concerning the system of scalar components of the neutral vector elds z 0,  and the scalar elds
g0, h, the cp-violation makes the usual denition of the higgs mass, the only physical parameter
of the system, meaningless. if the cp symmetry were conserved, (the real part of) the zero of the
two-point function for the higgs would correspond to its physical mass and the pole structure of
the unphysical elds would be xed by means of the sti. however, due to the cp violation, which
generates a mixing between the higgs and the goldstone eld g0, the mass of the higgs can not
be identied with the zero of the higgs two-point functions. this must be replaced with non-trivial
zero of the eigenvalues of the two-point function matrix for the system z    h  g0.

concerning the bfm, we have to recall two relevant results. the rst is the algebraic proof
of the stability under radiative corrections of the splitting of the gauge eld into a quantum part
and into a classical background [22]. the proof also includes the absence of anomalies beyond the
conventional adler-bardeen-jackiw anomaly [28], excluded by a suitable content of fermions of the
model. the second fact is the extension of this result to scalar elds in order to generalize the
t hooft gauge xing to a background-t hooft gauge xing. this problem was also covered in [16]
where the background scalar elds are introduced without imposing the (local) background gauge
invariance. the present work follows the lines of [23, 32] where to each bosonic eld corresponds a
background partner and the background gauge invariance is implemented.

besides the slavnov-taylor identities [4, 5], which implement the brst symmetry at the quan-
tum level, the nakanishi-lautrup equations [33], the equations of motion of the faddeev-popov ghost
elds, the abelian antighost equation [32] and the ward-takahashi identities for the background
gauge invariance are very useful to renormalize the sm. however, the complexity of the problem
requires a method to simplify the system of equations by reducing the problem to a restricted func-
tional space (the cohomology h k(s|d) [10], in the space of background gauge invariant functionals).
we propose the following hierarchy: i) we rst implement the linear identities, ii) we use the wti
for the background gauge invariance, and nally iii) we study the sti. as a result we are able to
enumerate the free parameters which must be tuned to renormalize the theory on a nite number

2related to this point we have to recall that the algebraic proof of the renormalization of non-semisimple gauge
model, given in [6], does not rely on any discrete symmetry (up to cpt). the authors, by introducing some supple-
mentary constraints in order to avoid the cp-odd mixing with the abelian ghost eld and the rest of the eld content
and to cancel the anomalies beyond the abj anomaly, are able to prove the renormalizability of the theory only by
means of brst symmetry.

3

of experimental data.

by imposing the wti, the number of free parameters is reduced and, consequently, a particular
care has to be devoted to check if the number of parameters is enough to ensure the correct ir
behavior of two- and three-point functions. in particular it can not be easily achieved in the renor-
malization of two-point functions for the ghost elds. in fact, in that sector, the matrix of two-point
functions is non symmetric and the number of the free parameters to x their ir behavior turns out
to be larger than the number of parameters needed for the system (, z 0).

furthermore it is interesting to clarify the relations among the two-point functions with only
external background elds and the two-point functions with quantum elds. the main point is to
compare their pole structures and to show that the normalization conditions x consistently both
of them.

a possible approach is to avoid nite renormalizations (except those needed to exclude ir diver-
gences) and to rely only on a subtraction scheme such as bphzl or ms in dimensional regularization
[8, 34, 35]. although these schemes seem to be very convenient from a theoretical and computa-
tional point of view, some diculties arise when the comparison with the physical data has to be
performed. in fact the ms or bphzl parameters have to be expressed in terms of the physical input
parameters and this implies that some algebraic equations are to be solved [8, 36]. a dierent way
of proceeding is to impose normalization conditions such that the correct parameterization is xed
from the beginning. an available scheme of this type is the on-shell scheme applied to the sm in
[11] and rigorously studied in [16].

the advantages of the on-shell scheme are due to the fact that the renormalized elds coincide
with the asymptotic elds whose normalization conditions are xed by the lsz conditions [37].
however this implies a large number of normalization conditions which appear unnecessary.
in
addition, the success of the on-shell scheme is mostly due to the construction of physical amplitudes
at the one loop order without the computation of lsz conditions for external particles. one price
to pay working with the on-shell scheme for the sm is the deformation of the sti and of the wti
[16] needed to avoid the ir anomalies. one possible alternative consists in requiring a minimal set
of normalization conditions for the physical parameters and the remaining parameters are xed by
a consistent subtraction scheme, like for ms.

our choice will be to keep the wti and the sti in their tree level form. this reduces the space
of free parameters and therefore we can only establish a partially on-shell scheme where a small set
of normalization conditions are necessary for the physical computations. we divide the complete set
into four dierent classes of normalizations:

1. at rst in order to have spontaneous symmetry breaking one has to renormalize the tadpoles.
this is essential in order to implement the higgs mechanism at higher orders. furthermore due
to the cp violation of the sm some cp-odd tadpoles could emerge from radiative corrections
and these have to be xed to zero in order to distinguish the physical higgs boson from the
unphysical scalars.

2. the second essential class of normalization conditions are the masses of particles. there are

three subclasses of masses which have to be xed:

(a) the masses of physical asymptotic particles. only the electron, the neutrinos and the
photon are asymptotic elds. for them there is no width and their only physical parameter
is their mass.

(b) the masses of unstable particles. for unstable particles the problem of correct denition
of masses was already taken into account in [38, 39]. instead of a real pole, a complex

4

pole has to be considered. clearly only the real part of the pole has to be compared with
the measured physical masses.

(c) the masses of unphysical particles. their masses are obviously un-observable, but their
denition is very important to guarantee the correct pole structure of two-point functions
ensuring the unitarity of the model.

3. ir constraints.

as we will discuss in the next paragraphs, the ir constraints are essential to guarantee the
correct pole structure of the massless elds. in fact by ensuring the vanishing of the two-point
functions for the massless elds and their mixed two-point functions with massive elds at
zero momentum we can avoid any ir divergences caused by regularization and subtraction. in
particular we have to discuss the following three classes of ir normalization conditions:

(a) transverse component of two-point functions for vector elds.

(b) two-point functions for the longitudinal component of vector elds and scalar elds. since
in the presence of cp violation (as for the sm) there is no discrete quantum number which
allows us to disentangle the complete scalar sector into unphysical (would-be-goldstone)
bosons and physical ones (higgs or its partners in the extended versions), we have to
discuss those elds in the same class. we have furthermore to clarify how to implement
correctly these conditions in order to avoid completely the ir problems to all orders.

(c) ghost elds. for the ghost elds which are the unphysical partners of massless gauge elds
attention has to be paid in order to get rid of the non-symmetric two-point functions.
in the following we will discuss the partially on-shell scheme comparing our results with
those given in the paper [16].

4. couplings.

the most delicate set of normalization conditions for the non-semi-simple gauge models are
the normalization of the couplings. generically the problem of xing the gauge couplings and
the yukawa couplings is a hard problem. in fact the best situation which can happen is a one-
to-one correspondence among parameters and measurable physical quantities. for couplings
it is in general quite dicult to nd out a correspondence among greens functions (computed
at a specic point and at xed perturbation order) with a single measurable quantity [40].
generically it turns out that the most commonly used combinations of greens functions are
gauge parameter dependent forbidding their comparison with physical quantities. alternative
approaches may be applied to by-pass this problem [40], however at the moment there is no
denitive unique procedure to x the gauge couplings at some physical value (for instance the
fermis constant is established by means of the -decay amplitude, which is satisfactory from
practical point of view, but it depends on the specic process considered).

for the couplings we have to single out three dierent classes of normalization conditions

(a) gauge couplings.

in this class, as is well known, due to the spontaneous symmetry breaking mechanism
some of the gauge couplings can be computed in terms of some physical masses and they
can be xed by measurable quantities (for instance the weinbergs angle w ). however
not all gauge couplings can be obtained in this way and some vertices have to be taken into
account (like for the electric charge e and the qcd strong coupling gs). this corresponds

5

to consider three- or four-point functions which generically depend on gauge parameters
in a complicate way and the best dened objects, also in the context of pure yang-mills
theory, are the s-matrix elements [41].

(b) yukawa couplings.

for the yukawa couplings we have to take into consideration two dierent types of cou-
plings. those couplings which can be expressed as fermion masses and those which are
expressed in terms of fermion mixing matrices (ckm). in general some yukawa couplings
may not even generate any contributions to fermion mass matrices, and they have to
be considered as genuine yukawa couplings. a proposal is xing them by computing
s-matrix elements involving the scalar and fermion coupling.

(c) higgs potential.

for the higgs potential a similar considerations as for the above classes has to be done.
some of the couplings of the higgs potential are xed by means of the scalar masses
(e.g. for the higgs mass in the minimal sm) and by means of vanishing of the tadpoles.
furthermore some couplings have to be dened in terms of s-matrix elements and this
requires the inspection of scalar self-couplings. notice that in extended models like 2hdm
and the mssm the higgs potential is parameterized by the mixing angles among physical
higgs particles. therefore they correspond to physical measurable quantities like the
ckm. we propose a scheme to x them by using the wti for the background gauge
invariance.

the paper is organized as follows:

in sec. 2, we briey review the notations, we introduce the
gauge xing and we discuss the relevant symmetries (brst, background gauge invariance and the
abelian antighost equation). in sec. 3 we discuss the free parameters by solving the complete set of
identities. then we systematically analyze the normalization conditions sector by sector. the hard
and soft anomalies are studied in sec. 4. in particular the cancellation of ir anomalies is explained.
finally, in the app. a we provide the complete set of identities and their algebra; in app. b and
in app. c we discuss the renormalization of nakanishi-lautrup, the equations of the ghost eld
equations (faddeev-popov equation and the abelian antighost equation), respectively.

2 general settings

2.1 gauge group, representations and fields

the eld content is specied by the quantized gauge vectors w a

scalars i, the background scalars i, the fermionsnl

 , their background partners w a
 , the
a
, the
,  a for quantized elds and
nakanishi-lautrup multipliers ba, the brst sources a
 , ca, c a, ba are identied by the index a
the external elds a
labeling a basis of the lie algebra g of the gauge group; the elds w as
 , as
 are restricted
to the semi-simple factors gs of g while i, i, i, i, r
i , l
i belong to the scalar, the left
handed and the right handed fermion representation spaces for g. the elds are also characterized
i , ba, 1 for
by a conserved faddeev-popov (ghost) charge which is: 0 for w a
c a, as

io3, the faddeev-popov ghosts ca, c

, i. the component of the elds w a

, 2 for  as and +1 for ca, as

 , w a

 , i, i, r

i , l

i , r

i and l

, i, l/r

i

 ,  as , as

 , i, l/r

i

, l/r

i

i , r

, l/r

i

3the index i for the fermion elds is a multi-index for isospin, avour, color (for quarks).

6

 , i.

in order to describe the general model it is also useful to introduce the charge matrices involved
in the coupling of the gauge elds w a
 . first of all we specify the symmetric, positive denite charge
matrix eab on adjoint representation of the algebra g. clearly eab has no elements connecting the
semi-simple factors gs to the abelian ones ga. furthermore the restriction of eab to each simple
component is proportional to the killing form, and, in a basis where the latter is diagonal, we have
eas bs = esas bs and es is identied with the charges of the simple factors. the charge matrix eab of
the abelian factors ga must be symmetric and positive denite.

the gauge group generators ta, t a

r, t a
(t a)

l in the scalar and fermion representations obey
r/l = t a

r/l,

(ta)t = ta,

hta, tbi = f abctc,

r/l, t b

ht a

r/li = f abct c

r/l,

r, t b

ht a

li = 0

where ta are real and f abc are the structure constants of g, with f abca = 0. the couplings of the
gauge elds w a
 (for each simple factor gs) and the couplings with scalar and fermion elds can now
be expressed in terms of the tensors

(ef )as bscs = esf asbs cs ,

(et)a = eabtb,

(et )a

r/l = eabt b

r/l.

the tree level action 0 is a local lorentz invariant hermitian functional

0 =z d4xl(w as

 , . . . , as

 )(x)

(2.1)

(2.2)

where l(w as

 , . . . , as

 )(x) is a local function of elds, of sources and their derivatives.

although we adopt the bphzl [8, 34] as a renormalization scheme in order to get rid of diver-
gences, our results can be extended to other renormalization schemes [35]. we will use the usual
symbol  to denote the eective action which generates the one particle irreducible greens functions
[8, 37].

according to the bphzl the elds are characterized by their uv and ir degrees so that the
power counting renormalizability of the theory and the ir niteness of the o-shell greens functions
requires

du v 0  4

and dir0  4.

(2.3)

we also assume the charge neutrality for 0 with respect to qed charge, faddeev-popov charge,
lepton numbers and baryon number. the tree level action 0, in this paper, is the bookkeeping of
all (invariant and non-invariant) counterterms of the model and we refer to the classical terms of
the action 0 as the lagrangian.

as is well known [4, 5, 7] the renormalization of gauge theories requires external sources coupled
to non-linear brst transformations. the brst-sources or, equivalently, the anti-elds enter on
the same footing as the quantum elds and they also require their own ir and uv degree. if  is
the brst-source for the eld , eqs. (2.3) imply

du v   4  du v  and dir  4  dir

with the condition du v  dir.

at tree level the gauge eigenstates are dened by the background gauge symmetry, but they
have no denite ir power counting4. this is clearly due to non-diagonal non-negative denite
4in the sm this applies to the mixing between the photon eld a and the z bosons. moreover also the ghost system
 cz has no denite ir power counting in the gauge eigenstates basis. for the quark elds it is reasonable to work

ca
in the gauge eigenstates, but this is not very practical.

7

mass matrices. a meaningful subtraction procedure with the correct ir power counting can only
be achieved by expressing the elds in terms of combinations corresponding to mass eigenstates.
then we also introduce the tree level mass eigenstates aa
z for massless
and massive gauge elds5, for would-be goldstone bosons and higgs elds, for fermions and for
massless/massive ghost elds respectively. 
a are the corresponding
brst-sources, background elds, the brst variations of the background elds, the antighost elds
and their brst variations in the mass eigenstates representation. the denition of the mass-
eigenstates will be extended at the quantum level in the next sections.

 , gi , hi, f i , fj , ca

 , z a

 , z a

 , gi

, aa

a , ca

, h i

, c

a, b

, 

2.2 symmetries and background gauge fixing

to implement the brst symmetry [4, 5, 9, 11, 16] at the quantum level, the non-linear brst
transformations are coupled to the brst-sources (summation over repeated indices is understood)

ls.t. = 

as(cid:16)cas  (ef )as bs cs w bs

 ccs(cid:17) + i(cid:16)ca(et)a

ij(j + vj)(cid:17) +

+  as(cid:18)

1
2

(ef )as bs cs cbs ccs(cid:19) + r

i ca(et )a

r,ij r

j + 

r
i ca(et )a

r,ij r

j + h.c..

(2.4)

the invariance of the vertex functional  is expressed by the slavnov-taylor identities (l/r is
suppressed, but the summation over the two types of fermion is understood)

s() =z d4x


as



w as


+ caa 
w aa


+


as


cas

+


i


i +


 
i





i +


 
i






i + bagab 
 cb

+ as



 w as


+ i

+



 i = 0.

(2.5)

the general symmetric and invertible matrix gab was introduced in the papers by becchi et al.
[5, 6]. it can be used to get rid of the possible ir problems in the on-shell renormalization scheme,
proposed by aoki et al.
in [11], for the sm as pointed out by e.kraus in [16]. however we can
introduce the rotated anti-ghost elds ca = (g1)ab cb in order to simplify our derivations and
we will use this matrix discussing the normalization conditions for the ghost elds in sec. 3 and in
app. c.

the nilpotency of the brst transformations is a crucial ingredient in the analysis of the quantum
theory; however, in the case of non-semisimple gauge models, this is not sucient to guarantee that
the gauge group of the renormalized theory and, in particular, its scalar and fermion representations
coincide with the tree level ones [6]. this is equivalently expressed by saying that the couplings
among the matter elds and abelian gauge bosons with scalars and fermions are not protected
against the mixing with other conserved abelian currents [49]. for that reason, we impose the
abelian antighost equation (aae)

gaa() 

 (  + v)k(et)aa
kj


caa
= 2caa + j(et)aa


j =

jk ( + v)k + r

i (et )aa

r,ij r

j + h.c.  cl
caa

(2.6)

as supplementary constraints on  (see [6, 32] for further details). in app. a (eq. (a.119) it will be
shown that the commutation relation between the sti (2.5) and the aae coincides with the wti

5in the paper we will follow the convention given by [11] for the sm: z = cw w 3

  sw w 0
 .

8

for the background gauge invariance with respect to abelian factors. those wti can be used to x
the abelian couplings in the same way as the eq. (2.6) as in [16].

the linear terms in eq. (2.5), proportional to the external elds as

 , i, which implement
the non-trivial brst transformation of the background elds w as
 , i, are essential for proving
the renormalizability [16, 22]. in fact the introduction of background elds w as
 , i triggers new
couplings with dimension less or equal to four among background and quantum elds: the latter are
absent in other formalisms and they require a proper renormalization. the extension of the brst
symmetry to the background elds is a necessary condition to ensure the renormalizability of the
model, but it is not sucient to guarantee the equivalence between the conventional approach (that
is without background elds) and the bfm. the equivalence can be only achieved requiring the
background gauge invariance of the simple factors gs

was ()  asbs



 as bs




 w bs


+


w bs


ij "( + v)j
r,ijr
bc "b


c



 
r
j



i

+(et)as

+(et)as

+(ef )as


i

+ (  + v)j

+




r
i

r

j +


 i



r
i

+ j


i

+ j

r
j + 

r
i


 
r

j

+ b



c


+ cb 

cc + bb 

bc + cb 



i# +
 + (l  r) +
 c# = 0

cc +  b 

(2.7)

, as bs



where as bs
and to the

backgrounds w as
 . the invariance under background gauge transformations of the action implies
also the invariance under rigid transformation of the group g.

are the covariant derivatives with respect to the gauge elds w as


the quantization of the classical gauge invariant action inv

[w, , ] requires a gauge xing

0

which breaks the local gauge symmetry. in particular for the bfm the choice6

lg.f. = bb"bas as bs



(w  w )
bs

+ baa (w  w )

aa + bc(  + v)i(et)c

ij( + v)j +

bc
2

bc#

(2.8)

is invariant under background gauge transformations (2.7) if the t hooft parameters ab and the
gauge parameters ab satisfy

ab = saas bbs as bs + aabaaaa bba ,

ab = saas bbs as bs + aabaaaa bba.

(2.9)

here a single gauge parameter s and a single t hooft parameter s is allowed for each simple factor
gs. the symmetric and positive denite7 matrices aaba, aaba x the gauge for the abelian factors
ga.

6 for the computations of radiative corrections [21], it is convenient to introduce the background gauge elds for
 . however those background elds are unessential from a theoretical point of view, since

the abelian gauge bosons aaa
their equations of motion are



 w aa



= baa

and they are free after removing the ba elds. this equation has to be compared with the analogous equations for
the non-abelian background gauge elds [22] and for the scalar elds. they are non-trivial and require the sources
as

 , i.

7the t hooft parameters, in the tree level approximation, are proportional to ghost masses. if some masses vanish,
as, for instance, for the ghost ca for the photon, the t hooft parameters ab are constrained to ensure this feature to
all orders.

9

0

we assume that inv

[w, , ] does not explicitly depend on the background elds w as

 , i. the
latter enter only in the gauge xing terms (2.8). this, together with the wti (2.7), ensures the
equivalence between the physical observables computed in the conventional approach (namely with
the t hooft gauge xing) and those computed by the bfm (see for example [24] for further details).
finally, the variation of the gauge xing with respect to the brst provides the following faddeev-
popov terms

l = cahaas as bs

 bscs



+asbs

 bs

 + abi(et)b

ij( + v)ji

ccs + aaa 2caa + ab(  + v)i(et)b

ij (et)c

jk( + v)kcc+

(2.10)

non-semisimple gauge models, quantized in the t hooft-background gauge, are completely deter-
mined by the complete set of identities, derived (see app. a) by computing the commutators among
sti (2.5), the aae (2.6) and the wti (2.7) for simple factors, and by normalization conditions
which will be discussed in the next section.

3 normalization conditions and parameterization

renormalization scheme

in the next sections we study the free parameters and the normalization conditions according to the
following scheme.

1. we derive the solution to the functional equations (2.5), (2.7), (2.6), (a.119), (a.111) in the
space of local integrated functionals. we assume that the identities are not spoiled by anomalies
and this hypothesis will be veried in the sec. 4. furthermore we assume that these identities
maintain their tree level form [4, 5, 6]. this implies severe constraints on the renormalizations
of the eld mixings and on the renormalization of the background elds. as a result we are
able to classify the free parameters of the model and to derive the classical action cl including
all counterterms.

2. in order to separate the normalization conditions for the unphysical states like ghost elds
from the physical ones (masses and couplings of physical particles), it is convenient to start
considering the ghost sector. there, we discuss the normalization conditions which prevent ir
problems and provide a reasonable denition of the z-ghost mass. as a consequence we nd
that the free parameters compatible with the complete set of functional identities are not suf-
cient to x the proper normalization conditions. nevertheless we show that ghost equations
(a.118)-(2.6) must be slightly deformed in order to be consistent with the normalization con-
ditions. therefore the equations of motion for the b elds (nl eqs. (a.111)) are accordingly
modied to higher orders. these deformations do not inuence either the sti and the wti
nor the physical amplitudes.

3. by using the renormalized ghost equations (a.118) and the nl eqs. (a.111) we can simplify
the sti for the longitudinal (scalar) gauge bosons and the mixing with scalar elds introducing
the reduced functional . within this sector we discuss the renormalization of tadpoles, the ir
problems (related to the ir anomalies studied in sec. 4.2) and we discuss the renormalization
of the would-be goldstone masses. as a consequence of the sti we are also able to identify
the masses of the higgs elds and to provide a gauge parameter independent denition for

10

them. in the sector of scalar elds we have to consider the possible mixing and the cp-odd
counterterms and renormalizations.

4. having xed the unphysical degrees of freedom and the higgs masses, we consider the gauge
bosons. by means of sti for two-point greens functions, we discuss the renormalization of
massless and massive gauge bosons and their mixings. we show that by using a minimal set
of free parameters compatible with the wti we are able to avoid completely the ir problems.
furthermore, independently of the mixings and in the case of cp violation we are also able to
x the proper, gauge parameter independent mass renormalizations.

5. for fermion elds we have to select the normalization conditions which must be fullled in
order to compute gauge invariant amplitudes: the renormalization of the mass and of the
ckm mixing matrices. we provide a gauge independent denition of the mass renormalization
which is also appropriate in the presence of mixings. moreover, we dene the mass eigenstates
and in terms of them we consider the wti. finally by using the wti expressed in the mass
eigenstates, we are able to x the ckm renormalizations.

6. finally we show that the renormalization greens functions with external background elds is
related to the renormalization of greens functions with external quantum elds. in particular
we show that the zeros of two-point functions with external background elds coincide with
zeros of two-point functions with external quantum partners. we also show that the constraints
coming form the wti are not sucient to x the ir problems for quantum greens functions
and proper normalization conditions must be used (see item (4) above).

7. at the end we discuss the gauge coupling renormalization.

3.1 general solution of the symmetry constraints at tree level

the unknown quantity of the problem is a lorentz-invariant cpt-even8 local functional9 cl =

r d4xlcl with zero faddeev-popov charge. furthermore the power counting renormalizability re-

quires du v cl  4 and dircl  4 and, since we perform the present calculation in the symmetric
variables, we derive the most general solution which respect to the uv power counting. in the next
sections we show that also the ir constraint can be satised by a suitable choice of normalization
conditions.

due to the complexity of the problem it is convenient to establish a precise hierarchy among
functional identities, solving the linear constraints at the rst step, then solving the wti and, nally,
the sti. this hierarchy shows how the abelian anti-ghost equation (2.6) xes the abelian couplings
among the quantum elds i, r
i and the renormalization of
the abelian ghost elds caa.

i and their brst sources i, r

i , l

i , l

the solution can be expressed in terms of the following separated terms

cl = q

cl + s.t.

cl + 

cl + g.f.
cl

(3.11)

8in the case of the sm we cannot assume the p and the cp invariance because they are broken by the presence
of explicit chiral vertices and by the cp-violating phase (and the non-degeneracy of the quark masses) of the ckm
matrix.

9this functional must not be confused with 0. this new quantity contains all the counterterms needed to impose

the normalization conditions [7, 8].

11

where q
of the quantum elds, 
of the background elds as

cl depends only on quantum elds, s.t.
cl

contains the brst-sources couplings and the w.f.r.
cl contains the couplings among the brst-sources and the brst variation

 , i and g.f.

cl

is

g.f.

cl = z d4xnbchcas as bs



+ cb(  + v)i(et)b

(w  w )
bs
ca
2

ij( + v)ji +

+ caa(w  w )
aa

bcba  caa2caa(cid:27)

(3.12)

contains the gauge xing terms. furthermore by the eqs. (a.118) and eq. (2.6) the reduced func-
tional  =   g.f.

cl depends on the new variables

as
 = as

 + as bs



cbs ,

i = i + caab(et)b

ij (  + v)j ,

i = i + (et)aa

ij (  + v)j caa.

as a consequence the complete dependence on the abelian ghost is re-absorbed by the new variable
. this is due to the aae (2.6). because of the negative faddeev-popov charge of the brst-sources
 , i, their uv dimensions and lorentz invariance 
as

cl can be parameterized by



cl =z d4x(cid:16)as

 xas bs bs

 + ixij j(cid:17)

(3.13)

where xas bs , xij are arbitrary non singular and, respectively, real and complex matrices. these are
constrained by the wti which imply (assuming the irreducibility of the scalar eld representation)

xas bs = xs as bs , xij = x0ij +xaa

xaataa
ij

(3.14)

where xs are single free real parameters for each simple factor gs of the group and x0, xaa for
the scalar representation. for a complex representation (as for the higgs minimal sector of the sm)
x0, xaa are complex. for this reason there is no counterterms for the mixing between the would-
be-goldstone boson and the higgs eld in the case of the minimal sm where only a restricted higgs
potential is allowed.
in the case of reducible representations for the scalar elds (such as in the
2hdm and in the higgs sector of the mssm) we have a set of free complex constants {x,0, x,aa}
for each irreducible representation .
it is convenient to rewrite the xij in terms of a product
of a multiplicative factor times a rotation xij = x0rx
ij . the rotation is generated by the abelian
generators taa
in the scalar representation. finally by imposing the sti and the wti we immediately
ij
get

w as

 = z w,asbs(cid:16)w bs

 + xs

w bs

 (cid:17) ,

i = z ,ij(cid:16)j + x0rx,jk k(cid:17)

(3.15)

where z w,asbs , z ,ij are arbitrary non singular matrices and the x are related to them by the
equations

as bs = z w
z w

s as bs ,

xs = z w,1

s

 1,

z 
ij = z 

0 ij +xaa

x0rx

ij = z ,1

0 r1

ij  ij.

aataa
z 

ij  z 

0 rij

(3.16)

(3.17)

as a consequence we derive the renormalization of the gauge elds and the splitting among the
quantum parts from the background ones

w as

 = z w,asbs(cid:16)w bs

  w bs

 (cid:17) + w as

 ,

i = z ,ij(cid:16)j  j(cid:17) + i.

12

 , i do not
this implies that the background eld part of the gauge elds and of scalar elds w as
get independent radiative corrections and only the quantum part of these elds is renormalized by a
wave function zs, z0rij. by rescaling the gauge elds w as
 and their background partners
w as
  es w as
 and introducing the wave function renormalization for the background gauge elds
z w
s as bs , the usual relation [20] between the charge renormalization and the two-point functions
with external background gauge elds is easily recovered.

  esw as

we introduce the redened sources 

as
 = z w,1

s

 , i = z ,1
as

ij

j, the brst-sources part s.t.
cl

is given by

where

s.t.

cl = z d4x"xs e

+xs

as z c,1
as a
s

as

 e

as bs(cid:16)z c

bs ds cds(cid:17) +e

(ef )as bs cs z c

cb

s z c

i

bs b
s

cc

s

cs c
s

as bs cbs (et)as
z c

ji (cid:16)e + v(cid:17)l

+ r,i (z ,r)1

+ 

r,i

(z

,r

ij z c
)1
ij z c

as bs cbs (et )as
as bs cbs (et )as

r,k z ,r
r,jk z

km r,m

,r

km r,m + (r  l)i
 (cid:17) cds

 + w as

(3.18)

(3.19)

= z c

s as bs

cbs = cas  (ef )as bs ds(cid:16)z w

as bs (w  w )bs

as bs

e

where z c
with an arbitrary real constant z c

as bs

are the w.f.r.s for ghost elds. the invariance under the wti implies z c

as bs

s for each simple factor.
,l
ij and applying the wti to the fermionic

ij , z ,l

,r
ij , z

ij , z

for the fermions we introduce z ,r

terms we have

ij = z ,r
z ,r

z r,
i,aa

t r,aa
ij

,

ij = z ,l
z ,l

z

,r
ij = z

z

r,

i,aat r,aa

ij

,

z

,l
ij = z

i,0 ij +xaa
i,0 ij +xaa

,r

i,0 ij +xaa
i,0 ij +xaa

,l

z l,
i,aa

t l,aa
ij

(3.20)

z

l,

i,aat l,aa

ij

for each independent multiplet of fermions.

in order to compare these free parameters with the conventional formalism of the sm, we translate

the compact notation i , i for fermions used here into physical elds

l

i =nql

,a,i, ll

,io ,

r

i =nur

,a, dr

,a, er

o

(3.21)

where  is the avour index, a is the color index and i is the su (2) isospin. in this formalism, we
obtain

z ,l
ij = z 0,l

, ijab +xaa

, t l,aa
z l,aa

ij

ab,

(3.22)

ij and analogous equations hold for z ,r/

for z ,l
. in the above equation the sum runs over
the ve abelian conserved currents (see app. a). notice that without the bfm, and therefore,
without imposing the wti, we can add a further set of parameters z 3,l
ij where 3 is the third
component of the su (2) factor of the gauge group.

, z ,r/l

, 3

ij

ij

13

1
4

q

1

r



f aa

 f 

f as

 f 

as 

4xs

cl = z d4x"

aa + e
j +e
el

 (cid:16)e + v(cid:17)k
+ ijkl(cid:16)e + v(cid:17)i(cid:16)e + v(cid:17)j(cid:16)e + v(cid:17)k(cid:16)e + v(cid:17)l
+ h.c.(cid:21)
i el,ij

ij(cid:16)e + v(cid:17)j eik
+ ji(cid:16)e + v(cid:17)i(cid:16)e + v(cid:17)j
j (cid:16)e + v(cid:17)i
+ ie
j + ie
er
el
i er,ij
 is the eld strength tensor for the non abelian gauge elds fw as
j are the rescaled fermions el
 . el
aai j
ij (cid:16)z w
ijj = i +h(et)as
e
k +h(et )r,as
 (cid:17) + (et )r,aa
ej = z ,r
er,ij

jkl
as + w 
s (w  w )as

as(cid:17) + (et)aa

s (w  w )

(cid:16)z w

 and f aa

 + w as

ij w aa

ik r

j = z l

r
i y ij

i

l





ij

ij w 

j . the covariant derivatives are given by

+

(3.23)

 for the abelian

 i z ,r

jk r
k

finally the terms q

cl involving the quantum elds only are (compare with [6] and [10]):

where f as
ones w aa

and analogously for the left-handed fermions.

the remaining free parameters (in the gauge sector) are the gauge couplings es for each simple
factor and the gauge couplings eaaba for the abelian factors. notice that for several abelian gauge
elds the kinetic terms of the action could mix the gauge elds. for the sm, for a single u (1) factor,
this is obviously excluded. a complete discussion on the free abelian gauge elds and abelian factors
is given in paper [10].

the free invariant parameters ij, ijkl are the quadratic and the quartic couplings for the scalar

elds, respectively. they satisfy the following algebraic relations [9]

(et)a
(et)a

ikkj + ik(et)a
immjkl + (et)a

kj = 0
jmimkl + (et)a

kmijml + (et)a

lmijkm = 0.

(3.24)

(3.25)

the number of these free parameters depends on the number of scalar multiplets. for the minimal
sm the number of free parameters are just one quadratic term () and one quartic coupling (),
however for the non-minimal sm such as the 2hdm the number of invariant scalar terms increases.
concerning the cp-violating counterterms we nd the following result: without the background
gauge invariance the cp-violation permits the existence of non-vanishing cp-odd greens functions
for instance the mixing between the would-be-goldstone boson and the higgs and the sti allows
for cp-violating counterterms which x these new divergences. by using the bfm in the case of
cp-violation induced only by fermion couplings, these cp-odd greens functions are automatically
xed by the background gauge invariance. for extended models, where the higgs potential violates
the cp symmetry, the background gauge invariance is not sucient to x all these cp-odd couplings
and new symmetries must be invoked.

in order to respect the symmetry constraints the yukawa coupling y ij

i

have to satisfy the

algebraic constraints [9]

(et )r,a

ik y kj

i + y ik

i

(et )l,a

kj + (et)a

ijy ik

j = 0

(3.26)

and this restricts further the number of free parameters.

notice that the covariant kinetic terms for fermions and scalars have no free parameter, beyond
the w.f.r., in contrast to the kinetic terms for the gauge elds or mass terms for the scalar elds.
this is due to the linear dependence among these terms and the invariant counterterms of the form

s0z d4xi(cid:16)e + v(cid:17)j

, s0z d4x(cid:0)i j + i j(cid:1)

14

(3.27)

the analysis of this linear dependence it is essential to separate the unphysical parameters such as
the w.f.r. and the physical ckm matrix elements.

the yukawa matrices for the sm in the basis (3.21) are given by (the indices of the representation

of su (2) for scalar elds and fermions are the same because they live in the same representation)

y jk

i =

y qu,i
(,a,j|,b) y qd,i

(,a,j|,b) y qe,i

(,a,j|)

y lu,i
(,j|,b)

y ld,i
(,j|,b)

y qe,i
(,j|)



(3.28)

and by the covariance with respect to su (3) gauge symmetry we have y qe,i
(,j|,b) =
y ld,i
(,j|,b) = 0 and y qu,i
(,j|)ab. the covariance with respect to the
su (2) is more delicate and the instabilities of the fermion representation of the abelian factor u (1)
have to be taken into account.

(,a,j|,b) = y qu,i

(,a,j|,b) = y qd,i

(,a,j|) = y lu,i

(,j|)ab, y qd,i

3.2 ghost sector

this section deals with the normalization conditions for the ghost elds and it is divided into two
parts. in the rst part we discuss the normalization conditions on two-point functions with a special
emphasis on the renormalization of the mixings ca  cz , cz  ca. in the second part we analyze the
faddeev-popov equations (a.118) and their deformations. in particular we show that the number of
free parameters (z c
), constrained by faddeev-popov equations (a.118) and by the aae (2.6)
is not enough to x the two-point functions in order to avoid the ir divergences. we discuss the
minimal extension of the set of parameters, namely the introduction of the w.f.r. for the antighost
elds z c
(related to the matrix gab discussed in sec. 2.2), which respects the sti and the
wti and the corresponding normalization conditions.

s, z c

s, z c

aaba

aaba

the ghost masses are independent parameters of the theory and their renormalization can be
achieved by adjusting the independent t hooft parameters s, aaba. for practical calculations, in
order to avoid the double poles, it is advantageous to set the ghost masses mgh equal to the masses
of the would-be-goldstone bosons (restricted t hooft gauge xing). that corresponds, at tree level,
to setting all the t hooft parameters s, aaba equal to the gauge parameters as , aaba. however,
at higher orders, this degeneracy cannot be maintained since, to exclude ir divergences, the t hooft
parameters must be used to enforce

(n)
a cb
ca

a

= 0

(n)
a cb
ca

z

= 0

(n)
z cb
ca

a

= 0

(3.29)

(p)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)p2=0

(p)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)p2=0

as normalization conditions. notice that the ghosts (ca
z are the
massive ones) and the antighost elds (ca
z ) have independent degrees of freedom and the
two-point function matrix is non-symmetric. as a consequence, unlike the gauge bosons, we must
nullify both the mixed two-point functions. to this end, we rstly check that we can impose such
normalization conditions by tuning the free parameters aa,ba, s, z c
for antighost
elds z c

a are the massless ghosts and ca

s and the w.f.r.

a and ca

, z c
s.

aaba

we consider the two-point functions matrix

(p)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)p2=0

  caa cba (p) caa cbs (p)
cas cba (p) cas cbs (p) !

15

(3.30)

where cacb(p) 6= cbca(p) and we rotate the elds by two independent transformations r(p), r(p)
obtaining, at xed momentum p,

  ca

ca

a cb
a cb

a

z

(p) ca
(p) ca

z cb
z cb

a

z

(p)

(p) !=  raaa

raaa

raas

raas !  caa cba (p) caa cbs (p)

raab ras b !
cas cba (p) cas cbs (p) !  raab ras b

furthermore, we consider tree level parameters appearing in the action (0), namely z c
svitij
z c
equation of (3.29) is rewritten in the form

vk, and analogously for mgh

and setting mgh

 s e2

as tjk
bs

, mgh

, mgh

s, z c

aaba

aaba

as ba

aabs

as bs

s, z c
,
aaba
, the rst

h ras a(cid:16) z c
+ ras a(cid:16) z c

smgh

as bs z c
as caz c

smgh

s(cid:17) rbsb + raaa(cid:16) z c
caba(cid:17) rbab + raaa(cid:16) z c

aacamgh

cabs z c
aacamgh

s(cid:17) rbs b

cadaz c

daba(cid:17) rbabi + (n)

a ca
ca
b

(3.31)

(0) = 0

a cz
b

(0), cz

where the ghost elds corresponding to the gauge eigenstates are rescaled. equivalent equations are
(0) substituting the matrices ras a, raaa with ras a, raaa (where the
derived for ca
index a runs over the set of massive ghost elds) and rbs b, rbab with rbs b, rbab. in eq. (3.31),
(n)
(0) computed in the bphzl
a ca
ca
b
subtraction scheme10.

(0) is the n-loop contribution to the two-point function ca

a ca
b

a ca
b

the determinant of the system which corresponds to the normalization conditions (3.29) vanishes.
this is due to the presence of massless particles and it is ensured by the sti. therefore some
(0) can be discarded. nevertheless the system is
equations are redundant and, for instance, ca
still solvable in terms of w.f.r. z c
s and in terms of the t hooft parameters. on the other
side z c
is xed by the wti and the aae to the charge renormalization eaaba. as an example
we consider the system ca  cz of the sm, and we impose that r and r coincide with the tree
level rotations, namely the weinberg angle w . the latter follows from our request of preserving
the sti and the wti in their tree level form in the non-minimal sector. in fact, we use the common
identications11

s, z c

, z c

a ca
b

aaba

aaba

r3 a = r3 a = sw ,
r0 a = r0 a = cw ,

r3 z = r3 z = cw ,
r0 z = r0 z = sw ,

for the rotations and

gh = z c
m33
gh = z c
m03

2m33
1m03

ghz c
ghz c

2 = z c
2z c
2 = z c
1z c

2 v2
22g2
21g2g1 v2

m30
m00

gh = z c
gh = z c

2m30
1m00

ghz c
ghz c

1 = z c
1 = z c

2z c
1z c

22g2g1 v2
11g2

1v2

(3.32)

(3.33)

2  z c

1  z c

su (2), z c

for the renormalized mass parameters. there we put z c
u (1) for the antighost and
z c
u (1) for the ghosts; we have also used the parameters 2  su (2), 1  u (1)
and the couplings g2  gsu (2), g1  gu (1). therefore in the neutral ghost sector of the sm, we have
ve real parameters. indeed, z1 is xed by the renormalization of the abelian gauge elds and, by
means of the aae (2.6), coincides with the renormalization of the u (1) gauge coupling.

su (2), z c

2  z c

1  z c

10in the present section we always use the notation (0)

 0 to indicate the tree level action; (n) to denote the

transform of the eld with in-coming momentum p and the momentum conservation is understood.

n-loop correction which satisfy the normalization conditions up to n  1 order. the eld e(p) indicates the fourier

11the symbols sw , cw denote the sine and cosine of the weinbergs angle.

16

then introducing this denition into the equation (3.31) we nally obtain the system

m03
m30

gh = s2
gh = s2

w cacz (0) + c2

w cz ca(0)  sw cw (cz cz (0)  caca(0))

w czca(0)  c2

w cacz (0)  sw cw (czcz (0)  caca(0))

(3.34)

which can be solved in terms of two parameters. one of the remaining parameters is used to impose

lim
p0

i p
p2 

3 ca(p) = sw

(3.35)

where 
3 is the brst source for the third component of su (2) triplet of gauge bosons, which is
essential to guarantee the absence of ir anomalies (see sec. 4.2). the remaining parameters are
needed to have a consistent renormalization of the eqs. (a.118) as we will be shown below, and to
x the mass of the z-ghost. therefore there is no free parameter to x also the mass of the w -ghost
as also discussed in [16]. to x those masses independently the wti must be deformed. on the
other hand, the degeneracy among the ghost masses and masses of the system of goldstones and
scalar components of gauge bosons is ensured by the sti.

in conclusion, this analysis shows that for the sm the free parameters, constrained by the equa-
tion of motion for the ghost elds (faddeev-popov equations and aae), are not enough to avoid
the ir problems and to x the z-ghost mass. if a new abelian factor is added and the new gauge
boson has to be massless, the wti and the sti are necessarily modied12.

at this point we are able to study the faddeev-popov equations and the renormalization of the
greens functions which contain the brst sources. in particular, by the faddeev-popov equations
we have the following relations among two-point functions

ij jcba (p2)

caa cba (p) = aabap2 + aacavi(et)ca
caa cbs (p) = aacavi(et)ca
cas cba (p) = ip
cas cbs (p) = ip

 cba (p) + svi(et)as
 cbs (p) + svi(et)as

ij j cbs (p2)

as

as

ij j cba (p2)
ij jcbs (p2).

(3.36)

the uv dimensions of brst-sources as
 cba , 
as

 , i and the lorentz invariance imply the supercial
 cbs j cba , icbs . they are renormalized by the
divergence of two-point functions 
as
w.f.r.s z c
s and the mass renormalization of ghost elds. furthermore, in order to clarify
 cbs , we dierentiate
the relation among the kinetic terms of ghost two-point functions and the 
as
the forth equation in the system (3.36) with respect to momentum p and we consider the limit
p  :

s, z c

, z c

aaba

lim
p

2
p cas cbs (p) = lim

 cbs (p)(cid:17) + svi(et)as

as

p(cid:16)p

phi2
p(cid:16)2ip + pp2(cid:17) 

 cbs (p).
as

= lim

ij 2

p jcbs (p2)i =

(3.37)

the weinbergs theorem [42] is used to discard the convergent two-point functions. on the other
 cba (p) are supercially nite to all
hand, because of the aae eq. (2.6), the greens functions 
as
orders and no normalization is required. this can be easily shown by dierentiating eq. (2.6) with
respect to the sources as

 (p)

p

 cba (p) + vi(et)ba

as

ij p

as
 j

(p2) = 0

(3.38)

12in that case new w.f.r. z c for ghost elds are needed to impose the normalization conditions.

17

and observing that p
also 
ghost elds z c

aaba

(p2) is supercially convergent by power counting. we conclude that
 cba (p) are supercially convergent to all orders. as a consequence, the w.f.r. of abelian
as

as
 j

is not independent of the w.f.r. of the abelian gauge elds.

finally to check the consistency among the eq. (3.36) and the normalization conditions (3.29),
we insert the expressions (3.36), computed at zero momentum, in (3.31). however, since the system
has sensible solutions only for specic models, we concentrate on the ca, cz system of the sm. from
identities (3.36), by using the identications (3.32-3.33) we obtain the following system

caca(p) = p2(cid:16)c2

z c
cacz (p) = p2 (cw sw  sw 3cz ) + (sw
cz ca(p) = p2 (sw cw  cw 3ca)  (cw

w + sw 3ca(cid:17) + (sw

z c

2g22 + cw
z c
z c

2g22 + cw
1g11  sw

1g11)0ca
z c
z c

1g11)0cz
2g22)0ca

(3.39)

z c

z c

2g22 + sw

where 0 is the brst source coupled to the brst variation of the neutral goldstone boson
g0. the vanishing of the terms on the l.h.s.
at zero momentum implies 3ca(0) = 0 and
(cw
1g11) = 0. the latter imposes a relation among the t hooft parameters and
the w.f.r. which reduces the number of free parameters. furthermore those relations imply that also
the rst eq. (3.39) is automatically satised showing that caca(0) = 0. this is a consequence of the
sti (which can also be checked from (3.36)) and the normalization conditions (3.29) are compatible
with the faddeev-popov equations. the resulting condition 0ca(0) = 0 turns out to be useful to
exclude the ir anomalies.

clearly the faddeev-popov eqs. (a.118) are deformed by the mass renormalization of the mass
of cz and by the conditions (3.29). this means that the parameters 1, 2 in eqs. (3.39) do not
coincide with to tree level parameters. moreover, the constraints coming from the sti and the wti
are not aected by these deformations.

3.3 scalar sector

the unitarity of the s-matrix relies on the quartet mechanism [5, 33]; that is, the scalar degrees of
freedom of gauge bosons and their goldstone partners must be degenerate with the system of ghosts
and anti-ghosts. therefore, it must be implemented at higher orders, and this requires a proper
renormalization of tadpoles, of the nakanishi-lautrup eqs. (a.111) and, nally, of the sti.

first, we recall that a generic subtraction scheme (for instance the m s scheme for the di-
mensional regularization) shifts the tadpole contribution to greens functions. consequently, by
adjusting the vacuum expectation value vi and the free parameters ij, ijkl, dened in (3.24), the
tadpole normalization conditions

=(cid:18)ijvj +

1
6

ijklvjvkvl(cid:19)(n)

+ (n)
i

(0) = 0

(3.40)

(n)

i (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)=0

must be imposed to all orders. on the r.h.s., (n)
i

(0) denotes n-loop contribution to tadpoles.

notice that the normalization condition (3.40) involves both the tadpoles of physical higgs
elds (hi where i = 1 . . . nhiggs) and the tadpoles of unphysical goldstone elds (gi with i =
1 . . . ngolstone) [31]. in fact, although the latter are absent at tree level, due to the cp invariance of
the scalar terms in the action (3.23), they are shifted by cp-odd radiative corrections involving the
ckm couplings. furthermore notice that for extended models there is a at direction of the higgs

18

potential ensured by the following sti13

ca

z i

(0)i (0) = 0

(3.41)

where ca
z are the neutral massive ghost elds. for the sm, neglecting cp violation, the above
equation implies that g0(0) = 0 where g0 is the neutral would-be-goldstone boson. for the sm,
considering the cp violation, we have that h(0) = 0 implies g0(0) = 0. and nally, for extended
model, by a suitable rotation among the scalar elds, one tadpole is automatically nullied.

for two-point functions we have to consider the complete matrix

ml

(p) =

w aa w ba (p) l
l
l
w as w ba (p) l
iw ba (p)

w aa w bs (p) w aa j (p)
w as w bs (p) w as j (p)
iw bs (p)

ij (p)



(3.42)

where l

w aw b(p) are the longitudinal part of two-point functions for the gauge bosons,

w a

 w b


(p) =(cid:18)g 

pp

p2 (cid:19) t

w aw b(p) +

pp
p2 l

w aw b(p);

in the same way

w ai(p) = ipw a

 i(p)

are the mixed two-point functions for gauge bosons and scalars and ij (p) are the two-point
functions matrix for scalars.

in sec. 2 the gauge xing was given in terms of the ba elds. however, for practical computation
these elds are commonly integrated out and the resulting tree level contribution to mixed gauge
-scalar greens functions and for scalar two-point functions of (3.42) are

(0)
w as j

(p) =(cid:18)1 

(0)
ij

(0) = ij +

1
2

s

ki ,

s(cid:19) vktas
ijklvkvl +  2

s

(0)
w aa j

(p) = 1 

baca! vktca

ki

1

aaba

1

baca

vktas

ki tas

jl vl + aaba

cadavktaa

ki tca

(3.43)

jl vl! .

the masses of the goldstone mij
g correspond to the expression in the brackets of ij (0). notice
that, since the relations among the goldstone masses and gauge parameters are invertible, the
goldstone masses can be read as gauge parameters. the restricted t hooft gauge xing corresponds
to setting the masses of the goldstones equal to the masses of the massive ghosts. clearly this is
not true for the gauge parameters of massless gauge elds.

another very convenient choice is the t hooft-feynman gauge xing (r gauge) which corre-
sponds to identify the masses of goldstone scalars with the masses of ghosts and with the masses
of the gauge bosons. this feature can not be achieved in the bfm because the background gauge
invariance implies the degeneracy among the gauge parameters: only a single gauge parameter s, s
can be introduced for each simple factor.

in conclusion the nakanishi-lautrup eqs. (a.111) cannot be maintained in their tree level form
and the parameters which appear in those equations are xed on the masses of the goldstone (3.45)
and by the normalization conditions (3.29) for the ghost elds.

13due to the ir power counting and the zero momentum conguration this sti cannot be spoiled by breaking terms

due to the regularization scheme.

19

besides the normalization of the goldstone masses, we have to verify that the equations

lim
p0

ip
p2 aa

 i

(p) = aa i

(0) = 0,

(3.44)

where a runs over the set of massless gauge elds and i over the set of scalar elds, are satised.
this conditions are valid at tree level, ensuring that the massless gauge elds remain massless after
xing the gauge and spontaneous symmetry breaking. however they must also be maintained at
higher orders to guarantee the absence of ir anomalies for the sti.

in particular for the minimal sm the equation

lim
p0

ip
p2 ag0(p)  ag0(0) = 0

(3.45)

expresses that the spontaneous symmetry breaking mechanism and the gauge xing does not generate
a mass term for the photon eld. however at the quantum level this conditions must be ensured by
the choice of the gauge xing, by the sti and eventually by using the wti of the bfm. in particular
we are able to prove it as a non-trivial consequence of wti, of sti and of the normalization conditions
for transverse component of the two-point functions for the gauge bosons. in the case of cp violation,
this is also related to the mixing between the goldstone eld and the higgs as it will be shown below.

on the other hand, the equation

lim
p0

ip
p2 ah (p)  ah(0) = 0 ,

(3.46)

where h is the higgs of the minimal sm, is not relevant for ir anomaly cancellations, but we are
able to prove it as a consequence of normalization conditions, wti and sti. notice that, at tree
level there is no bilinear coupling between the higgs eld and the longitudinal degree of freedom of
the photon because of the cp invariance of the lagrangian of the scalar and gauge sector. however,
at the quantum level, the cp violating radiative corrections might generate that greens function.
finally, we can study the denition of the higgs masses. these are the only physical parameters
entering in the present sector. in absence of cp-violation the two sectors, namely the higgs elds
and the unphysical scalar sector can be analyzed separately. however, the cp-violation introduces
cp-odd radiative corrections which mix the scalar elds. for instance for the minimal sm we must
consider the complete matrix

  g0g0(p) g0h(p)
hg0(p) hh(p) !

(3.47)

where the mixings g0h are dierent from zero only starting from three loops.

the aim of this paragraph is to show that, despite several mixings among the unphysical elds
and the higgses, it is always possible to dene the higgs masses. to this purpose we use the sti14

v aa v ba + caa cs
l
v aa v bs + caa cs
l

v cs v ba + caa k
l
v cs v bs + caa k
l

kv ba = 0
kv bs = 0

p2(cid:16)v aa j + caa cs

v cs j(cid:17) + caa k

cas cs
cas cs

v cs v ba + cas k
l
v cs v bs + cas k
l

kv ba = 0
kv bs = 0

kj = 0

14the ir anomalies of this equation will be discussed in the sec. 4.2.

p2(cid:16)cas cs

v cs j(cid:17) + cas k

kj = 0

20

(3.48)

(3.49)

(3.50)

(3.51)

(3.52)

(3.53)

where the reduced functional  dened by   g.f. replace ; to dene g.f. at the quantum level
the nakanishi-lautrup (a.111) and the faddeev-popov equations (a.118) are used. here g.f. is
dened by the renormalized nl eqs. (a.111) and by the renormalized ghost equations (a.118)-(2.6).

by means of these identities it is easy to prove that

rank(cid:16)ml(p)(cid:17) = rank(cid:16)ij (p)(cid:17) .

this means that non-trivial physical information is only contained in the scalar sub-matrix ij (p).
furthermore by using the sti (3.51)-(3.53) computed at zero momentum (static sti) it is easy to
show that

rank(cid:16)ij (0)(cid:17) = rank(cid:16)hi hj (0)(cid:17)

(3.54)

where i, j run over the only set of physical scalar elds15.

for the minimal sm, where only the higgs h and the neutral would-be-goldstone g0 are in-

volved, the eq. (3.54) coincides with

g0g0(0)hh (0)  2

g0h(0) = 0

(3.55)

and, therefore, g0g0(0) = 0 if g0h(0) = 0. this last condition is needed to cancel the ir anomalies
of the sti and it is a consequence of the wti. this will be shown in sec. 4.2. notice that this
particular normalization condition states that the would-be-goldstone bosons and the higgs are
decoupled on the mass-shell of the unphysical state. as a consequence this conrms that the higgs
eld is the physical eld of the present sector. in the case of extended models similar normalization
conditions must be established in order to prevent the theory from ir anomalies.

finally we have only to x the normalization conditions for the non-trivial eigenvalues (n)

i (p),i =
1, . . . , nhiggs. the complex zeros of the eigenvalues (n)
i) = 0, can be identied
with the masses mhi and the width hi of the physical higgses. clearly these normalization
conditions x partially the free parameters ij, ijkl.

i (p), namely (n)

i (p

as in the case of fermions (see next sections) two or more scalar doublets (e.g.

in the case of
the 2hdm [18] and of the mssm [17]) can generate physical mixing angles whose renormalization
must be discussed. the normalization conditions for the masses  by comparing the zeros of the
eigenvalues with the physical masses  is independent of the renormalization of the mixing angles
guaranteeing that the pole mass denitions can be always achieved.

for the renormalization of the mixing angle we use again the wti for the background gauge
invariance. there, indeed, the mixing angles appear as constant parameters and, on the basis of the
mass eigenstates they can be identied with the renormalized mixing angles.

to be more precise we consider the wti, neglecting gauge, fermion and ghost terms,

wa() = (gauge  fermion  ghost terms) + (et)a

ij"( + v)j


i + (  + v)j



 i# = 0

and we dene the mass eigenvectors by requiring

(3.56)

(3.57)

15for the sm i = j = h, i.e.the higgs eld, for the 2hdm [18], i, j = h, h, a, h , where h is the higgs, h is the

second neutral scalar eld, a is a pseudo-scalar (cp-odd) eld and h  are the charged physical scalar elds

ij (p)u(i)

= 0

j (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)p2=(p

i )2

21

where ij (p) are the two-point functions for scalar elds including all the counter terms computed
i = 0. as a consequence, the eigenvectors u(i)
in the sec. 3.1. in the case of the goldstone elds p
are functions of the free parameters of the higgs potential ij and ijkl and of the allowed w.f.r.
z 
0 , z 

aa of eq. (3.16).

j

finally we can rewrite the wti (3.56) in the mass eigenstates 

j i and correspondently

i =pj u(i)

for the background elds 

i =pj u(i)

j

i

wa() = (gauge  fermion  ghost terms) + t a

ij"( + v)j


,i + (  + v)j



 ,i# = 0

(3.58)

ij = u(i)

k (et)a

kl(u1)(l)

where t a
and at the quantum level they are functions of the free parameters ij, ijkl, z 
impose normalization conditions only on the angle the matrix u(i)
j
this can be achieved by adjusting the free parameters ij, ijkl, z 

j coincide, at tree level with the physical angles among the scalar elds,
aa . in order to
j = ij.

should be unitary: u(i)
0 , z 

the mixing angle can now be xed by requiring that at the quantum level t a

ij coincide with the
renormalized mixing angles. only by representing the wti on the basis of the mass eigenstates the
quantities t a
ij can be identied with renormalized mixing angles avoiding the problem of w.f.r. for
scalar elds.

k u(k)

0 , z 

aa.

3.4 gauge boson sector

for the transverse components of the two-point functions for the gauge bosons we have to impose
the following normalization conditions

(n),t

aa ab (p)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)p2=0

= 0

(n),t

aa z b (p)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)p2=0

= 0.

(3.59)

in order to avoid the ir divergences. then, recalling that the bfm leaves only z w
s as free parameters
for each gauge multiplet, it seems almost impossible that these normalization conditions can be
achieved. however, as we will show below, for the sm (a non-semisimple gauge model with a single
abelian factor) the eqs. (3.59) can be solved.

we dene the new two-point functions by rotating, at xed p, the matrices of two-point functions

matrix of the mass eigentstates



w ca w da (p) t
t

w cs w da (p)

w ca w ds (p) t
t

w cs w ds (p)

 = r1(p)

aa ab (p) t
t

z a ab (p)

aa z b (p) t
t

z a z b (p)

 r(p)

where the matrix r(p) of two-point functions has the following block structure

r(p) =

rbba(p) rbba(p)

rbbs (p) rbbs (p)



(3.60)

the indices a, b run over 1, . . . , n (where n is the number of massless gauge eld), a, b run
over 1, . . . , nz (where nz is the number of massive gauge eld; aa, ba, as, bs run over 1, . . . , na and
1, . . . , ns where na, ns are the number of the abelian factors and of simple factors, respectively.

22

the presence of massless particles is detected by computing the eigenvalues of the two-point
function matrix (3.60) and the sti ensure that the number of those particles, namely n is left
invariant under renormalization. this means that

rank

w ca w da (0) t
t

w cs w da (0)

w ca w ds (0) t
t

w cs w ds (0)

 = rank(cid:16)t

z a z b (0)(cid:17)

z a ab (0) = 0, a = 1, . . . , nz  a = 1, . . . , n, then t

which implies that if t
aa ab (0) = 0,
a, b = 1, . . . , n. therefore the normalization conditions (3.59) are not independent and they
require fewer free parameters to be xed. in particular, recalling that we have one free w.f.r.
for
each simple factor16 z w
s and, by using the invertibility of the matrix r  r(0) computed at zero
momentum, the normalization conditions t,(n)
z a ab (0) = 0, a = 1, . . . , nz  b = 1, . . . , n
corresponds to

t,(n)
aa z b (0)  m 2
zb

nsxs=1

z w,(n)

s xcs

racs r1

csb = 0

(3.61)

where t,(n)
equation is solved in terms for the unknown quantities z w,(n)

z a ab (0) is the renormalized amplitude up to n  1 order and r1

csb  (r1)cs b. this
if ns  n nz. the non-singularity

s

csb is insured by the the fact that rank(cid:16)t

z a z b (0)(cid:17) = nz and by the invertibility

of r (existence of non-trivial tree-level mixing). as an example for the sm, where n = nz =
nsu (2) = 1, z w

3 and a = a, b = z, cs = 3 we get

su (2)  z w

of pcs racs r1

z w

3 =

where ra3 = sw , r1

3z = cw .

(cid:16)m 2

1

zra3r1

az (0)

3z(cid:17) t,(n)

(3.62)

besides the conditions (3.59) we have also to impose some mass normalization conditions. there-
fore, we consider the sub-matrix (n),t
za zb involving only the massive gauge elds. this remaining
matrix is real17, symmetric and non-diagonal, and it can be diagonalized by means of an orthogonal
transformation restricted only to the subspace of massive elds. as a consequence, the only relevant
information is contained in its eigenvalues z a (p) and, in particular, in their zeros p
za . notice
that, for the transverse components of the two-point for gauge bosons, the existence of nz (number
of massive gauge bosons) non-trivial eigenvalues (n)
z (p) is ensured by the sti. then we compare
the real part (in the case of unstable particles) of zeros p

za with the experimental mass mza

re(p

za ) = mza .

this denition is independent of the gauge parameters ,  [36, 39] and of the mixings. at the tree
level the mixing of the gauge bosons in the sm concerns only the weinberg angle, but, at higher
orders, the radiative corrections generate new mixings. those mixings carry no physical information.
finally we can dene the mass eigenstates which appear in the lsz formalism. they are obtained

16we use the denition zw
17the two-point functions are real only below the particle creation thresholds.

.

s = 1 +pn1 h(n)zw,(n)

s

23

by requiring

  0

0 t

0

z a z b (0) !  ua,a

b ! = 0,

b
ua,a



aa ab (p
t

za ) t

z a ab (p

za )

aa z b (p
t

za ) t

z a z b (p

za )

  uz,a
b ! = 0.

b
uz,a

as a consequence the metric is not diagonal

  (ua,a

(uz,a

, ua,b
, ua,b

)
)

(ua,a
(uz,a

, uz,b
, uz,b

)

) ! =  a,b

k a,b

k a,b

h a,b !

(3.63)

(3.64)

where (., .) is the scalar product, and no free parameter can be adjusted in order to achieve its
diagonalization.

3.5 fermion sector

ij

in the fermion sector we have several free parameters (the yukawa couplings y i
ij , and the w.f.r.
ij , z r/l
z r/l
for the fermions) which can be tuned in order to satisfy the normalization conditions.
the free parameters are selected by the brst symmetry and, in particular, by the invariance un-
der the background gauge transformations. as a consequence the normalization conditions must
respect those symmetries to all orders. moreover in the present sector there are two kinds of phys-
ical normalization conditions which must be implemented in order to compare the model with the
experimental data: the fermion masses and the mixing parameters.

at the tree level those parameters can be easily expressed in terms of the yukawa couplings. in
fact we can diagonalize the mass matrices (after the spontaneous symmetry breaking) mij = y i
ij vi
by bi-unitary transformations u r/l
acting on the space of fermions and the resulting eigenvalues
y,i
i vi must be compared with the fermion masses mi . as is well known the diagonalization of the
yukawa matrices modies the interaction terms ( w ) among the fermion and the charged gauge
elds

ij



w  =z d4x(cid:16) l

k u l,

ik t l,a

ij u l

jm 6 w al

m + r

ku r,

ik t r,a

ij u r

jm 6 w ar

(3.65)

m + h.c.(cid:17)

u l/r

ik t l/r,a

and the resulting matrices u l/r,
jm are interpreted as the ckm angles. in the case of
the minimal sm, the matrices u l
ij split into up and down parts and they commute with the third
generator of the su (2) and with u (1). therefore we recover the usual ckm matrix. furthermore,
since the right fermions couple only to the u (1) gauge group (and to su (3)), the u r
ij commute and,
therefore, no ckm is present for the right-handed part. notice that the only relevant physical ckm
angles are obtained by a suitable rephasing of fermions.

ij

at the quantum level we have to translate those requirements in terms of normalization condi-
tions. first we have to dene the generations intrinsically. at the tree level this can be easily done by
considering the masses of the fermions and organizing the fermions according to the hierarchy of the
masses. at the quantum level we consider the two-point functions  i j (p) and their decomposition
into lorentz-invariant terms:

 i j

(p) = d

ij (p)pl+ 6 ppll

ij (p) + prd,

ji (p)+ 6 pprr

ij (p)

(3.66)

where d
ij (p) are lorentz invariant matrices. in order to avoid heavy notation we
suppress the labels i and only the index i of the avor (and of the color, in the case of quarks) is

ij (p), r

ij (p), l

24

used. then, we can form the following new lorentz invariant hermitian (below particle production
thresholds) matrix [43]

kij (p)  p2l

ij (p)  d,

ki (p)r,1

kl (p)d

lj (p)

(3.67)

and its eigenvalues i (p) correspond to fermion two-point functions with avour mixing. moreover
the zeros of eigenvalues i (p

i ) = 0, or equivalently the zeros of the determinant

det [kik (p)]|p2=(p

i )2 = 0,

(3.68)

are gauge independent18 and their real and imaginary parts are compared with the masses of fermions
mi and their width i . this xes a possible choice of normalization conditions for quark and lepton
masses. although the qcd corrections aect the pole structure, this denition is used in the explicit
computations [46] of electroweak radiative corrections (switching o the strong interactions). as a
consequence we are able to organize the fermions into generations intrinsically by xing the zeros of
the eigenvalues of the matrix kij (p) and this choice xes some of the free parameters y i

ij .

at this point we are able to dene the mass eigenstates for the fermion elds in the case of

mixing. we dene mass eigenstates by

u(i)

k kj (p)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)6p=6p

i

j (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)6p=6p

i

= 0,

kj (p)u(i)

= 0

(3.69)

ij

ij , z l/r

ij , z l/r

where u(i), u(i) are independent eigenvectors due to the cp violation. those vectors depend of the
free parameters y i
(cf. eqs. (3.26)-(3.20)) and the metric (u(i), u(j)) is not diagonal
at the quantum level. as a consequence we can dene the mass eigeneld by projecting the fermion
i = u(i)
elds i , i onto the vectors u(i), u(i): f 
j . notice that we can introduce
the matrices uij = u(i)
and uij = u(i)
j which are complicate functions of the free parameters
j
ij , z l/r
y i
(except those which are already xed by the mass renormalization) and we require
that the matrices are unitary in order to single out only the relevant mixing angles. it is easy to
show that the system is invertible at tree level and, by the theorem of the implicit function for formal
power series, this is true also at the quantum level.

k k and f 

i = j u(i)

ij , z l/r

ij

by following aoki et al. we would be forced to impose normalization conditions on the mass
eigenstates u(i), u(i), but, due to the constraints of bfm, this can not be achieved without deforming
the wti. therefore we choose to x the remaining parameters, namely the ckm matrix, by using
the wti themselves. in fact, by recalling that the ckm angles appear as couplings among charged
gauge elds and fermions and that the couplings among background and quantum gauge elds with
fermions coincide in the bfm, we are able to x the ckm by imposing the wti in the mass
eigenstate representations (f 

i , f 
i )

wa() = (scalar + gauge + ghost terms) +

(3.70)

+ (et )a

l,ijf

l
i  u l,

ii  ( u l)jj 


 
r
j 

f

+




f l
i 

i i (u l,)j j f l
u l

j  + (l  r)

= (scalar + gauge + ghost terms) +

+ f

l
i  v l,a
i j 


 
r
j 

f

+




f l
i 

j i  f l
v l,a

j  + (l  r) = 0

18the denition of masses has been taken into account in [38, 39] and in the case of fermion in [43], where the
problem of gauge parameter independence is considered. from a more rigorous point of view we refer to papers [44].
an extension to avour mixings is discussed in [26].

25

where only the fermion terms are displayed and v l,a
the right part and for v l,a
parameters y i

l,km um i  (and analogously for
i j ) are the renormalized ckm matrices. the above equation xes the free

analogously to the scalar mixing the quantities v l,a

ij up to unphysical rescaling and up to unphysical w.f.r..
ki (et )a

i j  can be
identied with the renormalized mixing angles avoiding the problem of the w.f.r. and the mixing
among physical and unphysical quantities.

l,km um i  and v l,a

i j  = u 

i j  = u 

ki (et )a

3.6 background field renormalization

in this section we discuss the normalization conditions for greens functions with external back-
ground elds. as is clear from [20] some greens functions with external background gauge and
scalar elds are divergent, then they require their proper normalization conditions. however two
orthogonal approaches can be assumed: the rst one is to x these normalization conditions in-
dependently of those of quantum elds, the second one corresponds to choose the normalization
conditions which respect the form of wti (2.7) and (a.119). the rst alternative has been adopted
in [16] and it requires some unphysical normalization conditions for the background elds; namely
the free parameters xs, xij are xed independently of w.f.r. z w
ij of quantum elds. here, we
choose the second alternative in order to minimize the number of normalization conditions and the
amount of work to renormalize the model.

s , z 

furthermore, since the bfm is a powerful tool to compute s-matrix elements from greens
functions with external bosonic background elds [24], it is crucial to show that the normalization
conditions imposed on those greens functions directly correspond to physical normalization condi-
tions on the poles of quantum greens functions. therefore, in the next paragraphs we explicitly
prove the degeneracy among the zeros of two-point functions with external background elds and
the corresponding two point functions with quantum elds.

bs


sources 

the parameters xs, xij are respectively related to the two-point functions with external brst-
(p), ij (p) which are supercially divergent; on the contrary, the other two-point
as

 
functions 
(p) are supercially convergent by power counting and lorentz covariance.
(p), 
to compare these greens functions we rstly use the wti to show that the renormalization of
,  jkccs depends on the renormalization of vertex functions with external quantum
 w
elds. in fact, by taking the derivative of (2.7) with respect to bs

 (p) and ccs (q), we get19

bs
 ccs

as
 j

as
 

i

bs


cs

2 (was )

 (p)cbs (q)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)=0

= i(p + q)(cid:16) w
ij (cid:18) j

+ vitcs

+ f csas ds 

as
cs
 


cbs (p, q) + w

 ccs (p, q) + 
as
bs
 ccs
 cbs (p) + f csbs ds 

j

ds



cs
 

as

 cbs (p, q)(cid:17)
(p, q)(cid:19)

 cds (q) = 0.
as

(3.71)

exploring the region of very high momenta and using the weinbergs theorem [42] from the

expression

lim


p

cs

2 (was )

 ( p)cbs ( p)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)=0

19in the present section we re-absorb the couplings es, eaaba from wti by rescaling the gauge elds and we impose

that the v.e.v. vi in the wti coincides with its tree level value.

= 
w

as
 

bs
 ccs

+ 
w

as
 

bs
 ccs

+ f asbs ds p
bs
 ccs


,

(3.72)

26

we can isolate the asymptotic behaviour of the greens like 
w

as
 

bs
 ccs

to be compared with the

renormalized greens functions with external quantum elds.

in the same way, by considering the derivative of wti (2.7) with respect to i(p) and ccs (q), we

= vj tas

jk 

kicbs + vj tas

jk 

kicbs + tas

ik 

kcbs + f asbs ds 

icds , (3.73)

obtain

lim


2 (was )

i( p)cbs ( p)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)=0

which relate the 
to greens functions with quantum elds. equations (3.72) and (3.73) are
the all-order version of relations between xs, x0, tij and zs, z0, rij, and they reduce to them at
the tree level.

kicbs

furthermore, the greens functions 
bs
 ccs


, kiccs contain the radiative correc-
tions to the structure constants f asbs cs of the gauge group g and to the generators ta
ij. therefore,
their correct renormalization ensures that the model has the same gauge group and the same matter
representation to all orders [6, 10]. moreover, in the case of non-invariant regularization schemes,
general non-invariant counterterms

,kccs , 

bs
as
 


w

c.t.

brst =z d4x(cid:16)x1

as bs cas 
bs

+ x2

as bs cs cas 
bs

w cs

 + x3

as icas i + x4

as ijcas ij(cid:17)

(3.74)

must be added to the action in order to restore the sti and the wti. the coecients x1
,
as bscs
as i, x4
x3
as ij are computed in terms of the breakings to the sti. this necessarily implies the analysis
of sti for the three-points functions involving, at least, two ghost elds and it requires a great
amount of work to compute these coecients at higher orders. however, by using the wti (3.72),
(3.73) x1
as ij can be computed from the breakings of wti, and only some sti
for two-point functions are needed [45]. furthermore, since up to this moment, only a subset of
two-loop electroweak radiative corrections have been computed [46], two-loop and one-loop wti
and one-loop sti are sucient to evaluate all possible counterterms, including those of eq. (3.74).
to complete our program we have to show the relation among the greens functions  jkccs ,
as
 

, ij . for this purpose we consider the sti

and the two-point functions 
as

 

as i, x4

bs
 ccs

as bs cs

 w

, x3

, x2

, x2

as bs

asbs

bs


 w

as
 

 ccs (p, q) = 

bs





as
 
+  ds 

ds
ds
 (p+q)
w
 
 (p)ccs (q)
as

bs
 (p)ccs (q)

+

bs
 cds (q)


+ 

 k(p+q)
as

k

bs
 (p)ccs (q)

(3.75)

 ik(p)ccs (q) = 

i

ds
 (p+q)



w

ds
 j(p)ccs (q)

+

+  ds i(p) ccs (q)j cds (p) + ik(p+q)phikj(p)ccs (q)

obtained by dierentiating (2.5) with respect to as
i(p  q), j(p), ccs (q). since  ds 
counting we immediately deduce the relations

 (p), ccs (q) and with respect to
 ccs and  ds iccs are supercially convergent by power
as

 (p  q), bs


w

as
 

bs
 ccs

= 
ds
as

 



w

ds
 

bs
 ccs

,


ikccs = 

ds
i



w

ds
 j ccs

.

(3.76)

these equations x completely the local parts of greens with background elds in terms of the
greens functions with quantum elds. furthermore we have to recall that the renormalization of

27



bs

bs

as
 

 ccs depends on the normalization conditions for 

 ccs and kccs (p). the latter
 jkccs ,  w
essentially corresponds to the w.f.r. for the gauge elds and for the scalar elds, and, consequently,
the normalizations for the greens functions with background elds depend on these w.f.r. as the
tree level relations (3.16). in conclusion, the renormalization of the background elds xs, xij are
unphysical parameters and they are xed to the renormalization of the quantum elds. however we
have also to recall that the present derivation has been performed by rescaling the gauge elds and
removing the gauge couplings es, eaaba from the wti. this means that the renormalization of the
background elds depends on the renormalization of the quantum elds only up to the renormaliza-
tion of the gauge couplings and up to the vacuum expectation value vi. and this is the well-known
result presented into [20].

in the last part of the present section, we discuss the relation among the zeros of the background
two-point functions,  w w , and the quantum two point functions. in particular, we prove that the
zeros of both greens functions coincide. this fact has a simple application in the computation of
radiative corrections with the bfm [21]: by xing the mass renormalization on the zeros (or on
the complex zeros in the case of unstable particles) of background two-point functions, the zeros of
quantum two-point functions are also consistently xed. needless to say, in several applications the
computation of background two-point functions is enough to derive the complete s-matrix element
for the process.

at rst, we consider the background two-point functions for gauge elds and the derivatives of

sti with respect to the elds as

 (p), w aa

 (p)

 w

as
 w

ba


= 

ds
as
 






w

ds
 w

ba


+ 

as
 k



kw

ba


(3.77)

where we have suppressed the argument since they are all two-point functions with same momentum.
the two-point functions 
have been already discussed in the previous paragraphs
and only the quantum abelian gauge elds w aa
enter into the discussion, since their background
are completely decoupled. in the same way, we get

, 

as
ds
 


as
 k





 w
 w

as
 w

bs


as
 w

bs


(p) = 

(p) = 

ds
as
 




ds
as
 




(p)

(p)

w

ds


w

bs


w

ds
 w

bs


(p) + 
(p) + 

as
 k

(p)

k w

bs


as
 k

(p)

kw

bs


(p)

(p)

(3.78)

(3.79)

by dierentiating with respect to as
 (p). therefore, by decomposing
the two-point functions into a transverse and a longitudinal part, the eqs. (3.78) can be put in the
form

 (p), w bs

 (p),

w

bs
 (p) and as



w aa w ba (p) t
t

w as w ba

t

w aa w bs

(p) t

w as w bs

where the matrix uab(p) is

w ca w da (p) t
t

w cs w da (p)

w ca w ds (p) t
t

w cs w ds

(p)

 udb(p)

(p)

(p)

 = uac(p)
uab(p)   aaca

0

as cs (p) ! .

0

(3.80)

(3.81)

this matrix uab(p) is a non-singular matrix for p 6= 0 and as cs (p) 6= 0 starting at one
loop. as a consequence, the zeros of the eigenvalues of the background two-point functions and the

28

t

t

= 0

 =(cid:16) r1u r(cid:17) (p)
w a w b (p)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)p2=0
w a w b (p)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)p2=0
= xa,b euaa(0)t
= xa,b euaa(0)t

= 0

we immediately get

t

t

w a w b (p)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)p2=0
w a w b (p)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)p2=0

corresponding quantum partners coincide20. this is a crucial property for the self-energies to ensure
that the s-matrix dened with the bfm is equivalent to the conventional one [24].

moreover we can immediately see that the diagonalization of the two-point functions matrix for
the background elds does not imply the diagonalization of the two-point functions for the quantum
elds. this is only achieved by a proper choice of normalization for the matrix uab(p). in particular
the ir behavior might be dierent. therefore, we have to study the two-point functions at zero
momentum. by using the eq. (3.60) and by dening, in the same way, for the background elds,
a matrix r(p) the relation among the background two-point functions and the quantum two-point
functions in the mass eigenstates is given by

z a ab (p)

aa z b (p) t
t

aa ab (p) t
t


and we set eu(p)  (cid:16)r1u r(cid:17) (p). since the local wti for the background gauge transformations

(cid:16)r1u r(cid:17) (p)

aa ab (p) t
t

aa z b (p) t
t

z a z b (p)

z a z b (p)

z a ab (p)

ensure that

a, b = 1 . . . n

a = 1 . . . n, b = 1 . . . nz

(3.82)

(3.83)

w a w b (0)eubb(0),
w a w c (0)eucb(0),

a, b = 1 . . . n

(3.84)

a = 1 . . . n, b = 1 . . . nz

from where euaa(0) = 0 for a = 1 . . . n, a = 1 . . . nz. the matrices euaa depend on the already

discussed greens functions t
(p) computed at zero momentum. these greens functions are
supercially divergent (only the transverse parts, while the longitudinal part is nite) and are xed
by the normalization conditions (3.84). however we saw that the greens functions t
are
related to the w.f.r. of the multiplets of quantum elds for each single simple sector gs of the group.
hence the ir requirements given by (3.84) for the quantum elds x their w.f.r.s zs.

as bs

as bs

the bfm restricts the number of free parameters to a single w.f.r. for each simple factor and
this bounds the number of massless particles which can be coupled to the model without modifying
the sti and the local wti. in fact increasing the number of massless particles the number of
normalization conditions increases and the bound nnz  ns (where ns is the number of simple
factors) can not be respected any longer.

3.7 renormalization of couplings

for what concerns the coupling renormalization it is very dicult to discuss general properties,
however we can divide the problem into two dierent categories: the couplings which are related to

20notice that, here, we used the representation w, w to denote the quantum eld and the background eld. however
the s-matrix elements obtained in the bfm approach are constructed with quantum elds qw = w  w and with
the background elds w . therefore the two-point functions with external background described in the literature
[20, 21, 24] are related to ours by the simple relation abbott
w w (p) =  w w (p) + 2 w w (p) + w w (p) where abbott is
dened in [20]. by the eq. (3.80), it is easy to show that abbott

w w (p) has the same zeros of w w (p).

29

the physical masses (in the case of spontaneous symmetry breaking) and those which are true gauge
couplings. for the rst set, by using the gauge invariant denition of masses we are able to provide
a proper denition, but for the others a construction of an invariant charge (see for example [37] in
chapter 13) is required [40].

the couplings ijkl, ij of the scalar sector are related to the renormalization of the tadpoles and
the masses of higgs elds (see sec. 3.3). by identifying the masses of the higgs elds as the real
part of the zeros of non-trivial eigenvalues of the two-point function matrix some of the couplings
ijkl, ij are xed in a gauge independent way.

in the sector of the gauge bosons of the sm, mz, mw dene the v.e.v. v and the weak angle
cw . the procedure of comparing the real part of the zeros of eigenvalues for the two-point function
matrices with the physical masses is gauge parameter independent and therefore the weak angle cw ,
dened by the conditions c2
[36] is clearly independent of the gauge parameters. as discussed
in the previous section, the zeros of two-point functions with external background elds and with
quantum ones coincide, therefore, in order to x the mass renormalization only the background
two-point functions are required. this has been already observed in reference [21] where the one
loop analysis has been performed.

m 2
w
m 2
z

w =

however due the precision of the experimental measurement of the -decay, the fermis constant
gf is used to calculate mw . the denition of gf is given in terms of the -decay amplitude which
is clearly gauge independent [36].

the qed charge qed is xed in terms of the photon two-point function computed at zero
momentum transfer. it is easy to see that this denition with the normalization conditions given in
sec. 3.4 is gauge independent to all orders. the denition of the qcd coupling constant s requires
a detailed analysis. we refer to the literature [20, 40, 41] on the subject.

finally, concerning the charge renormalization, we have to stress again that the renormalization
of the two-point functions for background gauge elds and for background scalar elds can be
immediately related to the charge renormalization or to the v.e.v. renormalization, respectively.
this provides a very simple way to compute the beta functions of the renormalization group
equation and the callan-symanzik equation. this advantage has been extensively used in the qcd
[20], in the sm [21] and for extended models.

4 anomalies

the issue of algebraic renormalization of identities has been widely analyzed in the literature [6,
9, 10, 16, 22, 47], therefore, here, we only recall the main results about the hard anomalies for
non-semisimple gauge models with background elds and we discuss the problem of ir anomalies
of sti in the minimal sm. besides the hard anomalies and the ir anomalies, some soft anomalies
can be present in the sm. however they are rule out by the callan-symanzik equation as shown in
[6, 9, 16].

4.1 hard anomalies

due to their relevance in the renormalization procedure, we describe briey the hard anomalies of
sti and of wti for a non-semisimple gauge model.

as proved in [6, 10] the structure of the general solution a of the consistency conditions s0(a) = 0

30

[4, 5, 48, 47] is given by

a =z d4xaabj (x) +z d4xa1(x) +z d4xa2(x) + s0z d4x b(x)
aabj (x) =xi

ri"dabc

(ca)w b

caw b

 w c

 w c

f abcd

i
12

 +

i

 w d

(4.85)

(4.86)

#
i caacba + h.c.(cid:19) (4.88)

(4.87)

p i

a1(x) = caaraa(x)
a2(x) = w

aa,ba(cid:18)j

w aa

 cba +

1
2

p as
,

as caacba +

1
2

icaacba +
p i

1
2

where aabj (x) is the well known adler-bardeen-jackiw anomaly [28] and the ri are its coecients;
the tensors f abcd

are dened by

i

f abcd

i

= dabx

i

(ef )xcd + dadx

i

(ef )xbc + dacx

i

(ef )xdb

i

with dabc
invariant symmetric tensors of rank three on the algebra of the gauge group. b(x) in
eq. (4.85) is a generic polynomial with dimension  4 and faddeev-popov charge zero21; raa(x)
are a set of brst invariant polynomials. the latter are absent if the discrete cp invariance is not
violated. in the expression a2 of eq. (4.88) the coecients w
are constant and antisymmetric
,, . . . , p i
in the abelian indices aa, ba for each value of  and p as

 are dened in app. a.

aa,ba

as observed by barnich et al.

[10] the anomaly terms (4.88) are trivial if and only if the
conserved currents j
 are trivial, that is, are equal to an identically conserved total divergence
when the equation of motion are satised; however as already observed, in the sm, the conserved
lepton and baryon numbers provide four non-trivial examples of j
 [49]. about the actual presence
of anomalies as (4.87) and (4.88) at higher orders there is no evidence from one- and two-loop
calculations and the only example where (4.87) occurs in the literature is given in [50]. in fact by
choosing an appropriate gauge xing, one can avoid these anomalies as in t hooft gauge xing as
proved in [6] or as in t hooft-background gauge xing as proved in paper [23]. generically for an
arbitrary choice of the gauge xing the abelian ghosts are coupled to scalars in order to protect the
model against ir divergences of massless would-be goldstone elds, as a consequence anomalies as
a1, a2 might appear.

to summarize we have the following anomaly cancellation mechanisms

 the coecients ri of aabj depend on the charges of fermion elds and on the gauge group
structures. therefore for a proper choice of fermion content of the theory, the coecients ri
are zero. in addition, by the non-renormalization theorem (see [9] and the references therein),
if ri are zero at one loop, they will be absent to all orders.

 the candidates a1 are excluded by the aae (2.6). in fact it is easy to show that, solving
the constraints hierarchically, the aae rules out the candidates which depend on the abelian
ghost elds caa [32].

 the candidates a2 are absent because of the aae. this can also easily proved by using the

wti (a.119) for the abelian factors which is a consequence of the sti and the aae.

 as proved in [22] the hard anomalies of the wti are related to those of the sti. therefore

they are cancelled by the same mechanisms.

21it provides the non-invariant counterterms to cancel the spurious anomalies coming from a non-symmetric renor-

malization scheme. those counterterms which are ir dangerous will be discussed in the next section.

31

4.2 ir anomalies

in this last section we present the analysis of the ir anomalies and we derive the conditions under
which their coecients vanish. we also prove that, under these conditions, the ir anomalies which
depend on background elds are absent to all orders. here, we consider only the ir anomalies to
sti; the ir anomalies to wti are related to the sti anomalies by consistency conditions. the
ir anomalies to the nakanishi-lautrup equations (a.111), to the faddeev-popov equations (a.118)
and to the abelian antighost equation (2.6) will be discussed in app. b and in app. c, respectively.
as a consequence of the quantum action principle (qap) [4, 7, 51], a non-invariant renormali-

zation scheme breaks the sti

s,4  

s() = 3
s,4(x) whose invariance properties (s03

by local (integrated) terms 3
s,4 = 0), uv and
ir power counting degrees22 (du v 3
s,4 = 3) and faddeev-popov charge are xed by
the algebraic properties of the functional operator s0 (cf. app. (5)). if the theory is renormalizable,
it must be possible to re-absorb the breaking terms 3

s,4 by suitable non-invariant counterterms.

s,4 = 4, dir3

however some of the anomaly candidates which can be written as a variation of a local coun-

s,4 =r d4x3

(4.89)

abaa

z b

+ x2

aica

a i(cid:17) + 3

s,4,

(4.90)

terterms

3

s,4 = s0z d4x(cid:16)x1

ab, x2

whose ir degree is smaller than four, cannot be removed by counterterms. indeed, these countert-
erms would generate ir divergences at the next order. as a consequence, the sti is anomaly-free
ai of the breaking terms vanish to all orders. the breaking terms 3
only if the coecients x1
s,4
contain other candidates which are removed by counterterms. notice that also some terms contain-
 ) might appear as ir anomalies to sti; however,
due to the fact that the background elds do not propagate, the corresponding counterterms do not
produce ir divergences. finally, we do not assume the cp symmetry as an invariance of the model
and the basis of monomials for 3

ing one or two background elds (e.g. r d4xaa

s,4 contains both cp-odd and cp-even terms.

z b



 z b

ab, x2

ab = x2

s0r d4xaa

 and s0r d4xca

to derive the minimal set of conditions under which the ir dangerous part of 3

s,4 vanishes
we have, rst, to dierentiate the sti with respect to those elds entering in the monomials
a i, and, then, to choose a convenient conguration for momenta to
compute the coecients x1
ai. it turns out that the most convenient point is at zero momentum
and the requirement that x1
ai = 0 implies sensible normalization conditions for two-point
greens functions at zero momentum. in particular, among these conditions there are independent
equations which must be solved in terms of the free parameters of the model. the existence of a
solution to those equations has been already covered in sec. 3.
(0) = 0 and aa i

(0) = 0 are required to cancel the ir
dangerous parts of 3
s,4, but they cannot be solved by adjusting free parameters. it will be shown
that from the explicit form of the breaking terms (4.90), by using the nilpotency of the slavnov-
taylor operator s0 and the wti they are not independent and they are implemented simultaneously.
it is important to stress that this particular cancellation of anomalies works only for the sm which
contains one neutral massless eld.

as an example, the two conditions ica
a

let us consider the sti in terms of the mass eigenstates [11, 16]

s() = z d4x"(cw ca  sw cz) cw


a

 sw



z! +

 sw


3


a

+ cw



z!

22we underline that we use the uv and ir power counting degrees dened within the bphzl scheme [8], but our

considerations remain valid for any renormalization scheme.

32

+



 3(cid:18)sw


ca

+ cw



cz(cid:19) +


0


g0

+


h


h

+ . . .(cid:21) = 3

s,4

(4.91)

where the ellipsis collect those terms which are not involved in the present analysis. here the symbol
 stands for the reduced functional given in eq. (3.12) and the sources 3
, 0  for the third component
of the triplet gauge eld w 3
 and for the goldstone  coincide with the modied ones dened in
(3.13). this choice is very convenient, although not strictly necessary, since it automatically takes
into account the faddeev-popov eqs. (a.118) and the abelian antighost eq. (2.6).

the ir dangerous breaking terms are given by the following local monomials

3

s,4 = s0z d4x (x1az  + x20ca + x3hca) =

= z d4x(cid:20)x1 (caz + acz + . . .) + x2(cid:18) 0
+ x3(cid:18) 0

3(cid:19)(cid:21) .

ca  hsw

0

h

g0

ca  0sw

0

3(cid:19)

(4.92)

(4.93)

where terms with higher powers of elds are not shown.

in order to compute the coecients xi, i = 1, 2, 3 we dierentiate both sides of the eq. (4.91)
with respect to ca(p) and z(p) and with respect to the ordinary derivative p. then, we evaluate
the entire expression at zero momentum

x1 + vx2 = ip

2

ca(p) z(p)

s()(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)=0,p=0

= (cid:16)c2

w + sw 3ca(0)(cid:17) az(0) +(cid:16)sw + 3ca(0)(cid:17) cw zz(0)

 0ca(0)g0z (0)  h ca(0)hz (0)

=

(4.94)

the conventional decomposition in terms of longitudinal and transverse parts of the gauge two-
point functions and the denition for the scalar-gauge mixed two-point functions (sec. 3), below the
eq. (3.42)) are used.

notice that the two-point functions 0ca, h ca must vanish at zero momentum transfer because
of the ir degrees of the elds and the brst sources. the rst one, namely 0ca(0) = 0 is ensured
by the ghost equations (see sec. 3), but the second one is a consequence of the sti and the aae as
we will show below. furthermore to ensure the correct ir behavior of the z  a mixing, as discussed
in sec. 3, l

az(0) = 0 and, nally, the vanishing of x1 + vx2 is achieved only if 3ca(0) = sw .

the other anomaly coecients are determined by the following sti

 p2 x2 =

ca(p) g0(p)

= p2h(cid:16)c2

w + sw 3ca(p)(cid:17) ag0(p) +(cid:16)sw + 3ca(p)(cid:17) cw zg0(p)i

 0ca(p)g0g0(p)  h ca(p)hg0(p)

2

2

=

s()(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)=0
s()(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)=0
w + sw 3ca(p)(cid:17) l

=

33

(m 2

h  p2)x3 =

ca(p) h(p)

= p2h(cid:16)c2

 0ca(p)g0h(p)  h ca(p)hh (p)

ah(p) +(cid:16)sw + 3ca(p)(cid:17) cw l

zh(p)i

(4.95)

(4.96)

where mh is the higgs mass. from the second one computed at zero momentum, we immediately
get x3 = 0 as a consequence of 0ca(0) = h ca(0) = 0. however the eqs. (4.95) are not sucient
for our purposes, in fact, in order to verify that also x2 = 0, it is necessary the dierentiate the
eq. (4.95) with respect to p2 and to study the system of scalar elds. this has been already analyzed
in sec. 3, however the corresponding identities are derived in the gauge eigenstates. in particular here
we show that the wti and the sti implies that vanishing of the mixed greens function g0h(p)
at zero momentum.

here we need the following two equations

2

cz (p) g0(p)

2

cz (p) h(p)

s()(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)=0,p=0
s()(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)=0,p=0

= 0cz (0)g0g0(0)  h cz (0)hg0 (0) = 0

(4.97)

= 0cz (0)g0h(0)  h cz (0)hh (0) = 0

which can be spoiled by breaking terms reabsorbable without any ir obstruction. as a consequence
of these equations, the determinant of the matrix of two-point functions for the scalars (3.47) vanishes
(see eq.
3.54). finally, by the normalization condition g0h (0) = 0, the two-point function for
the neutral goldstone g0g0(0) = 0 vanishes at zero momentum. going back to eqs. (4.95), we
can compute the derivative with respect to p2 and, setting p = 0, we deduce that ag0(0) = 0 is
a necessary and sucient conditions to guarantee that the coecients x2 is zero. to complete the
proof we have to derive g0h (0) = ag0(0) = 0.

the condition g0h(0) = 0 is satised as a consequence of the invariance under the background
gauge transformations and the relations among the two-point function with external background
elds and the two-point functions with external quantum elds. in particular by the sti

2

 g0(p) 0(p)

s()(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)=0,p=0

where 0 is the brst variation of the background goldstone g0, and the wti23

= 00(0)g0h(0)  h 0(0)hh (0) +  g0h(0) = 0,

(4.98)

(cid:16) g0h(0) + g0h(0)(cid:17) = 0,

(4.99)

obtained by dierentiating the functional identities (2.7) with respect to eh(0), we immediately get

(1 + 00(0)) g0h(p) = h 0(0)hh (0).

(4.100)

this implies that, if the cp-violation is induced only by means of the ckm matrix for fermions,
g0h (0) = 0.
in fact this equation relates the cp-odd greens function g0h(0) with external
quantum elds which are directly coupled to the fermions to the cp-odd greens function h 0(0)
whit external classical elds which do not couple directly to fermions. therefore we can conclude
that g0h (0) = h 0(0) = 0. notice that in the case of cp-violation higgs potential (see for
example [18]) this conclusion cannot be achieved any longer.

23notice that both the eqs.

(4.98)-(4.99) can be spoiled by breaking terms, however they can be removed by

counterterms without introducing any ir divergences.

34

to prove that ag0(0) = 0 we consider the following wti24

 ip(cid:16) az

(p) + az (p)(cid:17) = 0

which expresses the transversality of the mixed two-point functions. notice that this identity can
be broken by the renormalization procedure by terms of the form az (p) = y1p + y2p2p which
must be removed by the following counterterms

(4.101)

(4.102)

z d4x(cid:16)y1 az  + y2 a z (cid:17) .

only the rst terms has ir degree equal to 3. however, since this term is linear in the quantum eld
z, it does not contribute to the irreducible greens functions and it never produces ir divergences.
from eq. (4.101), by using the decomposition for two-point functions into longitudinal and

transverse part, we arrive to

and the normalization condition l
greens functions, we obtain that t

(cid:16)l

az (p) + l

az(p)(cid:17) = 0

az(0) = 0 implies that l
az

(0) = 0.

az

(0) = 0. finally, by analyticity of

(4.103)

furthermore we know from sec. 3.6 that the two-point functions with external background elds
are in general related, by means of the sti, to the two-point functions with quantum elds. and in
particular we have

az (p)  t
t

w3z (p) = t

az (p) + cw t

(4.104)

33(p)(cid:16)sw t

zz(p)(cid:17)

3 
3

(p). this equation implies that t

33(p) is the transverse part of 

zz (0) 6= 0 already at tree level, we deduce that t

where t
zz (0) = 0 to
all orders, and, since t,(0)
33(0) must vanish. notice
that this is a consequence of the normalization conditions for the transverse part of the two-point
functions for the gauge elds and, it follows from imposing the background gauge invariance as in its
tree level form. removing this essential constraint we cannot deduce this result and the sti must
be deformed as discussed in [16]. notice that the sti (4.104) can be spoiled by breaking terms,
however as proved in [22] these breaking terms are compensated by suitable counterterms dependent
on the background elds. this means that, as in the case of (4.101), the corresponding counterterms
do not produce any ir divergence.

33(0)t

analogously to the mixed two-point function we have also the following sti for mixed goldstone-

photon two-point function

 ag0

(p)   w3g0

(p) = l

33 (p)w3g0(p) + l

30(p)g0g0(p) + l

3h (p)hg0 (p).

(4.105)

notice that if the cp invariance were a symmetry of the model the last terms would be absent.
by recalling that hg0(0) = g0g0(0) = 0, that t
33(0) = 0 by analyticity and
(0)
w3g0

(p) 6= 0, we deduce that  ag0

33(0) = l

(0) = 0.

to establish that ag0(0) = 0 we can use again the wti for the background gauge invariance

(cid:16)l

ag0

(p) + l

ag0(p)(cid:17) = 0

(4.106)

24notice that for convenience we use the notation a to denote the background eld for the photon. however in
 a where
 is the background eld for the su (2) factor. using the background eld for the photon the following equations

our approach without an explicit background eld for the u (1) gauge boson we have that  a a = sw  w 3
w 3
stay unchanged.

35

which immediately implies our claim. notice that also in this case the wti can be broken by local
terms ag0(p) = y3p2 (a constant breaking terms is excluded by ir power counting) which is
removed by using counterterms of the form

z d4x(cid:16)y3 ag0(cid:17)

(4.107)

which is not ir dangerous and has no eect in irreducible greens functions.

finally we have to show that (n)

h ca(0) = 0, n. this can be achieved by considering the aae
and the sti. in particular, by taking the functional derivative of aae (2.6) with respect to h(p)
at zero momentum, we have

cw h ca(0)  sw h cz (0)  vh 0(0) = 0.

(4.108)

by considering eq. (4.98) and g0h(0) = 0, 0ca(0) = 0, from the second equation of (4.97) we get
(n)
h cz (0) = 0, n, and nally from eq. (4.108) and h 0(0) = 0 we obtain h ca(0) = 0 which is
our claim.

finally, by this minimal set of normalization conditions we are able to exclude any ir anomalies

and, by considering the new identity

2

ip

ca(p) a(p)

=

s()(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)=0,p=0
aa(0) +(cid:16)s2

= hsw(cid:16)cw + 3cz (0)(cid:17) l

 0cz (0)g0a(0)  h cz (0)ha(0) = 0

w  cw 3cz (0)(cid:17) l

za(0)i

we obtain the well-known result [11]

(4.109)

(4.110)

aa(0)l

zz (0)  (l

(cid:16)l

az)(0)2(cid:17) = 0.

for the z  a mixing. notice that this can be only achieved in restricted set of models. therefore,
by imposing az (0) = 0, we immediately get aa(0) = 0 from (4.110) and ah(0) = 0 from (4.109).
we conclude the section reminding the reader that this particular cancellation of the ir anomaly

can be only achieved in the minimal sm, because there is only one abelian factor.

the analysis of the ir anomalies cancellation in the case of extended models as the 2hdm and
in the mssm requires a more involved proof because any kind of mixing among the scalar elds are
admitted by symmetries and cp violation. in the same way the corresponding brst sources i
can mixed among themselves and we have to prove that cai(0) = 0 for all i. the analysis of these
model will be presented in a forthcoming paper.

5 conclusions

we have shown that the bfm allows for a consistent renormalization of non-semisimple gauge
theories and the standard model. we have discussed the relation between the background gauge
invariance, expressed in terms of ward-takadashi identities on the greens function and the normal-
ization conditions. in particular, we have analyzed the ir problems and we have dened a minimal
set of normalization conditions (partially on-shell scheme) compatible with the background gauge
invariance which avoids the (o-shell) ir singularities.

36

furthermore we have studied the anomalies of sti and wti with special attention to their ir
anomalies. we have shown that the ir anomalies for the sm can be excluded by a suitable choice
of free parameters. this implies that, in the case of extended models, the sti and the wti must
be deformed.

in addition, we have considered the problem of mixings in all sectors of non-semisimple gauge
models and we discuss the renormalization conditions for the ckm matrix elements and the mixing
angles. we are able to formulate the renormalization independently of the cp-invariance, showing
that new counterterms are xed by the wti for the background gauge invariance and by a proper
renormalization of tadpoles.

in conclusion, we have analyzed the renormalization of the background elds and we have proved
that the normalizations of their two-point functions are related to the renormalizations of quantum
elds. this ensures that there is no independent renormalization of the background elds and the
s-matrix elements built by background external greens functions, as prescripted by the background
field method, have the same poles as the s-matrix constructed in the conventional way.

acknowledgments

the author is deeply indebted to d. maison for discussions, suggestions and for a careful reading of
the manuscript. i also want to thank c. becchi and r. ferrari for useful remarks and comments.
moreover, i would like to acknowledge p. gambino for useful clarications on the electroweak radia-
tive calculations and, nally, e. kraus and k. sibold concerning the algebraic renormalization.

appendix a: functional operators and their algebra

in the present section we will present the functional operators and their algebra in the gauge eigeneld
formalism. the expressions of those operators in the mass eigeneld formalism is provided in [11, 16].
starting from the sti (2.5), from the wti (2.7) for simple factors, from the choice of the gauge
xing and from the aae discussed in sec. 2.2, and by requiring the closure of the algebra of the
functional operators we derive the complete set of identities.

the choice of the gauge xing (2.8) is implemented at the quantum level as equations of motion

for the ba elds


ba

= habs bs cs



ab(  + v)i(et)b

(w  w )

cs + aba (w  w )
ba

+

ij ( + v)j + acbci  cl

ba .

(a.111)

for deriving the consistency conditions among the sti and other functional identities we introduce
the linearized slavnov-taylor operator:

s0 =z d4x(cid:20) 0

as



r
i

+

+ as




w as


0

l
i


 w as



 0
r
i

ca

ba

+

0
w as




l
i

+

+ i



as


0

r
i


 i#



r
i



+

37

+ caa



w aa



l
i


 0
l
i



+

0
i


i +

0
i


i

+

+

0
as



cas

+

0
cas



 as

+

(a.112)

where 0 is the tree level action (2.2). notice that because of invariance of 0 under brst trans-
formations the operator s0 is nilpotent: s 2

0 = 0.

due to the presence of several multiplets of scalars and fermions, the classical action turns out
to be invariant under some global symmetries (here labeled by )[49]. the following wti for the
global symmetries implement those symmetries at the quantum level

w =z d4x(cid:20)p as

,


w as


+ p i



i + p i




 i +


i p i

(cid:21) = 0

(a.113)

where p as
global symmetry in the eld representation.

,, p i

 are local polynomials for each  and p as

, p i

, p i

,, . . . , p i

 are the generators of the

in the sm there are four dierent global currents which correspond to conserved quantum num-
bers (at the level of perturbation theory), namely the individual lepton numbers le, l, l and the
baryon number b. the corresponding currents are given by

jb

 =x (cid:16)ql,ql, + ur,ur, + dr,dr,(cid:17)
 =(cid:16)ll,ll, + er,er,(cid:17) ,

jl

(a.114)

where  = e, ,  and  counts the generations, which can mix with the current of the hypercharge
y

jy

 =x (cid:18) 1

6

ql,ql, +

2
3

ur,ur, 

1
3

dr,dr, 

1
2

ll,ll,  er,er,(cid:19) (a.115)

as discussed in [6, 10, 16, 22]. the currents (a.114) provide the four corresponding wti

wb =z d4xjb

 , wl =z d4xjl



(a.116)

which commute which the other functional equations and among themselves.

among the functional identities we have the following commutation relations (here expressed for

a generic functional f)

sf was (f)  was s(f) = 0

()  cl

sf s(f) = 0,


bb(cid:16)gaa(f)  cl
(cid:20)wa,(cid:18) 

caa(cid:17)  gaa(cid:18) 
bb(cid:19)(cid:21) (f) = (ef )abc(cid:18) 

[was , wbs ] (f) = (ef )as bs cswcs (f)

 cl

bb

bb

bc

bb(cid:19) = 0
bc(cid:19) (f)

 cl

(a.117)

which respectively express the nilpotency of the slavnov-taylor operator, the invariance of the
slavnov-taylor operator under the background gauge transformations of the simple factors, the
compatibility between the aae and the gauge xing and, nally, the covariance of the eq. (a.111)
with respect to the background gauge transformations.

however the system of the above equations does not close under the (anti-)commutation relations
and in particular the faddeev - popov equations of motion ( equations) are derived by requiring

38

the involution of the system:

ga() 


bb

s()  s(cid:18) 

bb(cid:19) =

()  cl

bb
+ ab(  + v)i(et)b
ij

=


ca + aas as bs




bs


= aaa 2caa  aas as bs

 bs

  abi(et)b


j =
ij( + v)j  cl
ca

(a.118)

although these equations are not independent of the nl eqs. (a.111) and of sti, they provide a
direct method for eliminating the ghost elds from the vertex functional.

the anti-commutation relation between the sti (2.5) and the aae (2.6) is more interesting,

since this implies the following wti

waa()  gaas()  s(cid:16)gaa()  cl

+(et)aa

+(et)aa

ij (cid:20)( + v)j
r,ij"r


r
j

i


i + (  + v)j

+ r
i


r
j

+ r
i

+

w aa


caa(cid:17) =   
i(cid:21) +
j# + (r  l)


i + j


r

+ 





r
i

+ j


 i

r
j



 ! +

 w aa

(a.119)

which describe the background gauge invariance for the abelian factors ga. by eliminating the
abelian background gauge elds we get

waa() = 2baa

(a.120)

and, since the l.h.s.
x its renormalization.

is linear in quantum elds baa it does not require any new external source to

at this point it is easy to check that the functional operators generates an algebra over the space
of local and integrated functionals, in particular we have to supply also the following remaining
relations

this ensures the integrability of the system (in the sense of the frobenius theorem).

appendix b: renormalization of nl equations

in this section we will discuss the renormalization of the nl eqs. (a.111) by means of the algebraic
technique with special care to the problems of ir divergences. in fact, although the renormaliza-
tion of the nl equations does not present any algebraic obstruction, we have to be sure that the

39

()  cl

bb(cid:19) = 0,



[waa, wb] (f) = 0,

sfwaa(f)  waas(f) = 0,

sf(cid:16)ga(f)  cl
hwa,(cid:16)gb  cl
(cid:20)wa,(cid:18) 
hwa,(cid:16)gaa  cl
n(cid:16)ga  cl

ca(cid:17) + gas(f) = 0,
cb(cid:17)i (f) = (ef )abc(cid:16)gc  cl
bb(cid:19)(cid:21) (f) = (ef )abc(cid:18) 
caa(cid:17)i (f) = 0,
ca(cid:17) ,(cid:16)gba  cl
cba(cid:17)o (f) = 0,

bca(cid:17)  ga(cid:18) 

bb(cid:16)ga(f)  cl
cc(cid:17) (f),
bc(cid:19) (f),
n(cid:16)gaa  cl
caa(cid:17) ,(cid:16)gba  cl
ca(cid:17) ,(cid:16)gb  cl
n(cid:16)ga  cl

 cl

 cl

bb

bc

bb

cba(cid:17)o (f) = 0,
cb(cid:17)o (f) = 0.

(a.121)

introduction of non-invariant counter term does not introduce some ir anomalies. in particular we
do not analyze the complete algebraic renormalization of the nl eqs.(a.111), but we look only for
the lower dimension terms. the renormalization of these equations is also studied in book [7] and
in recent paper [16].

by using the relation among the ba and the corresponding anti-ghost elds ca, we introduce
z nakanishi-lautrup which are the brst variation of the

a and the massive ba

a = ba

a , sca

z = ba

z with the same ir and uv degree.

the massless ba
anti-ghost elds: sca

then the quantum extension of the nl equations to the all orders gives


ba
a

= cl,a

ba

+hqa

ba  i2

2

,


ba
z

= cl,a

bz

+hqa

bz  i1

2

(b.1)

where the classical terms cl,a

, cl,a

ba

bz

are specied in eqs. (a.111).

recursively assuming that the lower order breaking terms of the eqs. (b.1) up to order hn1 are

compensated by means of counterterms we deduce

ba  i2
hqa

2

bz  i1
hqa

2

= hnqa

ba + o(hn+1qba),

= hnqa

bz + o(hn+1qbz )

(b.2)

, qa
bz

where qa
are local polynomials in terms of elds and their derivatives with zero faddeev-
ba
popov charge. by uv and ir power counting, by covariance and by faddeev-popov charges, the
possible candidates for qa
ba

, qa
bz

are

qa

bz = y ab

qa

ba = y ab

z,3

z,1 w b
+y aij
z,6
a,1w b
+y aij
a,6

 + y ai
i j + y ab
 + y ai
i j + y ab

z,2 i + y ai
z,7 ba
a,2i + y ai
a,7 ba

i + y aij
z,8 ba
i + y aij
a,8 ba

a + y ab

a + y ab

z,4 ij + y aij
a + y abd
a,4 ij + y aij

z,9 cbcd

a + y abd

a,9 cbcd

a,3

a,5

z,5

ij

ij

(b.3)

(b.4)

a

y ai
a,3

i are ir convergent because of the ir degree of the ba

where the coecients ya,, yz, are constant. the only dangerous terms are the y ai
i if
the scalar elds i are massless (at least one of them). nevertheless the non-invariant counter terms
a y ai
ba

a,2i, ba
moreover no other obstruction occurs to the compensation of the breaking terms to the nl
equations by means of local counter terms.
in the next appendix we will see that for the ghost
equations (2.6) and (a.118), this possibility occurs and a suitable rotation among massless and
massive elds has to be taken into account in order to avoid the ir divergences.
we have to remind that the presence of the non-linear breaking terms y aij

a,2i, y ai

a elds.

z,4 , y abc

z,9 , y aij

a,4 , y abc

a,9

a,3

introduce new feynman rules that have to be considered at the higher orders.

appendix c: renormalization of e and aae

in this appendix we briey discuss the renormalization of the functional equations for the ghost and
anti-ghost elds (2.6) and (a.118). although in the main text we underlined the implication of the
aae, here both the faddeev-popov equation and the aae turn out to be necessary to compute
ghost dependent counterterms. the present discussion follows essentially the lines of the proof of
absence of anomalies for the faddeev-popov equation and aae in [6] and in the paper by t.clark
[52].

40

by using the qap the faddeev-popov equation and the aae at higher order are given by

ga = cl,c

a +(cid:2) qa  (cid:3)1

2 ,

gaa = cl,c

aa + [qaa  ]3

4

(c.1)

a

is the left hand side of eq. (a.118) and cl,c

where cl,c
aa is given in eq. (2.6). recursively, by as-
suming that lower order breaking terms qa, qaa are compensated by means of suitable counterterms
up to order hn1 the r.h.s. of eq. (c.1) become

2 = hn qa + o(hn+1 q),

[qaa  ]3

4 = hnqaa + o(hn+1q)

(c.2)

where qa, qaa are local polynomials in terms of elds and their derivatives with faddeev-popov
charge +1 and -1 respectively. by uv and ir power counting, by the lorentz covariance and by
faddeev-popov charges conservation, the possible candidates for qa, qaa are

(cid:2) qa  (cid:3)1

qa = x ab
qaa = x aab

1

1 cb + x a[bc]d

2

cbcccd + x ai

3 i + x abs

cb + x aa[bc]d

2

cbcccd + x aai

3 i + x aabs

,4 
bs
,4 
bs

+ x aai

,5 i + h.c.

(c.3)

(c.4)

1 , x ai

3 , x abs

where x ab
,5 are polynomials of quantum elds while the constant
coecients x a[bc]d are totally antisymmetric tensors of the lie algebra of g. this follows from the
consistency conditions derived by the commutation relations (a.121):

,4 , x aab

, x aabs

, x aai

, x aai

,4

1

3

ga
(x)

gb
(y) + gb
(y)

ga
(x) = 0,

gaa
(x)gba

(y) + gba

(y)gaa

(x) = 0,

gaa
(x)

gb
(y) + gb

(y)gaa

(x) = 0

(c.5)

which imply relations among the coecients of qa, qaa.

as is well known (see for further details the papers [6] and [7]) the breaking terms (c.3)-(c.4) can
be removed by means of counterterms and no anomaly appears for equations (c.1). but, although
from an algebraic point of view there are local counterterms which cancel the apparent breaking
terms, we have to be sure that those counterterms do not introduce any ir divergences. to this
purpose we have to check the structure of the lower dimensional terms in the explicit decomposition
(c.3)-(c.4), that is x ab
and verify if the corresponding counter terms could give ir problems.
it is easy to see that the only dangerous candidates are

1 , x aab

1

ir3(x) = ca
lc.t.

z k 1

a,bcb

a + ca

a k 2

a,bcb

z + ca

a k 3

a,b(, )cb

a

(c.6)

with ir degree ir  3. only k 3
the coecients are constant and represent mass terms for the massless ghost elds ca
the last term of the lc.t.

a,b(, ) could depend on the scalars if they are massless, otherwise
a . however

ir3 is not necessary; in fact ir power counting implies that

a , ca

qa

ir1 = x ab

1,concb

z , qaa

ir3 = x aab

1,con cb

z

(c.7)

1,con, x aab

1,con are the eld independent constant parts of the polynomials x ab

where x ab
and the
index b runs only over the indices of massive ghost elds cb
z . furthermore the consistency conditions
(c.5) impose the constraint x aaa
1,con. in the
case x ab
1,con 6= 0 the corresponding counterterms (c.6) cannot be introduced in the tree level action.
however another solution can be found. we can use the matrix gab introduced above in order to
remove the anomaly terms (c.7), or equivalently, to x the normalization conditions

1,con = 0, reducing the only free coecients to x ab

1,con + x aaa

, x aab

1

1

ca

a cb

z

(p2 = 0) = 0,

ca

z cb

a

(p2 = 0) = 0,

41

ca

a cb

a

(p2 = 0) = 0

(c.8)

ensuring the correct normalization properties of massless ghost elds. as is well known the ir
problems arise when radiative corrections mix massive and massless elds. therefore the anomalies
in the functional equations for the ghost elds can be removed by rotating the anti-ghost elds.
finally we would like to stress that the coecients x ab
1,con computed within bphzl scheme, as a
consequence, are zero and the normalization conditions (c.8) are automatically satised. on the
other side the choice of other normalization conditions for physical elds (as for standard model
with on-shell normalization conditions) might spoil the (c.8) and spurious anomalies as (c.3)-(c.4)
might appear.

references

[1] c.n. yang and r.l. mills, phys. rev. d96 (1954) 191; t.d. lee and c.n. yang, phys. rev. d98
(1955) 101; s. weinberg, phys. rev. lett. 19 (1967) 1264; a. salam, in elementary particle
physics, ed. n. svartholm (almqvist and wiksells, stockoholm, 1968); s.l. glashow, nucl.
phys. b22 (1961) 579; a.salam and j. ward, phys. lett. 13b (1964) 168; j. schwinger, ann.
phys. (ny) 2 (1957) 407;

[2] n.n. bogoliubov and d.v. shirkov, introduction to the theory of quantized fields, interscience,

new york, 1959; k. hepp, comm. math. phys. 2 (1966) 301;

[3] h. epstein and v. glaser, ann. inst. poincare 29(1973) 211 and in statistical mechanics and
quantum field theory (c. de witt and r. stora, eds.), p. 501, gordon & breach, new york,
1971; t. hurth, ann. phys. 244, 340 (1995) [hep-th/9411080]; t. hurth and k. skenderis,
nucl. phys. b541, 566 (1999) [hep-th/9803030].

[4] c. becchi, a. rouet, and r. stora, comm. math. phys. 42 (1975) 127, ann. phys. (ny) 98
(1976) 287; c. becchi, a. rouet, and r. stora, gauge eld models and renormalizable models
with broken symmetries in renormalization theory, edited by g.velo and a.s.wightman, d.
reidel, pub. co.; i.v. tyutin, lebenev institute preprint n39 (1975).

[5] c. becchi, lectures on renormalization of gauge theories in relativity, group and topology

ii, les houches 1983;

[6] g. bandelloni, c. becchi, a. blasi, and r. collina, ann. inst. henry poincare xxviii,
3(1978)225, 285; c. becchi, a. rouet and r. stora, renormalizable theories with symmetry
breaking in field theory, quantization and statistical physics, ed. e. tirapegui.

[7] o. piguet and a. rouet, symmetries in perturbative quantum field theory phys. rep. 76
(1981) 1; o. piguet and s.p. sorella, algebraic renormalization lecture notes in physics mono-
graphs, m 28, springer-verlag berlin heidelberg, 1995;

[8] w. zimmermann, comm. math. phys. 39(1974)81, local operator products and renorma-
lization in quantum field theory in 1970 brandeis university summer institute lectures,
cambridge, mass. m.i.t. press and the references therein;

[9] g. bandelloni, c. becchi, a. blasi, and r. collina, comm. math. phys. 71 (1980) 239;

[10] g. barnich, f. brandt, and m. henneaux, commun.math.phys.174 (1995) 93,

[hep-
th/9405194], commun.math.phys.174 (1995) 57 [hep-th/9405109]; g. barnich, f. brandt,

42

and m. henneaux, phys. lett. 346b (1995) 81, [hep-th/9411202] and the references therein;
g. barnich and m. henneaux phys. rev. lett. 72 (1994) 1055, [hep-th/9312206];

[11] k. aoki, z. hioki, r. kawabe, m. konuma, and t. muta, prog.theor.phys.suppl. 73(1982)1;

[12] l. baulieu and r. coquereaux, ann. phys. 140, 163 (1982).

[13] m. bohm, h. spiesberger, and w. hollik, fortsch.phys. 34 (1986)687; w. hollik, renormaliza-
tion of standard model, in precision tests of the standard electroweak model, advanced series
on directions in high energy physics, vol.14, ed. p. langacker; w. marciano, ibidem;

[14] f. jegerlehner, renormalizing the standard model, in: proocedings of the 1990 theoretical
advanced study institute in elementary particle physics, boulder, colorado, ed. m. cvetic
and p. langaker, 1991, singapore;

[15] p. langacker, the standard electroweak model, in precision tests of the standard electroweak

model, advanced series on directions in high energy physics, vol.14, ed. p. langacker;

[16] e. kraus, ann. phys. (ny) 262 (1998) 155, [hep-th/9709154];

[17] h.p. nilles, phys. rep. 110 (1984) 1, h.e. haber and g.l. kane phys. rep. 117 (1985) 75,

a.b. lahanas and d.v. nanopoulos, phys. rep. 145 (191) 87

[18] r.a. flores and m. sher, ann. phys. (ny) 148 (1983) 95; r. santos and a. barroso, phys.

rev. d56 (1997) 5366 [hep-ph/9701257].

[19] h. georgi, s.l. glashow, phys. rev. d6 (1972) 429;

[20] h. kluberg-stern and j.b. zuber, phys. rev. d12 (1975) 467, phys. rev. d12 (1975) 482;
g. thooft, nucl. phys. b33 (1971) 436; l.f. abbott, nucl. phys. b185 (1981) 189, acta
phys.pol.12(1982); s. ichimose and m. omote, nucl. phys. b203 (1982) 221; d.m. capper
and a. maclean, nucl. phys. b203 (1982) 413; d.g. boulware, phys. rev. d12 (1981) 389;

[21] a. denner, g. weiglein, and s. dittmaier, phys. lett. 333b (1994) 420, [hep-ph/9406400],

nucl. phys.b(proceedings supplements), [hep-th/9410338], nucl. phys. b440 (1995) 95;

[22] p.a. grassi, nucl. phys. b462 (1996) 524;

[23] p.a. grassi, renormalization of standard model in the thooft-background gauge by means

of automatic symbolic computation, ph.d. thesis, 1997, milan university;

[24] m.t. grisaru, l.f. abbott, and r.k. schaefer, nucl. phys. b229 (1983) 372; c.f. hart phys.
rev. d28 (1983) 1993; a. rebhan and g. wirthumer, z. phys. c28 (1985) 269;c. becchi and
r. collina, [hep-th/9907092];

[25] w. marciano and a. sirlin, nucl. phys. b93 (1975) 303; a. denner and t. sack, nucl. phys.

b347 (1990) 203; b. kniehl and a. pilaftsis, nucl. phys. b474 (1996) 286;

[26] p. gambino, p.a. grassi, and f. madricardo, phys. lett. b454(1999)98 [hep-ph/9811470];

[27] g. bandelloni, c. becchi, a. blasi, and r. collina, comm. math. phys. 67 (1978) 147;
o. piguet, k. sibold, and m. schweda, nucl. phys. b168, 337 (1980); w.a. bardeen, o. piguet,
and k. sibold, phys. lett. 72b, 231 (1977).

43

[28] s.l. adler, phys. rev. d117 (1969) 2426; j.s. bell, r. jackiw, il nuovo cimento 60a (1969)
47; j.s. bell, r. jackiw, il nuovo cimento 60a (1969) 47; j. schwinger, phys. rev. d82 (1951)
664; w.a. bardeen, phys. rev. d184 (1969) 1848;

[29] c. cabibbo, phys. rev. lett. 10 (1963) 10; m. kobayashi and k. maskawa, prog. theor. phys.

49 (1972), 282;

[30] a. pilaftsis, phys. lett. 435b (1998) 88 [hep-ph/9805373], a. pilaftsis, nucl. phys. b504

(1997) 61 [hep-th/9702393];

[31] a. pilaftsis, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 6010 [hep-ph/9803297];

[32] p.a. grassi, nucl. phys. b537, 527 (1999) [hep-th/9804013];

[33] g. curci and r. ferrari, il nuovo cimento 35a (1976) 273; n. nakanishi and i. ojima, co-
variant operator formalism of gauge theories and quantum gravity world scientic lecture
notes in physics vol. 27, ed.world scientic, 1990 and the references therein.

[34] j.h. lowenstein and w. zimmermann, commun. math. phys. 44, 73 (1975), commun. math.
phys. 46, 105 (1976), and nucl. phys. b86, 77 (1975) j.h. lowenstein, comm. math. phys.
47 (1976) 53, nucl. phys. b96 (1975) 189; t.e. clark and j.h. lowenstein, nucl. phys. b113
(1975) 109;

[35] p. breitenlohner and d. maison, comm. math. phys. 52 (1977) 11, comm. math. phys. 52

(1977) 39, comm. math. phys. 52 (1977) 55;

[36] a. sirlin, phys. rev. d22 (1980) 971;

[37] c. itzykson and j.c. zuber, quantum field theory, mcgraw-hill book co., 1980, n.y.;

[38] a. sirlin, phys. rev. lett. 67, 2127 (1991), phys. lett. b267, 240 (1991). m. passera and
a. sirlin, phys. rev. lett. 77 (1996) 4146, [hep-ph/9607253], phys. rev. d58 (19113010) 98
[hep-ph/9804309]; b.a. kniehl and a. sirlin, [hep-ph/9807545], phys. rev. lett. 81 (1998)
1373 [hep-ph/9805390;

[39] r.g. stuart, phys. rev. lett. 70 (1993) 3193; nucl. phys. b498 (1928) 97 [hep-ph/9504215];

[40] w. celmaster and r.j. gonsalves, phys. rev. d20, 1420 (1979); j. papavassiliou, phys.
rev. d41, 3179 (1990). j. papavassiliou and a. pilaftsis, phys. rev. d54, 5315 (1996)
[hep-ph/9605385]; j. papavassiliou, e. de rafael, and n.j. watson, nucl. phys. b503, 79
(1997) [hep-ph/9612237]; n.j. watson, nucl. phys. b494, 388 (1997) [hep-ph/9606381].
r. hauling, e. kraus and k. sibold, nucl. phys. b539 (19691) 99, [hep-th/9807088];

[41] s.j. brodsky and h.j. lu, phys. rev. d51 (1995) 3652 [hep-ph/9405218].

[42] s. weinberg, phys. rev. d118 (1960) 838;

[43] j.f. donoghue, phys. rev. d19 (1979) 2772;

[44] n.k. nielsen, nucl. phys. b101 (19173) 75; h. kluberg-stern and j.b. zuber, phys. rev. d12
(1975) 467; o. piguet and k. sibold, nucl. phys. b253 (19517) 85; e. kraus and k. sibold,
zeit. phys. c68 (1995) 331 [hep-th/9503140]; e. kraus and k. sibold, nucl.phys.proc.suppl.

44

51c (1996)81, [hep-th/9608143]; r. hauling and e. kraus, zeit. phys. c75 (1997) 739
[hep-th/9608160]; r. hauling, e. kraus and k. sibold, nucl. phys. b539 (19691) 99, [hep-
th/9807088] o.m. del cima, d.h. franco and o. piguet, nucl. phys. b551 (1999) 813 [hep-
th/9902084]; p. gambino and p.a. grassi, [hep-ph/9907254.];

[45] p.a. grassi, t. hurth, and m. steinhauser, practical algebraic renormalization, mpi/pht/89-

90, [hep-ph/9907426];

[46] g. degrassi, p. gambino a. sirlin, phys. lett. 394b (1997) 188 [hep-ph/9611363], p. gam-

bino acta phys.polon. 27(1996)3671 [hep-ph/9611358];

[47] j.a. dixon, cohomology and renormalization of gauge theories, imperial college preprint-1977;
comm. math. phys. 139 (19495) 91; w.a. bardeen, phys. rev. 184 (1969) 1848; b. zumino,
chiral anomalies and dierential geometry, in relativity, groups and topology ii, ed. b.s.
dewitt and r. stora, north holland, amsterdam (1984); r. stora, algebraic structure and
topological origin of anomalies, in progress in gauge field theory, ed. t hooft et al, plenum
press, new york (1984); f. brandt, n. dragon, and m. kreuzer, phys. lett. b231 (1989) 263;
nucl. phys. b332 (1990) 224, 250; m. dubois-violette, m. henneaux, m. talon, and c.m.
viallet, phys. lett. b289 (1992) 361, hep-th/9206106; l. baulieu, nucl. phys. b241 (1984)
557; g. bandelloni, j. math. phys. 28 (1987) 2775; s.p. sorella, comm. math. phys. 157 (1993)
231; o. piguet and s.p. sorella, nucl. phys. b381 (1992) 373;

[48] j. wess and b. zumino, phys. lett. 37b (1971) 95;

[49] s. weinberg, phys. rev. lett. 43 (1979) 1566 and the references therein; s. weinberg, the

quantum field theory, vol. i & ii, cambridge, university press, 1996;

[50] j. dixon and m. medrano, phys. rev. d22 (1980) 429;

[51] w. zimmermann, comm. math. phys. 39(1974)81, local operator products and renormaliza-
tion in quantum field theory in 1970 brandeis university summer institute lectures, cam-
bridge, mass. m.i.t. press, and the references therein; y.m.p. lam, phys. rev. d6 (1972) 2145,
phys. rev. d7 (1973) 2943; j. lowenstein, comm. math. phys. 24 (1971) 1; j.h. lowenstein
and b. schroer, phys. rev. d7 (1975) 1929; p. breitenlohner and d. maison, comm. math.
phys. 52 (1977) 11, comm. math. phys. 52 (1977) 39, comm. math. phys. 52 (1977) 55;

[52] t.e. clark nucl. phys. b111 (1976) 134;

45

