9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
2

 

 
 

1
v
5
1
0
8
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

isospin from spin by compositenesa

bertfried fauser & heinz dehnen

universitat konstanz

fakultat fur physik

fach m678

d-78457 konstanz

e-mail: bertfried.fauser@uni-konstanz.de

may 21, 1999

we propose a new method to generate the internal isospin degree of freedom by
non-local bound states. this can be seen as motivated by bargmannwigner like
considerations, which originated from local spin coupling. however, our approach
is not of purely group theoretical origin, but emerges from a geometrical model.
the rotational part of the lorentz group can be seen to mutate into the internal
iso-group under some additional assumptions. the bound states can thereafter be
characterized by either a triple of spinors (1, 2, ) or a pair of an average spinor
and a gauge transformation (, r). therefore, this triple can be considered to be
an isospinor. inducing the whole dynamics from the covariant gauge coupling we
arrive at an isospin gauge theory and its lagrangian formulation. cliord algebraic
methods, especially the hestenes approach to the geometric meaning of spinors,
are the most useful concepts for such a development. the method is not restricted
to isospin, which served as an example only.

1 introduction

composite systems are of extraordinary importance in modelling physical sys-
tems. using composites as building blocks one can build up more involved
systems. however, an exact treatment of the bound systems show up to be
not only dicult but impossible in general. while two body problems are
usually solvable in classical mechanics, it has been proved that this cannot
be done in general already for a three body conguration. moreover, such a
three body, or three degrees of freedom, situation turns out to be in general
chaotic. this might be called the bound state problem. on the other hand,
it is possible only to design exact solvable models in very idealized situations
which have but a few contacts to real systems.

already luis de broglie suggested the photon to be composite.1 bargmann
and wigner 2 derived locally coupled systems of spins. this story entered quan-
tum eld theory via heisenbergs unied non-linear spinor eld theory, 3 which
took the radical point to start with only one fundamental spinor eld consid-
ering all (other) observable elds as composed quantities. a quite elaborate

ato appear in the proceedings of the workshop lorentz group, cpt, and neutrinos 26.
28. june 1999 zacatecas/mexico.

1

and extended version of a non-linear spinor theory of principally unobservable
preon elds was developed by stumpf, 4 a heisenberg and bopp pupil, which
succeeded in deriving, by exact calculations, the electro-weak interaction and
the corresponding bosons on a quantum level as composite elds including
their dynamics. however, due to the complicated and quite involved compu-
tations the strong and gravitational interactions resisted up to now an exact
treatment. nevertheless, the stumpf theory of weak mapping can fairly well be
applied to approximations, when the n-particle wave functions are not known
exactly. this led to very fruitful calculations deriving qcd and a linearized
version of gravity and a successful application to superconductivity including
the important fact of symmetry breaking. our criticism of this method, espe-
cially of the tedious composite wave function calculations and their algebraic
ill-dened behaviour, was formulated in.5

the method proposed in this paper relays, as the stumpf theory, on an
extension of the bargmannwigner idea of local spin coupling. since stumpf
tried to calculate non-local bound state wave functions as exact solutions of
bethesalpeter like equations, we surmount this diculty by a simple geomet-
ric postulate. hence, no dynamic origin of the bound mechanism is given.

beside the fact, that also in the bargmannwigner local coupling no such
mechanism was proposed, we will see later, that this step puts the bound state
problem in a nutshell and opens thereby the study of bound-state dynamics
even if the details are not known exactly. this is much more important in
non-abelian gauge theories like su(2) electro-weak and su(3) colour of qcd
which are chaotic in the classical formulation.

2 geometry of hestenes spinors

the main idea, proposed by hestenes6 since 1966, is to formulate dirac theory
representation independent. in usual, old fashioned notation, e.g. bjorken and
drell, 7 diracs equations for a free eld are written as

i

  m = 0.
the common interpretation is to look at the 
 matrices as matrix valued
components of a four-vector ~. with this preconception one runs immediately
into diculties. the spin indices ,  cannot be considered to characterize
components of the same space m1,3 (minkowski space) as the  index does. a
so-called internal spin space, no comment what internal does mean here or
is related to, is introduced. denoting spin space s, one has ~ to be an element
of a mixed tensor space

(1)

~ = 

 e      m1,3  s  s  =< 

 > .

(2)

2

using ockhams razor, hestenes simply identied the -matrices with the spinor
representation matrices of the minkowski basis vectors. denoting the half
integral spinor representations as d
2 , we can give a representation
 of an arbitrary but xed basis {e}  m1,3 as spin-tensors

2 0 and d0 1

1

(e) =   d

1

2 0  d0 1

2 = 

  s  s 
.

(3)

here  is a label, not an index! observe that these representation spaces
include the minkowski space.
in this way, no additional internal space is
needed.

since the -matrices constitute a cliord algebra over the reals r, which

can be denoted r1,3, one has the following decomposition

r1,3 = 1  m1,3  b  t  v = s  s ,

(4)

where b = m1,3  m1,3 is the space of bi-vectors, t are tri-vectors and v
is the four-vector volume element. a complexication can be achieved as
c  r1,3 = c1,3 if desired. from this decomposition it is clear that the
multivector spaces are invariant subspaces of the cliord-lipschitz group and
especially of the various pin and spin groups, e.g.: spin1,3 mr  mr. turning
diracs equations into a representation free scheme, yields the dirac-hestenes
equation in terms of an arbitrary basis {e} of the minkowski space

e12  me0 = 0.

(5)

notations are: e12 = e1e2,  = e and   r+
1,3 an even operator spinor.
the condition to be even reduces the number of degrees of freedom to the
correct value and splits the spin-tensor into two parts s  s = (s  s)+ 
(s  s), where only the even part is again a subalgebra. however since one
is interested in this spaces as representation spaces, only the linear structure is
in use. the equation respects this decomposition if and only if the mass term
vanishes, see.8 introducing  = e12, we arrive at the equation  = 0.

the important thing is, that  as an algebra element obtains an opera-

tional interpretation. for 1, i4 or 0 one gets

1 = 1, i4 = 2i4,

j  =< 0 >1 = < 0 >0 ,

(6)

where  is the reversion antiautomorphism and < . . . >1 the projection to the
one-vector part. we can give a polar decomposition of :

 = ()

1
2



()

1

2

= 

1

2 v,

3

(7)

where v is in the cliord-lipschitz group. since spinors are dened only up
to a phase, we extract the duality rotation with yvon-takabayasi angle  from
v , which hestenes interprets as statistical.9,10 the polar form is then

 = 

1

2 v = 

1

2 ei4



2 r.

(8)

r has six degrees of freedom (eight of  minus , ) and is an element of
the double cover of the lorentz group spin1,3, inducing lorentz transforma-
tions on vectors. a dirac-hestenes spinor is thus an operational object, which
transforms a reference object into locally given ones. as an example

j (x) = (x)e(x) = (x)ei4(x)r(x)er(x) = (x)ei4(x)l

 (x)e .

(9)
the current density is seen to be (x) times a duality rotation times a local
 (x) of the xed reference system {e}. this inter-
lorentz transformation l
pretation will be the starting point for our geometric composite model.

3 geometric model for bound states

3.1 bargmann-wigner bound states

recalling the idea of bargmann and wigner, we start with free spinors. how
are dynamical equations derived for spin tensors? restricting ourself to two
particle systems, every rank two spin tensor can be decomposed into irreducible
parts using the symmetric group. we obtain

1  2 = (1  2)  [1  2]

(10)

where [12] and (12) means (anti) symmetrization of the tensors. since the
2 spin one-half representation, we end up with a
i are supposed to cary a d
spin one triplet (symmetric case) and a spin zero singlet (antisymmetric case).
concentrating on the symmetric case, we can give the equations of motion as11

1

(  m) () = 0.

(11)

expanding this in a symmetric basis of -matrices c, c = 1
)c, where cc 1 = t , leads to a decomposition of  into

2 ( 

() = a (c) + f ( c).

(12)

since a has four and f has six components, they cannot be independent.
one nds the abelian u(1) gauge theory

f =  a   a = da
2a  (a ) = m2a .

4

(13)

in a suitable gauge and the limit of vanishing mass one arrives at the theory of
vacuum electrodynamics. spin zero particles or spin 3/2 proca elds emerging
from third rank spin-tensors can be treated analogously.

however, it can be shown, that e.g. gravitational forces cannot be modelled
in this way. also several other diculties remain unsolved. finally we remark,
that there is no direct contact between the dynamics of the constituents and
the composite. bargmann and wigner assume simply the same dierential
operator to act on every tensor of any rank.

3.2 non-local geometric bound states

a geometric composite model is proposed, which is based on the hestenes
interpretation of dirac spinors. this model is also ad hoc in some sense, but
cures some of the above mentioned problems of local bargmann-wigner states.
given two dirac particles 1 and 2 forming a non-local bound system,
we do not concentrate on informations about the internal dynamics, but try
to give a dynamics for the entire bound system. we propose: i) the bound
object shall be charaterizable by the usual quantum numbers.
ii) the dynamics of composites shall follow from the dynamics of the free
constituents.
from our consideration we conclude the following model: let (1, 2, ) be a
triple of spinors. the i are the spinors of the constituents and  is a reference
spinor connected to the i by i = 1/2
exp(i4/2)ri . assume that there is a
very small vector ~a satisfying ~x2 = 2~a+~x1. the time average over an internal
period of ~a shall be constant. since the i spins are space-like separated, they
can have any alignment. however we will discard here reections, boosts and
assume that rotations can map the spinors onto one another. we introduce
hence an average spinor  and a lorentz transformation r which describes all
internal degrees of freedom of the composite beside internal radial oscillations,
boosts and mutual internal reections. in fact this removes an internal phase.
one observes the correspondence

i

(1, 2, ) = (, r)

(14)

# 7 + 7 + 0 = 7 + 3 + (3 boosts + 1 radial),

where the second line gives the degrees of freedom. the reference spinor  is
not subjected to change, and has no freedom.

4 induced gauge theory

we derive the covariant coupling of  and r as a direct consequence of our
geometric composite model. thereafter the theory is completed by inducing

5



s

-1
r

a

-a



2

r



1

figure 1: geometrical model of a non-local bound object described by an
average spinor  and a lorentz rotation r or two constituents i.

the full action from the covariant coupling. the curvature two-form or kinetic
eld energy term is added to turn the local lorentz eld r into a dynamical
one, which has consequently to be chosen to be a boson.

from our geometrical model we derive that there exits a lorentz transfor-

mation s which connects the two spinors i, see figure 1.:

s2 = 1, s11 = 2, s = s1.

(15)

the inverse exists because of the group structure. but observe, that we can also
build the square root if we restrict ourselfs to the compact part of the lorentz
group (rotations). more generally this can be done if the spin directions are
not on the light-cone, which is impossible here. hence we dene

r2 = s, r = r1.

(16)

introduce a centre of mass or average spinor  which satises the following two
equations (which actually denes )

1 = r,

2 = r1.

(17)

more precisely we should include the translations t~a also, but in a dilute gas
at moderate temperatures the particles will usually be far away from another
and lock point like, so internal vibrations are not important.

in deriving the dynamics we have to remember that r(x) is a eld. fur-
thermore, we use the free eld dynamics for the i to derive the composite
dynamics. starting from the dirac-hestenes equation

inserting 1 = r, we get

1e12 + m 1e0 = 0

(r)e12 + m(r)e0 = 0.

6

(18)

(19)

using rr = 1 and the leibnitz rule yields (r(r) + )e12 + me0 = 0
which can be summarized with help of the covariant derivative d :=  +
r(r) to

de12 + me0 = 0.

(20)

indeed, r(r) can be considered to be a vector eld. following hestenes
12 we might introduce  = 2r(r) to obtain the derivative of r by r =
r/2(2r(r)) = 1/2 r. the covariant derivative reads now

d =  +

1
2

,

(21)

where the coupling constant is included in  = g . the eld strength can
easily be calculated as usual by computing the commutator of covariant deriva-
tives, which yields a non-abelian su(2) from the covering group of the rota-
tional part of the lorentz group,

f = [d, d] = [ +

1
2

,  +

1
2

].

in a symbolic notation this can be written as

f = d +

1
4

  

(22)

(23)

where the rst term is structural equivalent to the abelian eld strength and
= su(2) on
the second term is the non-abelian left regular action of spin3
the lie group generators. this sort of action can now be seen to constitute an
internal isospin of the geometric composite proposed above. the full action
of this theory can be written as

l = < (d +

1
2

) +

1
4

f 2 >0 .

(24)

it occurs now, that from a geometrical composite model, using operational
spinors, we were able to derive a su(2) gauge covariant coupling and a su(2)
gauge theory by inducing the gauge eld dynamics. the reversed statement
would be, that every gauge eld might be seen as an internal motion. since
only compact groups are used, this internal degrees of freedom are due to
bound structures. our approach should be compared with the purely gauge
theoretic treatment of daviau,13 which shows clearly the isospin acting on
dierent representations.

remark that for a single spinor it is not necessary to introduce a reference
spinor , while this is un-evitable, due to relative adjustments, for two or n-
particle systems. it is possible to account for internal radial oscillatory motions
in our approach, which then would gauge t~a.

7

since we omitted boosts, which are however not compact, our bound state
concept is not relativistic invariant, in-spite of the resulting theory which is.
this has to be considered elsewhere.

the geometric bound model is in accord with some very general consider-
ations on linear forms of multiparticle systems which were investigated in.14 it
furthermore explains a factor 2 not understood in the stumpf weak mapping
formalism which there forced the temporal gauge to be used.15,4

finally a strong support is given, that gauge theories might arise always

from dynamical eects in theories of compound objects.

acknowledgement

the rst author, b.f.,was partly supported by the dfg.

references

1. l. de broglie, theorie general des particules a spin gautier

villars/paris,2nd. ed. (1954)

2. v. bargmann, e. wigner, proc. nat. acad. sci. (usa) 34, 211223

(1948)

3. w. heisenberg, einfuhrung in die einheitliche feldtheorie der elemen-

tarteilchen hirzel/stuttgart (1967)

4. h. stumpf, th. borne, composite particle theory in quantum eld the-

ory vieweg/braunschweig (1994)

5. b. fauser, h. stumpf, adv. in appl. cli. alg. 7(sup.), 399418 (1994)
6. d. hestenes, space time algebra gordon and beach (1966)
7. j.d. bjorken, s.d. drell, relativistische quantenmechanik mc graw-hill

inc. 1964, bi-wissenschaftsverlag/mannheim (1966)

8. b. fauser, proc. of the 4th int. conf. on cliord alg. and their appl.

in math. phys., aachen, kluwer/dordrecht , 89107 (1996)
9. d. hestenes, r. gurtler, j. math. phys. 16(3), 556 (1975)
10. r. gurtler, d. hestenes, j. math. phys. 16(3), 573 (1975)
11. d. lurie, particle and fields interscience publ. (1968)
12. d. hestenes, new foundation for classical mechanics kluwer/dorchrecht

(1986)

13. c. daviau, equation de dirac non lineaire, thesis, univ. nantes (1993)
14. b. fauser, cliord geometric parameterization of inequivalent vacua, j.

phys. a: math. gen. , submitted (1999) hep-th/9710047

15. w. pster, yang-mills-dynamik als eektive theorie von vektoriellen
spinor-isospinor-bindungszustanden in einem preonfeldmodell, thesis,
univ. tubingen (1990)

8

