9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
3

 

 
 

1
v
6
1
0
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

introduction

to the yuri golfand memorial volume

many faces of superworld

theoretical physics institute, university of minnesota, minneapolis, mn 55455

m. shifman

supersymmetry is almost thirty years old. the rst supersymmetric model
in four dimensions was found by golfand and likhtman in 1970. yuri abramo-
vich golfand was a very modest man who, unfortunately, did not gain much
recognition when he was still alive. when i saw him for the last time in haifa
in 1992, he told me that he had a dream  to travel to the west, to the
united states or france, to attend a physics conference or just to see the
world. this dream never came true. he died in 1994, but you will look in
vain for the obituary in physics today, cern courier, or any russian physics
journals. this memorial volume is a belated tribute to the man who was one
of the discoverers of supersymmetry, which today, 30 years later, dominates
theoretical high energy physics.

basic biographic dataa

yuri abramovich golfand was born in kharkov, ukraine, on january 10, 1922.
like many soviet scholars of his generation, he started his education at the
kharkov university, department of physics and mathematics. this was in
1938. the second world war (ww ii) interrupted his academic career; in
1941 golfand becomes a cadet of the military airforce academy. the end
of 1944 found him at a front-line airdrome where he worked as a technician.
after the end of the war, in 1945, golfand resumed his studies, this time at
the department of mathematics of the leningrad university. he graduated in
1946 and got his phd in mathematics within a year and a half. at the end
of the 1940s, golfand worked for an electrical engineering research institute.
in 1951, he joined the group of i.e. tamm at the theory department of the
lebedev physical institute (fian) in moscow. he stayed there for 40 years,
with a long break, of which more will be said later. for a year or two, gol-
fand was marginally involved in the nuclear bomb project, like many of his
colleagues at that time. approximately at the same time he got interested

abelow i quote from a note written by misha marinov in 1994 for the proceedings of the
israeli physical society, a source inaccessible outside israel. i am grateful to m. marinov
for providing me with this publication from his archive. some additional data were kindly
communicated to me by mrs. n. koretz-golfand.

1

in fundamental physics. in the 1950s and 60s, golfand carried out several
projects in quantum eld theory, in particular, on applications of the functional
methods. in 1959, he published a famous work on the method of renormal-
ization, based on the assumption that the four-dimensional momentum space
has a constant nonzero curvature. that was one of fascinating attempts to
introduce elementary length to relativistic eld theory.

in 1972, the academy of sciences conducted a routine campaign of per-
sonnel cuts. at the fian theory department it was decided that golfand
was the least worthy member of the group, whose work was unimpactful. as
a result, he was red from fian in 1973. this unfortunate turn of events left
very little choice to golfand  he decides to apply for the exit visa to israel,
which only aggravates his situation. in due time there comes a refusal. in those
days such an application was considered to be high treason. thus, golfand
becomes a refusenik  a nonperson, according to the orwellian nomenclature
 with all ensuing political consequences. his struggle lasted for many years.
this chapter belongs to a dierent book, however, which has yet to be written.
we will not touch it.

golfand was unemployed for 7 years, until 1980, when he was accepted back
to fian (but not to the theoretical group), under strong pressure from the
world physics community, and, in particular, the american physical society.
it was only in june of 1990  seventeen years after the original application 
that the permission was granted to golfands family to leave the soviet union,
which at this time was rapidly approaching its demise. within a few months
his family moved to israel. an ocial farewell letter from fian, signed by
academician l. keldysh, the director general, arrived a few days before the
departure. the concluding paragraph of the letter reads: i would like to
express my deep and sincere regret for the damage which has been inicted on
you, and henceforth on the institute, by your dismissal from fian.

it will be fair to add that shortly before this, the soviet academy of
sciences awarded yuri golfand with the tamm prize for theoretical physics.
this was the only award yuri golfand ever received.

golfand spent the last years of his life in haifa. because of his age, he
could not get a regular professorship, so he settled for a research fellowship at
technion, under a special program of the israeli government. yuri abramovich
golfand died on february 17, 1994, in jerusalem, from complications of a brain
stroke.

2

work on supersymmetry; chronology

it is known that golfand discussed the bosefermi symmetry with his col-
leagues in the late 1960s, trying to solve the puzzle of weak interactions,
before the advent of the glashow-weinberg-salam theory. that is why he was
so much preoccuppied with the problem of parity violation which is clearly vis-
ible in the rst published work on four-dimensional supersymmetry.1 evgeny
likhtman recollects that when he appeared in fian as golfands phd student,
in the spring of 1968, golfand had already found an extension of the poincare
algebra by bispinor generators. (today the extension found by golfand is re-
ferred to as the super-poincare algebra, while the bispinor generators are called
the supercharges.) in the review article2 it is mentioned that the searches of
the extensions of the poincare algebra conducted by golfand in the late 1960s
were originally also motivated by the desire to bypass the well-known no-go
theorems due to coleman and mandula, and weinberg (or to establish new
no-go theorems).

golfand and likhtman worked on various aspects of supersymmetry for
several years. their rst published paper1 entitled extension of the algebra
of poincare group generators and violation of p invariance contained a eld-
theoretic model, which in modern terms can be described as supersymmetric
quantum electrodynamics (qed) with the mass term of the photon/photino
elds, plus two chiral matter superelds. (i suggest we call it the golfand
likhtman model.) adding the photon mass term in the abelian gauge theory
does not spoil renormalizability. alternatively, one can get this model from
massless super-qed by adding a higgs sector, and breaking u(1) sponta-
neously. the masses of the physical higgs elds are then sent to innity while
the photon/photino mass is kept nite. the requirement of renormalizability
was very important to golfand who tried to follow as close as possible the pat-
tern of the only respectable eld theory of the time, quantum electrodynamics.
on the other hand, the absence of massless particles was also a precondition
 otherwise golfand and likhtman would have had settled for massless super-
qed, which is signicantly simpler than the model they found. this shows
that golfand kept in mind phenomenological applications in weak interactions.
the paper1 was received by the editorial oce of jetp letters on march
10, 1971. to set the time scale, i should mention that the famous paper of
gervais and sakita,3 known to everybody, was received by the editorial oce
of nuclear physics on august 13, 1971. golfand and likhtman also prepared a
detailed publication, which appeared in the i.e. tamm memorial volume.4 the
only date one can infer now with certainty in connection with this publication
is that this volume was sent to print on march 20, 1972. in fact, according to

3

likhtmans memoirs, both papers were prepared practically simultaneously in
the end of 1970. for western readers i should explain some essential details
regarding the publication process in the soviet union. to publish a scientic
paper was much more than just typing the manuscript and mailing it to the
publisher. there was a long latent period, associated with getting all sorts
of clearances. first, the so-called expert commission (a group of authorized
fellow physicists in the given institution) was supposed to study the paper
and recommend its publication. according to the ocial rules they had to
certify that no new discoveries were reported, because if they were, the expert
commission had to recommend to classify the paper right away. of course,
people tended to stretch the ocial rules, otherwise not a single breakthrough
paper would have ever appeared in the soviet union.

at the next stage the paper would go to the so called regime department
whose task was to check that no references to classied work or undesirable
persons were made, no subversive ideas put forward, and so on. with all this
paperwork done, the decision to allow (disallow) publication was to be made
by the director of the institute. this is not the end of the story, however.
all materials intended for publication had to be cleared through the so-called
glavlit, the almighty agency whose sole obligation was to ensure total cen-
sorship in the country. if, at the previous stages the author would have at least
some minimal control over what was going on with his (her) paper, glavlit
was a total black box.

the process of getting all clearances could extend anywhere from weeks to
many months, and the paper was ocially nonexistent until the very end. the
author could not even refer to it in his/her further work. thus, the likhtmans
recollections that the paper1 was completed in 1970, and the ocial submission
date of march 10, 1971, are not inconsistent.

in their second paper on supersymmetry,4 golfand and likhtman described
in detail a recursive procedure of building supersymmetric models. by this
time likhtman, following golfands instructions, worked out the free eld rep-
resentations of the super-poicare algebra in several practically important cases
(today we would say, the chiral and vector supermultiplets were constructed).
so, they knew how the numbers of the boson and fermion degrees of freedom in
the supersymmetric lagrangians should be balanced. this determined a start-
ing point  the particle content of the models to be built. then they suggested
cataloguing all possible interaction terms in the lagrangian, compatible with
renormalizability, order by order in the coupling constant, and the correspond-
ing terms in the supercharges, with unknown coecients. the coecients were
to be xed by imposing the anti-commutation relation {q q } = 2p , or-
der by order in the coupling constant. (i use here the modern notation, q

4

denotes the supercharge and p  the energy- momentum operator.) needless
to say that this was much more time- and labor consuming procedure than
the supereld formalism of the present day. note, however, that the work i
describe now took place eight years before the invention of this formalism.

in the very same paper, in addition to the already established super-
poincare algebra, golfand and likhtman presented (a limiting case of) the
super-desitter algebra.

golfand continued to work on this range of ideas even after his forced
retirement, through the years of unemployment. misha marinov recollects:
soon after the wesszumino preprint appeared, in january or february of
1974, i was invited to give a talk on supersymmetry at the institute of physical
problems. golfand was in the rst row and listened to my explanations very
attentively. then we talked about all details. yuri abramovich was greatly
impressed by the wesszumino work, though he said it was too technically
complicated and that his approach was more elegant.
it is curious to note
that abrikosov who attended this seminar too, strongly objected against the
exploitation of the prex super since it was already in use in another context
in superconductors.

later golfand, together with likhtman, wrote an extended review2 for the
collection supersymmetry: a decade of development, edited by peter west,
where they summarized their own results and tried to indicate where they
stood in relation to other numerous results on supersymmetry which were
obtained by that time. this was the last paper written as a team by golfand
and likhtman.

likhtman

under the spell of golfands ill fate, the academic path of evgeny pinkhasovich
likhtman went astray. you will read this story in his memoirs published in this
volume. it should only be added that in the beginning of the 1970s, before
wess and zumino, likhtman published several papers of his own5,6, devoted
to various aspects of supersymmetry. in particular, on page 8 of ref. 5 one
reads: as is known, in relativistic quantum eld theory, in transforming the
free energy operator to the normal-ordered form there emerges an innite term
which is interpreted as the vacuum energy. it is also known that the sign of
this term is dierent for particles subject to the bose and fermi statistics. the
number of boson states is always equal to the number of fermion states. from
this it follows that the innite positive energy of the boson states in any of the
representations of the [super-poincare] algebra is annihilated by the innite
negative energy of the fermion states. in one of his jetp letters papers,6

5

likhtman mentions in passing that in supersymmetric theories the one-loop
boson mass diverges not quadratically, but, like the fermion mass, only log-
arithmically. thus, he apparently was the rst to establish two fundamental
properties of the supersymmetric theories, distinguishing them from all others
 the vanishing of the vacuum energy and the absence of the quadratic diver-
gences. it was likhtman who gave a talk on supersymmetry at itep in the
1970s. this was my only personal encounter with him.

e. likhtman remains the employee of the institute of scientic and tech-
nical information in moscow till the present. the only change is that back in
the 1970s the institute was referred to as all-union, while now, with the
fall of the soviet union, this part of the title is gone.

missed crossroads

it is natural to ask why the ideas of supersymmetry did not take root in the
moscow particle physics community right away, immediately after the dis-
covery of golfand and likhtman. the community was strong, vibrant and
versatile, and yet it missed a key turn on the pathway of theoretical physics.
of course, it is hardly possible now to give a certain answer. i will still

suggest a few conjectures.

one of the reasons might be a negative attitude to eld theory in general
which was prevalent in the community after landaus discovery of the zero
charge. even after the renormalizability of the glashow-weinberg-salam model
was proved by t hooft in 1972, some of the elders of the community, whose
opinions were highly respected, continued to openly express their animosity
towards eld theory. a radical turn occurred only in november of 1974, after
the discovery of j/, with the advent of quantum chromodynamics (qcd).

perhaps, more importantly, golfand was not taken seriously by many of
his former colleagues. to this day some of them insist that he himself did not
understand what he did because he was not really a good physicist. this is a
quotation from a letter which i got about half a year ago, when the work on this
volume began. the author of the letter then continued: i cannot remember
a single interesting statement on physics which he ever made. usually he was
quite ironic about doing physics. he would occasionally come to a seminar,
sit there and then disappear, without saying much or producing anything.
i hasten to add that this opinion is by no means shared by all of golfands
colleagues. human memory is rather selective, and in many cases we see what
we want to see... still, it gives an idea of the general attitude.

the point of view that golfand did not understand what he was doing
is absolutely unsubstantiated either by the analysis of three papers on super-

6

symmetry produced by golfand and likhtman or by recollections of likhtman
and others. from these papers, and from the problems golfand formulated for
likhtmans phd work, it is evident that golfand clearly saw the contours of
the theoretical construction they were building together with likhtman, posed
the right questions, and found adequate theoretical tools for their solution.
perhaps, some weakness was on the side of phenomenology. for instance, the
issue of the parity nonconservation in the golfand-likhtman model, a persis-
tent theme in refs. 1,4, was never elaborated in full. this is easily explained
by the isolation in which they were working, and the lack of enthusiasm on
the side of their colleagues. the soil fertile to the ideas of wess and zumino,
provided by cern in 1974, was totally absent in the case of golfand and
likhtman.

glimpses

golfand was a frequent participant of the itep theory seminars. i used to
bump into him in the corridors of itep regularly. at rst i did not know
who this small man, with warm eyes and a kind smile, was. so, i asked my
thesis advisor, prof. b.l. ioe. ioe lowered his voice to the level of whisper
and replied that this was golfand, the discoverer of supersymmetry. later,
whenever he spoke of him, ioe would automatically lower his voice even if we
were alone in ioes oce. this would emphasize, without any words, that
golfand was a nonperson.

everybody who knew golfand remembers his smile and his eyes. usually
he looked a little bit out of touch with reality, decoupled from the surround-
ing world, with thoughts directed inside rather than outside. marinov wrote
in 1994 in proceedings of the israeli physical society that the technion col-
leagues will remember forever golfands smile and his quiet and sympathizing
eyes. elsewhere he elaboratesb: it was extremely interesting to socialize
with golfand. he was sparing with words, he listened more than he talked;
his eyes, that were always alive and radiated warm energy, participated in the
conversation.

here is how lars brink describes golfand: when mike [green] and i gave
talks at lebedev in 1984 he had managed to sneak in, and i met him in the
shadow there. the last time i saw him was at the sakharov meeting in 1991.
he had emigrated then and was back, so i talked to him several times. he
represented to me a character that i have only seen in russia, the enormous
warm heart, the sadness around the eyes, somewhat subdued, a person whom

ban excerpt from the interview with n. portnova, 1995, unpublished.

7

you instantly like and feel complete condence in... stanley deser, who also
knew golfand personally, called him a man who came premature.c

after i drafted this introduction, i sent it to a few colleagues whose opinion
i value, soliciting comments. as a result, i got a letter from prof. b. ioe
which, to my mind, adds important touches to golfands human and scientic
portrait. i reproduce it below, with insignicant abbreviations.

ioe writes: i knew golfand from 1951. very close friendly relations
developed beginning in around 1957: we visited each other at home, which
is very unusual for me. once we celebrated together the new year (1958 or
1959, i do not remember exactly), meeting the new year midnight in a frosty
and snowy forest (this was near povarovo, 50 km from moscow) by the re we
made. we were on skis, golfand liked skiing as much as i did.

in the 1950s and 60s i often discussed physics with him; such discussions
were very fruitful for me. almost nobody knows now that golfand invented
the path integral formulation in eld theory independently from feynman. it
was in the early 1950s (probably, in 1952). he represented a eld theory
(he considered the scalar eld theory) as an integral over the mesonic elds.
golfand did not follow feynmans route who started from path integrals in
quantum mechanics. in fact, he did not know of feynmans work at that time.
when later he gave a talk at the tamm seminar, people were very skeptical,
because nobody understood the subject  the presentation was dierent from
feynmans, and only very few in the audience knew about feynmans paper,
and nobody understood it either. after some time it became clear, that it was
just the functional integral.

when golfand was unemployed, there was a serious problem with getting
permission for golfands participation in itep seminars. as you remember, all
outside participants were to be included in a list, which had to be cleared
through the itep regime department. the permission would be granted only
to people who had positions in physics institutes; the name of the institute had
to be explicitly indicated in the list we submitted to the regime department
before each seminar. since i was responsible for the list and was signing it each
time (formally till 1977 it was berestetskys signature, but in fact i did it), i

c i quote here from lars brink and misha marinov not accidentally. lars (together with s.
deser, d. gross, y. neeman, b. zumino and some other western physicists) was absolutely
instrumental in golfands survival through the years of unemployment. it was their victory
when golfand was reinstated in fian in 1980. misha, a recent immigrant in israel himself,
did whatever he could to help golfand to blend in into a complicated israeli life during
the most painful transition period. golfands knowledge of hebrew was rudimentary, and
he would be essentially helpless without marinovs constant assistance. later marinov took
the idea of this memorial volume close to heart; he helped to locate golfands widow, mrs.
koretz-golfand, in israel.

8

was committing fraud on a regular basis putting golfand to some ad hoc
institute, just to let him in. my whisper referred not to golfands name per se,
but to the fact, that he was unemployed. at this dicult time, we continued
seeing each other, often exchanged phone calls, etc. after his divorce, our
relations cooled o a little, though.

when i heard that golfand was red from fian, i expressed my dissatis-
faction to a few fian people. each time the response was: it was not me who
did it. as i remember, golfand was unemployed not all the time from 1973 to
80; sometimes he had a part-time teaching job at a technical college. after he
was taken back to fian, golfand continued to attend the itep seminars on
a regular basis, but he refused to participate in the fian seminars. that was
the demonstration of how strongly he was oended.

about this volume

when the idea of this memorial volume came to my mind, i wrote a letter
to my colleagues, fellow theoretical physicists. i sent it to about two dozen
active members of the hep community, those who determine the trends of
the modern high-energy physics, and to several physicists from the younger
generation  some of them i considered to be rising stars. the response was
overwhelmingly positive. with one or two exceptions, all agreed to participate
enthusiastically, and i got many very valuable suggestions as to the structure
of the volume. its scientic part will, hopefully, represent a full picture of the
huge tree into which supersymmetry grew today. the book will be used in the
community in the years to come, and this is the best tribute to golfand one
can think of. i am sincerely grateful to all participants of the project, to whom
i would like to say thank you. together, we did a good job.

also of importance is the rst part of the book, which consists of the
memoirs of golfands widow, mrs. natasha koretz-golfand, and his former
student, dr. evgeny likhtman. they are both emotional and moving, precious
evidence of the past, gone forever... i am very grateful to mrs. koretz-golfand
and to dr. likhtman for their willingness to share with us, and with those who
will come after us, their personal recollections. also included in the rst part is
a historical survey of the scientic ideas that paved the way to supersymmetry,
written by prof. m. marinov, and the english translation of the golfand-
likhtman paper from the tamm memorial volume.

9

conclusions

golfands career in theoretical physics spanned over 40 years. he was the
author of several dozen papersd devoted to aspects of eld theory, out of which
twoe opened to us the doors to the superworld, that will stay with us forever.
i will risk to say that the discovery of supersymmetry was the single most
important contribution of soviet fundamental physics after ww ii. i will go
so far as conjecture that supersymmetry will play the same revolutionary role
in physics of the 21-st century as special and general relativity in physics of
the 20-th century. treatises on the pioneers of supersymmetry  and yuri
golfand denitely belongs to them  will be written by professional historians
of science.

minneapolis, august 24, 1999

1. yu.a. golfand and e.p. likhtman, jetp lett. 13, 323 (1971) [reprinted
in supersymmetry, ed. s. ferrara, (north-holland/world scientic, am-
sterdam  singapore, 1987), vol. 1, page 7].

2. yu.a. golfand and e.p. likhtman, on n = 1 symmetry algebra and
simple models, in supersymmetry: a decade of development, ed. p.
west (adam hilger, bristol, 1986), p. 1.

3. j.-l. gervais and b. sakita, nucl. phys. b34, 632 (1971).
4. yu.a. golfand and e.p. likhtman,  on the extensions of the algebra
of the generators of the poincare group by the bispinor generators,
in i. e. tamm memorial volume problems of theoretical physics, eds.
v.l. ginzburg et al., (nauka, moscow 1972), page 37.

5. e.p. likhtman, irreducible representations of the extension of the al-
gebra of the poincare group generators by the bispinor generators,
report of the lebedev physics institute # 41, 1971, in russian.

6. e.p. likhtman, supergauge renormalizable theory of massive vec-
tor field, jetp. lett., 21, 109 (1975); supersymmetric renormal-
izable theory of massive vector non-abelian field, jetp. lett., 22,
57 (1975).

dsee the list of golfands publications at the end of this volume.
ein fact, one can view these two papers as a short and long version of one and the same
paper. in essence, golfand will be remembered as a one-work man. how many 200-paper
collections would be gladly traded for a single paper, like that?

10

