9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
2
2

 

 
 

1
v
5
5
1
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

induced charge matching and wesszumino term on

quantum modied moduli space

s. l. dubovsky, 1 d. s. gorbunov 2

institute for nuclear research of the russian academy of sciences,

60th october anniversary prospect, 7a, 117312 moscow, russia

abstract

recently it was proposed that matching of global charges induced in vacuum by
slowly varying, topologically non-trivial scalar elds provides consistency conditions
analogous to the t hooft anomaly matching conditions. we study matching of in-
duced charges in supersymmetric su (n ) gauge theories with quantum modied mod-
uli space. we nd that the wesszumino term should be present in the low energy
theory in order that these consistency conditions are satised. we calculate the ho-
motopy groups of the quantum moduli space, and show that there are no obstructions
to the existence of the wesszumino term at arbitrary n . the explicit expression for
this term is given. it is shown that neither vortices nor topological solitons exist in
the model. the case of softly broken supersymmetry is considered as well. we nd
that the possibility of global baryon number violating vacuum is strongly disfavored.

1 introduction

low-energy dynamics of gauge theories strongly coupled in the infrared often can be de-
scribed in terms of eective theories. for instance, the soft limit of quantum chromody-
namics (qcd) is the theory of self-interacting pion elds. in more sophisticated models
(e.g., supersymmetric gauge theories), the eective low-energy theories exhibit interesting
content of composite fermions as well. this property may be important for the construction
of composite models of quarks and leptons.

most of the results concerning the infrared behavior of supersymmetric gauge theories
are obtained without detailed calculations which are problematic in the strong coupling
domain. instead, one makes use of general properties, such as symmetries and holomorphy.
one of the most powerful tools for constraining the low-energy spectra is provided by the
t hooft anomaly matching conditions [1]. namely, one introduces topologically non-trivial
background gauge elds corresponding to the avor symmetry group and checks that the
anomalies in global currents are the same in the microscopic and eective theories. the basis
for the anomaly matching conditions is provided by the adler-bardeen non-renormalization
theorem [2].

1e-mail: sergd@ms2.inr.ac.ru
2e-mail: gorby@ms2.inr.ac.ru

1

recently, it was suggested to consider topologically non-trivial, slowly varying in space
scalar elds as other probes of eective theories [3]. the corresponding matching conditions
emerge due to the fact that such background scalar elds generically induce global charges
in vacuum. these charges are the quantities which should match in the microscopic and
low energy descriptions of the model. the non-renormalization theorem justifying these
matching conditions was proven in ref. [4].

induced charge matching in supersymmetric qcd (sqcd) with su(nc) gauge group
and the number of avors nf larger than the number of colors has been discussed in refs. [3,
4]. models with softly broken supersymmetry were also considered there and it was found
that in the latter case the induced charge matching conditions provide new information in
addition to the t hooft conditions. the present paper is devoted to the study of induced
charge matching in sqcd at nf = nc when the quantum deformation of the moduli space
takes place [5]. it is shown that all constraints are satised provided the term analogous
to the wesszumino term in qcd is added. this term has been already constructed in
the case of su(2) gauge group in ref. [6]. here we extend this construction to the case of
su(nc) group with arbitrary nc. in the case of softly broken supersymmetry it is found
that induced charge matching conditions require that baryon symmetry is unbroken in the
global vacuum.

the paper is organized as follows. in section 2 we recapitulate the notion of induced
charge matching. we consider the qcd case and discuss the role of the wesszumino term
there. in section 3 we study induced charge matching in sqcd with quantum modied
moduli space, analyze its topology and construct the analogue of the wesszumino term in
this model. the case of softly broken supersymmetry is considered in section 4. in section 5
we present our conclusions. appendix a is devoted to the details of the topological analysis
of the quantum moduli space and in appendix b we show that the wesszumino term of
sqcd is unambiguous in quantum theory.

2 induced charge matching

to begin with, let us consider qcd with nc colors and nf massless fermion avors. let
a and a, a, a = 1, . . . , nf , denote left-handed quarks and anti-quarks, respectively. this
theory exhibits the global su(nf )l  su(nf )r symmetry and non-anomalous baryon sym-
metry,   ei,   ei . to probe the theory, one introduces time-independent
background scalar elds ma

b (x) of the following form,

ma

b (x) = m0u a

b (x) ,

where m0 is a constant and u a

b (x) is an su(nf ) matrix at each point x.

let these elds interact with quarks and anti-quarks,

lint = ama

b b + h.c.

2

(1)

(2)

in what follows we restrict the form of the background elds by requiring that u(x) tends to
a constant at spatial innity. one can always make this constant equal to unity, u(x)  1
as |x|  , by making use of a global su(nf ) rotation.

the baryonic current is conserved and obtains non-vanishing vacuum expectation value
in the presence of the background scalar elds. to the leading order in momenta, the
one-loop result for the induced current is [7]

hj

bi =

nc
242

 tr(cid:0)u  u u u u u (cid:1) .

it follows from this expression that the baryonic charge induced in vacuum is proportional
to the topological number of the background,

(3)

(4)

(5)

hbi = ncn[u] ,

where

n[u] =

1

242 z d3x ijk tr(cid:0)u iu u j u u ku (cid:1) .

this topological property is the basis of the theorem proven in ref. [4] that states that
eq. (4) does not get renormalized in the full quantum theory provided the expansion in
momenta of the background elds is valid. it is worth noting also, that higher derivative
terms omitted in eq. (3) do not contribute to hbi.

more generally, one does not necessarily introduce masses to all quarks, and considers
instead background elds interacting only with some of the avors. the only requirement is
that all fermions coupled to the background elds become massive due to this interaction.
instead of the baryon number one may study generators of other non-anomalous global
symmetries which remain unbroken in the presence of the background elds.

the non-renormalization theorem implies that the induced charges should match in the
microscopic and eective theories. these matching conditions are analogous, but generally
inequivalent, to the t hooft conditions.

let us see how induced charges match in qcd with nf  3. following ref. [3] let us
consider a general case when a mass term (2) is added to the rst n0 quark avors. there
are two independent generators of the original su(nf )l  su(nf )r  u(1)b symmetry
group that remain unbroken in the presence of the background elds and act non-trivially
on the rst n0 quark avors. the rst one is a generator of a baryon symmetry and the
second one transforms rst n0 avors in the same way as baryon symmetry and acts trivially
on the other quarks.

as all fundamental fermions that couple to the background scalar eld acquire masses
due to this interaction, the derivative expansion is justied. hence, for slowly varying m(x)
one has

hqii = ncn[u]

(6)

3

for the induced charges hqii corresponding to the above two generators.

the low energy dynamics of qcd is described in terms of su(nf )-valued sigma-model
eld v (x). the interaction with the background eld m(x) induces a potential term into
the low-energy eective lagrangian,

for slowly varying m(x), the eective potential is minimized at

le = tr(cid:0)mv + v m(cid:1) .
1 (cid:19) .
v (x) =(cid:18) u(x) 0

0

(7)

as we will see shortly, the induced charge matching conditions are satised provided the
wesszumino term [8] is added in the eective action. this term cannot be written as a
four-dimensional integral of a su(nf )l  su(nf )r-invariant non-singular function and is
dened as follows [9]. a eld conguration v (x) of nite energy denes a map s4  su(nf )
from compactied spacetime to the space of vacua (moduli space). since 4(su(nf )) = 0,
the image of this map is a boundary of a ve-dimensional submanifold 5 in su(nf ). the
wesszumino term is the integral over this surface,

qcd =

inc

2402 z5

d  tr(cid:0)v 1v v 1v v 1v v 1v v 1v(cid:1) .

(8)

this expression is invariant under small deformations of 5 because the integrand is a closed
ve-form. the discrete ambiguity in the denition of qcd is related to non-zero homotopy
group 5(su(nf )). however, this ambiguity is irrelevant in quantum theory, because eiqcd
is well-dened. the contribution of the wesszumino term to all global currents except for
baryonic one can be obtained by making use of the conventional noether procedure and
reads [9]

ja =

1

482

 tr(cid:0)t a

lv 1 v v 1v v 1v + t a

rv v 1v v 1v v 1(cid:1) ,

(9)

l and t a

where t a
r are su(nf )l and su(nf )r components of a generator of a symmetry
transformation. comparing eq. (9) with the formulae (6) and (5) for the induced charges
and taking into account the vacuum value (7) of the eld v (x), one checks that induced
charges match for the unbroken generator of the avor group su(nf )l  su(nf )r. the
expression for the induced baryonic current can be obtained by the formal substitution
t a
l,r  1 in eq. (9), see ref. [9] for details. again, due to eq. (7) induced baryonic charges
match in the fundamental and eective theories. we conclude that induced charges match
in qcd due to the presence of the wesszumino term.

4

3 wesszumino term in sqcd

let us turn now to the case of sqcd with nf = nc = n. this theory exhibits quantum
deformation of the moduli space [5]. namely, the space of vacua of the microscopic theory
is described by the set of holomorphic gauge invariants constructed out of quarks qa and
anti-quarks qb. these invariants are mesons,

and (anti)-baryons

subject to the constraint

m a

b = qa qb

b = a1..an qa1 ..qan ,
b1..bn qb1.. qbn
b = 

detm  b b = 2n ,

(10)

where  is the infrared scale of the theory. the r.h.s of eq. (10) is of purely quantum origin
and indicates the dierence between the topologies of the quantum and classical spaces of
vacua.

in the low-energy theory of mesons and (anti-)baryons the constraint (10) can be pre-

sented as an eective superpotential

w = a(detm  b b  2n ) ,

(11)

where a is the lagrange multiplier supereld.

let us probe this theory by adding the scalar background eld mq

p(x) with the same

properties as above, i.e., by introducing the term

b
a(x) qbqa
m

(12)

into the superpotential of the fundamental theory. we add the mass terms to all quark
avors to avoid the run-away vacuum. then for the general matrix u b
a(x), the external
elds are neutral only under the baryon symmetry3. the calculation of the induced baryonic
charge in the fundamental theory proceeds as in sect. 2, and we again obtain

hbi = ncn[u] .

(13)

we now turn to eective low energy theory. for slowly varying m(x) the interaction
(12) translates into the additional term tr mm in the eective superpotential (11). as a

3in section 4 we discuss a special case where additional unbroken global symmetries are present.

5

result, the ground state is described by the following x-dependent expectation values4 of
mesons and baryons,

m(x) = 2u 1(x) ,
b = b = 0 .

(14)

one can explicitly check that no baryonic charge is induced due to superpotential interaction
in the eective theory, as opposed to the supersymmetric models considered in refs. [3, 4].
so, the wesszumino term is needed in complete analogy to the qcd case.

the wesszumino term has been already constructed in the case of su(2) group [6].
in that theory one combines mesons and baryons into a single 4  4 anti-symmetric matrix,

v =


0 b
b 0

m t

m

b
0
 b 0

.




in terms of this matrix, the wesszumino term can be written as follows5,

(15)

(16)

su (2) =

1

2402 imz5

d  tr(cid:0)v 1v v 1 v v 1v v 1v v 1v(cid:1) .

in fact, this equation denes only the bosonic part of the wesszumino action. however, it
is sucient for our purposes, since it is this part that is relevant for charge matching. the
wesszumino term (16) is written in the holomorphic form, see ref. [10] for a discussion of
why this is possible.

as pointed out in ref. [6], the generalization of eq. (16) to the case of sp (n) group is

straightforward. so, let us consider su(n) gauge group at n  3.

in order that the wesszumino term could be constructed, the fourth homotopy group of
the quantum moduli space q determined by eq. (10) should be trivial, 4(q) = 0. moreover,
if 5(q) is non-trivial, the value of the wesszumino functional  on its generators should
be equal to 2n, n  z, so that ei is well-dened in quantum theory.

in appendix a it is shown that

q   ( (su(n))) .

(17)

here by  we denote homotopic equivalence and (x ) is a suspension of the manifold x
(see, e.g., ref. [11] for denitions and notations). the theorem about suspension states that
q+1 ( (x )) = q (x ). in particular, eq. (17) implies that 1(q) = 3(q) = 2k(q) = 0
for k = 0, 1, . . . and 2k+1(q) = z for k = 2, 3, . . ..

4hereafter we use the same notations for superelds and their scalar components.
5note that the matrix v is non-degenerate due to the constraint (10).

6

therefore, in the case of su(nc) sqcd with nf = nc, the wesszumino term can be
constructed as a ve-dimensional integral, in similarity to the qcd case. another outcome
of our calculation is that the triviality of the groups 2(q) and 3(q) implies that neither
vortices nor topological solitons exist in this theory.

the explicit expression generalizing eq. (16) is

sqcd =

1

1224n imz5

d detm  b  b tr(cid:0)m 1m m 1m m 1m(cid:1) .

(18)

it is straightforward to check that eq. (18) indeed reproduces eq. (16) at n = 2.

it is shown in the appendix b that sqcd = 2 when 5 is a generator of 5(q) and
consequently the wesszumino term (18) is unambiguous in quantum theory. at rst sight
sqcd appears singular at the points where detm = 0. however, this is not the case.
indeed, due to the constraint (10) one has b, b 6= 0 at these points, and the integrand in
the r.h.s. of eq. (18) can be rewritten in the following way,

1
2

   b

b

tr(cid:0)m m 1 detm m (cid:0)m 1 detm(cid:1)(cid:1)! .

this expression is explicitly non-singular when detm = 0 because m 1 detm can be dened
there by making use of the identity m 1 detm = m t , where m is a matrix composed of
the minors of the matrix m.

let us check that the wesszumino term (18) properly reproduces the induced baryonic
charge. contrary to the qcd case, one can straightforwardly obtain the contribution of
the wesszumino term to the baryonic current by making use of the conventional noether
procedure,

n

j
b =

4824n detm 2   tr(cid:0)m m 1m m 1m m 1(cid:1) + h.c.

then, substituting the vacuum expectation value of the meson elds (14) one obtains the
same value of the induced baryonic charge as in the microscopic theory, eq. (13).

(19)

to summarize, the above analysis shows that eq. (18) is a well-dened expression for
the wesszumino term in the su(n) sqcd with quantum modied moduli space and that
induced charge matching conditions are satised in this theory when the term (18) is taken
into account.

4 softly broken sqcd

finally, let us discuss induced charge matching in the model with the soft supersymmetry
breaking mass term

vsof t = 2

q(|q|2 + | q|2)

(20)

7

added to the potential of the microscopic theory. it has been suggested in ref. [12] that, at
least at q  , the eective theory is described both by the constraint (10) and by the
the soft terms

vef f = 2

b(|b|2 + | b|2) + 2

m |m|2 .

(21)

then, up to avor rotations, there are two candidates for global minima of this potential.
in the rst one the baryon symmetry is unbroken, b = b = 0 , m a
= 2  1, while in
b
the second one the avor symmetries are unbroken, b =  b = n , m a
= 0. which of
b
these points is the global vacuum depends on the ratio 2
that has not been calculated.
b
2
m
indeed, the baryon number violating stationary point is always a stable minimum, while the
stationary point with b = b = 0 is unstable if 2
> n
2 .
b
2
m

< 1 and is a global vacuum if 2
b
2
m

let us now introduce the space-dependent mass term (12). the induced baryonic charge
as calculated in the microscopic theory is the same as in the supersymmetric case. in the
low-energy theory there are again two candidates for the global minimum of the eective
potential. the rst one corresponds to the stationary point with unbroken baryon symmetry
and is the same as in the supersymmetric case (see eq. (14)). in the second stationary point
the baryon symmetry is broken, b =  b = n , m a
b = 0. the baryonic current induced in
the rst candidate vacuum is given by eq. (19) and properly reproduces the induced charge
as calculated in the microscopic theory. in the second extremum the baryon symmetry is
spontaneously broken and the baryon charge matching condition cannot be straightforwardly
applied. consequently, the matching condition for the baryonic charge does not enable one
to conclude which of the two extrema is the global vacuum.

however, for some special choices of the background scalar eld (1), additional matching

conditions arise. namely, let us take the matrix u a
b

(x) in the following form,

u(x) =(cid:18) u (x) 0

1 (cid:19) ,

0

where u (x) is n0  n0 unitary matrix. in analogy to the qcd case, background elds of
this form respect two independent symmetries acting non-trivially on the rst n0 avors.
the rst one is the baryon symmetry. the second one is a vectorial subgroup of the original
su(nf )l  su(nf )r avor group; its generator is

t f = diag(cid:18)1, . . . , 1, 

n0

nf  n0

, . . . , 

n0

nf  n0(cid:19) .

in the microscopic theory both induced charges are equal to ncn[ u ].

in the eective theory the second symmetry remains unbroken in both minima. the

corresponding avor current determined by the wesszumino term (18) is

n

j =

424n detm 2   b  b tr(cid:0)t f m m 1(cid:1) + h.c.

8

(22)

therefore, this current is zero in both stationary points. nevertheless, in the minimum with
unbroken baryon symmetry (and in the supersymmetric case as well) the charge matching
condition corresponding to the additional symmetry is satised. the point is that fermionic
components of mesons m
i are charged under this symmetry provided that one of the indices
(i, j) is less than or equal to n0, while another is larger than n0. in the rst candidate
vacuum mesons obtain non-zero vacuum expectation values (14) which generate spatially
dependent masses for m

,

j

j
i

a

2 detm
m j
m k
i
l

m

j
i

m

k
l

through the term a detm in the eective superpotential. then the calculation of the induced
charge proceeds in the same way as in the microscopic theory and one can straightforwardly
check that the resulting charge is again ncn[ u ].

on the contrary, in the minimum with broken baryon symmetry one has m a
b

(x) = 0
and the relevant fermions remain massless. consequently, charge matching conditions are
not satised in this minimum, that strongly suggests that the baryon symmetry is unbroken
in the global vacuum 6 and that 2
b
2
m

> n
2 .

5 conclusions

we have considered matching of induced charges in su(n) sqcd with quantum modied
moduli space. we have found that matching conditions are satised provided an additional
term similar to the wesszumino term in the non-supersymmetric qcd is added. our
calculation has shown that, contrary to the qcd case, the third homotopy group 3(q) of
the vacuum space is trivial. consequently, no topological solitons exist in sqcd. another
consequence of this fact is that in the supersymmetric case, the baryonic current carried by
spatially inhomogeneous meson elds is not topological and can be obtained by making use
of the conventional noether procedure. the second homotopy group 2(q) was found to be
also trivial, so there are no global vortices in this theory either.

we have studied the case of softly broken supersymmetry as well.

in similarity to
the models considered in refs. [3, 4], induced charge matching conditions provide non-
trivial information about the low-energy eective theory in this case. namely, they strongly
disfavor the existence of the global baryon number violating vacuum. as a consequence, we
have obtained the lower bound on the ratio of the soft baryonic and mesonic masses.

6it is worth noting, however, that in the whole range 2
2

b

m

< n

2 there is a local vacuum in which matching

conditions are satised. for 2
2
there appears an additional local minimum where both baryon and avor symmetries are broken.

> 1 this is the vacuum with unbroken baryon symmetry and for 2
2

m

b

b

m

< 1

9

6 acknowledgments

the authors are grateful to m.v. feigin, s.a. loktev and v.a. rubakov for useful dis-
cussions. this work is supported in part by russian foundation for basic research grant
99-02-18410a, by the intas grant 96-0457 within the research program of the international
center for fundamental physics in moscow, by the russian academy of sciences, jrp grant
37 and by issep fellowships.

appendix a. topology of the quantum moduli space

in this appendix we present a proof of the homotopic equivalence given by eq. (17). let
us rst recall that the suspension (x ) of the manifold x is the cylinder x  [0, 1] where
all points on the lower base x  0 are identied and all points on the upper base x  1
are identied as well. as an example, the suspension of the d-dimensional sphere sd is the
(d + 1)-dimensional sphere s(d+1). the latter observation is the basis of the theorem about
suspension, q+1 ( (x )) = q (x ), which we refer to in the text.

in order to prove the homotopic equivalence (17), let us consider new variables b1 and
b2 instead of b, b such that the quantum moduli space is determined by the following
equation,

let us rst consider the manifold q1 dened by the constraint

detm = 2n  b2

1  b2
2.

detm = 2n  b2
1,

(23)

and show that q1 is homotopically equivalent to (sl(n, c)). indeed, the surface dened
by eq. (23) at a xed value of b1 6= n is topologically equivalent to sl(n, c). at
b1 = n , eq. (23) denes the surfaces homotopically equivalent to a point. consequently,
eq. (23) indeed denes the manifold homotopically equivalent to (sl(n, c)) if one restricts
b1 to belong to the interval [n , n ]. finally, let us construct a deformation retract of
q1 onto its part determined by b1  [n , n ]. let us take a point (m a
(0), b1(0))  q1
b
with b1(0) 6= n . let the coordinate b1 move in the complex plane as shown in fig. 1
and dene the matrix m a
b

(t) at the moment t as follows,

m(t) = t m(0) ,

where

t =  2n b1(t)2

2n b1(0)2

0

0

1 !

and 1 is the (n  1)  (n  1) unit matrix. the existence of such a deformation implies
that q1  (sl(n, c)).

10

n

+n

figure 1: trajectories of the deformation q1  (sl(n, c)) in the complex plane b1

one can straightforwardly generalize these arguments and show that q  (q1). the
last remark to be made for proving the relation (17) is that the su(n) group is homotopi-
cally equivalent to the sl(n, c) group.

appendix b. unambiguity of the wesszumino term in
quantum theory

sqcd is unambiguous in quantum theory i it is equal to 2n, n  z, when 5 is the
generator of 5(q). the theorem about suspension implies the following construction of
this generator. let us consider a sphere s5 with unit radius,

x2
1 + x2

2 + x2

3 + x2

4 + x2

5 + x2

6 = 1 , xi  r .

the generator of 5(q) is the map s5  q that in the notations of appendix a can be
written as follows

b1 = n x5 ,
b2 = n x6 ,
5  x2
n u a
6)

1

m a

b = 2(1  x2

b (x1, x2, x3, x4) ,

where u a
(x1, x2, x3, x4) denes a generator of 3(su(n)). taking into account the expres-
b
sion (5) for the topological number of the map s3  su(n) and recalling that db  d b =
2idb1  db2 one obtains

sqcd = 4zx2

5+x2

61

dx5dx6(1  x2

5  x2

6) = 2

when 5 is the generator of 5(q). consequently, the wesszumino term (18) is indeed
unambiguous in quantum theory.

11

references

[1] g. t hooft, in recent developments in gauge theories, eds. g. t hooft et. al.

(plenum press, n.y., 1980), p.135.

[2] s.l. adler, w.a. bardeen, phys. rev. 192 (1969) 1517.

[3] v.a. rubakov, induced charges as probes of

low energy eective theories, hep-

ph/9812128

[4] s.l. dubovsky, d.s. gorbunov, m.v. libanov, v.a. rubakov, phys. rep.

320 (1999) 147

[5] n. seiberg, phys. rev. d49 (1994) 6857

[6] a.v. manohar, phys. rev. lett. 81 (1998) 1558

[7] j. goldstone and f. wilczek, phys. rev. lett. 47 (1981) 986.

[8] j. wess and b. zumino, phys. lett. b37 (1971) 95

[9] e. witten, nucl. phys. b223 (1983) 422

[10] d. nemeschansky and r. rohm, nucl. phys. b249 (1985) 157

[11] a.t. fomenko, d.b fuchs, a course in homotopy theory, moscow, nauka, 1989

[12] o. aharony, j. sonnenschein, m.e. peskin and s. yankielowicz, phys. rev. d52, 6157

(1995)

12

