ucb-pth-99/38, lbnl-44209
hep-th/9909040

9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
7

 

 
 

1
v
0
4
0
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

wilson loops in large n theories 

hirosi ooguri

366 le conte hall, department of physics,
university of california at berkeley, berkeley, ca 94720, usa
and

theory group, mail stop 50a-5101, physics division,
lawrence berkeley national laboratory, berkeley, ca 94720, usa

1.

introduction

in the ads/cft correspondence, correlation functions of conformal elds are related
to amplitudes of a quantum theory in ads [1  3] (for a review, see for example [4]).
since the conformal group of the boundary and the isometry group of ads are identical,
correlation functions dened in this way are conformally symmetric. however not all
quantum theories in ads can be related to cft at the boundary in this way. the
correlation functions on the boundary must obey the axioms of cft. for example, any
cft contains the energy-momentum tensor in the operator algebra, and one must be
able to compute correlation functions including the energy-momentum tensor. there
has to be a eld in ads to which it can couple to, namely the graviton. thus a quantum
theory dual to cft is necessarily gravitational. a quantum gravity may or may not
be a string theory.
in some cases, however, there are operators in cft which can
directly couple to string states. wilson loop operators are examples of such operators.
so we may hope to learn about stringy aspects of the ads/cft correspondence by
studying the wilson loops. also, these are fundamental gauge invariant operators in
gauge theories, and we may hope to learn about gauge theories from the point of view
of ads.

in this talk, i will discuss wilson loops in the n = 4 supersymmetric yang-mills
theory in four dimensions, based on my work with nadav drukker and david gross [5].
first we review basic properties of the wilson loops in n = 4 theory. this part of the
talk is purely eld theoretical. the n = 4 theory contains massless scalar elds, and
they must be taken into account in constructing the wilson loop. the presence of the
scalar elds improves ultra-violet properties of the loop operators. we will then discuss

 talk presented at strings 99 in potsdam, germany (july 19  24, 1999).

2

how these and other properties of wilson loops can be seen from the point of view of
string theory in ads.

at the conference, i also presented my work in progress with cumrun vafa about
wilson loops in the large n chern-simons gauge theory in three dimensions, which will
appear elsewhere. (this is why the title says large n theories.)

2. wilson loops in the n = 4 super yang-mills theory
let me start with the n = 4 supersymmetric yang-mills theory in four dimensions. as
we mentioned, this part of the talk is purely eld theoretical.

2.1. denition

the wilson loop is a phase factor associated to a trajectory of a quark in the fundamental
representation of the gauge group g. we will discuss the case when g = u(n). the
n = 4 theory consists of the gauge eld a, four weyl fermions a (a = 1,   , 4),
and six scalar elds i (i = 1,   , 6) all in the adjoint representation of the gauge
group u(n). the theory does not contain particles in the fundamental representation.
instead, we may use the w-boson to probe the theory. we start with the u(n + 1)
gauge group and break it to u(n) u(1) by choosing the non-zero vacuum expectation
values for the scalar elds.

i

u (n +1) =   i

u (n ) = 0

0

0

ui! .

(1)

since there are six scalar elds, we parametrize their vacuum expectation values by a
point i on the unit 5-sphere, 2 = 1, corresponding to the direction of the symmetry
breaking. the absolute value of the scalar vacuum expectation value is denoted by u.

the phase factor associated to a trajectory of the w-boson gives the loop operator

of the form,

w = tr p exp(cid:20)i ds(cid:16)ia(x(s)) x(s) + ii(x(s))i(s)| x(s)|(cid:17)(cid:21) ,

in the minkowski space, and

w = tr p exp(cid:20)i ds(cid:16)ia(x(s)) x(s) + i(x(s))i(s)| x(s)|(cid:17)(cid:21) ,

(2)

(3)

in the euclid space. we should point out that there is an important dierence between
the minkowski case and the euclidean case, that is the absence of the imaginary unit
i in front of the scalar eld  in the euclidean case. in particular, the wilson loop
in the euclidean case is not a pure phase. this distinction is important in many of our
results in the following. in this talk, we will deal with the euclidean case only.

3

another important aspect of the wilson loop (3) generated by the w-boson is that it
couples to the gauge eld a and the scalar eld i with the same strength since 2 = 1.
clearly this is the consequence of the fact that the w-boson in this case is a bps
particle. this is not the most general gauge invariant observable one can write down.
in general, one may consider a more general loop operator whose coupling strength to
the gauge eld may be dierent from that to the scalar eld, as in

w = tr p exp(cid:20)i ds(cid:16)ia(x(s)) x(s) + i(x(s)) yi(s)(cid:17)(cid:21) .

(4)

here we used the symbol yi to denote the coupling to the scalar eld. the phase factor
for a w-boson trajectory corresponds to the special case when x2 = y2.

2.2. uv divergence

although the n = 4 theory is ultra-violet nite, composite operators of the theory may
require regularization. if two local operators coincide at a point, for example, there can
be a divergence. let us discuss the ultraviolet divergence in the wilson loop operator.
it turns out that the operator with the constraint x2 = y2 is special in this regard.

if the t hooft coupling g2n is small, one may compute the vacuum expectation
value of the wilson loop (4) by the perturbative expansion. the one-loop computation
gives

hwi = 1 +

g2n

(2)2 i ds| x| 1 

y2

x2! +    .

(5)

here  is the uv cuto parameter. when x2 = y2, the divergence is canceled due to the
cancellation between the gauge eld exchange and the scalar eld exchange diagrams. it
seems that this cancellation persists at higher loops. as we will see in the following, the
ads/cft correspondence shows that the cancellation of the uv divergence happens at
the large g2n also.

so far, we have assumed that the loop is smooth. when there is a singularity on
the loop, the divergence is not completely canceled, and some logarithmic divergence
remains even when x2 = y2. for example, when the loop has a cusp, the one-loop
computation shows the logarithmic divergence depending on the angle at the cusp as

hwwith cuspi = 1 +

g2n
(2)2

  
sin 

(cos  + cos ) log(cid:18)1

(cid:19) +    ,

(6)

where  is the angle at the cusp (i.e. a jump in x/| x|). at the cusp, the direction
i = yi/| y| of yi may also change discontinuously; the angle  is the amount of the
discontinuity in i at the cups. renormalizing this divergence would then give an
anomalous scaling property of the loop, which depends on  and . there is also

4

a logarithmic divergence when the loop has an intersection.

hwwith intersectioni = 1 +

g2n
2

1

sin 

(cos  + cos ) log(cid:18)1

(cid:19) +    .

(7)

these are somewhat similar to the logarithmic divergence in the even-dimensional
observables (such as points or surfaces) discussed by berenstein, corrado, fischler and
maldacena [6] and by graham and witten [7].

2.3. loop equation

the large-n loop equation is considered to be one of the fundamental properties of the
wilson loop operators [8]. it is expected to hold in both small and large g2n. when
g2n is small, it is equivalent to the perturbative feynmann rules of the gauge theory.
on the other hand, there are subtleties in the denition of the loop equation since it
is derived assuming that the loops are regularized but not renormalized. in fact, the
equation depends explicitly on the uv cuto. the situation seems better in the n = 4
theory because of the better ultraviolet behavior as we saw in the above. since the
equation is supposed to hold at large g2n also, it may be useful in testing the stringy
aspects of the ads/cft correspondence. i will comment on this later in this talk.

in order to write down the loop equation, we need a complete set of gauge invariant
observables which can be written in the form of loops. in particular, we need to introduce
sources for the fermion elds also. from the point of view of supersymmetry, it is natural
to couple the fermionic variable  to the gluino eld  in the combination,

w = trp exp(cid:20)i ds(cid:18)ia x + i yi +

i
2

(i x + i yi) +   (cid:19)(cid:21) .

(8)

it turns out that the combination (i x + i yi) of 4d and 6d gamma-matrices,  and
i, becomes nilpotent when the constraint x2 = y2 is satised. this simplies our task
of writing down the loop equation considerably. we then introduce the second order
dierential operator on the loop space dened as 

l = lim

0i dsz s+

s

ds 

2

x(s)x(s) 

2

yi(s)yi(s)

+

2

(s) (s)! . (9)

the two derivatives are taken at dierent points s and s on the loop. the distance 
between the two points must be chosen to be shorter than the uv cuto  so that we
can isolate the contact terms we need for the loop equation. this is the prescription
due to polyakov [9].

 the dierential operator l dened here does not preserve the constraint x2 = y2. recently some
improvement in the denition of l was made, and it was found to be possible to write a loop equation
which closes only among loops preserving the constraint [10].

when the loop satises the constraint x2 = y2, the action of the dierential operator
on the wilson loop can be written, using the schwinger-dyson equation and the large
n factorization, as

5

lhwi = g2n i dsi ds(4)(cid:16)x(s)  x(s)(cid:17) 

h x(s)  x(s)  y(s)  y(s)ihwssihwssi,

(10)

where wss given by the path ordered exponential of the form (8) integrated over the part
of the loop, between s and s. the fermionic variables  are set to be zero after taking
the derivative. the loop equation (10) states that lhwi is non-zero only when the loop
has a self-intersection. in the case of pure yang-mills theory without supersymmetry,
there is an ambiguity about whether to take into account the trivial self-intersection,
namely the case when s = s, for which the delta-function contraint x(s) = x(s) in
the right-hand side of (10) is satised trivially. in some sense, the loop intersects with
itself at each point along the loop. in the case of the n = 4 theory, we do not have to
worry about such an ambiguity since the factor [ x(s) x(s) y(s) y(s)] vanishes when
s = s.

3. wilson loops in ads5  s5
now let us discuss how these properties of loop operators can be seen from the point
of view of string in ads. in the above, we started with the u(n + 1) gauge group and
broke the group to u(n)  u(1). in the string theory, this corresponds to putting n
d3 branes on the top of each other, and probe it by another d3 brane. the open string
stretched between the n d3 branes and the single d3 brane probe corresponds to the
w-boson of the gauge theory. according to maldacenas conjecture, in the large n
limit, the n d3 branes are replaced by the geometry of the ads5 times 5-sphere. the
w-boson is now a string in ads stretched from the boundary. the large n wilson loop
was studied from this point of view by maldacena [11] and by rey and yee [12]. in the
following we will clarify some aspects of this approach and extend it to various cases.

the metric on ads5 times the 5-sphere is given by

ds2 = qg2ny2(dydy + dxdx) +qg2nd2.

(11)

it is often useful to combine the radial coordinate y of ads with the coordinates  of
the 5-sphere into six coordinates yi = yi. in the coordinates x and yi, it is easy to see
that the total metric is conformal to the at ten-dimensional metric.

ds2 = qg2ny2(dxdx + dyidyi)

in this coordinates, the boundary of ads is at y = 0.

(12)

6

3.1. boundary conditions

to compute the wilson loop observables in this framework, it is important to understand
the relation between the loop variables and the boundary condition on the string
worldsheet. it is well-known that the conformal eld theory on the string worldsheet
couples to the spacetime gauge elds a and i as

i d1 a

x 

1 + ip i! ,

(13)

where the integral is along the boundary of the worldsheet. we use  ( = 1, 2)
for the worldsheet coordinates with the worldsheet boundary at 2 = 0. the vector
eld a couples to the derivative of the string coordinates x  along the boundary of
the worldsheet. the scalar elds i, on the other hand, couple to the momentum p i
conjugate to the corresponding string coordinates y i,

p i =

1
g

g1 y i
 ,

(14)

where g is a metric on the worldsheet. the scalar elds i correspond to the transverse
coordinates of the d-brane, and they are t-dual of the gauge eld along the d-brane.
since the momentum p i is t-dual to the derivative of the string coordinate along the
boundary, the scalar elds couple to p i.

since the gauge eld a couples to the derivative of the string coordinates 1x 
along the boundary and the scalar eld i couples to the momentum p i conjugate to
the string coordinates at the boundary, it is clear that the wilson loop operator of the
form (4) couples to the string worldsheet with the following boundary conditions.

x (1, 2 = 0) = x(1)
dyi
d1 (1)

p i(1, 2 = 0) =

(15)

in the four-dimensional directions along the d3-brane, the string worldsheet obeys the
dirichlet condition that the string ends along the loop x(s). for the six transverse
directions, the string momentum is xed following the neumann condition. these
boundary conditions are complementary to the standard d3-brane boundary conditions
(neumann condition for x  and dirichlet condition for y i), as they should since we are
imposing extra conditions by inserting the loop operator on the d-brane.

when g2n is large, the string tension becomes large and we can approximate the
string dynamics by a minimum surface in ads [11,12]. for a given set of the loop
variables (x(s), yi(s)), we expect that there is a unique minimum surface in ads obeying
these boundary conditions. the existence and uniqueness of minimum surfaces in ads,
in the case when yi is constant, have been discussed in the mathematics literature
(see, for example, [13  15]). this, however, leads to a puzzle.
in the ads/cft

7

correspondence, we expect that the boundary conditions for the bulk degrees of freedom
are imposed at the boundary of ads at y = 0. however the condition that the string
worldsheet to terminate at y = 0 would be an extra dirichlet boundary condition. this
may or may not be compatible with the ten dirichlet/neumann boundary conditions
we have already imposed.

it turns out that there is a nice resolution to this puzzle. one can show that, if
the boundary conditions are smooth, the minimum surface obeying these ten boundary
conditions can terminate at y = 0 only if the constraint x2 = y2 is satised [5]. this
can be shown by using the hamilton-jacobi equation for a minimum surface in ads.
this ts nicely with the fact we saw earlier in the eld theory point of view; the wilson
loop generated by a trajectory the w-boson obeys the same constraint x2 = y2. this
resolves the puzzle, but it raises another question about how to dene the wilson loop
operator which does not obey the constraint. we will come back to this question later.

3.2. legendre transformation

once we nd the minimum surface obeying the boundary condition, we can compute the
value of its classical action. in the semi-classical approximation, the vacuum expectation
value of the wilson loop is given by the exponential of the action for the minimum
surface. there is a question of which action to use. a naive guess would be the area
of the surface, namely the nambu-goto action. this would be appropriate if we were
solving the fully dirichlet problem. in the fully dirichlet problem, the boundary loop
is xed in the target space, and there is a well-dened area for each surface. the area,
however, is not an appropriate action functional for the neumann problem. since the
neumann problem xes the string momentum, rather than the location of the loop at
the boundary, the area for the surface is not well-dened. the appropriate action for
the neumann problem is the legendre transform of the area, which we denote by a.

a = a i dspiy i.

(16)

a obtained by the legendre transformation is a good functional of the string momentum.
there is a bonus in performing this legendre transformation. since the metric in
ads diverges near the boundary, the area of the minimum surface is innite if the surface
terminates at the boundary of ads. to regularize this, we introduce a cuto  in the
y-coordinates. the boundary of ads is at y = 0, and the regularized area is given by an
integral in the region y  . by now, it is well-known that this infrared regularization in
ads corresponds the ultraviolet regularization in the gauge theory [16]. so we use the
same symbol  for both the uv cuto of the gauge theory and the ir cuto of the string
theory in ads. if the loop is smooth, the area is linearly divergent and the divergence

8

is proportional to the circumference of the loop [11].

g2n



a =

i ds| x| + (nite).

(17)

it turns out that the legendre transformation precisely cancels this linear divergence,
leaving the legendre transformed action a to be nite. therefore the vacuum
expectation value of the wilson loop, which is given by the exponential of a, is nite in
this case. earlier, we have seen in the gauge theory that the wilson loop is perturbatively
nite when x2 = y2. the fact that a is nite ts well with this gauge theory result.

3.3. examples

there are several types of wilson loops for which solutions to the corresponding
minimum surface problems can be found explicitly and the areas of the surfaces can
be computed analytically.

the rst example is the parallel wilson lines. this was studied by maldacena [11]
and by rey and yee [12]. by computing the area of the minimum surface connecting
the wilson lines and by performing the legendre transformation, one nds

a = qg2n

42
( 1
4)4

l
r

,

(18)

where l is the length of the wilson lines and r is the distance between them. this
expression is for l  r. the parallel wilson lines compute the potential between quark
and antiquark. this result shows that the potential goes as 1/r, as expected from the
conformal invariance, and the coecient is proportional to g2n .
it is interesting
to compare this with the perturbative computation. when g2n is small, the quark-
antiquark potential is proportional to g2n due to the one glueon exchange. somehow
when g2n becomes large, this g2n behavior turns into g2n . one may view this as a
prediction of the ads/cft correspondence, which can in principle be tested by a eld
theory computation at large n.

we can also nd a minimum surface corresponding to a circular wilson loop. the
area of the surface, after performing the legendre transformation, turns out to be
independent of the radius of the circle, and the vacuum expectation value of the loop is
given by

hwi = exp(cid:18)qg2n(cid:19) .

(19)

in these two cases, the wilson loops are nite as we expect for smooth loops.

another case we can nd a minimum surface is a loop with a cusp. near the
cusp singularity, the geometry is scale invariant and we can integrate the equation of
motion using the elliptic integrals. in this case, the divergence of the area is not precisely

9

canceled by the legendre transformation, and the logarithmic divergence remains. once
again, this is similar to what we saw in the gauge theory side (6). the coecient in
front of the logarithm is dierent from the perturbative result, however.

3.4. loops with x2 6= y2
we have seen that, when the wilson loop operator obeys the constraint x2 = y2,
we can evaluate its vacuum expectation value at large g2n by computing the area
of the minimum surface in ads. its vacuum expectation value is the exponential of the
legendre transform of the area, and it is nite when the loop is smooth.

it is then natural to ask how to compute the loop which does not satisfy the
constraint. for the boundary conditions which do not satisfy x2 = y2, there is no
minimum surface ending on the boundary of ads. so one may say that the vacuum
expectation value of such a wilson loop should be zero. this is a reasonable answer.
in fact, in other cases such as nite temperature theories, such an answer gave results
consistent with what we expect for gauge theories [17].

for some problems, however, we need information more detailed than simply stating
hwi = 0 for x2 6= y2 at large g2n. suppose for example we want to see whether the
wilson loop computed in this way give a solution to the large-n loop equation (10).
when the loop is smooth and without intersections, the equation is simply lhwi = 0
and this is satised by any smooth functional of the loop. non-trivial checks of the loop
equation, therefore, have to involve loops with cusps or intersections. for a loop with a
cusp, however, a minimum surface which can end at the boundary of ads violates the
condition x2 = y2 [5], while the loop equation (10) is derived for loops obeying x2 = y2.
thus, in order to test the loop equation, we need more rened knowledge on the vacuum
expectation value of such wilson loops.

the perturbative computation suggests that loops not obeying the constraint are
ultraviolet divergent. in analogy with the distinction between chiral primary elds and
non-chiral elds in gauge theory, we expect that computation the vacuum expection
value for loops with x2 6= y2 requires better understanding of stringy corrections in
ads.

4. comments

at the end of my presentation at the conference, i was asked whether the wilson loop
operator w as in (4) is well-dened in the euclidean quantum eld theory. do we
know that the functional integral for hwi is convergent? since the scalar eld i
in the exponent comes with the real coecient yi, the functional integral would be
convergent only if the distribution of the eigenvalues of i decays suciently fastly for
large eigenvalues. another audience commented that, since the wilson loop with the

10

constraint x2 = y2 is bps-like (it is a phase factor associated to a trajectory of the w-
boson, which is a bps particle in the n = 4 theroy), it is likely that such an operator
makes sense, and so does the one with x2 > y2 since the eect of the i in the exponent
would be weaker. on the other hand, one may question whether an operator with
x2 < y2 exists.

in fact, the ads/cft correspondence suggests that operators with x2 = y2, x2 > y2
and x2 < y2 behave dierently. as i pointed out, the minimum surface can terminate
at the boundary of ads at y = 0 only if the constraint x2 = y2 be satised. the
ads/cft corrspondence then gives a denite prescription to compute hwi using the
legendre transform of the area of the minimum surface. when x2 > y2, we can still
nd a minimum surface obeying the boundary conditions (15), except that the surface
ends somewhere in the interior of ads rather than at the boundary. one may therefore
hope to compute hwi using such a minimum surface. on the other hand, in the case
x2 < y2, there is no solution to the minimum surface problem even if we relax
of
the condition that the surface should terminate at y = 0. this may be viewed as an
indication that the loop operator for x2 < y2 is problematic. it would be interesting to
study properties of such loops from the point of view of the gauge theory and to see
how they t with these behaviors of minimum surfaces.

...........................................................

to conclude, the wilson loop provide us an window to observe the stringy nature
of the correspondence between gauge theory and string theory. in the n = 4 gauge
theory in four dimensions, we have understood various aspects of loops which obey the
x2 = y2. i think that nding a way to study loops without the constraint
constraint,
would teach us more about gauge theory and string theory.

acknowledgments

it is my pleasure to thank the organizers of strings 99 for giving me the opportunity
to present this work at this conference and for their hospitality. i would like to thank
nadav drukker and david gross for the collaboration on this work.

this research is supported in part by nsf grant phy-95-14797 and doe grant de-
ac03-76sf00098.

references

[1] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231; hep-th/9711200.
[2] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.m. polyakov, phys. lett. b428 (1998) 105;

hep-th/9802109.

11

[3] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 253; hep-th/9802150.
[4] o. aharony, s.s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri and y. oz, to be published in

phys. rep.; hep-th/9905111.

[5] n. drukker, d.j. gross and h. ooguri, to be published in phys. rev. d;

hep-th/9904191.

[6] d. berenstein, r. corrado, w. fischler and j. maldacena, phys. rev. d59 (1999)

105023; hep-th/9809188.

[7] c.r. graham and e. witten, nucl. phys. b546 (1999) 52; hep-th/9901021.
[8] a.a. migdal, phys. rep. 102 (1983) 199.
[9] a.m. polyakov, gauge fields and strings, section 7.2, (harwoof academic

publishers, 1987).

[10] n. drukker, hep-th/9908113.
[11] j. maldacena, phys. rev. lett. 80 (1998) 4859; hep-th/9803002.
[12] s.-j. rey and j. yee, hep-th/9803001.
[13] m. anderson, invent. math 69 (1982) 477.
[14] f.-h. lin, invent. math. 96 (1989) 593.
[15] y. tonegawa, math. z. 221 (1996) 591.
[16] l. susskind and e. witten, hep-th/9805114.
[17] o. aharony and e. witten, jhep 9811 (1998) 018; hep-th/9807205.

