duke-cgtp-99-07

hep-th/9909120

0
0
0
2

 

g
u
a
9
1

 

 
 

2
v
0
2
1
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

discrete torsion and gerbes ii

eric r. sharpe

department of physics

box 90305

duke university

durham, nc 27708

ersharpe@cgtp.duke.edu

in a previous paper we outlined how discrete torsion can be understood geometrically,
as an analogue of orbifold u(1) wilson lines. in this paper we shall prove the remaining
details. more precisely, in this paper we describe gerbes in terms of objects known as stacks
(essentially, sheaves of categories), and develop much of the basic theory of gerbes in such
language. then, once the relevant technology has been described, we give a rst-principles
geometric derivation of discrete torsion. in other words, we dene equivariant gerbes, and
classify equivariant structures on gerbes and on gerbes with connection. we prove that in
general, the set of equivariant structures on a gerbe with connection is a torsor under a group
which includes h 2(, u(1)), where  is the orbifold group. in special cases, such as trivial
gerbes, the set of equivariant structures can furthermore be canonically identied with the
group.

september 1999

1

contents

1 introduction

2 stacks

2.1 presheaf of categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 sheaf of categories

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2.1 gluing law for objects

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2.2 gluing law for morphisms

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2.3 examples

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3 cartesian functors

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4

2-arrows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4.1

2-arrows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4.2

sheaves of natural transformations

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 gerbes and stacks

3.1 denitions and examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2 equivalences of gerbes

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3 sheaf cohomology and gerbes

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.4 gauge transformations of gerbes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.5 connections on gerbes

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.6 transition functions for gerbes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.7 nonabelian gerbes

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 technical notes on stacks

4.1 sheacation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1.1

sheacation of presheaves of sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

5

6

6

8

8

10

11

12

13

13

14

16

16

18

18

21

22

27

28

28

29

29

4.1.2 descent categories

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1.3 direct limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1.4 lifts of cartesian functors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1.5 lifts of 2-arrows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2 pullbacks of stacks

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.1 pullbacks of stacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.2 pullbacks of cartesian functors

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.3 pullbacks of 2-arrows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.4 analogues of natural transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3 stalks of stacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 technical notes on gerbes

5.1 pullbacks of gerbes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2 torsors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3 gauge transformations of gerbes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3.1 gauge transformations of objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3.2

induced equivalences of categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3.3 action on connections

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3.4 gauge transformations commute with gerbe maps . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3.5

sheaves of morphisms as torsors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3.6

sheaves of natural transformations as torsors . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3.7 gerbe maps dier by gauge transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3.8 maps of gerbes are equivalences of gerbes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6 equivariant gerbes

30

33

35

38

39

40

43

45

46

48

48

49

49

51

51

53

57

58

59

62

64

66

68

3

7 equivariant gerbes with connection

8 check: loop spaces

9 conclusions

10 acknowledgements

references

71

73

75

75

75

4

1 introduction

historically discrete torsion has been a rather mysterious aspect of string theory. discrete
torsion was originally discovered [1] as an ambiguity in the choice of phases to assign to
dierent sectors of string orbifold partition functions. although other work has been done
on the subject, no work done to date has succeeded in giving any sort of genuinely deep
understanding of discrete torsion. in fact, discrete torsion has sometimes been referred to
has an inherently stringy degree of freedom, without any geometric analogue.

in this paper we shall give a purely geometric understanding of discrete torsion, as a
precise analogue of orbifold u(1) wilson lines, but for (two-form) b-elds rather than vector
elds. in [2] we outlined this description; in this paper we shall prove the technical details
omitted in [2]. in an upcoming paper [3] we shall rederive these results in a more elementary
fashion, and also describe how this picture can be used to derive other physical manifestations
of discrete torsion.

more precisely, in this paper we shall argue that discrete torsion should be understood as
a (discrete) ambiguity in lifting the action of an orbifold group  on a space x to a 1-gerbe
with connection on x, just as orbifold wilson lines can be understood as an ambiguity in
lifting the action of  to a bundle with connection. this description makes no assumptions
on the nature of   it may or may not be freely-acting, it may or may not be abelian  this
description holds true regardless.

our description of discrete torsion hinges on a deeper understanding of type ii b-elds
than is common in the literature. more specically, just as vector elds are understood
as connections on bundles, we describe b-elds as connections on (1-)gerbes. although
gerbes seem to be well-known in some circles, their usefulness does not seem to be widely
appreciated. as accessible accounts of gerbes which provide the level of detail we need do
not seem to exist, we describe gerbes in considerable detail.

we begin this paper by describing stacks (essentially, sheaves of categories), in section 2.
next, we give a basic description of gerbes in terms of stacks, in section 3. in order to dene
and study equivariant structures on gerbes, we need some rather technical results, which
we collect in sections 4 and 5, on stacks and gerbes. (readers studying this paper for the
rst time are advised to skip sections 4 and 5.) finally, we dene equivariant structures on
gerbes, and classify equivariant structures on gerbes and gerbes with connection, deriving
h 2(, u(1)) in the process.

for additional information on gerbes, the reader might consult [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11].

in passing, we should mention that in addition to the description of gerbes in terms
of stacks, there exist alternative descriptions. for example, (equivalence classes of) gerbes
can be described in terms of objects on loop spaces, as described in (for example) [6]. (we

5

briey review this description, using it to check our results, in section 8.) one noteworthy
description not in [6] is known as bundle gerbes [12, 13]. because of certain technical
diculties with the description of gerbes in terms of bundle gerbes, notably the diculty
in determining whether two bundle gerbes are isomorphic, we shall not refer to them any
further in this paper. in general, which description of gerbes is most useful clearly depends
upon both the application in mind and personal preference.

in an earlier version of this paper, we argued that the dierence between any two equiv-
ariant structures on a 1-gerbe with connection is an element of h 2(, u(1)). we have
since corrected a minor error in that calculation, and weakened the result to only claim
that the dierence between equivariant structures is an element of a group which includes
h 2(, u(1)).
in other words, there are additional degrees of freedom beyond just those
encoded in h 2(, u(1)), which we missed previously.

2 stacks

the reader might well ask what object should be associated to a gerbe  after all, in [2]
we really only referred to gerbes in terms of sheaf cohomology groups. the answer is that
gerbes can be understood in terms of sheaves of categories, also known as stacks, which we
shall review in this section.

our presentation of stacks closely follows [6, section 5], [7, section 3], and [10, chapter 1].

2.1 presheaf of categories

before dening a sheaf of categories, we shall rst dene a presheaf of categories, which are
sometimes also called prestacks. we shall closely follow the denitions of [10]. in passing
we shall note that stacks and related ideas are often dened with respect to grothendieck
topologies and sites, i.e., in the language of descent, rather than the topologies that most
physicists are acquainted with. we feel that such denitions add an essentially irrelevant (for
our purposes) layer of technical abstraction, and so have circumvented them. (for denitions
of stacks in terms of sites, see for example [6], [9, expose vi], or [14]; for a basic introduction
to the ideas of grothendieck topologies, see for example [15, 16].)

before we dene a presheaf of categories, let us take a moment to review the notion of a
presheaf of sets, following [6, section 1.1]. a presheaf of sets s on a space x is an assignment
of a set s(u) to every open set u  x, together with a map 
v u : s(u)  s(v ) associated
to each inclusion v u : v  u, such that if w  v  u are open sets, then


v u  

w v = 

w u

6

and such that 
u u , the map associated to the trivial inclusion u  u, is the identity. to
dene a presheaf of categories we shall follow a similar pattern: we shall associate a category
to each open set, and a functor to each inclusion of open sets, with certain constraints on
the functors.

a presheaf of categories c on a topological space x associates, to any open set u  x,
a category c(u), and for every inclusion of open sets  : u2  u1, there is a restriction
functor  : c(u1)  c(u2), which may be taken to be the identity whenever u1 = u2 = u
and  = 1u . (a word on notation: we shall sometimes use the notation c() or |u2 instead
of  in this paper.)

in passing, we should point out that not every category c(u) need be nonempty  for
example, we shall see later that a nontrivial 1-gerbe over a space x necessarily has c(x)
empty.

the restriction functors are required to satisfy two conditions. the rst is that for every
pair of composable inclusions of open sets 1 : u2  u1 and 2 : u3  u2, one is given an
invertible natural transformation1

1,2 : (12) = 

2  
1

the second condition on restriction functors is that if one has three composable inclusions
1 : u2  u1, 2 : u3  u2, and 3 : u4  u3, then the following diagram of natural
transformations is required to commute:

(123) = 

3  (12)




2  
3  
1

(23)  

1 = 

(1)

an assignment of categories to open sets, together with inverse image functors satisfying

the two conditions above, denes a presheaf of categories.

in order to get a better grasp of this material, the reader is encouraged to compare the

presheaf of categories dened above with the general denition of presheaf.

at this point an example might help the reader.

it is possible to describe a presheaf
of sets as a special kind of presheaf of categories. to do this, consider a set as a discrete
category  a category whose objects are the elements of the set, and whose only morphisms
are the identity morphisms mapping any object back to itself. it can then be shown fairly
easily that if we think of a set as a discrete category, then a presheaf of sets is a special kind
of presheaf of categories.

1readers closely watching related references will note that in [6, chapter 5], these natural transformations

are dened in the opposite direction.

7

before going on, we should also describe how any presheaf of categories contains within
it, a number of presheaves of sets. more specically, given a presheaf of categories c on
a space x, we shall dene, for any open u  x and any two objects pa, pb  ob c(u),
a presheaf (of sets) homu (pa, pb) of local morphisms from pa to pb. this presheaf of sets
is dened as follows. for any open v  u, the set of sections of the presheaf is given by
homc(v )(pa|v , pb|v ). for any inclusion  : u2  u1 of open sets u1, u2  u, dene the
restriction map  by,

 :  7 1

1,2  |u2  1,2
 hom (pa|u2, pb|u2)

for any   hom(pa|u1, pb|u1).
it is straightforward to check that the restriction map
satises the axioms for a presheaf of sets, and so homu (pa, pb) is a presheaf of sets. in order
to distinguish this presheaf of morphisms from a set of morphisms, we shall always denote
the presheaf by hom and the set by hom.

in passing, we should mention that we shall sometimes use the notation autc(u )(p ) to

denote the set homc(u )(p, p ), and autu (p ) to denote the presheaf homu (p, p ).

2.2 sheaf of categories

we shall use the terms sheaf of categories and stack synonymously in this paper, though
not all authors quite agree [10].
in the conventions of [10], where the two concepts are
distinguished, what we shall dene in this section will technically be a stack, rather than
a sheaf of categories (which is required to satisfy a stronger gluing condition on objects in
[10]).

before giving the technical denitions, let us review the gluing conditions for a sheaf of
sets, on which the gluing conditions below shall be modelled. following [6, section 1.1], given
a presheaf s of sets over a space x, we say the presheaf is a sheaf of sets if for any open set
u  x and every open cover {u} of u, if {s  s(u)} is a family of elements such that

u us = 

then there exists a unique s  s(u) such that 
uu s = s for all . the constraints for a
presheaf of categories to be a sheaf of categories are closely related; one must give a rather
similar gluing condition for both the objects and the morphisms of the categories.

u u s

2.2.1 gluing law for objects

first, we shall dene the gluing condition for objects. let {u} be an open cover of some
open set u  x, and suppose we are given a family of objects x  ob c(u), and a family

8

of isomorphisms :

 : x|u

 x|u

satisfying the compatibility condition    =  in c(u), and such that  = 1
in c(u).

gluing holds for objects (more technically, the descent condition is eective) if there
 x,

exists an object x  ob c(u), together with a family of isomorphisms  : x|u
such that the following diagram commutes:

x|u |u

, x|u

, x|u|u

 |u 

x|u



 |u

x|u

(2)

where we have used the notation |u to indicate the restriction functor, and where ,
indicates the natural transformation |u  |u|u appearing in the denition of presheaf
of categories.

before we proceed to the gluing law for morphisms, we shall take a moment to reect on
the gluing law for objects given above. first, note that one can not assume that the objects
x|u|u , x|u |u , and x|u in ob c(u) are the same object. rather, they are related by
invertible natural transformations between the restriction functors, nothing more.

we should also mention that we were sloppy in part of the gluing law given above.
strictly speaking, the relation    =  does not make sense, even after naively using
the restriction functors, as the morphisms in question act on distinct objects. in order to
properly make sense out of this relation, one must make use of the natural transformations
between restriction functors appearing in the denition of presheaf. more concretely, the
relation    =  should be replaced with the constraint that the following diagram
commutes:

1
,

x|u |u
, 
1

x|u

, 

x|u |u

 |u 

x|u |u

|u x|u |u

1
,

x|u

 ,

x|u |u

  |u

x|u |u

 1

,

x|u

(3)

finally, the reader might ask to what extent the object x constructed in the gluing
law above is unique. certainly in the denition of sheaves of sets, the gluing law specied
unique objects, but uniqueness was not mentioned in the denition above. in fact, it can be
shown using the gluing law for morphisms dened in the next section that the object x is
unique up to unique isomorphism commuting with the . we shall not work through the

9

 : x|u

details, but the basic idea is as follows. if x  ob c(u) is another object with isomorphisms
 x that make diagram (2) commute, then dene a set of morphisms f :

x|u  x|u by, f = 1
  . using the gluing law for morphisms these can be glued
together to form a unique morphism f : x  x whose restriction to each u commutes with
 and 

, i.e,

x|u
 
x

f |u x|u
 
x

=



commutes, and with further work it can be shown that f is an isomorphism. note that if
we dropped the constraint that the restriction of f commute with the , then we would
lose uniqueness  given any f , we could compose with any automorphism of either x or x
to obtain another morphism x  x.

2.2.2 gluing law for morphisms

the gluing condition on morphisms can be stated as follows. let u  x be an open set,
x, y  ob c(u), and {u} be an open cover of u. if {f : x|u  y|u} is a set of maps
such that f|u = f|u , then there exists a unique f : x  y such that f = f |u.

unfortunately this phrasing is slightly sloppy. strictly speaking, the relation f|u =
f|u does not make sense: the objects x|u|u and x|u |u are (in general) distinct objects
of ob c(u), so the morphisms f|u and f|u are morphisms between (in general)
distinct objects of c(u), and so cannot be immediately compared. thus, we must replace
the condition that f|u = f|u with the condition that the following diagram commutes:

x|u |u

, x|u

, x|u|u

f |u 

 f|u

y|u|u

1
, y|u

1
, y|u|u

(4)

finally, note that we can rephrase the gluing condition for morphisms somewhat more
elegantly by saying that morphisms satisfy the gluing law if for any pair of objects x, y 
ob c(u) and any open cover {u} of u, the ordinary sheaf (of sets) axiom for gluing in
the presheaf of morphisms homu (x, y) is satised. put another way, satisfying the gluing
condition for morphisms is equivalent to the presheaf of sets hom being a sheaf of sets.
phrased yet another way, in a sheaf of categories, each presheaf of sets of morphisms hom
is a sheaf of sets, not just a presheaf.

10

2.2.3 examples

one easy example of a stack is the sheaf of discrete categories associated to a sheaf of sets.
recall we pointed out earlier that a presheaf of sets can be understood as a presheaf of
discrete categories. (identify the elements of each set with objects in each category. by
denition, the only morphisms in a discrete category are the identity morphisms, so we have
completely characterized the categories.) it is easy to check that if the presheaf of sets is
actually a sheaf of sets, then the corresponding presheaf of (discrete) categories is actually
a stack.

a trivial example of a stack is the stack of all principal g-bundles on x, for some lie group
g. more precisely, dene a stack c by associating to each open set u  x, the category c(u)
whose objects are all principal g bundles over u, with morphisms all bundle isomorphisms2.
it is straightforward to check that this denes a presheaf of categories (with the restriction
functors dened naturally, and the natural transformations trivial), and furthermore this
presheaf of categories is a stack. we shall denote this example of a stack by tors(g).

now, let us describe an example of a presheaf of categories that is not a stack. fix some
principal g bundle p on x, and dene a presheaf of categories as follows. to each open
set u, associate a category with one object, equal to p |u , and let the morphisms in this
category be the automorphisms of p |u . it is easy to check that this denes a presheaf of
categories, with the restriction functors dened naturally, and the natural transformations
trivial. denote this presheaf of categories by p.

we shall now argue that the presheaf of categories p is not a stack in general, by observing
that it does not always3 satisfy the gluing law for objects. let u  x be an open subset of x
such that there exists a principal g bundle q over u such that p |u  q is not topologically
equivalent to p |u . let {u} be a good cover of u. let g : u  g denote the transition
functions for q, dened with respect to the cover {u}. dene a family of isomorphisms
 : p |u|u  p |u|u by

 = g  ,  1
,

where the  are the (trivial) natural transformations appearing in the denition of presheaf
of categories p. (we have made them explicit for completeness.) it is easy to check these
isomorphisms satisfy the gluing condition, and so by the gluing condition for objects we
should nd a corresponding object in p(u). this new object was essentially created by
tensoring local sections of p |u with local sections of q, and so in general should be local
sections4 of p |u  q. (this argument is somewhat weak; rigorous versions can be found in
2in fact, any morphism of principal g-bundles for xed g over a xed space x is necessarily an isomor-

phism [17, section 4.3].

3in special cases, such as x contractible, p may be a stack. however, we shall consider more general x,

for which p will not be a stack.

4in writing this slightly loose statement, we are assuming that g is abelian.

11

section 5.3, in the discussion of gauge transformations for gerbes.) by assumption, however,
no such object exists in p(u). thus, the gluing law is not satised, and so the presheaf of
categories p cannot be a stack.

2.3 cartesian functors

let c and d denote two presheaves of categories over a space x. a map f : c  d is dened
to be [10, section 1] a family of functors f (u) : c(u)  d(u), together with, for every
d  f (u1)  f (u2)  
inclusion  : u2  u1, an invertible natural transformation  : 
c.
these invertible natural transformations are required to have the property that for any pair
of composable inclusions 2 : u3  u2, 1 : u2  u1, the following diagram commutes:

1d  f (u1)

2d  

1,2 
d
(12)

d  f (u1)

1= 

2d  f (u2)  
1c

12=

2= f (u3)  
 c

2c  
1c

1,2
f (u3)  (12)
c

(5)

where the  are the invertible natural transformations appearing in the denition of presheaf
of categories.

such maps between presheaves of categories are called cartesian functors. note that
a cartesian functor is not precisely a functor, in the sense that it is not a map between
categories, but rather a map between presheaves of categories.

a morphism between stacks is precisely a morphism between the underlying presheaves

of categories, that is, a morphism between stacks is precisely a cartesian functor.

cartesian functors can be composed. that is, if c, d, and e are three presheaves of
categories on x, and f : c  d and g : d  e are two cartesian functors, then one can
dene a cartesian functor g  f : c  e. we shall outline the denition. for any open set
u, the functors f (u) : c(u)  d(u) and g(u) : d(u)  e(u) can certainly be composed.
given an inclusion  : u2  u1, we can dene the invertible natural transformation gf
as the composition of the natural transformations associated to f and g. in other words,
gf

e  (gf )(u1)  (gf )(u2)  

c is dened by



: 



gf



: 

e  g(u1)  f (u1)

g
= g(u2)  

d  f (u1)

f
= g(u2)  f (u2)  
c

it can be shown that gf



satises the pentagonal identity (5).

now, what does it mean for two stacks to be equivalent? we say that two stacks c,
d are equivalent if there exists a cartesian functor f : c  d such that the functor
f (u) : c(u)  d(u) associated to any open set u is an equivalence of categories5.

5recall that a functor f : e  f is said to be an equivalence of the categories e, f if there is a functor

12

we shall now show that a cartesian functor f : c  d between presheaves of categories

c, d induces a morphism of presheaves

homc(u )(pa, pb)  homd(u )(f (u)(pa), f (u)(pb))

for any open set u and any two objects pa, pb  ob c(u). for any open v  u, dene a
map of sets

(v ) : homc(v )(pa|v , pb|v )  homd(v )(f (u)(pa)|v , f (u)(pb)|v )

by,

(v )()  (cid:16)f

u,v (pb)(cid:17)1

 f (v )()  f

u,v (pa)

for all  : pa|v  pb|v , where f denotes the invertible natural transformation dening f as
a cartesian functor. it is straightforward to check that  denes a morphism of presheaves
of sets, in other words, that for every inclusion  : u2  u1 of open u1, u2  u, the following
diagram commutes:

homu (pa, pb)(u1)

(u1)
 homu (f (u)(pa), f (u)(pb))(u1)

 

 

(6)

homu (pa, pb)(u2)

(u2)
 homu (f (u)(pa), f (u)(pb))(u2)

2.4

2-arrows

now that we have dened analogues of functors for presheaves of categories (namely, carte-
sian functors), we shall dene analogues of natural transformations between cartesian func-
tors. these analogues of natural transformations are known as 2-arrows [10, section 1.1]. we
shall also dene sheaves of sets describing local natural transformations between cartesian
functors.

2.4.1 2-arrows

let f, g : c  d be cartesian functors between a pair of presheaves of categories c, d over a
space x. a 2-arrow  : f  g is a family of natural transformations (u) : f (u)  g(u)
(one for each open u  x), such that, for any inclusion  : u2  u1, the following diagram
commutes:

(u1)
= 

d  g(u1)


d  f (u1)
 
f
f (u2)  
c

 g
(u2)
= g(u2)  
c



(7)

g : f  e and there are invertible natural transformations ide  gf and idf  f g, i.e., ide = gf and
idf = f g.

13

where the  are natural transformations appearing in the denition of cartesian functors.

in passing, note that 2-arrows can be composed. in other words, if f, g, h : c  d
are cartesian functors and 1 : f  g, 2 : g  h are a pair of 2-arrows, then the
composition 2  1 : f  h is well-dened as a 2-arrow.

an invertible 2-arrow is a 2-arrow  such that (u) is an invertible natural transforma-

tion for all open u  x.

2.4.2 sheaves of natural transformations

let f, g : c  d be cartesian functors between a pair of presheaves of categories c and d,
over a space x. fix some open set u  x. we shall dene a presheaf of sets 2ru (f, g)
which shall describe local 2-arrows between f and g, as well as a presheaf of sets nt u (f, g),
a related sheaf which shall describe local natural transformations between f and g.

we shall dene a presheaf of 2-arrows from f |u to g|u , which we shall denote 2ru (f, g).
to any open v  u, dene the set 2ru (f, g)(v ) to be the set of all 2-arrows f |v  g|v .
in other words, an element   2ru (f, g)(v ) is a collection of natural transformations

(w ) : f (w ) = g(w )

(one such for each open w  v ), such that for any inclusion  : w2  w1 of open sets
w1, w2  v , the following diagram commutes:

  f (w1)

(w1)
=   g(w1)

 
f
f (w2)   (w2)

= g(w2)  

 g



(8)

where the  are the natural transformations dening f , g as cartesian functors.

restriction maps in the presheaf 2ru (f, g) are dened as follows. let  : v2  v1
denote an inclusion of open sets v1, v2  u. an element   2ru (f, g)(v1) is a collection
of natural transformations (w ) : f (w )  g(w ), for w  v1, as above. we dene  to
be the new collection of natural transformations obtained from the collection  by removing
all elements corresponding to open w such that v2  w  v1.

it should be clear that these denitions yield a presheaf of sets. for example, if 2 :
v3  v2 and 1 : v2  v1 are a pair of composable inclusions of open sets, then for all
  2ru (f, g)(v1), 

1 = (12).

2

in the special case that d is a stack, not just a presheaf of categories, it can be shown
that 2ru (f, g) is a sheaf of sets, not just a presheaf. we shall outline the details here. let

14

v  u be an open set, and let {u} be an open cover of v . let {  2ru (f, g)(u)} be
a set of elements such that 
, (where the  are the natural inclusions from
u  u into u, u). we need to show that there exists a unique   2ru (f, g)(v ) such
that 

 =  (where  : u  v is inclusion).

, = 

finding a 2-arrow  means nding a set of natural transformations (w ) : f (w ) 
g(w ), one for each open w  v , obeying the usual compatibility condition. let p 
ob c(w ), then we can dene (w )(p ) to be the unique morphism generated by gluing
together morphisms

(g

 )1  (w  u)(p |w u)  f

 : f (w )(p )|w u  g(w )(p )|w u

it is straightforward to check that this denes a natural transformation (w ) : f (w ) 
g(w ) for all open w  v , and also that these natural transformations satisfy diagram (8).
thus, we have dened a unique 2-arrow  such that 
 = , and so we shown the gluing
law for sheaves of sets is satised. thus, when d is a stack, the presheaf of sets 2ru (f, g)
is a sheaf of sets.

in addition to the presheaf of sets 2ru (f, g), one can also dene another presheaf of
natural transformations, which we shall label nt u (f, g). our use of this presheaf will be
very limited; we mention it solely for completeness. for any open v  u, dene the set
nt u (f, g)(v ) to be the set of all natural transformations

f (v )  |v = g(v )  |v

where |v indicates the restriction functor from c(u) to c(v ). for any inclusion  : u2  u1
between open sets u1, u2  u, dene the restriction map

 : nt u (f, g)(u1)  nt u (f, g)(u2)

by,

  c1

1,2  g

    (f

 )1  c
1,2

for   nt u (f, g)(u1) (i.e.,  : f (u1)  |u1  g(u1)  |u1), where the c are the natural
transformations dening c as a presheaf of categories, and where the  are the natural
transformations dening f , g as cartesian functors.

it is straightforward to check that this denes a presheaf of sets. for example, for two
composable inclusions 1 : u2  u1, 2 : u3  u2, u1, u2, u3  u, the restriction maps
obey 

1 = (12) for all  : f (u1)  |u1  g(u1)  |u1.

2

in the special case that d is a stack, not just a presheaf of categories, it is straightforward

to check that nt u (f, g) is a sheaf of sets, not just a presheaf, for all open u  x.

in passing, note that any 2-arrow  : f |u  g|u denes an element of nt u (f, g)(v )
for all open v  u for which d(v ) 6= , and moreover if  : u2  u1 is inclusion of open
sets, then (u1) = c1
1,2, i.e., the restriction functor relates these elements
in a natural way.

1,2  (u2)  c

15

3 gerbes and stacks

for a brief but readable discussion of gerbes in terms of stacks, see for example [7, section
3]. more detailed information is available in [6, 8, 10]. this section reviews material that
can be found in [6, chapter 5], [7, section 3], and [10, chapter 1].

3.1 denitions and examples

a stack c is called a (1-)gerbe if the following three conditions are satised:

1. for every open set u  x, every morphism in the category c(u) is invertible. (in

more technical language, this means c(u) is a groupoid.)

2. each point x  x has a neighborhood ux for which c(ux) is nonempty.

3. any two objects p1, p2 of c(u) are locally isomorphic. in other words, each x  u has

a neighborhood vx such that the restrictions of p1 and p2 to vx are isomorphic.

one says that a gerbe c is bound by a sheaf of abelian groups a (or, that the gerbe
has band a) if for any open set u and object p  ob c(u), there exists an isomorphism
= autu (p ). these isomorphisms are required to satisfy
of sheaves of groups u (p ) : a|u
a constraint which we shall describe shortly. in the rest of this paper, when we speak of
gerbes, we will implicitly refer to gerbes bound by some sheaf of abelian groups.

in passing, we should point out that since (u)(p ) is a morphism of sheaves of groups,

it is compatible with restriction, i.e., the following diagram commutes:

a(u1)
 

a(u2)

u (u1)(p )



homc(u1)(p, p )

 

u (u2)(p |u2 )



homc(u2)(p |u2, p |u2)

(9)

where the  are the restriction maps dening the sheaves of sets, p  ob c(u1), and
 : u2  u1 is an inclusion between open sets u1, u2  u.

we mentioned above that the isomorphisms u (p ) : a|u  autu (p ) are required to
satisfy a condition, which we shall now explain. let u be an open set, let p1, p2  ob c(u),
let   homc(u ) (p1, p2), and let g  aut(p1). the morphism   g  1  aut(p2), and
in fact inner automorphisms by  of the form above clearly dene a group homomorphism
(in fact, an isomorphism) from aut(p1) to aut(p2). put another way, for any g  aut(p1),
there exists g  aut(p2) such that   g = g  , and g and g are isomorphic to the same
element of the group a(u). more generally, the morphism  denes a morphism of sheaves

 : autu (p1)  autu (p2)

16

we can now nally state the constraint on the isomorphisms u (p ). the u (p ) are required
to be such that the following diagram commutes:

a|u
k

a|u

u (p1)
 autu (p1)
 
u (p2)
 autu (p2)

(10)

the 1-gerbes discussed in [2] all describe gerbes with band c (u(1)). here we see that

more general gerbes can be dened.

a trivial example of a 1-gerbe with band c (g) (for g an abelian lie group) is the stack
tors(g), the stack of all principal g-bundles, introduced earlier. in fact, we shall see later
that all gerbes with band c (g) look locally like tors(g), in the same sense that all ber
bundles look locally like the trivial bundle.

a nontrivial example of a 1-gerbe with band c (u(1)) is the stack describing spinc(n)
lifts of a principal so(n) bundle, which we shall now describe. (relevant information can
be found in [18, appendix d].) let p be a principal so(n)-bundle on x. we shall describe
a 1-gerbe, call it c, that implicitly describes obstructions to lifting the structure group of p
from so(n) to spinc(n). (we shall roughly follow [6, section 5.2].) to any open set u  x,
dene the objects of c(u) to be pairs (q, ), where q is a principal spinc(n) bundle on u
which is a lift of p |u , and where  : q  p |u is a morphism of principal bundles. (note that
if p does not admit a global lift, then c(x) = , for example.) morphisms between objects
of c(u) are dened as follows. let (q, ), (q, ) be two objects of c(u). a morphism
u : (q, )  (q, ) is dened to be a morphism6 u : q  q of principal spinc(n) bundles,
such that the following diagram commutes:

u q

q
 
p |u = p |u

 

(11)

it is straightforward to check that this structure denes a stack, and furthermore is a 1-
gerbe. the element of h 3(x, z) associated to this 1-gerbe precisely classies the obstruction
to lifting the structure group of p to spinc(n). if the category c(x) is nonempty, then its
objects are principal spinc(n) bundles on x, globally dened lifts of the principal so(n)
bundle p .

more generally, we shall see later that a nontrivial gerbe on a space x can be distinguished
from a trivial gerbe on x by the category c(x). if this category is nonempty, then the gerbe
is trivial  objects in c(x) dene trivializations of the gerbe, just as global sections of a
principal bundle trivialize the bundle. we shall return to this matter later.

6recall [17, section 4.3] that if u : q1  q2 is a morphism of principal bundles over the same space
with the same ber, then it is necessarily an isomorphism. thus, the morphisms we dene in c(u ) are all
necessarily isomorphisms.

17

3.2 equivalences of gerbes

let c and d be 1-gerbes, both with band a (a sheaf of abelian groups). under what
circumstances can we say that c is equivalent to d ?

a map between two gerbes c and d with specied band a is dened to be a cartesian
functor f : c  d such that for all open sets u and for all p  ob c(u), the following
diagram of sheaves of groups commutes (by denition of morphism of sheaves):

autc(u )(p )

c(u )(p )  

f (u )
 autd(u )(f (u)(p ))
  d(u )(p )

a|u

=

a|u

(12)

where the  are the isomorphisms between the band and the automorphisms of an object
(given in the denition of band), and we have used f (u) to denote the induced morphism
of sheaves (here, sheaves of abelian groups) discussed in the section on cartesian functors.
more intuitively, this condition means that the action of the band on the gerbe commutes
with the cartesian functor.

an equivalence of two gerbes c, d with band a is dened to be a cartesian functor
f : c  d obeying the constraint (12), such that the cartesian functor denes an equivalence
of stacks.

we shall show in section 5.3.8 that any map between two gerbes with the same band,
over the same space, is necessarily an equivalence of gerbes. this is closely analogous to
the result that any morphism of principal g-bundles, for xed g, over the same space, is
necessarily an isomorphism [17, section 4.3].

3.3 sheaf cohomology and gerbes

in [2] we claimed that gerbes were classied by elements of sheaf cohomology groups. how
can we derive an element of h 2(x, a) from the description of gerbes given above? we shall
work through the details in this subsection. more precisely, we shall show how to obtain a
cech representative of the relevant sheaf cohomology group, associated to some xed open
cover. for convenience, we shall assume the band a = c (u(1)), though the reader should
be able to easily extend to more general cases.

before describing how to associate sheaf (and also, more usually, cech) cohomology
elements to gerbes, we shall take a moment to review how this procedure works for sheaves
of local sections of bundles. let i be a sheaf of local sections of some principal g-bundle
on a space x, and let {u} be a good open cover of x. let {s} be any choice of local
sections of i with respect to the cover {u} (i.e., s  i(u) for all ). then on each overlap

18

u = u  u, the sections s|u and s|u will dier by some element of c (g) over
u. denote each such element by g. it is straightforward to check that the g dene a
cocycle representative of an element of h 1(x, c (g)) (or, rather, the corresponding cech
cohomology group associated to the cover {u}). picking dierent local sections corresponds
to changing the cocycle by a coboundary. thus, we have derived an element of h 1(x, c (g))
classifying the sheaf i. finally, note that i admits a global section if and only if there exist
sections s such that s|u and s|u agree on overlaps, i.e., g is the identity on each
overlap, i.e., the corresponding element of sheaf and cech cohomology is trivial.

now that we have described how to associate cech cohomology elements to any given
sheaf of local sections of a bundle, we shall discuss how to associate cohomology elements to
gerbes. we shall see that the details are closely analogous to the case above.

let {u} be a good cover of x, i.e., a cover such that every element and every intersection
of elements is contractible. we shall assume this is sucient for every object of any category
c(u) to be isomorphic. (if not, pick a suitable renement of {u}.) then, let p denote
an object of c(u). (since all objects in c(u) are isomorphic, the precise choice of p is
irrelevant.) let u denote the isomorphisms

u : p|u

 p|u

where u = uu, and we implicitly assume u = u1
dene h : u  u(1) by

. suppose u = uu u 6= .

h = u  u  u

 aut(p|u )

in fact, we have been slightly sloppy about the distinction between objects x|u|u
and x|u , for example. to rigorously dene h we must introduce the invertible natural
transformations  dening c as a presheaf of categories. dene maps u, : p|u 
p|u by,

u, = 1

,  u|  ,

then the rigorous denition of h is as

h = u,  u,  u,

 aut(p|u )

it is straightforward to check that h denes a cech 2-cocycle.

naively, our description of h above might appear to always be a coboundary, as h
naively appears to be the coboundary of a 1-cocycle dened by the u. however, there is
an important distinction at work here. the u, are maps between (in general) distinct
objects, not automorphisms of a single object. since they are maps between distinct objects,

19

they will not (in general) be valued in the band of the gerbe. thus, h will not be a trivial
cech cocycle in general.

, u

it can also be shown that if {p, u} and {p 

} are two choices of objects and
isomorphisms, then the 2-cocycles h, h
 dened by either dier by a coboundary. we
shall leave the details of this verication to the reader, but in passing we will mention three
important points that come up. first, one needs the fact that elements of the band commute
 p be a set of
with morphisms, as demonstrated earlier. second, if we let  : p 

isomorphisms, then it is a useful fact that the  commute with the natural transformations
used to dene the presheaf of categories, by denition of natural transformation. finally,
note that u and |u  u
 |u may dier by an element of the band, in general.

  1

thus, any set of choices {p, u} will dene the same element of cohomology.

furthermore, any two equivalent gerbes dene the same element of cohomology. let
f : c  d be a map between two gerbes on x with band a, which also denes an equivalence
of gerbes. let {u} be a good open cover of x, let {p  ob c(u)} be a set of objects,
 p|u } be a set of isomorphisms. then {f (u)(p)  ob d(u)} is
and {u : p|u
a set of objects in d, and

nf (u)(u) : f (u)(p|u )  f (u)(p|u )o

is a set of isomorphisms between objects in d. these objects and isomorphisms in d dene
a cocycle hd
, but as noted above, the cohomology class of the cocycle is independent of
the choice of objects and isomorphisms. thus, any two equivalent gerbes dene the same
element of cohomology.

an astute reader may be slightly confused by the paragraph above. nowhere in our
discussion did we seem to use the fact that f : c  d is an equivalence of gerbes; we only
used the fact that it is a map of gerbes. in particular, the reader might be concerned that
if we could derive a contradiction: if f were not an equivalence of gerbes, then we should
not get the same cohomology element. however, we shall show in section 5.3.8 that any
map of gerbes with the same band and over the same space is necessarily an equivalence of
gerbes. thus, it is not possible for f to not be an equivalence of gerbes, and so any potential
contradiction is averted.

so far we have described how a sheaf cohomology element can be associated to a given
gerbe. the converse is also possible  given a sheaf cohomology element, we can construct an
associated gerbe. this construction is carried out in, for example, [6, section 5.2]. we shall
not repeat the construction here, but in passing we shall mention that it uses techniques
closely akin to the descent categories we describe in section 4.1.2.

it should now be clear that equivalence classes of gerbes with band a on a space x are

in one-to-one correspondence with elements of h 2(x, a).

20

let us take a moment to try to gain some intuition for the meaning of this sheaf cohomol-
ogy description of gerbes. suppose a gerbe c on a space x is described by a cohomologically-
trivial cocycle h; what does this imply about the gerbe? if h is a coboundary, then by
 p|u we can arrange for h = 1.
slight redenitions of the isomorphisms u : p|u
(simply compose each isomorphism with an automorphism dictated by the cochain dening
the coboundary; use the fact that elements of the band commute with morphisms.) then,
we can use the gluing law for objects to construct an object of c(x). thus, a gerbe described
by a cohomologically-trivial cocycle has c(x) 6= . conversely, it is straightforward to check
that if c(x) 6= , then the corresponding element of cohomology is trivial. this is closely
analogous to the fact that a global section of a principal g-bundle is a trivialization of the
bundle; here, an object of c(x) is a trivialization of the gerbe.

in particular, let us consider the example of the gerbe tors(g), for g an abelian lie group,
on a space x. in this case, tors(g)(x) 6= , that is, there exists a globally dened object
(in fact, several globally dened objects, in general), so it should be clear that on a good
open cover {u} one can pick objects {p} and isomorphisms {u} such that h = 1. in
other words, tors(g) is an example of a gerbe with a globally dened object, which implies
that the corresponding element of cohomology is trivial. tors(g) is an example of a trivial
gerbe.

the spinc gerbes, discussed earlier, are somewhat more interesting. from the general
discussion above, as this class of gerbes has band c (u(1)), they should be topologically
classied by elements of

h 2(x, c (u(1))) = h 3(x, z)

indeed, in discussing whether an so(n)-bundle can be lifted to a spinc(n)-bundle, there
arises an element of h 3(x, z), usually labeled w3, which is the image under a bockstein
homomorphism of the second stiefel-whitney class of the so(n)-bundle in question. the
characteristic class w3 is precisely the integral characteristic class classifying the spinc gerbe.
an so(n)-bundle admits a spinc lift if and only if w3 vanishes, in precise accord with the
general framework above  a 1-gerbe admits a global trivialization if and only if the classifying
integral characteristic class vanishes. a global trivialization of the spinc gerbe associated to
some so(n)-bundle is precisely a spinc lift of the bundle.

3.4 gauge transformations of gerbes

just as a gauge transformation of a principal g-bundle on a space x is dened by a map
x  g, it turns out that a gauge transformation of a gerbe with band7 a = c (g) is a
principal g-bundle. (in terminology introduced in [2], a gauge transformation of an n-gerbe

7more generally, a gauge transformation on a 1-gerbe with band a is dened by an a-torsor. we are

specically trying to avoid using the language of torsors in this subsection.

21

is dened by an (n  1)-gerbe.) (note that we are implicitly assuming g is an abelian lie
group.)

strictly speaking, only equivalence classes of principal g-bundles will have distinct ac-

tions, but we shall defer discussion of this technicality until later.

how precisely does a principal g-bundle act on a gerbe with band c (g)? a complete
discussion of the technical details is beyond the intended scope of this section  see instead
section 5.3 for a complete discussion. however, we can give some general intuition. suppose,
for example, the objects of c(u) are line bundles on u. in this case, the action of i amounts
to tensoring each object with i. this yields, for any object p , a map p 7 p  i. (we use
the notation p  i instead of something like p  i because at the end of the day, we need
not be manipulating bundles. again, see section 5.3 for details.)

not only does a principal g-bundle yield an action on the objects of c(u), but it can

also be used to dene a self-equivalence of the category c(u).

in section 5.3 we will give a number of results related gauge transformations of gerbes.
one result, as noted above, is that a gauge transformation of a gerbe is dened by a bundle
(a 0-gerbe), just as a gauge transformation of a bundle is given by a function (a (-1)-gerbe).
we also argue that gauge transformations of gerbes commute with gerbe maps, just as gauge
transformations of principal bundles commute with principal bundle maps, and that any map
between two gerbes of the same band, over the same space, is necessarily an isomorphism,
just as any morphism of principal g-bundles, for xed g and over a xed space, is necessarily
an isomorphism. finally, we shall argue that any gerbe with band c (g) looks locally like
the trivial gerbe tors(g), just as any principal bundle looks locally like the trivial principal
bundle.

3.5 connections on gerbes

in this subsection we shall restrict to gerbes with band c (u(1)), for convenience.

now, how does one dene a connection on a 1-gerbe, dened in terms of stacks as above?
it is tempting to proceed as follows. (this description will be wrong, but useful pedagogi-
cally.) let {u} be an open cover. identify c(u) with tors(u(1))(u), i.e., identify objects
of c(u) with principal u(1)-bundles on u. to each open set u and principal u(1) bundle
l, associate a connection . note that since l need not be trivial, and since u need not
be contractible, there is no reason why  should be expressible in terms of a single 1-form
denable over all of u. let f  denote the curvature of  on u.
it is very tempting
(and incorrect) to then identify the b-eld associated to u with f . then, on overlaps,
f   f  = 0 in cohomology, so there exists 1-forms a such that f   f  = da. we
could then clearly build up the cech-de rham complex describing a connection on a gerbe,

22

as described in [2].

unfortunately, this natural-looking idea will not work in general. the essential problem
is that this would dene a 3-form h that was always zero in cohomology, as h|u = df  = 0.
put more simply, the b-eld associated to any open set need not be closed, whereas the idea
described in the paragraph above would always necessarily associate a closed 2-form to each
u.

the correct way to associate a connection to a 1-gerbe is somewhat more complicated to

explain.

in this section we shall make frequent use of the idea of a torsor. we have strenuously
avoided speaking of torsors in previous sections, but at this point their use becomes un-
avoidable. torsors are dened in section 5.2; we shall assume henceforward that the reader
is acquainted with the material in that section.

connections on gerbes are dened in [6] in terms of connective structures and curv-
ings on the gerbe. in order to get some intuition for the meaning of these concepts, we shall
take a moment to dene analogues of connective structure and curving for a bundle.
on a xed principal u(1)-bundle on a space x, a connective structure is dened to be an
1(x)-torsor consisting of all the connections on the principal u(1)-bundle. this connective
structure is required to obey the constraint that any gauge transformation  : x  u(1) de-
nes an automorphism  of the connective structure, such that any section  of the connec-
tive structure (a single connection on the bundle) transforms under  as, () = d ln .
one then denes a curving, which is a map that assigns a closed 2-form k() to any sec-
tion  of the connective structure, such that

1. if  : x  u(1) is a gauge transformation, then k(()) = k() for any 

2. for any   1(x), k( + ) = k() + d

clearly the curving corresponds to the curvature of the connection .

these notions of connective structure and curving for a bundle seem quite clumsy, how-

ever they are more useful when discussing gerbes.

now that we have given some basic intuitions, we shall give the rigorous denition of a
connection on a 1-gerbe. this is formally described as assigning a connective structure and
curving to a gerbe, call it c. we shall closely follow the presentation of [6, section 5.3].

let 1(u) denote the sheaf of 1-forms on an open set u. (note that 1(u) is a sheaf of

abelian groups on u.)

a connective structure on a gerbe c is dened to be a cartesian functor co : c  tors(1)
between the underlying stacks, subject to the following constraint. let u be an open set and

23

p  ob c(u), let  be a section of the 1(u)-torsor co(u)(p ), and let g : p  p be an
automorphism of p , which we shall identify with an element of the band. then we demand
co(u)(g)() =   d ln g.

at this point we shall introduce some notation. for any isomorphism  : p1

 p2 of
objects of c(u), its image under the functor co(u) is denoted . in other words,  =
co(u)(). for any inclusion  : u1  u, let  denote the invertible natural transformation
  co(u)  co(u1)   appearing in the denition of co as a cartesian functor. (readers
also studying [6, section 5.3] will note that in that reference, co(u)(p ) is abbreviated to
co(p ), and the natural transformation we denote by  is there denoted .)

an example of a gerbe with connective structure is in order at this point. consider
the (trivial) gerbe tors(g) of all principal g-bundles, where we assume g is an abelian lie
group. an example of a connective structure on tors(g) is the one obtained by assigning,
to each principal g-bundle p over any open set u, the 1(u)-torsor of all connections on
p . in other words, dene co(u)(p ) to be the 1(u)-torsor of all connections on p , and
for any isomorphism f : p1  p2 dene co(u)(f ) to be the morphism such that for any
  (u, co(u)(p1)), the morphism

f : (p1, )  (p2, co(u)(f )())

is an equivalence of bundles with connection. one can then dene the rest of the structure
of a cartesian functor in the obvious way.

it can be shown that any gerbe with band c (u(1)) admits a connective structure. we
shall not work through the details of this argument here; see instead, for example, [6, section
5.3].

note that [6, section 5.3] if  : g  g denes an equivalence of two gerbes g, g on a
space x, both with band c (u(1)), and the gerbe g has a connective structure, call it co,
then the connective structure co on g can be pulled back to form a connective structure
co on g. more specically, co = co  .

it should now be clear that there is a natural notion of equivalence of gerbes with connec-
tion structure. let (g1, co1) and (g2, co2) be a pair of gerbes with connective structure. we
say that a cartesian functor  : g1  g2 denes an equivalence of gerbes with connective
structure if

1.  denes an equivalence of gerbes, and

2. there exists an invertible 2-arrow  : co1  co2   between the cartesian functors

co1 and co2  .

for example, we shall see later that a principal u(1) bundle i denes a gerbe automorphism

24

ic : c  c, and in such a case, the 2-arrow  dened above is equivalent to a choice of
connection on the bundle.

just as the dierence between any two connections on a principal u(1) bundle on x is a
1-form on x, i.e., an element of 1(x), it can be shown [6, prop. 5.3.6] that the dierence
between any two connective structures on the same gerbe on x is given by an 1(x)-torsor.

so far we have yet to describe precisely how to associate a b eld to a 1-gerbe. b elds

are described as a curving of the connective structure introduced above.

more precisely, given some gerbe c on x with connective structure co, we can dene a
curving of the connective structure as follows. a curving of the connective structure is a rule
that assigns to any object p  ob c(u) and to any section  of the 1(u)-torsor co(u)(p ),
a (r-valued) 2-form k() on u, called the curvature8 of , such that the following three
properties are satised:

1. given an inclusion  : u1  u, the curvature k(()) of the section () of
co(u1)(p ) is equal to k(), where  denotes the natural transformation dening
co as a cartesian functor.

2. let  : p  p  be an isomorphism with another object p   ob c(u). let () be

the corresponding section of co(u)(p ). then k() = k(()).

3. let   1(u). then k( + ) = k() + d.

from the last two conditions on the curving, we see that k associates to any isomorphism
class of objects in c(u), a 2-form (an element of 2(u), not necessarily closed) modulo exact
2-forms.

it can be shown [6, section 5.3] that, given a connective structure co on a gerbe, there

always exist curvings.

in passing, we should mention that if 1, 2 : g1  g2 are any pair of gerbe maps between
the gerbes g1, g2, and  : 1  2 is any 2-arrow, then for any curving k on (g2, co), we
have as an immediate consequence of the denition of curving that

k() = k( ) )

where   (u, (co1)(u)(p )), for any open u and any object p  ob g1(u). intuitively,
this means that if (i, ), (i , ) are two bundles with connection which are isomorphic (as

8the reader should note that the 2-form which we here denote the curvature of a connection, is not
the curvature in the usual sense. rather, it is merely some 2-form  not necessarily closed  associated to
the connection. the nomenclature is unfortunate, but seems to be standard.

25

bundles with connection), then the associated 2-forms k() and k() should be identical
 the 2-forms k should be the same on equivalence classes of bundles with connection.

suppose that two gerbes with connective structure (g1, co1) and (g2, co2) come with
specied curvings k1, k2, respectively. then we say that  denes an equivalence of gerbes
with connective structure and curving if

1. (, ) denes an equivalence of gerbes with connective structure, where  : co1 

co2   is the associated 2-arrow between connective structures, and

2. for all open u, for all objects p  ob g1(u), and for all   (u, co1(u)(p )), we

have that

k1(  ) = k2( () )

earlier, we mentioned that for a gerbe automorphism ic dened by a principal bundle
i, specifying a 2-arrow  : co  co  ic is equivalent to specifying a connection on the
bundle. in order for such an automorphism of a gerbe with connective structure to be an
automorphism of a gerbe with connective structure and curving, the constraint on the ks
implies that the connection on i must be at.

we dene an equivalence of gerbes with connection to be an equivalence of gerbes with
connective structure and curving. we shall usually use the former notation rather than the
latter, as it is briefer.

how can we make contact with the description of connection given earlier in section 3?
let {u} be a good cover of x, such that the objects in any one category c(u1n) are all
isomorphic. then to each open set u, the curving k associates a 2-form (not necessarily
closed), dened up to the addition of an exact 2-form. these 2-forms are precisely the 2-
forms appearing in the earlier denition of connections on 1-gerbes. the rest of the earlier
description  connections on principal u(1) bundles on overlaps  can be understood directly
in terms of the transition functions.

earlier we argued that principal g-bundles dene gauge transformations on gerbes with
band c (g); how does such a gauge transformation act on the connective structure and curv-
ing? we shall examine this in detail in section 5.3.3; we shall outline the results here. let i
denote a principal g-bundle dening a gauge transformation of a 1-gerbe. let p  ob c(u).
we argued earlier that i denes a map p 7 p  (i|u ). now, a precise specication of how
a particular section   (u, co(u)(p )) is mapped by i is equivalent to a specication of a
connection on i [6, section 5.3, equn (5-11)]. (note in passing that this statement dovetails
with the earlier observation that any two connective structures dier by an 1-torsor.)

more explicitly, let {a} be a connection on i|u , dened with respect to an open cover
{u} of u. in other words, each a is a 1-form on u. then if   (u, co(u)(p |)),
then under the action of i on the gerbe,  7  + a.

26

so far we have described how the bundle i dening a gauge transformation acts on the
connective structure. how does i act on the curving? it is clear from the denition of
curving that k( + a) = k() + da.

thus, we have recovered the description of gauge transformations on gerbe connections

outlined in [2].

3.6 transition functions for gerbes

in section 5.3.5, we show that if c is a gerbe with band9 a = c (g), then for any open u
such that c(u) is nonempty, the category c(u) is equivalent to the category tors(g)(u).

we can use this fact to dene transition functions for gerbes. now, such a term should
be explained  we have described gerbes in terms of sheaves of categories, analogously to
describing bundles in terms of sheaves of sections. transition functions are not a necessary
component of such a description. however, we can certainly recover transition functions, if
we choose to do so. (for a discussion of sheaves of sets in terms of transition-function-like
language, see for example [19, ch. i.a.iii, cor. i-11].)

the transition functions for a gerbe should be clear. given some open cover {u} of
x such that c(u) 6=  for all , and a set of equivalences of categories from c(u) into
tors(g)(u), it should be clear that we could describe the gerbe in terms of transition
functions between the categories tors(g)(u). in other words, we can specify the gerbe by
specifying principal g-bundles on overlaps u = u  u. each such bundle determines a
functor, and so determines how tors(g)(u) is mapped into tors(g)(u). elements of cech
cohomology classifying the gerbe are determined from tensor products of the bundles on
triple overlaps; conversely, if one wishes to describe a gerbe with xed cech cohomology, one
can demand that tensor products of bundles on triple overlaps have appropriate canonical
trivializations. this description is precisely analogous to describing bundles in terms of
gauge transformations on overlaps, describing how the local trivializations are mapped into
one another. note furthermore that this description is precisely the description of 1-gerbes
given in [4, 5].

it should be clear that in order to describe a 1-gerbe with connection, one would specify

a principal g-bundle with connection on each overlap u.

morphisms of principal g-bundles (of same structure group, over same space) can be

described in local trivializations as a set of gauge transformations [17, section 5.5]

9more generally, for any open u such that c(u ) is nonempty, the category c(u ) is equivalent to the

category tors(a)(u ) of a-torsors on u .

 : u  g

27

one for each element u of an open cover {u}. it should be clear that one can describe
a map of gerbes in a similar fashion: for each u, associate a principal g-bundle t. this
bundle determines an automorphism of the category tors(g)(u), which describes how the
gerbes are mapped into one another at the level of local trivializations.

it should also be clear that a map of gerbes with connection can be described in terms

of a set of principal g-bundles t with connection.

3.7 nonabelian gerbes

in the physics literature it is sometimes claimed10 that certain physical theories have an
understanding in terms of nonabelian gerbes. in the rest of this paper we have specialized
to abelian gerbes, that is, gerbes with abelian band.

just as an abelian gerbe can be described in terms of a stack that locally looks like a
stack of principal g-bundles for abelian g, it is presumably the case that a nonabelian gerbe
can be described in terms of a stack that locally looks like a stack of principal g-bundles for
nonabelian g.

unfortunately, more than this is dicult to say within the present framework. much of
our discussion of gerbes has hinged, either implicitly or explicitly, on the assumption that
the band is a sheaf of abelian groups. we have not made a thorough study of how matters
would be altered if the band became nonabelian.

considerably more information on nonabelian gerbes can be found in [8]. related mate-

rial can be found in [21].

4 technical notes on stacks

in this section we give some highly technical material on stacks. a reader perusing this paper
for the rst (or even the second or third) time is strongly encouraged to skip this section
entirely.

in particular, we shall describe sheacation of presheaves of categories, pullbacks of

stacks, and stalks of stacks. the basics of these topics are outlined in [6, section 5].

10for example, see [20].

28

4.1 sheacation

given any presheaf of sets, it is possible to construct a sheaf of sets through a process
sometimes called sheacation. similarly, given any presheaf of categories, it is possible to
construct a sheaf of categories. in this section we shall describe this procedure.

we should warn the reader that this section is extremely technical in nature. a reader

visiting this material for the rst time is urged to skip ahead to the next section.

first, we shall review sheacation for presheaves of sets, then we shall describe the
process for presheaves of categories. in sheacation of presheaves of categories, one denes
a family of descent categories, then takes a direct limit of descent categories. we shall
devote subsections to both of these notions. finally, we shall describe how to lift a cartesian
functor between presheaves of categories to a cartesian functor between their sheacations.

the bulk of our discussion will be based on material in [6, section 5.2].

4.1.1 sheacation of presheaves of sets

first, let us take a moment to review how sheacation works for presheaves of sets, following
[6, section 5.1]. (for a less technical review, see for example [22, section 0.3].) let f be a
presheaf of sets on a space x, and pick some open set u  x. we want to build a sheaf of sets
f , i.e., a presheaf of sets f such that there is a bijective correspondence between elements
of f (u) and collections {s  f (u)}, {u} an open cover of u, such that s|u = s|u .

the basic idea will be to build f (u) by taking as elements, collections {s  f (u)} for
{u} an open cover, such that s|u = s|u . in other words, we will build a set f (u) in
which the bijective correspondence between elements of the set and local elements satisfying
compatibility conditions is built in from the denition.

more formally, each set f (u) is constructed as follows. take f (u) to be the disjoint
union over all open covers {u} of u of collections {s  f (u)} such that s|u = s|u ,
modulo an equivalence relation . in other words,

f (u) = a

{u}

n {s  f (u)} | s|u = s|u o / 

(13)

the equivalence relation  is dened as follows. identify two collections {u, s} and
, s
}, such

} if there exists another open cover {u 

}, a renement of both {u} and {u 

{u 
that whenever u 

  u  u 

, we have s|u 

 = s

|u 
 .

29

we can rewrite equation (13) in terms of a direct limit over open covers, as

f (u) = lim

{u}

n {s  f (u)} | s|u = s|u o

where the partial ordering on open covers {u} is provided by the notion of renement.

note that if f is a sheaf, not just a presheaf, then f = f , i.e., for all open sets u,

f (u) = f (u).

4.1.2 descent categories

let c denote a presheaf of categories on a space x, and let u denote an open set in x. in
order to dene the category c(u) in the associated sheaf c, we shall take a direct limit over
descent categories dened for the open set u. in this subsection we shall describe descent
categories. in subsequent subsections we shall describe the process of taking direct limits,
and the resulting sheacation.

to each open cover {u} of u, we shall dene a category, which we shall denote by

and which is called a descent category.

descu (c, {u})

the objects of desc(c, {u}) are collections {(x), ()}, where each x  ob c(u),

and where  : x|u

 x|u are isomorphisms, such that (schematically11)

in c(u), and  = 1 in c(u).

   = 

morphisms {(x), ()}  {(y), (

)} in desc(c, {u}) are collections of morphisms

{f : x  y} in {c(u)} such that the following diagram commutes:

x|u

 x|u

f|u 

y|u

 f|u


 y|u

(14)

note that if c is a sheaf of categories, not just a presheaf, then for any open cover {u}

of u, the category desc(c, {u}) is equivalent to c(u).

11the correct statement is commutativity of diagram (3).

30

suppose that {u 

i} is a renement of {u} and  : {u 

i}  {u} is the inclusion, i.e., 

is a collection of maps {i : u 

i  u(i)}. then  induces a functor

 : desc(c, {u})  desc(c, {u 

i})

the action of  on an object {(x), ()}  ob desc(c, {u}) is given by

 :
 :

(x) 7 (xi  x(i)|u 
() 7 (cid:16)ij  i,ij  1

)

i

(i)(j),ij  (i)(j)|u 

ij

j,ij(cid:17)
 (i)(j),ij  1

where the  are the invertible natural transformations appearing in the denition of the
presheaf of categories c. one can verify (after an extremely lengthy diagram chase) that
this functor is well-dened on objects, i.e., that the image under  of the set of morphisms
() satises the compatibility relation (3).

we still need to dene the action of the proposed functor  on morphisms. given objects

{(x, ()}, {(y), (

)}  ob desc(c, {u})

and a morphism

dene

{f : x  y} : {(x), ()}  {(y), (
)}
io
 y(i)|u 

{f} = nfi  f(i)|u 

: x(i)|u 

i

i

it can be shown that this map is well-dened, i.e., the appropriate version of diagram (14)
commutes.

it is now straightforward to check that  does indeed dene a functor

 : desc(c, {u})  desc(c, {u 

i})

now, suppose 1 : {u 

i}  {u} and 2 : {u 

a }  {u 

associated to the renement {u 
exists an invertible natural transformation  : (12)  

i} of {u}, and to the renement {u 

2  
1.

i} are a pair of families of inclusions,
i}. then there

a } of {u 

this invertible natural transformation is dened as follows. to each object

{(x), ()}  ob desc(c, {u})

 associates a morphism

({(x), ()}) :

(12){(x), ()}  (

2  

1){(x), ()}

given by

({(x), ()}) = n i(a),a(x(a)|u 

a ) : x(a)|u 

a  x(a)|u 

i(a)

a o
|u 

31

where the  are the invertible natural transformations appearing in the denition of c as
a presheaf of categories. it is straightforward to check that this indeed is a morphism, i.e.,
the appropriate version of diagram (14) commutes, and moreover  is an invertible natural
transformation.

finally, it is straightforward to check that if we are given three composable inclusions of
open covers 1, 2, 3, then the following diagram (corresponding to diagram (1)) of natural
transformations commutes:

(123) = 

3  (12)




2  
3  
1

(23)  

1 = 

so far we have discussed functors associated to sets of inclusion maps between two open
covers of a xed open set u. other functors can also be constructed, as we shall now discuss.
suppose  : v  u is an inclusion of open sets. then, for any open cover {u} of u, 
induces a functor 

v,{u} between descent categories associated to u and v :


v,{u} : descu (c, {u})  descv (c, {u|v })

where we have used the fact that {u|v } is an open cover of v . this functor can be dened
in precise analogy with the previously-described functor between descent categories between
open covers of a single open set u; we shall not repeat the details, as they are virtually
identical. similarly, given two inclusions 2 : u3  u2 and 1 : u2  u1, one can dene
(as above) an invertible natural transformation 12 : (12)
1 u2,{u},
such that analogues of diagram (1) commute.

2 u3,{u|u2 }  

u3,{u}  

finally, we can also construct natural transformations between compositions of the two
types of functors listed above. let 12 : {u 2
} be a set of inclusions between covers
of an open set u  x, and let  : v  u be an inclusion map between open sets, inducing
functors 
|v } be the set of inclusion maps
between covers of v that makes the following diagram commute:

}. let v,12 : {u 2

|v }  {u 1

} and 

}  {u 1

v,{u 1

v,{u 2

{u 1
}
12 
{u 2
}

v,{u 1
} {u 1

|v }
 v,12

v,{u 2
} {u 2

|v }

(15)

then we can dene the following two invertible natural transformations:

v,12 :
12,v :

(12  v,{u 2
(v,{u 1

})  
}  v,12)  

}  
12
v,12  

v,{u 2

v,{u 1

}

these natural transformations also make analogues of diagram (1) commute.

32

4.1.3 direct limits

given our presheaf of categories c and for any open u, the descent categories desc(c, {u}),
we can now construct the associated sheaf of categories.

the sheaf of categories c associated to the presheaf of categories c is dened by

c(u) = lim

{u}

desc(c, {u})

(16)

in words, c(u) is dened to be the direct limit over open covers of u of descent categories.

we shall now give the denition of the direct limit used above.

the objects of the direct limit (16) are the disjoint union of the objects of all the descent

categories associated to open covers of u. in other words,

ob lim

{u}

desc(c, {u}) = a

{u}

ob desc(c, {u})

(17)

now, we shall describe morphisms of the direct limit category. let p1, p2 be objects:

p1  ob desc(c, {u 1
p2  ob desc(c, {u 2
} be any (open cover) renement of both {u 1

})
})
} and {u 2

}  {u 2

} be the two sets of inclusions, and dene s{u 3

13p1  

23p2 in desc(c, {u 3

}).

let {u 3
and 23 : {u 3
morphisms  : 

}, let 13 : {u 3

}  {u 1
}
} to be the set of all

dene the set of all morphisms hom(p1, p2) to be the disjoint union of all the s{u 
{u 
} an (open cover) renement of both {u 1
 to be dened momentarily. in other words,

} (for
}), modulo an equivalence relation

} and {u 2

hom(p1, p2) = a

s{u 

}/ 

{u 

}

the equivalence relation  is dened as follows. if {u} and {u 

} are two open covers

which both rene both {u 1

} and {u 2

}, and
i : {u}  {u i

i : {u 
}  {u i

}
}

are the sets of inclusion maps (i  {1, 2}), then we say  : 
to  : 
1 p1  
both {u} and {u 

}, with sets of inclusion maps

2 p2 in s{u 

} if and only if there exists an (open cover) renement {u 

1p1  

2p2 in s{u} is equivalent
} of

such that

 : {u 
 : {u 

}  {u}
}  {u 
}

33

1. i = 

i for i  {1, 2},

2. the following diagram commutes:

(1)(p1)

1 

  

1 (p1)

1   

1(p1)

()
   

2(p2)
 2

()
   

2 (p2)


2 (2)(p2)

(18)

where the  are the natural transformations dened in the previous subsection.

we have dened objects and morphisms in the categories c(u). we shall now take a mo-
ment to discuss composition of morphisms in this category, as the correct denition might not
be completely obvious to the reader. let p1, p2, p3  ob c(u), i.e., pi  ob descu (c, {u i
})
for some open covers {u i
} of u, i  {1, 2, 3}. let   hom c(u )(p1, p2),   hom c(u )(p2, p3).
in other words, there exist renements {u 4
},
such that

}, and {u 5

} and {u 3

} and {u 2

} of {u 1

} of {u 2

  homdesc(c,{u 4
  homdesc(c,{u 5

}) (
} (

14p1, 
25p2, 

24p2)
35p3)

we dene the composition    as follows. let {u 6
{u 5

}, such that 2446 = 2556. dene    to be

} be a renement of both {u 4

} and

    1

356  

56  256  1

246  

46  146

 homdesc(c,{u 6

}) (

16p1, 

36p3)

where the  are the natural transformations dened in the previous subsection. it is straight-
forward to check that this composition is well-dened, i.e.,    and    implies
      .

so far we have discussed how to construct the categories c(u) appearing in the sheaf
associated to the presheaf of categories c. to completely dene the sheaf we must also
specify restriction functors and natural transformations, which we shall now do.

let  : v  u be an inclusion of open sets. we shall now show that  induces a functor

 : c(u) = lim

{u}

descu (c, {u})  c(v ) = lim

{u 
}

descv (c, {u 

})

first we shall describe how  acts on objects. recall that an object of c(u) is an object,
call it p , of descu (c, {u}) for some open cover {u} of u. the functor  acts on the
object p as,

p 7 

v,{u}(p )  ob descv (c, {u|v })

34

now we shall describe how  acts on morphisms. let p1, p2  ob c(u). in other words,

p1  ob descu (c, {u 1
p2  ob descu (c, {u 2

})
})

for some open covers {u 1

}, {u 2
} of u. recall
hom(p1, p2) = a

{u 3

}

hom(

13p1, 

23p2)/ 

let   hom(

13p1, 

23p2) for some renement {u 3

} of {u 1

} and {u 2

}. dene () as,

() = 23,v  1

v,23  

v,{u 3

}()  v,13  1

13,v

so that

()  homdescv (c,{u 3

|v })(cid:16)

v,13  

v,{u 1

}(p1), 

v,23  

v,{u 2

}(p2)(cid:17)

it is straightforward to check that this functor is well-dened  for example,    implies
()  ().

let v : v  u and w : w  v be inclusions between open sets. it is easy to check
that the natural transformations  dened in the previous subsection give a set of invertible
natural transformations v w : (v w )  
v between the restriction functors acting
on the direct limit categories. moreover, these natural transformations make analogues of
diagram (1) commute. (note that we have chosen to denote these natural transformations
by  instead of , in keeping with our general tendency to denote sheaed objects with a
tilde.)

w  

we have now given c the structure of a presheaf of categories  we have associated
categories (direct limits of descent categories) to each open set, and given restriction functors
and appropriate natural transformations.

furthermore, it can be shown that c is a sheaf of categories, not just a presheaf.

note that if c is a sheaf of categories, not just a presheaf, then c is equivalent to c as
a stack. in other words, if you sheafy a sheaf of categories, then you recover the original
sheaf.

4.1.4 lifts of cartesian functors

suppose  : c  d is a cartesian functor between presheaves of categories c, d on a space
x. in this section we shall show that  lifts to a cartesian functor  : c  d between the
sheacations of c and d.

35

let u be an open set, and {u} an open cover of u. we shall rst dene a functor

(u, {u}) : descu (c, {u})  descu (d, {u})

we shall dene the functor (u, {u}) on objects as follows. let {(x), ()} 

ob descu (c, {u}). dene the action of (u, {u}) by,

x 7 (u)(x)


7 1

,  (u)()  ,
 homd(u)(cid:16)(u)(x)|u , (u)(x)|u(cid:17)

where the  are the natural transformations appearing in the denition of  as a cartesian
functor. it is straightforward to check that this action is well-dened, i.e., that the images
of the  make the analogue of diagram (3) commute.

now we shall dene the functor (u, {u}) on morphisms. given objects

{(x), ()}, {(y), (

)}  descu (c, {u})

and a morphism

{f : x  y} : {(x), ()}  {(y), (

)}

between these two objects, we dene the action of (u, {u}) on this morphism as,

f 7 (u)(f)

it is straightforward to check that this map is well-dened, and moreover that

(u, {u}) : descu (c, {u})  descu (d, {u})

is a well-dened functor.

in passing, note that if  : d  e is another cartesian functor between presheaves of

categories d, e on x, then we have the relation

()(u, {u}) = (u, {u})  (u, {u})

now, let {u 2
i }  {u 1

i } be a renement of {u 1
}, both open covers of the open set u, and let
} be the set of inclusions. we shall dene an invertible natural transformation

 : {u 2

 : 

i })  
c

d  (u, {u 1

}) = (u, {u 2

we dene this natural transformation as follows. to each object

{(x), ()}  ob descu (c, {u 1

})

36

the natural transformation  associates the morphism

n (i),i(x(i)) : (u 1

(i))(x(i))|u 2

i

 (u 2

i )(x(i)|u 2

i

) o

where the  are the natural transformations dening  as a cartesian functor. it is straight-
forward to check that this is a well-dened morphism, and moreover it denes a natural
transformation, in that it commutes with morphisms {(x), ()}  {(y), ()} between
objects in descu (c, {u 1

}).

if 1 : {u 2

i } are two sets of inclusions from renements of
open covers of u, then the following diagram (closely analogous to diagram (5)) commutes:

} and 2 : {u 3

i }  {u 1

a }  {u 2

1d  (u, {u 1

2d  
12 
d
(12)
d  (u, {u 1

})

})

1= 

2d  (u, {u 2

i })  
1c

12=

2= (u, {u 3

2c  
1c

a })  
 c
a })  (12)
c

12

(u, {u 3

(19)

where the  are the natural transformations dened in the section on descent categories.

we are nally ready to start dening a cartesian functor  : c  d. let u  x be an

open set, and dene a functor (u) : c(u)  d(u) as follows.

let p be an object of c(u), that is, p  ob descu (c, {u 1

}) for some open cover {u 1
}

of u. dene

(u)(p )  (u, {u 1

})(p )  ob descu (d, {u 1

})  ob d(u)

let p1 and p2 be objects of c(u), meaning

pi  ob descu (c, {u i

})

for open covers {u i
some renement {u 3

} of u, and i  {1, 2}. let   hom c(u )(p1, p2), which means that for
} of both {u 1

} and {u 2

},

  homdesc(c,{u 3

}) (

13p1, 

23p2)

then dene

(u)()  1

23  (u, {u 3
 homdesc(d,{u 3

})()  13
})(cid:16)

13(u, {u 1

})(p1), 

23(u, {u 2

})(p2)(cid:17)

with the denitions above, it can be shown that

(u) : c(u)  d(u)

37

is a well-dened functor between the categories c(u) and d(u).

in order to dene a cartesian functor  : c  d, we need to specify more than the
functors (u). specically, for any inclusion  : v  u, we need to specify an invertible
natural transformation

 : 

d  (u) = (v )  
c

satisfying certain identities. this natural transformation is dened as follows. to each object

{(x), ()}  ob descu (c, {u})  c(u)

(dened with respect to some open cover {u} of u) the natural transformation  assigns
the following morphism:

 ({(x), ()})  { u,uv (x) : (u)(x)|uv  (u  v )(x|uv ) }

where the  are the invertible natural transformations dening  as a cartesian functor.

it is straightforward to check that the denition given above for  does in fact yield a
well-dened natural transformation. moreover,  satises the usual pentagonal identity (5).
specically, if 1 : v  u and 2 : w  v are inclusions of open sets, then the following
diagram commutes:


2 d  

1 d  (u)

12 
d


1= 

2 d  (v )  
1 c

(12)

d  (u)

12=

2= (w )  
 
c
12

2 c  
1 c

(w )  (12)
c

(20)

where the  are the natural transformations dened in the previous subsection.

thus, we have now dened a cartesian functor  : c  d. put another way, given
a cartesian functor  : c  d between two presheaves of categories c, d, we have now
constructed a lift of  to a cartesian functor between the sheacations c and d.

in passing, we shall mention that it is straightforward to check that if  : d  e is
another cartesian functor between presheaves of categories d, e, then the lift is compatible
with composition  in other words,

g(  ) =   

4.1.5 lifts of 2-arrows

in this section, we shall demonstrate that 2-arrows can also be lifted to sheacations. let
1, 2 : c  d be a pair of cartesian functors between presheaves of categories c, d, and
let  : 1  2 be a 2-arrow. we shall now dene a lift  : 1  2 of the 2-arrow  to a
2-arrow between the sheacations of the cartesian functors.

38

first, for any open set u and any open cover {u} of u, we shall dene a natural

transformation

(u, {u}) : 1(u, {u}) = 2(u, {u})

between functors from descu (c, {u}) to descu (d, {u}), as follows. let {(x), ()} be
an object in descu (c, {u}). dene a morphism

(u, {u}) ({(x), ()}) : 1(u, {u}) ({(x), ()})  2(u, {u}) ({(x), ()})

by,

(u, {u}) ({(x), ()})  { (u)(x) : 1(u)(x)  2(u)(x) }

it is easy to check that this is a well-dened morphism in the category descu (d, {u}), and
moreover that this denes a natural transformation 1(u, {u})  2(u, {u}).

we should mention that if {u 1

} and  : {u 2

}  {u 1

} and {u 2

} are both open covers of u, with {u 2

} a
} the set of inclusion maps, then the following

renement of {u 1
diagram commutes:

  1(u, {u 1

})

(u,{u 1

}) 

  2(u, {u 1

})

12= 1(u, {u 2

12= 2(u, {u 2

})  
 (u,{u 2
})  

})

(21)

where  is the natural transformation dened earlier, relating (u, {u}) dened with re-
spect to distinct open covers.

now, we shall dene the 2-arrow  : 1  2, lifting  to the sheacations. for each
open set u, let p  ob c(u), that is, p  ob descu (c, {u}) for some open cover {u} of
u. dene a morphism

(u)(p ) : 1(u)(p )  2(u)(p )

by,

(u)(p )  (u, {u})(p )

it is straightforward to check that (u) is a natural transformation for each open u, and
moreover satises the usual compatibility relation, so  is a 2-arrow.

in passing, we shall mention that it is easy to check that if 3 : c  d is another cartesian
functor between presheaves of categories c, d, and if 1 : 1  2 and 2 : 2  3 are a
pair of 2-arrows between the cartesian functors, then the sheacation is compatible with
composition:

g(2  1) = f2  f1

4.2 pullbacks of stacks

in this section we shall dene pullbacks of stacks and some associated technology. we shall
begin by dening pullbacks of stacks themselves, then go on to describe pullbacks of cartesian

39

functors, analogues of natural transformations between composed pullbacks of stacks, and
more.

4.2.1 pullbacks of stacks

let f : x  y be a continuous map, and let c be a presheaf of categories on y . in this
subsection we shall describe how to construct a stack f c on x.

we should warn the reader that this section is extremely technical; the reader should

probably skip this subsection on a rst reading.

before we describe the construction of pullbacks of stacks, we shall take a moment to
review the denition of pullbacks of sheaves of sets, which are closely analogous (and much
simpler technically). if f is a sheaf of sets on a space y and f : x  y is a continuous
map, then we dene the presheaf of sets f 1f to be the direct limit

f 1f (u) = lim



f (v )

v f (u )

over open subsets v  y containing f (u), for any open set u. restriction maps are dened
in a straightforward manner. to recover a sheaf, we sheafy f 1f . we shall follow a very
closely analogous procedure in dening pullbacks of stacks.

in order to construct the stack f c, we shall rst construct a presheaf of categories which
we shall denote f 1c. once we have constructed the presheaf f 1c on x, we shall sheafy
f 1c to recover a sheaf of categories we shall denote f c. the construction we will give
for f 1c will work for c a presheaf of categories, not necessarily a stack. readers following
[6, section 5] will note that our usage of the notation f  and f 1 diers slightly from that
reference.

in order to dene f 1c for a presheaf of categories c on y , one rst has to describe
how to construct categories f c(u) associated to each open set u  x, then how to build
restriction functors and invertible natural transformations.

for each open set u  x, the category f 1c(u) is dened to be the direct limit

f 1c(u) = lim
f (u )v



c(v )

where the direct limit is over open sets v  y such that f (u)  v .

we shall now describe precisely how one denes a direct limit of categories. we shall

closely follow the prescription of [6, section 5.2].

40

take as objects in f 1c(u), the disjoint union of all objects in all the categories c(v ).

in other words,

ob

lim
f (u )v



c(v ) = a ob c(v )

it remains to dene the set of morphisms in the category f 1c(u). let p1  ob c(v1),

p2  ob c(v2). for any diagram

(22)
for w an open set in y containing f (u), dene sw to be the set of morphisms  : 
1p1 
2p2 in c(w ). now, dene an equivalence relation  on the disjoint union `w sw as follows:

for any diagram (22) and a similar diagram

v1

1 w

2 v2


1 w 


2 v2

v1

(w  open, f (u)  w ) we say the morphism  : 
 : 

2 p2 if and only if there exists a diagram

1 p1  

1p1  

2p2 is equivalent to the morphism


 z


 w 

w

(z open, f (u)  z) such that

1. i = 

i for i  {1, 2},

2. there is a commutative diagram

(1)p1

,1(p1)
 

1p1

,1(p1) 


1 p1

()
 

2 p2

,2(p2)
 (2)p2

()
 

2p2
 ,2(p2)

(23)

where the  are the natural transformations appearing in the denition of c as a
presheaf of categories.

the set of morphisms hom(p1, p2) in the category f 1c(u) is dened to be the disjoint

union `w sw , modulo the equivalence relation  described above.

so far we have dened objects and morphisms in the direct limit category f 1c(u). we
shall now take a moment to describe composition of morphisms, as the correct denition
might not be obvious to the reader. let p1, p2, p3  ob (f 1c)(u), i.e., pi  ob c(vi) for
some open sets vi  f (u). let   homf 1c(u )(p1, p2), and   homf 1c(u )(p2, p3). in
other words, there exists open sets v, v, such that f (u)  v  v1  v2 and f (u)  v 
v2  v3, with

  homc(v )(p1|v , p2|v )
  homc(v)(p2|v, p3|v)

41

we dene    as follows. let v be an open set such that f (u)  v  v  v. then,
dene

    1

vv  |v  vv  1

v v  |v  v v

 homc(v ) (p1|v , p3|v )

it can be shown that this denition is well-dened, i.e., if    and   , then    
  .

so far we have described the categories f 1c(u) associated to any open set u  x. in
order to dene f 1c as a presheaf of categories, we still need to dene restriction functors
and appropriate natural transformations.

before we describe restriction functors, however, we shall take a moment to reect on the
meaning of the denition of the categories f 1c(u) given above. consider, for example, the
special case of the identity map id : x  x. it can be shown that id1c(u) is equivalent (as
a category) to c(u). naively, the reader might nd this result quite surprising  the direct
limit dening id1c(u) contains more objects than c(u). however, although it contains
more objects, there are also more isomorphisms, and in fact the number of isomorphism
classes of objects in both categories is the same. for example, if p1, p2  ob id1c(u) are
two objects, then it can be shown that p1 is isomorphic to p2 if and only if p1|u is isomorphic
to p2|u .

we shall not work through the details of proving that these are equivalent categories,
though we shall take a moment to outline the general idea. dene a functor f : c(u) 
id1c(u) by, f maps an object p 7 p , and f maps a morphism  7 . dene a functor
g : idc(u)  c(u) as follows. g is dened to map an object p 7 p |u . suppose p1 
ob c(v1) and p2  ob c(v2) for open sets v1, v2 such that u  v1  v2  in other words, let
p1 and p2 be objects of the category id1c(u). let   homc(v ) (p1|v , p2|v ) for some open
set v , u  v  v1  v2, i.e.,   homid 1c(u )(p1, p2). then dene g() = 1
u v  |u  u v .
it can be shown that g is a well-dened functor (meaning, for example, that    implies
g() = g()), and that f and g are inverses to one another, in the sense that there exist
invertible natural transformations f  g  idid 1c(u ) and g  f  idc(u ).

in fact, more generally it can be shown that if f : x  y is any open map (meaning, the
image of any open set is open), then for all open u  x, the category f 1c(u) is equivalent
to the category c(f (u)).

now that we have given some intuition for the meaning of the direct limits used above,
we shall describe the restriction functors and natural transformations needed to describe
f 1c as a presheaf of categories.

given the categories f 1c(u), we shall now dene the pullback functors  : f 1c(u1) 
f 1c(u2) for  : u2  u1. in fact, these restriction functors are straightforward to dene.

42

note that  induces a map

{ v | f (u1)  v }  { v | f (u2)  v }

given by v 7 v (any open set containing f (u1), also contains f (u2)). we dene  to act
on objects p  f 1c(u1) as, p 7 p , and on morphisms  as,  7 . it should be clear
that this map yields a well-dened12 functor f 1c(u1)  f 1c(u2).

it should be clear that the invertible natural transformations (12)  

1 needed
to dene a presheaf of categories are trivial. in other words, if p  ob f 1c(u), meaning
p  ob c(v ) for some open v  f (u), then both the functors (12) and 
1, for any
pair of composable inclusions 1, 2, map p 7 p , and so the morphism that the requisite
natural transformation should assign to p is given by the identity morphism.

2  

2  

so far we have dened a presheaf of categories f 1c. even if c is a sheaf, the presheaf
f 1c is, in general, not itself a sheaf. in order to get a sheaf from the presheaf f 1c, we
must sheafy the presheaf. we shall denote the result of the sheacation by f c.

as an illuminating example, consider idc, where id : x  x is the identity map and c
is a stack. we pointed out earlier that each category idc(u) is equivalent to the category
c(u), for any open set u. it should now be clear that idc is equivalent to c as a stack.

if f is a homeomorphism, for example, and c is a stack, then f 1c is already a stack,
not just a presheaf of categories. stronger statements can be made, but this is all we need
for later use.

4.2.2 pullbacks of cartesian functors

let f : x  y be a continuous map, and let  : c  d be a cartesian functor between
presheaves of categories c, d on y . we shall construct a cartesian functor

f  : f c  f d

by rst constructing a cartesian functor

f 1 : f 1c  f 1d

between the presheaf pullbacks f 1c, f 1d on x, and using the fact that a cartesian functor
between presheaves of categories lifts to a cartesian functor between the sheacations.

we shall rst dene functors

12for example, if   , then it should be clear that ()  ().

f 1(u) : f 1c(u)  f 1d(u)

43

for u  x an open set.

we dene f 1(u) on objects as follows. recall
ob f 1c(u) = a

f (u )v

ob c(v )

so p  ob f 1c(u) means, p  ob c(v ) for some open v  f (u). dene the action of
f 1(u) on p as,

p 7 (v )(p )  ob d(v )  ob f 1d(u)

now we shall dene f 1(u) on morphisms. let p1, p2  ob f 1c(u), meaning, pi 
ob c(vi) for open vi  f (u) and i  {1, 2}. let   homf 1c(u )(p1, p2). in other words,
there exists open v, f (u)  v  v1  v2, such that   homc(v )(p1|v , p2|v ). dene
f 1(u) on  as,

 7 1

v v2(p2)  (v)()  v v1(p1)
 homd(v) (cid:16)(v1)(p1)|v , (v2)(p2)|v(cid:17)

where  is the invertible natural transformation appearing in the denition of  : c  d as
a cartesian functor.

it is straightforward to check that f 1(u), as given above, yields a well-dened functor

f 1c(u)  f 1d(u).

in order to create a cartesian functor f 1, it remains to specify invertible natural

transformations

f 1 : 

f 1d  f 1(u1) = f 1(u2)  

f 1c

for inclusions  : u2  u1.

in fact, the requisite natural transformations are trivial. let p  ob f 1c(u1), meaning
p  ob c(v ) for some open v  f (u1). first, note p |u2 is given by the same p  ob c(v ),
from the denition of restriction functor for pullbacks. moreover,

f 1(u1)(p )|u2 = f 1(u2)(p |u2) = (v )(p )  ob d(v )  ob f 1d(u2)

clearly, the morphism that the natural transformation f 1 assigns to the object p is the
identity morphism on (v )(p ). this yields a well-dened natural transformation, satisfying
the usual pentagonal identity.

thus, we have dened a cartesian functor f 1 : f 1c  f 1d.

now that we have dened a cartesian functor between the presheaves f 1c and f 1d,
we can use the fact that cartesian functors between presheaves lift to cartesian functors
between sheacations to immediately recover a cartesian functor f :

f  : f c  f d

44

in passing, we shall mention that if we have another cartesian functor  : d  e between
presheaves of categories on x, then it is straightforward to check that pullbacks of cartesian
functors are compatible with composition of cartesian functors. in other words,

f 1(  ) = f 1  f 1

and so, using an analogous result for sheacations, we nd

f (  ) = f   f 

4.2.3 pullbacks of 2-arrows

let f : x  y be a continuous map, and let 1, 2 : c  d be cartesian functors between
presheaves of categories c, d. let  : 1  2 be a 2-arrow between the cartesian functors.
in this section we shall construct a 2-arrow

by rst constructing a 2-arrow

f  : f 1 = f 2

f 1 : f 11 = f 12

between the pullbacks f 11, f 12, and using the fact that a 2-arrow lifts to a 2-arrow
between sheacations.

we shall construct f 1 as follows. let u  x be an open set, and let p  ob f 1c(u),

that is, p  ob c(v ) for some open v  f (u). dene a morphism

(f 1)(u)(p ) : (f 11)(u)(p )  (f 12)(u)(p )

by,

(f 1)(u)(p )  (v )(p ) : 1(v )(p )  2(v )(p )

it is easy to check that this denes a natural transformation

(f 1)(u) : (f 11)(u) = (f 12)(u)

and moreover, for any inclusion  : u2  u1 of open subsets of x, these natural transfor-
mations are compatible with the natural transformations f 1 dening f 11 and f 12
as cartesian functors.

thus, we have dened a 2-arrow f 1 : f 11  f 12.

now that we have dened a 2-arrow between the cartesian functors f 11 and f 12,
we can use the fact that 2-arrows lift to 2-arrows between sheacations to immediately
recover a 2-arrow f :

f  : f 1 = f 2

45

in passing, we shall mention that if we have another cartesian functor 3 : c  d and a
pair of 2-arrows 1 : 1  2, 2 : 2  3, then pullback is compatible with composition.
in other words,

f 1(2  1) = (f 12)  (f 11)

by using the analogous result for sheacations, we nd

f (2  1) = (f 2)  (f 1)

4.2.4 analogues of natural transformations

in this section we shall dene an analogue of natural transformation for compositions of
pullbacks. more precisely, let f : x  y and g : y  z be continuous maps between
topological spaces. for any stack c on z, we shall dene a cartesian functor

with the properties

c

gf : (gf )c  f gc

1. for any cartesian functor  : c  d between stacks on z, the following diagram

commutes:

(gf )c
gf 
c
f gc

(gf )
 (gf )d
 d
f g f gd

gf

(24)

2. if f : x  y , g : y  z, h : z  w are three continuous maps, then for any stack c

on w we have the commuting diagram

(hgf )c

h,gf 
((gf )  h) c

hg,f (f   (hg)) c
 h,g

g,f (f   g  h) c

(25)

which the reader should immediately recognize as being analogous to diagram (1).

moreover, the cartesian functor gf : (gf )c  f gc will be invertible, in the sense that
there exists a cartesian functor 1
gf : f gc  (gf )c and invertible 2-arrows   1  id
and 1    id.

in order to dene , we shall work at the level of presheaves of categories and dene a

cartesian functor

gf : (gf )1c  f 1g1c

46

furthermore, we shall implicitly assume that the map f is open (i.e., images of open sets
are open), and that g is such that g1c is a stack, not just a presheaf of categories. these
restrictions could almost certainly be weakened; however, in this paper we shall only be
interested in cases in which both f and g are homeomorphisms, so we shall not investigate
these conditions further.

to dene the cartesian functor gf : (gf )1c  f 1g1c, we shall rst dene functors

gf (u) : (gf )1c(u)  f 1g1c(u)

for open sets u  x.

we dene the functor gf (u) on objects as follows. let p be an object in (gf )1c(u),

which is to say, p  ob c(v ) for some open v  (gf )(u). the functor gf (u) acts as

p 7 gf (u)(p )  p  a

ob c(v )

v (gf )(u )

 a

a

v g(v )

ob c(v ) = ob f 1g1c(u)

v f (u )

we dene the functor gf (u) on morphisms as follows. let p1, p2 be objects in
(gf )1c(u), which is to say, pi  ob c(vi) for open vi  (gf )(u), i  {1, 2}. let
  hom(gf )1c(u )(p1, p2), which means that for some open v, (gf )(u)  v  v1  v2,
  homc(v)(p1|v , p2|v ). the functor gf (u) acts on  as,

 7 gf (u)()  

in terms of equivalence classes, denoted by brackets [ ], the functor gf (u) maps []gf to
[[]g]f .

in order to dene a cartesian functor gf : (gf )1c  f 1g1c, we must specify an

invertible natural transformation

gf : 

f 1g1  gf (u) = gf (v )  

(gf )1

for every inclusion  : v  u. we dene this natural transformation to be the trivial one.
in other words, given an object p in (gf )1c(u), which is to say, p  ob c(v ) for some
open v  (gf )(u), we dene gf (p ) = idc(v )(p ). this assignment of morphisms to objects
clearly denes a natural transformation, and moreover it is easy to see that  satises the
pentagonal identity for natural transformations in cartesian functors.

thus, we have now dened a cartesian functor gf : (gf )1c  f 1g1c. it is straight-
forward to check that this denition satises the two properties listed at the beginning of
this section, and moreover that this cartesian functor admits an inverse cartesian functor

47

gf , such that the composite functors   1 and 1   can be identied with identity

1
functors, up to invertible 2-arrows.

finally, we can lift this cartesian functor to a cartesian functor between sheacations

satisfying the properties listed at the beginning of this section.

gf : (gf )c  f gc

4.3 stalks of stacks

for a presheaf of sets f on a space x, recall that one can dene a stalk of the sheaf f at
the point x  x to be the direct limit

over open sets u  x containing the point x  x.

fx  lim

u x

f (u)

we can perform the analogous construction for presheaves of categories. dene the stalk

of a presheaf of categories c at a point x  x to be the direct limit

cx  lim

u x

c(u)

over open sets u  x containing the point x  x. this direct limit is dened in precise
analogy with the direct limits dened in the previous two sections. note that just as the
stalk of a presheaf of sets is a set, the stalk of a presheaf of categories is a category.

this notion of stalk may give the reader some degree of intuition for stacks. furthermore,
one ought to be able to work out many stack-variants of other concepts from ordinary sheaves.
as we shall not use stalks of presheaves of categories in this paper, or other stack-theoretic
versions of other sheaf theory concepts, we shall not speak about such matters any further.

5 technical notes on gerbes

in this section we shall make some highly technical remarks on gerbes. in particular, after
discussing pullbacks of gerbes and dening torsors, we shall speak in detail about gauge
transformations of gerbes, and use such ideas to derive some basic facts about gerbes which
were mentioned earlier in this paper. many of the basic ideas are taken from [6, section 5].

readers studying this paper for the rst time are urged to skip this section.

48

5.1 pullbacks of gerbes

let f : x  y be a continuous map, and c a gerbe on y with band a. it is easy to check
that f c is a gerbe on x, with band f a [6, prop. 5.2.6]. moreover, the element of the sheaf
cohomology group h 2(x, f a) characterizing f c is precisely the pullback of the element of
the sheaf cohomology group h 2(y, a) characterizing c [6, section 5.2], as the reader might
have guessed.

if c has a connective structure, then (at least for f a dieomorphism) one naturally
obtains a connective structure on f c. let co denote the connective structure on c, meaning
that co is a cartesian functor

co : c  torsy (1)

which is compatible with the bands of either gerbe. this cartesian functor can be lifted to
a cartesian functor

f co : f c  f torsy (1)

and at least in the special case that f is a dieomorphism (the only case we shall need),
f torsy (1) = torsx(1). thus, at least for f a dieomorphism we nd that a connective
structure on c naturally denes a connective structure on f c.

let k denote a curving on (c, co). at least in the case that f is a dieomorphism, we
can pullback k to a curving f k on (f c, f co). we shall outline the details here. since
f is assumed to be a dieomorphism, we know that f c = f 1c, and so it suces to dene
f k at the level of f 1c and f 1co. let u  x be open, and let p  ob (f 1c)(u), i.e.,
p  ob c(v ) for some open v  f (u). recall that by denition,

(f 1co)(u)(p ) = co(v )(p )

let  be a section of (f 1co)(u)(p ), which is to say, a section of co(v )(p ). we are now
nally ready to dene f k. dene

(f k)()  (f |u ) [k()]

it is straightforward to check that this denition satises the dening axioms for a curving.

to summarize, there exist natural notions of pullback for both gerbes and connections

on gerbes.

5.2 torsors

most mathematical descriptions of gerbes rely heavily on torsors. for the most part, we have
strenuously avoided speaking of torsors in this text, but at times their use is unavoidable.

49

in this section we shall dene torsors. our discussion will largely follow [6, section 5.1] and
[23].

a torsor with respect to a group g is a set with an action of g that is free and transitive.
an example of a g-torsor for a topological group g is the group g itself (though when
described as a torsor, one implicitly drops the group structure). let c (g) denote the group
of smooth maps from a manifold x into a lie group g, then an example of a c (g)-torsor
is any principal g-bundle. (some authors abuse notation and refer to a principal g-bundle
as a g-torsor, rather than a c (g)-torsor; we shall specically avoid such mangled usage.)
let 1(x) denote the abelian group consisting of 1-forms on a manifold x, then an example
of an 1(x)-torsor is the space of connections on any principal u(1)-bundle. (any two such
connections dier by a 1-form, which can be seen as follows: let a
 denote two
locally-dened connections on the bundle with respect to a good open cover {u}. then
a  a = a  a = d ln g on overlaps, so in particular a  a is a globally-dened
1-form.)

 and a

the torsors that we use in this paper are torsors with respect to a sheaf of abelian groups,
not just a group. a torsor with respect to a sheaf of groups (say, a) is a sheaf of sets, say,
f , such that the set f (u) associated to any open set u is a torsor with respect to the group
a(u), and such that the action of a commutes with restriction maps.

a morphism of a-torsors  : f  g is a morphism of sheaves of sets, such that the

action of a commutes with .

an example of a torsor with respect to the sheaf13 a = c (g) of c  maps into g is

the sheaf of local sections of a smooth principal g-bundle.

the set of isomorphism classes of a-torsors has an (abelian) group structure. let f , g
be a pair of a-torsors. the product of sheaves f  g is an (a  a)-torsor. we dene the
a-torsor f  g (the result of the group operation) to be the sheaf associated to the presheaf

(f  g)  a

a  a

where a  a acts on a via the product map a  a  a.

given any a-torsor f , there is a natural denition of f 1. specically, the a-torsor
f 1 is dened by the property that for any open u  x, the set f 1(u) is the set of torsor
isomorphisms f (u)  a(u).

it can be shown that the group of isomorphism classes of a-torsors, over a space x, is

in natural bijection with the group h 1(x, a).

13note our notation is slightly ambiguous: we use c(g) to denote both the group of smooth maps into

g, and the sheaf of smooth local maps into g. the correct interpretation should be clear from context.

50

it should be clear that that any morphism of a-torsors, over the same space, is necessarily
an isomorphism. this is a generalization of a similar result for principal g-bundles [17,
section 4.3], namely that any morphism of principal g-bundles for xed g over the same
base space is necessarily an isomorphism.

we should also mention a technical lemma which we shall use in what follows. let i, k
be a pair of a-torsors over a space x, for some sheaf of abelian groups a. we shall show
that in order to dene an isomorphism i  k of a-torsors i, k, it suces to show how a
set of local sections {s} of i, dened with respect to an open cover {u} of x, are mapped.
to dene the isomorphism for other elements of the sets i(u), k(u), use the action of the
group a(u)  in other words, any other element of i(u) will dier from s by an element
of the group a(u), so we can dene its image to be the image of s modulo the same group
element, thus explicitly recovering an isomorphism of sets which, by construction, commutes
with the action of a(u). we can construct maps i(w )  k(w ) for w  u for some
u by using restriction in the obvious way, and we can construct maps for w  u by
performing all possible gluings of elements of {i(u)}.

more information on torsors can be found in, for example, [23], [24, section viii.2], or

[6, section 5.1].

5.3 gauge transformations of gerbes

just as maps x  g dene gauge transformations of principal g-bundles on a space x, we
will see explicitly in this section that (equivalence classes of) bundles dene gauge transfor-
mations of gerbes of band c (g).

to fully explain these ideas will take some time. much of the material we present in

subsections 5.3.1 and 5.3.5 is taken from [6, section 5.2].

5.3.1 gauge transformations of objects

let c denote a gerbe on a manifold x, with band a. we shall assume a = c (g) for some
abelian lie group g, for simplicity. let u  x be an open subset of a space x, and let i
be a principal g-bundle on u. strictly speaking, we should take i to be a a|u -torsor, not a
principal g-bundle; however, where possible, we are trying to avoid the language of torsors.

given any object p  ob c(u), we shall show how to use i to construct another object
we shall denote p i  ob c(u). let {u} be a good open cover of u, so that i(u) 6=  for
all . let {s  i(u)} be a set of local sections of i, over the open subsets u. dene g
to be the (unique) element of a(u) that transports s|u to s|u . (recall that strictly
speaking, we should interpret i as a torsor, so that there is no natural group law on the {s}

51

per se.)

we can now dene the object p  i, using the gluing law for objects, as follows. dene

a set of isomorphisms

by,

 : p |u |u  p |u|u

  ,  g  1
,

it is straightforward to check that these satisfy the axioms for the gluing law for objects,
and so from said gluing law we recover a new object in c(u) which we shall denote p  i.

in passing, we should mention a minor technical problem with the description above,
namely that the object p  i is almost, but not quite, uniquely specied by a set of local
sections of i. recall that the gluing law for objects yields objects that are unique only up
to unique isomorphism commuting with the gluing maps . thus, the object p  i is not
uniquely dened  however, there exists a unique isomorphism (commuting with the gluing
maps ) between any two objects that one might label p  i. thus, in order to uniquely
specify an action of a torsor i together with a set of local sections of i on objects, we must
choose specic examples of p  i for each object p . in the next subsection we shall derive a
functor describing the action of the torsor i, and it is straightforward to check that for any
two such functors diering only in the choices made of objects p  i, the isomorphisms
between the choices dene a 2-arrow between functors. we shall not speak further about
this issue, except when absolutely necessary.

in dening the action of a torsor i on objects p , we referred to a specic choice of a
set of local sections of i. what happens if we choose a distinct set of local sections of i?
the answer is that any two sets of local sections of i will dene isomorphic objects p  i.
we shall outline how this is proven in the special case that the two sets of local sections
in question are dened with respect to the same open cover {u}. (it is straightforward to
check that the same result also holds for local sections dened with respect to distinct open
covers, but the details are more cumbersome.) let u  x be an open set, i an a|u -torsor,
and {s}, {s
} two sets of local sections of i, both dened over the same open cover {u} of
u. let p  i and (p  i) denote the two objects obtained from gluing via the local sections
{s}, {s

}, and let

(p ) : (p  i)|u  p |u

(p ) : (p  i)|u  p |u

denote the corresponding isomorphisms. dene f : (p  i)|u  (p  i)|u by,

f  (

(p ))1  (s

  s)  (p )

  s) to denote the element of the band mapping s 7 s

where we have used (s
. it is
straightforward to check that the {f} satisfy the gluing axiom for morphisms, and so there
exists a (unique) morphism p  i  (p  i). thus, distinct local sections of i dene
isomorphic objects p  i.

52

5.3.2 induced equivalences of categories

a a|u -torsor i not only induces a map between objects of the category c(u), but it also
induces a self-equivalence of the category c(u), which we shall now explain.

we shall denote the proposed functor by i(u). we explained the action of i(u) on
objects, namely p 7 p  i, in the previous subsection. we dene the action of i(u) on
morphisms as follows.

let p1, p2 be objects of c(u), and let   homc(u )(p1, p2). let (pi) denote the

isomorphisms

(pi) : (pi  i)|u

 pi|u

(i  {1, 2}) constructed at the same time as the pi  i, in the gluing law for objects, for
{u} an open cover of u. dene morphisms

by

(  i)|u : (p1  i)|u  (p2  i)|u

(  i)|u  ((p2))1  |u  (p1)

one can then use the gluing law for morphisms to glue together the (  i)|u to form a
(unique) morphism   i : p1  i  p2  i.

it is straightforward to check that the map we have just dened, namely i(u) :  7  i,

completes the denition of a functor i(u) : c(u)  c(u).

in passing, note that the maps  dened above, dene a natural transformation  

ic(u)    idc(u), for  : u  u inclusion.

it is easy to check that there exist invertible natural transformations

i 1(u)  i(u) = idc(u )
i(u)  i 1(u) = idc(u )

where the i 1(u) are the functors associated to the dual torsors, so each functor i(u) denes
a self-equivalence of the category c(u).

so far we have shown how an a|u -torsor i (together with a specic choice of local sections
of i) denes an equivalence of categories i(u) : c(u)  c(u). we shall now use i to dene
a cartesian functor.

let i be an a-torsor, let {u} be a good open cover of x, and let {s} be a set of local
sections of i, dened with respect to {u}. we have already demonstrated how to dene
a family of functors i(u) : c(u)  c(u), each dened by the a|u -torsor i|u and local
sections {s|u } of i|u , dened with respect to the open cover {u  u} of u. in order to

53

dene a cartesian functor i : c  c, it remains to dene invertible natural transformations
 :   i(u)  i(v )   for each inclusion  : v  u, obeying the usual constraint.

let  : u2  u1 be an inclusion of open sets, and let p  ob c(u1). let

1
2

(p ) :
(p ) :

(p  i|u1)|u1u ( = i(u1)(p )|u1u )

 p |u1u

(p |u2  i|u2)|u2u ( = i(u2)(p |u2)|u2u )  p |u2|u2u

be the isomorphisms appearing in the gluing law for objects. dene f : i(u1)(p )|u2|u2u 
i(u2)(p |u2)|u2u by,

f  (2

(p ))1  2,2  1

1,2  1

(p )|u2u  1,2  1
2,2

where  are the natural transformations dening c as a presheaf of categories, and we have
implicitly used the notation ui = ui  u (i  {1, 2}). it is straightforward to check that
the f satisfy the gluing axiom for morphisms, and so there exists a unique morphism

(p ) : i(u1)(p )|u2  i(u2)(p |u2)

such that (p )|u2u = f. moreover, it is straightforward to check that the  dene
a natural transformation   i(u1)  i(u2)  , and moreover that this set of natural
transformations makes diagram (5) commute.

thus, we have just dened the natural transformations needed to describe i : c  c
as a cartesian functor. moreover, it should be clear that i denes a map of gerbes, i.e.,
commutes with the action of the band.

the cartesian functor i : c  c we dened above depends explicitly upon a choice of
local sections {s} of i, with respect to some open cover {u} of x. how do two cartesian
functors dened by distinct choices of local sections of the same a-torsor i dier? it is
straightforward to check that any two such cartesian functors i : c  c dier by a 2-arrow.
in other words, if i and i  are two cartesian functors c  c, both associated to the same
a-torsor i but diering in the choice of local sections, then there exists an invertible 2-arrow
 : i  i . the natural transformations over each open set u are dened by the morphisms
p i  (p i) we dened earlier in section 5.3.1, in studying this same issue in the context
of gauge transformations of individual objects.

} dened over an open cover {u 1

} of x. let {u 2

we should also mention an interesting special case of the matter above. let i 1

c denote
an automorphism of the gerbe c, associated to the a-torsor i and dened by local sections
{s1
}, and consider
the automorphism i 2
} of i, dened with respect
to the cover {u 2
i }. it is straightforward to check that, in this special case, the distinction
between i 1
c and i 2
c is identical to the ambiguity in dening ic on objects, for xed choices of
local sections. thus, for judicious choices in the denition of i 1
c is the same functor as
i 2
c.

c dened by the local sections {s2

i } be a renement of {u 1

c, i 1

i  s1

(i)|u 2

i

54

c and i 2

suppose i 1 and i 2 are a pair of a-torsors. let i 1

c be corresponding automor-
phisms of the gerbe c. we shall now show that (under the correct circumstances) the gerbe
automorphism (i 1  i 2)c is identical to the automorphism i 1
c . assume (without loss of
generality) that the local sections dening i 1
c are dened with respect to the same
open cover {u} of x (if not, restrict to a mutual renement); let {s1
} denote the
local sections of i 1, i 2, respectively, dening i 1
c. then it is straightforward to check
that (with the usual judicious choices) the gerbe automorphism (i 1 i 2)c dened with respect
to the local sections14 {s1
c i 2
c,
i.e.,

} of the torsor i 1 i 2 is identical to the composition i 1
(cid:16) i 1  i 2(cid:17)c

} and {s2

 a(u) s2

= i 1

c  i 2
c

c and i 2

c and i 2

c  i 2

suppose i 1 and i 2 are a pair of a-torsors. we shall show here that a torsor isomorphism
 : i 1  i 2 is equivalent to a 2-arrow  : i 1
c. first, we shall dene some notation.
assume {s1
c, i 2
c,
assumed to both15 be dened over an open cover {u} of x. assume rst that we are given
 : i 1  i 2; we shall describe how to construct  : i 1
c. let u be an open set, and
c , i 2
denote the natural transformations associated to i 1

} are local sections of i 1, i 2 dening the gerbe automorphisms i 1

c  i 2
c by , i.e.,

} and {s2

c  i 2

(p ) : i i
i

c(u)(p )|u u  p |u u

for p  ob c(u), and i  {1, 2}. then we dene

(u)(p ) : i 1

c(u)(p )|u u  i 2

c(u)(p )|u u

by,

(u)(p )  (cid:16)2

(p )(cid:17)1

 (cid:16)s2

  (s1

)(cid:17)  1

(p )

it is easy to check that the (u)(p ) satisfy the gluing axiom for morphisms, and so can be
glued together to form a unique morphism

(u)(p ) : i 1

c(u)(p )  i 2

c(u)(p )

whose restriction to u  u is given by (u)(p ). moreover, it is straightforward to check
that (u) : i 1
c is
a 2-arrow. thus, given a torsor isomorphism  : i 1  i 2, we have constructed a 2-arrow
 : i 1

c(u) is a natural transformation, and nally that  : i 1

c(u)  i 2

c  i 2

c  i 2
c.

conversely, given a 2-arrow  : i 1

c , we shall now construct a torsor isomorphism
 : i 1  i 2. we shall dene  by describing the action of  on the local sections {s1
} of i 1
c.
using the same conventions as in the paragraph above, for any open u and p  ob c(u),

c  i 2

14our notation is slightly sloppy, in that a(u) is an abelian group, not a ring, and i i(u) is a set, not a

module.

15if they are not both dened over the same open cover, then restrict to a mutual renement.

55

dene g(u  u)(p ) to be the element of the abelian group a(u  u) associated to the
automorphism

(p )  (u)(p )  (cid:16)1
2

(p )(cid:17)1

: p |u  p |u

assume without loss of generality16 that {u} is a good cover, and so each category c(u)
contains a single isomorphism class of objects17. then, for u = u, the band element g(u)
dened above is independent of the choice of p . dene

(s1

)  g(u)1  s2



to dene a torsor isomorphism, it suces to describe the action on a set of local sections
associated to a cover, which we have just done. thus, we have just associated a torsor
isomorphism  : i 1  i 2 to the 2-arrow  : i 1
c. to summarize the results of this
paragraph and the last, a torsor isomorphism  : i 1  i 2 is equivalent to a 2-arrow  : i 1
c 
i 2
c.

c  i 2

as a consequence of the results in the last paragraph, we see that isomorphic torsors
dene isomorphic gerbe automorphisms. thus, distinct gerbe automorphisms are dened by
equivalence classes of torsors, not individual torsors per se. this fact will be quite important
when discussing how the group cohomology group h 2(, u(1)) appears when describing
equivariant structures on b elds  modding out by group coboundaries ultimately comes
from the fact that only equivalence classes of torsors dene distinct gerbe automorphisms.

in passing, we should also speak briey on pullbacks, and how the pullback of an auto-
morphism associated to a torsor i is related to the automorphism associated to the pullback
of the torsor. let f : x  y be a continuous map, and let c be a gerbe on y , with band
a. let i be an a-torsor, and let ic denote an associated automorphism of c (dened with
respect to local sections {s}, over an open cover {u} of y ). let (f i)c denote the auto-
morphism of the gerbe f c dened by the f a-torsor f i, with respect to the same open
sections {s} of f i, over the open cover {f 1(u)} of x. it is straightforward to check
that, at least in the case that f is a homeomorphism (so that f 1c = f c and f 1i = f i),
the gerbe automorphisms f (ic) and (f i)c coincide18.

16if not, restrict to a suitable renement.
17we shall prove later that isomorphism classes of objects in each category c(u ) are in one-to-one corre-

spondence with elements of h 1(u, a|u ).

18in fact, we are being slightly sloppy. in dening the action of i, recall there was a minor ambiguity in
the denition of the action on the objects of c. distinct choices dier by unique morphisms, so we assumed
such choices were made, and thereafter ignored the point. essentially the same problem arises here. the
correct statement is that f (ic) and (f i)c dier by at most a unique 2-arrow; but by making judicious
choices, they can be assumed to coincide.

56

5.3.3 action on connections

in this section we shall describe how gauge transformations of gerbes act on connective
structures and curvings. we briey touched on these matters in section 3.5; here we re-
examine them in more detail.

to x notation, let c be a gerbe with connective structure co. let u  x be open, and
p  ob c(u). let i be an a|u -torsor, let {u} be a good open cover of u, and let {s}
be a set of local sections of i, dened with respect to {u}. let ic : c|u  c|u denote the
gerbe automorphism corresponding to i with sections {s}.

consider the action of ic on p . by denition of p  i = ic(u)(p ), we have morphisms

(p ) : (p  i)|u such that the following diagram commutes:

(p  i)|u |u

 (p )|u 

p |u|u

,

(p  i)|u

,

, p |u

ss

p |u

,

(p  i)|u|u

 (p )|u

p |u|u

where the  are the natural transformations dening c as a presheaf of categories, and ss
denotes the band element mapping s  s.

by applying the cartesian functor co, we can (with a bit of work) recover the following

commutative diagram:

co(p  i)|u |u



,

co(p  i)|u

,

co(p  i)|u|u



co(p )|u |u

, co(p )|u

d ln (ss)



co(p )|u

, co(p )|u|u

(26)

where we have abbreviated co(u)(p ) by co(p ), for example, and where the map

co(u)(p  i)|u|u  co(u)(p )|u|u

is given by the composition

()1  ()1  co(u)((p )|u)    

the  are the natural transformations dening co as a cartesian functor.

from diagram (26), it should be clear that co(u)(p  i) and co(u)(p ) dier by the
1|u -torsor of connections on i. moreover, a precise specication of how a particular section
  (u, co(u)(p )) is mapped is determined by the local sections {s} determining ic,
and is equivalent to a choice of connection on i. (compare, for example, [6, section 5.3,
equn (5-11)].)

57

in other words, let {a} be a family of 1-forms on {u} dening a connection on i.
assume the action of ic on sections of co(u)(p ) is determined by {a}. then for any
  (u, co(u)(p |u),  7  + a under the action of ic.

phrased more simply still, a gauge transformation of a gerbe with connective structure
(after all, a 2-arrow be-
is dened by an equivalence class of bundles with connection.
tween gerbe automorphisms lifts to a connection-preserving map between the connective
structures, as noted earlier.)

how does ic act on a curving k on (c, co)? the answer should be immediately clear

from the denition of curving:

k( + a) = k() + da

much earlier in this paper we remarked that an automorphism of a gerbe with connection
is dened by an equivalence class of bundles with at connection. here, we can see that
more explicitly. if the connection is at, then the curving k is invariant under the gauge
transformation. put another way, just as constant gauge transformations dene bundle au-
tomorphisms that preserve the connection, a gauge transformation of a gerbe that preserves
the connection is an equivalence class of bundles with at connection.

5.3.4 gauge transformations commute with gerbe maps

let f : c  d be a map between gerbes c, d, that is, a cartesian functor commuting with
the action of the band. assume c and d both have band a, and are both dened over a
space x.

in this section, we shall show that if i is any a-torsor, then there exists an invertible

2-arrow

where ic : c  c and id : d  d are gerbe maps induced by the a-torsor i.

 : f  ic = id  f

in fact, this is quite straightforward. without loss of generality19, assume that the local
sections of i dening ic and id are identical. let {u} be a good open cover of x, and let
{s} be the local sections of i over {u} which dene ic and id. let

c
ic(u)(p )|u u  p |u u
(p ) :
 (p ) : id(u)(p )|u u  p |u u
d

for p  ob c(u)
for p   ob d(u)

(for open u  x) denote the isomorphisms obtained in the denition of gauge transforma-
tion. dene

(u)(p ) : (f  ic)(u)(p )|u u  (id  f )(u)(p )|u u

19as the gerbe automorphisms dened by distinct choices of local sections of i dier by an invertible

2-arrow, clearly we are free to choose any convenient sets of local sections without changing the result.

58

for open u  x and p  ob c(u) by,

(u)(p )  d

 (f (u)(p ))1  (cid:16)f

(cid:17)1

 f (u  u)(cid:16)c

(p )(cid:17)  f



where the f are the natural transformations dening f as a cartesian functor.
it is
straightforward to check that the (u)(p ) satisfy the gluing axiom for morphisms, so they
can be glued together to form a unique morphism

(u)(p ) : (f  ic)(u)(p )  (id  f )(u)(p )

such that (u)(p )|u u = (u)(p ).

it is straightforward to check that (u) denes a natural transformation (f  ic)(u) 

(id  f )(u), and moreover that  denes an invertible 2-arrow f  ic  id  f .

thus, loosely speaking, gauge transformations commute with gerbe maps.

5.3.5 sheaves of morphisms as torsors

if p1 and p2 are any two objects of c(u), then the sheaf of (iso)morphisms homu (p1, p2) is
= aut(p1) acts on the left, and it should be clear that
an a|u -torsor20. in particular, a|u
this action is free and transitive  for any open v  u, the set hom(p1|v , p2|v ) is either
empty (and so trivially an a(v )-torsor), or is nonempty and is manifestly a torsor under the
group a(v ). thus, as a sheaf of abelian groups, a|u acts freely and transitively on the sheaf
homu (p1, p2), and moreover its action commutes with restriction maps, so homu (p1, p2) is
an a|u -torsor.

one can easily check that if f : c  d is a map of gerbes of band a over the same space

x, then for any open u and for any two objects pa, pb  ob c(u), the induced map

homu (pa, pb)  homu (f (u)(pa), f (u)(pb))

is a morphism of torsors. as any morphism of a-torsors is an isomorphism, this means that
the a-torsors homu (pa, pb) and homu (f (u)(pa), f (u)(pb)) are isomorphic.

it is straightforward to check that the torsor homu (p1, p2) induces the gauge trans-
formation on c(u) that maps the object p1 to the object p2, as the reader has probably
guessed.

moreover, it is straightforward to see that homu (p, p  i) = i as a|u -torsors, for any
a|u -torsor i. let {u} be a good open cover of u, and let {s  i(u)} be the set of local

20those readers also studying [6, section 5] will note that in that reference, hom(p1, p2) is instead denoted

isom(p1, p2).

59

sections of i dening the map p 7 p  i. recall that we constructed p  i using the gluing
law for objects, and the same gluing law also yields a set of isomorphisms

(p ) : (p  i)|u  p |u

we can dene an isomorphism of a|u -torsors by specifying that the sections {s} should map
to the isomorphisms {1
 }. as mentioned in the section on torsors, to dene an isomorphism
between two torsors, it suces to describe how a set of local sections (dened with respect to
an open cover) are mapped, thus we have now dened an isomorphism i  homu (p, p i)
of a|u -torsors.

one implication of the fact that homu (p, p  i) = i is that the action of i is free on
equivalence classes of objects in c(u): p i is isomorphic to p if and only if i is trivializable,
i.e., only if i has a global section does there exist a morphism p  p  i, not just between
their restrictions to open subsets.

moreover, the action of torsors on objects is not only free, but transitive: any two objects
p1, p2  ob c(u) can be related by a set of local sections of the a|u -torsor homu (p1, p2).

thus, the set of equivalence classes of objects of c(u) is a torsor under the action of the

abelian group h 1(u, a|u ).

this means that there exists a (noncanonical) one-to-one correspondence between equiv-
alence classes of objects of c(u) and equivalence classes of a|u -torsors. in the case that
a = c (g) for some abelian g, we can rephrase this by saying that equivalence classes
of objects of c(u), for any gerbe c with band a, are in one-to-one correspondence with
equivalence classes of principal g-bundles on u. this implies that all gerbes with band
a = c (g) look locally like the trivial gerbe tors(g), just as all bundles look locally like a
trivial bundle.

this last result gives a great deal of insight into gerbes, and so is worth repeating. just
as all bundles can be locally trivialized, all gerbes can be locally trivialized. gerbes with
band a = c (g) for abelian g are locally isomorphic to the stack of principal g-bundles,
a trivial gerbe.

we shall conclude this section by explicitly demonstrating such local trivializations. local
trivializations are not needed to dene a sheaf  however, as they can be used to give insight
into local structure, we shall work them out explicitly. more precisely, for any open set u
such that c(u) 6= , we shall construct functors

f (u) :
f (u) : tors(a)(u) 

c

 tors(a)(u)

c(u)

such that there exist invertible natural transformations f (u)  f (u)  id and f (u) 
f (u)  id.

60

fix an object p0  ob c(u), and a torsor i0  ob tors(a)(u). we dene the functor

f (u) as follows. let p  ob c(u) be any object, and dene the a|u -torsor

dene

i  homu (p0, p )

f (u)(p )  i  i0

next, let pa, pb  ob c(u) be objects, and  : pa  pb be a morphism. dene the a|u -
torsors

i a  homu (p0, pa)
i b  homu (p0, pb)

the morphism  induces a morphism of torsors

# : i a  i b

and so we dene

f (u)()  # : i a  i0  i b  i0

with these denitions, f (u) is a well-dened functor from c(u) to tors(a)(u).

next, we shall dene the functor f (u). let i be a a|u -torsor in ob tors(a)(u), and

dene

0 (cid:17)c
f (u)(i)  (cid:16)i  i 1

(u)(p0)

next, let i a, i b be a|u -torsors in ob tors(a)(u), and let  : i a  i b be a morphism of
a|u -torsors. the morphism  denes a 2-arrow

dene

 : (cid:16)i a  i 1
0 (cid:17)c

= (cid:16)i b  i 1
0 (cid:17)c

f (u)()  (u)(p0)

with these denitions, f (u) is a well-dened functor from tors(a)(u) to c(u).

finally, it is straightforward to check that there exist invertible natural transformations

f (u)  f (u) = idc(u )
f (u)  f (u) = idtors(a)(u )

thus, we have now nished demonstrating explicitly that for any u such that c(u) 6= ,

the category c(u) is equivalent to the category tors(a)(u).

61

5.3.6 sheaves of natural transformations as torsors

we shall now show that sheaves of natural transformations are a-torsors. more specically,
let f, g : c  d be a pair of cartesian functors dening maps of gerbes, between the gerbes
c and d, assumed to both have band a and both be dened over the same space x. we
shall show that the sheaf of local 2-arrows 2ru (f, g) is an a|u -torsor, for any open u  x.
we shall also derive some useful properties of these torsors.

we shall now argue that the sheaf of sets 2ru (f, g) is an a|u -torsor. we dene the action
of a|u as follows. let v  u be open, and let g  a(v ). let  be an element of the set
2ru (f, g)(v ), which is to say,  is a collection of natural transformations f (w )  g(w ),
one for each open w  v . the element g  a(v ) acts on each natural transformation
(w ) as,

(w ) 7 (w )  (

w g)

where  is the restriction map in the sheaf a, and for each p  ob c(w ), g is interpreted
as an element of aut(f (w )(p )).

it is easy to see that this action of a is free, and commutes with the restriction map.
to check that it is transitive requires more work, which we shall outline here. let a, b
be two elements of the set 2ru (f, g)(v ). for any p  ob c(v ), b(v )(p )1  a(v )(p ) is
an automorphism of f (v )(p ), which we can identify with an element g(p )  a(v ). any
two objects p1, p2 which are related by a morphism will clearly dene isomorphic group
elements: g(p1) = g(p2). more generally, one can show that g(p1) = g(p2) even if p1, p2 are
not related by a morphism, by restricting to an open subset w  v such that there exists
a morphism  : p1|w  p2|w . dene a morphism

 : f (v )(p1)|w  f (v )(p2)|w

by,

  (f

w )1  f (w )()  f

w

then it is straightforward to check that

(cid:16)b(v )(p2)1  a(v )(p2)(cid:17) |w =   (cid:16)b(v )(p1)1  a(v )(p1)(cid:17) |w  1

which implies that g(p1) = g(p2). thus, for any pair of 2-arrows a, b  2ru (f, g)(v ),
there exists g  a(v ) such that a = b  g. this means that the action of a|u on the sheaf
of sets 2ru (f, g) is transitive, and so we have nished demonstrating that 2ru (f, g) is an
a|u -torsor.

we shall now argue that if v is an open subset of u such that the categories c(v ) and
d(v ) each only contain a single isomorphism class of objects, then the set of local 2-arrows
2ru (f, g)(v ) is nonempty. first, we shall construct natural transformations f (v )  g(v ).
fix some p0  ob c(v ), and a morphism (v )(p0) : f (v )(p0)  g(v )(p0). for any

62

other p  ob c(v ), let  : p  p0 be a morphism, and dene (v )(p ) : f (v )(p ) 
g(v )(p ) by, (v )(p )  g(v )()1  (v )(p0)  f (v )(). it is straightforward to check
that (v )(p ) is independent of the choice21 of , and moreover that this denes a natural
transformation (v ) : f (v )  g(v ). in fact, we can generate an entire a(v )-torsor of
natural transformations in this fashion, by choosing dierent p0 and dierent (v )(p0). in
passing, note that this also implies that a natural transformation f (v )  |v  g(v )  |v ,
for example, uniquely determines a natural transformation f (v )  g(v ) (assuming that,
for |v denoting a restriction functor associated to the inclusion v  u, c(u) and d(u) are
both nonempty).

so far we have constructed a natural transformation (v ) : f (v )  g(v ); we shall
now show that any such natural transformation denes a local 2-arrow f |v  g|v , i.e., an
element of 2ru (f, g)(v ). in order to construct an element of 2ru (f, g)(v ), we need to
specify (suitably compatible) natural transformations f (w )  g(w ) for all open w  v .
for any (v ) : f (v )  g(v ) and any open w  v , dene (w ) to be the natural
transformation generated by the composition

f (w )   f

=   f (v )

(v )
=   g(v )

g
= g(w )  

where  : w  v is inclusion. the composition above only denes a natural transformation
f (w )    g(w )  , not f (w )  g(w ); however using the ideas in the previous
paragraph, it should be clear that the composition can be used to determine a natural
transformation f (w )  g(w ) (uniquely, in fact, if every object of d(w ) is isomorphic
to the restriction of an object of d(v )). moreover, it is straightforward to check that this
collection of natural transformations has the property that for any inclusion of open sets
 : w2  w1, the following diagram commutes:

  f (w1)

(w1)
=   g(w1)

 
f
f (w2)   (w2)

= g(w2)  

 g



(27)

thus, given any natural transformation (v ) : f (v )  g(v ), we can construct a local 2-
arrow  : f |v  g|v . in other words, we have constructed an element of 2ru (f, g)(v ), and
so if v  u is an open set such that c(v ) and d(v ) each only contain a single isomorphism
class of objects, then the set of local 2-arrows 2ru (f, g)(v ) is nonempty.

we shall now argue that for any a|u -torsor i, there is an isomorphism

i

 2ru (f, id  f )

of a|u -torsors. we shall dene this isomorphism by describing how a distinguished set of local
sections {s} of i, dened with respect to an open cover {u} of u, are mapped into local

21in other words, if (v )(p ) and (v )(p ) denote the two isomorphisms dened by any two morphisms

,  : p  p0, then (v )(p ) = (v )(p ).

63

sections of 2ru (f, id  f ). denote the local sections of i dening the gerbe map id : d  d
by {s}, and assume (without loss of generality22) that they are dened with respect to an
open cover {u} of u such that c(u) and d(u) each only contain a single isomorphism
class of objects, for all . by denition of id, there exist natural transformations



(u) : |u  id(u) = |u  idd(u)

where the |u denote restriction functors associated to the inclusion u  u. dene new
natural transformations

as the natural transformations associated to the composition

(u) : f (u) = (id  f )(u)

f (u)  |u

f
= |u  f (u)


(u)
= |u  (id  f )(u)

if
= (id  f )(u)  |u

as in the previous paragraphs. furthermore, proceeding again as in the previous few para-
graphs, extend (u) to an element   2ru (f, g)(u). finally, dene the isomorphism
i  2ru (f, id  f ) of a|u -torsors by mapping s 7 . as described in the section on
torsors, to dene an isomorphism it suces to describe how a set of local sections, dened
with respect to an open cover, is mapped. thus, i = 2ru (f, id  f ).

we have just shown that i = 2ru (f, i  f ) as a|u -torsors. one important consequence
which is immediately derived from this fact is that if there exists a 2-arrow f  i  f for
some a-torsor i, then i must have a global section, and so is trivial.

5.3.7 gerbe maps dier by gauge transformations

in this subsection we shall show that any two gerbe maps dier by a gauge transformation
of the gerbe (i.e., a bundle, modulo equivalence). there is a precisely analogous notion
for bundles: any two morphisms f, g : p1  p2 between principal g-bundles dier by a
gauge transformation (namely, f  g1, which is a bundle automorphism, and hence a gauge
transformation).

let f, g : c  d be any two gerbe maps, and open u  x open. we shall rst show that
there exists an a|u -torsor i and a local 2-arrow  : g|u  (id  f )|u (i.e., a global section
of the sheaf 2ru (g, id  f )). given f and g, dene i to be the a|u -torsor 2ru (f, g). let
{u} be a good open cover of u, and let {s} be a set of local sections of i dening the
gerbe automorphism id. let

i

(u) : |u  id(u) = |u  idd(u)

(where |u denotes the restriction functors associated to the inclusions u  u) denote
the natural transformations associated to the {s}, appearing in the denition of id. let

22if this is not true, then simply restrict the {s} to elements of a suitable renement.

64

s
 : f |u  g|u denote the s, interpreted explicitly as local 2-arrows. now, we shall
dene a natural transformation g(u)  (id  f )(u), by using the gluing law. for any
object p  ob c(u), dene a morphism

f(p ) : g(u)(p )|u  (id  f )(u)(p )|u

by,

f(p )  i

 (f (u)(p ))1  (f

 )1  s

(u)(p |u)1  g



it is
where the  denote natural transformations dening f , g as cartesian functors.
straightforward to check that the f(p ) satisfy the gluing axiom for morphisms, and so dene
a morphism (u)(p ) : g(u)(p )  (id  f )(u)(p ). moreover, it is straightforward to check
that the (u)(p ) dene a natural transformation (u) : g(u)  (id  f )(u). finally, a
few paragraphs earlier we argued that a natural transformation (u) : g(u)  (id  f )(u)
denes a local 2-arrow g|u  (id  f )|u . thus, we have explicitly constructed a global
section of the sheaf 2ru (g, id  f ).

in other words, we have just shown that for any two gerbe maps f , g, and for any open
u  x, there exists a a|u -torsor i and a local 2-arrow  : g|u  (id  f )|u . (of course, i
is only dened up to isomorphism, as always.)

note that the result above implies that if  : c  c is any automorphism of the gerbe
c, then there exists an a-torsor i such that  is equivalent to ic : c  c, i.e., there exists
an invertible 2-arrow   ic.

next, suppose that f and g dene equivalences of gerbes with connective structure. this

means that we also have invertible 2-arrows

f : coc = cod  f
g : coc = cod  g

it is straightforward to check that the dierence between these 2-arrows is dened by a choice
of connection on i (up to equivalence, as always).

finally, suppose that f and g dene equivalences of gerbes with connective structure
and curving. this means that in addition to also having invertible 2-arrows f , g as above,
the curving k is invariant under the action of the 2-arrows. the dierence between such
data is again dened by a bundle i with connection, and the constraint that the curving is
invariant becomes the constraint that the connection on i is at. so, the dierence between
two equivalences of gerbes with connection (connective structure and curving) is dened by
a bundle i with at connection.

in passing, we should mention that there is a closely analogous notion for bundles. given
two morphisms f, g : p1  p2 between, say, principal u(1)-bundles p1, p2 with connection,

65

the dierence f  g1 is a gauge transformation which preserves the connection  in other
words, a constant23 gauge transformation.

5.3.8 maps of gerbes are equivalences of gerbes

in this subsection we shall argue that any map between gerbes with the same band, over the
same space, is necessarily an isomorphism. this is a direct analogue of the statement that
any morphism of principal g-bundles, for xed g and over a xed space, is necessarily an
isomorphism [17, section 4.3].

let f : c  d be a map between the gerbes c, d, both assumed to have band a and
both be dened over a xed space x. we shall argue that f is an equivalence of gerbes.
more precisely, we shall show that each functor f (u) : c(u)  d(u) is an equivalence
of categories, in that there exists a functor f (u) : d(u)  c(u) and invertible natural
transformations

1 : f (u)  f (u) = idd(u )
2 : f (u)  f (u) = idc(u )

we dene the functor f (u) : d(u)  c(u) on objects as follows. fix some arbitrary

object p0  ob c(u). for any object p  ob d(u), dene an a|u -torsor

dene f (u)(p )  ic(u)(p0).

i = homu (f (u)(p0), p )

we dene f (u) on morphisms as follows. let  : pa  pb be a morphism between

objects pa, pb  ob d(u). dene a|u -torsors

i a  homu (f (u)(p0), pa)
i b  homu (f (u)(p0), pb)

the morphism  denes a morphism of torsors # : i a  i b, and thus a 2-arrow  : i a
dene

c  i b
c.

f (u)()  (u)(p0)

it is straightforward to check that with these denitions, f (u) is a well-dened functor
d(u)  c(u).

before proving that f (u) denes an inverse to f (u), we shall briey attempt to provide
some intuition for this result. first, note that for any object p  ob d(u), there exists a
2-arrow such that

(f f )(u)(p ) = (f ic)(u)(p0) = (idf )(u)(p0) = p

23assuming the base space is connected. locally constant, more generally.

66

this is not quite sucient to prove that f is an equivalence of categories, because the 2-arrow
above depends upon p , whereas we need to nd a single natural transformation. similarly,
using the fact that

homu (f (u)(p0), f (u)(p )) = homu (p0, p )

for any object p  ob c(u), we see that

(f f )(u)(p ) = ic(u)(p0) = p

again, the remarks above are not intended to be proofs, but are intended merely to give the
reader some intuition as to why our denition of f (u) is a correct one.

we shall now construct invertible natural transformations

1 : f (u)  f (u) = idd(u )
2 : f (u)  f (u) = idc(u )

existence of these natural transformations, together with f (u), will suce to prove that
f (u) is an equivalence of categories, and that f : c  d is an equivalence of gerbes.

we shall dene 1 : (f f )(u)  id as follows. let pi be a family of objects of d(u),

one for each equivalence class of objects in d(u). dene a family of a|u -torsors

fix a family of 2-arrows i:

i i  homu (f (u)(p0), pi)

i : (f i i

c) = (i i

df )

now, for any object p  ob d(u), let f : p  pi be a morphism from p to some pi, and
dene 1(p ) : (f f )(u)(p )  p by,

1(p )  f 1  i(u)(p0)  (f f )(u)(f )

it is straightforward to check that 1(p ) is independent of the choice of f , and moreover
that 1(p ) denes a natural transformation

1 : f (u)  f (u) = idd(u )

we shall dene 2 : (f f )(u)  id as follows. let p 

i be a family of objects of c(u),

one for each equivalence class of objects in c(u). dene families of a|u -torsors

i i  homu (p0, pi)
i i  homu (f (u)(p0), f (u)(pi))

67

and x a family of 2-arrows



i : i i

c = i i
c

now, for any object p  ob c(u), let f : p  p 
dene 2(p ) : (f f )(u)(p )  p by,

i for a morphism from p to some p 

i , and

2(p )  f 1  

i(u)(p0)  (f f )(u)(f )

it is straightforward to check that 2(p ) is independent of the choice of f , and moreover
that 2(p ) denes a natural transformation

2 : f (u)  f (u) = idc(u )

thus, any gerbe map f : c  d between gerbes of the same band, over the same space,

is necessarily an equivalence of gerbes.

6 equivariant gerbes

in this section we shall dene the notion of equivariance under a group  acting on a space
x for gerbes dened on the space x. we shall (loosely) follow [6, section 7.3]. we shall
assume that x is connected. we should also mention that we shall often refer to pullbacks
of stacks and gerbes, concepts which were dened in section 4.2. more generally, in both this
section and the next, we shall often make use of results proven in sections 4 and 5, without
specic attribution.

first, however, we shall dene the notion of an equivariant stack. let  be a group acting
on a topological space x by homeomorphisms, and let c be a stack on x. loosely, for c to
be equivariant under  means that gc should be isomorphic (in the appropriate sense) to
c for all g  . technically, an equivariant structure on a stack c consists of the following
data:

1. a cartesian functor g : gc  c dening an equivalence of stacks, for each g  .

2. for each pair (g1, g2)    , an invertible 2-arrow

g1,g2 : g1g2 = g2  g

2g1  c

g1,g2

between cartesian functors (g1g2)c  c, where c
analogue of a natural transformation dened in section 4.2.4.

g1,g2 : (g1g2)c  g

2g

1c is the

68

moreover, the 2-arrows g1,g2 are required to make the following diagram commute:

g1g2g3

g1,g2g3 

g1g2,g3=

g3  g

3g1g2  g1g2,g3

 g1,g2

(28)

g2g3  (g2g3)g1  g1,g2g3

g2,g3= g3  g

3 (g2  g

2g1  g1,g2)  g1g2,g3

note that in order to make sense out of the diagram above, we are using the fact that the
 obey

g1,g2  g1g2,g3 = g2,g3  g1,g2g3

and also that

g2,g3  (g2g3)g1 = g

3g

2g1  g2,g3

as is discussed in section 4.2.4.

an equivariant structure on a gerbe is dened to be an equivariant structure on the

underlying stack such that each g : gc  c denes an equivalence of gerbes.

we shall now argue that any two distinct equivariant structures on a gerbe dier by
a choice of principal g-bundles tg (for a = c (g)), one for each g  , and a set of
isomorphisms of principal g-bundles

such that the following diagram commutes:

g1,g2 : tg1g2  tg2  g

2tg1

tg1g2g3

g1,g2g3 
tg2g3  (g2g3)tg1

modulo equivalences of bundles.

g1g2,g3

tg3  g

3tg1g2
 g1,g2
3 (tg2  g

g2,g3 tg3  g

2tg1)

(29)

in passing, we should point out the close formal resemblance between diagram (29) and

structures appearing in [11, section 1].

g : gc  c and corresponding 2-arrows g1,g2, 

suppose we have two distinct equivariant structures on a gerbe, that is, two sets of gerbe
maps g, 
g1,g2. first, from section 5.3.7,
g dier by a gauge transformation, that is, (for band a = c (g))
any two gerbe maps g, 
there exists a principal g-bundle we shall denote tg and a 2-arrow g : g  tg  
g. note
we have used tg to denote both a principal g-bundle and an associated gerbe automorphism.

note that we have been slightly sloppy  to completely specify a gerbe automorphism
associated to the bundle tg, we would also need to specify a choice of local sections. any
two choices of local sections dene automorphisms that dier by a 2-arrow, so changing the
choice of local sections merely corresponds to changing g. thus, we shall not belabor the
choice of local sections any further.

69

next, let g1,g2

: tg1g2  tg2  g

2tg1 be a 2-arrow such that the following diagram

commutes:

g1g2
g1g2 
tg1g2  

g1g2

g1,g2=

g2  g

2g1



g1,g2= tg1g2  (cid:16)

g2  g

2

g1(cid:17) 1,2g1,g2= (tg2  

 g2 g

2 g1
2(tg1  

g2)  g

g1)

(30)

where  are implicit (omitted for aesthetic reasons), and where we have used 1,2 to denote
a 2-arrow

1,2 : (tg2  g

2tg1)  (cid:16)

g2  g

2

g1  g1,g2(cid:17) = (tg2  

g2)  g

2(tg1  

g1)  g1,g2

describing how we commute the gauge transformations past gerbe maps. the  should not
be assumed to be completely arbitrary; we shall assume that the following diagram of 
commutes:

(tg3  g

3(tg2  g

g3  g

3 (cid:16)

g2  g

(tg3  g

3tg2)  

g2  g

2tg1  g

2

2tg1))  
3 (cid:16)


g3  g

g1(cid:17) = tg3  
2
g1(cid:17) = tg3  

g3  (tg2  g


g3  g

3 (cid:16)tg2  

2tg1)  (cid:16)

g2  g

g2  g

2tg1  g

2g1(cid:17)
g1(cid:17)
2

where we have omitted g1,g2 and g1g2,g3.

the specication of the 2-arrow g1,g2 : tg1g2  tg2  g

2tg1 is equivalent to a specication

of an isomorphism of principal g-bundles

g1,g2 : tg1g2  tg2  g

2tg1

and it is straightforward to check that the requirement that diagram (28) commute for both
the g1,g2 and the 

g1,g2 implies that the following diagram of 2-arrows commutes:

tg1g2g3

g1,g2g3 
tg2g3  (g2g3)tg1

g1g2,g3=

tg3  g

3tg1g2
 g1,g2
3 (tg2  g

2tg1)

g2,g3= tg3  g

(31)

which implies that diagram (29) commutes, as claimed.

to summarize our progress so far, we have discovered that the dierence between two
equivariant structures on a gerbe is described by the data (tg, g1,g2) such that diagram (29)
commutes. however, we have been a little sloppy. we could replace any of the bundles
principal g-bundles tg by isomorphic bundles t 
g, as only equivalence classes of principal
g-bundles are relevant. if g : tg  t 
g are isomorphisms, then the dierence between two
2g1)1(cid:17).
equivariant structures can also be described by the data (cid:16)t 

g, g1g2  g1,g2  (g2  g

at the end of the day, we will recover a classication of equivariant structures preserving
the gerbe connection, in which we shall nd h 2(, g). before we begin working out the

70

details, we should take a moment to explain the general idea. first, since automorphisms
of gerbes with connection are dened by equivalence classes of bundles with connection, we
will also specify connections on the bundles tg, and the isomorphisms g1,g2 will be forced
to preserve those connections. then, we will demand that the connection on the gerbe be
invariant under all gerbe equivalences, in precise analogy with our strategy for studying
equivariant bundles in [2]. this will imply that any two equivariant structures dier by
a set of bundles {tg} with at connection. we nd the group h 2(, u(1)) by taking the
bundles tg to be topologically trivial, not just at, with gauge-trivial connections. cocycle
representatives of elements of h 2(, u(1)) will be dened by the isomorphisms g1,g2; the
group cocycle condition will come from commutivity of diagram (29).

7 equivariant gerbes with connection

in this
in the previous section we dened the notion of equivariant structure for gerbes.
section we shall extend this notion to dene equivariant structures for gerbes with connection
(connective structure and curving). as we have only dened connections for gerbes with band
a = c (u(1)), we shall assume throughout this section that all gerbes have band c (u(1)).

let c be a gerbe which is equivariant with respect to the action of a group  acting
by dieomorphisms. under what circumstances will the equivariant structure respect the
connection on c ? as the reader has probably guessed, the gerbe maps g : gc  c are
required to be equivalences of gerbes with connection, so we must also specify 2-arrows

g : gco = co  g

(recall that the pullback of a gerbe with connection is another gerbe with connection  a
connection on c naturally induces a connection on gc. in order for the equivariant structure
to respect this connection, we must demand that the equivalence of gerbes g respect the
connection.)

so far we have dened equivariant structures on gerbes with connection. how are these

equivariant structures classied?

suppose we have two equivariant structures on a gerbe with connection, that is, two
g, 
g) dening equivalences of gerbes with connection, and
g1,g2 satisfying the conditions above. how are these two

sets of gerbe maps (g, g), (
corresponding 2-arrows g1,g2, 
equivariant structures related?

in the previous section, we mentioned that for any pair g, 

g, there exists24 a principal

24up to isomorphism.

71

u(1)-bundle25 tg and a 2-arrow g : g  tg
g, using results in section 5.3.7. here, because
the gerbe maps dene equivalences of gerbes with connection, to describe the dierence
between the gerbe maps we must also specify a connection on each bundle tg, and the
connections are constrained to be at. moreover, from commutivity of diagram (30), as
applied to the connective structures, we nd that the morphisms g1,g2 must preserve the
connection on each bundle.

in other words, so far we have found that the dierence between two equivariant structures
on a gerbe with connection is dened by a set of principal u(1)-bundles tg, each with a at
connection, together with connection-preserving isomorphisms g1,g2 : tg1g2  tg2  g
2tg1
such that diagram (29) commutes.

as before, the bundles with connection are only dened up to isomorphism. if g : tg 
t 
g denes a set of isomorphisms of bundles with connection, then we can replace the data
(tg, g1,g2) with the data (cid:16)t 

g, g1g2  g1,g2  (g2  g

2g1)1(cid:17).

at the end of the day, we wish to nd how the group h 2(, u(1)) appears in describing
the dierence between two equivariant structures. this group appears as follows. take all
the bundles tg to be topologically trivial, with gauge-trivial connections. then, we can use
the fact that the bundles tg are only dened up to isomorphism to replace each tg with
the canonical trivial bundle with identically zero connection. as the isomorphisms g1,g2
are constrained to preserve the connection, this means they must be constant (assuming the
underlying space is connected). from diagram (29) we see that the g1,g2 dene a group
2-cocycle. now, even after making this choice of tgs, there is still a residual gauge invariant
 we can gauge-transform each tg by a constant gauge transformation, which preserves the
(identically zero) connection on each tg. it is clear that these constant gauge transformations
of each tg change the g1,g2 by a group coboundary. thus, we have found elements of the
group h 2(, u(1)) lurking in the dierences between any two equivariant structures on a
gerbe with connection.

in general, however, there will be additional possible orbifold group actions, beyond
those classied by elements of h 2(, u(1)). in retrospect, we should not be surprised  for
example26, the cartan-leray spectral sequence for h 2(x/, z) (for  freely-acting) contains
contributions from more than just h 2(, u(1)). we shall discuss this matter further in [3].

25 we get principal u (1) bundles because we have assumed the band is c(u (1)) in this section. in the

previous section we did not have such a constraint on the band.

26 lest we give the wrong impression, classifying equivariant structures is not the same thing as calculating

cohomology, but in very special cases, cohomology calculations can shed light.

72

8 check: loop spaces

in this section we shall shed some light on the methods and results of the previous two
sections by thinking about gerbes in terms of loop spaces.

first, note that a principal u(1) bundle p with connection on a manifold m determines
a u(1)-valued function on lm, the loop space of m. more precisely, for any loop in m, we
can assign an element of u(1) given by the value of the wilson loop. thus, wilson loops
assign elements of u(1) to each loop in m, and so dene a u(1)-valued function on lm.

the assignment above, of u(1)-valued functions on lm to principal u(1) bundles with
connection on m, is a basic example of a more general principle. namely, to any n-gerbe
with connection on a manifold m, one can assign an (n  1)-gerbe with connection on the
loop space lm. (this can be seen in terms of deligne cohomology; see, for example, [6,
section 6.5].) more relevantly to this paper, to any (1-)gerbe with connection (and band
c (u(1))) on a manifold m, one can assign27 a principal u(1) bundle with connection on
the loop space lm. (for more details, see, for example, [6, section 6.2]; a derivation of this
fact at the level of deligne cohomology is also given in [25].)

thus, the reader might naively be led to suspect that an equivariant gerbe on a space
m is equivalent to an equivariant bundle on lm. unfortunately, this is not quite correct.
the essential diculty is that, in general, the map from n-gerbes on m to (n  1)-gerbes on
lm is a many-to-one map. for example, consider the map from principal u(1) bundles on
m to u(1)-valued functions on lm dened by wilson loops, as described at the beginning
of this section. specifying wilson loops about every loop on a manifold m (i.e., specifying
a u(1)-valued function on lm) does not uniquely determine a principal u(1) bundle with
connection.
instead, such a set of wilson loops only determines an equivalence class of
principal u(1) bundles with connection [26, prop. 1.12.3].

in the present situation, because a (1-)gerbe with connection on m can not be uniquely
determined by a principal u(1) bundle with connection on lm, we can not completely
describe equivariant gerbes with connection in terms of equivariant bundles with connection
on lm.

however, it is true that an equivariant structure on a gerbe with connection on m does
determine an equivariant structure on the corresponding bundle with connection on lm.
we shall merely outline the results. recall that an equivariant structure on a gerbe c with

27strictly speaking, to a (1-)gerbe with connective structure on m , we can assign a bundle on lm . a
curving on that connective structure can be used to dene a connection on the bundle on lm . see [6,
section 6.2] for more details. in this framework, gerbe maps become morphisms of principal bundles (more
generally, torsors) on lm , and gerbe maps related by invertible 2-arrows map to the same morphism of
principal bundles on lm .

73

connection is dened by a collection of gerbe maps

g : gc  c

and invertible 2-arrows

g1,g2 : g1g2 = g2  g

2g1  c

g1,g2

subject to various constraints. we shall let p denote the bundle with connection on lm
corresponding to the gerbe c on m. the gerbe maps g become bundle isomorphisms
g : gp  p , and the existence of invertible 2-arrows g1,g2 implies that g1g2 = g1  g
2g1,
which, recall from [2], denes an equivariant structure on the bundle p .

recall in [2] we pointed out that any equivariant structure on a bundle with connection
could be obtained from any other equivariant structure via a set of constant gauge transfor-
mations. in the present context, however, there is a slight subtlety. gauge transformations
of p on lm are determined by principal u(1) bundles with connection on m, that is, u(1)-
valued functions on lm. however, not all u(1)-valued functions on lm can be understood
in terms of wilson loops on bundles with connection on m. in fact, the only constant u(1)-
valued function on lm that can be understood in terms of wilson loops on bundles with
connection on m, is the trivial constant function that is the identity for all points on lm.
to see this fact, suppose that l is a principal u(1) bundle with connection on m with the
property that all wilson loops are equal to some (single) element of u(1), call it x. let
w () denote the value of the wilson loop about any loop , then it should be clear that

w (2) = w ()2

or, in other words, x = x2. but as x  u(1), the only way that this can be satised is if x is
the identity. thus, the only constant gauge transformations on lm that can be understood
as coming from bundles with connection on m are those that are identically the identity.

if lm is connected, then there is only one constant gauge transformation allowed between
equivariant structures on p  lm. from this the reader might incorrectly conclude that
this must mean that there can only be one equivariant structure on a gerbe with connection.
the problem with this argument is that the map from bundles (with connection) on m to
functions on lm is a many-to-one map. at the level of the loop space lm, there is only
one equivariant structure; however, there are actually multiple equivariant structures on the
gerbe on m, all of which map to the same equivariant structure on the bundle p on lm.

to classify equivariant structures on a gerbe with connection, we must return to the
analysis of the previous section. in passing, however, there is one slight additional bit of
insight that can be gained from thinking in terms of loop spaces. we argued that on lm, for
lm connected, there was only one equivariant structure on the bundle p ; any other diered
from it by a constant gauge transformation on lm. however, specifying a constant gauge
transformation on lm only determines an equivalence class of bundles with connection on

74

m. in the previous section, we found that equivariant structures on a gerbe with connection
on m were determined by a set of isomorphisms of (trivial) bundles with (trivial) connection;
here we see that these isomorphisms must preserve the trivial connection, and so must be
constant, in order to remain within the equivalence class determined by the trivial constant
gauge transformation on lm. this sheds some light on the constraints on these isomorphisms
determined in the previous section.

in general, lm has one component for each element of 1(m). dierences between
equivariant structures on a bundle with connection on a non-simply-connected space are not
described by constant gauge transformations, but rather by locally constant gauge transfor-
mations. these degrees of freedom correspond to taking the bundles tg with connection to
be at, but nontrivial.

9 conclusions

in this paper we have accomplished two things. first, we have given a thorough review
of gerbes in terms of stacks, at a relatively basic level (i.e., without using the language of
sites). second, we have discussed the classication of equivariant structures on (1-)gerbes
with connection, and proven that in general the set of such equivariant structures is a torsor
under a group that includes h 2(, u(1)), as claimed in [2], providing a simple geometric
understanding of discrete torsion.

10 acknowledgements

we would like to thank p. aspinwall, d. freed, a. knutson, d. morrison, and r. plesser for
useful conversations.

references

[1] c. vafa, modular invariance and discrete torsion on orbifolds, nucl. phys. b273

(1986) 592-606.

[2] e. sharpe, discrete torsion and gerbes i, hep-th/9909108.

[3] e. sharpe, discrete torsion, to appear.

75

[4] n. hitchin, lectures on special lagrangian submanifolds, math.dg/9907034, and lec-
tures given at the harvard winter school on vector bundles, lagrangian submanifolds,
and mirror symmetry, january 1999.

[5] d. chatterjee, on the construction of abelian gerbs, ph.d. thesis, cambridge uni-

versity, 1998.

[6] j. l. brylinski, loop spaces, characteristic classes and geometric quantization,

birkhauser, boston, 1993.

[7] j.-l. brylinski and d. a. mclaughlin, the geometry of degree-four characteristic

classes and of line bundles on loop spaces i, duke math. j. 75 (1994) 603-638.

[8] j. giraud, cohomologie non abelienne, springer-verlag, berlin, 1971.

[9] a. grothendieck, revetements etale et groupe fondamental, sga 1, lecture notes in

math. 224, springer-verlag, berlin, 1971.

[10] l. breen, on the classication of 2-gerbes and 2-stacks, asterisque 225, societe

mathematique de france, 1994.

[11] d. freed, higher algebraic structures and quantization, comm. math. phys. 159

(1994) 343-398, hep-th/9212115.

[12] m. murray, bundle gerbes, j. london math. soc. (2) 54 (1996) 403-416,

dg-ga/9407015.

[13] a. carey, m. murray, and b. wang, higher bundle gerbes and cohomology classes in

gauge theories, j. geom. phys. 21 (1997) 183-197, hep-th/9511169.

[14] a. grothendieck, technique de descente et theor`emes dexistence en geometrie
algebrique, i. generalites. descente par morphismes d`element plats, seminaire bour-
baki 190.

[15] m. artin, grothendieck topologies, harvard university, 1962.

[16] d. mumford, picard groups of moduli problems, in arithmetical algebraic geometry,

ed. by o. f. g. schilling, harper & row, new york, 1965.

[17] d. husemoller, fibre bundles, third edition, springer-verlag, new york, 1966, 1994.

[18] h. b. lawson and m.-l. michelsohn, spin geometry, princeton university press,

princeton, 1989.

[19] d. eisenbud and j. harris, schemes: the language of algebraic geometry, wadsworth

& brooks, pacic grove, california, 1992.

[20] r. dijkgraaf, the mathematics of vebranes, hep-th/9810157.

76

[21] p. deligne, j. milne, a. ogus, and k. shih, hodge cycles, motives, and shimura

varieties, lecture notes in math. 900, springer-verlag, berlin, 1982.

[22] p. griths and j. harris, principles of algebraic geometry, john wiley & sons, new

york, 1978.

[23] b. iversen, lectures on torsors and divisors, aarhus universitet lecture notes series

56, 1986.

[24] s. mac lane and i. moerdijk, sheaves in geometry and logic, springer-verlag, new

york, 1992.

[25] k. ga wedzki, topological actions in two-dimensional quantum eld theories, pp.
101-141 in nonperturbative quantum field theory, ed. by g. t hooft, a. jae,
g. mack, p. k. mitter, and r. stora, nato asi series vol. 185, plenum press, new
york, 1988.

[26] b. kostant, quantization and unitary representations, pp. 87-208 of lectures in
modern analysis and applications iii, r. m. dudley et al, lecture notes in math.
170, springer-verlag, berlin, 1970.

77

