9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
8

 

 
 

1
v
6
4
0
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

lth-456

three loop renormalization of the su (nc) non-abelian thirring

model

j.f. bennett & j.a. gracey,
theoretical physics division,

department of mathematical sciences,

university of liverpool,

peach street,

liverpool,
l69 7zf,

united kingdom.

abstract. we renormalize to three loops a version of the thirring model where the fermion
elds not only lie in the fundamental representation of a non-abelian colour group su (nc) but
also depend on the number of avours, nf . the model is not multiplicatively renormalizable
in dimensional regularization due to the generation of evanescent operators which emerge at
each loop order. their eect in the construction of the true wave function, mass and coupling
constant renormalization constants is handled by considering the projection technique to a new
order. having constructed the ms renormalization group functions we consider other massless
independent renormalization schemes to ensure that the renormalization is consistent with the
equivalence of the non-abelian thirring model with other models with a four-fermi interaction.
one feature to emerge from the computation is the establishment of the fact that the su (nf )
gross neveu model is not multiplicatively renormalizable in dimensional regularization. an
evanescent operator arises rst at three loops and we determine its associated renormalization
constant explicitly.

1

1

introduction.

models with a four-fermi interaction have played an important role in exploring fundamental
properties of physical quantum eld theories. for example, the two dimensional o(n ) gross
neveu model, [1], is similar to qcd in that it is asymptotically free. another two dimensional
four-fermi theory which shares similar properties to the gross neveu model is the thirring model
with a non-abelian symmetry, [2]. it too is asymptotically free and additionally is more closely
related to qcd itself. for instance, when the fermion elds of the non-abelian thirring model,
(natm), have the same quantum numbers as the quarks of qcd, with nf avour dependence
in addition to being in the fundamental representation of the colour group, it has been argued
that it is equivalent to qcd in the large nf limit, [3]. more precisely, hasenfratz and hasenfratz
demonstrated that by taking the natm in its d-dimensional extension then integrating over the
leading quark loops which dominate when nf is large, the usual three and four gluon vertices
of qcd are recovered as one approaches four dimensions. moreover, graphs with a quark loop
and ve or more external gluon legs were shown to be irrelevant in the four dimensional limit
when nf was large, [3]. this equivalence can be understood better in the context of the critical
point renormalization group. in eect one has a xed point equivalence between qcd and the
natm at the d-dimensional wilson-fisher xed point of qcd which is completely analogous
to the d-dimensional equivalence at the wilson-fisher xed point of o(n ) 4 theory and the
two dimensional o(n )  model both treated in d-dimensions. this underlying d-dimensional
property of qcd has been exploited in the large nf expansion to compute o(1/nf ) corrections to
various renormalization group functions in the natm in d-dimensions, [4, 5, 6]. more recently,
results have also been determined at o(1/n 2
f ), [7]. as the natm is equivalent to qcd then
the information contained in these scheme independent critical exponents also relate to the
perturbation theory of qcd. the calculational advantage of using the natm is the absence
of the graphs with gluon self interactions which substantially reduces the number of feynman
diagrams which need to be computed. given this intriguing connection between the natm and
qcd it is important to understand the quantum and renormalization properties of the former
theory in more detail. for instance, in qcd the four loop -function and mass anomalous
dimensions have recently been determined in ms in [8, 9]. these built on the earlier loop
calculations of [10, 11, 12, 13]. however, the situation in the natm is unfortunately not as
advanced. the model has only been renormalized to two loops, [14, 15]. therefore, we have
undertaken to renormalize the natm at three loops which is the main topic of this article.
moreover, it is worth emphasising that aside from the qcd connection the two dimensional
natm deserves study in its own right given its rich structure and connection with integrability.
indeed the computation of s-matrix elements is closely connected with the latter property and
their computation in perturbation theory can only proceed when the model has been rendered
nite.

as will become clear in the discussion, however, performing the renormalization is a highly
non-trivial exercise. unlike the majority of useful quantum eld theories the natm is not
multiplicatively renormalizable in dimensional regularization,
[15]. though the original two
loop calculation of [14] was performed in strictly two dimensions using a cuto regularization,
it does not seem appropriate to us for technical reasons to develop that regularization for a
three loop calculation. further, dimensional regularization is widely used and has been applied
to the renormalization of four-fermi theories before at three loops in [16, 17, 18, 19]. the
lack of multiplicative renormalizability is manifested by the generation of extra operators in
d-dimensions which do not have counterterms available from the original interactions. however,
they dier from the generation of non-renormalizable terms in a theory by the fact that they
exist only in d-dimensions and vanish in the limit to two dimensions. hence, they are accorded

2

the name of evanescent operators. as such they aect the extraction of the true renormalization
group functions which is a problem we address in the three loop calculation. this absence of
multiplicative renormalizability in thirring like models has already been recognized in the work
of [15, 20, 21, 22] upon which a lot of our calculation is founded. though in [15] the natm was
only discussed at the level of the two loop -function and anomalous dimension, whilst [21, 22]
extended the wave function renormalization to three loops. these papers were important for our
determination of the -function, anomalous dimension and mass anomalous dimension at three
loops, which is our central aim. due to these technical reasons, which will be explicitly detailed
later, we concentrate on presenting a comprehensive discussion on the full renormalization of
the natm. moreover, due to the nature of the renormalization we have also found it necessary
to comprehensively study a variety of mass independent renormalization schemes, aside from
the widely used ms scheme, to ensure consistency from other considerations, [15, 21, 22]. this
is guided very much by the fact that in two dimensions thirring models are equivalent by, for
instance fierz rearrangements, to other four-fermi models such as the gross neveu model for
certain values of nf and nc. these properties need to be preserved in the quantum theory.

the paper is organised as follows. the basic properties and relevant formalism is reviewed
in section 2 in the context of the known renormalization of several two dimensional four-fermi
models. the fundamental calculational details are discussed in section 3 prior to its application
rst to the gross neveu model with an su (nf ) symmetry in section 4. here we reproduce the
known three loop ms renormalization group functions prior to presenting the detailed renor-
malizion of the the natm in the ms scheme in sections 5 and 6. we discuss the relation of
these results to other renormalization schemes in section 7 before providing our conclusions in
section 8. various results relevant to the main discussion are provided in an appendix.

2 preliminaries.

the form of the lagrangian for the natm which we will use is

lnatm = i ii /ii  m ii ii +

g

2 (cid:16) ii t a

ij ij(cid:17)2

(2.1)

where we take dirac fermions ii with an su (nf ) internal symmetry, 1  i  nf , living in the
fundamental representation of the colour group su (nc), 1  i  nc. the generators of su (nc)
are t a with 1  a  (n 2

c  1) satisfying the lie algebra

[t a, t b] = if abct c

(2.2)

where f abc are the usual structure constants. with these denitions the fermion eld is endowed
with the same structure as quark elds in qcd. the more astute reader will have observed
that the sign of the coupling constant, g, is opposite to the normal convention. one reason for
this resides in the relation the interaction has with the gross neveu model which we discuss
presently. thus in its present form (2.1) will not be asymptotically free. for the major part of
the calculation the issue is one of performing the renormalization of the model and we will be
able to restore the correct convention by the change g =   at the end. although the main
focus will indeed be on the natm, the calculation will run in parallel with a similar calculation
in the su (nf ) gross neveu model, [1]. there are various reasons for this. first, each possesses
a four-fermi interaction with the dierence residing in the presence of additional lorentz and
colour group structure in the former case. more concretely, its lagrangian with the same fermion
denitions is

lgn = i i/i  m ii +

( ii)2

(2.3)

g
2

3

where, with this choice of coupling constant sign convention, the model is asymptotically free.
therefore, the integration rules for the feynman integrals are the same in each case which will
provide us with a useful cross-check on calculations in the natm. in other words, since the
d-dimensional values of the gross neveu graphs are known to three loops, [18], ensuring that
these are rst reproduced exactly gives us condence that the integration routines we use are
correct. second, for various values of the parameters of each model the theories are equivalent.
these and other equivalences for the most general two dimensional four-fermi interaction have
been summarized in [15]. here we recall two which are relevant for this article. first, the abelian
limit of (2.1) gives the abelian thirring model, (abtm), which has the lagrangian

labtm = i i/i  m ii +

( ii)2 .

g
2

when nf = 1 one can show by fierz rearrangement that

( )2 =  2( )2 .

(2.4)

(2.5)

therefore, the nf = 1 abelian thirring model is classically equivalent to the nf = 1 gross
neveu model. assuming that this is also valid in the quantum theory, [15, 20], means that the
renormalization group functions have to be the same for nf = 1. moreover, ensuring that this
is the case is tantamount to preserving the ward identities which lurk within the quantum eld
theory. a second equivalence exists between the nf = 3 gross neveu model and the nf = 4
non-abelian thirring model which was discussed in [15]. again we will assume that this is a
property of the renormalization group functions.

indeed in this context it is worth recording the renormalization group functions as they stand
prior to this work for each model. although we have dened our model as having an su (nc)
colour group, the 2-loop -function and anomalous dimensions are available for the model with
a classical lie group, [2, 14]. in our notation, these are

and

(g) =

c2(g)g2

2

+

t (r)nf c2(g)g3

22

+ o(g4)

(g) = 

c2(r)t (r)nf g2

22

+ o(g3)

(2.6)

(2.7)

where we recall that to this order the -function is scheme independent and the anomalous
dimension, (g), is in the ms scheme. for reasons which we explain later, we will concentrate
on the group su (nc) whose casimirs are

c2(r) =

(n 2

c  1)
2nc

, c2(g) = nc

, t (r) =

1
2

.

(2.8)

however, the abelian limit is dened when the renormalization group functions are expressed in
terms of the casimirs of a general classical lie group, by setting

c2(r)  1 , c2(g)  0 ,

t (r)  1 .

(2.9)

(for more insight into the relation between the abelian limit of a non-abelian theory, see [23]).
hence, the abelian thirring model renormalization group functions are quite simply

(g) = o(g4)

,

(g) = 

nf g2
22 + o(g3) .

(2.10)

4

it is worth noting that there exist several all orders results for these renormalization group
functions, [24]. these are

(g) = 0 ,

(g) = 

nf g2

22(1  nf g/)

.

(2.11)

a similar formula for the -function of the natm when nf = 1 has been deduced in [25]. for
the gross neveu model the renormalization group functions have been computed to two loops
in [1, 16] and to three loops in ms in [17, 18, 19] as

(g) = 

(g) = 

m(g) = 

(nf  1)g2



(2nf  1)g2

82

(2nf  1)g

2

+

+

+

(nf  1)g3

22

+

(2nf  1)(nf  1)g3

163

(2nf  1)g2

82

+

(2nf  7)(nf  1)g4

163

+ o(g4)

+ o(g5)

(2.12)

(2.13)

(4nf  3)(2nf  1)g3

323

+ o(g4)

(2.14)

for an su (nf ) internal symmetry. (we note that the results of [17, 18] corresponded to a gross
neveu model with majorana fermions in an o(nf ) symmetry group. for an even value of this
nf one can complexify the fermions to ensure they lie in su (nf ).) setting nc = 4 and nf = 1
in (2.6) and (2.7), we nd

(g) =

2g2


+

g3
2 + o(g4)

,

(g) = 

15g2
322 + o(g3)

and nf = 3 in (2.13), we have to two loops

(g) = 

2g2


+

g3
2 + o(g4)

,

(g) = 

5g2
82 + o(g3)

(2.15)

(2.16)

which makes explicit the earlier equivalence after accounting for the relative minus sign in the
coupling constant denitions. the apparent non-equality between both expressions for (g) is
accounted for by the realisation that we are comparing the anomalous dimensions in models
with four and three elds respectively.

it is worth commenting on the role of the mass term in each of (2.1) and (2.3). strictly its
presence breaks the continuous chiral symmetry possessed by each model, [1]. though in the
case of the gross neveu model, which is the same as a model with an o(2nf ) symmetry, it has a
discrete chiral invariance. therefore, the equivalences we discussed above will only be assumed
to hold in the massless case. however, if one is considering perturbative calculations in this
instance one inevitably will encounter infrared divergences. these can be regularized by using
a modied or eective fermion propagator as discussed in [15] which is

ip/

(p2  m2)

.

(2.17)

in this case m is not a parameter of the original theory and does not enter the corresponding
renormalization group equation.
indeed the origin of m in the denominator is not from the
lagrangian but put by hand into the feynman integrals which result from a purely massless
propagator. for technical reasons concerned with checking the construction of the renormal-
ization group functions in a consistent way for various schemes in this case, we will need the
full renormalization group equation for the massive model. therefore, we have performed the
renormalization of each model in two separate cases. one which we refer to as the massless
natm, where the propagator (2.17) is used and another where the propagator is

i(p/ + m)
(p2  m2)

5

(2.18)

which we will refer to as the massive natm. in this latter case m is treated as a parameter of
the theory since (2.18) follows from (2.1) and it will appear in the full renormalization group
equation. the feynman diagrams will of course be the same for each case.

the ultraviolet innities will be regularized by using dimensional regularization.

in this
approach the dimension of spacetime is taken to be d = 2   where  is small. integrals are
performed in d-dimensions with the poles in  absorbed into the appropriate renormalization
constants. however,
in this analytic continuation the -algebra requires special treatment,
[26, 27, 15, 21, 22] which we briey recall. in d-dimensions the set of products of -matrices
dened by

12...n
(n)

= [12 . . . n]

(2.19)

where [. . .] denotes total antisymmetry, form a complete basis in the spinor space, [26]. clearly
this space is innite dimensional, only becoming nite when d is restricted to a positive integer.
therefore, in dimensional regularization of theories with fermions one, in principle, ought to
decompose all -strings into this basis. for theories, such as qcd, the nature of the interaction
and its ultraviolet structure ensures that the higher (n) do not arise, [21]. the situation
for two dimensional four-fermi theories is dierent in that interactions of the form ( (n))2
will be generated in the renormalization. one consequence of this is that the theory is not
multiplicatively renormalizable in principle and to extract the correct renormalization group
functions requires care. we remark that this is a feature of dimensional regularization and if
one were, for example, to use a cuto in strictly two dimensions, the generation of these extra
interactions would not arise. these are the evanescent operators we referred to earlier. in the
context of the abtm their presence has been noted before in [15, 21, 22] and the most general
(abelian) scenario discussed in [15, 20]. in both instances the analysis has been to two loops,
though in [22] the consequences for the three loop wave function renormalization were also
discussed. as an aside we remark that whilst the three loop gross neveu model renormalization
has been performed, primarily to deduce the renormalization group functions at this order, the
issue of whether evanescent operators are generated in this model had not been resolved, [18, 19].
that they do not at two loops has already been established. though it was noted in [22] that
their generation at three loops only aects the form of the four loop renormalization group
functions. as our goal is the full three loop renormalization of (2.1) we need to take account of
the subtlety of the evanescent operators presence. therefore, we recall the important features
of the earlier explicit analysis of [15]. at the outset one can acknowledge the existence of such
operators by including them in the most general possible lagrangian, each with its own coupling.
to make this more concrete we will focus for the moment on the abtm before remarking on
the natm later. in this instance, the d-dimensional lagrangian (2.4) now becomes

labtm = i i/i  m ii +

1
2



x=0

g(cid:16) i1

()

i(cid:17)2

(2.20)

where all the elds and parameters are bare and g are the couplings of all the possible four-
fermi operators. for notational purposes in general discussion, we will use roman letters to
refer to only evanescent operators and distinguish the coupling of the original operator by g.
thus for the abtm we take g1  g and setting gk = 0 one recovers the original lagrangian,
(2.4). moreover, when we consider the renormalization group functions for the model with an
innite number of couplings, we introduce the convention that if the argument of a function is
the original coupling g, then it means that it corresponds to a renormalization group function
evaluated in the case that gk = 0, for all k. greek indices will correspond to both original and
evanescent couplings and the letters  and k will be reserved for dummy indices in sums for the
respective cases.

6

if, for the moment, we assume that the practical task of computing the greens functions to
some order has been achieved, then the renormalized parameters of (2.20) can be deduced with
respect to some renormalization scheme. so, for instance, the renormalized couplings will be
a function of  and a nite number of other couplings. therefore, the resulting -function for
each coupling will depend on the others. ordinarily in a theory with more than one coupling
this is the standard method. however, since the couplings gk correspond to operators which do
not exist in the limit d  2, one might navely believe that one can recover the renormalization
group functions of the theory by setting gk = 0. the resulting -function of the coupling g,
however, will not correspond to the true -function of the theory. to understand this, it is
best to consider the underlying renormalization group equation of the general model, (2.20).
for a renormalized n-point greens function g(n)(p, m, , g) where p represents the external
momenta and  is a mass scale introduced to ensure the coupling constant remains dimensionless
in d-dimensions, it satises, in our conventions,

"




+



x=0

()(g)


g

+ m(g)m


m

+

n
2

(g)# g(n)(p, m, , g) = 0

(2.21)

where ()(g) are the nave -functions of the theory and (g) is the nave anomalous dimen-
sion. in terms of the respective renormalization constants, z and z(), these are dened to
be

ln z()

,

(g) = 

ln z .

(2.22)

()(g) = g 







(our convention for the (g) term of (2.21) is consistent with the denition of the perturbative
functions, (2.10).) by considering the nature of feynman diagrams, it is simple to observe that
in the limit gk  0, that the nave evanescent -functions do not vanish. therefore there will be
a remnant contribution in (2.21) in this limit, which would contribute to the true renormalization
group functions, which satisfy




(cid:20)

+ (g)


g

+ m(g)m


m

+

n
2

(g)(cid:21) g(n)(p, m, , g) = 0

(2.23)

where g(n)(p, m, , g) now corresponds to a nite n-point greens function in strictly two di-
mensions. in other words, the eect and contributions from the evanescent operators in higher
loop corrections are not properly decoupled in the nave -function, (g). before reviewing how
to do this we note our calculational strategy in light of the above remarks. clearly there are
two avenues of computation. the rst of these is to take the most general lagrangian with
evanescent couplings truncated at the appropriate order which is dictated by the number of
loops the renormalization will be performed for. one then carries this out, computing the nave
renormalization group functions before proceeding to the extraction of the true renormalization
group functions. however, it is clear that this will necessitate a huge amount of calculation since
gk 6= 0. since at the end of the computation the evanescent couplings will be unimportant, this
provides us with the second approach which is the one we follow. we set gk = 0 at the outset.
this reduces the amount of calculation from the point of view of feynman diagrams but we
will still be able to deduce the nave functions (g) and (g) which will now only depend on
g. the procedure is to begin with the bare operator with a bare coupling g and perform the
one loop renormalization of the 2 and 4-point greens functions. this will generate one or more
evanescent operators whose coupling will be o(g2). to perform the two loop renormalization,
the lagrangian with these new operators is used with the evanescent operators being treated
as if they were vertices in the original theory. these newly generated vertices at this order are
included in the subsequent greens functions and so on.

7

the correct renormalization group functions in the chosen renormalization scheme are re-
covered by applying the projection technique of [28] and discussed in the four-fermi context
in [15, 20].
it is based on the observation that the insertion of an evanescent operator in a
greens function is not independent of the insertion of the relevant or physical operators in the
same greens function. more concretely, if we denote an operator by o and its normal ordered
version by n [o], [29], then within the context of a greens function

z ddx n [ok] = z ddx(cid:16) (k)(g)n [i /  m  + 2go1]

 (k)

m (g) n [m ] + c (k)(g)n [o1](cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)gi=0 d=2

(2.24)

2 ( ())2 and (k)(g), (k)

m (g) and c (k)(g) are the general projection
where we take o = 1
functions which will be computed order by order in perturbation theory. to do this one inserts an
evanescent operator in either a 2 or 4-point greens function and calculates it to the appropriate
loop order. in general this greens function with the operator insertion will be divergent, but
one absorbs the regularized innity into the composite operator renormalization constant which
is available, with respect to the renormalization scheme being used. after renormalization one
expresses this greens function in two dimensions with gk = 0. the result will be non-zero.
this exercise is repeated for the insertion of each of the operators of the right side of (2.24) and
the nite value after renormalization is then used to determine the projection functions (k)(g),
(k)
m (g) and c (k)(g) perturbatively, [15]. the practicalities of this procedure will be claried
later when the explicit calculations are performed. therefore, these projection functions are a
measure of the presence of the evanescent operators in the appropriate greens functions. if one
now considers the action, s, of the theory (2.4),

then it is simple to deduce, [15],

s = z d2x labtm



s


= z ddx  (g)n "i /  m  + 2
x=0

 m(g) n [m ] +



go#



x=0

()(g)n [o]! .

(2.25)

(2.26)

however, substituting for the relation of the evanescent operators to the physical ones, results
in the simple relations, [15],



c (k)(g) (k)(g)

(k)(g) (k)(g)

(g) = (g) +

(g) = (g) +

m(g) = m(g) +



xk=0
xk=0
xk=0



m (g) (k)(g)
(k)

(2.27)

from the realisation that the action of relevant operators obeys



s


= z ddx(cid:18) (g)n [i /  m  + 2go1]  m(g) n [m ] + (g)n [o1](cid:19) . (2.28)

following this procedure allows us to properly account for the evanescent operator problem. a
similar reasoning, which we also found instructive in understanding the renormalization, arises

8

in the renormalization of the two dimensional wess-zumino-witten model, [30, 31]. there
the evanescent operator which is generated occurs in the 2-point function and its presence can
be properly accounted for in the construction of the renormalization group functions to three
loops. the issue of evanescent operators in the context of renormalization has also been studied
in [32, 33].

although we have concentrated on the massive models in the above, one can easily recover the
massless case by setting m = 0 in the appropriate equations. further, we have only considered
the abtm, since it is simpler than the non-abelian case. for the natm, the procedure is
exactly the same. the only dierence being that we have to account for the presence of the
generator t a. for a general colour group there appears to be no simple way of proceeding.
indeed a systematic study of group theory for general classical and exceptional lie groups in the
context of multiloop calculations has been provided in [34] which illustrates the deep complexity
of the problem. instead we follow the cvitanovic procedure, [35], and restrict ourselves to the
colour group su (nc). for this group the generators satisfy

t a
ij t a

kl =

1

2 (cid:20)ilkj 

1
nc

ij kl(cid:21)

(2.29)

which means that for each (n) there are two possible evanescent operators. moreover, it will
lead to a substantial simplication in the computation where we use (2.29) to decompose the
interaction of (2.1). after completing the calculation at each loop order, we then reconstruct
the generator products. however, the full colour basis requires the inclusion of the identity i  i
as well as t a  t a for completeness. therefore, we take as the generalized lagrangian

l = i ii /ii  m ii ii +

1
2



x=0(cid:20)g0(cid:16) ii ()ij ij(cid:17)2

+ g1(cid:16) ii ()t a

ij ij(cid:17)2(cid:21) (2.30)

where the second subscript in the evanescent coupling counts the number of generators. for the
natm, we now reserve g  g11 for the coupling of the physical operator, with the projection
functions now denoted by (ki)(g), (ki)
m (g) and c (ki)(g) with i = 0 or 1. although we have
now explicitly specied su (nc) one can reconstruct the colour group casimirs for an arbitrary
classical lie group at the end of the renormalization group function calculation by applying the
results (2.8) where t (r) always accompanies one power of nf . one issue which might arise with
this is the appearance of casimirs other than products of (2.8). from the nature of the feynman
diagrams, it is easy to convince oneself that new casimirs, such as those which appeared at four
loops in the ms -function and quark mass anomalous dimensions in qcd, [8, 9], will not occur
at three loops in the natm.

3 calculational details.

we now turn to a discussion of the technical aspects of the algorithm used to carry out the full
three loop renormalization of (2.1). we performed the calculation by a semi-automatic symbolic
manipulation method using several languages and packages. for instance, the feynman diagrams
were generated using the package qgraf, [36], and then encoded in the language form, [37],
as it was the most favourable package to perform the tedious amounts of algebra associated
with the -matrices which we now discuss in detail. the advantage of using such packages
can be fully understood from the nature of the problem we have already discussed. we are
primarily interested in the structure of the gross neveu and natm and to a lesser extent the
abtm. our programmes are organised such that the graphs are encoded with a general vertex
function carrying all the necessary lorentz, spinor and group indices. one then species the

9

model by calling the routine which substitutes for the vertex peculiar to that model. this degree
of exibility has been fundamental in checking the results for the gross neveu model which is
taken as the basic reference point. for any topology the evanescent vertex operator can also be
implemented by using the same encoding for that topology but with the basic vertex replaced
by the evanescent operator feynman rule. this ensures that no graphs are accidentally omitted.
for completeness we record the structure of the feynman rules we have used for the vertices in
each model in addition to (2.17,2.18). for the gross neveu model the basic interaction of (2.3)
leads to the feynman rule

 labelled anti-clockwise. whilst the natm has the feynman

  ilkj 

 i
  

ighij kl 
  
 , kk

and ll
 ,



ji t a

lk  
 



   ilkjt a

li t a

jk 
 

(3.1)

(3.2)

(3.3)

(3.4)

(3.5)

, k
for external elds i
rule for the set of elds, ii

and for the evanescent vertices

, j

 and l
 , jj
ighij klt a
ighijklji lk
ighijklt a

jit a

lk 

and

the abelian limit of the original vertex is





  i
 i
(n)  (n) 
 i .
(n)  (n) 





(n)  (n) 

  ilkjli jk 



(n)  (n) 

  ilkjt a

li t a

jk

ighij kl 

 



   ilkj 
 



  i .

to appreciate the initial problems with the -matrices, we recall that each propagator has
one -matrix whilst for the natm each basic vertex contributes two more -matrices. thus
for any three loop topology there are at most fourteen -matrices. for the massive model each
topology will also involve sums of less numbers of -matrices as well. from the fact that there are
four free spinor indices the overall result will be the tensor product of two -strings. given the
nature of the vertex the two extremes of this tensor product will take the form 1    13  1
and 1    7  1    7 where the nature of the explicit contractions are not important for
the present illustration. as we need to re-express the nal value for the integral after integration
in terms of the (n)-basis we need to have a systematic way of reducing these strings to products
of the form 1    r  1    r , r  7. in the two extreme cases there are no free lorentz
indices on the strings. for the former it is clear that the string of thirteen -matrices will
have six pairs of contracted indices. in the latter if there is a pair of contracted indices in one
string then there will be a pair in the other string also contracted. otherwise the contractions
are across the tensor product. in general, rules for the treatment of the (n)-basis have been
developed, [27], and then applied to the three loop 2-point function, [21, 22]. we have not used
the majority of these as they prove too cumbersome to implement symbolically. instead we used
a minimal number of their properties in addition to the d-dimensional cliord algebra

{,  } = 2 .

(3.6)

our algorithm was based on (3.6) to shue contracted s together via, for example,

1 . . . n . . . =  1 . . . n . . . + 2n1 . . . n1 . . .

.

(3.7)

then contracted pairs were removed with the usual simple identities

  =  (d  2)

  = (d  4)  + 4

 =  (d  6)   4 + 4  4 .

(3.8)

(3.9)

(3.10)

10

this process was repeated until one was left with tensorial -strings which only had lorentz
contractions across the tensor product. at this point we decomposed each -string into its (n)
basis, which requires inverting the simple denition, (2.19). this is achieved as follows by using
the lemmas, [15, 27],

1...n
(n)

 = 1...n

(n+1) +

1...n

(n)

= 1...n

(n+1) +

beginning with the product

(1)nr r  1...r1r+1...n

(n1)

(1)r1 r 1...r1r+1...n

(n1)

n

n

xr=1
xr=1

(1)

(3.11)

.

(3.12)

(3.13)

we evaluate it in two ways. one way, of course, is simple in that 
(1)   and thus the
expression is a string of two ordinary -matrices, . however, using the lemma once this is
equivalent to


(2) +  (0)

(3.14)

where (0) carries only spinor indices. it is easy to observe that this method is iterative. be-
ginning now with 
(1)  and multiplying (3.14) by  and applying (3.12) gives the relation
between 
(3) and  and so on. moreover, the iteration is trivial to implement symbolically
and the output converted into the appropriate substitution routine. once in this (n)-basis any
spinor trace which is left can be carried out by noting that

tr (n) = 0 for n 6= 0

(3.15)

and tr (0) = 2. in practice, though, the performance is more ecient if we take traces at an
earlier point.

although this completes the algorithm for performing the -algebra of the basic three loop
graphs, the generation of the evanescent operators means that when they are substituted into
feynman diagrams the presence of (n) for n 6= 1 needs to be handled. first, one could decompose
each (n) via (2.19), and then use the above algorithm to reconvert into the (n) basis after loop
integration. however, this is not ecient, especially when one is dealing with the decomposition
of (5) since it will involve 120 terms which with its tensor partner is beginning to generate a
sizeable number of terms before one considers the number of feynman diagrams for a topology
or indeed the number of vertices in each. the more ecient way to proceed is to exploit another
(n) identity which contains the rst equation of (3.10) as a simple case. it is, [15, 27],

1...n
(n)

1...n
(m) (n)

1...n = f (n, m)1...n

(m)

where

f (n, m) = (1)nm(1)n(n1)/2 n

(3.16)

.

(3.17)

un h(1 + u)dm(1  u)mi(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)u=0

at the outset any diagram involving the inclusion of an evanescent operator will be a mix of
(n) and ordinary s. the latter, however, are decomposed into (n)s by the earlier algorithm
before (3.16) is applied at the end. having ensured that the -algebra can be handled in terms
of the basis (n) we note that the most general set of 4-fermi operators covering the natm is

1

2(cid:16) ii ij (n)ij(cid:17)2

,

1

2(cid:16) ii (n)t a

ij ij(cid:17)2

.

(3.18)

we note that this relation appears in both [27] and [21]. in [21] there appears to be a minor typographical
error in a phase factor in the rst equations of (a.1.2) and (a.1.3). the correct factor, which we have used, ought
to be m and not k which can be readily checked by evaluating special cases of m and n.

11

one recovers this basis in practical terms by inverting (2.29) in conjunction with the spinor in-
ll i,
dices of the (n)s. for instance, if one is dealing with the four point function hii

then

jj kk



ilkj (n) 

 



(n)  = (cid:20)2t a

ij t a

lk +

ij kl

nc

(cid:21) (n) 

 



(n)  .

(3.19)

the other major part of the calculation is the integration of the feynman diagrams which
is based on the earlier papers of [17, 18], which we follow here. we will compute each of the 2-
point and 4-point functions in both the gross neveu model and natm (massive and massless).
the former will be at non-zero external momentum whilst for the 4-point function we will set
all external momenta to zero. this is another reason for the presence of a mass term which is
necessary to have a scale in the integrals. in [18] the diagrams were computed in d-dimensions
with the substitution d = 2   only being made at the end. we follow this source here primarily
so that we can check that each of our integral programmes gives the correct result in the gross
neveu model before applying to the natm. there is one complication though. in the gross
neveu model the vertex involves the spinor identity. therefore within a topology the -matrices
contracted with the momenta are adjacent. this simplied the gross neveu calculation as one
did not need to consider tensor feynman integrals. these, however, are necessary in the natm
and we have had to rework the results of [18] to determine the tensorial nature of the integrals
which arise for each topology. by way of illustration we recall that a typical integral is

i3zklq

(k2  m2)2((k  l)2  m2)(l2  m2)(q2  m2)2 .

kkklqq

the most general form that can be consistent with the integral structure is

 [x  + y  + z] .

(3.20)

(3.21)

however, by lorentz symmetry it is simple to deduce that x = y = z. hence the unknown
amplitude is readily deduced by contraction with the resulting integral determined from the
results in the appendix of [18]. it evaluates to

 [  +  + ](cid:20)i 2 +

(d + 3)

3

m2(0)(cid:21)

i

4d(d + 2)

.

(3.22)

throughout the computation two basic integrals emerge which are present in (3.22). the rst
is the simple tadpole result

which is divergent in two dimensions. the second term (0) is the zero momentum value of the
more general integral

where

j(p) = izk

1

(k2  m2)((k  p)2  m2)

.

we leave (0) unevaluated since it is connected to the issue of renormalizability. if we were
performing the calculation of the 4-point function at non-zero external momenta the function
(p) as well as other nite momentum dependent functions would emerge. for the theory to
be renormalizable such quantities must not appear in the full evaluation of the greens function
multiplied by poles in . if they did then they would correspond to some non-local counterterm
in the lagrangian which would not t the usual criteria for renormalizability.
it occurs in a

12

i = izk

1

(k2  m2)

(p) = izk

j(k2)

((k  p)2  m2)

(3.23)

(3.24)

(3.25)

subset of the two and three loop topologies. the appearance at two loops is as a nite term but
it will contribute at three loops when multiplied by a one loop counterterm. in [17, 18] their
cancellation to give a nite contribution in the full expression for the 2 and 4-point functions
was veried to ensure that the gross neveu model is renormalizable to three loops. we have
checked this again within the context of our semi-automatic calculation before verifying that
in the natm and abtm the sum of all (0)/ pieces yield a nite contribution as it ought
to, to preserve the usual renormalizability criteria at three loops. since we will be considering
non-minimal renormalization schemes in a later section we will require knowledge of the nite
parts in addition to the poles in . therefore we have been careful in the construction of all the
tensor integrals similar to (3.22) not to discard any d-dependence. in other words even though
say (d  2)2i 2 is clearly nite in two dimensions we have not omitted it from any amplitude in
the tensor decomposition.

figure 1: one and two loop topologies for the 2-point function.

figure 2: three loop topologies for the 2-point function.

finally, we recall that the topologies for the various diagrams can be readily constructed.
to three loops the basic ones for the 2-point function are given in gures 1 and 2. we have not
labelled the graphs with arrows for the charge ow as to include all possibilites would increase
the number of graphs signicantly. suce to say that at one and two loops there are a total of
24 graphs for the 2-point function and at three loops a total of 7 graphs. for the 4-point function
the topologies are illustrated in gures 3, 4 and 5. in these cases there are more graphs due
to the existence of various scattering channels which are not illustrated. in total there are 196
one and two loop graphs and 213 three loop graphs. for both greens function these gures for
one and two loops take into account the contributions from diagrams with 2-point counterterms
and evanescent vertices. we have not counted as separate those graphs generated by the vertex
counterterm.

4 gross neveu model.

before considering the renormalization of the natm in detail we address the multiplicative
renormalizability issue of the gross neveu model. in constructing our algorithm we have been

13

careful to check that the d-dimensional expression for each set of graphs contributing to the
same topology agree with those given in [18]. although that calculation was carried out for
the model with o(nf ) majorana fermions, the observation that su (nf ) = o(2nf ) allows us to
compare the results. moreover, the comparison is made only for the (0)  (0) type vertex.
in [18] and [19] it was assumed that there were no other structures available which had not
been justied. however, if new divergent structures did appear at three loops, they would not
invalidate the three loop ms renormalization group functions computed in [17, 18, 19]. with the
machinery of the (n)-basis now available we have recomputed the full 4-point greens function
in the su (nf ) gross neveu model. it turns out that at three loops several topologies give rise
to non-zero contributions involving (3)  (3) both for the massive and massless models. it
could, of course, be the case that their sum is nite in two dimensions. however, we rst record
the values of the (3)  (3) part of the contributing graphs as

g41(o3) =

i 3g4

g45(o3) = 

, g42(o3) = 

i 3g4
6d

, g44(o3) =

(3d  4)i 3g4
12d(d  1)2

, g46(o3) = 

(3d  4)i 3g4
6d(d  1)2

, g47(o3) =

i 3g4

3d(d  1)

(4.1)

4
i 3g4
2d

where the subscripts correspond to the graphs of gure 4. it is worth observing that these extra

figure 3: one and two loop topologies for the 4-point function.

contributions in the (3)  (3) sector only arise in those diagrams with vertex subgraphs. it is
easy to sum the contributions of the graphs to nd the total is

g(4)(o3) =

(3d  2)(d  2)2i 3g4

12d(d  1)2

(4.2)

which possesses a simple pole in . therefore, we need to include an extra set of evanescent
operator counterterms in the original lagrangian, (2.3), which involved only bare elds and
parameters. so, if the bare lagrangian is

lgn = i i

0/i

0  m0 i

0i

0 + 1

2 g0( i

0i

0)2

then we introduce the lagrangian involving renormalized elds and parameters as

lgn = iz i/i  mzzm ii + 1

2 gzgz 2

( ii)2 + 1

2 gz33z 2

(4.3)

(4.4)

(cid:16) i(3)i(cid:17)2

which will be valid to three loops and where we dene the usual renormalization constants by

1

2
0 = z


, m0 = mzm ,

g0 = gzg .

(4.5)

we have checked that z, zm and zg are in agreement with the ms results of [17, 18, 19].
additionally, we have

.

(4.6)

g3

483

z33 = 

14

the form of z33 is typical of the structure of renormalization constants associated with
evanescent operators in that its leading term is not o(1). this can be appreciated by considering
the lagrangian analogous to (2.20) where one begins with an innite set of basis evanescent
operators each with their own coupling. if one were to renormalize with that theory then the
resulting renormalization constants would have a similar structure to zg with the corrections
involving all the couplings. however, in the limit gk  0, it is simple to see that the form
(4.6) would emerge. with (4.6) our observation is that the su (nf ) gross neveu model is
not multiplicatively renormalizable at three loops in dimensional regularization. moreover, the
lowest operators that can be generated in principle is (3)  (3). this is due to the fact that if
(1)  (1) or (2)  (2) appeared one would have to include counterterms for operators which
do not vanish in the limit d  2. this would be counter to the multiplicative renormalization
in other strictly two dimensional regularizations. if we count the total possible number of -
matrices which will occur in a 4-point function at successive loops up to three we nd that these
will be respectively 2, 4 and 6. it is clear therefore that the rst appearance of a truly evanescent
operator cannot occur before three loops which is what we nd.

figure 4: basic three loop topologies for the 4-point function.

as will be discussed in more detail later for the natm, the existence of such an operator
only aects the renormalization of the model at the order after which it rst appears. this
is because the extra term in (4.4) gives rise to a new vertex with a coupling involving z33.
therefore the rst diagrams where (4.6) will be relevant are given in gure 6 where we denote
the location of the 4-point evanescent operator by the cross in a circle. we note that one needs
to take care when counting the g dependence of such graphs, since z33 is o(g3). whilst the
anomalous dimension (g) has been computed to 4-loops in [38] in ms that result does not
require the (3)  (3) operator insertion in the 2-point function. it is easy to see this since the
rst feynman integral, when computed, only contributes to the mass dimension. the integral
involving the loop momentum in the numerator vanishes by lorentz symmetry. thus only the
4-loop -function and mass anomalous dimension will require the computation of the graphs of

15

gure 6 in addition, of course, to the (large) set of diagrams arising from the original vertex.
the detailed procedure to achieve this will be discussed in the context of the natm where the
same problem arises but at a lower loop order, [15].

figure 5: three loop topologies with tadpoles for the 4-point function.

z33

z33

z33

figure 6: contributions from evanescent operators to the four loop wave function, mass and
coupling constant renormalization in the gross neveu model.

5 massive natm in ms.

as far as we aware there been two calculations dealing with the two loop renormalization of the
(massless) natm, [14, 15]. the initial one performed in [14] used the auxiliary eld formulation
with a cuto regularization which is not easy to extend to three loops. the latter one was
detailed in the appendix of [15] and used dimensional regularization. using the elementary
argument of the previous section to ascertain the form of the highest possible operator which
could emerge from the 4-point function, it is elementary to observe that a (3)  (3) structure
can emerge at one loop. this is evident in [15] and as a preliminary to discussing the three
loop calculation we will rst reproduce the analysis of [15] in the context of this article. there
will be several minor dierences in our strategy. for instance, we will be interested in the mass
renormalization which was not discussed before. second, the results presented in [15] were for
a general colour group and did not appear to appeal to the simplication manifested by (3.19)
for su (nc). although this is not necessary to two loops the problem of obtaining independent
combinations of the colour generators is not trivial in the general case, [35]. indeed it is tedious
even at the two loop level. at the outset we note that any calculation we have performed at
two loops has been checked with the natm analysis of [15] including the coecients of the

16

renormalization constants of the usual parameters and emerging evanescent operators, as well
as the simple application of the projection formula to obtain the correct -function of [14].
although we will extend the massless calculation of [15] to three loops, our strategy will be
to rst consider the massive model. the primary reason for doing this is to exploit non-trivial
checks on the full renormalization group functions which become available in the massive model.
having understood the procedure for the massive model we proceed to the massless case where
such a check does not exist. this is due to the dierent roles m plays in both models. in the
latter case, since m is a regularizing parameter it does not appear in the full renormalization
group equation.

we begin by dening the renormalization constants we will compute, where the bare la-

grangian is

setting

lnatm = i ii

0 /ii

0  m0 ii

0 ii

0 +

g0

2 (cid:16) ii

0 t a

ij ij

0 (cid:17)2

1

2
0 = z


, m0 = mzm ,

g0 = gz11

.

(5.1)

(5.2)

and allowing for all possible evanescent operators up to three loops, we will take the renormalized
lagrangian as

lnatm = iz ii /ii  mzmz ii ii

+

1
2

gz 2


7

xk=0(cid:20)zk0(cid:16) ii (k)ij ij(cid:17)2

+ zk1(cid:16) ii (k)t a

ij ij(cid:17)2(cid:21)

(5.3)

where as in (4.4) the zki are o(g) except when k = 1 and i = 1. although it would appear
that there are thirteen terms up to level (7)  (7) in addition to the original vertex, it turns
out that only the operators involving (2r+1) for integer r, will occur, [21, 22], and the explicit
calculation is consistent with this. to one loop the relevant diagrams are given in gures 1 and
3. the tadpole, dened as a zero momentum insertion on a line, only contributes to the mass
renormalization, and gives the value

for the 4-point function the sum of all channels gives

i(n 2

c  1)dmig

2nc

.

ig2i

4 " 

(n 2

c  1)
n 2
c

d(d  2)o00 

(n 2

c  4)
nc

d(d  2)o01  nc(3d  2)o11

+ nc(d  2)o21 +

(n 2

c  1)
n 2
c

o30 +

(n 2

c  4)
nc

o31# .

(5.4)

(5.5)

2 ( (n)i)2 and on1  1

here, we adopt the practice that the greens functions are written in terms of the (basis)
2 ( (n)t a)2 whose denition does not contain any
operators on0  1
coupling constant dependence. by doing this one can easily dene the counterterm appropriately.
at this stage we choose to renormalize using the ms scheme and absorb only those parts of (5.4)
and (5.5) which are divergent. we have computed the coecients of each operator as a function
of d in order to consider other schemes which we will do later. therefore due to the presence
of the factors of (d  2) in (5.5) counterterms are only required for o11, o30 and o31 which
have an odd number of -matrices. this is consistent with the earlier observation relating to
chirality, [21, 22]. the generation of the latter operators aects the two loop renormalization.
by counting the powers of the coupling constant in the lagrangian, they need to be included
with the two loop diagrams of gures 1 and 3, unlike in the gross neveu model where they

17

contribute at four loops. therefore, in the 2-point function they are only relevant for the mass
dimension through the tadpole of gure 6. for the 4-point function of gure 6, the insertion
now represents the presence of both o30 and o31.

at two loops in the 2-point function there will be a contribution to the wave function renor-
malization from the sunset diagram. of all the graphs we consider, this, aside from its related
graphs at three loops, represented the most tedious to evaluate. it was not possible to write the
relevant integral in a closed form. instead we treated it by expanding the integral in powers of
p2 around p2 = 0 and retained only those pieces which involve p/ or m 
 . these contributed
respectively to the wave function and mass renormalization.
in addition, we were careful to
determine not only the pole parts but also the nite parts for the three loop calculation and in
order to consider non-minimal renormalization schemes. we note that the wave function and
other renormalization constants to three loops in the ms scheme have been collected together
in appendix a.

computing the 4-point function now yields in addition to the operators o30 and o31, the
new operators o10, o50 and o51. the latter two would be expected due to the simple -matrix
counting, since the addition of a vertex introduces two -matrices from the new propagators
and two -matrices from the extra vertex. for the one loop diagram of gure 6, the presence of
(3) at the operator insertion also yields a maximum of ten -matrices which have the extreme
decomposition of (5) (5). the main issue with the two loop 4-point function is the observation
that one cannot simply deduce the full -function from the nave renormalization constant z11.
ordinarily in the absence of the higher order operators the coecients of the simple poles in 
are simply related to the coecients of the -function. in this case we would have

(g)  11(g) =

ncg2
2

+ (4n 3

c nf  3n 4

c + 12n 2

c  36)

g3
c 2 + o(g4) .
16n 2

(5.6)

as was pointed out in [15], this clearly contradicts the calculation of [14] since on general
considerations the -function for a single coupling theory is scheme independent to two loops.
the discrepancy between the two results is 3(n 4
c ) which is related to the
-function of the operator f in the notation of [15] where

c + 12)g3/(16n 2

c  4n 2

f = 1

2

t at bt c t abc

(5.7)

with

and

t abc = 2t at bt c + 2t ct bt a + t at ct b + t bt at c + t ct at b + t bt ct a

(5.8)

f (g) = 

3g3
162 .

(5.9)

for su (nc),

f|su (nc) =

c  1)(n 2

c  4)

1

2 " (n 2

2n 3
c

( i)2 +

(n 4

c  4n 2
2n 2
c

c + 12)

( t a)2#

(5.10)

so that the second term is related to the spurious contribution to the nave -function. clearly
one needs a systematic method of accounting for the existence of such contributions and removing
them from the true -function and the other renormalization group functions.

this is provided for in the projection technique, [28], discussed in [15] but which we recast in
the basis of operators we have chosen. in addition to the nave -function, 11(g), the evanescent

18

operators generated at one loop also have -functions, deduced in the usual fashion. to o(g3)
these are

30(g) = 

31(g) = 

(n 2

(n 2

c 

c  1)g2
8n 2
c  4)g2
8nc

.

(5.11)

(5.12)

although the general formalism was presented in section 2 its practical application requires
explanation, especially as it will be applied to the three loop renormalization. as it stands,
equation (2.24) represents the decomposition of the evanescent operator into a linear combination
of the relevant original operators. the coecients of this combination are perturbative functions
of the physical coupling and the formula is only meaningful in the context of a greens function.
substituting, say, the operator n [o31] into a 2-point function one evaluates the greens function
in two dimensions after any innities have been removed. then one inserts the right side of (2.24)
into the same greens function with the as yet undetermined projection functions and evaluates
the feynman diagrams to the same order before renormalizing and setting d = 2. however, it
is easy to deduce that at leading order only the operator n [o11] will contribute for insertions
in a 4-point function. likewise n [i /] and n [ ] will be relevant for the leading order in the
2-point function. this therefore provides the starting point of the perturbative iteration which
determines (ki)(g), (ki)
m (g) and c (ki)(g), i = 0, 1. indeed at leading order it is only the tree
level insertions of the relevant operators on the right side of (2.24) which will contribute. the
insertion of these in the respective greens function each evaluate to unity.

hence one needs only to compute the graphs of gure 6 for each operator o30 and o31. for

the 2-point function each is nite to this order and give

hn [o30] iwf = o(g)
hn [o31] iwf = o(g)

(5.13)

and

hn [o30] im =

hn [o31] im =

1

(n 2

+ o(g)

c  1)
2nc

+ o(g) .

(5.14)

we have separated the contributions to the full 2-point function with the operator insertion into
the piece involving p/ and the mass and denoted these respectively by the subscripts wf and
m. however, for the 4-point function care must be taken to renormalize the operator insertion
before setting d = 2. as this will become important later we record the insertion of each operator
in the 4-point function to the o() term

h n [o30] i =

ig

 " 1

  o51 

4(n 2
c  1)
nc

o30!  6o11
m2!! o30 +



(n 2

c  1)
nc

+ 3 2  ln  2

 1 + 2 ln  2
m2!! o11 + o(; ok0, ok1)# + o(g2) (5.15)

m2! o51

ln  2

1
2

and

h n [o31] i =

ig

 " 1

   (n 2

c + 4)
nc

o31 +

(n 2

c  1)
4n 2
c

o50 +

(n 2

c  4)
4nc

o51!

19



3(n 2

c  1)
2n 2
c

o10 

3(n 2

c  4)
2nc

o11 

nc
4

o41

+  7n 2

(n 2

c + 4) ln  2
c + 4 + 2(n 2
ln  2
m2! o50 +
 2  ln  2

c  4)
4nc

c  1)
8n 2
c
3(n 2

+

+

m2!! o31

4nc

(n 2

c  4)
8nc

ln  2

m2! o51

m2!! o11 + o(; ok0, ok1)# + o(g2)

(5.16)

where we have introduced the new mass scale 2 = 4e2, with  denoting eulers constant,
to ensure that we are in the ms scheme as opposed to the ms scheme. the renormalization con-
stants to remove the simple poles on the right side are provided by the fact that the expressions
eectively represent the rst stage in the renormalization of a composite operator in the normal
fashion. there is a caveat here in that there is mixing into other basis operators. however, one
can introduce a counterterm which is a linear combination of the basis elements. the upshot of
this for higher order calculations is that when the renormalized operator is inserted one must
also include the counterterms from the mixing operators. for instance, for o30 this will mean
at the next order that a tadpole graph with insertions 4(n 2
c  1)o31/(nc) and  o51/ have to
be included. after this renormalization which we also take to be ms here, the contribution to
the greens function after setting the evanescent couplings to zero and d = 2 are, to this order,

h n [o30] i(cid:12)(cid:12)o11
h n [o31] i(cid:12)(cid:12)o11

so it is trivial to deduce,

= 

= 

6ig

3i(n 2

+ o(g2)

c  4)g
2nc

+ o(g2) .

(5.17)

(30)
m (g) = 

(30)(g) = o(g)
1

6g


c (30)(g) = 

,

(31)(g) = o(g)

+ o(g)

,

(31)
m (g) = 

+ o(g)

(5.18)

(5.19)

+ o(g2)

, c (31)(g) = 

+ o(g2) .

(5.20)

(n 2

c  1)
2nc
3(n 2

c  4)g
2nc

hence, substituting these functions into the general formul in (2.27) the actual renormalization
group functions to two loops are

(g) =

ncg2
2

(g) = 

nf ncg3

+

(n 2

42
c  1)nf g2
8nc2

m(g) =

(n 2

c  1)g
2nc

+ (n 2

c  1)(4nf  nc)

g2

16nc2

(5.21)

where the result of [14] is recovered. moreover, we also have the ms mass anomalous dimension
which has not been computed in this model before.

we now turn to the details of the three loop calculations which builds on the above. we
do not comment on the mundane task of the computation of the diagrams of gures 2, 4 and
5 since their evaluation very much parallels any usual perturbative calculation in other models.

20

instead we focus on the role of the evanescent operators. as the two loop calculation generated
new operators their contributions must also be included. however, they will only enter through
the topologies of gure 6 where the circle with a cross will now represent successively o10, o50
and o51. additionally the counterterms generated for o30 and o31 are also included in those
topologies as well as the original operator in the graphs of gures 7, 8 and 9. in gure 8 the
insertion stands for the four possible combinations of o30 and o31. in these and the graphs
with the original vertex we note that we have also included the usual wave function, mass and

figure 7: graphs contributing to the natm 2-point function from evanescent operators o3i in
the two loop topology.

vertex counterterms. having detailed the extra evanescent operator contributions which have to
be included it perhaps can be appreciated that such a calculation can only properly be attacked
using symbolic and algebraic manipulation programmes.

figure 8: graphs contributing to the natm 4-point function from evanescent operators o3i in
the one loop topology.

it is not possible to include the values of each diagram in terms of the full operator basis.
to illustrate the complexity of the result for one diagram, though, we record the structure of
the three loop chain of gure 4. we found that for arbitrary d it is

ig4i 3(cid:20)  d(3d3 + 31d2  70d + 40)(d  2)(n 4

c  2n 2

c + 6)(n 2

c  1)

o00

128n 4
c

 d(3d3 + 31d2  70d + 40)(d  2)(n 4

c + 2)(n 2

c  4)

o01
64n 3
c
o10

128n 2
c
o11
64nc
o20

128n 2
c
o21
64nc
o30

128n 4
c

 (45d4  165d3 + 168d2 + 36d  80)(n 2

c  4)(n 2

c  1)

 (45d4  165d3 + 168d2 + 36d  80)(n 4

c  4n 2

c + 10)

+ (6d3 + 103d2  394d + 376)(d  2)(n 2

c  4)(n 2

c  1)

+ (6d3 + 103d2  394d + 376)(d  2)(n 4

c  4n 2

c + 10)

+ (30d3  75d2  130d + 376)(n 4

c  2n 2

c + 6)(n 2

c  1)

+ (30d3  75d2  130d + 376)(n 4

c + 2)(n 2

c  4)

o31
64n 3
c

21

 (d2 + 41d  116)(d  2)(n 4

c  2n 2

c + 6)(n 2

c  1)

 (d2 + 41d  116)(d  2)(n 4

c + 2)(n 2

c  4)

o41
64n 3
c

o40

128n 4
c

 (3d2 + 9d  58)(cid:18)(n 2
+ 3(d  2)(cid:18)(n 2
c  4)(n 2
c  2n 2

c + 6)(n 2

+ (n 4

c  1)

c  4)(n 2

c  1)

o50

128n 2
c

+ (n 4

c  4n 2

c + 10)

o60

c  1)

+ (n 4

c  4n 2

c + 10)

128n 2
c
+ (n 4

o70

128n 4
c

c + 2)(n 2

c  4)

o51

64nc(cid:19)

(5.22)

o61

64nc(cid:19)
c (cid:21) .

o71
64n 3

unlike the one loop result for the graph of gure 3 the evanescent operators which are even
in the number of -matrices have, in principle, been generated with simple and double poles
in . however, it turns out that when all contributions are summed and evaluated that they
have nite coecients. thus divergences are only associated with those operators which have
an odd number of -matrices as expected from general arguments, [21, 22]. further, the new
operators o70 and o71 appear which is consistent with our earlier argument. renormalizing the
contributions from the 2 and 4-point functions in ms determines the renormalization constants

figure 9: graphs contributing to the natm 4-point function from evanescent operators o3i in
the two loop toplogies.

given in appendix a. the resulting nave renormalization group functions for each operator can
be deduced as

(g) = 

(n 2

c  1)nf g2
8nc2

 (n 2

c  1)(2n 2

c n 2

f + n 3

c nf + 2n 2

c + 2)

g3
32n 3
c 3

(5.23)

m(g) =

(n 2

c  1)g
2nc

+ (n 2

c  1)(2ncnf  n 2

c + 1)

g2
8n 2
c 2

+ (n 2

c  1)(16n 2

f n 2

c  20nf n 3

c + 16ncnf  3n 4

c + 61n 2

c + 62)

g3
128n 3

c 3

(5.24)

(g) =

ncg2
2

+ (4n 3

c nf  3n 4

c + 12n 2

c  36)

g3
16n 2
c 2

22

+ (10n 4

c n 2

f  15n 5

c nf + 60n 3

c nf  180ncnf + 87n 4

c + 13n 2

c  360)

g4
64n 3
c 3

(5.25)

30(g) = 

(n 2

c  1)g2
8n 2

c 

 (n 2

c  1)(2ncnf + 3n 2

c  2)

g3
c 2
16n 3

 (n 2

c  1)(96n 2

c n 2

f + 240n 3

c nf  144ncnf + 773n 4

c  1004n 2

c + 284)

g4

1024n 4

c 3
(5.26)

31(g) = 

(n 2

c  4)g2
8nc

 (n 2

c  4)(ncnf  n 2

c  1)

g3
8n 2
c 2

 (n 2

c  4)(24n 2

c n 2

f  20n 3

c nf  56ncnf + 45n 4

c  54n 2

c + 94)

50(g) = 

(n 2

c  1)(n 2
128n 3

c  4)g3
c 2

51(g) =

10(g) = 

(n 2

c  3)g3
32n 2
3(n 2

c 2
c  1)(n 2
c 2

16n 3

c  4)g3

g4
256n 4

c 3

(5.27)

(5.28)

(5.29)

(5.30)

where aside from o30 and o31 we have only retained those terms of the evanescent operator
-functions which are relevant for the true three loop renormalization group functions. to
complete the calculation we need the subsequent terms in the projection functions.

for the 2-point function this necessitates rst of all computing the additional graphs to
hn [o30] i and hn [o31] i as well as the new greens functions hn [o10] i, hn [o50] i
and hn [o51] i. as the details of the calculation of the latter three are very much akin to
those of the former two at the previous order we merely record the results

(50)
m (g) =

(10)
m (g) =

2

1

+ o(g)

,

(51)
m (g) =

(n 2

c  1)
nc

+ o(g)

2 "1  ln  2

m2!# + o(g) .

(5.31)

(5.32)

for o3i their composite operator insertion into the 2-point function requires the computation of
the graphs of gure 7 as well as the contribution from the graphs dened by the counterterms
to the simple poles in (5.15) and (5.16) and their projection into the relevant operator. the
upshot of including the additional graphs is that after ms renormalization we now have

hn [o30] iwf = 

hn [o31] iwf =

+ o(g2)

(n 2

c  1)g
2nc2
c  1)g
c 2 + o(g2)
4n 2

(n 2

and

hn [o30] im =

1




7(n 2

c  1)g
4nc2

hn [o31] im =

(n 2

c  1)
2nc

+

m2!# + o(g2)
"2 + ln  2
  n 2
" 13

c  1)g
n 2
c 2

c +

n 2

7
4

c
2

8

(n 2

23

(5.33)

(5.34)



7

8! ln  2

m2!# + o(g2) .

to determine the extra terms of the projection formul the insertion of the right side of (2.24)
in a 2-point function must be included. therefore, there is a contribution from the rst graph of
gure 10 after renormalization, from the n [o11] term of (2.24). this enters with the coecients
c (30)(g) and c (31)(g). additionally the second graph, being o(g), gives a potential contribution.
however, it only contributes to the equation for (k)
m (g). finally, the nite part of the right side

n[i], (cid:10)n[]

/

n[o11]

figure 10: graphs for the three loop projection formula in a 2-point function for the natm.

of (2.24) is

3(n 2

c  1)g
2nc2

for o30 and

"1  ln  2

m2!#  (cid:16)(30)(g) + (30)

m (g)(cid:17)"1 +

(n 2

c  1)g

4nc  3  ln  2

m2!!# + o(g2)

3(n 2

c  1)(n 2
c 2

8n 2

c  4)g

"1  ln  2

 (cid:16)(31)(g) + (31)

m (g)(cid:17)"1 +

m2!#
4nc  3  ln  2

c  1)g

(n 2

m2!!# + o(g2)

for o31. therefore, solving this perturbatively we nd

(30)(g) = 

(n 2

c  1)g
2nc2

+ o(g2)

,

(31)(g) =

(n 2

c  1)g
c 2 + o(g2)
4n 2

(5.35)

(5.36)

(5.37)

(5.38)

25(n 2

c  1)g

4nc2

+ o(g2)

+

1

(n 2

c  1)
2nc

+

(n 2

c  1)
n 2
c

" 3

4

ln  2

m2! 

c + 31)

(7n 2
8

# g
2 + o(g2) . (5.39)

n[i], (cid:10)n[]

/

(30)
m (g) = 

(31)
m (g) = 

n[o11]

figure 11: graphs for the three loop projection formula in a 4-point function for the natm.

the procedure for the 4-point function is similar. one also has extra graphs to consider
involving the insertion of the relevant operators n [i /] and n [ ] and these are given in
gure 11 for the right side of (2.24). including counterterm contributions both for the evanescent

24

operator poles and the o11 vertex renormalization, the nite two dimensional greens functions
now become

h n [o30] i(cid:12)(cid:12)o11
h n [o31] i(cid:12)(cid:12)o11

= 

6ig


+ i"3nc ln  2

m2! 
+ i" 3(nc  4)

4

= 

3i(n 2

c  4)g
2nc

3nf
2

+

65nc

4



20

nc# g2

2 + o(g3)

ln  2

m2! 

3(n 2

c  4)nf
8nc



(13n 4

c  29n 2

c  82)

4n 2
c

# g2
2 + o(g3) . (5.40)

likewise, the sum of contributions to the right side give

[c (3i)(g) + 2g(3i)(g)]"1   nc

2

ln  2

m2! 

3nc

4 !# +

nc(3i)
m (g)g2
2

+ o(g3)

(5.41)

for i = 0 and 1. hence, it is easy to deduce the projection functions to the order we require are

c (30)(g) = 

c (31)(g) = 

6g

3(n 2

 (cid:20) 3nf

2
c  4)g
2nc



89nc

4

+

21

nc(cid:21) g2

2 + o(g3)
(15n 4

 " 3(n 2

c  4)nf
8nc

+

c  16n 2

c  168)

8n 2
c

# g2
2 + o(g3) .

(5.42)

for the operators o10, o50 and o51 we note that the one loop graphs of gure 6 with the
appropriate operator insertions take simpler forms. respectively, we have

h n [o10] i =

ig

 " 1



o31 + 2o01 +

1
2

ln  2

m2! o31 + o()# + o(g2)

(5.43)

and

h n [o50] i =

ig

 " 1

  40o31 
 20 3 + ln  2

16(n 2
c  1)
nc

o50 + o71!
m2!! o31  10o41 +
 1 + 4 ln  2



2(n 2
c  1)
nc

m2!! o50 + o()# + o(g2) . (5.44)

1
2

ln  2

m2! o71

the expression for h n [o51] i is similar to that for o50 but involves more operators. as
it does not contain any relevant new features we do not record it. since the operator o11 does
not appear on the right side of (5.43) and (5.44), then after renormalization and removal of the
evanescent operators the contribution to the left side of the respective projection formul is zero
at this order. therefore we have the simple results

c (10)(g) = 0 + o(g2) , c (50)(g) = 0 + o(g2) , c (51)(g) = 0 + o(g2)

(5.45)

which imply that at this order 10(g), 50(g) and 51(g) are not in fact needed for the renor-
malization group functions. with the corrections to the other projection functions, it is now

25

possible to deduce the true ms renormalization group functions for the natm at three loops.
for su (nc) we nd

(g) = 

g()



=

ncg2
2

+

nf ncg3

42

+ (cid:20) 5

32

ncn 2

f +

3
64

n 3

c 

11
64

(g) = 

(n 2

c  1)nf g2
8nc2

and

 (n 2

c  1)(cid:16)2n 2

nc +

3 + o(g5)

1

39
64

nc(cid:21) g4
f + nf nc + 1(cid:17)

g3

32nc3

(5.46)

(5.47)

m(g) =

(n 2

c  1)g
2nc

+ (n 2

c  1)(4nf  nc)

g2

16nc2

+ (n 2

c  1)(cid:16)16n 2
f n 2

c  12nf n 3

c + 3n 4

c + 5n 2

c  26(cid:17)

g3
c 3 .
128n 3

(5.48)

it is worth noting that the term involving ln(2/m2) has cancelled in the sum for m(g).

although we have detailed the projection technique of [15] for the massive natm there is
an alternative method of determining these renormalization group functions. in performing the
calculation we were careful to compute the feynman graphs as functions of d. therefore, we can
deduce the nite parts of the 2 and 4-point functions after renormalization. these must satisfy
the full renormalization group equation (2.23) with the above functions. therefore with

g(2)(p, m, , g) = i(p/  m) +

(n 2

m2!  1#

c  1)mg
4nc

"ln  2
m2! + 1# (n 2

c  1)g2
32n 2

c 2

+ p/"2ncnf ln  2
 m"(2n 2

c  1) ln2  2
c  3(cid:21) (n 2
c nf ln2  2
c nf + 4n 2

+ 3n 2

+ p/" 6n 3

 10n 3

+ m"2(2n 2

c  1)(3n 2

 (84n 4

c + 36n 3

+ (129n 4

c + 60n 3

m2!  (7n 2

c  6 + 2ncnf ) ln  2
m2!

c  1)g2
32n 2

c 2

c  1)g3
384n 3
c 3

m2! + 6(3n 2
c + 2ncnf  2)ncnf ln  2
m2!
c + 24ncnf  14(cid:21) (n 2
f  5n 2
c n 2
m2!
c  1) ln3  2
c  12ncnf + 30) ln2  2
m2!
c nf  108n 2
f  207n 2
c n 2

c nf + 24n 2

 45n 4

c + 20n 3

c nf + 16n 2

c n 2

f + 42n 2

m2!
c  84ncnf + 12) ln  2
c  32ncnf  194i (n 2

c  1)g3
768n 3
c 3
(5.49)

26

and

g(4)(0, m, , g)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)o11

c + 8ncnf ) ln  2
m2!

= ig +

+ "4n 4

 "24n 3



nc

+ 15n 4

8 "3  2 ln  2
c ln2  2

m2!# g2
m2!  (20n 4
c nf + 2n 2
c + 4n 3
m2!  12(19n 3
c + 192n 2

c ln3  2
+ (cid:16)522n 3

c  8n 2
c  34(cid:21)
c + 2n 2

c nf + 24ncn 2
c ! ln  2

m2!  345n 3

96nf
n 2



+

96n 2
f

nc

g3
64n 2
c 2

f  456nc + 120nf

c  20n 2

m2!
c nf  10nc + 8nf ) ln2  2

+ 764nc  288nf +

32n 2
f

nc



1440
nc

+

1056nf

nc

+

c nf  32ncn 2
f
c #

1424
n 3

g4

15363 .
(5.50)

if we did not possess the ms functions then we could
it is easy to verify that (2.23) holds.
have solved for them by ensuring that the renormalization group equation (2.23) holds. for the
massless model, since the mass is not a parameter of the theory it means that this avenue is
not possible for us. this will leave us only the projection method which we have now shown to
be consistent. in writing (5.50) we have retained only the contribution to the original relevant
operator since after renormalization d is set to 2 and the evanescent operators removed. finally,
it is a simple task to rewrite the ms -function back in terms of the colour group casimirs as

() = 

c2(g)2

2

+

t (r)nf c2(g)3

22

 c2(g)(cid:20) 5

8

t 2(r)n 2

f +

39
16

c 2

2 (r) 

67
32

c2(r)c2(g) +

31
64

c 2

2 (g)(cid:21) 4

3 + o(5)
(5.51)

where we have also included the coupling  for comparison with the two loop results of [14].

6 massless natm in ms.

as the massive model clearly does not provide us with a fully chirally symmetric theory, we
have also computed the ms renormalization constants for the model when the propagator (2.17)
is used. as the calculation runs very close to that of the previous section we concentrate on
the new features. first, when one evaluates the contributing graphs to three loops with (2.17)
the structure is simpler than the corresponding ones obtained by using (2.18). indeed the rst
graph of gure 4 now becomes

ig4i 3(cid:20)  (105d3  420d2 + 588d  272)(n 2

c  4)(n 2

c  1)

o10

128n 2
c

f  4(d  2)ncnf + 3(d  2)2)(d  2)3nf nc  4(d  2)6

 (cid:16)4(2n 2
c n 2

+ (105d3  420d2 + 588d  272)(n 4

c  4n 2

c + 10)n 2

c (cid:17) o11

64n 3
c

27

c  2n 2

c + 6)(n 2

c  1)

+ (n 4

c  4)

o30

128n 4
c

+ 7(15d2  70d + 88)(cid:18)(n 4
 7(3d  10)(cid:18)(n 2
c  4)(n 2

+ (n 4

c  2n 2

c + 6)(n 2

c  1)

c  1)

o50

128n 2
c

+ (n 4

c  4n 2

c + 10)

o70

128n 4
c

+ (n 4

c + 2)(n 2

c  4)

o51

c + 2)(n 2
64nc(cid:19)
(cid:21) .

o71
64n 3
c

o31
64n 3

c (cid:19)

(6.1)

comparing this with the expression for the same graph in the massive case we observe its decom-
position into the operator basis involves only those operators with (2r+1) for integer r. this is a
result of the chiral symmetry which underlies the choice (2.17). moreover, this is also a property
of all the other graphs to this order, so that the potential need for renormalization constants
zni for n even and i = 0 or 1 is automatically excluded. completing the ms renormalization of
the model as previously it turns out that the renormalization constants are the same as for the
massive model with exception of zm which, of course, does not arise at the outset.

the computation of the full (g) and (g) in the massless natm now follows the use of the
projection formula for the massive model whose practical use we have just demonstrated. since
m is no longer a true parameter of the model, the projection formula (2.24) clearly takes the
simpler form, [15],

z ddx n [oki] = z ddx (cid:16) (ki)(g)n [i / + 2go11] + c (ki)(g)n [o11](cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)gi=0 d=2

the absence of (ki)
m (g) and, in principle, dierent values for the contributing terms to the
greens function structure might mean that the true ms renormalization group functions will
dier from those of the massive model. however, as argued in [15, 22] one would expect them
to be equivalent. therefore, it is important that this is checked explicitly. though we need only
do this for (g), as clearly (g) will be unchanged.

.

(6.2)

for the 4-point function there are again no contributions to the relevant operator in the
greens function involving separate insertions of o10, o50 and o51 leaving us to concentrate on
o30 and o31. for these, in order to illustrate the dierences in the structure of the greens
functions which are needed to deduce c (30)(g) and c (31)(g), we note that their one loop forms
are

h n [o30] i =

and

h n [o31] i =

ig

 " 1

c  1)
nc

(n 2

  o51 
+  4  3 ln  2

o30!  6o11

m2!! o11 + o(; ok0, ok1)# + o(g2)

(6.3)

ig

 " 1

   (n 2

c + 4)
nc

o31 +

(n 2

c  1)
4n 2
c

o50 +

(n 2

c  4)
4nc

o51!



3(n 2

c  4)
2nc

o11 + o(; ok0, ok1)# + o(g2)

(6.4)

which can be compared with those of the massive natm calculation. further, including all
relevant counterterms the restriction of these greens functions in d = 2 at two loops gives

h n [o30] i(cid:12)(cid:12)o11

= 

6ig


+ i"3nc ln  2

m2! 

9nf
2

+

67nc

4



28

20

nc# g2

2 + o(g3)

h n [o31] i(cid:12)(cid:12)o11

= 

3i(n 2

c  4)g
2nc

+ i" 3(nc  4)

4

ln  2

9(n 2

c  4)nf
8nc

m2! 
# g2
2 + o(g3)

c  41)

(6.5)



(6n 4

c  14n 2
2n 2
c

which dier from those of the massive model. to deduce the nal values of the projection
functions, we record that now the right side of (6.2) is simpler than (2.24) due to the absence
of (k)

m (g). explicitly, we have

[c (3i)(g) + 2g(3i)(g)]"1   nc

2

ln  2

m2! 

nf
2



3nc

4 !# + o(g3)

(6.6)

for i = 0 and 1. however, when solving perturbatively for the projection functions it turns out
that their values to this order are the same as before. therefore the ms -function is identical
to that of the massive model as expected. the discrepancy between each set of formul rests
in the hidden role of the mass term in various greens functions.

figure 12: graphs contributing to the renormalization of [ ] in the massless natm.

although it may seem that for the massless model that there is no renormalization group
function for the mass, it is possible to compute the anomalous dimension of the composite
operator whose coupling would correspond to a mass. clearly this is [ ]. as this operator
will be renormalized, one can dene an anomalous dimension  (g) from its renormalization
constant z  which can then be regarded as the mass dimension. indeed the computation of
the three loop quark mass dimension in ms in qcd was performed in the massless theory by
renormalizing the 2-point quark greens function with a [ ] insertion, [13]. we have computed
the relevant diagrams to three loops for both the massless gross neveu model, in order to check
our integration routines, and the massless natm. these are illustrated in gure 12 where we

29

have only shown those diagrams which are not trivially zero. also, the cross indicates the location
of the insertion of [ ]. therefore, if the insertion in the two loop tower of bubbles had not been
on the top loop but the lower one, then the diagram is simply zero because in the massless model
the one loop tadpole vanishes by lorentz symmetry. therefore if a topology has one tadpole then
for a non-zero contribution its [ ] insertion must be in that tadpole. although it may appear
that we have to introduce a new set of integrals to carry out the calculation, we have exploited
the fact that since we are only interested in the [ ] renormalization, the graphs need only be
computed at zero external momentum. in this case it turns out that tensor integrals for each
graph can be paired with a graph used in the evaluation of the 4-point function. the topology
of the related graph is deduced by regarding the insertion as the location of two external legs.
so, for example, the last graph of gure 12 is paired with the penultimate graph of gure 4.
similarly the rst graph of the bottom row of gure 12 is related to the fth graph of gure 4.
this observation ensures that we do not have to unnecessarily undertake extra calculation. it
turns out that performing the ms renormalization of these graphs that z  is identical to zm of
the massive model for both the gross neveu model and the natm. to complete the evaluation
of the associated true renormalization group function, we need to extend the projection formula
of (6.2) to the case of bona de operator insertions. in this case we take it to be

z ddx n [ok] = z ddx (cid:18) (k)(g)n [i /] + (cid:16)c (k)(g) + 2g(k)(g)(cid:17) n [o11]

+ (cid:16)(k)(g) + (k)

(g)(cid:17) n [1](cid:19)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)gi=0 d=2

.

(6.7)

here the last term has the insertion of unity since we regard this operator equation as being
inserted in a greens function of the structure h . [ ] i which includes the original operator
insertion itself represented by the dot. therefore, one needs to be careful in distinguishing

figure 13: graphs contributing to the massless natm 2-point function with [ ] insertion from
the evanescent operators o3i.

which operator is which when considering the graphs contributing to the greens function. to
this end we have illustrated the relevant non-zero contributions to the two loop greens function
hn [o][ ] i in gure 13. as we have detailed similar calculations earlier, we record the values
of the greens function for the operators n [o30] and n [o31] as those of other operators will
only involve one loop graphs. we found,

hn [o30][ ] i = 

hn [o31][ ] i = 



1

(n 2

(n 2

c  1)g
nc2

" 9

4

+

7
4

c  1)
2nc



(n 2

c  1)g
n 2
c 2

ln  2
" 15n 2

m2!# + o(g2)
  n 2

9
8

c
2

+



c

8

7

8! ln  2

m2!# + o(g2)

where we note that the overall sign dierence between these and the analogous results in the
massive model is due to the fact that here we are inserting the operator [ ] and not the negative

(6.8)

30

of this. moreover,

(50)
 (g) =

(10)
 (g) =

2

1

+ o(g)

,

(51)
 (g) =

(n 2

c  1)
nc

+ o(g)

m2!# + o(g)

2 "2  ln  2
 (g) and (10)

(6.9)

(6.10)

(6.11)

(6.12)

so that the numerical values of (10)
m (g) dier. for the right side of the projection
formula we have displayed the one loop corrections which need to be computed in gure 14.
with their values the respective right sides of each projection formul are



3(n 2

c  1)g
2nc2

for o30 and

"2  ln  2

m2!#  (cid:16)(30)(g) + (30)

 (g)(cid:17)"1 +

(n 2

c  1)g

4nc  2  ln  2

m2!!# + o(g2)



3(n 2

c  1)(n 2
c 2

8n 2

c  4)g

"2  ln  2

m2!#
4nc  2  ln  2

c  1)g

(n 2

m2!!# + o(g2)

 (cid:16)(31)(g) + (31)

 (g)(cid:17)"1 +

for o31, from which it is easy to deduce

(30)
 (g) = 

(31)
 (g) = 

+

1

(n 2

25(n 2

c  1)g

4nc2

+ o(g2)

c  1)
2nc

+

(n 2

c  1)
n 2
c

" 3

4

ln  2

m2! 

c + 37)

(7n 2
8

# g
2 + o(g2) . (6.13)

therefore, the ms  (g) is identical to m(g) of the massive model.

n[i]

/

n[i]

/

n[o11]

figure 14: graphs for the three loop projection formula in a 2-point function with [ ] insertion
for the massless natm.

7 symmetric schemes.

although we have produced the renormalization group functions for both massive and massless
versions of the natm in ms there still remains the problem of reconciling the results with the
equivalences with other models discussed earlier. the ms expressions do not represent results
which are consistent with symmetries of the original model and the problem can eectively be
traced to a hidden 5 issue, [15, 21, 22].
in other words, when one deals with models with
continuous chiral symmetries in dimensional regularization this symmetry is not preserved in

31

ms. for example, in qcd one must treat 5 carefully in renormalizing quark bilinear currents
involving 5. there the resolution is to use a renormalization scheme which does preserve
the symmetry. this is achieved by rst performing an ms calculation to the requisite order
and then introduce an additional nite renormalization to ensure that in that case the greens
functions obey the (quantum) ward identities, including the axial anomaly, [39]. for the present
calculation the general approach is the same. though there will be several minor dierences.
one rests in the fact that the analogous nite renormalization is chosen so that one ensures
the renormalization group functions in the rst instance and not the greens functions are the
same in the equivalences between the various models. further, in the present context, similar
nite renormalization schemes have been established for the three loop anomalous dimension
ensuring agreement of the equivalences between the abtm and the gross neveu model for nf
= 1, [22]. in essence that scheme was specied by removing in addition to the simple poles, the
(numerical) nite part of the greens function into the renormalization constant, [22]. we stress
that terms involving ln(2/m2) were not removed so that one is still within the context of mass
independent renormalization schemes. in [15, 22] this was referred to as the symmetric scheme.
to appreciate the eect such a choice of scheme can have on the renormalization group functions
we have determined them for the gross neveu model. to three loops for the two dimensional
massive model, we found that

(g) = 

(g) = 

m(g) = 



(6nf  1)(nf  1)g4

83

+ o(g4)

(nf  1)g2



(2nf  1)g2

82

(2nf  1)g

+





(nf  1)g3

22



(2nf  1)(2nf  3)g3

83

(2nf  1)(4nf  7)g2

2
f  42nf + 37)(2nf  1)g3

82

(8n 2

163

+ o(g4) .

+ o(g5)

(7.1)

(7.2)

(7.3)

clearly, one now has a cubic polynomial in nf at three loops in m(g) in contrast to the quadratic
that appears in the ms scheme. we can readily produce this result since we have been careful in
the contruction of the integration routines to keep all the d-dependence. the aim now is to extend
our calculation to determine the scheme or schemes which preserve the known equivalences of
the natm. we follow the approach of [15, 22] and reconcile the results with the ms forms
of the o(2nf ) gross neveu model which possesses a discrete 5 chiral symmetry. though we
stress that one could choose another scheme as reference. further, since the choice of scheme is
very much arbitrary we will take a general approach and introduce a parametrization. this will
involve a set of variables which will be constrained by the equivalences. to illustrate this we will
consider the massless model only and dene the nite terms of the wave function renormalization
to be

(n 2

c  1)g2
nc2

(cid:18)w21nf + w22nc +

w23

nc (cid:19) .

(7.4)

likewise for the coupling constant renormalization constant, z11z 2
be

, we take the nite part to

(cid:18)b11nf + b12nc +

b13

nc(cid:19) g



+ (cid:18)b21n 2

f + b22nf nc +

b23nf

nc

+ b24n 2

c + b25 +

b26
n 2

c (cid:19) g2
2 .

(7.5)

an o(g3) term will aect the four loop form of the renormalization group functions. the form of
the additional terms has been chosen to be consistent with the colour casimir structure that is
allowed. therefore, the term of (7.4) is proportional to c2(r). of course, these additional terms
will aect the form of poles in  of the renormalization constants which we have not recorded.

32

in the context of the usual multiplicatively renormalizable theories the treatment of a scheme
change is straightforward and well documented. (see, for example, [40, 21, 22].) once one has
one scheme, the renormalization group functions in another are determined by the relations

(g) = (g)


g

g(g)

(g) = (g)  2(g)


g

ln (g)

g(n)(p, , g) = ng(n)(p, , g)

(7.6)

(7.7)

where

and the bar denotes the corresponding quantity in another scheme.
in general the relation
between the couplings in both schemes is determined by comparing the renormalized 4-point
greens functions using (7.7) after the function (g) is deduced at the appropriate order in the
2-point function. for the non-multiplicatively renormalizable natm the situation is the same,
though of course one has to rst compute the new greens functions in the scheme involving
(7.4) and (7.5). to understand fully the proper procedure for this we have rst performed the
renormalization in the massive model and then determined the renormalization group functions
by nding the function (g) before applying the formul, (7.6). these could then be checked
against the renormalization group functions deduced by ensuring that the renormalization group
equation itself was satised. repeating this rst method for the massless model we have the
general functions

(n 2

c  1)g2
nc2

(g) = "1 +
g(g) = g(cid:20)1  (cid:18)b11nf + b12nc +

(cid:18)w21nf + w22nc +

b13

nc(cid:19) g



c nf w21 + 4n 3

+ 2n 3
 ncnf b23 + 2n 4

c w22 + 2n 4

c b2

w23

nc (cid:19)#
+ (cid:16)2n 2
c n 2
12  n 4

+ 4n 2

c b12b13  n 2

c b25  2w23 + 2b2

c b24  2n 2

c w22 + 2n 2
c 2#
13  b26(cid:17) g2

n 2

c w23

(7.8)

f b2

11  n 2

c n 2

f b21

c nf b11b12  n 3

c nf b22  2ncnf w21 + 4ncnf b11b13

which therefore provide us with the general scheme results

(g) = 

(n 2

c  1)nf

8nc

g2
2 

(n 2

c  1)
32n 2
c

+ n 2

c nf + 8nf b13 + 32n 3

f b11 + 2ncn 2

h8ncn 2
c w22 + 32ncw23 + nci g3

f + 32n 2

c nf w21 + 8n 2

c nf b12

3 + o(g4)

(7.9)

and

(g) =

+

f b2

nf ncg3

42 + h32n 2
c n 2

ncg2
2
+ 64n 3
+ 64ncnf b11b13 + 16ncnf b13  32ncnf b23 + 64n 4
+ 3n 4

c nf b11b12 + 16n 3

c nf w21 + 64n 3

11 + 16n 2

c n 2

c nf b12  32n 3

f b11  32n 2

c b12b13  32n 2

c  64n 2
13  32b26 + 39i

c w23 + 64n 2
c w22 + 64n 2
g4
64nc3 + o(g5) .

+ 32b2

c n 2

f b21 + 10n 2

c n 2
f

c nf b22  64ncnf w21

c w22 + 32n 4

c b2
c b25  11n 2

12  32n 4
c  64w23

c b24

(7.10)

the ms results are of course recovered by setting the various constants to zero.

33

the two equivalences we wish to preserve are those discussed in section 2. for the one
involving the abtm and the gross neveu model at nf = 1, we rst need to convert the su (nc)
dependence into the general colour group casimirs and then apply (2.9). we nd

(g) = 

(g) = 0

giving

nf g2

22  (cid:16)n 2

f + 4b11n 2

f  4b13nf(cid:17) g3

23

0 = 4b11  4b13 + 1
0 = 32w21  32w23  1
0 = 32b21  32b23 + 32b26  31

(7.11)

(7.12)

where the latter two equations arise from choosing to remove the numerical part of the 2-point
and 4-point functions respectively at three loops, similar to [22]. with the caveat we had
previously on the form of (g) for the second equivalence, we nd that the constraints in this
case are

0 = 16b12 + 5b13 + 80w21 + 256w22
0 = 8192b2

12 + 5120b12b13 + 800b2

13  2048b22  640b23  8192b24  512b25

+ 480b26 + 4800w21 + 15360w22 + 231 .

(7.13)

clearly not all the general coecients can be determined by these restrictions and the undeter-
mined coecients represent the remaining freedom in the choice of scheme that is possible. for
instance, if we set

w21 = b12 = b13 = 0 , b22 =

15
128

, b23 =

1
4

, b24 =

3
64

, b26 = 1

(7.14)

then the renormalization group functions will take the form

(g) = 

(n 2

c  1)nf

8nc

g2
2 

(n 2

c  1)nf g3

32

+ o(g4)

(g) =

ncg2
2

+

nf ncg3

42
f  60n 3

+ h16n 2
c n 2

c nf  128ncnf + 24n 4

c  105n 2

c + 144i

g4

1024nc3 + o(g5) .
(7.15)

in the abelian limit, we obtain (g) = 0 and (g) =  nf g2/(22) + o(g4) consistent with
(2.14). moreover, comparing (g) with the choice made in [22] one observes that there are other
schemes aside from the symmetric one of [15, 22] for which the general form can be reconciled.
of course, choices other than (7.14) can be made. finally, this completes our analysis of the
basic renormalization group functions for the original massless non-abelian thirring model.

8 discussion.

we conclude by stressing that we have now completed the rst three loop renormalization of the
natm in a dimensional regularization. whilst it involved the careful extraction and treatment

34

of evanescent operators in the four point function we were able to determine the renormaliza-
tion group functions of the model at a new order in perturbation theory in a variety of mass
independent renormalization schemes. moreover, from a calculational point of view we have
also demonstrated how one interprets and applies the projection formul of [15, 29] beyond the
leading perturbative order which was used to determine the 2-loop -functions of [15]. although
we have concentrated on the renormalization of the natm, another important property we have
established is the breakdown of multiplicative renormalizability in the gross neveu model at
three loops in dimensional regularization. for the natm this, of course, occurs at one loop, [15].
in [22] the consequences of the perturbative non-multiplicative renormalizability of the gross
neveu model were discussed from the point of view of the (non-perturbative) large nf expan-
sion and the determination of critical exponents at a xed point of the d-dimensional -function.
indeed it is worth reviewing some of these results now that the property has been established.
such exponents are fundamental, being scheme independent, and relate to experimentally mea-
surable quantities. one ordinarily determines them from the d-dimensional renormalization
group functions through the -expansion, using perhaps resummation techniques to improve the
series convergence for applications in, say, three dimensions. the large nf expansion comple-
ments such an approach in that perturbation theory is reordered so that bubble chain graphs are
summed rst. indeed in the context of the gross neveu model the large nf expansion has been
successful in d-dimensions in determining the wave function exponent  to o(1/n 3
f ), [41, 42, 43],
and the mass and -function exponents to o(1/n 2
f ), [44, 45]. for the three loop perturbative
ms results which had been computed there is exact agreement in the region of overlap since
the exponents are related to the renormalization group functions through, for example,  =
(g) where g is the value of the critical coupling in d-dimensions. however, in light of the
perturbative non-multiplicative renormalizability of the gross neveu model, it is worth rst of
all recording the basis of the large nf formulation. rather than using the lagrangian (2.3) the
starting point is the massless lagrangian written in terms of an auxiliary eld, ,

lgn = i i/i +  ii 

2
2g

.

(8.1)

1

one then develops the large nf formalism using (8.1). with this form it does not appear
possible to generate another operator of the form  i(3)
i which would be analogous
to the evanescent operator generated in (4.4). for instance, if one considers the graphs of
gure 4 which give rise to the evanescent operator, it is evident that a (3)  (3) structure
cannot emerge in the 1/nf expansion. with this apparent discrepancy between the renormalized
perturbative theory and large nf approach, it has been suggested in [22] that the simple relation
 = (g) needs to be modied in the perturbative approach to account for the presence of the
evanescent operators in d-dimensions. in other words in perturbation theory one assumes that
in d-dimensions the gross neveu model possesses an innite set of couplings g for each operator
2 ( ())2 corresponding to a lagrangian which is multiplicatively renormalizable. then the
xed point of the d-dimensional theory is dened by ()(g
) = 0 for all . whilst in practical
terms this may be dicult to determine, if we assume that there is a solution then one can dene
the actual exponents by extending the nave relation for the wave function to  = (g
), [22],
where now the renormalization group functions will depend on all the couplings. turning away
from this ideal scenario one can approach this innite set of xed points in an appropriate way,
[22], by assuming that it is close to the one dened by g
n = 0. in other words the
case where all the evanescent couplings are set to zero, [22]. several issues immediately arise.
first, it is not clear whether the nave -functions of the d-dimensional theory are the ones
which dene the xed points. second, the practical task of computing the corrections to the
evanescent xed points needs to be resolved. in reviewing these issues we believe the simplest
strategy to tackle this problem is to perform explicit calculations. as the evanescent operators

0 6= 0 and g

35

in the gross neveu model do not become evident before three loops, the rst stage would be to
determine the four loop ms renormalization group functions. second, since the renormalization
constant for the evanescent operator is nf independent its eect in the 1/nf expansion will not
become apparent at least before o(1/n 3
f ). in fact by computing the graphs of gure 6 it turns
out that they are nf independent. this follows from the fact that to obtain any nf dependence
one must have a closed fermion loop. however, from the nature of the new evanescent vertex
such a loop in any of the graphs is associated with tr (3) which vanishes. so for the -function
and the mass dimension one can not access the contribution from this operator in large nf prior
to o(1/n 4
f ). therefore to reconcile higher order large nf results for critical exponents with
explicit perturbative calculations will require a huge amount of calculation.

acknowledgements. we are grateful to prof. a.n. vasilev for drawing our attention to
the problem of the multiplicative renormalizability of the gross neveu model in dimensional
regularization. this work was carried out with the support of pparc through a postgraduate
studentship (jfb) and an advanced fellowship (jag). invaluable to the calculation were the
symbolic manipulation programme form, [37], and computer algebra package reduce, [46].
the gures were prepared using the package feyndiagram.

a ms renormalization constants.

in this appendix we record the values for all the renormalization constants in the ms scheme to
three loops in the non-abelian thirring model. from the 2-point function, we nd
c nf + 2n 2
96n 3
c 

c  1)  nf

g2
2  (n 2

c  1)nf
16nc

z = 1 

482 +

! g3

f + n 3

c + 2)

c n 2

(2n 2

(n 2

3
(a.1)

zm = 1 +

(n 2

c  1)
2nc

g


+ (n 2

c  1)  (2n 2

8n 2

+ (n 2

c  1)  (3n 2

c  1)

c  1)(2n 2
c 3
48n 3
c n 2
f  20n 3

(16n 2

+

c  1)
c 2 +
(14n 3

+

(2ncnf  n 2
16n 2
c 

c + 1)

! g2

2
c + 4n 2

c nf  6ncnf  6n 4

c  19)

c 2

96n 3
c + 61n 2

c + 62)

c nf + 16ncnf  3n 4

384n 3
c 

! g3
3 .

(a.2)

for the 4-point operators we have

z11 = 1 +

nc
2

g


+   n 3

83 +

c

+   n 2

c

(28n 5

42 +
c nf  9n 6

(4n 3

c nf  3n 4

c + 12n 2

c  36)

32n 2
c 
c  72n 2

c + 288)

! g2

2

c  72n 4
c 2
192n 3
c nf + 60n 3

(10n 4

c n 2

f  15n 5

c nf  180ncnf + 87n 4

c + 13n 2

c  360)

+

192n 3
c 

! g3

3

(a.3)

z30 =  (n 2

c  1)" 1

+   (5n 2

g

c nf + 12ncnf  380n 2
c  12n 3

c  4)
c 2 +

8n 2
c 

16n 3

c + 388)

(2ncnf + 3n 2
32n 3
c 

c  2)

! g2

2

+   (169n 4

192n 4

c 3

36

+

+

+

+

z31 =  (n 2

+   (7n 4

c  4)" 1

8nc
c  2n 3

g


+  

1
c 2 +
4n 2
c nf + 8ncnf + 16n 2

c + 104)

64n 3

c 3
(160ncnf + 105n 4
768n 3
c nf  56ncnf + 45n 4

c + 200n 2
c 2

f  20n 3

c + 1328)

(24n 2

c n 2

z50 = (n 2

z10 =  (n 2

c  1)(n 2

c  4)"
c  4)"(cid:18)
c 3 +

c  20)

c  1)(n 2
+   (17n 2

192n 4

1

1
c 2 
64n 3
256n 3
(20ncnf  97n 2
c 2

1536n 4

c (cid:19) g2

2

c + 104)

z51 = "  (n 4
+  

c  4n 2
c + 12)
64n 2
c 2
c  40n 4
(7n 6

+

(n 2
c  3)
64n 2

c  ! g2

2

c + 56n 2

c + 160)

(5n 5

c 3
128n 3
c nf  20n 3
c nf + 60ncnf  9n 6
c 2
c nf + 48ncnf  71n 4

c nf  16n 3

384n 3

(n 5

+



768n 3
c 

c  54n 2

c + 94)

3#
! g3

(a.5)

3

32n 3
c 

g2

2 +   (n 2

32n 4

c  4)

c 2 +

(20ncnf  7n 2
256n 4
c 

c + 40)

3#(a.6)
! g3



(16ncnf + 39n 2
3072n 4
c 

c + 64)

3#
! g3

(a.7)

(100n 3

c nf  80ncnf + 315n 4

c  728n 2

c + 852)

384n 4

c 2

(96n 2

c n 2

f + 240n 3

c nf  144ncnf + 773n 4

c  1004n 2

c + 284)

3#
! g3

(a.4)

3072n 4
c 
(ncnf  n 2
c  1)
16n 2
c 

! g2

2

(a.8)

# g3

3
(a.9)

(a.10)

z70 = (n 2

c  1)"

(n 4

c  4n 2
512n 4

c + 12)
c 3

c  28n 2
c + 84)
6144n 4
c 2

+

(n 2

c + 6)(n 2
c  2)
4096n 4
c 

768n 3
c 
(3n 4

+

c + 19n 4

c  135n 2

c + 312)

c + 39n 2

c + 192)

3#
! g3

z71 =  (n 2

c  4)" (n 4

512n 3

c + 8)

c 3 

7

768n 3

c 2 +

1

c # g3
3 .

512n 3

for completeness, we also provide the values for the same renormalization constants in the
abelian thirring model in the ms-scheme. these were computed separately from those of the
natm, but agree with them when the abelian limit of (2.9) is taken. we have

z = 1 

zm = 1 +

nf
4
g
1



g2
2 
+ (cid:18) 1

(n 2

f + 1)
6

g3
3

22 +
(6nf  19)

122

(cid:19) g2

2

(2nf  1)

4
(8n 2

+

f  8nf + 31)

+   1

63 +

24

37

(a.11)

(a.12)

! g3

3

z10 = 1 

z30 =  " 1

2

2 +

3
2
g


g2

2  (cid:18) 4
+ (cid:18) 2
2 +

5(nf  2)

2
(nf + 1)

(cid:19) g3

3

(cid:19) g2

2

2

+

(a.13)

+  
z50 = "(cid:18) 1
42 
z70 =  (cid:20) 1

83 

(3nf  59)

33

(20nf + 119)

62

+

(8n 2

f + 12nf + 39)

16

3# (a.14)
! g3

1

33 +

16(cid:19) g2
7
962 +

2 + (cid:18) 10
64(cid:21) g3
3 .

1

(5nf  26)

122



(nf  4)

6

3#
(cid:19) g3

(a.15)

(a.16)

from these renormalization constants, it is straightforward to compute the nave renormalization
group functions to o(g3). they also agree with the abelian limit of the analogous functions in
the natm, apart from 10(g). we nd

nf g2
22 

(n 2

f + 1)g3
23

(2nf  1)g2

(8n 2

f  8nf + 31)g3

83

(g) = 

m(g) =

g

(g) = 

30(g) = 

50(g) = 

+

3g3
2 
g2

2
g3
82 .

+

22
15(nf  2)g4

24

(nf + 1)g3

2

(a.17)

(a.18)

(a.19)

(a.20)

(a.21)

finally, we note that the values of the ms renormalization group functions to three loops are

(g) = 0

(g) = 

m(g) =

g


n 2
f g3
23

nf g2
22 
nf g2
2 +

+

(8n 2

f  13)g3
83

.

(a.22)

38

references.

[1] d. gross & a. neveu, phys. rev. d10 (1974), 3235.

[2] r. dashen & y. frishman, phys. lett. b46 (1973), 439; phys. rev. d11 (1975), 2781.

[3] a. hasenfratz & p. hasenfratz, phys. lett. b297 166.

[4] j.a. gracey, phys. lett. b318 (1993), 177.

[5] j.a. gracey, phys. lett. b373 (1996), 178.

[6] j.a. gracey, phys. lett. b322 (1994), 141; j.f. bennett & j.a. gracey, nucl. phys. b517

(1998), 241.

[7] m. ciuchini, s.e. derkachov, j.a. gracey & a.n. manashov, hep-ph/9903410.

[8] t. van ritbergen, j.a.m. vermaseren & s.a. larin, phys. lett. b400 (1997), 379.

[9] j.a.m. vermaseren, s.a. larin & t. van ritbergen, phys. lett. b405 (1997) 327; k.g.

chetyrkin, phys. lett. b404 (1997) 161.

[10] d.j. gross & f.j. wilczek, phys. rev. lett. 30 (1973), 1343; h.d. politzer, phys. rev.

lett. 30 (1973), 1346.

[11] w.e. caswell, phys. rev. lett. 33 (1974), 244; d.r.t. jones, nucl. phys. b75 (1974), 531;

e.s. egorian & o.v. tarasov, teor. mat. fiz. 41 (1979), 26.

[12] o.v. tarasov, a.a. vladimirov & a.yu. zharkov, phys. lett. 93b (1980), 429; s.a. larin

& j.a.m. vermaseren, phys. lett. b303 (1993), 334.

[13] d.v. nanopoulos & d.a. ross, nucl. phys. b157 (1979) 273; r. tarrach, nucl. phys.
b183 (1981) 384; o. nachtmann & w. wetzel, nucl. phys. b187 (1981) 333; o. tarasov,
jinr preprint p2-82-900.

[14] c. destri, phys. lett. b210 (1988), 173; phys. lett. b213 (1988), 565(e).

[15] a. bondi, g. curci, g. pauti & p. rossi, ann. phys. 199 (1990), 268.

[16] w. wetzel, phys. lett. b153 (1985), 297.

[17] j.a. gracey, nucl. phys. b341 (1990), 403.

[18] j.a. gracey, nucl. phys. b367 (1991), 657.

[19] c. luperini & p. rossi, ann. phys. 212 (1991), 371.

[20] a. bondi, g. curci, g. pauti & p. rossi, phys. lett. b216 (1989), 349.

[21] a.n. vasilev, m.i. vyazovskii, s.e. derkachov & n.a. kivel, theor. math. phys. 107

(1996), 27.

[22] a.n. vasilev, m.i. vyazovskii, s.e. derkachov & n.a. kivel, theor. math. phys. 107

(1996), 359.

[23] s.j. brodsky & p. huet, phys. lett. b417 (1998), 145.

39

[24] c.r. hagen, nuovo cim. 51b (1967), 169; nuovo cim. 51a (1967), 1033; a.h. mueller &
t.l. trueman, phys. rev. d4 (1971), 1635; y. taguchi, a. tanaka & k. yamamoto, prog.
theor. phys. 52 (1974), 1042; s. hikami & t. muta, prog. theor. phys. 57 (1977), 785.

[25] d. kutasov, phys. lett. b227 (1989), 68.

[26] a.d. kennedy, j. math. phys. 22 (1981), 1330.

[27] a.n. vasilev, s.e. derkachov & n.a. kivel, theor. math. phys. 103 (1995), 179.

[28] g. curci & g. pauti, nucl. phys. b286 (1987), 399.

[29] w. zimmermann, ann. phys. 77 (1973), 536; ann. phys. 77 (1973), 570.

[30] m. bos, phys. lett. b189 (1987), 435; ann. phys. 181 (1988), 177.

[31] z-m. xi, phys. lett. b214 (1988), 204; nucl. phys. b314 (1989), 112.

[32] m.j. dugan & b. grinstein, phys. lett. b256 (1991), 239.

[33] s. herrlich & u. nierste, nucl. phys. b455 (1995), 39; n. pott, hep-ph/9710503.

[34] t. van ritbergen, a.n. schellekens & j.a.m. vermaseren, int. j. mod. phys. a14 (1999),

41.

[35] p. cvitanovic, phys. rev. d14 (1976), 1536.

[36] p. nogueira, j. comput. phys. 105 (1993), 406.

[37] j.a.m. vermaseren, form version 2.2c, (can publication, amsterdam, 1992).

[38] n.a. kivel, a.s. stepanenko & a.n. vasilev, nucl. phys. b424 (1994), 619.

[39] t.l. trueman, phys. lett. b88 (1979), 331; s.a. larin, phys. lett. b303 (1993), 113.

[40] j.c. collins, renormalization (cambridge university press, 1984).

[41] j.a. gracey, int. j. mod. phys. a6 (1991), 395, 2755(e).

[42] a.n. vasilev, s.e. derkachov, n.a. kivel & a.s. stepanenko, theor. math. phys. 94

(1993), 179.

[43] j.a. gracey, int. j. mod. phys. a9 (1994), 727.

[44] a.n. vasilev, & a.s. stepanenko, theor. math. phys. 97 (1993), 364.

[45] j.a. gracey, phys. lett. b297 (1992), 293; int. j. mod. phys. a9 (1994), 567.

[46] a.c. hearn, reduce users manual version 3.4, (rand publication cp78, 1991).

40

