duke-cgtp-99-06

hep-th/9909108

0
0
0
2

 

n
a
j
 

1
2

 
 

2
v
8
0
1
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

discrete torsion and gerbes i

eric r. sharpe

department of physics

box 90305

duke university

durham, nc 27708

ersharpe@cgtp.duke.edu

in this technical note we give a purely geometric understanding of discrete torsion, as an
analogue of orbifold wilson lines for two-form tensor eld potentials. in order to introduce
discrete torsion in this context, we describe gerbes and the description of certain type ii
supergravity tensor eld potentials as connections on gerbes. discrete torsion then naturally
appears in describing the action of the orbifold group on (1-)gerbes, just as orbifold wilson
lines appear in describing the action of the orbifold group on the gauge bundle. our results
are not restricted to trivial gerbes  in other words, our description of discrete torsion
applies equally well to compactications with nontrivial h-eld strengths. we are also able
to describe analogues of discrete torsion for the type iia rr 1-form and the iib rr 2-
form elds. moreover, we describe a specic program for rigorously deriving analogues of
discrete torsion for many of the other type ii tensor elds, and we are able to make specic
conjectures for the results.

september 1999

1

contents

1 introduction

2 orbifold wilson lines

2.1 basics of orbifold wilson lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 equivariant bundles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3 equivariant bundles with connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4 example: heterotic orbifolds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.5 discussion in terms of cech cohomology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 n-gerbes

3.1 description in terms of cohomology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2 description in terms of transition functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3 connections on gerbes

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.4 gauge transformations of gerbes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.5 gerbes versus k theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.6 why gerbes? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 discrete torsion

4.1 basics of discrete torsion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2 equivariant gerbes

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3 equivariant gerbes with connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.4 analogues of discrete torsion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 conclusions

6 acknowledgements

2

4

6

6

10

11

13

14

16

17

19

21

23

24

25

26

26

30

32

33

34

35

a review of group cohomology

references

35

38

3

1 introduction

historically discrete torsion has been a rather mysterious aspect of string theory. discrete
torsion was originally discovered [1] as an ambiguity in the choice of phases to assign to
twisted sectors of string orbifold partition functions. although other work has been done
on the subject (see, for example, [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]), no work done to date has succeeded in
giving any sort of genuinely deep understanding of discrete torsion. in fact, discrete torsion
has sometimes been referred to has an inherently stringy degree of freedom, without any
geometric analogue.

in this paper we shall give a purely geometric understanding of discrete torsion. speci-
cally, we describe discrete torsion as a precise analogue of orbifold wilson lines, for 2-form
elds rather than vector elds. put another way, we shall argue that discrete torsion can be
understood as orbifold wilson surfaces.

our description of discrete torsion hinges on a deeper understanding of type ii b-elds
than is common in the literature. more specically, just as vector potentials (gauge elds)
are understood as connections on bundles, we describe b-elds as connections on (1-)gerbes.
although gerbes seem to be well-known in some circles, their usefulness does not seem to be
widely appreciated. we shall review a recent description of transition functions for gerbes,
given in [7, 8], which provides a simplied language in which to discuss gerbes, and then shall
discuss gerbes themselves (in the language of stacks) in detail in [9]. as accessible accounts
of gerbes which provide the level of detail we need do not seem to exist, we provide such an
overview in [9].

let us take a moment to give some general explanation of our ideas.

in dening an
orbifold of a physical theory, the orbifold group  must dene a symmetry of the theory.
specifying the action of the orbifold group on the underlying topological space is, however,
not sucient when bundles or other objects (such as gerbes) are present  specifying an action
of the orbifold group  on a space does not uniquely specify an action of  on a bundle. put
another way, for any given action of  on the base space, there can be multiple inequivalent
actions of  on a bundle or a gerbe. this fact is usually glossed over in descriptions of
orbifolds.

what is the physical meaning of this ambiguity in the lifting of the action of  to a
bundle? specifying a specic action of  on a bundle with connection implicitly denes an
orbifold wilson line. in other words, orbifold wilson lines are precisely choices of actions of
 on a bundle with connection. we shall show that, similarly, discrete torsion is a choice of
an action of  on a (1-)gerbe with connection.

technically, specifying a lift of  to a bundle, or a gerbe, is known as specifying an
equivariant structure on the bundle or gerbe. thus, in the paper we shall often speak of
classifying equivariant structures, which means classifying lifts of .

4

our results are not restricted to trivial gerbes  in other words, our description of discrete
torsion applies equally well to compactications with nontrivial h-eld strengths. also, we
do not make any assumptions concerning the nature of   it does not matter whether 
is abelian or nonabelian. it also does not matter whether  acts freely on the underlying
topological space  in our description, freely-acting orbifolds are understood in precisely the
same way as orbifolds with xed points.

we are also able to describe analogues of discrete torsion for the type iia rr 1-form and
the iib rr 2-form elds. in addition, our approach makes it clear that there should exist
analogues of discrete torsion for the other tensor elds appearing in supergravity theories.
we describe a specic program for rigorously deriving analogues of discrete torsion for many
of the other type ii tensor eld potentials (specically, those which can be understood in
terms of gerbes), and conjecture the results  that analogues of discrete torsion for p-form
elds are measured by h p(, u(1)), where  is the orbifold group.

we begin in section 2 by reviewing orbifold wilson lines in language that will easily
generalize. more specically, we describe orbifold wilson lines as an ambiguity in lifting
the action of an orbifold group to a bundle with connection. in section 3 we give a basic
discussion of n-gerbes, describing how they can be used to understand many of the tensor
eld potentials appearing in supergravity theories. this discussion is necessary because we
shall describe discrete torsion as a precise analogue of orbifold u(1) wilson lines for 1-
gerbes. in section 4 we outline precisely how one can derive discrete torsion as an ambiguity
in specifying the action of an orbifold group on a 1-gerbe with connection, in other words, as
an analogue of orbifold wilson lines. we do not give a rigorous derivation of discrete torsion
in this paper; see instead [9]. finally, we include an appendix on group cohomology, which
is used a great deal in this paper and may not be familiar to the reader.

in this paper we concentrate on developing some degree of physical intuition for our
results on discrete torsion, and give simplied (and rather loose) derivations. a rigorous
derivation of our results on 1-gerbes, together with a detailed description of 1-gerbes, is
provided in a separate paper [9].

we should remark that our purpose in writing this paper and [9] was primarily con-
ceptual, rather than computational, in nature. in these papers we give a new conceptual
understanding of discrete torsion. along the way we provide some fringe benets, such as an
understanding of orbifold wilson lines for nontrivial bundles, a description of discrete torsion
in backgrounds with nontrivial torsion1, and a thorough pedagogical review of 1-gerbes in
terms of sheaves of categories. however, we do not provide signicant new computational
methods.

we should mention that there are a few issues concerning discrete torsion which we
shall not address in either this paper or [9]. first, we shall only discuss discrete torsion

1torsion in the sense of, nontrivial 3-form curvature, as opposed to the mathematical senses.

5

for orbifold singularities. one might wonder if discrete torsion, or some close analogue, can
be dened for non-orbifold singularities, such as conifold singularities; we shall not address
this matter here. second, we shall not attempt to discuss how turning on discrete torsion
alters the moduli space structure, i.e., how discrete torsion changes the allowed resolutions
of singularities. see instead [2] for a preliminary discussion of this matter.

2 orbifold wilson lines

we shall begin by making a close examination of principal bundles and heterotic string
orbifolds, in order to carefully review the notion of an orbifold wilson line. in the next
section, we describe gerbes, which provide the generalization of line bundles required to
describe higher rank tensor potentials in supergravity theories. once we have given a basic
description of gerbes, we shall describe how the notion of orbifold wilson line generalizes
to the case of gerbes, and in the process, recover discrete torsion (and its analogues for
the other tensor potentials appearing in supergravity theories) as a precise analogue of an
orbifold wilson line for a gerbe.

let x be a smooth manifold, and  a discrete group acting by dieomorphisms on x.
in this section we shall discuss how to extend the action of  to a bundle on x and to a
connection on the bundle. we shall explicitly recover, for example, the orbifold wilson lines
that crop up in toroidal heterotic orbifolds. in the next section we shall generalize the same
methods to describe discrete torsion as an analogue of orbifold wilson lines for higher-degree
gerbes.

2.1 basics of orbifold wilson lines

before we begin discussing orbifold wilson lines in mathematical detail, we shall take a
moment to discuss them in generality. we should point out that in this paper we will always
assume that gauge bundles in question are abelian; that is, any principal g-bundle appearing
implicitly or explicitly has abelian g.

in constructing heterotic orbifolds, people often mention orbifold wilson lines. what are
they? in constructing a heterotic toroidal orbifold, one can combine the action of  on x
with a gauge transformation, so as to create wilson lines on the quotient space. the action
on the gauge bundle denes the lift of  to the bundle. such wilson lines are typically called
orbifold wilson lines.

the simple description above works precisely in the case that the bundle being orbifolded
is trivial. in this case, there is a canonical (in fact, trivial) lift that leaves the bers invariant,
and any other lift can be described as combining a gauge transformation with the action

6

of  on the base. in general, when the bundle is nontrivial, there is no canonical lift, and
so one has to work harder. a specication of a lift of  to a bundle is known technically
as a choice of equivariant structure on the bundle, and so to derive orbifold wilson lines
in the general context we will speak of classifying equivariant structures. we shall study
equivariant structures in much more detail in the next subsection. in the remainder of this
subsection, we shall attempt to give some intuition for the relevant ideas.

consider for simplicity the special case of an orbifold group  acting freely (without xed
points) on a space x. how precisely do we describe a wilson line on the quotient space? let
x  x, and pick some path from x to g  x for some g  . in essence, a wilson loop on the
quotient space x/ is the composition of the (nonclosed) wilson loop along this path from
x to g  x with a gauge transformation describing the action of g   on the corresponding
principal bundle. it should be clear from this description that equivariant structures on a
bundle are encoding information about wilson lines on the quotient space, among other
things. for this reason, choices of equivariant structures are often called orbifold wilson
lines.

how should orbifold wilson lines be classied? again, for simplicity assume  acts freely
on x. we shall examine how at connections on the quotient space are related to at
connections on the cover, in order to shed some light. (in later sections we shall not assume
that bundles under consideration admit at connections; we make this assumption here in
order to perform an enlightening calculation.) first, recall that for any g, the moduli space
of at g-connections on x/, for abelian g, is given by

hom (1(x/), g) /g

where g acts by conjugation. for abelian g, conjugation acts trivially, and so the moduli
space of at g-connections on x/ is simply

hom (1(x/), g)

thus, in order to study orbifold wilson lines on x, we need to understand how 1(x/)
is related to 1(x). assuming  is discrete and x is connected, then from the long exact
sequence for homotopy2 we nd the short exact sequence

0  1(x)  1(x/)  0()  0

so 1(x/) is an extension of 0() =  by 1(x). as 1(x/) receives a contribution from
, we see that orbifolding enhances the space of possible wilson lines by hom(, g), roughly
speaking. more precisely, we have the long exact sequence

0  hom(, g)  hom (1(x/), g)  hom (1(x), g)    

2applied to the principal  bundle

  x  x/

whose existence follows from the fact that  acts freely.

7

for example, for the special case g = u(1), we have the short exact sequence3

0  h 1(, u(1))  hom (1(x/), u(1))  hom (1(x), u(1))  0

where h 1(, u(1)) denotes group cohomology of  with trivial action on the coecients
u(1). thus, we see explicitly that for  discrete and freely-acting, at u(1)-connections on
the quotient space pick up a contribution from the group cohomology group h 1(, u(1)),
which we can identify with orbifold u(1) wilson lines.

the results of the discussion above are important and bear repeating. we just argued
that, for  discrete and freely-acting, at u(1) connections on the quotient get a contri-
bution from h 1(, u(1)). we shall argue in later sections that for general abelian g and
general discrete  (not necessarily freely-acting), orbifold g wilson lines are classied by
h 1(, g), where h 1(, g) denotes group cohomology of , with coecients4 g.
in later
sections we shall also not make any assumptions concerning the nature of the bundle  we
shall not assume the bundle in question admits at connections. we shall rigorously de-
rive the classication of orbifold wilson lines as a classication of equivariant structures on
principal bundles with connection. when we classify equivariant structures on gerbes with
connection5, we shall recover a classication described by h 2(, u(1)).

at this point we shall take a moment to clarify an issue that may have been puzzling
the reader. we claimed in the introduction that we would describe discrete torsion in terms
of orbifold wilson lines for b elds. however, discrete torsion is measured in terms of
group cohomology, whereas (for at connections) wilson lines are given by hom(1, g)/g.
however, for the special case g = u(1),

hom (1, g) /g = h 1(, u(1))

where h 1(, u(1)) is group cohomology.
it should now be clear to the reader that the
formal classication of discrete torsion  given by h 2(, u(1))  is quite similar to the
formal classication of orbifold u(1) wilson lines  given by h 1(, u(1)).
in particular,
the reader should now be less surprised that orbifold wilson lines and discrete torsion are
related.

one issue we have glossed over so far concerns fake wilson lines, which we shall now
take a moment to discuss. consider for example the orbifold c2/z2. this space is simply-
connected, yet the usual prescriptions for orbifold wilson lines tell us that there is a physical
degree of freedom (given by hom(z2, g)) which we would usually associate with wilson
lines. such degrees of freedom are often referred to as fake wilson lines [11].

3using the fact that u (1) = r/z is an injective z-module [10, section i.7].
4technically, we are also assuming that the action of  on the coecients g is trivial. we shall make this

assumption on group cohomology throughout this paper.

5and band c(u (1)), technically.

8

this degree of freedom is in fact physical  not some unphysical artifact. in the next few
sections we shall see mathematically that one will recover degrees of freedom measured by

h 1(, g) = hom(, g)

for -orbifolds of spaces with g-bundles (with g abelian), regardless of whether or not  is
freely acting.

how precisely should fake wilson lines be interpreted on the quotient space? it can be
shown [16, chapter 14] that if one quotients the total spaces of bundles, using equivariant
structures dening fake wilson lines, then the resulting object over the quotient space is
not a ber bundle. (for example, a z2 orbifold of a rank n complex vector bundle over c2
with nontrivial orbifold wilson lines is not a ber bundle over the quotient space c2/z2
 one gets an object whose ber over most points is cn, appropriate for a rank n vector
bundle, but whose ber over the singularity is cn/z2.) we have not pursued this question
in depth, but we do have a strong suspicion. in the case that x/ is an algebraic variety6,
it is possible to construct (reexive) sheaves which are closely related to, but not quite the
same as, bundles. for example, on c2/z2, in addition to line bundles there are also reexive
rank 1 sheaves. we nd it very tempting to conjecture that these reexive rank 1 sheaves
correspond to quotients of equivariant line bundles on c2 with nontrivial fake wilson lines,
and that more generally, fake wilson lines on quotient spaces that are algebraic varieties
have an interpretation in terms of reexive sheaves which are not locally free. moreover,
isomorphism classes of reexive sheaves on ane spaces c2/ are classied in the same
way as orbifold wilson lines [17], a fact that forms one corner of the celebrated mckay
correspondence. we shall have nothing further to say on this matter in this paper.

before we move on to discuss lifts  of  acting on line bundles with connection, we shall
discuss some amusing technical points regarding equivariant bundles. one natural question
to ask is the following: given some equivariant structure on a bundle p , how can one compute
the characteristic classes of the quotient bundle p/?

the basic idea is to construct a principle g-bundle on e  x, such that the projection
to x/ yields the quotient bundle. we shall not work out the details here; see instead [12],
where this program is pursued in detail. in principle one could follow the same program
for the equivariant gerbes we shall construct in later sections, and discuss their equivariant
characteristic classes. however, we shall not pursue this direction in this paper.

in passing we should also note that on rare occasions, equivariant bundles and equivariant
bundles with connection have been discussed in the physics literature in terms of v-bundles
[13, 14, 15]. the language of v-bundles is rather dierent from the language we shall use in
this paper to describe orbifold wilson lines, though it is technically equivalent.

6 technically, a noetherian normal variety.

9

2.2 equivariant bundles

let p be a principal g-bundle on x for some abelian lie group g (e.g., g = u(1)n for some
positive n). given the action of  on x, we would like to study lifts of the action of  on x
to the total space of p .

what precisely is a lift of the action of ? let  : p  x denote the projection, then
a lift of the action of an element g   is a dieomorphism g : p  p such that g is a
morphism of principal g-bundles. the statement that g is a morphism of bundles means
precisely that the following diagram commutes:

p
 
x

g

 p

 

(1)

g

 x

the statement that g is a morphism of principal g-bundles, not merely a morphism of
bundles, means that, in addition to the commutativity of the diagram above, the action of
g on the total space must commute with g. in other words, g(h  p) = h  g(p) for all h  g
and p  p . furthermore, in order to lift the action of the entire group  and not just its
elements, we shall impose the constraint that

for all g1, g2  .

gg1  g2 = g1  g2

(2)

the constraint given in equation (2) is quite important; one is not always guaranteed of
nding lifts that satisfy (2). as an example7, we shall examine the nontrivial z2 bundle over
s1. consider the group  = z2 that acts on the base s1 as a half-rotation of the circle. on
the total space of the nontrivial z2 bundle, essentially a 720 object,  must act by rotation
by either +180 or 180, in order to cover the action of  on the base s1 (i.e., in order
for diagram (1) to commute). unfortunately, neither such action on the total space of the
bundle squares to the identity, and so equation (2) can not be satised in this case.

as the example just given demonstrates, although trivial bundles admit lifts of orbifold
group actions, not all nontrivial bundles admit lifts of orbifold group actions. rather than
digress to explain conditions for the existence of lifts, we shall simply assume lifts exist in
all examples considered in this paper. (we shall make a similar assumption when discussing
equivariant gerbes.)

a lift of the action of  to a bundle is also called a choice of (-)equivariant structure on

the bundle.

in passing, we should also mention that instead of speaking of lifts, we could equivalently
work in terms of pullbacks. loosely speaking, in terms of pullbacks, a bundle p is almost

7we would like to thank a. knutson for pointing out this example to us.

10

equivariantizable with respect to the action of  if, for all g  , g p = p . as above, not
all bundles will necessarily be equivariant with respect to some given , but we shall not
discuss relevant constraints in this paper. more precisely, an equivariant bundle p is dened
to be a bundle with a choice of equivariant structure, which can be dened as a specic set of
isomorphisms g : g p  p for all g  , subject to the obvious analogue of equation (2).

it is easy to check that the denitions of equivariant structures in terms of lifts and in
terms of pullbacks are equivalent. for completeness, we shall outline the argument here. let
g : g p  p dene an equivariant structure (in terms of pullbacks) on a principal bundle
p . then, we can dene a lift g of g   as, g = g1  (g1). the reader can easily check
that g does indeed dene a lift of g, as dened above. conversely, given a lift g of g  , we
can dene an equivariant structure (in terms of pullbacks) g : g p  p by, 1
g = g   g.
it is easy to check that the two constructions given here are inverses of one another.

how many possible lifts of the action of a given g   exist? given any one lift, we can
certainly make any other lift by composing the action of the lift with a gauge transformation.
more precisely, given a set of lifts {g|g  }, we can construct a new set of lifts {g } by
composing each g with a gauge transformation g : x  g such that g2(x)  g1(g1
2 x) =
g2g1(x) for all x  x. moreover, any two lifts dier by a set of such gauge transformations.
we can rephrase this by saying that any two lifts of the action of  to p dier by an element
of hom(, c (g)) = h 1(, c (g)).

now, from our knowledge of orbifold wilson lines, we will eventually want (equiva-
lence classes of) lifts to be classied by h 1(, g) = hom(, g), but above we only have
h 1(, c (g)). what have we forgotten?

so far we have only studied how to extend the action of  to the total space of a bundle.
we have not yet spoken about further requiring the action of  to preserve the connection
on the bundle. this requirement will place additional constraints on the lifts. when we are
done, we will see that by considering lifts of the action of  to line bundles with connection,
instead of just line bundles, we will recover the classication h 1(, g), as desired.

for more information on equivariant bundles, see for example [16].

2.3 equivariant bundles with connection

in the previous subsection we described the action of the group  on principal g-bundles, for
g an abelian lie group. in this section we shall extend this discussion to include consideration
of a connection on a bundle. we shall argue that equivalence classes of lifts of the action of
 to pairs (line bundle, connection) are classied by the group cohomology group h 1(, g).
(more precisely, we shall nd a non-canonical correspondence between equivariant structures
on principal g-bundles with connection and elements of h 1(, g). in special cases, such as

11

trivial principal g-bundles, there will be a canonical correspondence.) for more information
on connection-preserving lifts, see8 [12] and [22, section 1.13].

before going on, we shall take a moment to very briey review connections on principal
bundles and what it means for a lift to preserve a connection. one way to think of a
connection on a bundle is as a set of gauge elds a, one for each element of a good cover
of the base. however, there is a slightly more elegant description which we shall use instead
[21, section vbis.a]. if p is the total space of a principal g-bundle on x, then a connection
on p is a map t p  lie g, or a (lie g)-valued 1-form on p , satisfying certain properties
we shall not describe here (see instead, for example, [20, section 11.4] or [21, section v bis
a1]). given an open set u  x such that p |u is trivial, let s : u  p be a section, and let
 denote the connection on p , i.e., the corresponding (lie g)-valued 1-form, then we can
recover a gauge eld on the base x as s. any two distinct sections s1, s2 : u  p dene
2  (dg)g1. if  : x  g
gauge elds diering by a gauge transformation, i.e., s
denes a gauge transformation, then it acts on the connection  as ([21, section v bis,
problem 1], [22, section 1.10])

1 = s

(p)  ((p)) (p) 1((p))  d ln(  )(p)

for p  p and  : p  x the projection. clearly, a gauge transformation  : x  g will
preserve the connection (not just up to gauge equivalence) if and only if  is a constant map.

how does a morphism of principal bundles act on a connection? let  : p1  p2 denote a
morphism of principal bundles, then if 2 is a connection on p2,  2 (dened in the obvious
way) is a connection on p1. more relevantly to the problem under discussion, if g   and
g denotes the lift of g, then we shall say that g preserves the connection  if g  = , not
just up to gauge transformation.

in order to get a well-dened connection living over the quotient x/, we shall demand
that the lift of the action of  preserves the connection itself, not just its gauge-equivalence
class. (if this were not the case, then we would not be able to immediately write down a
well-dened connection over the quotient space.) phrased another way, a lift of the action
of  on x will yield a well-dened connection on the quotient precisely if it can be deformed
by an element of h 1(, c (g)) so that it preserves the connection itself, not just its gauge-
equivalence class. phrased another way still, if we merely demanded that the lift of 
preserve only the gauge-equivalence class of the connection, then naively spoke of the gauge-

8there is also related information in [18, sections 2.4, 2.5] and [19, section v.2]. these references analyze
a distinct but related problem; their discussion might at rst confuse the reader. specically, instead of
considering representations of  in the group of all connection-preserving lifts of dieomorphisms of the
base, they study the space of connection-preserving lifts itself, and argue that it is a central extension of the
group of bundle-with-connection-preserving dieomorphisms of the base by u (1), for principal u (1)-bundles.
the reader might be then tempted to argue that lifts of  should be classied by h 2(, u (1)), but this is not
quite correct. in particular, when viewing the set of all connection-preserving lifts as a central extension, the
elements that project to  will not, in general, form a representation of , i.e., will not satisfy equation (2).

12

equivalence class descending to the quotient, we would not be guaranteed of nding any
representatives of the quotiented gauge-equivalence class.

necessary and sucient conditions for a lift of  to preserve the connection are known
and easy to describe [22]. in fact, the action of g   on the base x is liftable to a map of
bundle with connection if and only if the action of g preserves the values9 of wilson loops
on the base [22, prop. 1.12.2]. (note that even for bundles with a non-at connection 
nontrivial bundles  one can still dene wilson loops  however, only in the special case
of a at connection will the value of a wilson loop depend only on the homotopy class of
the loop.) the reader should not be surprised by this result, as this fact is often implicitly
claimed in the literature on toroidal heterotic orbifolds, for example.

now, how many lifts of  preserve the connection itself? let {g} denote a lift of {g  }
that preserves the connection itself. we can compose {g} with an element of h 1(, c (g)) to
get another lift, but only the constant elements, namely those in h 1(, g)  h 1(, c (g)),
will act so as to preserve the connection itself. thus, h 1(, g) acts on the set of connection-
preserving lifts of , and it should be clear this action is both transitive and free.

note that in the very special case that the equivariant bundle on x is trivial, then there
is (distinguished) trivial lift, and so there is a canonical correspondence between elements
of h 1(, g) and connection-preserving lifts. for more general bundles, there is no such
distinguished lift.

as this result is important, we shall repeat it. we have just shown that (-)equivariant
structures on g-bundles with connection can be (noncanonically) identied with elements of
h 1(, g). in special cases, such as trivial bundles, there is a canonical identication.

in passing, note that our analysis of equivariant structures on bundles with connection
did not assume  was freely-acting or that  be abelian: our analysis applies equally well to
cases in which  has xed points on the base space, as well as cases in which  is nonabelian.

2.4 example: heterotic orbifolds

as a more explicit example, let us consider how to dene a toroidal heterotic orbifold. here
we have some principal g bundle (for some g) over the torus, which for simplicity we shall
assume to be trivial10. we shall also assume the connection on the bundle on the torus is
not merely at, but actually trivial. in these special circumstances, any dieomorphism of

9strictly speaking, preserves the values of the wilson loops up to conjugation; however, for bundles with

abelian structure group, conjugation acts trivially.

10although the bundle has a at connection, it need not be topologically trivial or even trivializable  this
is a stronger constraint than necessary, which we are introducing in order to keep this warm-up example
simple.

13

the base lifts to an action on the bundle.

now, to dene a lift of an action of  on the torus to the total space of the principal
bundle is trivial. since the total space of a trivial principal bundle is just x  g, clearly we
can lift the action of  to the total space by dening it to be trivial on the ber g. (more
generally, for a nontrivial bundle, demanding that the group  lift to an action on the total
space of the bundle is not trivial. depending upon both x and the bundle in question, there
are often obstructions.) given any one such lift, we can nd all other possible lifts simply
by composing the trivial lift with a gauge transformation.

in order to get a well-dened connection on the quotient space, however, there are some
constraints on the possible lifts. first, note that in these special circumstances, we can
describe any lift as the composition of the trivial lift with a gauge transformation. for any
g  , let g : x  g denote the corresponding gauge transformation. then in order
to preserve the connection itself, g must be constant, in other words, g = (g) for some
 :   g. these (g) dene the usual orbifold wilson lines.

2.5 discussion in terms of cech cohomology

eventually in this paper we will work through arguments closely analogous to those above
to derive analogues of orbifold wilson lines for gerbes. in order to do this properly is some-
what dicult and time-consuming  (1-)gerbes are properly described in terms of sheaves of
categories, and their full analysis can be somewhat lengthy. in order to give some general
intuition for the results at the level of hitchins [7, 8] discussion of gerbes, we will eventu-
ally give a rather loose derivation of the results in terms of cech cohomology. (a rigorous
derivation will appear in [9].)

as a warm-up for that eventual discussion, in this section we shall very briey describe
how one can re-derive orbifold wilson lines while working at the level of cech cohomol-
ogy, i.e., at the level of transition functions for bundles. we feel that such an approach is
philosophically somewhat awed  the transition functions of a bundle do not really cap-
ture all information about the bundle. for example, gauge transformations of a bundle are
completely invisible at the level of transition functions. thus, we do not nd the notion
of dening an equivariant structure on a bundle by putting an equivariant structure on its
transition functions to be completely satisfying. thus, when we study equivariant gerbes,
we shall not limit ourselves to only discussing equivariant structures on gerbe transition
functions, but shall also discuss equivariant structures on the gerbes themselves.

experts will note that in this subsection we implicitly make some assumptions regarding
the behavior of bundle trivializations under the action of the orbifold group. as our purpose
in this subsection is not to give a rigorous derivation but merely to perform an enlightening
calculation, we shall gloss over such issues.

14

let p be a principal g-bundle on a manifold x, and let  be a group acting on x
by dieomorphisms. let {u} be a good invariant cover of x, by which we means that
each u is invariant under , and each u is a disjoint union of contractible open sets. for
example, one can often get good invariant covers of a space x from good covers of the
quotient x/. note that a good invariant cover is not a good cover, in general. we shall
assume good invariant covers exist in this subsection, though it is not clear that this need be
true in general. (again, our purpose in this subsection is to present enlightening calculations
and plausibility arguments, not completely rigorous proofs.)

let h denote transition functions for the bundle p . assume p has an equivariant
structure, which at the level of transition functions means that for all g   there exist
functions g

 : u  g such that

g h ( = h  g ) = g

 h (g

)1

(3)

the functions g
 are local trivialization realizations of an isomorphism of principal g-bundles
g : p  g p for each g  . it should be clear that g = (g)1 where the g were dened
in the section on equivariant bundles.

the g partially specify an equivariant structure on p , but we also need a little more

information. in particular, we must also demand that for g1, g2  ,

g2
 g 

2g1

 = g1g2



(4)

note that this is the appropriate cech version of equation (2).

now, suppose g

 and  g
the same group . dene g

 dene two distinct equivariant structures on p , with respect to
 : u  u(1) by,

g

 

g

 g


from the fact that both g
fact that

 = g
g



 and g

 must satisfy equation (3), we can immediately derive the

on u = u  u, and so the g
 dene a function g : x  u(1). this is a gauge
transformation describing the dierence between two equivariant structures. it is almost,
but not quite, the same as the gauge transformation g described in the section on equivariant
bundles.

from equation (4), we see that the g must obey

g2  g 

2g1 = g1g2

thus, any two equivariant structures on p dier by an element of h 1(, c (g)), as

described in the section on equivariant bundles.

15

we shall now recover the fact that equivariant structures on bundles with connection

dier by elements of h 1(, g), for abelian g.

let a be a (lie g)-valued one-form on the open set u, dening a connection on p . in

other words, on overlaps u = u  u,

a  a = d ln h

under the action of g  , since

g h = g

 h (g

)1

we know that

g a = a + d ln g


from this we see that if g

 dene two distinct equivariant structures on the
transition functions, then we must have g
 be constant, in order for g a to be well-
dened. thus, we recover the fact that g is constant, and so the subset of h 1(, c (g))
that describes equivariant bundles with connection is given by h 1(, g), as claimed.

 and  g

/g

in essence, we have been using a form of equivariant cech cohomology. the mathematics
literature seems to contain multiple11 versions of equivariant cech cohomology, unfortunately
none of them are quite adequate for our eventual needs (i.e., none of them correspond to the
precise way we set up equivariant structures on gerbes), and so we shall not speak about
them further.

3 n-gerbes

discrete torsion has long been associated with the two-form b-elds of supergravity theories.
the reader should not be surprised, therefore, that a deep understanding of discrete torsion
hinges on a deep understanding of the two-form b elds. we shall argue that b elds should
be understood as connections on 1-gerbes, and that discrete torsion arises when lifting the
action of an orbifold group to a 1-gerbe with connection.

why might one want a new mathematical object to describe b-elds in type ii string
theory? the reason is a dilemma that has no doubt puzzled for many years. the torsion12 h
is dened to be h = db. so long as h is taken to be cohomologically trivial, this is certainly
a sensible denition. unfortunately, in general one often wants to speak of h which is not

11one version of equivariant cech cohomology is described in [23, chapitre v]. another version is described

in [24, section 2] and [25, section 5].

12no relation to the various mathematical concepts of torsion.

16

a cohomologically trivial element of h 3(r). in such a case, the relation h = db can only
hold locally. (this point has been made previously in, for example, [26].)

we shall see shortly that such h can be understood globally as a connection on a 1-gerbe.
more generally, many of the tensor eld potentials appearing in type ii string theories will
have a natural and obvious interpretation in terms of connections on n-gerbes, though for
the sake of simplifying the discussion we will usually only discuss the two-form tensor eld
in examples.

in passing, we should also mention that although many tensor eld potentials clearly can
be understood in terms of gerbes, it is not clear that all tensor eld potentials have such
an understanding. one notable potential exception is the b-eld of heterotic string theory.
recall that one has the anomaly cancellation constraint

dh  tr r  r  tr f  f

if the heterotic b eld were a 1-gerbe connection, then we shall see that the curvature h
would be a closed form, whereas that is certainly not the case here in general. moreover, many
other tensor eld potentials have nontrivial interactions and mixed gauge transformations,
and it is not completely clear whether these phenomena can always be understood in terms of
gerbes. as a result, one should be somewhat careful about blindly identifying all tensor eld
potentials with connections on gerbes. these issues should not arise for the comparatively
simpler cases of type ii 2-form potentials, which is the primary case of interest for us in this
paper.

we should also mention a slight technical caveat. we shall only be discussing gerbes with
band c (u(1)) [9], which means, in less technical language, that there exist more general
gerbes than those discussed in this section. for example, some theories contain multiple
coupled tensor multiplets (for one example, see [27]), which would be described in terms of
connections on gerbes with band c (u(1)n ). we shall not discuss gerbes with general
bands in this paper; see instead [9].

in this section we will give a description of gerbes and connections on gerbes, due to [7, 8].
we shall begin by dening gerbes themselves, then afterwards we shall describe connections
on gerbes. in the next section we will discuss the analogue of orbifold wilson lines for
gerbes.

3.1 description in terms of cohomology

we shall begin by describing characteristic classes of abstract objects called n-gerbes,
following the discussion in [7, 8]. these characteristic classes, which for n-gerbes on a
space x, are elements of the sheaf cohomology group h n+1(x, c (u(1))). this is closely
analogous to describing a line bundle in terms of chern classes. more intrinsic denitions of

17

gerbes are given in the next section and in [9]. gerbes themselves take considerably longer
to dene; by rst describing their characteristic classes, we hope to give the reader some
basic intuitions for these objects.

in passing we should comment on our usage of the terminology n-gerbe. we are
in general, an n-gerbe should, morally, be
following the simplied conventions of [7, 8].
understood in terms of sheaves of multicategories. unfortunately, n-categories for n > 2 are
not well understood at present. as a result, although 1-gerbes and, to a slightly lesser extent,
2-gerbes are well understood, higher degree gerbes are not on as rm a footing. it seems
reasonably clear that such objects should exist, however, and one can certainly describe
many properties that a general n-gerbe should possess in terms of characteristic classes (as
in this section) and deligne cohomology. thus, we shall often speak (loosely) of general
n-gerbes, though for n > 2 the reader should probably take such remarks with a small grain
of salt.

a couple of paragraphs ago we mentioned that the characteristic classes of gerbes could
be understood in terms of sheaf cohomology, and more specically that the characteristic
classes of possible n-gerbes on a space x live in h n+1(x, c (u(1))). for those readers
not acquainted with sheaf cohomology, we can express this somewhat more simply (and
loosely) in terms of cech cocycles with respect to some xed open cover. let u be a
reasonably nice13 open cover of x. then an element of h n+1(x, c (u(1))) is essentially
dened by a set of smooth functions h0 n+1 : u0 n+1  u(1), one for each overlap
u0 n+1 = u0      un+1, subject to the constraint

(h)0n+2 = 1

(5)

where h is dened by

(h)0 n+2 

n+2yi=0

h()i
0  i n+2

on the intersection u0      un+2. two such sets of functions h0 n+1, h
identied with the same element of h n+2(x, c (u(1))) if and only if

0 n+1 are

h0 n+1 = h

0 n+1

n+1yi=0

f ()i
0  in+1

(6)

for some functions f0 n : u0      un  u(1).

as a special case, let us see how this duplicates line bundles. in the classication of n-
gerbes implicit in the description of characteristic classes above, it should be clear that line
bundles are very special examples of n-gerbes, specically, 0-gerbes. a 0-gerbe is specied
by an element of h 1(x, c (u(1))), that is, a set of smooth functions h : u  u  u(1),
such that

13specically, a good open cover.

hh1

 h = 1

18

on triple intersections u  u  u (this is the specialization of equation (5)). the reader
should immediately recognize this as dening transition functions for a smooth u(1) bundle
on x. equation (5) is precisely the statement that transition functions agree on triple
overlaps. moreover, two u(1) line bundles are equivalent if and only if their transition
functions h, h

 are related by [28, chapter 5.2]

h = h

f/f

for some set of functions f : u  u(1). the reader should immediately recognize this as
the specialization of equation (6).

although the sheaf cohomology group h 1(x, c (u(1))) precisely describes (equivalence
classes of) transition functions for 0-gerbes (smooth principal u(1) bundles), the same is not
true for higher degree gerbes  an element of sheaf cohomology for a higher degree gerbe
does not dene a set of transition functions. (we shall study transition functions for gerbes
in the next subsection.)

we can rewrite these characteristic classes of n-gerbes in a format that is more accessible

to calculation. using the short exact sequence of (c ) sheaves

0  c (z) = z  c (r)  c (u(1))  0

one can immediately prove, from the associated long exact sequence, that for n  0,

h n+1(x, c (u(1))) = h n+2(x, z)

as a special case, this implies that 0-gerbes are classied by elements of h 2(x, z), and

indeed it is a standard fact that c  line bundles are classied by their rst chern class.

in general, any two trivializations of a trivializable n-gerbe, that is, one described by a
cohomologically trivial (n + 1)-cocycle, dier by an (n  1)-gerbe. this should be clear from
the description above  any cohomologically trivial (n + 1)-cocycle is a coboundary of some
n-cochain, and any two such cochains dier by an n-cocycle, dening an (n  1)-gerbe.

before going on, we should mention that in the remainder of this paper (as well as [9]) we
shall usually abbreviate 1-gerbes to simply gerbes. unfortunately, on rare occasion we
shall also use gerbes as shorthand for n-gerbes. the usage should be clear from context.

3.2 description in terms of transition functions

in the previous section we described n-gerbes in terms of sheaf cohomology, which is precisely
analogous to describing line bundles in terms of chern classes. traditionally gerbes are
typically dened in terms of sheaves of multicategories, as we shall do in [9]. in this section,

19

we shall give a simplied account, due to [7, 8], which amounts to describing gerbes in terms
of transition functions. in [9] we shall review sheaves of categories and the description of
1-gerbes in such language, in addition to giving a geometric rst-principles derivation of
discrete torsion.

before grappling with transition functions for n-gerbes, we shall begin with a description
of transition functions for 1-gerbes. let {u} be a good cover of x, then we can dene a
1-gerbe on x in terms of two pieces of data:

1. a principal u(1) bundle l over each u = u  u (subject to the convention

l = l1

), such that l  l  l is trivializable on u

2. an explicit trivialization  : u  u(1) of l  l  l on u

then,  naturally denes a cech 2-cochain, and it should be clear that  = 1, i.e., the
canonical section of the canonically trivial bundle dened by tensoring the obvious twelve
factors of principal u(1) bundles.

thus,  denes a 2-cocycle, and it should be clear that this 2-cocycle is the same 2-cocycle

dening the 1-gerbe in the description in the previous subsection.

we should take a moment to clarify the precise relationship between the construction
above and 1-gerbes dened in terms of sheaves of categories. in the description of gerbes in
terms of sheaves of categories, one can dene transition functions for the gerbe with respect
to a local trivialization, in precise analogy to transition functions for bundles. however, for
1-gerbes the objects one associates to overlaps of open sets are not maps into the group,
but rather line bundles, subject to a constraint on triple overlaps. put more directly, the
description given in the paragraphs above precisely describes transition functions for a 1-
gerbe. the corresponding element of sheaf cohomology is merely a characteristic class,
classifying isomorphism classes.

thus, the description of 1-gerbes given so far in this section is technically a description of
transition functions for 1-gerbes. the reader may well wonder what is a 1-gerbe; the answer
is, a special kind of sheaf of categories. sheaves of categories and related concepts have been
banished to [9], but we shall give a very quick avor of the construction here.

sometimes one speaks of objects of the 1-gerbe. these are line bundles l over open
sets u, such that l = l  l1
 . objects exist locally on x, but in general will not exist
globally (unless the 1-gerbe is trivializable, meaning the associated cech 2-cocycle is trivial
in cohomology).

in more formal treatments of gerbes, one often associates sheaves of categories with
gerbes14. in this description, the objects mentioned above are precisely objects of a cate-
14more precisely, there is a standard method to associate sheaves of 1-categories and 2-categories to 1-

20

gory associated to some open set on x. we shall not go into a detailed description of gerbes
as sheaves of categories in this section; see instead [9].

now that we have discussed 1-gerbes, how are n-gerbes dened? in principle an analogous
description should hold true  transition functions for an n-gerbe should consist of associating
an (n  1)-gerbe to each overlap, subject to constraints at triple overlaps. although we are
well-acquainted with more intrinsic denitions of 1-gerbes [9], we have not worked through
higher n-gerbes in comparable detail, and so we hesitate to say much more concerning
transition functions for higher order gerbes. we hope to return to this elsewhere [29].

3.3 connections on gerbes

now that we have stated the denition of an n-gerbe, we shall dene a connection on an
n-gerbe, which is a straightforward generalization of the notion of connection on a c  line
bundle.

for simplicity, x some good open cover u of x. a connection on an n-gerbe is dened
by a choice of h  n+2(x) such that dh = 0 (a closed (n + 2)-form on x), and a choice
of (b)  c 1(n+1), that is, a choice of smooth (n + 1)-form on u for each , such that on
each u, h|u = db, and such that on overlaps u  u, b  b = da, where a is a
smooth n-form on u. in general there will more more terms, of lower-degree-forms, lling
out an entire cocycle in the cech-de rham complex.

to be complete, we need to specify how the forms on various open sets are related by
the transition functions for the n-gerbe. for simplicity, consider a 1-gerbe. here, we have a
globally-dened 3-form h, a family of 2-forms b, one for each open set u, a family of 1-
forms a, one for each intersection u = u  u. recall transition functions for a 1-gerbe
consist of line bundles l associated to each u; the 1-forms a are precisely connections15
on the u(1) bundles l. if  denotes the specied trivialization of l  l  l on
u, then we have

a + a + a = d ln 

then, as per the description above,

on overlaps u, and

b  b = da

h|u = db

in principle, similar remarks hold for more general n-gerbes.

gerbes and 2-gerbes, respectively. the higher-degree gerbes outlined in [7, 8] presumably correspond to
sheaves of higher-degree multicategories, however the precise denitions required have not been worked out,
to our knowledge.

15note we are implicitly using the fact that the {u} form a good cover, so each u is contractible.

21

the reader should immediately recognize that a connection on a 1-gerbe is precisely the
same thing as a type ii string theory b-eld. (the point that b elds and the relation
h = db should really only be understood locally has been made previously in the physics
literature, albeit not usually in terms of connections on gerbes; see for example [26].) this
relationship seems to be well understood in certain parts of the eld; we repeat it here simply
to make this note more self-contained. in general, the reader should recognize that tensor
eld potentials appearing in type ii supergravities often look like connections on gerbes.

the reader should also notice that a connection on a 0-gerbe precisely coincides with
the usual notion of connection on a smooth line bundle. to make this more clear, change
notation as follows: change h to f , and change b to a. for a connection on a smooth line
bundle, locally we have the relation f = da, but globally this does not hold if f is a nonzero
element of h 2(x, r).

in the special case that f descends from an element of h 2(x, z) via the natural map
h 2(x, z)  h 2(x, r), then there exists a c  line bundle whose rst chern class is rep-
resented by f . (in particular, kahler forms can be interpreted as the rst chern classes of
(holomorphic) line bundles precisely when the kahler form lies in the image of h 2(x, z) in
h 2(x, r).) analogously, for an n-gerbe, when the curvature h descends from an element
of h n+2(x, z), then there exists an n-gerbe whose characteristic class is dened by h.

in fact, we have been slightly sloppy about certain details. suppose that h n+2(x, z)
contains torsion16, that is, elements of nite order, then if an n-gerbe-connection denes
an n-gerbe, it does not do so uniquely  one will get several n-gerbes, each of which has a
characteristic class that descends to the same element of h n+2(x, r). are these extra degrees
of freedom physically relevant  in other words, must there be an actual gerbe underlying
these connections?

it is easy to see that an actual gerbe must underlie such connections. the point is that
torsion elements of h n+2(x, z) contain physically relevant information, as was noted in, for
example, [4].

given that n-gerbes can be loosely interpreted as one generalization of line bundles, the
reader may wonder if there is some gerbe-analogue of the holonomy of a at u(1) connection.
indeed, it is possible to dene the holonomy of a at n-gerbe-connection, though we shall
not do so here. such holonomies have been observed in physics previously; one example is
[27].

as mentioned earlier, gerbes are often described in terms of sheaves of categories. there
is a corresponding notion of connection in such a description, which we have summarized in
[9] and can also be found in [18, section 5.3].

16in the mathematical sense.

22

3.4 gauge transformations of gerbes

for principal u(1)-bundles there is a well-dened notion of gauge transformation: a gauge
transformation is dened by a map f : x  u(1). what is the analogue for n-gerbes?

we shall begin by describing gauge transformations for 1-gerbes. it can be shown that
the analogue of a gauge transformation for a 1-gerbe is given by a principal u(1)-bundle.
a rigorous derivation of this fact and related material is given in [9]. we shall describe the
implications of this fact for connections on 1-gerbes, and for transition functions.

intuitively, how does a principal u(1)-bundle act on a 1-gerbe? in terms of sheaves
of categories, a 1-gerbe is locally a category of all principal u(1)-bundles, so given any one
object in that category, we can tensor with a principal u(1)-bundle to recover another object.
this is essentially the action, in somewhat loose language.

to properly describe how a principal u(1)-bundle acts on a 1-gerbe requires understand-
ing 1-gerbes in terms of sheaves of categories. the reader might well ask, however, how a
bundle acts on the transition functions for a 1-gerbe? we described transition functions for
1-gerbes by associating principal u(1) bundles to intersections u, together with an explicit
trivialization of cech coboundaries. the reader should (correctly) guess that a gauge trans-
formation of a 1-gerbe, at the level of transition functions, should be a gauge transformation
of the bundle on each coordinate overlap, such that the gauge transformations preserve the
trivializations on triple intersections. in other words, a gauge transformation of a 1-gerbe
should be a set of maps g : u  u(1), subject to the condition that g = 1. put more
simply still, a gauge transformation of a 1-gerbe is precisely a principal u(1)-bundle. note
that as expected by analogy with bundles, the transition functions are invariant (the bundles
on coordinate overlaps are unchanged by gauge transformations). note that by analogy with
bundles, one should expect a gauge transformation to leave transition functions invariant 
and indeed, our 1-gerbe gauge transformation does leave the transition functions invariant,
as a gauge transformation of each bundle is an automorphism of the bundle.

how does a gauge transformation of a 1-gerbe act on a connection on the 1-gerbe?
principal bundles have well-dened actions on gerbes; a unique specication of the action
of a principal u(1)-bundle, call it p , on a gerbe connection is equivalent to a choice of
connection on p . let {h : u  u(1)} be transition functions for p , and {a} a set
of 1-forms on elements of the cover {u} dening a connection on p . let (b, a, g)
be a set of data dening a connection on a 1-gerbe. then under the action of p , this data
transforms as follows:

b 7 b   b + da
a
g

7 a  a + d ln h
7 g + h

= g

23

more generally, the reader should correctly guess that a gauge transformation of an n-

gerbe is an (n  1)-gerbe. we shall not attempt to justify this statement here, however.

3.5 gerbes versus k theory

there seems to be a great deal of confusion regarding the relation between gerbes and k
theory, which we shall take a moment to speak to.

briey, a gerbe is an object for which (many) tensor eld potentials of supergravity are
(local) connections, just as a principal u(1)-bundle is an object for which a 1-form is a (local)
connection. by contrast, k theory classies possible charges of d-branes [30, 31].

loosely speaking (we shall rene this in a moment), gerbe connections are related to k
theory in the same way that background electromagnetic eld vacuum expectation values
are related to electrically-charged matter content  that is to say, at least at a naive level,
they are completely distinct.

for example, the gerbe connection corresponding to the iia rr 1-form is clearly a con-
nection on a line bundle, whereas the d0-brane is closely analogous to an electron, for
example, charged under the vector describing the connection on the gerbe. gerbe connec-
tions generalize vector elds; d-branes are analogous to generalizations of charged matter
elds. in this description, k theory is closely analogous to a classication of charged matter
representations appearing in the theory, which a priori, has nothing to do with the vectors
of the theory.

thus, at least naively, gerbes and k theory are (distinct) answers to distinct questions.
indeed, in general although k theory and integral cohomology are closely related, they are
in general not quite the same:

k 0(x)
k 1(x)

6= h even(x, z)
6= h odd (x, z)

now, in truth the full story is somewhat more complicated than we have pretended. one
signicant complication we have completely glossed over is that it is quite possible that not
all of the higher order tensor eld potentials can be properly understood in terms of gerbes.
even assuming that all of the tensor elds in a type ii supergravity can be understood
in terms of n-gerbes, there are additional issues. we have implicitly assumed gerbes can
be understood in the physical theory in isolation; whereas in fact, type ii supergravities
couple the connections of dierent gerbes, so it is not quite correct to try to understand
gerbes in type ii theories in isolation from the rest of the theory. in principle, if one studies
quantization17 of gerbe charge suciently carefully, taking into account the issues above,

17some relevant remarks can be found in, for example, [32, 33].

24

then one should be led to k theory. in other words, at some level, the k theory picture is
providing a compact discussion which takes these issues into account.

3.6 why gerbes?

so far we have presented gerbes as being a natural mathematical structure for which many
of the tensor eld potentials of supergravities can be understood as connections. a doubting
thomas might argue, are gerbes really necessary? after all, in supergravity theories, we only
see the tensor elds themselves; why not only speak of tensor elds on coordinate charts,
and forget about more abstract underlying structures?

we shall answer this question with another question: why bundles? whenever one
sees a vector eld with the usual gauge invariances, it is commonplace to associate it with
some bundle. one can ask, why? in supergravity and gauge theories containing vector
elds, one does not see a bundle, only a set of vector elds on coordinate charts. bundles
(formulated as topological spaces) describe auxiliary spaces  bers  which are bered over
spacetime, but these auxiliary structures are neither seen nor detected in physics. there are
no extra dimensions in the theory corresponding to the ber of a ber bundle, so why work
with bundles at all? since using bundles means invoking physically meaningless auxiliary
structures, why not just ignore bundles and only work with vector elds on coordinate
patches?

part of the reason people speak of bundles and not just vector elds on coordinate patches
is that bundles give an insightful, elegant way of thinking about vector elds on coordinate
patches. for example, recent discussions of brane charges in terms of k-theory [30, 31] would
have been far more obscure if the notion of bundles was not commonly accepted.

similarly, the notion of a gerbe gives an insightful and elegant structure in which to un-
derstand many of the tensor eld potentials appearing in supergravity theories. in principle,
one could understand tensor elds without thinking about gerbes, in the same way that one
can understand vector elds without thinking about bundles. however, just as bundles give
an insightful and useful way to think about vector elds, so gerbes give an insightful and
useful way to think about tensor elds.

a slightly more subtle question that could be asked is the following.

in [9], we shall
describe 1-gerbes in terms of sheaves of categories; however, this description is not unique
 gerbes can be described in several dierent ways. if one should work with gerbes, which
description is relevant?

a closely analogous problem arises in dealing with bundles. a bundle has multiple de-
scriptions  as a topological space, or a special kind of sheaf, for example. connections on
bundles can be described in terms of vector elds, or, in special circumstances, as holomor-

25

phic structures on certain topological spaces. the correct description one should use varies
depending upon the application and ones personal taste. similarly, which description of
gerbes is relevant varies depending upon both the application and personal inclination.

4 discrete torsion

in dening orbifolds, it is well-known that the riemannian space being orbifolded must
have a well-dened action of the orbifold group . however, after our discussion of gerbes,
the reader should suspect that something has been omitted from standard discussions of
orbifolds in string theory. namely, if we understand the tensor elds appearing in type
ii supergravities in terms of connections on gerbes, then we must also specify the precise
-action on the gerbes. this action need not be trivial, and (to our knowledge) has been
completely neglected in previous discussions of type ii orbifolds.

we shall nd that the action of an orbifold group  on a 1-gerbe is described in terms
of the group cohomology group h 2(, u(1)). more precisely, for a trivial 1-gerbe, the set of
equivariant structures on the gerbe (i.e., the set of lifts of  to the gerbe) can be canonically
identied with h 2(, u(1)). for a nontrivial 1-gerbe, the set of equivariant structures on
the 1-gerbe can be identied with h 2(, u(1)), but in general18 not canonically. these
equivariant structures correspond to analogues of orbifold wilson lines for b-elds, in the
same way that equivariant structures on a bundle with connection correspond to orbifold
wilson lines.

it is natural to speculate that the action of an orbifold group  on an n-gerbe is described
by the group cohomology group h n+1(, u(1)), in a fashion analogous to the above. this
can be checked for 2-gerbes in the same fashion as for 1-gerbes described in this paper, and
we are presently studying this issue [29]. for gerbes of higher degree, a precise understanding
in terms of sheaves of multicategories is not yet known, and so one can only make somewhat
more limited remarks [29].

4.1 basics of discrete torsion

discrete torsion was originally discovered as an ambiguity in the choice of phases of dierent
twisted sector contributions to partition functions of orbifold string theories. the possible
inequivalent choices of phases are counted by elements of the group cohomology group19

18 there may exist other special cases, other than trivial gerbes, in which there is a canonical identication
between equivariant structures on gerbes with connection and elements of h 2(, u (1)). for example, we
would not be surprised if this were the case for certain gerbes on group manifolds and homogeneous spaces.
however, in general there is no canonical identication.

19where the action of the group  on the coecients u (1) is trivial.

26

h 2(, u(1)), where  is the orbifold group. since its discovery, discrete torsion has been
considered a rather mysterious quantity.

our description of discrete torsion essentially boils down to the observation that discrete
torsion is the analogue of orbifold wilson lines for 2-form-elds rather than vectors. recall
orbifold wilson lines could be described as a (discrete) ambiguity in lifting the orbifold
action on a space to a bundle with connection. a similar ambiguity arises in lifting orbifold
actions to gerbes with connection, and this ambiguity is measured by h 2(, u(1)) [9]. more
precisely, in general the set of lifts of orbifold actions (in more technical language, the set
of equivariant structures on a (1-)gerbe with connection) is (noncanonically) isomorphic to
h 2(, u(1)), viewed as a set rather than a group. in special cases, such as trivial gerbes,
there exists a canonical isomorphism.

just as for bundles, not all nontrivial gerbes admit lifts of orbifold group actions. we
shall not attempt to study conditions under which a nontrivial gerbe admits such a lift;
rather, we shall simply assume that lifts exist in all examples in this paper.

how does this description of discrete torsion as an analogue of orbifold wilson lines mesh
with the original denition in terms of distinct phases associated to twisted sectors of string
partition functions? recall there are factors

exp(cid:18)z b(cid:19)

(7)

in the partition function, contributing the holonomy of the b-eld. (we have used  to
denote the embedding map  :   x of the worldsheet into spacetime.) because of these
holonomy factors, distinct lifts of the orbifold action to the 1-gerbe with connection (i.e.,
distinct equivariant structures on the 1-gerbe with connection) yield distinct phases in the
twisted sectors of orbifold partition functions  we recover the original description of discrete
torsion [1].

put another way, we do not just derive some set of discrete degrees of freedom that
happen coincidentally to also be measured by h 2(, u(1)); the discrete degrees of freedom
we recover necessarily describe discrete torsion. the passage from lifts of orbifold actions to
phase factors is provided by the partition function factors (7).

in passing, we should mention that the phase factors (7) were the original reason that dis-
crete torsion, viewed as a set of phases of twisted sector contributions to partition functions,
was associated with b-elds at all [1]. in some sense, our description of discrete torsion is a
natural outgrowth of some of the original ideas in [1].

in passing, we should also briey speak to discrete torsion on d-branes as discussed in
in those references, d-branes on orbifolds with discrete torsion were argued to be
[5, 6].
described by specifying a projective representation of the orbifold group on the bundle on
the worldvolume. we believe (although we have not checked in total detail) that this can be

27

derived from our description of discrete torsion, using the interconnection between b-eld
backgrounds and bundles on worldvolumes of d-branes, as recently described in [34, section
6].

it is one thing to state that possible lifts of orbifold actions to gerbes with connection are
classied by h 2(, u(1)); it is quite another to describe precisely the characteristic classes
and holonomies of the resulting gerbe on the quotient space. in principle, both could be
determined as for orbifold wilson lines: for a gerbe on a space x, with orbifold action ,
construct a gerbe on the space e  x, such that the projection to x/ yields the quotient
gerbe, analogously to the program pursued in [12]. we shall not pursue this program here.

suppose the (discrete) orbifold group  acting on x acts freely, i.e., without xed points.
in section 2.1, we studied moduli spaces of at connections on quotient spaces, in order to
gain insight into orbifold wilson lines. in particular, we argued that (for bundles admitting
at connections) orbifold u(1) wilson lines could be understood directly in terms of extra
elements of hom(1, u(1)) in the quotient space, for  a freely-acting discrete group.
in
other words, in this case orbifold wilson lines were precisely wilson lines on the quotient
space. we shall perform analogous calculations here. (in the next few paragraphs we shall
implicitly only consider at n-gerbes  but only for the purposes of performing illuminating
calculations. we do not make such assumptions elsewhere.)

for gerbes, the interpretation is slightly more obscure. first, note that in the case 
acts freely, we have a principal  bundle   x  x/, so we can apply the long exact
sequence for homotopy to nd that n(x) = n(x/) for n > 1 and  discrete. in other
words, although the fundamental group of x/ received a contribution from , the higher
homotopy groups of x/ are identical to those of x. thus, the higher-dimensional analogues
of orbifold wilson lines (for at n-gerbes) can not correspond to extra elements of homotopy
groups. we shall nd, rather, that the higher-dimensional analogues correspond to extra
elements of

homz ( hn(x/), u(1) )

we shall now describe the homology of the quotient x/. one way to compute the
homology of the quotient space x/ is as the limit of the cartan-leray spectral sequence
[35, section vii.7]

e2

p,q = hp(, hq(x))

(8)

note that the group homology appearing in the denition above has the property that, in
general,  acts nontrivially20 on the coecients hq(x), even if  acts freely on x.

in special cases, the homology of x/ can be computed more directly. for example, for
any path-connected space y , for any n > 1 such that r(y ) = 0 for all 1 < r < n, we have

20an example should make this clear. let x be the disjoint union of 2 identical disks, and let  be a z2
exchanging the two disks. then h0(x) = z2, and  exchanges the two z factors, i.e.,  acts nontrivially on
h0(x).

28

that [36, theorem ii] the following sequence is exact:

0  n(y )  hn(y )  hn(1(y ), z)  0

where the group homology hn(1(y ), z) is dened by the group 1(y ) having trivial action
on the coecients z. using the results above, we nd that for path-connected x such that
r(x) = 0 for 1 < r < n for some n > 1, the following sequence is exact:

0  n(x)  hn(x/)  hn(1(x/), z)  0

in the special case that 1(x) = 0, we can rewrite this as

0  n(x)  hn(x/)  hn(, z)  0

moreover, using the hurewicz theorem, applying the functor homz(, u(1)), and using a
relevant universal coecient theorem, we can rewrite the short exact sequence above as21

0  h n(, u(1))  homz (hn(x/), u(1))  homz (hn(x), u(1))  0

(technically we are also assuming that x/ is a path-connected space.)

from the calculation above we can extract two important lessons. first, for n = 2, we
see that (in special cases), the holonomy of a b-eld (of a at 1-gerbe) on the quotient x/,
as measured by hom(h2(x/), u(1)), diers from the possible holonomies on the covering
space by h 2(, u(1)), and so we can understand discrete torsion in such cases as being
precisely the extra contribution to hom(h2(x), u(1)) on the quotient. (more generally, the
precise relationship between group cohomology and holonomies of b-elds is described by
the spectral sequence (8).)

the second, and more basic, lesson we can extract from the calculation above is that
it is quite reasonable to believe that there exist analogues of discrete torsion and orbifold
wilson lines for the higher-ranking tensor elds appearing in supergravity theories, and that
those analogues of discrete torsion should be measured by higher-degree group cohomology
h n(, u(1)). we shall return to this point later. in this paper, we only derive22 discrete
torsion for b-elds, and in so doing nd h 2(, u(1)). however, our general methods should
apply equally well to higher-ranking tensor elds, and it is extremely tempting to conjecture
that the analogue of discrete torsion for an n-gerbe is measured by h n+1(, u(1)).

before we go on to outline how discrete torsion can be derived, we shall mention that
in this paper, when speaking of an n-gerbe on a space x, we shall assume that x has (r)
dimension at least n.

21this result has been independently derived, using other methods, by p. aspinwall.
22our derivation in [9] is not restricted to at 1-gerbes; the restriction to at 1-gerbes in the previous
few paragraphs was for purposes of making illustrative calculations only. we should also mention that our
derivation in [9] does not assume  is freely acting, or that it is abelian  our derivation holds equally well
regardless.

29

4.2 equivariant gerbes

in this section we shall try to give some intuitive understanding of the classication of
equivariant structures on 1-gerbes, that is, the classication of lifts of the orbifold action to
1-gerbes. more precisely, we shall study what equivariant structures on 1-gerbes mean at the
level of transition functions for 1-gerbes. we shall not be able to rigorously derive results on
equivariant gerbes in this fashion  such derivations are instead given in [9]. however, we
hope that this approach should give the reader some intuitive understanding of our results,
without requiring them to gain a detailed understanding of 1-gerbes in terms of stacks.

let c denote a 1-gerbe on a space x, and let  denote a group acting on x by homeo-
morphisms. let {u} be a good invariant cover of x  namely, a cover such that each u
is invariant under  and each u is a disjoint union of contractible open sets. (for example,
we can often obtain such a cover as the inverse image of a good cover on the quotient x/.)
note that a good invariant cover is not usually a good cover.

in order to dene c at the level of transition functions for the cover {u}, recall we need
to specify a line bundle l on each overlap u  u  u, and an explicit trivialization
 : u  u(1) of l  l  l on u.

now, let us describe how one denes an equivariant structure on the 1-gerbe c at the level
 g l
of transition functions. first, we need g l
denote a specic choice of isomorphism. since {u} is a good invariant cover of x, we can
represent each g

= l for all g  . let g

 by a function g

 : u  u(1).

 : l

note that the  necessarily now obey

g  ( =   g ) =  g

 g

 g


(9)

before going on, we should pause to derive an implication of equation (9). let g

g
 denote a pair of maps (partially) dening equivariant structures on c. dene

 and

then the g

 satisfy

g
 

g

g


g
 g

 g

 = 1

for all g  , and so dene transition functions for a bundle on x we shall denote tg.
thus, even though we have not nished describing equivariant structures on the 1-gerbe c
at the level of transition functions, we can already derive the fact that any two equivariant
structures will dier by, among other things, a set of principal u(1)-bundles tg, one for each
g  .

30

before we can claim to have dened an equivariant structure on the transition functions
in particular, how do the  behave under

for c, we need to ll in a few more details.
composition of actions of elements of ? we shall demand that for any pair g1, g2  ,

(g2

) g 

2(g1

) = (g1g2

 ) h(g1, g2) h(g1, g2)1


(10)

for some functions h(g1, g2) : u  u(1). we shall also demand that the functions h(g1, g2)
satisfy

h(g1, g2) h(g1g2, g3) = h(g2, g3) h(g1, g2g3)

(11)

these constraints probably seem relatively unnatural to the reader.
in our discussion of
equivariant gerbes in terms of stacks, we shall show how these constraints (or, rather, their
more complete versions for stacks) are quite natural.

we can attempt to rewrite equations (10) and (11) somewhat more invariantly in terms
 is the local trivialization
 : l  g l, then equation (10) states that

of the line bundles l on overlaps u = u  u. recall that g
representation of the bundle morphism g
the two bundle morphisms

(g 

2g1

)  g2

 : l  (g1g2)l

and

g1g2


: l  (g1g2)l

are related by a gauge transformation on (g1g2)l dened by h(g1, g2)h(g1, g2)1

 , i.e.,

(g 

2g1

)  g2

 =   g1g2



where  : (g1g2)l  (g1g2)l is the gauge transformation dened by the function
h(g1, g2)h(g1, g2)1

 on u.

given two distinct equivariant structures on the same transition functions, labelled by

,  and h, h, if we dene functions

(g1, g2) 

h(g1, g2)
h(g1, g2)

then from equation (10) we have the relation

(g2

) g 

2(g1

) = (g1g2

 ) (g1, g2) (g1, g2)1


(12)

the functions (g1, g2) dene local trivialization realizations of isomorphisms of princi-
pal u(1)-bundles. we denote these bundle isomorphisms by g1,g2, and so we can rewrite
equation (12) more invariantly as the denition of g1,g2:

g1,g2 : tg1g2

 tg2  g 

2tg1

31

furthermore, from equation (11) we see that the bundles tg and isomorphisms g1,g2 are

further related by

tg1g2g3

g1,g2 g3 
tg2g3  (g2g3)tg1

g1g2 ,g3

tg3  g 

3tg1g2
 g1 ,g2
3(tg2  g 

g2 ,g3 tg3  g 

2tg1)

(13)

4.3 equivariant gerbes with connection

to properly derive the classication of equivariant gerbes with connection at the level of
transition functions is extensively messy and not very illuminating, so instead we shall settle
for outlining the main points. (a complete derivation, in terms of gerbes as stacks, can be
found in [9].)

in the previous section, we argued that any two equivariant structures on a (1-)gerbe dier
by a set of principal u(1) bundles tg (g  ), together with appropriate bundle isomorphisms
g1,g2, such that diagram (13) commutes. when we demand that the equivariant structures
preserve the connection on the gerbe, this data becomes highly constrained, just as in the
case of equivariant structures on bundles with connection.

one constraint imposed by demanding that the equivariant structures preserve the con-
nection is that the principal u(1) bundles tg must all be trivial, so the bundle isomorphisms
g1,g2 can be interpreted as gauge transformations of a trivial bundle. the second important
constraint imposed is that the g1,g2 must be constant gauge transformations.

from the constraint that the g1,g2 must be constant gauge transformations (assuming
x is connected) and commutivity of diagram (13), it is clear that any set of g1,g2 denes a
cocycle representative of an element of h 2(, u(1)) (with trivial action of  on the coecients
u(1)), in the inhomogeneous representation. more detailed examination shows that group
coboundaries dene isomorphic equivariant structures, and so we see that any two equivariant
structures on a gerbe with connection dier by an element of h 2(, u(1)).

in special cases, such as trivial gerbes, there exist canonical trivial equivariant structures,
and so we can canonically identify the set of equivariant structures with elements of the group
h 2(, u(1)). more generally, the identication of equivariant structures with h 2(, u(1)) is
not canonical23.

in particular, the possible actions of a discrete group g on a 1-gerbe, whose connection
is the two-form b eld, are classied by elements of h 2(g, u(1)), in precise agreement with
the original results of [1].

23technically, in general the set of equivariant structures on a gerbe with connection is a torsor under the

group h 2(, u (1)).

32

4.4 analogues of discrete torsion

so far in this paper we have outlined how orbifold wilson lines and discrete torsion can
both be understood as discrete degrees of freedom implicit in any denition of an orbifold
of an n-gerbe (for n = 0, 1, respectively) with connection. we have really only alluded to
the relevance of this result for vector elds and for ns-ns b-elds, though in principle the
relevance of these results is more general.

for example, the same statements should also be true of the type iia rr 1-form, and
the type iib rr 2-form  in other words, from the analysis given so far, one should expect
to nd discrete degrees of freedom associated with both of these elds. later in this section
we will argue similarly for some of the other tensor eld potentials of type ii supergravities.

the reader might well ask how such degrees of freedom could be seen in perturbative
string theory. orbifold wilson lines and discrete torsion both crop up unavoidably; but how
could one turn on analogues for rr elds? the answer surely lies in the description of rr
eld backgrounds in perturbative string theory. judging from the results in, for example,
[37, 38, 39, 40, 41], it seems reasonable to assume that one can understand ramond-ramond
backgrounds in conformal eld theory after coupling to the superconformal ghosts, and that
in principle analogues of discrete torsion for rr elds in conformal eld theory should emerge
when considering orbifolds of such backgrounds.

an example of an orbifold wilson line for the type iia rr 1-form was described in [42],
in considering type iia string duals to heterotic chl [43] compactications, though the
authors did not use precisely this language. for completeness we review the result here. in
the paper [42], a z2 orbifold of k3 was considered. they found a string vacuum with a
nontrivial ramond-ramond ux in the orbifold theory induced by the orbifold action, and
in particular noted that such uxes correspond to homomorphisms from z2 to u(1). now,
homomorphisms from z2 to u(1) are precisely elements of h 1(z2, u(1)), with trivial action
on the coecients, which agrees with the statements above.

in [42] the (nontrivial) orbifold action on the type iia rr 1-form a was realized as the
map a  a. the reader may well wonder how such an action can be consistent with
our earlier analysis of orbifold wilson lines, in which we demanded that the connection be
invariant under the orbifold group (so as to form a well-dened connection on the quotient
space). here, after all, the connection is specically not invariant. the answer to this
dilemma is that the map a  a described the orbifold action on the eld a in the
physical theory, whereas our description of orbifold wilson lines only describes the vacuum
expectation value of a. clearly, the vacuum expectation value of a is identically zero, and
so is invariant under the orbifold action. the map a  a describes the action of the
orbifold on (part of) the full physical theory. this distinction between the orbifold action
on an n-gerbe (here, a 0-gerbe) with connection and the orbifold action on the full physical
theory is an important one, and we shall see shortly that this distinction seems to lead to a

33

generalization of the notion of modular invariance conditions.

in passing, we should mention that orbifold wilson lines for the iia rr 1-form were also

discussed in [44].

we have argued that in describing equivariant principal u(1)-bundles with connection,
one has a discrete degree of freedom given by h 1(, u(1)), and in describing equivariant
1-gerbes with connection, one has a discrete degree of freedom given by h 2(, u(1)). what
about higher order gerbes? it is extremely natural to conjecture that an equivariant n-gerbe
with connection has a discrete degree of freedom given by24 h n+1(, u(1)). we are presently
studying this matter [29].

it is quite possible that there may also be certain analogues of modular invariance con-
ditions for these analogues of discrete torsion. we have only discussed gerbes in isolation,
whereas in type ii theories, the gerbes interact with one another. it is quite conceivable
that, in order for any given orbifold to dene a symmetry of the full physical theory, there
are nontrivial constraints among analogues of discrete torsion for various gerbes. we have
nothing particularly concrete to say on this matter, though we hope to return to it in [29].

it is not clear, however, whether all analogues of modular invariance conditions can be
described in this fashion. for example, in [44] it was argued that there existed a constraint
on orbifold wilson lines associated to the iia rr 1-form, arising nonperturbatively. (we
are referring to the so-called black hole level matching of that reference.) unfortunately
we are not able to address the existence and interpretation of such constraints.

5 conclusions

in this paper we have given a geometric description of discrete torsion, as a precise analogue
of orbifold wilson lines. put another way, we have described discrete torsion as orbifold
wilson surfaces. after giving a mathematically precise discussion of orbifold wilson lines,
we outlined how the classication of orbifold wilson lines (as equivariant structures on
bundles with connection) could be extended to discrete torsion (as equivariant structures
on 1-gerbes with connection). although we outlined how this result on discrete torsion was
proven, we have deferred a rigorous examination to [9].

there is a related issue involving b-elds and orbifold singularities about which the
reader may also be curious. specically, it is known [46, 47] that at orbifold singularities,
the holonomies of the b-eld associated to collapsed cycles take on one of a discrete set of

24recall that we only study n-gerbes on spaces of (r) dimension at least n. thus, we shall not at-
tempt to understand, for example, whether there should be discrete-torsion-analogues in the horava-witten
construction of heterotic theories from m theory [45].

34

values25. it seems quite reasonable to believe that this phenomenon has an understanding
in the language we have presented in this paper; unfortunately, we are not yet able to see
precisely how to explain this phenomenon in our language. we hope to return to this matter
in future work [29].

6 acknowledgements

we would like to thank p. aspinwall, d. freed, a. knutson, d. morrison, and r. plesser for
useful conversations, and e. silverstein for pointing out reference [12]. we would also like
to thank j. stashe for extremely extensive comments on the rst version of this paper, and
we would like to apologize for taking so long to implement his suggestions.

a review of group cohomology

for a complete technical overview of group cohomology, the standard reference is [35]. for
much shorter and more accessible accounts, we recommend [49, section iv.4] and [50].

let g and m be groups, m abelian, with a (possibly trivial) action of g on m by group
automorphisms. we shall assume that the action of g commutes with the group operation
of m on itself.

dene c n(g, m) to be the set of all maps

 : g      g = gn+1  m

such that (gg0, gg1,    , ggn) = g(g0, g1,    , gn) for all g, gi  g. (this representation of
the cochains is known as a homogeneous representation, because of the obvious analogy with
projective spaces.)

dene a coboundary operator  : c n(g, m)  c n+1(g, m) by

()(g0,    , gn+1) =

n+1xk=0

()k(g0,    , gk,    , gn+1)

note that 2 = 1.

25for a c2/z2 singularity, it has been proven [46] that possible holonomies of the b-eld lie in {0, 1/2}; for
c2/zn singularities, it has been argued [48] that possible holonomies of the b-eld lie in {0, 1/n, 2/n, ...(n 
1)/n}. it seems natural to conjecture that at a c2/ singularity, possible holonomies of the b-eld are
classied by h 1(, u (1)).

35

dene z n(g, m) to be the set of cocycles, that is,   ker   c n(g, m). dene
bn(g, m) to be the set of coboundaries, that is,   im   c n(g, m). then dene the
group cohomology to be h n(g, m) = z n(g, m)/bn(g, m).

there is an alternative presentation of group cohomology, which can be dened as follows.
given a cochain   c n(g, m), which is to say, a map gn+1  m, dene a map  : gn  m
as,

(g1, g2,    , gn) = (e, g1, g1g2, g1g2g3,    , g1g2    gn)

this is known as an inhomogeneous representation, that is, these are called inhomogeneous
cochains. it is then easy to demonstrate that

()(g1, g2,    , gn+1) = g1(g2,    , gn+1)

+

nxk=1

()k(g1, g2,    , gkgk+1,    , gn+1)

+ ()n+1(g1, g2,    , gn)

in the group cohomology appearing in this paper, and to our knowledge in the physics
literature to date26, we always assume that the action of the group on the coecients is
trivial.

when the action of g on m is assumed trivial, if  : g  m is a homogeneous 0-cochain,
then it is easy to check that  is constant. from the denitions of coboundaries for homoge-
neous and inhomogeneous cochains, it is easy to derive that the associated inhomogeneous
0-cochain  must always be the identity of m. to repeat, if  is an inhomogeneous 0-cochain,
then  = 1  m.

as a consequence, for trivial action of g on m, we have that h 1(g, m) = z 1(g, m),

that is, h 1(g, m) is precisely the set of group homomorphisms g  m.

in passing, we shall mention that more formally, for any g-module m, we can dene

group cohomology as

h n(g, m)  extn

z[g](z, m)

where z[g] is the free z-module generated by the elements of g. in other words, any element
of z[g] can be written uniquely in the form

xgg

a(g)g

where a(g)  z. this denition of group cohomology does not make any assumptions
concerning the nature of the g-action on m.

26for example, experts should note that it is this latter, inhomogeneous form, restricted to the special

case that the action of g on m is trivial, which appears in [50].

36

in addition to group cohomology, one can also dene group homology in a very similar
manner, though we shall not do so here. for the case of group homology and cohomology
dened by groups with trivial actions on the coecients, there exist precise analogues of
the usual universal coecient theorems for homology and cohomology [35, exercise iii.1.3].
there is also a kunneth formula [35, section v.5].

for reference, we shall now list some commonly used group homology and cohomology
groups. first, the homology groups hi(zn, z), where the group zn acts trivially on the
coecients z, are given by

hi(zn, z) = 

h i(zn, u(1)) = 


z i = 0
i odd
zn
0
i even, i > 0

u(1)
zn
0

i = 0
i odd
i even, i > 0

the cohomology groups h i(zn, u(1)), where the group zn acts trivially on the coecients
u(1), are given by

from the kunneth formula [35, section v.5], we nd that the homology groups hi(zn 

zm, z), where the group acts trivially on the coecients z, are given by

hi(zn  zm, z) = 


in other words,

z

zn  zm l(i1)/2 torz
li/2 (zn z zm)

1 (zn, zm)

i = 0
i odd
i even, i > 0

h0(zn  zm, z) = z
h1(zn  zm, z) = zn  zm
h2(zn  zm, z) = (zn z zm)
h3(zn  zm, z) = zn  zm  torz
h4(zn  zm, z) = (zn z zm)  (zn z zm)

1 (zn, zm)

and so forth.

using the identities

zn z zm = zgcd(n,m)
1 (zn, zm) = zgcd(n,m)

torz

and the appropriate universal coecient theorem, one can compute the cohomology groups
h i(zn  zm, u(1)), where the group zn  zm is assumed to act trivially on the coecients

37

u(1):

in other words,

h i(zn  zm, u(1)) = 


u(1)

zn  zm l(i1)/2 zgcd(n,m)
li/2 zgcd (n,m)

i = 0
i odd
i even, i > 0

h 0(zn  zm, u(1)) = u(1)
h 1(zn  zm, u(1)) = zn  zm
h 2(zn  zm, u(1)) = zgcd(n,m)
h 3(zn  zm, u(1)) = zn  zm  zgcd(n,m)
h 4(zn  zm, u(1)) = zgcd(n,m)  zgcd(n,m)

and so forth. note that we have used the notation  and  in this subsection interchangeably.

references

[1] c. vafa, modular invariance and discrete torsion on orbifolds, nucl. phys. b273

(1986) 592-606.

[2] c. vafa and e. witten, on orbifolds with discrete torsion, j. geom. phys. 15 (1995)

189-214, hep-th/9409188.

[3] p. aspinwall, d. morrison, and m. gross, stable singularities in string theory, comm.

math. phys. 178 (1996) 115-134, hep-th/9503208.

[4] e. witten, baryons and branes in anti de sitter space, jhep 9807 (1998) 006,

hep-th/9805112.

[5] m. douglas, d-branes and discrete torsion, hep-th/9807235.

[6] m. douglas and b. fiol, d-branes and discrete torsion ii, hep-th/9903031.

[7] n. hitchin, lectures on special lagrangian submanifolds, math.dg/9907034, and lec-
tures given at the harvard winter school on vector bundles, lagrangian submanifolds,
and mirror symmetry, january 1999.

[8] d. chatterjee, on the construction of abelian gerbs, ph.d. thesis, cambridge uni-

versity, 1998.

[9] e. sharpe, discrete torsion and gerbes ii, hep-th/9909120.

[10] p. j. hilton and u. stammbach, a course in homological algebra, springer-verlag,

new york, 1971.

38

[11] l. dixon, symmetry breaking in string theories via orbifolds, ph.d. thesis, princeton

university, 1986.

[12] d. freed and c. vafa, global anomalies on orbifolds, comm. math. phys. 110 (1987)

349-389; erratum ibid. comm. math. phys. 117 (1988) 349-351.

[13] b. greene, c. lazaroiu, and p. yi, d-particles on t 4/zn orbifolds and their resolu-

tion, nucl. phys. b539 (1999) 135-165, hep-th/9807040.

[14] i. satake, the gauss-bonnet theorem for v-manifolds, j. math. soc. japan 9 (1957)

464-492.

[15] t. kawasaki, the index of elliptic operators over v-manifolds, nagoya math. j. 84

(1981) 135-157.

[16] j. j. duistermmat, the heat kernel lefschetz fixed point formula for the spin-c
dirac operator, progress in nonlinear dierential equations and their applications
18, birkhauser, boston, 1996.

[17] m. artin and j.-l. verdier, reexive modules over rational double points, math.

ann. 270 (1985) 79-82.

[18] j. l. brylinski, loop spaces, characteristic classes and geometric quantization,

birkhauser, boston, 1993.

[19] v. guillemin and s. sternberg, geometric asymptotics, math. surveys 14, american

mathematical society, providence, rhode island, 1977.

[20] d. martin, manifold theory, ellis horwood, new york, 1991.

[21] y. choquet-bruhat, c. dewitt-morette, and m. dillard-bleick, analysis, manifolds,

and physics: part i, north-holland, amsterdam, 1977.

[22] b. kostant, quantization and unitary representations, pp. 87-208 of lectures in
modern analysis and applications iii, r. m. dudley et al, lecture notes in math.
170, springer-verlag, berlin, 1970.

[23] a. grothendieck, sur quelques points dalg`ebre homologique, tohoku math. j. 9

(1957) 119-221.

[24] j. packer, i. raeburn, and d. williams, the equivariant brauer group of principal

bundles, j. operator theory 36 (1996) 73-105.

[25] i. raeburn and d. williams, dixmier-douady classes of dynamical systems and

crossed products, can. j. math. 45 (1993) 1032-1066.

39

[26] d. freed, j. harvey, r. minasian, and g. moore, gravitational anomaly can-
cellation for m-theory fivebranes, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 601-618,
hep-th/9803205.

[27] o. j. ganor, six-dimensional tensionless strings in the large n limit, nucl. phys.

b489 (1997) 95-121, hep-th/9605201.

[28] d. husemoller, fibre bundles, third edition, springer-verlag, new york, 1966, 1994.

[29] e. sharpe, work in progress.

[30] r. minasian and g. moore, k theory and ramond-ramond charge, jhep 9711

(1997) 002, hep-th/9710230.

[31] e. witten, d-branes and k theory, jhep 9812 (1998) 019, hep-th/9810188.

[32] j. harvey, magnetic monopoles, duality, and supersymmetry, hep-th/9603086.

[33] c. hull and p. townsend, unity of superstring dualities, nucl. phys. b438 (1995)

109-137, hep-th/9410167.

[34] d. freed and e. witten, anomalies in string theory with d-branes, hep-th/9907189.

[35] k. brown, cohomology of groups, springer-verlag, new york, 1982.

[36] s. eilenberg and s. mac lane, relations between homology and homotopy groups of

spaces, ann. math. 46 (1945) 480-509.

[37] n. berkovits, c. vafa, and e. witten, conformal eld theory of ads background with

ramond-ramond ux, jhep 9903 (1999) 018, hep-th/9902098.

[38] d. berenstein and r. leigh, superstring perturbation theory and ramond-ramond

backgrounds, hep-th/9904104.

[39] j. de boer and s. shatashvili, two-dimensional conformal eld theories on ads2d+1

backgrounds, hep-th/9905032.

[40] n. berkovits, m. bershadsky, t. hauer, s. zhukov, and b. zweibach, superstring

theory on ads2  s2 as a supersymmetric coset, hep-th/9907200.

[41] n. berkovits, quantization of the type ii superstring in a curved six-dimensional

background, hep-th/9908041.

[42] j. schwarz and a. sen, type iia dual of the six-dimensional chl compactication,

phys. lett. b357 (1995) 323-328, hep-th/9507027.

[43] s. chaudhuri, g. hockney, and j. lykken, maximally supersymmetric string theories

in d < 10, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 2264-2267, hep-th/9505054.

40

[44] s. ferrara, j. harvey, a. strominger, and c. vafa, second-quantized mirror symme-

try, phys. lett. b361 (1995) 59-65, hep-th/9505162.

[45] p. horava and e. witten, heterotic and type i string dynamics from eleven dimen-

sions, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 506-524, hep-th/9510209.

[46] p. aspinwall, resolution of orbifold singularities in string theory, pp. 355-379
in mirror symmetry ii, ed. b. greene and s.-t. yau, international press, 1997,
hep-th/9403123.

[47] e. witten, some comments on string dynamics, in proceedings of strings 95,

hep-th/9507121.

[48] m. douglas, enhanced gauge symmetry in m(atrix) theory, jhep 9707 (1997) 004,

hep-th/9612126.

[49] y. choquet-bruhat and c. dewitt-morette, analysis, manifolds, and physics: part

ii, north-holland, amsterdam, 1989.

[50] r. dijkgraaf and e. witten, topological gauge theories and group cohomology,

comm. math. phys. 129 (1990) 393-429.

41

