preprint typeset in jhep style. - hyper version

hep-th/9909194

remark about non-bps d-brane in iia
theory

by j. kluson

department of theoretical physics and astrophysics
faculty of science, masaryk university
kotlarska 2, 611 37, brno
czech republic
e-mail: klu@physics.muni.cz

abstract: in this short note, we would like to show simple mechanisms, how from
the action for non-bps dp-brane proposed by sen, we can simply obtain action
describing bps d(p-1)-brane in iia theory.

keywords: d-branes.

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
5

 

 
 

2
v
4
9
1
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1. introduction

in the last year, many new results about d-branes in string theories have emerged.
in the remarkable series of paper by sen [5, 6, 11, 12, 13], the problem of non-
supersymmetric conguration in string theories has been studied. it is clear, that
non-bps d-branes in iia, iib theories are as important as supersymmetric ones.
on the other hand it is known, that non bps d-branes are not stable, so they can
decay into supersymmetric string vacuum, which is a consequence of tachyon eld,
that lives on world-volume of non-bps d-brane. but presence of non-bps brane
in the string theory is important from one reason. we can construct on the world-
volume of non-bps d-brane kink solution of tachyonic eld, which forms d-brane of
dimension smaller than original non-bps d-brane, and this solution can be stable
from topological reason (for a review of this subject, see [4, 2] ). witten generalised
this construction and showed, that all branes in iib theory can be constructed as
topological defects in space-time lling world-volume of d9 branes and d9 antibranes
[7]. horava extended this construction to the case of iia theory and showed, that
all d-branes in iia theory can emerge as topological solutions in space-time lling
non-bps d9 branes . horava also proposed an intriguing conjecture about matrix
theory and construction of d0 branes in k theory [8, 14]. for review of the subject
d-branes and k theory, see [10], where many references can be found.

in recent paper, sen [1] proposed an supersymmetric action for non-bps d-
branes. because non-bps branes break all supersymmetries, it seams to be strange
to construct supersymmetric action describing this brane. but when we remember,
that this brane moves in supersymmetric world or iia or iib theory, this action cer-
tainly could be possible. sen showed, that this action has to contain the full number
of fermionic zero modes (32), because this non-bps d-brane breaks completely su-
persymmetry. on the other hand, bps brane contain 16 zero modes because breaks
one half of supersymmetry. sen showed that this action has origin in supersymmetric
action describing bps d-brane. this action is manifestly symmetric under all space-
time supersymmetries. sen argued, that ordinary action for bps d-brane contain
dbi term and wz term, which are invariant under supersymmetry but only when
they both are in the action for d-brane, the action is invariant under local symmetry
on brane,  symmetry, that is needed for gauging away one half of fermionic degrees
of freedom, so that on bpsd-brane only 16 physical fermionic elds live, as should
be for bps d-brane. sen showed, that dbi term for non-bps d-brane is exactly the
same as dbi term in action of bps d-brane (when we suppose, that other massive
elds are integrated out, including tachyon) that is invariant under sypersymmetric
transformations, but has no a  symmetry, so that number of fermionic degrees of
freedom is 32, as should be for nonsupersymmetric d-brane.

sen also showed, how we could include the tachyonic eld into action. because
mass of tachyon is of order of string scale, there is not any systematic way to construct

1

this eective action for tachyon, but sen proposed an general form of the term
containing interaction between tachyon and other light elds on world-volume of
non-bps d-brane. this term has a useful property, that for constant tachyon eld,
this term is zero, so that the action for non-bps vanishes identically, so we end with
supersymmetric vacuum.

in next section, we would like to extend this construction to the situation, when
all massless elds living on world-volume of non-bps d-brane in iia theory vary
slowly, and when we suppose trivial background coming from closed string sector,
which means, that background metric is at and b eld is zero. (we will not discuss
issue with nonzero b eld leading to the noncommutative geometry [15]). then we
can expand dbi action and we obtain action for ym term and action for left and
right handed fermions on d-brane. now we start to construct function describing
interaction tachyon with massless elds. we will show, that in case of kink solution
of tachyonic eld, we must set one half of fermionic elds to zero and as sen argued
[1], the action reduces to the action for supersymmetric d-brane. in the limit of zero
size and low energy approximation we can construct an action for supersymmetric d-
brane of dimension smaller than the original d-brane, that contain ym term and the
correct number of scalar elds describing transverse uctuation of resulting d-brane
and correct number of fermionic zero modes as well. this result correctly reproduce
general arguments of [5, 7, 8]. when we also use the results of [16], we obtain action
for bps d-brane .

in conclusion, we will discuss other problems with non-bps d-brane and relation

of this construction to the k theory.

2. action for non-bps d-brane in iia theory

we start this section with recapitulating basic facts about non-bps d-branes in
iia theory, following [1]. let ,  = 0, ...p are world-volume co-ordinates on d-
brane. fields, living on this d-brane arise as the lightest states from spectrum of
open string ending on this d-brane. these open strings have two cp sectors [6]: rst,
with unit 22 matrix, which corresponds to the states of open string with usual gso
projection (1)f |i = |i, where f is world-sheet fermion number and |i is state
from hilbert space of open string living on dp-brane. the second cp sector has cp
matrix 1 and contains states having opposite gso projection (1)f |i =  |i.
the massless elds living on dp-brane are ten components of x m (), m = 0...9, u(1)
gauge eld a() and 32 component of fermionic eld  transforming as majorana
spinor under transverse lorenz group so(9, 1). we can write  as sum of left handed
majorana-weyl spinor and right handed majorana-weyl spinor:

 = l + r, 11l = l, 11r = r

(2.1)

2

all elds except r come from cp sector with identity matrix, while r comes from
sector with 1 matrix.

as sen [1] argued, action of non bps d-brane should go to the action of bps
d-brane, when we set r = 0 (we have opposite convention that [1]). from this
reason, action of non-bps d-brane in [1] has been constructed as supersymmetric
dbi action, which is manifestly supersymmetric invariant, but has not  symmetry,
so we cannot gauge away one half of fermionic degrees of freedom, so that this action
describes non-bps d-brane. in the following, we will not need the general form of
this action, because we would like to have clear physical interpretation of our result,
so that we will work in static gauge:

s = cz dp+1q det(g + f)

g + f =  + iji j + f
2l( + i i)l  2r( + ii)r +
+(lm l)(lm l + rm r) +
+(rm  r)(lm l + rm r)

(2.2)

where f = a   a is a eld strength for gauge eld and c is constant equal
to the dp-brane tension (we work in units ls = 1) .

now if we set r = 0, we obtain action for bps d-brane as in ref. [17].
the next thing is to include the eect of tachyon. in order to get some relation
between tachyon condensation and supersymmetric d-branes, we would like to have
an eective action for massless eld and tachyon living on world-volume of non-bps
d-brane. this eective action should appear after integrating out all massive modes
of open string ending on dp-brane. because tachyon mass is of order of string scale,
there is no systematic way to obtain eective action for this eld, but we can still
study some general properties of this action. following ref.[1], the eective action
for non-bps dp-brane with tachyonic eld on its world-volume should have a form:

s = z dp+1qdet(g + f)f (t, t, d t, ... g

a , g

s ) + iw z

(2.3)

where g
a,s are symbols introduced in [15], that are appropriate quantities for open
string in presence of general background arising in closed string sector. in this note,
we are interested in the simplest case, where metric is at and b eld is zero, so that
this quantities can be taken to be trivial.

3

in the function f the constant c is included , so that for t = 0, f = c and we
obtain action for non-bps d-brane (2.2). this function has a important property
[1], that for tachyon eld t = t0, where t0 is a vacuum value of tachyon eld, this
function is zero 1:

f (t0) = 0

(2.4)

we also have iw z = 0 due to the fact, that wz term has a form for non-bps
dp-brane [16]:

iw z = czp+1

c  dt  ef +b  g

(2.5)

where g is geometrical part of wz term, but in our case we take normal and tangent
bundles to be trivial, so this term is trivial as well. we see, that for t = const., this
terms is zero. when on the whole world-volume the tachyon is equal its vacuum value
t0 (recall, that vacuum value of elds is the value, that minimise potential for this
eld), the action is identical zero and we end with pure supersymmetric vacuum,
which is satisfactory result, because we expect, that after tachyon condensation,
non-bps d-brane disappears and we obtain supersymmetric vacuum.

now we are interested in nontrivial behaviour of tachyon on world-volume of
non-bps d-brane.
in other words, we would like to construct kink solution for
tachyon. as was explained elsewhere [5, 8], when we have one non-bps d-brane,
tachyon eld must be real and consequently there is no coupling between tachyon
and gauge eld living on world-volume of non-bps d-brane. it can be shown [5, 6],
that potential for tachyon must be even function of t , so that we have two values of
t , that minimise potential for tachyon. in other words, we have two ground(vacuum)
states for tachyon eld : {t0, t0} 2.

in order to construct supersymmetric d-brane as topological solution of elds
living on world-volume of non-bps d-brane, we expect, that these massless eld are
slowly varying, so that we can expand dbi action in standard form, when derivatives
of massless elds are small. as a result, we obtain action for u(1) gauge eld and
massless scalars i, i = p + 1, ...9, describing transverse uctuations of d-brane, as in
ordinary construction of bps d-branes [18, 19]. there are also terms for fermionic
elds r, l, so that action has a form

s = z dp+1(f f  + 2ijij + f.t.)f (t, t...) + iw z

(2.6)

1in fact, sen argued, that in case of constant t , f reduces to the potential for tachyon and as a
consequence of general form of potential for tachyon, this term is zero for t = t0. in this article, we
slightly change behaviour of this function, because we only demand, that in point on world-volume,
where tachyon is equal to its vacuum value t0, we should recover supersymmetric vacuum, so that
there are no elds living on non-bps d-brane, so we have (2.4).

2to see, why tachyon is real, we must consider general case of n non-bps d-branes, where
tachyon lives in adjoin representation of u (n ) gauge group. because u(1) has no adjoin represen-
tation, tachyon eld is real eld with charge zero. this has important consequence in construction
f function in (2.3).

4

, where f.t. means term containing both left handed and right handed fermionic
elds r, l. we need not to know direct form of this term, we only must know, that
in case of r = 0 and t = 0, this action goes into sym action with gauge group
u(1) describing bps dp-brane in low energy limit.

now we would like to construct kink solution for the tachyon eld. this means,
that we must solve equation of motion for tachyon, which can be obtained from (2.6).
because tachyon is present only in f function, we can obtain equation of motion for
tachyon from this function. in the next part we must determine on some physical
grounds form of this function. we expect, that interaction terms between tachyon
and other massless elds must be present in this function, because as in ref.[1], when
we set t = 0, we must obtain action for non-bps d-brane.

we write f as

f = c(v (t ) + g(t, r, l))

(2.7)

, where v(t) is potential for tachyon and in g we have included kinetic term for
tachyon and all interaction terms between tachyon and spinor elds and we have used
the fact, that tachyon has charge zero with respect of gauge eld a. for the same
reason there is no interaction term between tachyon and scalar eld i, because we
know, that non-bps dp-brane transform under t duality into non-bps d(p  1)-
brane, which results into transformation of component of gauge eld in direction of
t transformation into scalar eld describing position of t dual d(p-1)-brane in dual
direction, and because tachyon has no charge with respect to gauge eld, we can
conclude, that there is also no interaction between tachyon and scalar eld (we have
at metric and b=0, so that we have no interaction between tachyon and light elds
coming from closed string sector).

now we must discuss possible form of g function. we know from previous
discussion, that l comes from cp sector with identity matrix and r comes from
cp sector with 1. as we know, open string amplitudes comes with factor containing
trace of cp matrix. interaction vertex with two fermionic lines and k tachyon lines
contain following trace (we are interested only in terms with two fermionic elds
without derivatives, because interaction with more fermionic elds and with more
derivatives do not give new information):

tr((1)k11)

(2.8)

where rst matrix corresponds to the tachyon, the second matrix to l and the
third matrix to r. from the identity tr(2n+1
) = 0 it is clear, that k must be odd.
on the other hand, terms containing two left handed spinor elds l must contain
even number of tachyon insertions and terms with two right handed spinor elds r
must contain odd number of tachyon elds. we think, that interaction should be
invariant under parity transformations , which result into exchange left handed and
right handed spinors r  l and because vertex with left handed spinors contains

1

5

even polynomial k(t ) and vertex with right handed spinor contains odd polynomial
h(t ) and from the fact, that these polynomial cannot be equal, so that interaction
term of the form

 h(t )rr + k(t )ll

is not parity invariant, we can suppose, that these term vanish identically. we than
propose interaction between tachyon eld and one spinor eld from left handed sector
and one eld from right handed sector:

g(t, r, l) = f (t )(rl + lr)  t t

(2.9)

where f (t ) are odd function of t and where we have included only terms with two
derivatives of tachyon into g.

now, we are ready to construct kink solution on non-bps d-brane. we suppose,
that tachyon is function only one co-ordinate, say x1. firstly, we should ask what
happen, when t is equal one of vacuum expectation value in one particular point.
we know, that f in (2.6) must be zero in this point, because we should obtain pure
supersymmetric vacuum in this point:

f = c(v (t0) + f (t0)(rl + lr)) = 0

(2.10)

, because v (t0) is zero and there is no reason why f (t0) should be zero (for example,
in the simplest case f (t ) = t , this function is clearly nonzero in t = t0 ), the only
possibility is to take either r or l to be zero. we choose r = 0 in the point, where
t = t0. we must also mention, that other elds are not restricted in this particular
point.

in kink solution, tachyon approaches in limit x1   one vacuum value (say
t0) and then in limit x1   the vacuum value t = t0. we can take special limit
of this solution, when tachyon is dierent from its vacuum expectation value t0 only
in small region around point x1 = 0 and in extreme case, t has a form:

t (x1) = ( t0,

t0 x1 > 0

x1 < 0

(2.11)

of course, this is very special function and there could be some opinions, why we
do not take terms with higher derivatives into g, but we expect, that these terms
make behaviour of our solution more singular, so that in any case, f looks like
f  (x1)(this can be seen from the fact, that potential term in (2.10) is nite
function and singular behaviour comes from derivative term). now from (2.9) we
can obtain the equation of motion for tachyon

d2t
dx2
1

+

df
dt

(rl + lr) +

dv
dt

= 0

(2.12)

6

dt  (x1) and dt 2

we know, that dv (t )
is singular as well, but because delta function
is even function, this function is odd, we can expect, that these two terms cancel
among themselves, and because we suppose, that f (t ) is polynomial in t , that is
nite in region x1 = 0, we can conclude, that in order to satisfy equation of motion
for tachyon, we must demand, that r is zero in x1 = 0 as well.

dx2
1

r = 0

(2.13)

this result is with agreement with our original assumption, that massless elds
vary slowly on world-volume of non-bps d-brane, because in case of nontrivial de-
pendence of r on x1, its derivative would by proportional to the delta function and
then r certainly does not vary slowly on world-volume of non-bps d-brane.

we know, that in extreme case (2.11), we have

f (x1)  c(x1)

(2.14)

and when we insert this term into (2.6), we obtain integral over (p-1) spatial direction,
which can suggest, that we have obtained low energy action for bps d(p-1)-brane
(condition r = 0 in original action leads to the action for bps dp-brane) 3, but
there are two puzzles, that must be resolved. firstly, when we insert (2.14) into
(2.6), we also obtain following terms

x1|x1=0

, where  is any massless world-volume eld. but we know, that there is no depen-
dence of any eld in resulting (p-1) dimensional action on x1, so we must demand,
that this term is zero.

x1|x1=0 = 0

(2.15)

the other problem arises with scalars describing transverse uctuation of d-
brane. any dp-brane has (9-p) world-volume scalars describing uctuation of this
d-brane in transverse directions. original non-bps action has (9-p) scalar elds, but
now we would like to have action for d(p-1)-brane, so that there should be (10-p)
scalars. we can obtain this additional scalar from gauge eld. remember, that in
original action we have had a term (now m, n goes from 0...p and ,  = 0...p  1 ):

fm n f m n = 2f1f 1 + ff 

(2.16)

we see, that additional scalar can be rst component of gauge eld a1, that has

kinetic term

2f1f 1 = 2a1a1

(2.17)

3we must remember, that we are working in units 2ls = 1, so that tension of dp is ( c  1/g ),
but when we would work in units, where 2ls is not one , than integral over x1 would be multiplied
with ls , so we would obtain tension for d(p-1)-brane as t  cls  ls
, which is a correct
gl+1
tension for d(p-1)-brane.

 1
glp

s

s

7

, that has the same form as term for scalar elds in (2.6), so that after renaming
a1 = p, we obtain (10-p) scalars, the correct number of scalar elds describing
transverse uctuations for d(p-1)-brane. from previous facts and from (2.13) we
conclude, that kink solution on non-bps dp-brane forms bps d(p-1)-brane, that
is localised in x1 direction. this can be also conrmed with wz term [16], that in
extreme case has a form (dt (x1) = (x1)dx1)

which has the same form as wz term for bps d(p-1)-brane.

iw z = zp

c  ef

(2.18)

3. conclusion

in previous part we have obtained kink solution of tachyon on world-volume of non-
bps dp-brane in iia theory and we have shown, that this solution really describes
bps d(p-1)-brane in iia theory, which is in agreement with [5, 7, 8] and in some
sense can serve as further support of their results.

the next step in this work is to extend this analysis to the case of non-bps
in iib theory. the other problem is relation between action for non-bps d-brane
in iia theory and k theory as was proposed in ref.[8].
in this construction, all
d-branes arises as topological solitons on world-volume of space-time lling non-
bps d9-branes with appropriate gauge group.
it would be interesting to extend
our analysis to the case of non-abelian gauge group on world-volume of non-bps
d-brane, following [8], and then possibly to the case of non-bps d9-brane.

8

references

[1] a. sen ,supersymmetric world-volume action for non-bps d-branes,

hep-th/9909062

[2] a. sen, non-bps states and branes in string theory , hep-th/9904207;

[3] a. lerda and r. russo, stable non- bps states in string theory: a pedagogical

review , hep-th/9905006;

[4] j. schwarz, tasi lectures on non- bps d- branes systems, hep-th/9908144;

[5] a. sen, so(32) spinors of type i and other solitons on brane-antibrane pair, j.

high energy phys. 9809 (023) 1998, hep-th/9808141,

[6] a. sen, type i d particle and its interactions, j. high energy phys. 9810 (021)

1998, hep-th/9809111,

[7] e. witten, d-branes and k theory, hep-th/9810188,

[8] p. horava, type iia d-branes, k-theory and matrix theory, hep-th/9812135,

[9] k. olsen and r. j. szabo,brane descent relations in k theory, hep-th/9904157

[10] k. olsen and r. j. szabo, constructing d-branes from k theory, hep-th/9907140,

[11] a. sen, tachyon condensation on brane-antibrane system, j. high energy phys.

08 (012) 1998, hep-th/9805170

[12] a. sen , stable non-bps states of bps d- particles, j. high energy phys. 08 (010)

1998,

[13] a.sen , bps d-branes on non-supersymmetric cycles, j. high energy phys. 12

(021) 1998, hep-th/9812031

[14] p. horava,  m theory as a holographic theory, phys. rev. d 59 (046004) 1999

[15] n. seiberg and e. witten, string theory and noncommutative geometry ,

hep-th/9908142

[16] m. billo, b. craps and f. rosse, ramond-ramond coupling of non-bps d-branes,

hep-th/9905157

[17] m. aganagic, c. popescu and j. m. schwarz,  gauge-invariant and gauge-xed d-

brane actions, nucl. phys. b 495 (99) 1997, hep-th/9612080

[18] e. witten, bound states of strings and p-branes, nucl. phys. b 460 (1996) 335,

hep-th/9510135,

[19] w. taylor

iv.,
hep-th/9801192

lectures on d-branes, gauge theory and m(atrices),

9

