iktuw 9909401

0
0
0
2

 

n
u
j
 

8

 
 

2
v
0
0
1
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

bosonization in four dimensions: the smooth way

institut fur kernphysik, technische universitat wien

jan b. thomassen

a1040 vienna, austria

november 16, 1999

abstract

i investigate bosonization in four dimensions, using the smooth bosonization scheme. i
argue that generalized chiral phases of the fermion eld corresponding to chiral phase
rotations and chiral poincare transformations are the appropriate degrees of freedom for
bosonization. smooth bosonization is then applied to an abelian fermion coupled to an
external vector. the result is an exact rewriting of the theory, including the fermion, the
bosonic elds, and ghosts. exact bosonization is therefore not achieved since the fermion
and the ghosts are not completely eliminated. the action for the bosons is given by the
jacobian of a change of variables in the path integral, and i calculate parts of this. the
action describes a nonlinear eld theory, and thus static, topologically stable solitons may
exist in the bosonic sector of the theory, which become the fermions of the original theory
after quantization.

pacs numbers: 11.15.tk; 11.30.rd; 11.10.lm
keywords: bosonization; chiral anomalies; nonlinear eld theories

1

introduction

bosonization is an operation which maps the description of a physical system in terms of
fermionic elds into a description in terms of bosonic elds. such operations have been known
in relativistic eld theory since the seminal paper by coleman [1], and in condensed matter
physics even for a longer time [2]. a more precise statement of bosonization is that there is a
correspondence between a certain set of greens functions in the fermionic theory with another
set in the bosonic theory. reasons for wanting to bosonize a fermion are for example that the
description of the system might be easier to handle mathematically, that it brings insight into
the physics of the system, or that it is otherwise useful.

however, bosonization is understood only in two dimensions (2d); it is not yet completely
understood how to generalize it to four. some papers dealing with this problem in the path
integral formalism are refs. [3, 4, 5, 6] and references therein. an investigation in the operator
formalism is1 [7]; see also the references in [6]. the results from these papers do not coincide.
in the case of the path integral formalism this is a reection of the fact that a number can be

supported by fonds zur forderung der wissenschaftlichen forschung, p11387phy
e-mail: thomasse@kph.tuwien.ac.at
1i thank j. paaske and the referee for calling my attention to this reference.

1

represented by an integral in many dierent ways. therefore, bosonization is not unique, and
further requirements must be formulated in order to proceed.

what i will do in this paper is to investigate bosonization in the path integral in 4d from an-
other point of view, dierent from those in the references above, but which perhaps follows more
closely the ideas in 2d from colemans paper [1]. let us recall that in 2d the bosonic equivalent
of a massive dirac fermion is the sinegordon model (with coupling constant  = 4), a non-
linear eld theory which has static, topologically stable solitons. one of the main messages of
ref. [1] is that these solitons have properties which allow us to identify them with fermions in the
quantum theory, and indeed mandelstam [8] showed in the operator formalism that fermionic
operators satisfying the dirac equation (for the thirring model) can be constructed from the
bosonic operators satisfying the sinegordon equation.

thus, we also want something like this in 4d: a nonlinear bosonized theory with static,
topologically stable solitons that can be identied with the fermions in the original theory. for
this to be at all possible in three space dimensions, it is necessary for topological reasons to
have bosonic elds with at least three degrees of freedom. furthermore, it is necessary to have
a mechanism which prevents the solitons from collapsing according to derricks theorem [9],
like terms with four derivatives in the lagrangian, which is the situation in the skyrme model
[10]. we also want a skyrme-like picture to be possible for an abelian dirac fermion. this is
dierent from the skyrme model where there is a triplet of pseudoscalar elds which transforms
under an internal symmetry group (the pion), and where the fermion (the nucleon) acquire a
corresponding internal quantum number.
i am, however, not aware of any reasons why the
internal symmetry could not be spin, leading to a skyrme soliton with a u (1) quantum number.
note that if we express the equivalence between the fermionic and bosonic descriptions in
terms of greens functions, then only greens functions of bilinear operators of fermions could
be considered, like in 2d. this may seem to imply that some information is lost by bosonization
 namely the information in greens functions with external spinor lines. however, this is not
necessarily the case. in 2d this information is encoded in the solitons of the bosonic theory,
as is veried from mandelstams construction of the dirac eld operators [8]. this is one way
to understand our requirement of 4d bosonization that skyrme-like fermionic solitons should
appear in the theory: there is then a chance that spinor information is encoded in the bosonic
theory.

another thing we recall from 2d is that in the path integral investigations of bosonization
the bosonic eld equivalent to the dirac fermion is essentially the chiral phase of the fermion.
moreover, the lagrangian for the boson is in one way or another connected with the jacobian of
a chiral phase rotation of the fermion (see for instance ref. [11]), that is, if we write the jacobian

as j = exp(ir d2xlj ), then the lagrangian is connected with lj . the exact connection depends
on the particular bosonization scheme, but lj always contains at least the kinetic terms of the
bosonic elds. thus, in 4d we should be looking for something similar to the chiral phase of
the fermion, which gives rise to a jacobian when the fermion is transformed, and such that this
jacobian can be connected with the lagrangian for the bosonic eld.

to summarize our requirements, we want:
(i) generalized chiral phases of the fermion, which should be elds with at least three

internal degrees of freedom, like a vector or a tensor,

(ii) that the generalized chiral transformations for the fermion give rise to a jacobian
when the variables are changed in the path integral, and when a suitable regularization scheme
is applied, and

(iii) the jacobian j = exp(ir d4xlj ) must be such that the lagrangian quantity lj contains,

at least, the kinetic terms of the chiral elds, and also other terms with four derivatives that
can stabilize solitons in the bosonic theory.

2

i emphasize that these are not the only requirements one can make for 4d bosonization,
but i think they are a reasonable starting point if we want to generalize from 2d the idea that
solitons are fermions in the quantum theory.

as we shall see, we are able to meet these requirements when the generalized chiral phases
are degrees of freedom (dofs) connected with what may be called chiral poincare transfor-
mations [12]. these are (global) transformations that act on the dirac fermion in the same
way as ordinary lorentz transformations and translations, except that a 5 is multiplied onto
the generators j = 1
2  + (xi  xi)  s + l and p = i. the reason i consider
exactly these dofs is the following: the particle states in a relativistic quantum eld theory are
labelled by internal quantum numbers, spin, and mass, according to which representation of the
internal symmetry group and poincare group they belong. since these properties are connected
with phase rotations, lorentz transformations, and translations, and since the chiral phase
is likely to take part in bosonization, then it is also likely that chiral lorentz dofs and chiral
translation dofs take part as well. such transformations are not in general symmetries of
the lagrangian, but naively they are symmetries of the fermionic measure in the path integral.
however, in ref. [12] it was shown that they give rise to a jacobian when a change of fermionic
variables is made in the regularized path integral. moreover, the elds connected with these
dofs are an axial vector and a tensor, which may have nontrivial topology. thus, we may
regard the quantity lj for these chiral transformations as a candidate for the lagrangian of a
bosonized theory.
it is then necessary to show that this bosonic theory really is equivalent to the original
fermionic one, or that it is in some sense a partial bosonization. in 2d an appealing method to
do bosonization in the path integral is the smooth bosonization scheme of damgaard, nielsen
and sollacher [13, 14]. this is the scheme i will adopt here for 4d  hence the title of this
paper. (this scheme has already been used to obtain partial bosonization in 4d for some special
cases [4, 5].) briey stated, the method is to perform a change of variables in the path integral,
using instead a fermion that is locally rotated with a chiral phase (x). this gives a jacobian

j[] = exp(ir d2xlj []), assuming an appropriate regularization is used. the eld  enters into

the expression for the path integral, and the theory is enlarged by promoting it to a dynamical
eld, meaning that we path integrate over it. the theory now has a new local symmetry. this
symmetry can be gauge-xed, and by carefully choosing the gauge-xing condition, we can
get either the original fermionic theory or a new bosonic theory  the bosonized theory. the
i emphasize that this bosonization scheme is based on
lagrangian for this theory is lj [].
exact manipulations of the path integral, and uses only familiar concepts from eld theory  in
particular gauge-xing and chiral anomalies.

in this paper, i will investigate the bosonization of a massive abelian dirac fermion, coupled
to an external vector eld, along these lines. i will show how the new generalized chiral phases
of the fermion, corresponding to chiral poincare transformations, can be introduced into the path
integral. then i will discuss how the new local symmetry of the path integral can be gauge-xed,
and i will use the gauge-xing constraints for the chiral phase and chiral poincare symmetry,
along with the conservation of the current, energy-momentum and angular momentum tensors,
to try to eliminate the fermion from the theory. the resulting theory includes a lagrangian lj
for a pseudoscalar , a tensor  and an axial vector b. these elds are the parameters of
the local chiral transformations. unfortunately, the ghosts do not decouple in the chosen gauge,
and, furthermore, a small residual part of the fermion is not eliminated. nevertheless, the
resulting theory may still be useful. perhaps it can serve as a starting point for obtaining a low
energy eective description of the system.

the organization of the paper is the following. in sec. 2, i briey review the smooth bosoniza-
tion scheme [13]. the scheme was rst applied to a massless fermion; the massive case was

3

considered in ref. [14]. however, the treatment of the massive case in ref. [14] was not as
straightforward as for the massless case. in particular, the simple result that the bosonic la-
grangian equals lj was not found. i therefore reconsider this massive case, and nd that one
may indeed achieve that the bosonic lagrangian is lj . what makes this work can be under-
stood as the eective vanishing of the axial current (and therefore also the current), which is a
consequence of the combined eects of gauge-xing and current conservation.

in sec. 3, i begin my investigations of a massive fermion coupled to a vector in 4d. first i
introduce the chiral phase  into the theory, inspired by the 2d case. the appropriate gauge-
xing for this dof, together with energy-momentum and angular momentum conservation, is
used to try to make the axial current eectively vanish. then i introduce the chiral lorentz
and chiral translation phases,  and b, into the theory in an analogous way and use gauge-
xing of these dofs, together with current conservation, to try to get the eective vanishing
of the current. the idea is that the vanishing of both the current and the axial current should
be enough to eliminate the fermion from the theory. the exact theory which results from this
is given by a path integral with the original fermion, the bosonic elds (including lagrange
multipliers for the gauge-xing delta functions), and ghosts.

in sec. 4, i discuss the calculation of the jacobian of the chiral transformation, which would
describe the bosonic theory in the best of all worlds where bosonization is exact. the complete
lagrangian lj is probably too hard to calculate exactly. however, the part containing only 
can be calculated exactly. i also calculate the gaussian part (i.e. up to two orders in the eld)
of the spin part of the action for  . terms involving l and the lagrangian for b (which
involves p) are not calculated. the terms that are left out are thereby small in the weak eld,
low energy limit. the lowest order coupling terms between  and  are also calculated.

in sec. 5, i summarize and discuss the problems which prevented us from getting exact
bosonization in sec. 3. i sketch how to generalize the results to the non-abelian case and discuss
some aspects of the physics of the bosonized theory.

2 smooth bosonization in 2d: the massive case revisited

the smooth bosonization scheme has been used in 2d to bosonize a dirac fermion coupled to
a vector and axial vector [13], and a dirac fermion coupled to scalar and pseudoscalar mass
terms [14]. the bosonization procedures are completely dierent in these two papers. in the
rst paper the bosonic action is found from the jacobian of the chiral rotation, while in the
second paper it is the result of integrating out the fermion. i will demonstrate here that also
mass term bosonization can be obtained from the jacobian. this will also serve as a review of
the smooth bosonization scheme. the point in performing this exercise is that it suggests that

the identication of the quantity lj in the expression j = exp(ir ddxlj ) for the jacobian with

the lagrangian of the bosonic theory is a general feature of this scheme, and may be expected
also in 4d.

the path integral with mass terms is

z[m, m] = z dd  exp iz d2x [i6   mp+  mp],

(1)

where p  1
s and p , by m(x)  s(x) + ip (x). the chiral change of variables

2 (1  5) and the chiral mass m is dened from the scalar and pseudoscalar mass,

(x)  ei(x)5 (x),

(x)  (x)ei(x)5

(2)

4

leads to the rotated path integral

z = z dd  exp iz d2x(cid:18) [i6 6 5  me2ip+  me2ip]

+

1
2

 +

1
4

1m(e2i  1) +

1
4

1m(e2i  1) + o(m2)(cid:19).

(3)

an appropriate regularization scheme is assumed here, one where the current is conserved2.
this gives the second line in eq. (3) as the contribution from the jacobian. 1 is an arbitrary
massive parameter. note that the kinetic term and the terms proportional to m in the jacobian
is the desired result for the lagrangian of the bosonic theory.

we now promote the local parameter  to a dynamical eld and thus include the path inte-
gration over this eld. the path integral does not depend on  (at this point), so this produces
an irrelevant innite numerical factor which is absorbed in the path integration measure. there
is now a local symmetry

(x)  ei(x)5 (x),

(x)  (x)ei(x)5 ,

(x)  (x)  (x)

(4)

in the system, provided the transformation of the measure is included.

according to the smooth bosonization scheme, this local symmetry is viewed as an ordinary
gauge symmetry which can be gauge-xed. the gauge xing procedure is then to choose a
gauge-xing function (x) and to insert a functional delta function

() = z deir d2x  z deir d2xlgf

and a faddeevpopov determinant

det(cid:18) 

(cid:19) = z dcdceir d2xc( 

 )c  z dcdceir d2xlghosts

(5)

(6)

into the path integral. it is necessary to include the anomalous variation of the gauge-xing
function in order to get the correct faddeevpopov determinant. in other words, it is necessary
to include the contribution from the jacobian for the brst variation

(c) =  + c(cid:18) 
= lgf + lghosts

(cid:19) c

(7)

that is added to the lagrangian, see the discussion in ref. [13].

one can now consider a general gauge-xing function  which interpolates between fermionic
and bosonic variables. in this paper i am only interested in gauges which give bosonization,
thus  should depend on the fermion elds only. the choice i make is

 = j
5 ,

  5.
j5

(8)

this is the preliminary gauge-xing chosen in ref. [13] (eq. (20) in that paper with  = 1). it is
one of the endpoints of a smooth gauge; the other one is  = (cid:3)/ ( = 0 in eq. (20) of ref.
[13]) which returns the original fermionic theory. eventually, another gauge-xing condition was

2the requirement of current conservation alone does not completely x the regularization scheme. the am-
biguities can be resolved by imposing bose symmetry in triangle diagrams instead [15]. the conservation of the
current then follows.

5

adopted in ref. [13], which was a formal integration of eq. (8), in order to take care of certain
zero modes. however, in this paper i will assume that appropriate boundary conditions have
been imposed on the elds of the theory in order to make all free elds vanish. then there are
only trivial zero modes in the theory. when we set  = 0, it gives j
5 = 0, and this will then
decouple the fermion from the bosonic eld   except for the mass terms  as seen from the
path integral (3). furthermore, in this gauge the ghosts decouple.

thus, the problem is to decouple also the fermionic mass terms from . in the treatment of
this problem in ref. [5] the massive parameter 1 in the jacobian is chosen to be zero. instead
the required terms  linear in m and m  are generated by rewriting parts of the theory into
the schwinger model with a perturbation and evaluating a few relevant expectation values.
however, we can solve this problem in another way if we make use of colemans results [1]. the
point is that decoupling will occur if the expression

z ddd  exp iz d2x [i6 6 5  mp+e2i  mpe2i]

(9)

is unity. by using colemans results, we can bosonize this path integral. we get

z dd exp iz d2x(cid:18) 1

2

 + 

1




+

1
4

me2i(e2i  1) +

1
4

me2i(e2i  1) + o(m2)(cid:19).

(10)

here, the massive parameter  is arbitrary. it is clear from consistency reasons that it must
be equal to 1, and also that the terms of o(m2) should be present, but this is not needed
(the terms of o(m2) do not appear in colemans expressions, probably
for the argument.
as a consequence of his denition of the composite operators (x) in terms of point-splitting
[1].) we should also recall that the replacement of eq. (9) with eq. (10) holds in the sense of a
perturbative expansion in m and m. this is what coleman showed, and is a result that to our
knowledge has not been improved upon. now it is seen that the path integration over  gives a
delta function for  to be a free eld, hence to vanish, and so the expression is unity.

this demonstrates that lj is the lagrangian of the bosonized theory within the smooth
bosonization scheme, even for massive fermions. unfortunately, we needed colemans results to
prove it. therefore, what we just did amounts to a consistency check, and not an independent
derivation of bosonization. similar results are not available in 4d because it involves statements
about the explicit forms of nontrivial greens functions. however, this has not necessarily been
a useless exercise if we can understand why the condition for the divergence of the axial current
to vanish was strong enough to decouple the mass terms. let us now consider this point.

first of all, let us observe that there is phase rotation invariance in the theory, which implies

a conservation equation for the current:

note the similarity between this conservation equation and the gauge-xing condition. indeed,

j = 0,

j  .

(11)

  j

(12)

is itself a gauge-xing function if we carry out the same procedure for the phase rotations as we
have just done for the chiral phase rotations. the new dynamical eld  then couples to the
fermion through

z deir d2xj

= z deir d2x = (),

(13)

6

and is therefore the eld that implements the delta function for . strictly speaking, we have not
really done any gauge-xing, in the sense of inserting a further delta function and an associated
faddeevpopov determinant, and therefore there are no ghosts.

the point is now this: let us consider the axial current and make the hodge decomposition

j5
 =  +  .

(14)

(i work in a spacetime with trivial topology in this paper, so there is no harmonic form in the
decomposition.) the gauge-xing condition now implies

conversely, due to the property

(cid:3) = 0.

 =  5

of the gamma matrices in two dimensions, current conservation implies

this means that eectively

   = (cid:3) = 0.

(cid:3)j5

 = 0

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

in the path integral, i.e. in the sense of a delta function constraint in the path integral. in other
words, the axial vector vanishes.

we are therefore dealing with a theory where the axial current, hence also the current,
vanishes. could this be the real reason for the decoupling of  from the mass terms? the
following heuristic argument suggests that it is: since the axial current vanishes, we have a
local condition (it applies pointwise) which eectively puts two dofs of the fermion to zero.
however, a physical dirac fermion in two dimensions only have two dofs, which means that
there were not any dofs left over for the mass terms.

this argument works in 4d as well if we can nd similar local constraints. the idea is to
count the dofs aected by these constraints, and conclude that there is no room left for mass
terms or other bilinear combinations of the fermion eld. this leads to our strategy for smooth
bosonization in 4d. the local constraints that i will consider in 4d are to have both the vector
and the axial vector current vanish. thus, my choice of gauge-xing functions will be guided by
this, rather than trying to nd gauges where the ghosts decouple (which may not even exist).

3 smooth bosonization of an abelian fermion in 4d

i consider an abelian fermion of mass m coupled to an external vector a(x). the theory is
described by the path integral

z[a] = z dd eir d4x l,
l = [i6  6a  m].

(19)

i will briey consider generalizations to non-abelian fermions later.

first let us try the chiral phase of the fermion and see how far we can get with bosonization
in this case. of course, our requirements for the bosonized theory can not be fullled with only
the chiral phase, because topologically stable congurations can not be achieved with just one

7

pseudoscalar eld, but we will get an idea of what is going on. thus, we perform the change of
variables

in the path integral, which then becomes

  ei5 ,

  ei5

z[a] = j[]z dd eir d4x l
l = [i6 6 5 6a  me2i5 ],

,

(20)

(21)

and j[] = exp(isj []) is the jacobian of the transformation. according to our previous consid-
erations, sj [] is an action for the eld  and a part of the nal action for the bosonized theory.
i will consider the dicult problem of how to calculate this in the next section, but we do not
need the explicit form here.

by the smooth bosonization scheme we now path integrate over  and insert a gauge-xing
delta function and faddeevpopov determinant. an obvious choice of gauge-xing function is

 = j
5 .

(22)

this decouples the axial current from , leaving only the mass term to couple  and the fermion.
the faddeevpopov determinant can now be found by adding  to the lagrangian and
performing a gauge transformation. there is actually a subtlety connected with this, since the
new terms in the lagrangian is of the form

(cid:0)f1() + 2f2() + 3f3()(cid:1) ,

(23)

where  is the parameter of the gauge transformation. this can be found from a calculation
similar to that described in the next section. thus it appears that the path integration over
 no longer gives a delta function.
it turns out, however, that only f1 contributes to the
faddeevpopov determinant:




= f1().

(24)

this gives the brst invariant result, and can be veried by the alternative procedure of adding
(c) to the lagrangian. f1 is a derivative operator depending on . i will not give the explicit
form here, mainly because it is tedious to calculate, but also because the inclusion of further
dofs will modify it, and because we will not need the explicit form. thus the ghosts do not
decouple in this gauge. however, the meaning of the path integral over  as a delta function is
still intact.

let us see if the gauge-xing condition leads to the vanishing of the axial current j5

 itself.

to nd out we perform a hodge decomposition like we did in 2d. it is

2 .
the gauge-xing condition leads immediately to (cid:3) = 0. j5
vanish  if  is a free eld. this happens if

j5
 =  + 1

 will then be a free eld  hence

(25)

1

2 j

5 = 0.

using the property

1

2{ , } = 5

8

(26)

(27)

of the gamma matrices, eq. (26) is equivalent to

( 1
2

{ 1

2  , }) = 0.

(28)

we can compare this to the equation for the conservation of the angular momentum current:

j,  ( 1

2

{, 1

2 } + l) = 0,

(29)

where l = xi  x i is the orbital angular momentum operator. thus, the spin part
of this conservation equation, together with the gauge-xing condition, would make the axial
current a free eld.

the orbital part of the conservation equation can also be written

where

(x  x),

  i 

is the energy-momentum tensor. but translation invariance implies

and the orbital part, eq. (30), becomes

 = 0,

(x  x) =   .

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

thus, gauge-xing and poincare invariance does not lead to the vanishing of the axial current
as a local constraint because the energy-momentum tensor of a dirac fermion is not symmetric.
let us now consider the chiral poincare transformations. first, we concentrate on the chiral

lorentz transformations, acting on the dirac fermion by

  ei 1

2  j  5

  ei 1

2  j  5.

(34)

this is a global transformation, and a symmetry of the kinetic part of the lagrangian. couplings
to vectors and mass terms (and tensors) break the symmetry explicitly. in addition there are
anomalies, which are crucial to our discussion since they are responsible for the jacobian.

in order to bosonize these dofs we proceed as for the chiral phase: a local change of
variables in the path integral, with now the eld  (x) as parameter of the transformation,
is performed. this gives rise to a jacobian which depends on this eld, and to which we will
return in the next section. the fermionic part of the new transformed lagrangian is

l = [i6   1

2 ( 1

2{, 1

2 }5 + 5l)

 6a   (a5 + x6a5)  m  im j  5] +  .

(35)

i have only given the terms of lowest order in  ; the dots refer to higher orders. it is understood
that a symmetric product of  and j is used, and derivative operators are symmetrized to
act both to the right and to the left, all in order to get a real expression. from the last term
in eq. (35), the coupling term involving the mass m, it is seen that  must have the same
properties under discrete symmetries as the bilinear combination  5 in order not to come
in conict with these discrete symmetries. this means that the dual tensor  transforms in
the same way as the electromagnetic tensor f .

9

the bosonic eld  couples in a complicated way to the fermion. but a choice for a
gauge-xing function which almost suggests itself (by analogy to the previous coupling to ) is

 = ( 1
2

{, 1

2 }5 + 5l)  j,

5

.

(36)

the gauge-xing condition leads to a manifest decoupling only between  and  in the lowest
order term with  in l, but the sense of the decoupling is implicitly stronger.
delta function leads to the term

the remarks about the gauge-xing procedure for the chiral phase apply here as well. the

in the lagrangian, where  is the lagrange multiplier eld. the faddeevpopov determinant
gives

lgf = 1

2  

(37)

lghosts = 1

2 c (cid:18) 

 (cid:19) c,

where  / is a complicated derivative operator depending on .

let us investigate the spin part of the gauge-xing condition. it is

which is equivalent to

( 1
2

{, 1

2 }5) = 0,

1

2  j = 0

(38)

(39)

(40)

due to the property (27). the meaning of this equation is revealed if we hodge decompose the
vector j:

j =  + 1

2 .

(41)

from this we can deduce that eq. (40) implies (cid:3) = 0. moreover, from phase rotation
invariance, we have the current conservation equation

j = 0,

(42)

from which also (cid:3) = 0 follows. thus, modulo the orbital part of the gauge-xing condition,
we have eectively a delta function in the path integral which ensures that the current j is a
free eld.

then what about the orbital part? this reads

( 5l) = (x

5  x
5 ),

where i have introduced the axial energy-momentum tensor


5  5i .

(43)

(44)

at this point we introduce further dofs in the theory, corresponding to chiral translations.

thus we make the change of variables

  eibp 5,

  eibp 5

(45)

10

in the path integral. this leads to a jacobian and to the new lagrangian

l = [i6   b5

 6a  b 6a5  m  2imbp 5] +  .

the eld b is an axial vector.

to x the new gauge symmetry we choose the condition

the new terms in the lagrangian from the gauge-xing procedure are

 = ( 5i ) = 

5 = 0.

and

lgf = 

lghosts = c(cid:18) 

 (cid:19) c .

(46)

(47)

(48)

(49)

in the presence of the delta function for the gauge-xing condition, the orbital part of the chiral
lorentz gauge-xing function, eq. (43), eectively becomes

(50)
thus, an obstacle for having eectively a vanishing current j is the antisymmetric part of 
5 .
we have now included all the chiral dofs advertized in the introduction in the path integral.


5  
5 .

putting all together, we come to the following result:

where

z = z dd d[a]d[b]d[c]d[c]eir d4xle

d[a]  d d db,
d[b]  d d d,

d[c]d[c]  dcdcdc dc dc dc,

and the eective lagrangian is

where

le = l + lgf + lghosts + lj ,

l = eib5 [i6  6a  m]eib5 ,
lgf =  + 1
2   + ,
2 c (cid:18) 
(cid:19) c + 1
lghosts = c(cid:18) 
z d4xlj = i ln j[b].

b   + 1
 (cid:19) c + c(cid:18) 

 (cid:19) c,

2  j  + bp ,

(51)

(52)

(53)

(54)

in addition, the three conservation equations (current, angular momentum and energy-momen-
tum) implicitly hold. they can be included explicitly by introducing the lagrange multiplier ,
 and , and adding

j + 1

2  j, +  

(55)

to the eective lagrangian.

it is now clear that exact bosonization fails, at least with only the chiral dofs that we have
considered. the currents do not vanish, and the ghosts do not decouple. the meaning of this
result, and the question of how far we are from exact bosonization, will be discussed in sec. 5.

11

4 the bosonic action

i now turn to the problem of calculating the quantity lj from the jacobian j = exp(ir d4xlj )

of the chiral transformations. this is the lagrangian for the would-be bosonized theory.

technically, the full change of variables

  eib5 ,

  eib5 ,

(56)

with b as in eq. (54), is dicult to implement. we may anticipate that the action sj is a
complicated nonlinear functional of the bosonic elds, containing innitely many derivatives
and angular momentum operators. approximations are therefore necessary. observe that the
latter features come from the derivatives in the innitesimal generators, that is, their spacetime
parts. the rst approximation i will adopt for my calculations is to ignore these parts of the
generators, that is, i will ignore the orbital part of j in the term with , and the eld b
altogether. intuitively this is a low energy approximation.

still further simplications are necessary. i will consider the action for  and  separately

to begin with; interactions between the elds will be investigated later.

the jacobian j[] = exp(isj []) can be calculated exactly provided the regularization scheme
is carefully chosen. there are two things we must pay special attention to. the rst one is that
phase and poincare invariance must be respected. we can achieve this by using the proper
time regularization scheme described in ref. [12]. this is not an unimportant point, because an
axial vector will appear in the dirac operator in intermediate calculations, and this may destroy
poincare invariance for certain schemes, see ref. [12]. but other schemes should also be possible.
the second thing is that proper time regularization by itself is quadratically divergent. for
our calculations we have removed the quadratic divergences by extending the regularized proper
time integral into a paulivillars sum [16]. the procedure is described in ref. [17], where it is
used for the calculation of chiral anomalies in the path integral.

the calculation proceeds by integrating up a sequence of innitesimal chiral rotations, and

the result is

l =

1
122 ()2

1
242  (cid:3)2  +


+

m2
122  
m4
242 (cid:16)e4i + e4i  2(cid:17) 
1
82 f f ,

m2

62 (cid:16)e4i + e4i(cid:17) 

m4

1922 (cid:16)e8i + e8i  2(cid:17)

(57)

with sj = r d4xl and f = a  a. it is a kind of generalized sinegordon lagrangian;

the last term is the familiar adlerbelljackiw (abj) anomaly. i repeat that this is an exact
result. there is no hidden dependence on the regularization scheme in terms of carefully chosen
parameters, and the cuto has been taken to innity. furthermore, there are no higher powers
of derivatives than four.

i will return to the physics of l in the next section, but let us here expand it in powers of
 and keep only the gaussian part  a weak eld approximation. we also ignore the coupling
to the vector eld. we get

l =

1
242  (cid:3)2  +

5m2
122  (cid:3)  +

m4
2 2 +  .

(58)

12

it is more convenient to rewrite this as

l =
=

1

242 (cid:0)(cid:3)2 + 10m2(cid:3) + 24m4(cid:1)  + 
1
242 ((cid:3) + 6m2)((cid:3) + 4m2) +  .

(59)

thus  has a negative metric, assuming the sign of the metric is dened from the gaussian part
of the action. let us now try to insert an i according to the usual prescription m  m  i.
this appears to lead to a negative imaginary part for the lagrangian, hence jeopardizing the
convergence of the path integral. however, we should really consider the full lagrangian (57),
which contains several oscillating terms. these are harmless with respect to divergence, and the
only potentially dangerous term is the third one,

but if we take a plane wave (x) = eikx for , then this term becomes

m2  i
122 .



m2  i
122 k2,



(60)

(61)

which leads to convergence for k time-like, as is expected on-shell. thus the theory is well
dened despite the negative metric of , although this may severely restrict the physical role of
this eld.

we can in principle perform a similar analysis for the eld  when the orbital part of
j is ignored, but in practice our level of technology limits what we can do. a full nonlinear
lagrangian like (57) would be very hard to calculate. it is, however, possible to nd the gaussian
part. a procedure for this is rst to perform one innitesimal chiral lorentz transformation and
calculate the jacobian, then perform a second transformation and calculate the jacobian for that
with the new dirac operator, this time keeping two orders of  . the correct, total jacobian
is the sum of these, but with the terms proportional to 2 divided by two. this procedure
can be proved by considering the total jacobian as an integral over a sequence of innitesimal
contributions. the gaussian approximation for the  lagrangian is

1

1922  ((cid:3) + 6m2)((cid:3) + 4m2) +
the last term is the spin part of the anomaly from ref. [12].

l =

1
482  ((cid:3) + 6m2) f  .

(62)

note the similarity between the two gaussian lagrangians for  and  , apart from the
coupling to the vector eld a.
in fact, we can get the latter lagrangian by making the
replacement   1
4 tr(). this suggests that writing all
the terms in the lagrangian (57) in terms of exponentials (i.e. also the kinetic terms), making
the replacement

2  and taking the dirac trace: 1

2 

1

   + 1

2 j  + bp ,

(63)

and taking the dirac trace divided by four leads to a quantity that is a part of the full bosonic
lagrangian. additional terms are expected to appear in a real calculation from the derivative
operators l and p, and various terms containing the vector eld a. furthermore, there may
be a term similar to the wesszumino term in the chiral lagrangian of the strong interactions,
because the 1
2 a of su (3) in
the usual case.

2  generate a non-abelian group, like the gell-mann matrices 1

13

finally, we can calculate the interaction terms between  and  . there are several terms
which couples one  with one  . these can be computed in the same way as the gaussian
lagrangian for  above, and are therefore the only ones i will consider. it has the complicated
form

l =

1

242(cid:18) 1

f((cid:3) + 6m2)

(cid:3)
+ 3f   + 3

+ f  + 3

2 f  (cid:3)   2f   + 2f  
2 f (cid:3)  + 12m2f (cid:19)

(64)

(65)

to obtain this result i have made the replacement

a   a  (cid:18)g 



(cid:3) (cid:19) a =

1
(cid:3)

f,

where the projection operator  removes the gradient part of a and thus renders the ex-
pression gauge invariant. this can be done without loss of generality, since the gradient part
of a does not couple to the fermion. the presence of an f could be anticipated since a
nonvanishing expression could not be obtained from one , one , and derivatives alone.

this completes my calculation of the bosonic action. two more terms are actually known:
a coupling term between one  and three as, and a coupling term between one b and three
as. these are part of the chiral poincare anomalies, and are found in ref. [12]. they are not
given here, because they contain an l and a p, respectively.

it should also be possible to calculate the faddeevpopov determinants in lghosts to the
same precision. this would require only a jacobian for an innitesimal transformation, but the
change (56) in the lagrangian, which clearly complicates the calculation.

5 discussion

5.1 summary

let us rst recall how our initial requirements are met:

(i) the generalized chiral phases are the antisymmetrical tensor eld  from the chiral
lorentz transformations, and an axial vector b from the chiral translations; both of these can
be used for making congurations of nontrivial topology,

(ii) the chiral phase rotation and chiral poincare transformations give rise to a jacobian

when a change of variables are made in the path integral, and

(iii) the quantity lj is at least a part of the lagrangian for the bosonic theory  if bosoniza-
tion had been exact, it would be the complete lagrangian; it is nonlinear, hence possibly have
soliton solutions, and contains fourth order derivative terms, which can stabilize these solitons.
the question of whether or not topologically stable solitons can be formed in the bosonic
theory is interesting by itself, and deserves further investigation. i favor the possibility that the
tensor  is responsible for these congurations, rather than the axial vector b. the reason is
that b is the parameter of a pure derivative operator, p5, while  is the parameter of j 5
which at least has an internal part, 1
2  5. hence, if part of the lagrangian for  is indeed
given by the replacement (63) in eq. (57), then that part bears a resemblance to the skyrme
model where the matrices  play the role of the pauli or gell-mann matrices.

guided by the observation that the axial vector current (and vector current) vanishes in a
certain gauge of the smooth bosonization scheme, i tried in this paper to nd the gauges which

14

would implement the vanishing of the vector and axial vector currents in 4d. however, this
program was not completely successful due to the fact that the energy-momentum tensor for a
dirac fermion, and its axial counterpart, is not symmetrical. furthermore, in the chosen gauge
the ghosts did not decouple. nevertheless, this is an exact rewriting of the theory, exhibiting
some dofs of the fermion in an unusual way.

5.2 problems with the approach

if what we desire is exact bosonization, the most serious problem is that the ghosts do not
decouple from the bosonic elds. even if we did get rid of the fermion, the ghosts would be
there as an obstacle for this. conversely, if we could nd a ghost-free gauge  and it is far
from clear that this exists  then the fermion would probably not be decoupled. thus exact
bosonization must fail, at least for the model and dofs i have considered in this paper.

another problem is the lack of symmetry of the energy-momentum tensors. however, in
applications the energy-momentum tensor is frequently replaced by a symmetrical improved
tensor. this suggests that the antisymmetrical part is somehow unimportant. if we were allowed
to replace the two energy-momentum tensors with their symmetrized versions, this would mean
that the current and axial current would eectively be free elds, hence vanish, and the fermion
would be completely eliminated from the theory, according to our previous arguments. in this
case the resulting theory would be a theory of only bosons and ghosts.

of course, also a problem is the lack of a proof that vanishing currents imply a vanishing
fermion. indeed, if such a proof could be found, it is likely to be known rst in 2d. however,
no such proof is known in 2d.

these problems may imply the possibility that we have really been going the wrong direc-
tion. perhaps it is some complicated nonlinear bosonic theory which is the fundamental thing,
and that when fermionized gives a theory of a fermion coupled to bosonic elds. this is the
situation with the skyrme model [10]. if this possibility is correct, then it would explain why an
arbitrary fermion could not be bosonized, and it would imply that certain theories of fermions
coupled to bosons could.

there is also a potential problem that may occur at nite temperature. in the literature [7]
there exists an argument3 that each fermion dof has the same energy as 7/8 bosonic dofs.
this seems to restrict the construction of bosonic theories from fermionic ones. however, it is
important to take into account that the 7/8-rule only applies if the system is in a state of
an approximately free gas of particles, both with respect to the fermionic description and the
bosonic description. this is not the case for the bosonization procedure in this paper, because
the bosonized theory is nonlinear, hence cannot describe a free gas. the same is of course true
for other bosonization schemes that produces nonlinear bosonic theories.

5.3 non-abelian fermions

i now briey consider the possibility of generalizing the results to a non-abelian dirac fermion.
(see also refs. [5, 12].) the fermion will then transform in some representation of the non-
abelian group. if we for simplicity choose u (n ) and the fundamental representation, we have
the color transformations

  eiata

,

  eiata

,

(66)

where a = 1, . . . , n and ta are the generators. this is of course a generalization of the phase
rotation of the abelian phase, and as such should be considered together with the poincare

3i thank the referee for pointing out this argument.

15

transformations and their chiral counterparts. we must therefore admit the possibility that
also poincare transformations, chiral phase rotations and chiral poincare transformations can
be generalized to color space. that is, each color of fermion can be transformed separately.
thus we have the generators

ta,

taj ,

tap,

ta5,

taj 5

and tap5,

(67)

respectively, for these transformations. note that they do not generate a group, since their
algebra does not close. they are also not in general symmetries of the fermion lagrangian.
however, they have the property that they are naive symmetries of the fermionic measure while
giving rise to a jacobian in the regularized theory. it is for this reason that they are important
for smooth bosonization.

we can now follow the same procedure as for the abelian case, introducing the new dofs
in the path integral, gauge-xing etc. the bosonic action will again be sj from the jacobian
with bosonic elds a, a
. the action will then have further complications from a
non-abelian structure. the presence of colored matrices in the dirac operator will break the
color symmetries and may change the conservation equations needed for our previous arguments.
however, the new conservation equations will probably be equally eective, and a generalization
of the results of sec. 3 should be straightforward.

 and ba

5.4 the physics of lj : a model theory
even if bosonization is not exact, it may be possible to use the rewritten theory as a starting
point for an approximate description of certain processes, perhaps at low energies. this may be
relevant in particular when the eective dofs in these processes are pseudoscalars, tensors or
axial vectors. but i will now consider another approximation, motivated instead by simplicity.
namely, i will consider the theory described by the lagrangian lj of the bosonic theory in its
own right. i can think of no reason why this theory cannot be a perfectly healthy quantum eld
theory. in a sense it is like a caricature of the true fermionic system. a heuristic argument for
this is given in terms of a physical interpretation of the jacobian j below.

first, let us assume that the vector eld a is absent. in the weak eld limit we can nd

the equation of motion for  from eq. (59):

((cid:3) + 6m2)((cid:3) + 4m2) = 0,

a double kleingordon equation. this has plane wave solutions:

(x) = eikx,

k2 = m2

1  4m2

or k2 = m2

2  6m2.

(68)

(69)

thus there are apparently two mass shells for the eld, corresponding to two branches of
propagation. the same is true for weak  s, as can be seen from eq. (62). of course, these
modes may turn out to be irrelevant when higher orders of the elds and interactions between
them are taken into account.

if we now include the vector a, and furthermore, assume that this eld is a dynamical eld
in a larger theory, then the situation becomes more interesting. the  may then decay into two
as through the abj anomaly, and the  mixes with a ( and b decays also into three
as through the anomaly terms we mentioned in the previous section). it also induces further
couplings between  and  (and b) by a-exchange.

finally, i will discuss the physical interpretation for the use of the jacobian of chiral trans-
formations in the bosonic theory. we can dene the eective action w for the fermionic theory
by

eiw  z = z dd eir d4x d,

(70)

16

where d is the dirac operator. a change of variables will give

z = j[b]z dd eir d4x (eib5 deib5 ) = j[b]eiw [b],

(71)

with b dened in eq. (54) and w [b] the rotated eective fermion action, so that the jacobian
can be written

j[b] =

= ei(w w [b]).

(72)

r dd eir d4x d

r dd eir d4x eib5 deib5 

the quantity sj [b] in j = eisj [b] is therefore the dierence between the eective action of an
unrotated fermion eld and a rotated fermion eld. in a sense, sj [b] measures the response of
the fermion to external forces  it is the amount of action we must inject into the system
to maintain the rotated congurations eib5 , eib5 compared to the unrotated ones , .
an analogy which comes to mind is the physics of an elastically deformable solid, where the
fermion eld is like the solid, and the chiral transformations are like compression, shear and
tension deformations. the lagrangian lj thus describes the theory of such deformations of
the fermion eld.
ideas reminiscent of these have been used in ref. [3] to justify a derivation of the chiral
lagrangian [18] from qcd. in these papers, however, mainly the chiral avor phase dofs of
the quarks were considered. it would be interesting to try to bosonize all dofs of the quark
eld, including both color and chiral poincare phases. (for a related investigation see ref. [5].)

acknowledgments
faber, a.n. ivanov, s.h. hansen, and o. borisenko for discussions.

i thank p.h. damgaard for invaluable discussions and comments, and m.

references

[1] s. coleman, phys. rev. d11 (1975) 2088
[2] d.c. mattis and e.h. lieb, j. math. phys. 6 (1965) 304;

a. luther and i. peschel, phys. rev. b9 (1974) 2911

[3] d.i. diakonov and m.i. eides, pizma zh. eskp. teor. fiz. 38 (1983) 358 [jetp lett. 38

(1983) 433];
j. balog, phys. lett. 149b (1984) 197;
a.a. andrianov, phys. lett. 157b (1985) 425;
a.a. andrianov and yu.v. novozhilov, phys. lett. b181 (1986) 129

[4] p.h. damgaard, h.b. nielsen and r. sollacher, nucl. phys. b414 (1994) 541
[5] p.h. damgaard and r. sollacher, phys. lett. b322 (1994) 131
[6] c.p. burgess, c.a. lutken and f. quevedo, phys. lett. b336 (1994) 18;

r. banerjee, nucl. phys. b465 (1996) 157;
c.d. fosco and f.a. schaposnik, phys. lett. b391 (1997) 136

[7] a. luther and k.d. schotte, nucl. phys. b242 (1984) 407
[8] s. mandelstam, phys. rev. d11 (1975) 3026
[9] g.h. derrick, j. math. phys. 5 (1964) 1252
[10] t.h.r. skyrme, proc. roy. soc. a260 (1961) 127
[11] e. abdalla, m.c.b. abdalla and k.d. rothe, non-perturbative methods in 2-dimensional

quantum field theory, world scientic, singapore, 1991

17

[12] j.b. thomassen, chiral poincare transformations and their anomalies, preprint iktuw

9906401, hep-th/9906086

[13] p.h. damgaard, h.b. nielsen and r. sollacher, nucl. phys. b385 (1992) 227
[14] p.h. damgaard, h.b. nielsen and r. sollacher, phys. lett. b296 (1992) 132
[15] r. banerjee, nucl. phys. b445 (1995) 516
[16] w. pauli and f. villars, rev. mod. phys. 21 (1949) 434
[17] s.-k. hu, b.-l. young and d.w. mckay, phys. rev. d30 (1984) 836
[18] j. gasser and h. leutwyler, ann. phys. 158 (1984) 142; nucl. phys. b250 (1985) 465;

j.f. donoghue, e. golowich and b.r. holstein, dynamics of the standard model, cam-
bridge university press 1992

18

