9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
2
2

 

 
 

1
v
8
5
1
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

hip-1999-60/th

an essay on color connement

masud chaichian

high energy physics division, department of physics,

university of helsinki

and

helsinki institute of physics

p.o. box 9, fin-00014 helsinki, finland

and

kazuhiko nishijima

nishina memorial foundation

2-28-45 honkomagome, bunkyo-ku, tokyo 113-8941, japan

abstract

color connement is a consequence of an unbroken non-abelian gauge symmetry and the
resulting asymptotic freedom inherent in quantum chromodynamics. a qualitative sketch of its
proof is presented.

1 introduction

there has been an accumulation of evidence in favor of the quark model of hadrons [1] and we
can no longer think of any other substitute for it. yet, no isolated quarks have been observed to
date, and we are inclined to think that observation of isolated quarks is, in principle, impossible.
this is the hypothesis of quark connement, and it has been further extended to that of color
connement that implies not only the unobservability of quarks but also of all the isolated colored
particles such as quarks and gluons. then a natural question is raised of whether or not we can
account for this hypothesis within the framework of the conventional quantum chromodynamics
(qcd) dealing with the gauge interactions of quarks and gluons. the answer to this question
is armative and the detailed mathematical proof of color connement has been published
elsewhere [2-6]. in this article, therefore, we shall follow the ow of ideas underlying the proof
in a qualitative manner.

1

the problem of color connement may be decomposed into two steps. the rst step consists
of nding a consensus of interpretations of color connement. unless it is properly settled we
do not know what we have to prove in the second step. because of the importance of this
subject many authors have proposed various interpretations. a typical example is wilsons area
law for the loop correlation function in the lattice gauge theory [7]. when it is obeyed the
interaction between a quark and an antiquark is given by a conning linear potential. another
example is given by coherent superposition of magnetic monopoles in the vacuum state [8-13].
this is dual to the superconducting vacuum based on coherent superposition of charged objects
such as the cooper pairs. corresponding to the superconductor of the second kind a pair of
magnetic monopoles can be connected by a quantized magnetic ux forming a hadronic string
whose energy is proportional to the distance between them. then the situation is similar to the
preceding example.

in these examples one introduces a topological structure through monopoles, strings and
in the present paper, however, we shall consider a
instantons into the conguration space.
dierent topological structure in the state vector space. for this purpose we look for a known
example of connement within the framework of known eld theories, and we nd a prototype
example in quantum electrodynamics (qed) [2]. when the electromagnetic eld is quantized in
a covariant gauge, say, in the fermi gauge, three kinds of photons emerge, namely, transverse,
longitudinal and scalar photons, but only the transverse photons are subject to observation
leaving the other two unobservable. we recognize that this is indeed a typical example of
connement, and we may be able to nd some clues to color connement by studying closely
the mechanism of connement of longitudinal and scalar photons in qed. for this reason we
analyze its mechanism in sec. 2 so that we can generalize it and apply it to qcd.

one of the profound features of gauge theories is the becchi-rouet-stora (brs) invariance
[14] and its introduction is vital to the interpretation of connement. therefore, we shall describe
some of the basic properties of this invariance in sec. 3.

the strong interactions described by qcd possess a novel feature called asymptotic freedom
[15,16], and in sec. 4 we shall discuss how this aspect of strong interactions drew our attention
and how the non-abelian gauge theory entered the game. finally in sec. 5 we shall combine
brs invariance with asymptotic freedom to prove color connement.

2 quantum electrodynamics and indenite metric

when the electromagnetic eld is quantized in a covariant gauge, say, in the fermi gauge, we
nd transverse, longitudinal and scalar photons, but the latter two are never observed. we
may interpret it as an example of connement, and we have at least three alternative ways
of explaining it. first, we can refer to the representations of the poincare group for massless
particles [17,18]. then, massless particles are known to have only two directions of polarization
no matter what their spin is. thus photons are always transversely polarized and the same would
be true with gluons if they could be observed. the second method is to employ the coulomb
gauge by keeping only the transverse photons from the start. the remnants of unobservable
photons manifest themselves in the form of the coulomb potential. this method is applicable,
however, only to the linear abelian gauge theories such as qed. the third and the most useful
method is the introduction of a subsidiary condition such as the lorentz condition.

2

quantization of the electromagnetic eld in a covariant gauge forces us to introduce indenite
metric [19] which is inherited from the minkowski metric. thus the whole state vector space in
qed can no longer possess the positive-denite metric, and for the physical interpretation of
the theory we have to eliminate indenite metric by imposing the lorentz condition on the state
vectors to select observable or physical states. in order to execute this program let us quantize the
free electromagnetic eld in the fermi gauge and for a given momentum we have four directions
of polarization, namely, two transverse, one longitudinal and one scalar. thus we have four
kinds of photons specied by the directions of polarization. the canonical quantization then
implies that the scalar photons are represented by negative norm states. this is a consequence
of the manifest covariance of the quantization of the vector eld in the minkowski space.

the emergence of indenite metric indicates that observable states occupy only a portion of
the whole state vector space called the physical subspace. in order to dene such a subspace
we introduce a subsidiary condition known as the lorentz condition. let us consider the four-
divergence of the vector eld, then it represents a free massless eld even in the presence of the
interactions. we decompose it into a sum of positive- and negative- frequency parts correspond-
ing to destruction and creation operators, respectively. we nd that the photons involved in
this operator are special combinations of the longitudinal and scalar photons in the amplitude.
we shall call them a-photons, then an a-photon state has zero norm. we can introduce an
alternative combination of longitudinal and scalar photons called b-photons in such a way that
a b-photon state also has zero norm. thus for a given momentum we have two transverse (t-)
photons, an a-photon and a b-photon. although both an a-photon state and a b-photon state
have zero norm, their inner product is non-vanishing so that they are metric partners.

a physical state is dened as such a state that is annihilated by applying the positive fre-
quency part of the four-divergence of the vector eld. this is the lorentz condition. we can
easily verify that the s matrix in qed transforms a physical state into another physical state
since it commutes with the four-divergence. this is one of the general features of the subsidiary
condition. also we can easily verify that the b-photons are excluded from the physical subspace.
therefore, we have only t-photons and a-photons in the physical states. then we can show that
the inner product of a physical state involving at least one a-photon with another physical state
vanishes identically. in other words, a-photons give no contributions to observable quantities,
and both a- and b-photons escape detection. this is the connement mechanism of the longi-
tudinal and scalar photons. in qed only the transverse photons remain observable. in qcd,
however, not only longitudinal and scalar gluons but also transverse gluons are unobservable.
thus, there are some essential dierences in the nature of connement between qed and qcd.
in the former case connement is kinematical in the sense that it could be understood without
recourse to dynamics of the system, whereas in the latter case it is dynamical in nature as the
proof depends sensitively on the dynamical properties of the system.

3 quantum chromodynamics and brs invariance

as we shall see in the next section strong interactions of quarks are mediated by a non-abelian
gauge eld corresponding to the su (3) color symmetry. thus we shall discuss one of the most
characteristic features of gauge theories known as the brs invariance in this section [14].

classical electrodynamics is gauge-invariant. field strengths expressed in terms of the vector

3

eld are invariant under the local or space-time-dependent gauge transformations of the latter.
given a source term, therefore, the solution of the equation for the vector eld is not uniquely
given, and this non-uniqueness is an obstacle to quantization. in order to overcome this diculty
we add to the gauge-invariant lagrangian a term violating the local gauge invariance. this
extra term is called the gauge-xing term and was rst introduced by fermi. later it has been
generalized so as to include an arbitrary parameter called the gauge parameter. in the original
form introduced by fermi this parameter is equal to unity.

after quantization we nd that we have to introduce indenite metric into the state vector
space and that the divergence of the vector eld commutes with the s matrix. because of the
inclusion of the gauge-xing term the eld equation deviates from the classical maxwell equation
by a term proportional to the four-divergence of the vector eld. it so happens that a matrix
element of this four-divergence between two physical states vanishes identically because of the
lorentz condition, and the classical maxwell equation is recovered in the physical subspace. in
this way we nd, despite the introduction of the gauge-xing term, that expectation values of
gauge-invariant quantities and the s matrix elements in the physical subspace are independent
of the choice of the gauge parameter because of the congeniality between the gauge-xing term
and the subsidiary condition. in what follows we shall extend this approach to qcd.

there are many essential dierences between qed and qcd, however. the former is an
abelian gauge theory described by a linear eld equation, whereas the latter is a non-abelian
gauge theory described by a non-linear eld equation. in both cases the gauge-invariant part
of the lagrangian is given by the square of the eld strength. so, let us introduce the gauge-
xing term in qcd assuming the same structure as in qed. then we recognize that it does not
work because observable quantities depend explicitly on the gauge parameter. another diculty
arises from the fact that the four-divergence of the gauge eld is no longer a free eld, and this
prevents us from dening its positive frequency part.
in other words, the lorentz condition
cannot be employed to dene physical states in qcd. thus we are obliged to nd a device to
overcome these diculties and to this end we shall introduce the faddeev-popov ghost elds.

in order to eliminate the gauge-dependence of physically relevant quantities faddeev and
popov have proposed a procedure of averaging the path integral over the manifold of gauge
transformations. we skip the mathematical detail here and refer to the original paper [20], but
we should mention that this procedure resulted in a new additional term in the lagrangian called
the faddeev-popov (fp) ghost term. this term involves a pair of hermitian scalar elds, but
they are anticommuting and consequently violate paulis theorem on the connection between
spin and statistics. for this reason they are called ghost elds. paulis theorem is based on
three postulates, (1) lorentz invariance, (2) local commutativity or microscopic causality and
(3) positive-denite metric for state vectors, and the fp ghost elds violate the last one obliging
us to introduce indenite metric into the theory.

thus we face again the problem of eliminating indenite metric from the theory with the
help of an appropriate subsidiary condition to select physical states out of the whole state
vector space. when physical states are so dened as those that are annihilated by applying a
certain operator, that operator should commute with the s matrix as does the four-divergence
of the vector eld in qed. in order to nd such an operator a novel symmetry discovered by
becchi, rouet and stora is extremely useful. although this symmetry was originally utilized in
renormalizing qcd, it plays an essential role in the proof of color connement in qcd.

4

in a classical gauge theory a local gauge transformation is specied by a function of the
space-time coordinates called the gauge function and the classical theory is invariant under such
a transformation. this local gauge invariance is lost when the gauge-xing and fp ghost terms
are introduced. besides, local gauge transformations are dened only for the color gauge eld
and the quark elds, but they are not even dened for fp ghost elds. the brs transformations
for the color gauge eld and the quark elds are given by replacing the gauge function by one of
the fp ghost elds in innitesimal gauge transformations. since we have a pair of ghost elds we
introduce, correspondingly, a pair of brs transformations. then a question is raised of how to
dene brs transformations of the ghost elds since their gauge transformations are not dened.
fortunately, this problem has a simple but beautiful solution. their brs transformations are
introduced by demanding the invariance of the total lagrangian under them.

the total lagrangian including the gauge-xing and fp ghost terms is no longer invariant
under local gauge transformations, but it is invariant under the global brs transformations.
noethers theorem then tells us that there must be a pair of conserved quantities corresponding to
a pair of brs symmetries. they are hermitian and called the brs charges. as mentioned before
there are two kinds of hermitian fp ghost elds and correspondingly a brs charge must involve
one of the ghost elds. in what follows we keep only one of these two charges for simplicity.
the brs charge that we keep is anticommuting just as the fp ghost eld, and consequently the
square of the brs charge vanishes and it is called nilpotent. the hermiticity and nilpotency
of the brs charge would imply indenite metric since otherwise it would be a null operator
[21,22]. the nilpotency is important and allows us to introduce the concept of cohomology in
the theory. after a long detour we are going to introduce an appropriate subsidiary condition.
physical states are dened as those states that are annihilated by applying the brs charge [23].

the fp ghost elds do not appear in the conventional qed but we can also introduce them
although they are non-interacting elds. then we can combine the lorentz condition with the
additional condition implying the absence of fp ghosts to dene the physical states. when
these conditions are satised, we can prove that physical states so dened are annihilated by
the brs charge in qed.

the brs charge is the generator of the brs transformation and the brs transform of an
operator is given by the commutator or anticommutator of that operator with the brs charge,
and this transformation is also nilpotent. an operator which is the brs transform of another
operator is called an exact operator, then it is clear that the matrix element of an exact operator
between a pair of physical states vanishes.

the equation for the non-abelian gauge eld deviates from the classical maxwell equation
and in fact the divergence of the eld strength plus the color current does not vanish but is equal
to a certain exact operator, which will be referred to as an exact current hereafter. therefore,
the classical maxwell equation is recovered when we take the matrix element of the eld equation
between a pair of physical states. furthermore, the brs charge commutes with the s matrix.
thus the scenario in qed is reproduced almost exactly.

when single quark states and single gluon states are unphysical these particles are unob-
servable and consequently conned. thus the problem of color connement reduces to that of
proving that they are unphysical states. we shall evaluate the expectation value of the exact
current in a single quark state or a single gluon state. if they should belong to physical states
the expectation values in these states would vanish identically, so that non-vanishing of the

5

expectation values would be a direct indication that these particles are unphysical and conned.

the four-divergence of the exact current vanishes, and we can give a set of ward-takahashi
identities for greens functions involving the exact current [2-4]. by making use of the above
set of ward-takahashi identities we can prove that the expectation value of the exact current
in a single colored particle state survives when the exact current as applied to the vacuum
state does not generate a massless spin zero particle. therefore, the absence of such a massless
particle is a sucient condition for color connement [2-4]. in order to check its absence we
introduce the vacuum expectation value of the time-ordered product of the gauge eld and the
exact current and evaluate the residue c of the massless spin zero pole of the fourier transform
of this two-point function. the four-divergence of this two-point function is proportional to this
constant c except for a trivial kinematical factor, and the divergence can be cast in the form of
an equal-time commutator.

by checking this equal-time commutator closely we nd that c is the sum of a constant a
and the goto-imamura-schwinger (gis) term. the constant a is equal to the inverse of the
renormalization constant of the color gauge eld. these constants c and a satisfy distinct
renormalization group (rg) equations and boundary conditions. we shall not enter this subject
here since the mathematical detail has been given elsewhere [2-5], but we infer the fact that
vanishing of a automatically leads to vanishing of c and color connement is realized. indeed,
it has been known for some time that gluons are conned when a vanishes [24,25], but now with
the help of the brs invariance we could conclude that not only gluons but also all the colored
particles are simultaneously conned. we shall come back to this subject again in sec. 5.

4 asymptotic freedom

in this section we shall review briey how and why our attention was drawn to the non-abelian
gauge theory in describing strong interactions. in particle physics strongly interacting particles
such as nucleons and pions are called hadrons. hadrons are composite particles of quarks and
antiquarks, however, and we have to study the origin of the strong interactions of quarks.

we already know that strong interactions are mediated by the color gauge eld and the
quanta of this eld are called the gluons since they glue up quarks together to form hadrons.
dynamics of quarks and gluons is called qcd as mentioned before. in the sixties experiments
on the deep inelastic scattering of electrons on protons had been carried out. the dierential
cross-section had been measured by specifying the energy and direction of electrons without
observing the hadrons in the nal states. then, apart from kinematical factors this dierential
cross-section can be expressed as a linear combination of two structure functions. they are
functions of the square of the momentum transfer and the energy loss of the electron in the
laboratory system. when these two variables increase indenitely the two structure functions
tend to be functions of the ratio of these two variables except for trivial kinematical factors.
this characteristic behavior of structure functions is called the bjorken scaling [26], and it is
considered to be an empirical manifestation of the properties of strong interactions. what do
we learn from this? in 1969 feynman proposed the parton model and assumed that a nucleon
consists of point-like partons moving almost freely inside the nucleon [27]. in order to keep the
partons inside the nucleon, however, the four-momentum of a parton must be equal to a fraction
x of the total four-momentum of the nucleon. the partons may be identied with the quarks

6

and since x is identied with the ratio of the two kinematical variables referred to in the above
the distribution of the fraction x has been shown to be related to the structure functions.

from the success of the parton model in reproducing the bjorken scaling we may infer
that quarks inside the hadrons are almost free and that the interactions of quarks turn out
to be weaker at shorter distances. this is a distinctive feature of strong interactions and we
may express it in the momentum space as follows: the probability of a process involving large
momentum transfer in strong interactions is small.

we look for a model satisfying this condition and nd that only non-abelian gauge interac-

tions meet this requirement with the help of rg [15,16].

the concept of rg was rst introduced by stueckelberg and petermann in 1953 [28], and it
was further advanced by gell-mann and low in qed in 1954 [29]. let us consider a dielectric
medium and put a positive test charge inside, then the medium is polarized, namely, negative
charges are attracted and positive ones are repelled by this test charge. as a consequence it
induces a new charge distribution in the medium. the total charge inside a sphere of radius
r around the test charge is a function of r and we call it the running charge. the vacuum
is an example of the dielectric media because of its ability of being polarized  the vacuum
polarization. in this case the test charge is called the bare charge and the total charge inside
a sphere of a suciently large radius is called the renormalized charge. the running charge
is a function of the radius r, but it can also be regarded as a function of momentum transfer
through the fourier transformation. the bare charge then corresponds to the limiting value of
the running charge for innite momentum transfer.

gell-mann and low have proved on the basis of the rg method that given a nite renormal-
ized charge the bare charge is equal to a certain nite constant independent of the value of the
renormalized one or it is divergent [29]. the bjorken scaling phrased in terms of rg implies that
the bare coupling constant must be equal to zero. we shall refer to this property as asymptotic
freedom (af), and the non-abelian gauge theory is the only known example in which af is
realized as claried by gross and wilczek and by politzer [15,16]. the origin of af may be
traced back to the fact that the vector eld introduces indenite metric needed to realize af
and that the non-abelian gauge theory is the only example involving non-linear interactions of
the vector eld.

thus starting from the empirical bjorken scaling we have nally reached the non-abelian

gauge theory of strong interactions, namely, qcd.

5 color connement

now we are ready to present the proof of color connement, at least verbally, by combining
arguments given in preceding sections.

in qed the square of the ratio of the renormalized charge to the bare one is equal to the
renormalization constant of the electromagnetic eld. it is equal to the inverse of the dielectric
constant of the vacuum relative to the empty geometrical space. usually the dielectric constant
of a dielectric medium is dened relative to the vacuum, but here we dene it relative to the
empty geometrical space or the void.

7

this dielectric constant of the vacuum is larger than unity as a consequence of the positive-
denite metric of the physical subspace, or more intuitively, it is a consequence of the screening
eect due to the vacuum polarization. then, let us consider a ctitious case in which the
dielectric constant of the vacuum is smaller than unity.
in this case we have antiscreening
instead of screening when a test charge is placed in this ctitious vacuum, and such a vacuum
is realized when a pair of virtual charged particles of indenite metric should contribute to the
vacuum polarization. in this case the running charge would be an increasing function of the
radius r at least for small values of r. next we shall consider an extreme case of the vanishing
dielectric constant, then a small test charge would attract an unlimited amount of like charges
around it thereby bringing the system into a catastrophic state of innite charge. nature would
take safety measures to prevent such a state from emerging, and a possible resolution is to bring
another test particle of the opposite charge. the total charge of the whole system is equal to
zero and charge connement would be realized.
in qed, however the dielectric constant of
the vacuum or the inverse of the renormalization constant is larger than unity, and the above
scenario reduces to a mere ction.

the situation in qcd is completely dierent since it allows introduction of indenite metric
in the vacuum polarization and af is one of its manifestations. in qcd what corresponds to the
dielectric constant of the vacuum in qed is the inverse of the renormalization constant of the
color gauge eld denoted by a in sec. 3. if a should vanish we would encounter a scenario similar
to the one mentioned above and a test color charge would induce an intolerable catastrophic
state. in sec. 3 we have shown that such a state is excluded by means of the subsidiary condition
that selects physical states. therefore, what can be realized are states of zero color charge and
this is precisely color connement. unlike electric charge, color charge is not a simple additive
quantum number but a member of a lie algebra su(3), so that physically realizable states should
belong to the one-dimensional representation of this algebra. thus the entire problem of color
connement reduces to the proof that the constant a vanishes.

before presenting its proof we have to introduce the concept of the equivalence class of gauges
[2,4,5]. when the dierence between two lagrangian densities is an exact operator we say that
these two lagrangian densities belong to the same equivalence class of gauges. for instance, two
lagrangian densities corresponding to two distinct values of the gauge parameter belong to the
same equivalence class. in qcd hadrons are represented by brs invariant composite operators
[30-32], and the s matrix elements for hadron reactions are obtained by applying the reduction
formula of lehmann, symanzik and zimmermann [33] to greens functions dened as the vacuum
expectation values of the time-ordered products of the brs invariant composite operators. then
we can readily prove that the s matrix elements for hadron reactions are the same within the
same equivalence class of gauges [2,4,5]. color connement signies that the unitarity condition
for the s matrix in the hadronic sector is saturated by hadronic intermediate states. that
means that quarks and gluons have no place to show up in the unitarity condition just as
longitudinal and scalar photons never appeared in the s matrix elements in qed. therefore, we
may take it for granted that the concept of color connement is gauge-independent within the
same equivalence class.

then we come back to the evaluation of the constant a. first, it should be stressed that a
can be evaluated exactly as a function of the gauge coupling constant and the gauge parameter
thanks to af [2,5]. these two parameters dene a two-dimensional parameter space, which
is then decomposed into three domains according to the value of a, namely, zero, innity and

8

nite. it should be stressed here that the existence of these three domains can be proved without
recourse to perturbation theory. of these three domains color connement is manifestly realized
in the rst one, and also in the other two connement should prevail because of the gauge-
independence of the concept of color connement. evaluation of a by means of rg based on
af is a very interesting mathematical problem, but we shall refer to the original paper for the
technical detail[5].

finally, it should be stressed that connement as has been discussed in this paper is real-
ized only when we have an unbroken non-abelian gauge symmetry [2]. when a certain gauge
symmetry is spontaneously broken the exact current generates a massless spin zero particle
as the nambu-goldstone boson and our proof of connement breaks down. for instance, the
electroweak interactions are formulated on the gauge group su (2)  u (1), but spontaneous
symmetry breaking reduces the gauge symmetry to the abelian u (1) corresponding to the elec-
tromagnetic gauge symmetry. thus the electroweak interactions do not possess any unbroken
non-abelian gauge symmetry and are not capable of conning any particle.

to conclude, we have presented the ow of ideas towards intuitive understanding of the
mechanism of color connement without recourse to mathematical detail, but interested readers
are encouraged to refer to the original articles.

acknowledgement: the nancial support of the academy of finland under the project no.
163394 is greatly acknowledged. the authors are grateful to professor a. n. mitra for kindly
inviting us to contribute this article to the insa book.

references

[1] m. gell-mann, phys. letters 8, 214 (1964).

[2] the most extensive review article on the proof of color connement in the context of present

approach is found in the article, k. nishijima, czech. j. phys. 46 , 1 (1996).

[3] k. nishijima, int. j. mod. phys. a9 , 3799 (1994).

[4] k. nishijima, int. j. mod. phys. a10 , 3155 (1995).

[5] k. nishijima and n. takase, int. j. mod. phys. a11 , 2281 (1996).

[6] k. nishijima, int. j. mod. phys. b12 , 1355 (1998).

[7] k. g. wilson, phys. rev. d14 , 2455 (1974).

[8] h. b. nielsen and p. olesen, nucl. phys. b6 , 45 (1973).

[9] y.nambu, phys. rev. d10 , 4262 (1974).

[10] s. mandelstam, phys. reports. c23 , 245 (1976).

[11] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b79 , 276 (1974).

[12] n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl. phys. b426 , 19 (1994).

[13] n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl. phys. b431 , 484 (1994).

9

[14] c. becchi, a. rouet and r. stora, ann. phys. 98 , 287 (1976).

[15] d. j. gross and f. wilczek, phys. rev. lett. 30 , 1343 (1973).

[16] h. d. politzer, phys. rev. lett. 30 , 1346 (1973).

[17] e. p. wigner, nuovo cimento 3 , 517 (1956).

[18] e. p. wigner, rev. mod. phys. 29 , 255 (1957).

[19] n. nakanishi, prog. theor. phys. suppl. no. 51, 1 (1972).

[20] l. d. faddeev and v. n. popov, phys. lett. 25b , 29 (1967).

[21] k. nishijima, nucl. phys. b238 , 601 (1984).

[22] k. nishijima, prog. theor. phys. 80, 897 (1988).

[23] t. kugo and i. ojima, prog. theor. phys. suppl no. 66, 1 (1979).

[24] k. nishijima, prog. theor. phys. 75, 1221 (1986).

[25] r. oehme, phys. lett. 195b, 60 (1987).

[26] j. d. bjorken, phys. rev. 179, 1547 (1969).

[27] r. p. feynman, phys. rev. lett. 23, 1415 (1969).

[28] e. c. g. stueckelberg and a. petermann, helv. phys. acta 26, 499 (1953).

[29] m. gell-mann and f. e. low, phys. rev. 95, 1300 (1954).

[30] r. haag, phys. rev. 112, 669 (1958).

[31] k. nishijima, phys. rev. 111, 995 (1958).

[32] w. zimmermann, nuovo cimento 10, 597 (1958).

[33] h. lehmann, k. symanzik and w. zimmermann, nuovo cimento 1, 205 (1955).

10

