symmetries and interactions

in

matrix string theory

feike hacquebord

institute for theoretical physics

university of amsterdam

1018 xe amsterdam

the netherlands

abstract

this phd-thesis reviews matrix string theory and recent developments therein. em-
phasis is put on symmetries, interactions and scattering processes in the matrix model.
we start with an introduction to matrix string theory and a review of the orbifold
model that ows out of matrix string theory in the strong ym coupling limit. then
we turn our attention to the appearance of u-duality symmetry in gauge models, after
a (very) short summary of string duality, d-branes and m-theory. the last chapter
reviews matrix string interactions and scattering processes in the high energy limit.
also, pair production of d-particles is studied in detail. d-pair production is expected
to give important corrections to high energy scattering processes in string theory.

9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
0
3

 

 
 

1
v
7
2
2
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

symmetries and interactions

in

matrix string theory

academisch proefschrift

ter verkrijging van de graad van doctor aan
de universiteit van amsterdam op gezag van
de rector magnicus prof. dr j.j.m. franse
ten overstaan van een door het college voor
promoties ingestelde commissie in het openbaar
te verdedigen in de aula der universiteit op

woensdag 22 september 1999 te 11.00 uur

door

feike hayo hacquebord

geboren te epe

promotor:

prof. dr h.l. verlinde

promotiecommissie:

prof. dr p. van baal
prof. dr ir f.a. bais
prof. dr r.h. dijkgraaf
prof. dr j. smit
prof. dr e.p. verlinde
prof. dr b.q.p.j de wit

faculteit der wiskunde, informatica, natuur- en sterrenkunde

instituut voor theoretische fysica

isbn 90-9013055-1
nugi 812

the research described in this thesis is nancially supported by a pionier fund of nwo.

introduction

1 towards matrix string theory

1.1 perturbative string theory

1.1.1 the polyakov approach to string theory
1.1.2 light-cone string theory
1.1.3 high energy scattering in string theory
1.1.4 string theory in the dlcq formalism
1.2 dlcq string theory from an orbifold model

1.2.1 hilbert space of an orbifold theory
1.2.2 the long string picture
1.2.3 twisted vacua and excitations

1.3 reproducing tree level string scattering

1.3.1 interaction vertex
1.3.2 tree level string scattering
1.3.3 towards matrix string theory

appendix a

2 u-duality in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

2.1 d-branes and string dualities

2.1.1 string duality
2.1.2 d-branes
2.1.3 bound states of n d-branes
2.1.4 bound states within d-branes
2.1.5 m-theory and iia string theory

2.2 matrix theory

2.2.1 the matrix theory proposal
2.2.2 the matrix string theory proposal
2.2.3 (de)compactication

2.3 n=4 sym and m-theory on t 3

2.3.1 u-duality in matrix theory on t 2

2.4 bps spectrum

2.4.1 bps spectrum from m-theory
2.4.2 bps spectrum from n=4 sym on t 3

contents

7

13

13
13
15
19
20
23
24
25
27
29
29
32
34
35

39

39
39
41
43
45
46
48
48
49
51
53
56
57
58
59

contents

2.4.3 complete bps partition function

2.5 nahm duality

2.5.1 nahm duality for gauge theory on noncommutative tori

2.6 relation to born infeld theory

2.6.1 born infeld bps mass spectrum
2.6.2 degeneracies

3 high energy scattering in matrix string theory

3.1 introduction
3.2 fixed angle scattering of strings

3.2.1 kinematic relations for four string scattering
3.2.2 gross mende saddle points
3.2.3 higher genus contributions

3.3 matrix string interactions

3.3.1 sym solution near interaction point

3.4 high energy scattering of matrix strings
3.4.1 evaluation of the classical action
3.4.2 minimal distance

3.5 one loop uctuation analysis

3.5.1 zero modes of the instanton
3.5.2 tree level high energy scattering

3.6 d-particle pair production

3.6.1 supergravity calculation
3.6.2 d-pair production via electric ux creation
3.6.3 d-particles in matrix string theory
3.6.4 one-loop calculation, n = 2
3.6.5 generalization to arbitrary n
3.6.6 ranges of validity

3.7 discussion and conclusions

bibliography

acknowledgements

63
64
67
68
68
70

73

73
78
78
80
82
83
84
87
88
89
89
90
92
93
94
96
96
98
101
104
106

109

115

6

introduction

the subject of this thesis is a new eective formulation of string theory in terms of
a 1 + 1 dimensional yang-mills theory. this approach will prove to be useful for the
investigation of the short-distance behavior of strings. before we explain in some more
detail what the coming chapters are about, we will rst spend some words on the mo-
tivation to do string theory.

the motivation to study string theory is twofold: one is the desire of physicists to
construct a theory that unies all elementary forces in nature. a second important
motivation is to learn more about gravity. newtonian mechanics and general relativity
give precise predictions for gravitational interactions at large distances. for example,
we can in principle launch a spacecraft, explore a planet in our solar system and return
safely to the earth again. without our knowledge of gravity this would be a rather
hazardous adventure.

for very tiny distance scales (like 1033cm, the planck length) however, we expect
that newtonian mechanics or general relativity no longer gives an accurate description
of gravity. the physical conditions at the planck scale are so extreme that they cannot
be realized in laboratories. this makes it hard to do actual experiments (but they are
not ruled out). at present consistency is the only tool available . it is of interest to try
to formulate a theory of gravity in the kinematic regime of the planck scale, because
it is relevant for the study of black holes (their existence is conrmed by convincing
observational evidence) and the study of the early universe.

at the planck scale quantum eects for gravitational interactions are important.
when one tries to formulate a quantum eld theory of gravity, for example by a per-
turbation expansion of the einstein hilbert action with a coupling term to a scalar
eld, increasingly severe short-distance divergencies appear, which cannot be removed
by renormalization procedures. therefore one has to nd a way out; the singularities
should be somehow smeared out by a drastic adaption of the theory.

at present there is only one consistent way known how to do this. this way is
string theory, a theory where the fundamental objects are one dimensional, instead of
zero dimensional as for point particles. interactions in string theory have a geometrical
interpretation in terms of smooth riemann surfaces, as indicated in gure 1. this al-
ready gives a heuristic explanation why strings are able to smear out the short-distance
divergences.

a key idea of string theory is that the dierent vibration modes of a string corre-
spond to dierent particle states. the massless states are the most relevant ones, as

introduction

they should form the particles known today in the standard model (which are massless
or very light compared with the planck mass). the eective theories of these states
can in principle be derived from string theory, but in practice that can be hard.

figure 1 string theory smoothens out the short-distance divergences in eld
theories of gravity (like einstein-hilbert gravity coupled to a scalar eld).
the gure shows a tree level diagram in eld theory which describes two
scalar particles exchanging a graviton, and its analogue in string theory. both
diagrams are nite, but higher loop contributions are nite only in string
theory.

it is not a priori clear why string theory should be the right way to proceed. one
could for instance try membranes, objects with two spatial dimensions, which might
be able to smear out the divergences as well. the study of membranes revealed some
problems however, while string theory proved to have particular attractive features.
among these features are the following: string theory contains a massless spin-2 state
(the graviton) whose low energy eective description is general relativity; string the-
ory has a consistent perturbation expansion; it is rich enough to be a candidate for
a unication of all known forces in nature. in particular string theory has intimate
relations with gauge theories. there are no free parameters in string theory, instead
there are many (classical) ground states parameterized by the expectation values the
scalar elds take.

consistency of string theory requires supersymmetry, a symmetry between the
bosonic and fermionic degrees of freedom. supersymmetry is expected to be a symme-
try of nature for sucient high energies only. the order of these energies is (almost)
within reach of the elementary particle colliders of today, so in principle the superpart-
ners of known particles states could be detected there. detection of the superpartners
would be an experimental proof of supersymmetry and strong evidence for string the-
ory to be the right way to proceed.

superstrings live in ten dimensions. this may be viewed as a drawback, but com-
pactications to lower dimensions give rise to a rich structure of kaluza klein elds.
in ten dimensions we can dene 5 superstring theories: type iia and iib, which are
theories of closed strings; type i describing unoriented open strings (plus closed strings)
and two types of the heterotic string. we will be mainly interested in type iia and
iib so we will not dwell on the precise denition of other string theories. the impor-
tant point here is that the theories are all related by duality transformations. it was

8

conjectured by witten that the ve string theories are in fact manifestations of one
eleven-dimensional theory, that goes with the name m-theory. the dualities and the
existence of m-theory are not proven yet, but substantial evidence has been collected
in recent years.

the string duality symmetries were known from earlier studies as classical symme-
tries of supergravity theories. these models failed to be consistent quantum theories of
gravity; the addition of supersymmetry did not resolve the short-distance divergences.
later supergravity theories appeared again as low energy eective descriptions of the
graviton state (and its superpartner the gravitino) of string theory and it is expected
that their classical symmetries are genuine quantum mechanical duality symmetries in
string theory.

an example of a string duality transformation is the mapping that relates strings
at large distances to strings at small distances. this is somewhat similar to the more
familiar electromagnetic duality in (supersymmetric) gauge theories, that relates the
weak coupling to the strong coupling regime. both duality transformations map a
region of the theory where a perturbation expansion suces, to a region where this
expansion breaks down.

to understand (and to prove) these dualities we have to learn about the non-per-
turbative degrees of freedom. these degrees of freedom in string theory have been
mysterious for a long time, till in the fall of 1995 polchinski realized that the so-called
d-branes carry them. d-branes were known before as hyper-surfaces in space-time on
which open strings can end, but in fact they are dynamical non-perturbative objects
in string theory.

at low energy the dynamics of d-branes are described by supersymmetric yang-
mills theories. these theories have matrix valued scalar elds, that commute when the
d-branes are widely separated. one can then diagonalize the matrices simultaneously
and interpret the eigenvalues on the diagonals as the d-brane positions in the tradi-
tional sense. when the d-branes come close something remarkable happens: in general
the matrices no longer commute and the interpretation of the d-brane positions gets
obscured. space-time becomes fuzzy:
its coordinates no longer commute. this non-
commutativity is somewhat similar to what happens with the classical phase space in
quantum mechanics and is therefore highly suggestive.

the supersymmetric yang-mills model in 1 + 1 dimensions compactied on a circle
is an eective theory of one dimensional d-branes (called d-strings), but it can also
be viewed as a theory of fundamental strings. this gauge theory, called matrix string
theory, is dened on a cylinder that is covered by the world-sheet of a string one or
more times.

again one can think of the eigenvalues of the matrix valued scalars as the coor-
dinates of the strings. these coordinates elds are not necessarily periodic along the
yang-mills circle, but instead they may satisfy particular non-trivial boundary condi-
tions. the simplest non-trivial example of a string of length 2 is illustrated in gure
2. in the lower left corner the two eigenvalues of a 2  2 matrix are mapped to each
by going around the circle once. so though it looks like we have two short strings we
in fact have one long string. in the lower right corner the conguration of eigenvalues
has changed. here the two eigenvalues of the matrix are periodic and we have two

9

introduction

short strings. the one string conguration transforms to the other by changing the
non-trivial boundary conditions at a certain time and place on the world-sheet. this
is illustrated in the diagram in the middle of gure 2. we added in the gure the usual
geometric representation of the interactions (the joining or splitting of strings).

compared with the known perturbative string theories, matrix string theory has
the advantage that non-perturbative degrees of freedom are contained in the model as
well. namely, the gauge model has besides matrix valued scalar elds, a two dimen-
sional gauge eld. this gauge eld makes it possible to adorn the string states with
an extra quantum number: the d-particle number (zero dimensional branes).





figure 2 the smooth riemann surfaces illustrate how a single closed string
can split in two strings in perturbative string theory. the lower pictures show
the eigenvalues of matrix valued scalar elds in matrix string theory as a
function of , where  runs over half the interval of the spatial world-sheet
coordinate . these eigenvalues describe the coordinates of strings. they may
satisfy non-trivial boundary conditions on the  circle, so that the eigenvalues
can describe dierent collections of strings. in the lower left corner we have
one long string; in the lower right corner we have two short strings. these two
congurations transform to each other when the boundary conditions of the
eigenvalues are changed, as indicated by the arrow in the middlest diagram.
the conventions are chosen such that the added string lengths are conserved
during interactions.

d-particles are special, because they can be interpreted as kaluza klein particles in
eleven dimensional m-theory compactied on a circle.
it has been conjectured that
the low energy eective model of d-particles (a u(n) matrix quantum mechanics)
is equivalent to m-theory in a particular gauge. this theory called matrix theory is
closely related to matrix string theory.

the fact that matrix string theory contains the degrees of freedom of d-particles
in a natural way, makes it possible to calculate non-perturbative corrections to pro-
cesses in string theory. these corrections are important for the investigation of the
short-distance behavior of strings, because in this regime the perturbation expansion

10

of string theory appears to break down.

in chapter three we will show how string interactions can be realized in matrix
string theory. interactions arise as instanton type solutions of the yang-mills theory
equations of motion. with these instantons known results from perturbative string
theory can be reproduced. we will also start a calculation of non-perturbative correc-
tions.

in chapter two we will investigate in how far the symmetries of string theory are
present in (supersymmetric) gauge theories. in particular we will show that there are
quantum states in the theory that have degeneracies consistent with a large string du-
ality symmetry.

chapter one reviews geometrical aspects of perturbative string theory in the light-
cone gauge and in the discrete light-cone gauge quantization (dlcq). we discuss a
reformulation of dlcq string theory in terms of an orbifold model. we end the chap-
ter by introducing matrix string theory.

although we have tried to add as much explanation of relevant basic concepts in
string theory as possible, this thesis is not meant to be self-contained. as background
material we refer to the textbooks on string theory [47][72] and quick introductions
to light-cone string theory [37][38], to d-branes [71][7] and to matrix (string) theory
[17][30]. for some basic concepts of conformal eld theory we will need, we refer to
[41].

11

introduction

12

chapter 1

towards matrix string theory

1.1 perturbative string theory

1.1.1 the polyakov approach to string theory

as strings move through space-time, they sweep out a two-dimensional surface. on
this surface, called the world-sheet, the coordinates of the strings are dened. the
history of a collection of strings is thus described by a map from the two-dimensional
world-sheet into the d-dimensional space-time. this space-time is endowed with a met-
ric that in principle should be derived from the string conguration. we will take the
strings however in a xed background metric, usually just at.

in the polyakov approach to string theory, the string perturbation expansion ap-
pears as a sum over two-dimensional riemann surfaces. these riemann surfaces are
of a certain genus g (the counting parameter of the perturbation expansion) and have
a number of boundary curves that correspond to the external states. they are the
feynman diagram representations of scattering amplitudes at g-loop order. an ac-
tual calculation of the contribution to the scattering amplitude in principle involves a
path-integral over all maps of the surface into the space-time manifold, as well as an
independent integration over all two-dimensional metrics gab on the genus g surface.

figure 1.1 a typical world-sheet of genus two. the four tubes correspond
with the external strings and extend to innity.

more concretely in the polyakov path integral approach, a general g-loop amplitude is

towards matrix string theory

given by the expression

ag(1,   , n) =

1

n z dgabz1,n dx  exp (s).

(1.1)

here n is a normalization factor and the s indicate the external state wave func-
tionals, that are dened on the boundaries of the world-sheet at innity. for bosonic
strings the action s is given by

s =

1

2z ddggabgax bx .

(1.2)

here  and  are world-sheet coordinates taking values on a cylinder and g is the
metric of space-time.

the action (1.2) has local symmetries, namely reparametrizations (dieomorphisms)

and weyl rescalings. weyl rescalings act on the world-sheet metric as

gab  egab

(1.3)

and it easy to verify that the action (1.2) is invariant under this transformation.

one can use this weyl invariance to make, at least locally, the world-sheet metric
to be at. then there is still a gauge degree of freedom left over, namely arbitrary
holomorphic coordinate transformations acting on the complex coordinate w =  + i
combined with an appropriate weyl rescaling, so that the metric remains at. these
combined transformations are precisely conformal transformations, that will prove to
be an important tool in string theory.

figure 1.2 the world-sheet in gure 1.1 is conformally equivalent to a genus
two riemann surface with four punctures.

the most obvious parameterization of a world-sheet has boundaries at innity (we
assumed this up to now), like in gure 1.1. by a particular conformal transformation
this surface can be mapped to a compact riemann surface with punctures, that corre-
spond with the external string states.

w

z= ew

z

figure 1.3 the conformal transformation w  z = ew, that maps cylinders
to annuli in the complex plane.

14

1.1 perturbative string theory

this can be visualized by locally applying the exponential mapping that transforms
a tube to an annulus in the complex plane. a world-sheet as in gure 1.1 is thus
conformally equivalent to the riemann surface in gure 1.2.

the conformal mapping that transforms the riemann surface 1.1 to the one in
gure 1.2 should be combined with the replacement of the boundary states i(x) by
local operators vi on the world-sheet. these operators called vertex operators create
the external states on the world-sheet by introducing extra momentum and/or other
quantum numbers. the most simple vertex function is the one that represents the
emission of a tachyon, with no other degrees of freedom then the momentum. it is
given by the expression

v = eipx,

(1.4)

where p2 = 8 is the on shell condition for tachyons. in terms of the vertex operators
the amplitude (1.1) becomes

ag(1,   , n) =

1

n z dgabz dx  exp (s)v1    vn.

(1.5)

as mentioned before making use of the local symmetries of string theory greatly re-
duces the moduli space of world-sheet metrics over which one has to integrate. this
simplication of the path integral is obtained after constructing a good slice through
the space of metrics on the riemann surface, that modulo weyl transformations and
dieomorphisms covers all of moduli space only once. for external tachyons whose
vertex operators are given by (1.4) the expectation value of the vertices is a simple
gaussian integral over the elds x, that can readily be calculated to be

a(1,   , n) = g2g+2

s

z [dm]yi z d2zipg(zi)(dets) exp[

1

2x pi  pjgm (zi, zj)],

(1.6)

where gm(zi, zj) is the scalar green function on the genus g world-sheet (depending on
the moduli m, which have to be integrated over). in the integrand of (1.6) we abbre-
viated the uctuation determinants that appear after integrating out the coordinate
elds and reducing the path integral to a nite dimensional integral. in the limit that
all pi  pj become large, the leading behavior of the integral can be derived by saddle
point techniques [49]. later on in chapter 3 these saddle points will prove to be crucial
when we establish an alternative approach to string theory, called matrix string theory
[65][10][29], that is also able to include non-perturbative corrections.

1.1.2 light-cone string theory

in this section we will discuss some geometric facts of yet another approach to per-
turbative string theory: light-cone string theory. as background material we refer to
[47][38] and [37].

15

towards matrix string theory

quantization of strings in the light-cone gauge formalism has two particular fea-
tures. one is the absence of ghosts, only physical degrees of freedom are present, the
other is the existence of a globally well-dened world-sheet time [39]. covariance is
broken in light-cone string theory, but the formalism has been proven to be equivalent
to the covariant polyakov path integral formulation of string theory [57].

in the light-cone gauge, light-cone time and world-sheet time are identied via

x +(z, z) = p+,

(1.7)

where p+ is one of the light-cone momenta. this parameterization together with taking
the world-sheet metric to be at leads to the mass-shell condition

2p+p =z d(( x i)2 + (x i)2) := h,

(1.8)

with h the world-sheet hamiltonian and p and p+ the integrated light-cone momenta.
the index i runs over all directions transversal to the light-cone directions.

4n 

p
4

n 2 p
2

n 1

p
1

n 3

p3

figure 1.4 this gure indicates the kinematics of a two particle scattering
process in string theory. the pi are the eight dimensional transverse momenta
that lie in one plane; the n s stand for the p+ momenta.

a two particle scattering process like in gure 1.4 can be conveniently summarized
in light-cone string theory by drawing a so called light-cone diagram or mandelstam
diagram. a light-cone diagram is a geometrical way of representing a scattering process
in string theory. the external states are represented by tubes that extend to innity.
together with a collection of other cylinders that correspond to internal strings they
are glued together at interaction points. thus a two-dimensional surface is formed that
contains all essential information about the interaction process.

it is customary to rescale the spatial coordinate  on the world-sheet, so that its
range becomes 0    2p+. because of this rescaling the radii i of the cylinders
are proportional to the light-cone momenta p+
i of the corresponding strings. the total
momentum p+ is conserved during a scattering process, and therefore the sum of the
radii of the cylinders is also conserved. an example of a light-cone diagram that
describes the tree level contribution to the scattering process indicated in gure 1.4, is
shown in gure 1.5 where we have two incoming strings that join to one string and split
again into two strings. in the diagram the interaction times and possible twist angles

16

1.1 perturbative string theory

are indicated. these twist angles are the angles under which the internal tubes are
allowed to rotate before undergoing another interaction. as these twistings cannot be
undone by a conformal transformation or reparametrization, they belong to the moduli
of the light-cone string diagrams. 1




1


2



figure 1.5 a tree level light-cone diagram. two incoming strings join to one
string and then split again into two outgoing strings. the interaction times
 are indicated, as well as one twist angle , over which the internal tube is
allowed to rotate before undergoing another interaction.

for xed external momenta p+, a light-cone diagram is uniquely characterized by its
moduli: the interaction times, the twist angles and the internal p+ momentum frac-
tions. in calculating the contribution to the scattering amplitude of a diagram like in
gure 1.5 one has to do a path integral over these moduli. this path integral is equal
to the analogous expression in the polyakov approach (1.1). the general form of an
h-loop contribution to the amplitude of n scattering strings is

an =

1

n z [d ][d][d]z1n dx ieslc,

(1.9)

where the functional integral is taken over the moduli of the light-cone diagram. the
integral is weighted with the exponential of the light-cone action that is just the action
of free strings

slc =z dd (( x i)2 + (x i)2).

(1.10)

as discussed in the previous section light-cone diagrams like gure 1.5 are conformally
equivalent to riemann surfaces of genus equal to the number of internal strings, and a
number of punctures on it, that correspond to the external strings.

an important feature of these riemann surfaces is that the x + coordinate denes
a one-form  on it, that contains all relevant geometrical information. we can turn

1a twisting over an angle of 2, called a dehn twist, is a global symmetry of the light-cone string

action. the twist angles are therefore dened modulo 2.

17

towards matrix string theory

this around: each riemann surface has a unique one-form that can be used to dene a
local coordinate on the string world-sheet w =  + i via

 = dw = dx +(z).

(1.11)

this gives a precise relation between the parameterizations of the world-sheet z, w and
the holomorphic component x +(z) of x +(z, z).

the abelian dierential  has simple poles at the punctures, with real residues
that add up to zero. it moreover has purely imaginary periods on any homology cycle.
because the periods are purely imaginary the world-sheet time dened via (1.11) is well-
dened, and can therefore be extended to all over the world-sheet of any genus [39].
the other coordinate  in (1.11) is the multivalued space-like world-sheet coordinate.
the simple poles of the abelian dierential (1.11) mark the locations of the vertex
operators of the external states on the riemann surface. this can be seen by noting
that when the abelian dierential (1.11) has a simple pole at a certain point wi, with
residue p+
i

dw 

p+
i dz
(z  zi)

,

we have for the local coordinate w in a neighborhood of the pole

w  wi  p+

i log(z  zi).

(1.12)

(1.13)

hence a punctured neighborhood of zi in the complex plane is mapped by the logarithm
to innity, the inverse mapping of the conformal mapping illustrated in gure 1.3.

there are also specic points on the world-sheet at which strings join or split.
these interactions take place at zeros of , that is critical points z = z0 of the light-
cone coordinate x +. in the neighborhood of a simple zero of the abelian dierential 
we have

dw  (z  z0)dz  (w  w0)  (z  z0)2.

(1.14)

from this equation we see that if we follow a contour around z0 in the complex z-plane
once, an angle 4 is swept out in w. this angle is the same one that is swept out when
circling around an interaction point in the light-cone picture. we conclude that ze-
roes of  correspond to points on the world-sheet where string interactions take place.
higher order zeroes correspond to higher order interactions.

w = (z-z  )

0

2

z 0

p

z

w

figure 1.6 a critical point of  corresponds with a string interaction point.

18

1.1 perturbative string theory

the abelian dierential also contains information about the internal p+ momenta and
the twist angles via its integral along the a- and b-cycles of the riemann surface. we
have

ii

 = ip+
i ,

ii

 = ip+

j mi

jaa,

(1.15)

ja is a real-valued matrix that can be chosen to have integer coecients.

where mi
as an example for the location of the interaction points, we consider an n particle
scattering process at tree level. for a given set of locations zi of the corresponding
vertex operators, the classical location of the world-sheet is described by

x +(z, z) =

x i(z, z) =

1

2xi
2xi

1

ip+

i log |z  zi|2,

ipi

i log |z  zi|2,

(1.16)

(1.17)

where  = 1 for incoming and 1 for outgoing particles. the interactions take place
at critical points z = z0 of the light-cone coordinate x +, cf (1.14)

inserting the explicit form (1.16) for x + gives

dx + |z=z0= 0.

nxi=1

ip+
i
z0  zi

= 0 .

(1.18)

(1.19)

in case of n-point scattering, this condition can be reduced to an equation of degree
n  2 in z0, after a conformal transformation that maps one of the locations of the
vertex operators to innity. the n  2 zeroes correspond with elementary splittings or
joinings of strings that occur at the interaction points of the corresponding tree level
light-cone diagram.

1.1.3 high energy scattering in string theory

in chapter three we will be particularly interested in high energy four string scattering.
the motivation to study string theory in this kinematic regime is to explore strings
at short distances and to learn more about the structure of string theory. the high
energy behavior of scattering strings has been studied in the past [3][49] by making use
of perturbation techniques. an important result of this study, is that the dominant
world-sheets at every order of the genus expansion, are all determined by the same
saddle-point. as a consequence the dominant world-sheets have the same form at any
genus (up to scaling factors), and their contribution to the scattering amplitude can
be calculated in principle.

however the analysis revealed two apparent diculties as well. one is that the
size of scattering strings tends to grow with increasing energy. strings are therefore

19

towards matrix string theory

not suitable as probes to investigate the short distance behavior of string theory. the
other diculty is the fact that the higher order amplitudes grow as an exponential of
the energy. this behavior is completely dierent from most eld theories. it leads to
the disturbing conclusion that higher order corrections are important. this means, in
less mild words, that the perturbation expansion breaks down for high-energy string
scattering processes.

these two problems might be cured when we take non-perturbative eects into ac-
count. firstly non-perturbative objects called d-branes can be used as probes for much
smaller distance scales then the string scale  [78][23][34]. secondly non-perturbative
eects will give important corrections to scattering amplitudes, as already was sus-
pected in [49].

the need of a better knowledge of non-perturbative eects in string theory will be
one of the main motivations to introduce the matrix string theory model. before we
do this, we will rst explain some features of string theory in the so called discrete
light-cone gauge (dlcq) formalism. we will moreover review a reformulation of it in
terms of an orbifold model.

1.1.4 string theory in the dlcq formalism

in the dlcq gauge one compacties one of the light-like directions on a circle of radius
r, so one identies

x   x  + 2r.

(1.20)

the other light-like coordinate x + gets the interpretation of time. compactication of
x  modies the theory in two ways: the hilbert space gets truncated to sectors with
total p+ momentum that is integer valued (in 1/r units)

p+ = n.

(1.21)

in each sector the p+ momenta of states take values in a nite positive set only (namely
the integers 0 . . . n). another modication of the theory is that we allow for wind-
ing modes around the x  direction. these winding modes again decouple from the
theory in the large n limit, which should lead us back to light-cone gauge string theory.


a  


b 


c


1


2



figure 1.7 in this light-cone diagram we indicated three time slices. in the
rst time slice we have the two incoming strings, in the second the intermediate
string and in the last slice we have the outgoing string conguration.

20

1.1 perturbative string theory

the fact that in dlcq string theory p+ momenta are integer valued, is an important
rst step towards dening matrix string theory. it will enable us to dene matrices out
of the string coordinates.

consider the light-cone diagram, illustrated in gure 1.7 with total p+ momentum
equal to n. out of the eight transversal coordinate elds of the strings we construct
eight diagonal matrices in the following way.

the spatial world-sheet coordinate  runs over an interval [0, n]. we cut this

interval into n equal pieces of length one and dene new elds x i

i (,  )

i (,  ) = x i( + (i  1),  ),
x i

(1.22)

where i runs from 1,   , n and i = 1,   , 8 are the transversal directions and  now
runs over the interval [0, 1]. these elds are then interpreted as the eigenvalues of an
n  n matrix

x i(,  ) =

.

(1.23)

x i

1 (,  )



x i

2 (,  )

. . .

. . .

x i

n (,  )



i(cid:1) ,

the light-cone action on the cylinder (1.10) becomes in terms of these matrix eigen-
values

s =

1

2z dd(cid:0)x i

i

x i

i + i

i 

i + i 
i

 

(1.24)

where we included 16n fermionic elds 
i which together form n 16-component
majorana-weyl spinors. the action (1.24) is left invariant by two space-time left-
moving and two right-moving supersymmetries. the corresponding left-moving super-
charge is

i ,  

q = ni d


i ,

nxi=1

q  =

1

n i dg ,

where

g (z) =

nxi=1

i
 

i x i
i .

(1.25)

(1.26)

the right-moving charges have analogous denitions.

the eigenvalues in the matrix (1.23) are not single-valued, but multivalued with
respect to the coordinate . for dierent time slices the eigenvalues xi in (1.23) satisfy
dierent quasi-periodic boundary conditions. for example we have for the rst time

21

towards matrix string theory

slice a two blocks of eigenvalues as indicated in the next equation

x i(, a) =

.

(1.27)

x i
1

   x i

n1





  

x i

n1+1

   x i

n





the collection of eigenvalues in the blocks each satisfy cyclic boundary conditions. the
eigenvalues of the rst block satisfy

x i

i ( + 1) = x i

i+1()

,

i = 1   n1  1

x i

n1( + 1) = x i

1 ().

we can write this condition as an n1  n1 matrix equation

x i( + 1) = v x i()v 1,

with v the cyclic permutation matrix on the n1 eigenvalues,

(1.28)

(1.29)

v =

.

(1.30)

1

. . .



1

1



1





at time slice c in gure 1.7 the blocks have changed; we then have an n3  n3 matrix
and an n4  n4 matrix, representing the outgoing states with p+ momenta n3 respec-
tively n4.

figure 1.8 a conguration of long strings is determined by the particular
boundary conditions on the elds x i
i . here we have two strings of length 3
and 4. figure taken from [29].

for a general string conguration the coordinate matrix (1.23) will satisfy a periodicity
condition of the form (1.29) with v a block diagonal matrix consisting of (say) s blocks

22

1.2 dlcq string theory from an orbifold model

of order ni, such that each block can be taken of the form (1.30), and thus, as described
above, denes a string of length ni.

each sector contributes to the total world-sheet energy and momentum via

h =xi

1
ni

(l(i)

0 + l(i)
0 )

p =xi

1
ni

(l(i)

0  l(i)
0 ),

(1.31)

where we normalized the l(i)
0 operators of each separate string, such that the oscillator
levels are canonically counted. they moreover satisfy the level matching condition in
the dlcq formalism

l(i)
0  l(i)

0 = nimi,

(1.32)

so that each contribution to the total world-sheet momentum is integer valued. here
mi are the winding numbers along the light-like circle x . in the large n limit the
usual level matching condition l0  l0 = 0 gets restored [29], because in this limit the
winding states decouple. this arises, because when n  , only long strings survive
with pi
+ = ni/n nite. these strings necessarily have zero winding number, because
else they become innitely massive compared to the energy of strings with vanishing
winding number.

1.2 dlcq string theory from an orbifold model

the numbers ni that stand for the p+ momenta of the separate strings in the preceding
section, form a partition of total rank n. thus they dene a conjugacy class of the
symmetric group sn , that is the permutation group of n elements. one can write each
group element g of sn as a product of irreducible cyclic permutations. by conjugating
g with an appropriate group element of sn its (disjunct) cycle decomposition has the
particular simple form

g = (1   n1)(n1+1   n1+n2)     (nnk+1   n).

(1.33)

other elements in the conjugacy class of g have an equivalent decomposition, that is
their cycle decompositions all have the same number nn of cycles of length n, with the
obvious restriction

nnn = n,

xn

(1.34)

so that the conjugacy classes of sn are in one-to-one relation to partitions of n.

the now established fact that in the dlcq formalism, one can associate to each
collection of free strings, a conjugacy class of the symmetric group sn , naturally sug-
gests the following conjecture: free moving strings in the dlcq sector p+ = n can
be reformulated in terms of a supersymmetric two dimensional conformal eld theory
with 8n free bosons x i
i, (here i = 1 . . . n and i = 1   8) dened on the symmetric
product orbifold

sn r8 = (r8)n /sn ,

(1.35)

23

towards matrix string theory

that together with their fermionic partners are described by the action of free strings
(1.24), where it is understood that all eld congurations (x, ) related by sn trans-
formations are identied x  gx,   g for permutations g.
in the next subsections we will review evidence for this conjecture. first we will
show that the model is able to recover the complete fock space of second quantized
type iia string theory in the large n limit. subsequently we will perturb the action of
the model (1.35) by an appropriate interaction term that describes elementary splitting
and joining of strings. after this we will review work that was done in [4] and [5], where
the authors were able to reproduce all tree level four particle scattering amplitudes in
string theory.

we will start however by making some general remarks about orbifold theories and
their partition functions. the results we derive will be useful both for understanding
matrix string theory, and for the next chapter, where we will calculate the degeneracy
formula of bps states in n = 4 yang-mills theory on a three torus.

1.2.1 hilbert space of an orbifold theory

before we derive the hilbert space of the orbifold model (1.35), we will rst discuss
the hilbert space in the more general case of a conformal eld theory dened on an
orbifold target space m/g, that consists of a smooth manifold m divided out by a
discrete group g. again we take the two dimensional world-sheet of our model to be a
cylinder parameterized by coordinates (,  ), where 0 <  < 1. as we divide out by the
group g all eld congurations (x, ) are identied when they can be mapped to each
other by a group element, x  gx,   g for g  g. because of this identication the
coordinate elds of the string are no longer necessarily periodic in the spatial coordinate
. instead it is allowed that they satisfy so called twisted boundary conditions

x( + 1) = gx().

(1.36)

when we act with a group element h on the coordinate eld x satisfying (1.36) we
get another coordinate eld y = hx with boundary condition y ( + 1) = hgh1y ().
the eld y is to be identied with x, so the twisted boundary conditions are well
dened for conjugacy classes only. the group element g in (1.36) must therefore be
thought of as a representative of its conjugacy class [g].

in order to construct the g-invariant hilbert space of the orbifold model, we rst
consider the subspace hg which consists of states with sigma winding g (that is the
coordinate elds satisfy the boundary condition (1.36) ). the subspace hg will be
mapped to hhgh1, when acting with a element h on the states, so we have to include
the subsector hhgh1 as well. in case that h is an element of the centralizer of g, hg
is mapped to itself. this implies that all states in hg have to be invariant under the
action of the centralizer cg of g.

we thus conclude that the total hilbert space of the orbifold model is determined
by the conjugacy classes of the group g, with each twisted sector invariant under the
centralizer. in other words the hilbert space of an orbifold conformal eld theory has

24

1.2 dlcq string theory from an orbifold model

the decomposition

h(m/g) =m[g]

hcg
g (m),

(1.37)

where g is an arbitrary representative of the conjugacy class [g] and where hcg
is the
g-twisted subsector of the total hilbert space that is invariant under conjugation by
elements in the centralizer cg.

g

at the level of partition functions we can see the just described structure of the
hilbert space as follows. we start with the path-integral representation of the orbifold
partition function on a torus with two homology cycles along spatial and time direction

z =

1

|g| xg,hg

[g,h]=1

z(g, h).

(1.38)

here z(g, h) represents the partition function evaluated with twisted boundary con-
ditions by the group elements g and h along the two dierent cycles. for consis-
tency the elements g and h have to commute. the next step is then to recognize
that the partition functions z(g, h) depend only on the conjugacy classes of g :
z(xgx1, xhx1) = z(g, h) for all x  g. hence we can write (1.38) as follows

z =x[g]

1

|cg| xhcg

z(g, h),

where we used the identity |cg||[g]| = |g|. as the operator

p[g] =

1

|cg| xhcg

h

(1.39)

(1.40)

projects onto cg invariant states we conclude that the partition function can indeed
be written

z =x[g]

trh[g]p[g]ql0 q l0.

(1.41)

the form of this partition function precisely corresponds with the structure of the
hilbert space of the orbifold model we have just discussed.

1.2.2 the long string picture

we have seen in the previous section that the hilbert space of an orbifold model is
determined by the conjugacy classes of the symmetry group that is divided out. for
the symmetric product orbifold model (1.35) this group is the permutation group sn .
as explained before a conjugacy class of the symmetric group sn is labeled by a

partition p nnn = n of n. the corresponding centralizer subgroup takes the form
cg =qn

 snn where snn permutes the nn cyclic permutations of length n, and

25

znn

n

towards matrix string theory

where each subfactor zn acts within one particular cyclic permutation. due to the
factorization of the conjugacy classes in irreducible elements of sn , one can express
the twisted sectors of the hilbert spaces hcg
g as a product over the sectors of graded
nn-fold symmetric tensor products of smaller hilbert spaces hzn
g =on>0
hcg
h(sn x) = mnn
p n nnn=non>0

combining the ingredients we get the decomposition for the total hilbert space

snnhzn
(n).

(1.42)

(1.43)

(n)

snnhzn
(n).

the space hzn
(n) is a particular zn-invariant subsector of the total hilbert space. it can
be interpreted as the space of states of a single string living on x  s1, winded n times
around the circle.

x

...

..
....

...

..
....

figure 1.9 an illustration of the long string picture introduced in [28][29].
three strings are shown, of length 2,3 and 4.

s 1

this single string has a description in n coordinate elds xi  x, with the cyclic
boundary conditions (1.28) . thus we are back to the string coordinate congurations
of section 1.1.4. one can glue the coordinates xi of a single string into one single eld
x() via

x( + k) = xk+1(),

(1.44)

where now the argument of the eld x runs over a circle of radius n.

this string coordinate has fractional oscillators modes, but invariance under the
group zn implies that the fractional left moving minus right moving oscillator numbers
add up to an integer. this can be easily seen by noting that zn acts by cyclic permu-
tations on the elds xi and therefore acts by translations    + 1 on the eld x of
the single long string. in other words the zn invariance implies that the contribution
from each single string sector to the total world-sheet momentum p = l0  l0 is
integer-valued. so we are back to the decomposition of the total world-sheet energy
and momentum in (1.31), combined with the level matching condition (1.32).

26

1.2 dlcq string theory from an orbifold model

1.2.3 twisted vacua and excitations

in this subsection we will discuss the twisted vacua of the model (1.35). it is convenient
to change coordinates from the cylinder w =  + i to the complex plane w  z = ew
(cf. gure 1.3).
a string of maximal length (i.e. a long string, whose length equals the total p+
momentum) has coordinates that satisfy the quasi-periodic boundary conditions (1.29)
. in the cft we are considering these boundary conditions can be used to dene a
bosonic twist eld n(z, z) [41] via the monodromy relation

x i(e2iz, e2i z)n(0) = nx i(z, z)(n)(0),

(1.45)

where now x should be viewed as an operator and where n is the generator of the
zn group that acts cyclically on the long string sector of length n. the twist operator
n dened by (1.45) can be used to create the vacuum in the twisted sector by acting
with it on the untwisted vacuum

in this twisted sector the left-moving component of the eld x(z, z) has the laurent
type power series expansion

|(n)i = (n)(0, 0)|0i .

(1.46)

x i

j = 

i

nxm

me 2i
i

n jmz m

n 1,

(1.47)

where the i
mutation relation

m are the usual creation and annihilation operators that satisfy the com-

[i

m, j

n] = mij m+n,0.

(1.48)

the conformal weight of the twist eld (n) can be found by reading o the singular
term in its ope with the bosonic stress-energy tensor. this stress-energy tensor is
dened as

t (z) = 

1
2

8xi

nxi

: x i

i (z)x i

i (z) : .

(1.49)

by a straightforward calculation one nds the conformal weight of (n). the result is

hb
n =

1
3

(n 

1
n

).

(1.50)

the most singular term in the operator product expansion of the bosonic twist eld
(n) and the eld x i
i

is

x i

j (z)  (n)(w, w)  (z  w)(1 1
n )e

where

2i

n j i

(n)(w, w),

 i
(n)(0, 0)|0i = 

i
n

i
1 |(n)i ,

(1.51)

(1.52)

27

towards matrix string theory

is the rst excited state in the twisted sector |(n)i . by dimensional counting we nd
that the conformal dimension of  i
n ). the operator  i will be used later for
the construction of the interaction vertex.

3 (n + 2

(n) is 1

one obtains excitations of the twisted vacuum states by applying the usual vertex
operators. for instance a scalar particle with momentum ki in a sector |n > is obtained
by acting on this vacuum state with the vertex operator

: eiki

i x i

i (0,0) : |(n) >,

(1.53)

is the total momentum of the collection of long strings in the

in a long string sector of length n the expansions of the left and right-moving

here ki = pn

transversal direction i.

i=1 ki
i

components of the fermions are


j (z) =

n jmz m

n  1
2 .

 
j (z) =

n jmz m

n  1
2 .

2i

1

1

 
me

me 2i


nxm
nxm
n(cid:9) = m+n,0.
(cid:8)

m, 

(1.54)

(1.55)

(1.56)

the creation and annihilation operators satisfy the commutation relations

these commutation relations imply that the zero modes form a cliord algebra. this
means that the vacuum state must represent this algebra. because of triality in the
transversal spatial index i and the spin indices  and  the vacuum state can be chosen
as a 16 component vector with components |ii and | i normalized in the standard way,
that moreover satisfy the relations [47]


0 |ii =

1
2

i
  | i ,


0 | i =

1
2

i
  |ii .

(1.57)

the vacua |ii and | i are created by primary fermionic twist elds (spin elds) which
we denote by i
the most singular terms of the ope of the fermionic twist elds and the fermionic

(n) respectively  

(n).

elds  are

i (z)  i


(n)(w) 

i (z)   


(n)(w) 

1
2n

1
2n

(z  w)1/2i

  

(n)(w),

(z  w)1/2i

 i

(n)(w).

the stress energy tensor for the fermionic elds is dened as

t f (z) = 

1
2

8x=1

nxi=1

28

: 

i (z)

i (z) : .

(1.58)

(1.59)

(1.60)

1.3 reproducing tree level string scattering

from the ope of the twist operator (n) with the fermionic stress energy tensor one
can read o its conformal weight.

n = n

6 + 1
3n .

it equals f
now we have dened the bosonic and fermionic twist operators we can construct
vertex operators, that create the vacuum ground states of arbitrary twisted sectors.
each sector is represented by a particular conjugacy class of the symmetric group sn .
for a given conjugacy class [g] the vertex operator can be written as a product of vertex
operators in correspondence to the decomposition of a representative g in irreducible
cyclic permutations of length n

v[g] =yn

v(n).

(1.61)

each vertex operator v(n) in equation (1.61) can be represented by products of bosonic
and fermionic twist elds (1.51), (1.58)-(1.59), that together create the vacua of the
twisted sectors. explicitly the vertex operator (1.61) reads

v[g] =

1

n! xhsn

vh1gh(z, z).

(1.62)

the expression (1.62) is invariant under conjugation of elements of the symmetric
group and therefore well dened. we assume that the vertex operators can be written
as the tensor product of a left-moving part and a right-moving part, that can each be
decomposed in a fermionic twist operator and a bosonic operator.

combining the fermionic and bosonic states, all the 256 massless states of iia super-
gravity are obtained. for example in the long string sector a graviton with momentum
ki and polarization  is created by the vertex operator

v(n)[ki, ](z, z) = ij (n)[ki](z, z)i

(n)(z) j

(n)(z).

(1.63)

here (n)[ki] is shorthand for the product of the twist operator n and the vertex
operator (1.53) that introduces momentum ki.

in the next section we will consider string interactions that can be described by the

orbifold model after adding a deformation term.

1.3 reproducing tree level string scattering

1.3.1 interaction vertex

the question arises, how interactions between strings can be formulated in the orbifold
model (1.35). to include splitting and joining processes of strings we have to deform
the model by adding an interaction term. it is clear from gure 1.7 that an interac-
tion should somehow connect the block diagonal eld congurations (1.27) of dierent
ranks. in other words an interaction changes the quasi-periodic boundary conditions
the matrix elds satisfy. two eigenvalues of the eld xi will be interchanged at some
intermediate stage, so that a group element g1 of sn that represents the initial string

29

towards matrix string theory

conguration is changed into another element g2 (see gure 1.10). then one naturally
associates the group element g = g1
1 g2 to the interaction vertex, though of course this
group element is not unique.

as an example we take the scattering process of gure 1.7. the incoming state can
be represented by an sn group element that consists of two permutations (12   n1)(n1+
1   n), whereas the intermediate string state has maximal length and therefore has
an associated permutation element (12   n). these two group elements are related
by a simple permutation

(12   n1)(n1+1   n)(n1n) = (12   n),

(1.64)

or by any other transposition that exchanges an element of the integers 1   n1 with
another element of n1+1   n.
hence we see that the joining process in gure 1.7 can be described by simple per-
mutations. likewise the splitting of one string into two strings can be described with
the help of transpositions.

figure 1.10 a splitting process of a long string corresponds to a change of
the boundary conditions of the coordinate elds. to an elementary splitting
of strings a simple permutation is associated, cf equation (1.64). figure taken
from [29].

it is quite natural to use twist elds [41] for the denition of the interaction ver-
tex, as these twist elds change the boundary conditions of bosonic or fermionic elds.
joining and splitting of strings have a description in terms of z2 twist operators, that
are special cases of the operators dened in (1.51), (1.58) and (1.59). they are dened
via the operator product expansions

x i

(z)  (w, w)  (z  w) 1

2  i (w, w),


(z)  i

(n)(w) 

1
2

(z  w) 1
2 i

  (w),


(z)   (w) 

1
2

(z  w) 1
2 i

 i(w).

(1.65)

(1.66)

(1.67)

here the index  refers to the element of z2 with order 2.
with the twist elds (1.65)  (1.67) one can construct a vertex that describes the
joining and splitting of strings, and that is moreover supersymmetric and manifestly

30

1.3 reproducing tree level string scattering

so(8)-invariant [29],

vint =

n

2 xi<j z d2z(cid:0) i (z)i (z)   j (z) j (z)(cid:1)ij .

(1.68)

here  is a coupling constant of mass dimension 1, as the integrand is a weight ( 3
2, 3
2)
conformal eld. we take  to be proportional to the string coupling constant gs, so that
in the zero string coupling limit the interaction vertex vanishes. the vertex operator
is manifestly invariant under the supercharges q (1.25), as the qs only depend on
the zero modes 
+ . the other supercharge q  in (1.25) acts in a non-trivial way on
the terms in (1.68) but leaves the vertex as a whole invariant [29]: first we note that
(no summation over )

hg 

 1
2

,  i =

1
2

 i i,

(1.69)

where g 
 1
2
metry operator g  which has conformal weight 3/2

is the fourier mode with a simple pole in the expansion of the supersym-

g  = xnz+ 1

2

gnzn3/2.

(1.70)

taking the commutator with g 
 1
2
we get

on both sides of (1.69), and using the jacobi identity

[g 
 1
2

,  ii ] = [l1,  ] = z( ).

(1.71)

because the right-hand side of (1.71) is a total derivative we conclude that the vertex
operator is invariant under the supercharge q .

the interaction vertex (1.68) is unique in the sense that it is the least irrelevant

supersymmetric so(8)-invariant operator we can form with the twist operators.

long time ago mandelstam already proposed the vertex (1.68) in the context of
interactions formulated in the nsr approach to superstrings [64]. in this formulation
the twist elds i play the role of the fermionic variables of the string. in the light-cone
gauge the obvious geometrical three vertex function

y,i

(x i

f ()  x i

i ()),

(1.72)

is not so(9, 1) invariant. here xi and xf are the string states before and after the
interaction. a lorentz invariant vertex is obtained for the nsr formalism by adding
an extra term factor at the joining point [64]

ix i .

(1.73)

remarkably when we consider the geometric joining and splitting that in the formalism
of [29] takes the form of the twist operator (0) and take into account the extra factor
(1.73) we precisely arrive at the vertex operator (1.68)

i dz
z1/2 i x i(z)(0) =  ii (0).

(1.74)

31

towards matrix string theory

the fact that in the nsr formulation the factor (1.73) makes the three-vertex so(9, 1)
invariant, gives a hint that matrix string theory also has ten dimensional lorentz
invariance, although of course we expect full lorentz invariance only in the large n
limit.

1.3.2 tree level string scattering

now we have derived the vertex operator for elementary joining and splitting processes
we can in principle calculate amplitudes of string scattering processes and compare the
results with light-cone string theory.

in [4] the four graviton scattering amplitude was calculated at tree level and in
[5] this result was extended to all (tree level) four particle scattering amplitudes. to
compare these results with light-cone string theory, the large n limit should be taken,
but it appears that for tree level amplitudes this limit is straightforward.

as the calculations of the amplitudes are rather technical we will only sketch here

the general ideas, and refer to [4][5] for the details.

for a four graviton scattering process the s-matrix is up to quadratic order in  [4]

hf| s |ii = 

1

2(cid:18)n
2(cid:19)2

hf|z d2z1d2z2|z1||z2|t xi<j

vij(z1, z1)xk<l

vkl(z2, z2)|ii , (1.75)

where vij is dened as the integrand of the integral in (1.68), t is the ordering operator
used in radial quantization [41] and |ii and |fi are the initial and nal states, each
consisting of two gravitons with certain momenta and polarization,

and

|ii = v[g0][~k1, 1; ~k2, 2](0, 0)|0i

hf| = lim

zh0| v[g][~k3, 3; ~k4, 4](z, z)z2h z2h.

(1.76)

(1.77)

the conjugacy class [g0] can be represented as the product of two irreducible (disjunct)
cycles g0 = (n0)(n  n0), with according to the long string picture n0 and n  n0
the p+-momenta of the two scattering gravitons. likewise [g] has a representative
(n)(n  n).
and
the introduction of a new integration variable u = z2
. the integral over z1 contributes
z1
a delta-function of the k momenta, so that the s-matrix reduces to a single integral

the expression (1.75) gets simplied after the conformal transformation z  z

z1

hf| s |ii = i22n 3(xi

k

i ) xi<j,k<lz d2u|u| hf|t vij(1, 1)vkl(u, u)|ii .

the expression in (1.78) involves correlation functions of four vertex functions

hvg()vh2(1, 1)vh1(u, u)vg0(0, 0)i .

(1.78)

(1.79)

32

1.3 reproducing tree level string scattering

the vertex functions vg, vg0 correspond to the twisted in- and out-states, the other
two describe elementary splitting respectively joining of strings (and therefore the group
elements h1,2 are two-cycles).

the vertex functions (1.79) vanish unless the sn group elements that label the
vertex functions, satisfy the appropriate physical conditions. these conditions are de-
termined by the particular process by which the incoming state gets transferred to
the outgoing state. for the four particle scattering process we consider, we have two
possibilities: one of the two incoming strings splits into two strings; out of the three
intermediate strings two join together again, so that there are two outgoing strings.
in the other process two incoming strings join to one string; this intermediate string
propagates and splits again in two outgoing strings. to these possibilities, that are
illustrated in gure 1.11, particular group elements of sn are associated, for which the
expectation value (1.79) does not vanish.

n , k 
1      1

n , k 
2      2

n , k 
3      3

n , k 
4      4

n , k 
n , k 
1      1
1      1

n , k 
n , k 
2      2
2      2

n , k 
n , k 
3      3
3      3

n , k 
n , k 
4      4
4      4

figure 1.11 two typical diagrams that contribute to the tree level ampli-
tudes.

the rest of the calculation is rather tedious; for the full details we refer to the original
papers [4][5]. there, rstly the correlation functions are factorized in left-moving/right-
moving and bosonic/fermionic parts. then these bosonic and fermionic correlation
functions are determined explicitly, together with the appropriate normalizations.

the end result for four-graviton scattering at tree level is

a = 228z d2z|z|

1

2 k1k42|1  z|

1

2 k3k42k(z, z, ),

(1.80)

where k is a kinematic factor depending on the polarizations and momenta known
from tree amplitudes in string theory. the result (1.80) coincides with known results
of string theory [47].

for the above result the large n limit is needed. for tree level this limit is relatively
simple, because there are no subleading terms in the scattering amplitude like 1/n
corrections. this is the case as all strings in the diagrams of gure 1.11 satisfy the
standard level matching condition l0  l0 = 0. note that this is no longer necessarily
true for higher loop string diagrams, where the intermediate strings may not satisfy
the usual level matching condition. we therefore expect that the large n limit will be
less trivial for higher genus contributions to the scattering amplitude.

in [5] the results of [4] were further extended to all four particle scattering ampli-
tudes of iia string theory. they are all reproduced by the orbifold model. this gives

33

towards matrix string theory

clear evidence for the conjecture that the orbifold model is a reformulation of light-cone
string theory.

it is however not entirely clear -with the knowledge reviewed in this chapter- how
non-perturbative corrections may be added. therefore we will now turn our attention
to a more direct way to add the non-perturbative degrees of freedom. this approach
that will be explained starting in the coming section, and in more detail in the next
chapters, has the orbifold model as a special limit. using this relation it is possible
to propose a way to include the non-perturbative degrees of freedom to the orbifold
model, but we will postpone this till the end of chapter three.

1.3.3 towards matrix string theory

to get a quick understanding of matrix string theory (for a review see [30]) we will give
here a somewhat heuristic introduction of the model. in the course of the next chapters
we will become more precise. the ideas presented here are nevertheless important
ingredients of matrix string theory, and we will need them throughout this thesis.

in principle it is possible to say in one sentence what matrix string theory is all
about: matrix string theory is a supersymmetric gauge theory that contains dlcq
string theory and extra degrees of freedom that represent the non-perturbative objects
in string theory. the presence of these additional degrees of freedom is the very motiva-
tion to study matrix strings: their presence gives us a way to calculate non-perturbative
corrections to processes in perturbative string theory.

in the preceding sections we only did some reformulations of free strings and their
interactions. the orbifold model we used for this alternative description of perturbative
strings can be shown to ow out of a gauge theory in the infra-red. this gauge theory is
n = 8 two dimensional supersymmetric u(n) yang-mills theory dened on a cylinder,
that can be viewed as the dimensional reduction of n = 1 sym from ten down to two
dimensions. the idea is that the matrices (1.23), which were formed out of the string
coordinates in section 1.1.4 , are identied as diagonal eld congurations of higgs
elds in the gauge model, when the strings are widely separated. then the dierences
between the eigenvalues of the higgs elds x i are large, so all charged elds in the sym
theory become very massive (as compared to the higgs scalars) and they eectively
decouple from the dynamics. widely separated strings break the gauge symmetry
u(n) to (u(1))n , but when they approach each other and/or interact, part of the
broken gauge symmetry is restored. a description of interactions therefore needs the
complete non-abelian theory.

the action of the gauge model is given by

s =z dz d trn

g2
s
4

f 2
 

1
2

(dx i)2 +

1
4g2
s
1
gs

+i  6d 

[x i, x j ]2

i [xi, ]o .

we identied the yang-mills coupling constant with the inverse of the string coupling
constant

y m = 1/g2
g2
s,

(1.82)

34

(1.81)

appendix a

so that the relation between the gauge model (1.81) and dlcq string theory is an ex-
ample of a strong-weak coupling duality. string interactions are perturbative processes
in string theory, but non-perturbative in matrix string theory.

in equation (1.82) we wrote the yang-mills coupling constant (which has dimensions
of inverse length) in units where the radius of the yang-mills cylinder is equal to one.
the zero string coupling limit is therefore equivalent to the strong coupling limit and/or
infra-red limit. we postpone a more concrete derivation why the gauge model (1.81) is
related to dlcq string theory, including the coupling constant identications (1.82)
till the next chapter.

the basic dynamical variables of the theory are n  n hermitian matrices and
include 8 scalar elds x i and 8 fermion elds a
in the free string limit
gs  0 (or strong yang-mills coupling limit) the gauge elds a decouple from the
theory and the higgs elds satisfy the commutation relations

l and  a
r.

[x i, x j ] = 0.

(1.83)

the equations (1.83) imply that the higgs elds can be diagonalized simultaneously.
they still can satisfy non-trivial boundary conditions, that are classied by the weyl
group of the gauge group. for u(n) this weyl group is the symmetric group sn , so
we are back to the orbifold model (1.35) we discussed before. we are thus lead to
the conjecture that in the zero string coupling limit the gauge theory (1.81) ows to a
supersymmetric conformal eld theory that is dened on the orbifold (1.35).

when we relax the limit gs  0 and take the string coupling constant to be nite,
there can be non-diagonal terms in the matrix string congurations. these terms are
responsible for the extra degrees of freedom present in matrix string theory as compared
to light-cone string theory.

for nite gs interactions will be included automatically, but we still have to nd
the appropriate solutions of the equations of motion that yield a (classical) description
of joining and splitting of strings.
indeed in chapter 3 we will nd an instanton-
like solution that describes these elementary processes in matrix string theory. this
instanton solution should be glued into a global solution that equals the asymptotic
states far away from the interaction region. for a concrete comparison with string
theory, the quantum uctuations around the classical solution have to be taken into
account. we will discuss this and other issues in chapter three.

appendix a: partition function of a symmetric
product orbifold model

in [28] an identity was proven that equates the elliptic genus partition function of a
supersymmetric sigma model dened on an n-fold symmetric product x n /sn to the
partition function of a second quantized string theory on the space x  s1. here x
is a kahler manifold. the elliptic genus of a supersymmetric sigma model is dened
as the trace over the r-r sector of the evolution operator ql0 times (1)f yfl. here
f = fl + fr is the sum of left and right moving fermion number, and y is a complex
parameter that counts the left moving fermion number. by virtue of supersymmetry

35

towards matrix string theory

the right moving sector contributes only via the ground states. in the special case that
y = 1 the elliptic genus reduces to the euler number. the orbifold euler number can
be read of from the generating functional [52][85]

xn 0

pn (sn x) =yn>0

1

(1  pn)(x) .

(a.1)

the full partition function of the supersymmetric sigma model can also be related to
a second quantized string theory. more concretely we claim that the following identity
holds,

xn 0

pn (sn x; q, q) = yn>0

l,m0

1

(1  pn(q q)l/nqm) d(mn+l,l).

(a.2)

here d(m, l) are the degeneracies of the single partition function, that contribute at
level k and l to the operators l0 and l0,

(h; q, q) =xk,l

d(k, l)qk ql.

(a.3)

the assumption we make is that the single hilbert space h is discrete, i.e. the indices
l, m in (a.3) run over a discrete set, but are not necessarily integer-valued (this in
contrast to the case of the elliptic genus where all levels are integer-valued). note that
in (a.3) there are both zero mode contributions and oscillator modes contributions to
the levels of q and q, but we did not make this explicit in order to keep the formulas
as simple as possible.

before we prove (a.2) let us comment on the physical interpretation of the right-
hand side of (a.2). the right-hand side can be interpreted as the second quantized
partition function of a string, whose fock space is made up by applying creation op-
erators i
l,m,n, i = 1 . . . d(m, l). the parameter p counts the light-cone momentum p+,
|q| and q count two quantum numbers (not necessarily integer-valued).
the original proof for the case of the elliptic genus partition function [28].

in the remaining part of this section we will proof (a.2), thereby heavily relying on

in the preceding subsection we have seen that the hilbert space of a closed string
theory on a symmetric product space can be written as a direct sum of direct products
of smaller hilbert spaces, see equation (1.43). repeatedly using the following rules for
partition functions of direct sums respectively tensor products of hilbert spaces

(h  h; q, q) = (h; q, q) + (h; q, q),
(h  h; q, q) = (h; q, q)  (h; q, q),

we get for partition function of the orbifold model

(h(sn x); q, q) = xnnp nnn=nyn>0

(snnhzn

(n); q, q),

36

(a.4)

(a.5)

appendix a

where we used the notations of the previous subsection. to proceed we rst proof that
the partition function of a symmetrized tensor product of identical hilbert spaces can
be written in terms of the partition function of one single hilbert space only. this will
enable us to reduce further the righthand side of (a.5).

as already indicated we assume that the single hilbert space h has a discrete
spectrum. the partition function of the symmetrized tensor product of h is given by
the generating function

xn 0

pn (snh; q, q) =yk,l

1

(1  pqk ql) d(k,l).

(a.6)

this identity can be proven as follows [28]. we dene the vk,l to be the vector space
whose dimension equals the degeneracy number d(k, l) of the single hilbert space h.
we have

xn =0

pn (snh; q, q) =

xn =0

p nk,l=nyk,l
pnxnk,l

(qk ql)nk,l dim(snk,lvk,l),

(a.7)

where nk,l runs over all partitions of n. the summations in the expression of the right
hand side in (a.7) can easily be rewritten as

xn =0

pn (snh; q, q) =yk,l xn

finally by using the identity

pn (qk ql)n dim sn (vk,l).

(a.8)

dim(sn vk,l) =(cid:18) d(k, l) + n  1

n

(cid:19) ,

(a.9)

we arrive at the result (a.6).

now we return back to the goal of this section, namely calculating the partition
function of the symmetric product orbifold model. the partition function of the single
hilbert space hzn
(q, q,hzn

d(l + nm, l)(q q)l/nqm.

n is given by

(a.10)

n ) = xk,l0

kl=nm

combining this result with (a.8) we arrive at the result (a.2)

d(k, l)qk/n ql/n =xl,m
pn xnnp nnn=nyn>0
(n); q, q) = yn>0

l,m0

xn 0

pn (sn x; q, q) =xn 0
=yn>0xn 0
pkn (snhzn

(n); q, q)

(snnhzn
1

(1  pn(q q)l/nqm) d(l+nm,l),

(a.11)

where again it is understood that the labels m, l run over a discrete set, but are not
necessarily integer valued. we will use the result (a.2) in chapter 3 when we calculate
the degeneracies of bps-states in supersymmetric yang-mills theory compactied on
a three-torus.

37

towards matrix string theory

38

chapter 2

u-duality in n=4
yang-mills theory on t 3

toroidal compactied type ii string theory is conjectured to be invariant under a
discrete symmetry group, called u-duality [59]. relations between gauge models and
string theory suggest that this string duality should be reected in gauge theories as
well.
in this chapter we will review why this is indeed the case. we will moreover
show that gauge theories know about extended u-duality symmetries. that is, certain
properties of the theories, like bps mass spectra, or bps state degeneracies, can be
shown to be invariant under a larger symmetry group, than one might at rst sight
expect.

in the gauge theory interpretation this extended symmetry group is a combination
of electro-magnetic duality, the mapping class group of tori, and nahm-type dualities.
we will mainly concentrate on a supersymmetric yang-mills model dened on a
three-torus. we will study in detail the degeneracies of bps states in this model, and
show that they exhibit a u-duality symmetry. in the last section we explain in detail
the appearance of the duality symmetry, and its absence in the bps mass spectrum.
first, however, we will introduce some basic concepts. we start with a brief ex-
planation of string duality. then we give a review of d-branes, and their low energy
description. after this we introduce m-theory, a conjectured eleven-dimensional model
that unies all known string theories. the notions of d-branes and m-theory naturally
lead us to the matrix theory proposal of [9], which says that m-theory in a special
regime has a particularly simple description in terms of a matrix quantum mechanics.
matrix string theory is closely related to this model, and following [76] we will give
arguments why it yields a description of non-perturbative iia strings.

2.1 d-branes and string dualities

2.1.1 string duality

first we will briey discuss string duality in closed string theory. the bosonic massless
modes of closed string theory come from two sectors, the rr sector and the ns-ns
sector:

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

ns  ns
r  r

| >l  | >r  g, b, 
| >l  | >r  antisymmetric forms ai

(2.1)

here g is the ten-dimensional space-time metric, b an antisymmetric two form,  the
dilaton eld and the ai are antisymmetric rr forms. the rr gauge elds that satisfy
denite chirality conditions, form together with the ns-ns elds the ground states of
either type iia or iib string theory. this is illustrated in the next table

ns  ns

r  r
iia g, , b a1, a3
iib g, , b a0, a2, a4

table 2.1 the bosonic massless elds of type
iia and iib string theory

the low energy dynamics of these massless modes have a eld theory description in
terms of supergravity theories.

a remarkable property of these eld theories are the so-called duality symmetries.
these classical symmetries are expected to be quantum mechanical symmetries in
string theory. they come in two types: t -duality and s-duality. a single t -duality
transformation (for a review of t(arget space)-duality see [43]) changes the chirality
of the theory from type iia to type iib [22][31] and in the opposite direction. in its
simplest non-trivial form it inverts the radius r of a compact direction to /r, and
exchanges the momentum and winding modes of strings winded along the compact
direction, thereby leaving the total mass spectrum invariant. the rr forms get an
extra index or lose one, depending on whether the index was already there or not.
it thus changes the rank of the rr tensor elds by 1, so that we get a map from
type iia string theory to iib and vice versa. together with the mapping that acts by
integral shifts in the elds, the r  /r duality forms an sl(2, z) symmetry group.
generalized to d compactied dimensions the t -duality group becomes so(d, d). for
a detailed account of the action of t duality on the elds we refer to [16] and [43].

sl(2, r)

string theory

d d
10 1
9 2
8 3 sl(2, r)  sl(3, r) sl(2, z)  sl(3, z)
7 4
6 5
5 6

so(5, 5, r)

sl(5, z)

so(5, 5, z)

e6(z)

sl(2, z)

sugra

sl(5, r)

e6(r)

table 2.2 the u -duality groups of type ii string theory in
dierent dimensions

40

2.1 d-branes and string dualities

ten dimensional type iib string theory is conjectured to have s-duality as a gen-
uine symmetry [59]. it is a non-perturbative sl(2, z) symmetry; it relates the weak
coupling regime to the strong coupling regime, and it is therefore reminiscent of electro-
magnetic duality in gauge theories. the dilaton forms together with the rr-eld a0
a complex scalar that transforms under fractional sl(2, z) transformations. the two-
forms b and a2 transform as a doublet.

the generators of both types of duality groups do not commute, together they
form a larger group that goes under the name of u-duality [59]. the u-duality groups
become larger in lower dimensions and are discrete: as indicated in table 2.2, in eight
dimensions the symmetry group is sl(2, z)  sl(3, z), in seven sl(5, z) and in six
dimensions so(5, 5, z).

2.1.2 d-branes

an immediate corollary of the conjecture that iib string theory has s-duality invariance
is the existence of a dual string that transforms together with the elementary string
in a doublet. this dual string has been mysterious for a long time, until polchinski
realized that the d-string could play this role [70]. a d-string is a particular example
of p + 1 dimensional d-branes, which were previously known as hyper-surfaces with
the property that open strings can end on them [22]. polchinski also claried the role
of the rr-elds by noting that they should couple to the d-branes [70].

one explains the possibility that strings can end on a hyper-surface by considering
the boundary conditions that the coordinate elds of open strings have to satisfy at
their endpoints. there are two types of possible boundary conditions for the open
string,

x  = 0 (neumann),

x  = 0

(dirichlet).

(2.2)

dirichlet boundary conditions break poincare invariance, and hence represent topo-
logical defects in space-time. these topological defects are called d-branes, which is
shorthand for dirichlet branes. a static d-brane with p spatial dimensions is described
by the boundary conditions

x 0,1,...,p = 0,

x p+1,...,9 = 0.

(2.3)

the massless modes of the open string tied to the world-volume of the brane have a
description in terms of a low energy eld theory on the d-brane. thus we get a eld
a(), where  is a parameterization of the world-volume, that decomposes into a
parallel gauge eld a() on the brane and transversal components x i() that form
scalar elds.

the eective action of a (uctuating) d-brane was originally derived by requiring
that its equations of motion reproduce the conditions that are implied by conformal
invariance of open strings in the d-brane background [22][63]. another, less technical,

41

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

way to derive the action is by noting that the d-brane low energy eective action is
essentially xed by lorentz invariance and t-duality [7]. to see this we start with
the example of a d-particle moving through at spacetime [7]. we take its world-line
through ten-dimensional space-time parameterized in the following way

the point particle lagrangian is

x 0( ) = 

x i = x i( ).

s = 0z dp1  (0xi)2.

(2.4)

(2.5)

(2.6)

(2.7)

(2.8)

the action (2.5) is an eective action in the sense that higher order derivatives with
respect to time, e.g. acceleration terms, are neglected. we have put the rr elds to
zero, which would otherwise couple to the d-particle through wess-zumino terms.

by a t -duality transformation in the 1 direction the boundary condition of the
open string coordinate eld x 1 turns from neumann to dirichlet, the d-brane scalar
eld x 1 becomes a gauge eld a1 and hence the d-particle becomes a d-string. the
velocity of the d-particle in the 1 direction plays the role of a eld strength on the
d-string

so we get for the eective world-volume action of the d-string

f01 = 0a1 = x1/2.

s = 1z d2p1  (0xi)2  (2f01)2,

where i now runs from 2 . . . 9. the same argument can be repeated for other directions,
so that we get higher dimensional d-branes. this leads us to the form of the bosonic
low energy eective action of a p + 1 dimensional d-brane

s = tpz dp+1 eqdet(g + b + 2f).

here tp is the brane tension. we included the pull-back of the antisymmetric ns-ns
b-eld. together with the pull-back of the rr eld strength it forms the u(1) gauge
invariant world-volume eld strength 2f = b + 2f that lives on the d-
brane world-volume. the metric g is the pullback of the space-time metric to the
d-brane volume

g = gxx.

(2.9)

in addition to the action (2.8) there are couplings of the d-brane to rr elds in the
form of wess zumino terms.

the born-infeld action (2.8) as an eective description of d-branes can also be
veried by a perturbative string calculation [71]. this open string calculation moreover
gives the actual value of the brane tension tp; the result is [71]

p =

tp
gs

=

1

gs

1

(2)p

,

(2.10)

42

2.1 d-branes and string dualities

where the string coupling gs is related to expectation value of the dilaton gs = e<>.
as expected the brane tension is proportional to the inverse of the string coupling
constant, so that the d-branes are indeed non-perturbative objects.

with some further restricting assumptions the form of the bi action (2.8) simplies
considerably: in the zero-slope limit   0 combined with additional restrictions, the
bi action reduces to abelian yang-mills theory.
to show this we take for simplicity the background metric and the d-brane to be

at. the pullback of the metric to the brane is then

g =  + x ix i + . . . .

(2.11)

furthermore, we set the antisymmetric tensor b to zero, and assume that the terms
2f and x i are small. then we can expand the born-infeld action as follows

s = tpvp +

1
4g2

ymz dp+1 (cid:18)f 2

 +

2

(2)2 x ix i(cid:19) + . . . ,

where we made the identication

g2
ym =

1

42()2p

.

(2.12)

(2.13)

the action (2.12) is the bosonic part of 10-dimensional n = 1 sym, dimensionally
reduced to p + 1 dimensions. though this theory is a truncated model of d-branes, it
has some peculiar properties in favor when compared with born-infeld theory. one can
easily add fermionic degrees of freedom, and especially one can replace in a straight-
forward way the abelian gauge group by non-abelian u(n) groups. this extension
to non-abelian groups is useful, because when we have more than one d-brane, the
dynamics get naturally a description in terms of u(n) gauge theory.

thus d-branes shed new light on the intimate relation between string theory and
(non-abelian) gauge theories. we will explain this in more detail in the next section.

2.1.3 bound states of n d-branes

in the simplest case of two parallel d-branes there are two hyper-surfaces on which
open strings can end. these possibilities can be included in string theory by adorning
the open strings with extra degrees of freedom at their endpoints, called chan paton
factors, that simply indicate which brane the endpoint is restricted to. with the
inclusion of these chan paton factors, string wave functions have decompositions like

|k; ai = |k; iji a
ij,

(2.14)

where the a
matrices a
in string amplitudes only traces of products of chan paton factors appear.1

ij are, in this case, 2  2 matrices that label the chan paton factors. the
ij are allowed to be simultaneously conjugated by u(2) transformations, as

1we consider oriented open strings. for non-oriented strings the gauge group changes to so(n )

or u sp(n ).

43

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

on each of the two d-branes we have a u(1) gauge eld that couples to open strings.
these elds can be thought of as two abelian directions in a larger u(2) group. this
u(2) gauge group is equal to u(1)su(2)/z2. the u(1) subgroup describes the center
of mass motion of the branes, while the non-abelian su(2) part determines the relative
motion. the weyl group z2 of su(2) acts by permuting the branes, corresponding to
the fact that they are indistinguishable.

_
w

  

  


+

  

  


  

  


a

2

  

_

  

  


  

  


a

1

  

  


+

  

  


_

+

w

figure 2.1 the low energy dynamics of two separated branes has a descrip-
tion in terms of a u (1)  u (1) broken sector of u (2) gauge theory. the open
strings that begin on one brane and end on another, are coupled to massive
charged w -bosons. the open strings beginning and starting on the same
brane couple to the abelian u (1) gauge elds on the brane. when the branes
are on top of each other the complete gauge symmetry gets restored [86].

when the branes are separated the su(2) gauge group is broken to u(1)

u(1)  su(2)  u(1)  u(1),

(2.15)

much like in spontaneously broken gauge theories. for example the role of the charged
w  bosons is played by the ground states of strings beginning on one brane and ending
on another brane, and the masses of the w  particles are proportional to the distance
between the d-branes, and thus vanish when they are on top of each other (in this case
the complete gauge group u(2) gets restored). thus spontaneous symmetry breaking
in gauge theory can be visualized in string theory by pulling d-branes apart. this is
an example of a technique which is called geometric engineering, which can be used to
give phenomena in gauge theories a geometric interpretation.

in case of n parallel d-branes the total gauge symmetry group is u(n), which is
broken to a subgroup, depending on the relative locations of the separate d-branes.
the eective description of n d-branes has an obvious generalization in terms of non-
abelian yang-mills theory. also the fermionic degrees of freedom can be included in a
straightforward way. in this way we arrive at ten-dimensional n = 1 supersymmetric
yang-mills theory, dimensionally reduced to the dimension of the d-branes, which has
precisely the right eld content.

as noted above this yang-mills description of d-branes is only valid in the zero-
slope limit   0. when we add up all  corrections we would expect to arrive at
44

2.1 d-branes and string dualities

a generalization of born-infeld theory, like in the abelian case. the generalization of
born-infeld theory to non-abelian gauge groups with or without inclusion of fermionic
degrees of freedom is however not yet fully established. 2 there have been proposals for
a non-abelian generalization [84]. by considering the equations of motion implied by
the action, the right one can be singled out almost uniquely. there appears, however,
to be an ambiguity in the choice of representation that is to be used for the trace over
the gauge group. for a discussion of these matters see [84].

2.1.4 bound states within d-branes

in supersymmetric gauge theories electric charged particles can combine with magnetic
charged solitons to dyonic bound states. these states usually break part of the super-
symmetry and saturate a bps mass bound. their masses are smaller than the added
masses of single electric and magnetic objects; in other words the binding energy is
non-zero and the dyons are therefore truly bound.

in a quite analogous way d-branes can form bound states with p-branes (extended
fundamental objects in string theory) in type iib string theory. as an example we
take bound states of fundamental strings (f-strings) and d-strings. these two types of
strings transform as a doublet under the sl(2, z) action of s-duality, so string duality
predicts the existence of a whole tower of bound states of p f-strings and q d-strings,
with p and q relatively prime. it also suggests the following binding tension formula
for a (p, q) string [75]

p,q =

1

2sp2 +

q2
g2
s

.

(2.16)

this formula implies that for weak coupling the mass dierence between a single f-
string plus a single d-string, and a (1, 1) bound state is equal to the mass of a single
fundamental string up to zeroth order of the coupling constant. apparently the f-string
dissolves almost entirely in the d-string when they form a bound state by minimizing
their energy. this can be visualized by imagining the following procedure [87]. consider
a fundamental string (f-string) in type iib wrapped around a compact dimension. in
the absence of d-strings, the string winding number is conserved. this winding number
is equal to the conserved charge of the gauge eld that can be formed out of the ns-ns
two form b by integrating it over the compact direction [72][47]. in the presence of a
d-string however the winding number of an f-string is no longer conserved. instead the
charge of the gauge eld obtained from the u(1) eld strength f = f + b/2
on the d-string is conserved. now the closed f-string can break in two parts and
disappear, thereby leaving electric ux on the world-volume of the d-string behind,
in such a way that the charge of the abelian gauge eld on the d-string remains
conserved.

2the appropriate supersymmetric version of the born-infeld action, that describes both the
fermionic degrees of freedom and the bosonic degrees of freedom has been constructed for the abelian
case [1].

45

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

a d-string with electric ux on it is thus interpreted as a bound state of a d-string
it is a bps state, because the conguration can be mapped to a

and an f-string.
d-particle with non-zero momentum via t-duality, cf. (2.5)-(2.7).

a proof that the bound states really exist has been given by witten.

in [87]
he argued that the existence of a d-string/f-string bound state can be proven by
considering the relevant low energy eective theory, perturbed with a mass term. this
mass term will break part of the supersymmetry but it does not aect the bps mass.
by tuning the mass parameter of the extra term in the supersymmetric yang-mills
theory, the eective coupling constant can be made small. for this theory then, it
can be shown that the relevant supersymmetric ground state exists (and is unique)
[87]. the existence and uniqueness of the ground state is not aected by putting the
mass term to zero again, so that the whole tower of (p, q) strings states with p and q
relatively prime do exist in string theory.

analogous results hold for gauge theories that are associated with higher dimen-
sional branes. by turning on electric and magnetic uxes not only the d-brane itself
is described but also bound states with lower dimensional branes and strings.

ym flux                       string interpretation        

 rank n                               # max. dim d-branes

 electric flux                       f-string winding number

 magnetic flux                    # codim 2 d-branes 

 instanton number               # codim 4 d-branes 
 

table 2.3 bound states of a d-brane with lower dimensional branes and
fundamental strings have a low energy description in gauge theory. this table
contains the translation code for the two theories.

this is illustrated in table 2.3. we will come back to this in section 2.3 .

2.1.5 m-theory and iia string theory

m-theory is a conjectured model in eleven dimensions that should unify all known
string theories, and whose low energy limit is eleven-dimensional supergravity.

a concrete formulation of the model has not been established at present, but there
are some proposals for particular sectors of the theory. a denition of m-theory could
be the strong coupling limit of type iia string theory. the motivation for this denition
is, among other facts, the presence of d-particles in iia theory whose masses depend on
the inverse of the string coupling constant gs. when they are viewed as kaluza klein
states of an eleven dimensional theory, the radius of the extra eleventh dimension
should be proportional to gs

r11 = gsls.

(2.17)

46

2.1 d-branes and string dualities

then in the strong coupling limit an extra dimension in iia string theory appears.
another motivation is the already long known fact that the dimensional reduction of
11d supergravity theory on a circle is iia supergravity, the eective eld theory of 10d
type iia string theory. the bosonic eld content of 11d sugra [21] is the eleven di-
mensional metric gm n and an antisymmetric three-form gauge potential cm n p . upon
dimensional reduction we therefore get a scalar, a gauge eld g11, a two form c11,
a ten-dimensional metric and a three form, precisely the massless bosonic elds of iia
supergravity theory.

a graviton with momentum n/r11 in the eleventh direction gets the interpretation
as a bound state of n d-particles, whose masses add up to m = n/r11. the kaluza
klein mode of the graviton g11 couples to these d-particles and gets the role of the
rr gauge eld. the membrane, an extended solitonic object in 11d supergravity,
wrapped along the eleventh direction gets associated to the iia elementary string (as
was realized for the rst time in [83].)

m-theory                           iia string theory        

11d graviton                               d particle

wrapped membrane                     fundamental string

membrane                                    membrane 

wrapped five brane                      d four brane

five brane                                     ns five brane 

kk gauge field                             rr gauge field 

table 2.4 the dictionary between m theory (11d supergravity) compactied
on a circle and iia string theory.

the other solitonic object in supergravity, the ve-brane, gives rise to the d four-
brane and ns ve brane. these identications and others are summarized in the table
2.4.

one can also read o the spectrum of 11d sugra and m-theory from the eleven

dimensional superalgebra [11]

{q, q} = 2p + 2z 1212 + 2z 1515,

(2.18)

where i = 0,   10 and ,  = 1,   32. the superalgebra (2.18) includes two central
charges: a two brane charge z 12 and a ve brane charge z 15. these charges are
innite in non-compact eleven dimensional space, but in compact space they can have
nite values.

the superalgebra (2.18) is well known to have u-duality invariance. the continuous
versions of the u-duality groups are classical symmetries of the action of dimensional

47

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

reduced eleven dimensional supergravity. the symmetries can be thought of as being
generated by two groups, namely the t -duality group and the mapping class group of
the torus on which 11d sugra (m theory) should be compactied to get supergravity
theories (type ii string theory) in lower dimensions. the u-duality groups can thus be
viewed as so(d  1, d  1, z)  sl(d, z). we list the groups in dierent dimensions
in table 2.2.

2.2 matrix theory

2.2.1 the matrix theory proposal

in the previous section we saw that d-particles are the only objects that carry p11
momentum in m-theory. this was an important motivation for the following conjecture
due to banks, fischler, shenker and susskind [9]

conjecture [9]: m-theory in the innite momentum frame is exactly described
by the n   limit of 0-brane quantum mechanics

1

2r11z dt tr(cid:16) x 2 + [x i, x j ]2 + t (i   i[x i, ])(cid:17) ,

s =

(2.19)

where n/r11 plays the role of the 11d momentum, and where n/r11 and r11
are both taken to .

in writing down the d-particle action (2.19) we used units where 2 = 1. the matri-
ces x are elements of the gauge group u(n), and r11 is the radius on which m theory
should be compactied to get type iia string theory. when the elds x are large, the
nite energy congurations lie in the at directions. along at directions the elds x i
are simultaneously diagonalizable and thus it is possible to interpret these diagonal ma-
trix elements as coordinates of d-particles, with kinetic energy md0 x 2/2 = x 2/2r11.
for small distances the elds no longer necessarily commute and the interpretation of
the eigenvalues of the matrices as coordinates gets obscured. the o-diagonal com-
ponents describe strings stretched between the branes, with characteristic energies
 |xi  xj|r11m 3
p l, where mp l is the eleven dimensional planck mass. the action
neglects string oscillations and higher energy excitations (for example brane creation).
matrix theory has properties of a theory in the innite momentum frame. it is an
eective theory of d-particles, so by construction it has only states with positive mo-
mentum in the eleventh direction. furthermore the model (2.19) has ten-dimensional
(super)-galilean invariance. because of this it seems plausible that in the innite mo-
mentum frame of m-theory the states are primarily composed of d-particles, whose
eective low energy dynamics is determined by (2.19).

other important evidence for the model (2.19) is the natural appearance of super-
membranes in matrix quantum mechanics, as was originally observed in [24]. the
matrix theory hamiltonian is exactly the same as the light-cone hamiltonian of the
supermembrane [24]. due to supersymmetry this hamiltonian has a continuous spec-
trum [25], which from the membrane point of view may be disappointing (as this

48

2.2 matrix theory

would seem to rule out a generalization of strings in terms of membranes). matrix
theory, however, gives a new interpretation of this result. the continuous supermem-
brane spectrum belongs to the collective dynamics of (many) d-particles. then the
continuity of the spectrum is exactly what we want.

additional evidence for the model (2.19) came from calculations of d-particle scat-
tering amplitudes, whose results are to be compared with supergravity [13][14][73]. the
rst calculation, presented in [9] was the remark that in the born approximation the
scattering amplitude of two gravitons in 11d supergravity corresponds with the leading
potential term between two d-particles. in [13] this agreement was checked, up to a
two loop calculation in matrix theory.

one can also investigate in how far the symmetries of m-theory are present in
matrix theory. these symmetries are lorentz symmetry and u-duality symmetries.
we will comment on this in the coming sections.

in calculations the rank n is usually taken to be xed and large. for nite n the
model (2.19) has been conjectured to describe m-theory in the dlcq formalism [80].
one might view this as a stronger conjecture than the original one in [9], as it tells
us something about the matrix quantum mechanics for any rank n. but the large n
limit needed in the conjecture of [9] is a rather subtle issue and should be considered
with great care.

we will go on with the proposal of [80] in the next section, and adapt it to matrix
in particular we show how the close relation between matrix string

string theory.
theory and dlcq string theory can be made plausible.

2.2.2 the matrix string theory proposal

we can now be more precise on the relation between string theory and matrix string
theory: the matrix string theory proposal at nite n is type iia string theory in the
dlcq formalism, with rank n and p+ momentum identied. the d-particle number
in string theory has the interpretation of (integer) electric ux in matrix string theory.

 

 

1
m-theory on s x s 

1

pb

=n/r

=rr11

a

r9=r

b

pa

=m/r

a

iia on  s 1
m=d0#
p
9=n/r b
9t

1
iib on  s
m=d1#
n=f1#

9-11 flip

s-duality

b

r9=r
a
r1 =r
1

b

iia on s 1
n=d0#
p9
=m/r

a

t9

1

iib on  s

m=f1#
n=d1#

figure 2.2 this diagram illustrates the 9-11 ip which is one of the essential
features of matrix string theory. all identications only depend on the m-
theory conjecture [86] and string duality.

49

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

we can make this claim plausible by the following argument [76].
in gure 2.2 we
consider m-theory compactied on two circles with radii ra and rb. either of these
radii can be chosen to be in the eleventh direction, so we can dene two copies of type
iia string theories compactied on a circle of radius ra respectively rb.

the string coupling and string scale are determined by the eleventh radius and the

11-dimensional planck scale lp l through

r11 = gsls = g2/3

s

lp l,

(2.20)

so that the type iia string theory obtained via compactication of the a direction has
string coupling and string scale given by

gs = (ra/lp l)3/2,

 = r1

a l3

p l.

(2.21)

by a further t -duality in the nine direction on both sides of diagram 2.2 we get two
type iib theories that are related by an s-duality transformation. the type iib theory
in the lower-right corner in gure 2.2 is dened on a circle of radius r
a and has string
coupling and string scale (see [16] for a translation code between iia and iib)

r

a = l3

p lr1

a r1
b ,

gs = rb/ra,

 = r1

b l3

p l.

(2.22)

the idea now is to obtain a relation between dlcq iia string theory and yang-mills
theory by an innite boost in the rb direction of the equivalent iia and iib string
theories (2.21) and (2.22). this innite boost is accompanied by a zero size limit of
radius rb such that

rb = er (  ),

(2.23)

b)1/2/2rb.
where  is the boosting parameter which we will take to be cosh  = (r2+4r2
this procedure has the eect that one of the light-like coordinates x = xbt becomes
compactied. namely, for nite  we have the simultaneous identications

x+  x+ + er ,

x  x + r (  ),

(2.24)

so that in the limit rb  0 the light-cone coordinate x becomes compact, while x+
is identied with time. in this way we get on the left in gure 2.2, dlcq iia string
theory in the sector p+ = n/r and d-particle number m, with nite string coupling
and string scale given by (2.21) .

on the right we have weakly coupled type iib theory with n d-strings and m

f-strings wrapped along a circle of large radius

r

a = l3

pr1

a r1

b = e l3

pr1

a r1

(  ).

at the scale of this compactication radius, the string length  vanishes

r2

a/  = e l3

pr2

a r1

(  ).

(2.25)

(2.26)

50

2.2 matrix theory

this means that the iib theory gets a yang-mills theory description, which can be
derived from the low energy eective d-string action (born-infeld theory) via the zero
slope limit   0. using (2.13) and (2.22) we nd the yang-mills coupling constant
of the gauge theory description

g2
y m =

g
s
 =

r2
b
ral3
p

.

(2.27)

in this formula g
side of gure 2.2.

s is the string coupling constant of the type iib theory on the right

there is one additional condition for this reduction to make sense: namely nite-
ness of the yang-mills energy, as compared with the energy scale determined by the
compactication radius r

a.

the relevant yang-mills hamiltonian is the energy of a sector with integer electric

ux m,

hy m = g2

y m r
a

m 2
2n

.

(2.28)

this follows from the remarks made in section 2.1.4 where we explained that a (p, q)
string bound state has a low energy description in terms of yang-mills theory with
electric ux turned on. the yang-mills energy (2.28) is nite with respect to the yang
mills radius r

a, as can be veried by using (2.25) and (2.27).

when we include transversal momenta p of the strings the ym hamiltonian be-

comes

hy m =

1
2p+ (p2

 +

m 2
g2
s

),

(2.29)

which equals the dlcq string theory hamiltonian with d-particle charge m [80].

we come to the conclusion that dlcq iia string theory is equivalent to super yang-
mills theory dened on a cylinder, with dimensionless coupling constants identied via

gy m =

1
gs

.

(2.30)

the equivalence is thus an example of a strong-weak coupling duality as already em-
phasized in chapter 1.

the relation between matrix string theory and m-theory in the discrete light-cone
gauge is reected at the level of the superalgebras too. the superalgebra of dlcq
11-dimensional supergravity (2.18) on a d-dimensional torus is identical to the one
of maximally supersymmetric yang-mills theory on the dual torus, after appropriate
identications of the uxes [11].

2.2.3 (de)compactification

in the previous section we argued why matrix string theory yields a dual description of
non-perturbative type iia string theory. the gauge model describes type iia strings
in the dlcq formalism, moving in eight transversal dimensions.

51

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

the way of reasoning of the previous section can be repeated for type iia string
theory toroidally compactied to lower dimensions. the result is that the dual super-
symmetric u(n) gauge model is dened on a higher dimensional torus. this procedure,
however, is of limited use, as yang-mills theories are quantum mechanically well dened
only up to 4 dimensions.

this is one of the reasons why we will focus on the well known n = 4 u(n)
sym model in 3+1 dimensions, which, according to the reasoning above, describes
three-branes or dlcq string theory in 8 dimensions.

instead of repeating this reasoning again we will show that dimensional reduction
of the gauge theory means decompactication of the associated string theory, and vice
versa. to begin with let us consider the lagrangian of the n = 4 model

s = 

1

g2z d4x tr(cid:16)1

f 2

 +

1
2

4

(dx i)2 + idi

+i[x i, ] +

1
4

[x i, x j]2(cid:17),

(2.31)

with i = 1, . . . 6. when we compactify this model on a three torus of the form t 2 s1,
and rescale the circle according to x3  x3, the bosonic part of the action (2.31)
becomes

s = 

1

g2z d4x tr(cid:16) 1

2

f 2

3i +

1
4

f 2

ij +

1
2

(d3x i)2 +

1
2

(dix i)2 + [x i, x j ]2(cid:17). (2.32)

in the limit    (2.32) is conjectured to ow to an eective supersymmetric con-
formal eld theory in the infrared [51][29]. in this limit nite energy congurations
satisfy the atness conditions

fij = 0,

dix i = 0,

[x i, x j] = 0.

(2.33)

these conditions are the same atness conditions one gets in the strong coupling limit
of matrix string theory (see also section 1.2 ). we thus see that the limit    (or
equivalently shrinking the transversal two torus to zero size) dimensionally reduces the
model (2.31) to 1 + 1 dimensions, i.e. to matrix string theory. the associated string
theory is however decompactied from six to eight transversal dimensions.

conversely compactifying string theory to lower dimensions lead to higher dimen-
sional gauge theories. note that we have to dene what we actually mean by compact-
ifying matrix string theory. hereto we will follow the original argument due to taylor
[81], who discussed toroidal compactications of matrix theory.

matrix string theory is equivalent to the low-energy description of a system of n
d-strings moving in at space r9. an obvious denition of compactied matrix string
theory is therefore the low energy description of d-strings living on compact space.

a collection of d-strings on a circle can be described by using orbifold techniques.
the covering space of a circle s1 is the real line r, so we can study the d-strings by
considering the motion of an innite family of d-strings on r and then impose con-
straints that imply translation invariance of the d-string conguration. the matrices

52

x i get two type of indices: x i
conditions the discrete symmetry z imposes on these elds read [81][82]

mi,nj where n  z and i runs over integers 1,   , n. the

2.3 n=4 sym and m-theory on t 3

mn = x i
x i
mn = x 9
x 9
nn = x 9
x 9

(m1)(n1)

(m1)(n1)
(n1)(n1) + 2r91l,

i < 9,
m 6= n,

(2.34)

where we suppressed the indices i, j of the matrices. we took the compactied direction
in the ninth direction. as a result of the constraints (2.34) the matrix x 9
mn can be
written in the following form [82]

x 9 =



x1

. . .
. . .
x2
x1 x0  2r91l x1
x3
x0
x2
x2
x1 x0 + 2r91l x1
x3
. . .
. . .

x3
x2
x1

x1
x2

x3

x2

x1



,

(2.35)

where we used the shorthand notation xk = x 9
0k. one can interpret the matrix of the
form (2.35) as a representation of the covariant derivative of ym theory dened on the
dual circle

acting on the fourier components of a periodic function dened on the dual circle

x 9 = i  + a(x),

(2.36)

decomposing the gauge eld a(x) into fourier components

(x) =xn
a(x) =xn

neinx/ r9.

aneinx/ r9,

(2.37)

(2.38)

we see that the covariant derivative (2.36) has precisely the same action on the fourier
components of the function (2.37) as the matrix (2.35). thus we conclude that com-
pactication of matrix string theory on a circle means adding an additional compact
dimension to the ym theory, plus replacing a higgs eld by a gauge eld. this proce-
dure is the counterpart of dimensional reduction.

of course one can repeat this for tori of other dimensions, keeping in mind that the

gauge theory is well dened in low dimensions only.

2.3 n=4 sym and m-theory on t 3

the n = 4 sym model (2.31) has been thoroughly studied in the past. elegant semi-
classical studies have revealed that the spectrum of dyonic bps-saturated states in the
theory exhibits an exact symmetry between electric and magnetic charges [66][69][88][85]

53

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

[42]. this s-duality is expected to extend into the full quantum regime, thereby pro-
viding an exact mapping between the strong coupling and weak coupling sectors. al-
though recent breakthroughs in non-perturbative supersymmetric gauge theories and
string theory have produced substantial evidence for the duality conjecture, nding an
explicit construction of the duality mapping still seems as dicult as ever.

the s-duality of the n = 4 model (2.31) forms an important ingredient in the
matrix theory [9] formulation of 11-dimensional m-theory. as reviewed in section
2.2.2, matrix theory proposes a concrete identication between the u(n) sym model
dened on a three-torus t 3 and dlcq type iia or iib string theory compactied on a
two-torus t 2. a particularly striking consequence of this conjectured correspondence
is that the s-duality of the gauge model gets mapped to a simple t -duality in the
string theory language [79][36].

central in the correspondence with m-theory on t 3 is the following construction of
the 11-dimensional supersymmetry algebra in terms of the sym degrees of freedom.
the generators of the four-dimensional n = 4 supersymmetry algebra can be conve-
niently combined into one single so(9, 1) spinor supercharge q, by considering the 4d
sym model as the dimensional reduction of ten-dimensional n = 1 sym theory. in
this ten dimensional notation the fermionic elds transform under the supersymmetry
according to  = f, and the corresponding supercharge q is equal to

q =zt 3

tr(cid:20)rer  0rs

1
2

frs(cid:21) .

(2.39)

here and in the following the indices r, s run from 1 to 9. as the spatial part of
our space-time manifold is compact we have an additional global supersymmetry: the
action is invariant under adding a constant spinor to  via  = . we denote the
corresponding supercharge by q

q =zt 3

tr ,

(2.40)

where we put the volume of the three torus (and the length of all its sides) equal to
one. the supersymmetry algebra is

n q, qo = n,
nq, qo = z,
(cid:8) q, q(cid:9) = 20h + 2ipi,

where the central charge term

(2.41)

(2.42)

consists of the total electric and magnetic ux through the three-torus, dened via

z = 0iei  ijmij
mij =zt 3

tr ei,

ei =zt 3

tr fij.

(2.43)

54

2.3 n=4 sym and m-theory on t 3

h in (2.41) denotes the supersymmetric yang-mills hamiltonian and the quantities pi
are the integrated energy momentum uxes, dened (in 3+1 notation) as

pi =zt 3

tr(ejfji + idixi +

1
2

itdi),

(2.44)

where i is the conjugate momentum to the higgs scalar eld xi. in writing the above
supersymmetry algebra we have assumed that the u(1) zero mode part of i vanishes.
from the eleven dimensional m-theory perspective, this means that we assume to be
in the rest-frame in the uncompactied space directions.

the superalgebra (2.41) has the same form as the one of eleven dimensional super-

gravity (cf.(2.18) ) in the dlcq formalism:

n q, qo = p+,
nq, qo = 2paa + 2z a1a2a1a2 + 2z a1a5a1a5,
nq, qo = 2p + 2z aa + 2z a1a4a1a4.

(2.45)

here we split the 32-component supercharge of 11d supergravity into two sixteen-
component supercharges q and q. as prescribed by dlcq, x is dened on a circle
and x+ plays the role of time.
in writing up the supersymmetry algebra we have
therefore set the charges with a + component to zero, while the charges with a 
component do not necessarily vanish. these charges are indicated by z a and z a1a4
and they belong to membranes respectively ve-branes wrapped around the light-like
circle and transversal directions. comparing the superalgebras (2.45) and (2.41) we see
that they have the same form, except for the ve-brane central charge. but the ve-
brane is not included in m theory on low dimensional tori, because then it is innitely
massive, so the superalgebras are indeed identical.

we thus get a dictionary for the various uxes of 3 + 1 dimensional sym theory in
terms of charges of eleven-dimensional m-theory on t 3 and 10-dimensional iia string
theory compactied on t 2. this leads to the following list of correspondences (here
i, j run from 1 to 2):

n h

e3

ei

m3 mi

p3

pi



p+

p9

p

pi

mij m9j

m9 mi



p+

q0

p

pi

mij wj

w mi

(2.46)

4d sym

m-theory on t 3

iia string on t 2

here q0 denotes the d-particle number in the iia string theory.
in the second and
third table, the integers mij - corresponding to the sym magnetic uxes - denote the

55

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

wrapping numbers of the m-theory membrane around the t 3 and the d2-brane around
the t 2 respectively. the m-theory membranes wrapped m9j times around the compact
light-like direction turn into iia strings with winding number wi.

states with non-zero momentum ux pi = pi in the sym theory correspond to
membranes that are wrapped around the longitudinal x light-like direction. in the
original proposal of [9], m-theory arises in the limit n   while restricting the
spectrum of the n = 4 sym model to the subspace of states that have energy of
order 1/n. this limit amounts to a decompactication of the longitudinal direction.
states with non-zero pi will thus correspond to innite energy congurations containing
membranes stretched along the light-cone direction. all nite energy states therefore
must have pi = 0.

in the dlcq setup, the longitudinal membranes are no longer innitely massive,

and must be naturally included in the spectrum.

2.3.1 u -duality in matrix theory on t 2

the correspondence with string theory and m-theory gives a number of predictions
concerning the duality properties of the gauge theory. these predictions in particular
concern the bps spectrum of the sym model at nite n as well the behavior of the
model at large n. for example, from the above table 2.46 it is seen immediately that
electric-magnetic duality in the sym theory follows from the t -duality on the two
torus, as rst noted in [51]. the t -duality that exchanges the d-particles with the d2-
branes and the kk momenta with the ns winding numbers in type iia string theory,
when translated to the rst table indeed gives rise to the s-duality that interchanges
all the electric and magnetic uxes. via this correspondence, the complete u-duality
symmetry sl(2, z)  sl(3, z) of m-theory on t 3 is expected to be realized as an
exact symmetry of the matrix formalism [79][36]. 3 a discussion about the expected
sl(5, z) duality symmetry group of matrix theory on t 4 can be found in [74]. this
case is more subtle as the theory is not simply described by 4 + 1 dimensional gauge
theory, because it is not renormalizable.

at nite n there are reasons to suspect that the duality group that acts on the bps
sector is in fact enlarged. as we have discussed in section 2.2.2, for nite n matrix
theory describes m-theory in the dlcq formalism, and correspondingly one no longer
needs to restrict to states with vanishing momentum ux pi. bps states at nite n
can therefore carry a total of 10 charges, labeled by (n, ei, mi, pi).

the gauge theory descends from born infeld theory in the zero slope limit   0
(cf. section 2.1 ). therefore we can interpret the u(n) sym model as a low energy
description of all possible bound states of n d3 branes of iib string theory on t 3. in
this correspondence, ei denotes the ns string and mi the d-string winding number,
while pi is the kk momentum. the sym theory should thus encompass all bps bound
states of this system.

it should be emphasized, however, that from this reasoning we should only expect
the bps degeneracy formula to be sl(5, z) symmetric, while of course the energy

3for a review of u -duality in matrix theory we refer to [68].

56

2.4 bps spectrum

spectrum is not, since the yang-mills model only represents a particular limit of the
n d3 brane system.

2.4 bps spectrum

the goal of our study in this section is to determine the explicit form of the bps
degeneracies for nite n as a function of the charges (n, ei, mi, pi), and thereby exhibit
its full duality symmetry. we will approach this problem in two ways: rst from m-
theory and then directly from the n = 4 sym model. our main nding is that the
spectral degeneracy of individual bound states from both points of view is identical,
and furthermore exhibits a full sl(5, z) duality symmetry. part of this large duality
group also acts on the rank n of the gauge group, an example of so called nahm type
transformations [67].

the bps-states that we will consider respect 1/4 of all supersymmetries. every

such bps-state in a xed multiplet satises

(cid:16)q +  q(cid:17)|bpsi = 0,

for a certain xed collection of so(9, 1) spinors  and . these spinors are, up to an
overall factor, completely determined by the set of charges.

by taking the commutator with q and q in the preceding equation we get two

conditions for the spinors  and 

20h + 2ipi + 0z = 0,
n  + z  = 0.

plugging  in the rst equation gives the following equation for 

(2.47)

(2.48)

(2.49)

(cid:0)0h  + ip 

i(cid:1)  = 0,

where h  and p 
contributions removed. explicitly,

i denote the hamiltonian and momentum uxes with the zero-mode

h =

1
2n

(e2

i + m2

i ) + h ,
pi = (e  m)i/n + p 
i .

(2.50)

from the last equation, we see that the eigenvalues of p 

i are equal to p

i = i/n with

i = npi  (e  m)i.

(2.51)

the operator in equation (2.49) should have eigenvalues equal to zero. this is only the
case when the magnitude of h  and the length of p 
i|. using this
relation, we can write equation (2.49) in the following way

i are equal, h  = |p 

where the vector i denotes the unit vector in the direction of i.

(cid:0)0 + ii(cid:1)  = 0,

(2.52)

57

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

2.4.1 bps spectrum from m-theory

now we are ready to determine the detailed bps spectrum from discrete light-cone
m-theory. to this end it is useful to introduce the notion of an irreducible bps state,
as a state that contains only one single bps bound state. indeed, general bps states
can in principle combine more than one such bound state into one second quantized
bps state. the combined state will still be bps, provided each of the irreducible
constituent bound states is left invariant by the same set of supersymmetries, i.e. with
the same spinors  and .

the degeneracy of irreducible bps states is determined almost uniquely from u-
duality invariance, and from the known bps spectrum of perturbative string states.
the relevant u-duality group for our case turns out to be as large as the complete
sl(5, z) duality group of string theory on t 3, i.e. m-theory on t 4.

the 10 quantum numbers (n, ei, mi, pi) can be combined into a 55 anti-symmetric

matrix [92]

,

(2.53)





p3
0
p1

p2
0
e1 m1
p3
p1
e2 m2
p2
0
e3 m3
e1 e2 e3
n
0
m1 m2 m3 n 0

on which sl(5, z) acts by simultaneous left- and right-multiplication. 4 the smaller
sl(3, z)  sl(2, z) symmetry group is included in the group sl(5, z) and is repre-
sented by block-diagonal matrices, with an sl(3, z) group element in the upper left
corner and an sl(2, z) element in the lower right corner. together with an sl(5, z)
matrix that is not in this block-diagonal form the elements of sl(3, z)  sl(2, z)
generate the complete extended duality group. we will call the extra transformations
nahm type transformations, because they mix rank and electro-magnetic uxes with
each other. they resemble the well known nahm duality mapping that exchanges in-
stanton number and rank of gauge group in euclidean u(n) yang-mills theory [19].
we come back to this issue in section 2.5.

the following bilinear combinations of the uxes

ki = (npi  (e  m)i, pm , pe ),

(2.54)

transform as a 5 vector under sl(5, z) duality. it can be formed out of the uxes by
contracting the matrix (2.53) with its hodge dual, a three tensor. from this we deduce
that the relevant sl(5, z) invariant scalar combination we can make out of the ten
charges is the integral length of this ve-vector 5

|k| = gcd(npi  (e  m)i, pm , pe ).

(2.55)

4the sl(5, z) transformations also acts on the metric of the torus and the coupling constant in a

non-trivial way. we will discuss this in the last section of this chapter.

5another sl(5, z) scalar is gcd(n, pi, ei, mi) which is not relevant for the degeneracies of bps
states in yang-mills theory. this scalar will be important however when one considers the bps
spectrum of supersymmetric born infeld theory on t 3 [92].

58

2.4 bps spectrum

duality invariance thus predicts that the degeneracy of irreducible bps bound states
should be expressible in terms of the quantity |k| only.
to determine the explicit degeneracy formula, we note that by using the u-duality
symmetry, any irreducible bound state can be rotated into a state that carries only
kk momentum and ns string winding (in the sym language these states have zero
momenta pi = 0). such a state must necessarily be made up from a single fundamental
iia string. the invariant |k| for this perturbative string state simply reduces to the
bilinear combination of momenta and winding numbers that determines (via the bps
restriction) the oscillator level of the string. single bps states of toroidal compactied
ii string theory have only left-moving (or right-moving) excitations. the number of
irreducible bps bound states is therefore counted by means of the chiral string partition
function [72]

xk

c(k)qk = (16)2yn (cid:18) 1 + qn
1  qn(cid:19)8

,

(2.56)

with k = |k| as dened in (2.55) .
general bps states of discrete light-cone gauge m-theory may consist of more
than one irreducible bound state. the total bps condition requires that the charges
of these separate bound states must be compatible. the complete second quantized
partition sum is obtained by taking into account all possible such ways of combining
individual bound states into a second quantized conguration with a given total charge.
more detailed comments on the combinatorial structure of the second quantized bps
partition sum will be given in section 2.4.3.

2.4.2 bps spectrum from n=4 sym on t 3

the above description of the bps spectrum can be reproduced directly from the u(n)
gauge theory on t 3 as follows. first let us recall the denition of the electro-magnetic
ux quantum numbers. to this end it is useful to decompose the u(n) gauge eld into
a trace and a traceless part

and to allow the elds on t 3 to be periodic up to gauge transformations of the form

a = au (1)



1l + asu (n )



(2.57)

asu (n )

i

(x + aj)

= jasu (n )

i

(x)1

j

,

au (1)

i

(x + aj) = au (1)

i

(x)  2mij/n,

(2.58)

with mij integer. here ai with i = 1, 2, 3 denote the translation vectors that dene the
three torus t 3. 6 the su(n) rotations i must satisfy the zn cocycle conditions

jk = kje2ijk/n ,

6we repeat here that for simplicity we mostly take t 3 to be cubic with sides of length 1.

(2.59)

59

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

for integer jk. the quantities ij/n dene the t hooft zn magnetic uxes [58] and
mij/n can be identied with the u(1) magnetic ux dened in (2.43). the integers
ij and mij are restricted via the condition that the combined gauge transformation
(2.58) denes a proper u(n) rotation. this requirement translates into the dirac
quantization condition that the total ux (ij  mij)/n must be an integer. hence
mij = ij(mod n ).
electric ux carried by a given state is dened via the action of quasi-periodic gauge

rotations [n] dened via

j[n] = [n]je2inj /n ,

(2.60)

with integer nj. such gauge rotations will preserve the boundary condition (2.58)
on the gauge elds. a state |i is dened to carry su(n) ux j if it satises the
eigenvalue condition

2i

n njj|i,

(2.61)

b[n]|i = e

where b[n] denotes the quantum operator that implements the gauge rotation [n] on

the state |i. similarly as for the magnetic ux, the electric ux receives an overall
u(1) contribution ei dened in (2.43). the abelian and non-abelian parts of the ux
must again be related via ei = i(mod n).

to determine the supersymmetric spectrum for a given set of charges, the idea
is to rst reduce the phase space of the u(n) sym model to the space of classical
supersymmetric congurations and then to quantize this bps reduced phase space.
the justication for this procedure should come from the high degree of supersymmetry
in the problem, while furthermore the degeneracy of bps states is known to be a very
robust quantity.

to obtain the reduced phase space, we recall that the susy transformation for the
fermionic partners of the yang-mills elds reads (again using ten-dimensional notation)

 =(cid:18)er0r +

1
2

frsrs(cid:19)  + .

(2.62)

the bps restriction requires that the right-hand side vanishes for those  and  deter-
mined in the previous section. thus in particular we can use the equation (2.48) to
express  in terms of  and the u(1) zero modes. the result is

 =(cid:18)e

r0r +

1
2

f 

rsrs(cid:19)  = 0.

(2.63)

where the primed quantities are equal to the un-primed ones with the constant u(1)
parts removed. for bps-states in a xed multiplet, supersymmetry is unbroken for 
satisfying the equation (2.49) above. hence for these bps-states the following must
hold for all spinors

(cid:18)e

r0r +

1
2

f 

rsrs(cid:19)(cid:0)0  k k(cid:1)  = 0.

(2.64)

60

2.4 bps spectrum

note that 0  kk acts like a projection operator on the space of spinors satisfying
equation (2.49). we conclude that the matrix in spinor space in the last equation has
to vanish. this is the case when e and f  satisfy the following two conditions

ii = 0,
e
[rs] = f 
e

rs.

(2.65)

from now one we shall omit the prime, and simply denote by e and fij the u(n) elds
without the u(1) constant mode. we will also return to a 3+1-dimensional notation,
and for additional notational convenience, use the sl(3, z) symmetry to rotate the
three-vector i dened in (2.51) in the 3 direction. so we will choose coordinates such
that

3 = np3  eimi3,
j = npj  eimij  e3m3j = 0

(2.66)

i, j = 1, 2.

here and from now on the indices i, j run from 1 to 2. from the second condition in
(2.65) we read o that the gauge and higgs elds are at on the plane perpendicular
to , meaning

in addition we have

fij = 0,
dixj = 0,
[xi, xj] = 0.

ei = f3i,
i = d3xi.

finally, the rst condition in (2.65) simply becomes

e3 = 0.

(2.67)

(2.68)

(2.69)

we can interpret this constraint equation as a gauge invariance condition under arbi-
trary local shifts in the longitudinal gauge eld a3. we can therefore exploit this gauge
invariance by putting a3 = 0. the relations (2.67) then simplify to the statement that
the transversal gauge elds ai and higgs scalars xi satisfy the chiral 2d free eld
equations

0ai = 3ai,
0xi = 3xi.

(2.70)

furthermore, the equations of motion imply that the elds do not depend on the
coordinates of the transverse torus. thus we conclude that the bps reduced theory is
described by the left-moving chiral sector of a two-dimensional sigma model with target
space given by the space of solutions to the atness conditions (2.67) subject to the
twisted boundary conditions specied by the electro-magnetic ux quantum numbers.

61

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

to determine the detailed properties of this sigma model, let us rst consider the
case with all electro-magnetic uxes equal to zero. the only non-zero quantum numbers
are therefore n and p3. in this case we can parameterize the space of solutions to (2.67)
by means of the orbifold sigma model on the n-fold symmetric product space

(r6  t 2)n

sn

,

(2.71)

where sn denotes the permutation group of n elements, acting on the n copies of the
transversal space t 2  r6. 7 to see that this is the right space, we observe that for
solutions to (2.67) one can always choose a gauge in which all u(n) valued elds take
the form of diagonal matrices. each such matrix eld thus combines n separate scalar
elds, corresponding to the n eigenvalues. the sn permutation symmetry arises as
a remnant of u(n) gauge invariance, acting via its weyl subgroup on the space of
diagonal matrices. finally, the at transversal gauge elds ai with i = 1, 2 give rise to
periodic 2d scalar elds, since constant shifts in ai by multiples of 2 are pure gauge
rotations.

the model thus reduces to the free limit of type iia matrix string theory [65][10][29]
in the discrete light-cone gauge [80]. as explained in section 1.2 the hilbert space of
the model decomposes into twisted sectors labeled by the partitions of n, in which the
eigenvalue elds combine into a collection of long strings of individual length nk such

that the total length adds up topk nk = n. each such string is made up from, say, nk

eigenvalues that, by their periodicity condition around the 3-direction are connected
via a cyclic permutation of order nk. in the m-theory interpretation, all these separate
strings will indeed correspond to separate bound states, i.e. particles that each can
move independently in the uncompactied space directions. the general form of the
bps partition function of symmetric product sigma models of the form (2.71) has been
described in detail in [28].

in the following we will mainly concentrate on the irreducible states, describing one
single bps particle. these necessarily consist of one single string of maximal length.
in the present case, with zero total electro-magnetic ux, this maximal string has total
winding number n around the 3-direction. correspondingly, its oscillation modes have
energies that are quantized in units of 1/n. thus the degeneracy of states as a function
of n and p3 is obtained by evaluating the chiral superstring partition function, as given
in (2.56), at oscillator level np3.

next let us turn on the magnetic ux m3. the space of solutions to (2.67) with
twisted boundary conditions (2.58) around the transverse torus again takes the form
of a symmetric product

(r6  t 2)n 

sn 

,

(2.72)

but where now n  = gcd(n, m3). in order to visualize this reduction, we note that
gauge rotations i with 12 = 21 exp(2im3/n) that dene the twisted bound-
ary conditions, can be chosen to lie within an su(k) subfactor of u(n) where k =

7this orbifold sigma model was rst considered in relation with n = 4 sym theory on the three

torus in [51].

62

2.4 bps spectrum

n/ gcd(n, m3). by decomposing the matrix valued elds according to the action of
su(k) u(n ) with n  = gcd(n, m3), we can thus factor out a sector of u(n ) valued
eld variables that are unaected by the twisted boundary conditions. now following
the same reasoning as before, these elds parameterize the symmetric product space of
the above form. note that in the particular case that m3 = 1, the whole su(n) part
of the moduli space of solution to (2.67) collapses to a point, so that only the u(1)
part survives.

by a very similar reasoning we can also include the electric ux e3 in our description.
like with the magnetic ux, an electric ux e3 = 1 has the eect of reducing the su(n)
part of the vacuum moduli space (2.67) to a point, or rather, it projects out just one
single supersymmetric state in the su(n) sector [87]. more generally, however, it can
be seen that one can again factor out a u(n ) subfactor of the model, that is unaected
by both the electric and magnetic ux e3 and m3, where now

n  = gcd(n, m3, e3).

(2.73)

the bps sector for non-zero m3 and e3 is thus obtained by quantizing the supersym-
metric orbifold sigma model on (2.72), with n  equal to (2.73).

the spectrum of irreducible bps bound states is obtained as before, by considering
the hilbert space sector dened by the eigenvalue string of maximal length. the
maximal winding number is now equal to n . the total momentum along this string is
determined by the remaining quantum numbers of the bps state, and should be equal
to

p3  eimi3/n,

(2.74)

which is the total momentum of the bps state minus the contribution from the u(1)
electro-magnetic uxes. notice that the latter contribution is in general fractional.
however, since the oscillation modes of the long string states also have fractional os-
cillation number quantized in units of 1/n , this fractional total momentum (2.74)
can in fact be obtained via integer string oscillation levels. the total oscillation level
corresponding to this momentum ux is

k = n   (p3  eimi3/n)

(2.75)

and it is easy to check using (2.66) that this is an integer. in fact, after taking the
direction of i again arbitrary, we nd that the integer quantity (2.75) becomes equal
to the sl(5, z) invariant length |k| dened in (2.55) of the ve-vector (2.54). in this
way we reproduce the description of the bps spectrum given in the previous section.
in particular we nd conrmation that the degeneracy of supersymmetric bound states
has a discrete sl(5, z) duality invariance.

2.4.3 complete bps partition function
as mentioned earlier, the complete supersymmetric spectrum of the n = 4 sym model
contains many more sectors, that in m-theory describe congurations of multiple bps
bound states. these correspond to the other twisted sectors in the orbifold model

63

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

(2.72), describing multiple strings with separate lengths nk withpk nk = n . via their

zero modes these strings each separately carry all the possible ux quantum numbers.
the degeneracy of these separate states as a function of these charges is identical to the
sl(5, z) invariant result just described. however, it turns out that the combinatorics
by which many such states can be combined into one second quantized bps state no
longer respects the full sl(5, z) symmetry. for this it would be necessary that, via the
compatibility of the individual bps conditions, the 10 dimensional charge vectors of
all constituent states must align in the same direction. it can be seen, however, from
the second condition in (2.48) and condition (2.49) that this alignment is not entirely
implied: in the above notation, all charges must indeed align, except for the individual
p3 momenta.

in case of nonzero p3 momentum (and other uxes equal to zero) the multiple
states are in one-to-one relation with partitions of rank n. one can distribute the p3
momentum freely among the dierent sectors. we conclude that the degeneracies are
simply determined by a second quantized string partition function

xn,p3

pn qp3 =yr,s

1

(1  prqs) c(rs),

(2.76)

where the integers c(k) are the degeneracies of long string states dened by equation
(2.56).

in the situation where we have general uxes, the multiple bps states are, as
k = n, with n

explained above due to supersymmetry, related to partitions pk n

dened by the greatest common divisor of all charges except p3

n := gcd(n, ei, mi, p1, p2).

(2.77)

a single short string has length nk = n
its degeneracy is equal to d(nk p3
the dierent short string sectors is not limited by supersymmetry.

(em)3
n .
k). again the way the p3 momentum is divided among

kn /n and oscillator level p3

k = p3

k  n

k
n

hence the total bps partition function is again generated by a second quantized

string partition function

pn

xn,p3

where

sr = r

qp3 =yr,s
n (cid:18)s 

n 

1

(1  prqs) d(sr),

r
n

(e  m)3

n

(cid:19) .

(2.78)

(2.79)

the degeneracy formula (2.78) is invariant under the nahm type transformation that
exchanges m3 and n. we therefore conclude that the bps partition function of the
u(n) sym model does not exhibit the sl(5, z) symmetry, but still has a symmetry
essentially larger than the manifest sl(2, z)  sl(3, z). in the next section we will
discuss the geometric origin of this extra symmetry in some detail.

64

2.5 nahm duality

2.5 nahm duality

an especially interesting class of duality transformations that act on bps sectors of
u(n) sym theory are those that interchange the rank n of the gauge group with the
magnetic ux.

in the notation used in section 2.4.2 (with  rotated in the 3-direction) the bps

reduced quantum phase space exhibits a manifest symmetry under the interchange

n  m3

m3  n

mi  ijmj

ei  pi,

as well as under its electro-magnetic dual counterpart

n  e3

e3  n

ei  ijej

mi  pi.

(2.80)

(2.81)

in particular one can verify that the last two relations and 3/n in (2.66) as well as the
integers n  in (2.73) and n dened in (2.77) are invariant under these two mappings.
the second type of duality symmetry (2.81) is particularly interesting, because
from the m-theory perspective, this symmetry (2.81) must be some manifestation of
11-dimensional covariance, as it exchanges the eleventh direction (more precisely a light
direction) with a transversal direction.

because of the possible relevance for lorentz invariance of matrix theory, it is of
interest to know whether the symmetry extends to the full n = 4 model. although we
do not expect that this is the case, 8 we cannot resist reviewing the geometrical origin
of this duality mapping, which can in fact be dened for arbitrary non-bps gauge
congurations.

the type of transformations (2.80) and (2.81) are very similar to the nahm-type
transformations, considered e.g. in [19]. there it was proven that a k-instanton solution
of u(n) euclidean gauge theory on a four torus can be mapped to an n-instanton
solution of u(k) gauge theory on the dual four torus. this mapping was shown to
induce a bijection between the moduli spaces of the two instantons. in two dimensions
it is possible to formulate an analogous mapping, where now rank and magnetic ux
of an arbitrary gauge eld conguration are exchanged.

consider an arbitrary u(n) gauge eld a = ax + iay on t 2 with magnetic ux
m. this conguration can be related to a dual u(m) gauge eld with ux n dened
on the dual torus t 2 as follows. the key idea of the construction is to consider the
parameter family of connections on t 2 of the form (here a, b denote the u(n) color
indices, we use the fundamental representation of the gauge group u(n))

aab(x; z) = aab(x) + 21abz

(2.82)

with z = z1 + iz2 a complex coordinate on the dual torus bt 2. the mapping proceeds

by considering the space of zero modes of the dirac-weyl equation dened by a. let
d and d denote the corresponding dirac operator acting on right- and left-moving

8 in the context of gauge theories on non-commutative tori, nahm-type transformations are part
of a larger manifest (classical) duality symmetry [54][55]. we will briey comment on this at the end
of this section.

65

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

spinors, respectively. we will assume that d has no zero-modes (we can make this
assumption because, depending on the sign of the magnetic ux, either dd or dd
is a strictly negative denite operator on the two torus). according to a dirac index
theorem [47], the number of zero-modes of d then equals the magnetic ux m. we
have

di(x; z) = 0,

(2.83)

with i = 1, . . . , m. we can choose an orthonormal basis of zero modes, satisfying the
orthogonality relations

(2.84)

(2.85)

(2.86)

z . this denition is equivalent to the following formula for the dual covariant

z d2x i(x; z)j(x; z) = ij.
the dual u(m) gauge eld ba on bt 2 is now dened as
baij(z) =z d2x 
withb = 
derivative bd

i (x; z)baj(x; z),

a

bd = (1  p)b,

where p denotes the projection on the space of zero modes i of the operator d. it
can be shown that this dual gauge eld has magnetic ux equal to n, and moreover

to make these properties more manifest, it is useful to obtain a somewhat more

that the mapping from a to ba is a true duality (it squares to the identity).
explicit form of the dual covariant derivative bd. to this end, dene the green function

g(x, y) = (2)(x  y)
of the laplacian  = dd, and introduce the notation

(2.87)

(g)(x; z) =z d2y g(x, y)(y; z).

then the projection operator p satises the relation

1  p = dgd.

(2.88)

(2.89)

inserting this identity into the analogous formula for bd of the denition (2.86), we

nd that

(2.90)

bd = dgd  = 0,

since [d, ] = 0. hence the zero modes of the dirac-weyl operator on the dual torus
are equal to the ones on the original torus, with opposite chirality. by an explicit
construction [53] one can indeed verify that the dual u(m) gauge eld has magnetic

66

2.5 nahm duality

ux equal to n, as predicted by the index theorem. thus the nahm transformation
can be summarized in an elegant way by means of the two equations (2.83) and (2.90),

which together specify the map from a to ba. note in particular that in this form, one

of the magical properties of the nahm transformation has become manifest, namely
that it is a map of order 2, i.e. it squares to the identity:

bba = a,

(2.91)

up to gauge equivalence. notice further that the mapping is dened for arbitrary
connections a.

when we translate the above construction back to our 3+1-dimensional setting, the
resulting mapping indeed interchanges n and m3 as advocated. in addition, since it is

reected, as predicted.

direction of the t 2 gets interchanged with that of the electric ux along this direction,
as indicated in (2.81). naturally, the electric ux represents the conjugate momentum
to the constant mode of the gauge elds ai, and thus denes the total momentum

a mapping from t 2 to the dual torus bt 2, the denition of the momentum ux in the
on the dual torus bt 2. further inspection also shows that the magnetic uxes mi get

finally, we should of course note that in the interpretation of the u(n) sym model
as describing n d3 branes, this nahm duality is nothing other than a double t-duality
along the 1-2 directions of the three torus. 9 from this perspective, it seems somewhat
surprising that the yang-mills theory (via the nahm transformation) still knows about
this t-duality symmetry, despite arising from string theory via the zero-slope limit.
we will give an explanation for this in the next section.

2.5.1 nahm duality for gauge theory on noncommutative
tori

we end this section with some remarks on nahm-type duality transformations of gauge
bundles dened on non-commutative tori. these gauge theories are relevant for com-
pactications of matrix theory with non-zero b elds [20][33]. it is therefore of interest
to investigate their duality symmetries.

as we have seen above the nahm transformation on commutative tori is somewhat
involved. it requires knowledge about the zero modes of the dirac equation. on non-
commutative tori however, nahm type transformations can be made manifest [54][55].
these transformations are part of a larger so(d, d) symmetry, that is known in the
mathematics literature as morita equivalence.

the most simple example of a non-commutative space is the non-commutative
. the coordinates of this torus do not commute, but they satisfy the

two torus t2
commutation relation

[x1, x2] =


2i

or u1u2 = e2iu2u1.

(2.92)

9to recognize this interpretation of the mapping (2.80), see the translation code summarized on
page 57. this interpretation of the nahm transformation, as related to t-duality in string theory, was
rst suggested in [35].

67

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

here  is a real parameter and ui = e2ixi are exponentials that generate the fourier
modes of the functions which can be dened on the non-commutative torus.

trivial gauge bundles can be constructed by dening the gauge connection by j =
j + iaj(x) where xi = xi + i
2 ijj are modied coordinates that commute with the
original coordinates. the connection depends on the modied coordinates and not on
the coordinates xi, because this guarantees that the connection commutes with the full
algebra of functions and therefore obeys the correct leibniz rule [54][55].

to construct a non-trivial gauge bundle with magnetic ux m modied fourier
modes have to be used to construct a gauge eld that has the right properties (for
example the translation operators should act like gauge transformation on the elds,
as in (2.58)). now the interesting thing is that these modied fourier modes them-
selves generate an algebra of an abelian gauge theory on a non-commutative torus,
with modied -parameter that is related to the original  via an fractional sl(2, z)
transformation [54][55]. the gauge elds and uxes also transform in a representation
of sl(2, z). we can turn this around, by starting with an abelian theory dened on a
particular non-commutative torus, apply an arbitrary sl(2, z) transformation on the
gauge elds and the non-commutative parameter, and thus get a sl(2, z) family of
equivalent gauge bundles. a nahm transformation interchanging rank and magnetic
ux of the gauge bundle is included in this sl(2, z) group. thus nahm duality can
be made manifest in gauge theories on non-commutative spaces.

analogous results hold for gauge bundles on 4 dimensional non-commutative tori.
the degeneracies of 1/4 bps states of u(n) gauge theory on a non-commutative
three-torus have been calculated in [62]. the result is the same as (2.56) in this chapter.
this conrms the idea that the degeneracies of bps states are rather robust quantities.

2.6 relation to born infeld theory

in this chapter we have shown that the multiplicities of single bps-states of n = 4 su-
persymmetric yang mills theory on t 3 has the extended sl(5, z) u-duality invariance.
this result may be remarkable, but it is clear that a possible explanation comes from
the relation between yang-mills theory and born-infeld theory. yang-mills theory is
a truncated theory of d-branes, whereas born-infeld is a more accurate low energy
eective description.

this is most clearly reected in the bps mass spectrum of the two theories: the bps
mass spectrum of bi theory compactied on a three torus has the expected sl(5, z)
invariance, as has been shown in [56][92]. this duality symmetry is broken however
in the limit   0, that is needed to get sym theory. yet the symmetry in the
degeneracies of irreducible bps states remains preserved in the zero slope limit. it is
the aim of this last section to explain how this can happen.

2.6.1 born infeld bps mass spectrum

let us rst summarize the analysis that was done in [56] and [92] where the bi-theory
bps mass spectrum was calculated explicitly. the spectrum was derived by starting

68

2.6 relation to born infeld theory

(2.93)

(2.94)

from the bosonic action with abelian gauge group, (cf. (2.8))

sbi = t3z d3xdt eqdet (g + 2f).

for given electro-magnetic uxes and momenta, the energies of the bps states can be
obtained from the bi hamiltonian by a bogomolny type of argument [56]. these masses
are in agreement with the bps masses that were obtained from the ns ve-brane in
[26][27]. in units where 2 = 1 the bps mass spectrum is [56][92]

e2

bps = g4/5

s

(det g)1/5(cid:18) 1

g2
s

(n 2 det g + gijmimj) + eigijej + pigijpj(cid:19) +

2g1/5

s

(det g)1/5qdet g igijj + (p  m)2 + g2

s (p  e)2.

here gij is the string metric. note that we have put the rank n in the mass formula by
hand. the mass spectrum (2.94) is invariant under the complete sl(5, z) symmetry.
part of this u-duality symmetry is the electric-magnetic s-duality under which the
coupling constant is inverted and the string metric gets transformed [16] in the following
way

gs  g1
s ,

gij 

1
gs

gij.

(2.95)

the other non-trivial symmetry of the mass spectrum (2.94) is a double t -duality (e.g.
in the 1 and 2 direction), that as explained in section 2.5, can be interpreted in gauge
theory, as a nahm transformation. under this duality the string metric and the string
coupling constant transform according to [16]
g22  g1
22 ,

gs  gs(g11g22)1/2.

g11  g1
11 ,

when combined with the transformations of the uxes it can be easily checked that
the born infeld bps mass spectrum is invariant under s-duality and nahm transfor-
mations. together with the manifest sl(3, z) symmetry of the torus these duality
transformations generate the complete sl(5, z) symmetry, and therefore the mass
spectrum (2.94) is indeed u-duality invariant. analogous duality symmetries hold for
born infeld theory on 4 dimensional and 2 dimensional tori. for example in four di-
mensions the symmetry group of the bps mass spectrum is so(5, 5, z), the u-duality
group of string theory in 6 dimensions [56].

(2.96)

the invariance can be made manifest by writing the bps masses in the following

way [92]

e2
bps = 

1
2

tr(gfgf) + 2pkgk.

here f is the 55 matrix (2.53) containing the uxes, k = (npi(em)i, p m, p e)
is the ve vector (2.54) and g is dened by

(det g)1/2gij

(2.97)



,

(2.98)

69

g =

gs(det g)1/4

g1
s (det g)1/4

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

the metric gij is related to the string metric gij via

(2.99)
on both matrices f and g the u-duality group sl(5, z) acts by conjugation, and
hence the sl(5, z) invariance becomes manifest.
it is instructive to extract the sym bps mass spectrum from born infeld theory.

(det g)1/8 gij.

gij = g1/2

s

to this end we reintroduce the string scale  and expand the expression (2.94)

ebps = (2)5/4nv 1/2 +

1

2nv(cid:18) 1
s v 3/2(p  m)2 + 25/4gsv 3/2(p  e)2(cid:19)1/2
n(cid:18)igijj + 25/4g1

migijmj + gseigijej + 25/4v 1/2pigijpj(cid:19) +

+    ,

gs

1

(2.100)

where the volume is dened in terms of the metric, v = det g. this expansion shows
that in the large n limit (or large volume limit) and the string decoupling limit   0
we recover the bps mass spectrum of sym,

ebps =

ymeigijej +

igijp
j,

(2.101)

1

2nv (cid:18)g2

1
g2
ym

migijmj(cid:19) +qp

where p
the yang-mills coupling constant squared

i = pi  (e m)i/n = i/n. we identied the string coupling constant gs with

g2
y m = gs.

(2.102)
obviously the sym mass spectrum (2.101) is invariant under sl(2, z)  sl(3, z)
but not under the complete sl(5, z) u-duality group. for example the nahm type
transformation that exchanges rank n and electric ux e3 does not leave the mass
spectrum invariant. from the matrix theory point of view this is no surprise (at least
for nite n) as for that theory the ux n is interpreted as a light-cone momentum,
whereas e3 is momentum in a spatial direction. m(atrix) theory is not likely to be
invariant under the exchange of a light-like direction and a space-like direction, so we do
not expect the bps mass spectrum to be invariant under nahm-type transformations.

2.6.2 degeneracies

what about the degeneracies of the 1/4 bps states in born-infeld theory? for this the-
ory the same philosophy that was used in the sym case can be applied: rst the phase
space of the model is reduced to the space of classical supersymmetric congurations,
and then this bps reduced phase space is quantized.

when doing this analysis an immediate important dierence emerges between the
bi case and the ym case: as emphasized in section 2.2.2 the superalgebra of sym is
equal to the one of 11d supergravity in the dlcq formalism, whereas the superalgebra
of born infeld theory 10 is just the 11d superalgebra with 4 spatial directions compact-
ied [92]. the last mentioned superalgebra has an sl(5, z)-invariance and therefore

10we repeat here that the action for supersymmetric abelian bi theory has been constructed [1].
we make the assumption that results for the non-abelian case follow from the analysis of the abelian
model.

70

2.6 relation to born infeld theory

we expect that the degeneracies of the bi states exhibit this duality symmetry as well.
another dierence is of course the square root in the born infeld action, that makes
explicit calculations more complicated.

as in section 2.4 the zero modes and uctuations of the bps states are restricted

by the equation

where q are the supercharges of supersymmetric born-infeld theory, and  is a 16
component spinor. the restriction on the zero modes can be rewritten with the help
of a projection operator [92]

(cid:8) q, q(cid:9)  = 0,

(2.103)

(|k| + kii) = 0,

(2.104)
for some suitable  matrices. here ki is again the ve vector (2.54). in the   0
limit this condition reduces to the condition (2.52), which can be seen from the inverse
of the 5 dimensional metric (2.98), which collapses to a 3 dimensional metric in the
  0 limit.
unlike the yang-mills case the bps equations of born-infeld theory implied by
conditions (2.103) and (2.104), are in general quite complicated. however, in the special
case that the ux conguration consists of only non-zero rank n and momentum p3,
they lead to the simple chiral 2d free eld equations (2.70) [92]. any conguration
of electric and magnetic uxes can be mapped to this simple case by an appropriate
sl(5, z) transformation (see reference [17] in [92]). this transformation will also act
on the gauge elds and the rank n, that can be combined into an antisymmetric matrix
of the form (2.53). the component of the 5  5 matrix that is supposed to represent
the rank of a gauge group may therefore be non-constant in the transformed matrix.
then the relation to a gauge theory seems to be obscured. this apparent problem can
be solved, however, by noting that the bps equations only depend on the quotients of
the gauge elds and rank n. as argued in [92] this observation makes it possible to
use sl(5, z) transformations to generate bps solutions for general uxes.

the procedure just sketched extends to the bps quantum theory [92]. the degen-
eracy formula for the irreducible states (the long string states) thus obtained is equal
to the one in (2.56) and therefore agrees with the m-theory result.

for the irreducible states (the long string states) both theories give the same count-
ing formula (2.56) for the multiplicities. a dierence appears when we consider the
second quantized bps spectrum. single bps states can be combined into a second
quantized bps state, provided these single states preserve the same supersymmetries.
in bi theory the condition (2.103) implies that all 10 charges of the single bps states
align; in sym only 9 charges have to align. an alternative way to arrive at this con-
clusion is by considering the bps energy (mass) spectra. the energies of bps states
add up when they are combined into a new bps state. for sym theory this precisely
means that 9 charges align (not p3, when i is turned in the three direction); for bi
theory all 10 charges have to align, because all uxes come in quadratic form in the
bps energies.

we thus see that born infeld gives more restrictions on the charges of single bps
states to combine into a second quantized bps state, than sym does. as expected the

71

u-duality symmetry in n=4 yang-mills theory on t 3

bi conditions are relaxed and become equal to conditions in sym, in the   0 limit.
we therefore conclude that sym contains more second quantized states than bi does.
despite the success in nding appropriate string u-duality symmetries in supersym-
metric gauge theories, it is not clear whether these symmetries are actually genuine
duality symmetries of the born infeld theories. the problem one has in proving electro-
magnetic duality for n = 4 sym theory appears here as well: it is dicult to nd an
explicit duality mapping for the elds. another problem arises when one investigates
nahm duality, namely the rank n is not the zero mode of any eld in the gauge theory.
it may be possible to embed the 3+1 bi theory into a six dimensional string theory in
the light-cone gauge. one could then think of n as the p+-momentum of this theory.
for a discussion of ideas in this direction see [92].

72

chapter 3

high energy scattering
in matrix string theory

3.1 introduction

high energy processes in string theory were rst considered from the point of view
of conventional string perturbation theory by gross and mende [49] in the regime of
xed angle scattering and in the near forward regime by amati et al in [3]. the recent
insights from m-theory, however, have provided a large number of new non-perturbative
tools which can now be used to put these works into a new perspective, and extend the
results into new directions. for instance, it was long believed that the string length s
marks the minimal distance that can be probed via scattering processes in string theory.
this belief was based on the fact that fundamental strings tend to increase in size when
boosted to high energies, and thus appear to be incapable of penetrating substringy
distance scales. since the discovery of d-particles as non-perturbative solitons of the
iia theory, however, we know that there exists small scale structure that, at least
for weak string coupling, extends well below the string length [78][23][60][34]. this
particular realization provided important motivation for the matrix theory conjecture
of [9] that all localized excitations of m-theory (including the fundamental strings) are
representable as multi-d-particle bound states [70][87].

in this chapter we begin a study of high energy processes in type iia string theory,
by making use of this matrix theory formalism. we focus on the four graviton scattering
amplitude, and in particular we will present a detailed calculation of the pair production
rate of d-particles via this process. our aim is to probe in this way the transition region
between the conventional perturbative string regime and the strong coupling regime
described by 11-dimensional m-theory (see gure 3.1).

from the ten dimensional perspective of iia string theory, d-pair production is an
inelastic scattering process, in which two strings exchange one unit of d-particle charge.
it is inherently nonperturbative and thus inaccessible to conventional perturbative
methods.
it is also inaccessible in the traditional matrix theory approach since the
anti-d particles are boosted to innite energy.

from the eleven dimensional perspective, on the other hand, the d-pair creation
process can simply be thought of as the elastic scattering of two particles in which one

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

unit of kaluza-klein momentum in the 11 direction is exchanged. via this interpre-
tation, one can rather straightforwardly obtain a tree level estimate of the probability
amplitude. this estimate should be reliable for large values for the s1 compactica-
tion radius r11 and for collision energies suciently below the 11-dimensional planck
energy. at high energies and/or small values for r11, on the other hand, we expect the
physics of the scattering process to be quite dierent from (semi-)classical supergravity.
in the following we will attempt to gain more insight into this regime via the matrix
string approach.

log g

s

g =1s

 

 


l = r11

10d sugra

l = l

pl

      

      

      


11d sugra

subplanckian


        

        

        

        

        


                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           
                 

                 


                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           


perturbative 
string theory

high energy
string theory

m-theory

   

l = l s

log l/l s

figure 3.1 the phase diagram of the s1 compactication of m-theory, with
horizontal axis the log of the length scale and vertical axis the log of the string
coupling. the various perturbative and low energy limits are indicated. the
shaded region marks the regime where d-pair production is expected to be
the dominant high energy process.

matrix string theory arises from the original matrix theory proposal [9] via compact-
ication on a circle, and starts from the action of 1+1-dimensional maximally super-
symmetric yang-mills theory with gauge group u(n). via the identication of the
eigenvalues of the matrices x i with the transverse location of type iia supersymmet-
ric strings, this sym model can be reinterpreted as a non-perturbative formulation
of light-cone gauge iia string [65][10][29]. in this correspondence, the string coupling
constant gs is inversely proportional to the yang-mills coupling gy m (cf. (1.82)) and the
free string limit therefore arises in the strong coupling limit of the yang-mills model.
this correspondence has been worked out in some detail in section 2.2.2.

more generally, however, all regimes of the s1 compactication of m-theory, as
indicated in gure 3.1 should according to the matrix string conjecture of [9][65][10][29]
via the above identications be described by particular regimes of (the large n limit)
of the 1+1d supersymmetric gauge theory.

in particular, it is expected that in the weak coupling, moderate energy limit of
the sym theory it eectively reduces to the matrix quantum mechanics description of

74

3.1 introduction

11-dimensional supergravity. indeed, a new feature of matrix string theory (relative to
standard light-cone string theory) is that via the electric ux of the gauge eld, the
string states can be adorned with an extra quantum number, identied with the d-
particle charge [29]. in a small gs expansion, these ux sectors energetically decouple,
corresponding to the fact that d-particles can not be produced via perturbative string
interactions. nonetheless, electric ux can get created in the gauge theory: it is easy
to see that electric ux creation is a simple one-loop eect that takes place whenever
a virtual pair of charged particles gets created and annihilated, after forming a loop
that winds one or more times around the  cylinder.

in the following we will develop a new method for studying high energy scattering
and d-pair production in matrix string theory, which will be based on a semi-classical
expansion from the sym perspective. an important novelty of this method is that
it applies to processes with arbitrary longitudinal momentum exchange. in the gauge
theory language, this means that the transitions between the initial and nal states
that we will consider will involve a non-perturbative tunneling process in which an
arbitrary number of eigenvalues get transferred between the two scattering states. most
previous calculations in matrix theory relied on perturbative sym corrections and thus
were necessarily restricted to zero p+ transfer. 1

concretely, we will construct sym saddle point congurations that will allow us to

interpolate between in-going matrix congurations of the form

~xin( ) =

1

2 ( ~p1

n1

 + ~b)i1

0

( ~p2
n2

and outgoing congurations of the form

~xout( ) = ( ~p3

n3

 + ~b)i3

0

( ~p4
n4

0

  ~b)i2!
  ~b)i4! ,

0

(3.1)

(3.2)

where ii are nini identity matrices, where all nis are dierent (but subject to the
momentum constraint n1+n2 = n3+n4). these in and out congurations each describe
two widely separated gravitons with dierent light-cone momenta

p+
(i) = n(i)/r

(3.3)

and transverse momenta ~p(i), and with relative impact parameter ~b.

the interpolating solutions that we will construct, essentially look like an appro-
priate matrix generalization of perturbative string world-sheets. the importance of
these solutions is not entirely obvious, however, since a priori one would expect that
the range of validity of the semi-classical yang-mills approximation has no overlap

1in [73] polchinski and pouliot analyzed graviton scattering with non-zero m-momentum transfer
in matrix theory. in their case, the m-momentum was identied with the magnetic ux of the sym
gauge theory, and the corresponding instanton was a magnetic monopole. here we will consider
dierent kind of momentum transfer, namely of longitudinal momentum represented by the size n of
the matrix bound states, i.e. the number of d-particles in the original matrix dictionary of [9]. this
will require a dierent, less familiar type of instanton process.

75

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

with that of perturbative string theory. indeed, as emphasized in section 2.2.2 the two
regimes appear related via a strong/weak coupling duality. however, as we will argue
in the following, even at small or moderate string coupling gs, at suciently high colli-
sion energies and/or impact parameters one enters a regime in which the semi-classical
sym methods may provide an accurate description of the scattering process.

just like string/m-theory, the 1+1 sym model contains various length scales: (i)
the circumference of the cylinder, (ii) the scale set by the yang-mills coupling y m =
1/gy m , in units where the circumference of the cylinder is set equal to 1

y m  gs,

(3.4)

(iii) the typical mass scale set by the higgs expectation values of the sym model. the
latter length scale is inversely proportional to the impact parameter b of the string/m-
theory scattering process:

b 

gs
b

,

(3.5)

in units where 2 = 1. finally, (iv) there is also the length scale e determined
by the typical size of the sym energy e, which is related to the relative space-time
momenta via e  p2/n.
the existence of these scales allows us to nd small dimensionless ratios that may
parameterize the strength of the sym processes taking place at that scale. for example,
while gy m = 1/gs denes the eective coupling of sym processes that take place at
the scale of the ym cylinder, we also have

gef f
y m (b)  b/y m  1/b,

(3.6)

as the dimensionless coupling at the scale b. similarly, we can also associate an eective
coupling gef f
y m (e) with the scale set by the sym energy e. this suggests the possibility
that even if gs is small or of order 1, processes at these other 2d length scales can be
accurately described by perturbative and/or semi-classical sym methods. this will
require however that we consider the limit of high collision energies and suciently
large impact parameters.2

the two types of processes that we will consider, high energy scattering with non-
zero p+ and the d-pair production, may at rst sight seem quite unrelated. however,
there are several connections between these two types of processes. first of all, it is
worth pointing out that in both cases the scattering process involves (depending on
which duality frame one chooses) the transfer of d-particle charge and/or momentum
between the two scattering particles. indeed, the rank n started out as identied with
d-particle charge, and only after the duality it and the electric ux e are mapped onto
each other under an 11-9 ip: i.e. the interchange of the 11-th and 9-th direction (a

impact parameter b scales with the transverse relative momentum p via b (cid:0)g2

2in this context it may be of relevance that in classical 10-dimensional dlcq supergravity, the
with n
the dlcq p+-momentum. hence, at least in this classical context, and for xed scattering angles 
and gs of order 1, the condition that b is large is automatically satised in limit of large p2  n .

s p2/n sin (cid:1)1/6

76

detailed explanation on this ip was given in section 2.2.2). hence quantitative under-
standing both types of processes will have a direct bearing on the lorentz invariance
of the matrix formalism.

3.1 introduction

figure 3.2 this gure depicts a typical saddle point trajectory that con-
tributes to the high energy scattering amplitude of fundamental strings, ac-
cording to the perturbative physical picture proposed in [49].

another, more speculative connection between the two calculations is related to
a fundamental puzzle in the original calculation of [49], namely the apparently domi-
nant contribution of arbitrarily high genus to scattering amplitudes. the saddle point
trajectory at loop order g typically describes a process as depicted in gure 3.2 two
incoming strings, that are wound n = g + 1 times, interact and then propagate as n
intermediate short strings. the n strings then join together again, producing a nal
state of two dierent n times wound outgoing strings (see g. 3.2). it was found in [49]
that the contributions of these higher order interactions grows larger with the genus
g. this instability appears to signal a fundamental breakdown of conventional string
perturbation theory in the high energy regime.

on the other hand, the fragmented form of the intermediate state in gure 3.2 gives
a strong hint of some underlying non-perturbative structure that looks quite similar
to that of the multi-d-particle bound state dynamics of matrix theory. this suggests
that the matrix treatment may provide a rather natural stabilizing mechanism for a
cuto on the genus. furthermore, our study will show that d-particle pair production
becomes relevant at this cuto  when the strings become maximally fragmented. this
leads us to suspect a deeper relation between gross and mendes high energy, xed
angle scattering and the non-perturbative process of d-pair creation.

we will begin this chapter with a quick review of the kinematics of xed angle scat-
tering in the traditional string framework, with particular emphasis on its description
in the light-cone gauge. this will be followed by a discussion of the gross mende saddle
points, rst at tree level and then generalized to arbitrary genus g world-sheets. then
we turn to string interactions in the matrix string formulation. in particular, we will
nd a local instanton solution in the two-dimensional theory that describes the split-
ting/joining interaction. furthermore, the condition for this instanton to be matched
to the incoming/outgoing states is precisely that we be working at the world-sheet
moduli corresponding to the saddle-point surfaces of reference [49].

after this we will briey discuss recent results of [91], where by a detailed zero mode
analysis of the interaction instanton, the four tree-level string scattering amplitude was

77

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

reproduced exactly, up to a numerical factor.

we then turn to d-pair production, which we consider both from the supergravity
perspective as well as via a one loop yang mills calculation valid for arbitrary n. this
is followed by a discussion of the ranges of validity of our calculations. in particular, we
suggest that the ranges of validity of the two calculations overlap, and allow the picture
we have mentioned, in which they complement each other. this connection is further
discussed in the nal section, together with some other observations and speculations.

3.2 fixed angle scattering of strings

high energy, xed angle processes in superstring theory were rst studied in detail
from the point of view of conventional string perturbation theory by gross and mende
[49]. central to their approach is the observation that in the limit of large external
momenta, the polyakov path integral at each given perturbative order is dominated by
a nite number of saddle point congurations. furthermore, it was proposed that all
these saddle points essentially describe the same preferred world-sheet trajectory, up
to an overall factor depending on the loop order.

in the subsequent sections we will nd independent evidence from the point of view
of matrix string theory that supports this physical picture. in addition we will give
a useful characterization of the gross-mende saddle points in terms of the light-cone
gauge formulation of string perturbation theory.

3.2.1 kinematic relations for four string scattering

it will be useful to rst establish a few kinematic relations of the tree level diagram
that describes the scattering of four external massless particles with light-cone mo-
menta p+

i = ni/r and transverse momenta ~pi.

4n 

p
4

n 2 p
2

n 1

p
1

n 3

p3

figure 3.3 this gure indicates the kinematics of the transverse momenta
pi.

for deniteness, we will describe this process in the center of mass frame in the transver-

78

3.2 fixed angle scattering of strings

sal direction

~p1 + ~p2 = 0,

~p3 + ~p4 = 0.

(3.7)

the four transversal momenta pi can all be chosen to lie within one given plane. we
can thus write all pi as complex numbers. in addition, longitudinal momentum and
energy conservation imply that

and

n1 + n2 = n3 + n4,

|p1|2
n1

+ |p2|2
n2

= |p3|2
n3

+ |p4|2
n4

.

(3.8)

(3.9)

for a given set of locations zi of the corresponding vertex operators, the classical
location of the world-sheet is described by the equations (1.16) and (1.17)

1

2xi

x +(z, z) =

ini log |z  zi|2,

x(z, z) =

ipi log |z  zi|2.

(3.10)

in the light-cone gauge, one chooses a xed world-sheet parameterization by identifying
x + with the world-sheet time  , which via (3.10) amounts to setting (after a rescaling)

1

2xi

w   + i =

ini log(z  zi) .

(3.11)

1

2xi

the dierential  = dw (see (1.11)) is a specic globally dened holomorphic dierential
on the world-surface; existence and uniqueness of such a dierential at arbitrary genus
[39][38] generalizes the construction to higher loop amplitudes. notice that (due to
the branch cuts in the logarithm) the coordinate  in (3.11) is dened on an interval
0   < (n1 + n2), in accord with the rescaling of the world-sheet coordinates with
total light-cone momentum p+.
the light-cone coordinate system (3.11) species a particular time-slicing of the
string world-sheet. as argued in section 1.1.2, in this coordinate frame there are specic
points on the world-sheet at which strings split or join. namely, these interactions
take place at zeros of , that is critical points z = z0 of the light-cone coordinate
x +. inserting the explicit form (1.16) for x + then gives the condition (1.19) that can
be reduced in the specic case of the four-point scattering amplitude, to an equation
relating the interaction point and the mobius invariant cross ratio

for given , this is a quadratic equation for z0 with in general two solutions z+
z
0 , representing the simple splitting and joining interaction respectively.

0 and

via

 =

(z1  z3)(z2  z4)
(z1  z2)(z3  z4)

,

n1
z0

+

n2
z0  1

=

n3
z0  

.

(3.12)

(3.13)

79

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

3.2.2 gross mende saddle points

now we are ready to discuss the gross-mende saddle point. already in chapter one we
wrote down the typical (bosonic) g-loop amplitude of n scattering particles in string
theory (1.6). the only place where the external momenta pi enter in the amplitude is
the exponential of

ec(pi, zi, mi) =

1

2xi<j

pi  pjgm(zi, zj).

(3.14)

here zi are the insertion points of the vertex operators and g is greens function
associated to the g-loop world-sheet with moduli m.
in the limit of large external
momenta, the polyakov path integral is dominated by saddle point congurations that
minimize the exponential (3.14) . this minimizing problem has an elegant physical
interpretation: it is equivalent to nding a semi-stable conguration of two-dimensional
minkowski charges pi placed at positions zi on a riemann surface of genus g and moduli
m [49].

in the simplest case of four string scattering at tree level, the greens function in
(3.14) is simply given by the logarithm g(z1, z2) = log |z12| on the plane, so that the
coulomb energy (3.14) becomes

ec =

1

2xi<j

pi  pj log |zi  zj|2.

(3.15)

due to conformal invariance, the energy ec depends on the locations zi of the vertex
functions only by means of the cross ratio  dened by (3.12). the variation of ec
with respect to this variable  reads

ec() =

p1p3


+

p2p3
  1

.

the saddle point equation ec = 0 is solved by
t
=
s

 =

p1p3
p1p2

,

(3.16)

(3.17)

where s, t are the usual mandelstam variables. the saddle point corresponds to a
particular classical world-sheet trajectory which at high energies gives the dominant
contribution to the scattering amplitude.

for later reference, it will be useful to translate the above description of the gm
saddle point into the light-cone gauge language. to begin with, in the complex param-
eterization for the pi, the mandelstam parameters s and t are expressed as

s = 2p1p2 = (n1 + n2)2 |p1|2

n1n2

,

t = 2p1p3 = |n3p1  n1p3|2

n1n3

,

(3.18)

(3.19)

80

3.2 fixed angle scattering of strings

so that (3.17) takes the form

 =

n2
n3

|n3p1 n1p3|2
(n1 + n2)2|p1|2 .

(3.20)

together with (3.13), this saddle point species a particular set of locations for the
two interaction points z
0 of the light-cone string diagram. we now claim that this
preferred location of the interaction points z = z
0 is singled out by the requirement
that, in the immediate neighborhood of z = z
0 , the transverse coordinate elds x(z)
are (anti-)analytic functions of z

zx |z=z0= 0,

zx |z=z0= 0.

(3.21)

to verify this claim, let us compute the cross ratio  from (3.21). the result should
be equal to (3.17). inserting the solution (1.17) into (3.21) gives

xi

ipi
z+
0  zi

= 0.

in terms of the cross-ratio  dened in (3.12) this reads

p1
z+
0 (z+
0  1)

= 

p3
z+
0  

,

(3.22)

(3.23)

where we used that p1 +p2 = 0. when combined with the equation (3.13), which relates
 with the location of the interaction points z0, this equation can be used to compute
 in terms of the scattering data. if we subtract n3 times (3.23) from p3 times (3.13),
we obtain a linear equation for z0, solved by

z+
0 =

n1p3  n3p1
(n1 + n2)p3

.

further, from (3.23) we nd that

 = z+

0(cid:16)1 +

p3
p1

(z+

0  1)(cid:17) .

(3.24)

(3.25)

after inserting (3.24) into (3.25), it is a simple calculation to verify that the resulting
expression for  coincides with the high energy saddle point (3.17). note that for the
saddle-point conguration,  is in fact real. the interaction points z+
0 are in
this case each others complex conjugate.

0 and z

we conclude that for gross-mende saddle point world-sheets the transverse co-
ordinate elds behave holomorphically near the interaction points. this light-cone
characterization of the gm saddle point in terms of the holomorphicity conditions
(3.21) will be critical in establishing the implementation of high energy scattering in
the matrix string context.

81

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

3.2.3 higher genus contributions

in general extending the results to higher genus is not straightforward. especially
nding the dominating saddle points will not be so easy. the one-loop case is still
relatively simple. using the explicit form of the green function on the torus, one can
again extremize the electrostatic energy (3.14) of four charges placed on the torus. the
resulting extremized energy is a factor two smaller than the tree level energy [49], and
surprisingly the saddle point is exactly the same as in the tree level case.

there is little hope to do successful analogous calculations for higher genus dia-
grams. however in [49], gross and mende proposed the following attractive general-
ization of the saddle-point to higher orders in the string perturbation expansion. they
assume that the dominant saddle points at genus g take the form of an n = g + 1 fold
cover of the same four-punctured sphere as described above, branched over the four
locations zi of the vertex operators. the resulting surfaces are known as zn curves.
such a zn curve is dened by the polynomial expression

yn =

(z  zi)li.

lyi=1

(3.26)

this curve represents an n sheeted covering of the complex plane, with l branch points

of order n  1 (providedpi li = 0 mod n and the lis relatively prime with respect

to n). in case of four string scattering l = 4.

when we place electric charges pi at the branch points the total electric eld takes

the same value on all n sheets, and is given by

en (z) = ex

n  iey

n =

1

n xi

pi
z  zi

.

(3.27)

it is straightforward to show that (3.27) is the right expression for the electric eld.
it is a conservative eld and it moreover satises gausss law. the last property can
be easily checked by considering a cycle that encloses a region that contains a branch
point. this cycle will encircle the branch point n times, one time on each sheet. thus
the contribution of surface integral of the electric eld will be equal to the charge
enclosed. so the eld dened in (3.27) obeys gausss law.

the electrostatic energy is given by

en = 

1

2n xi<j

pi  pj log |zi  zj|2,

(3.28)

that is 1/n times the energy of the tree level case. obviously extremizing (3.28) with
respect to the mobius invariant  will yield the same saddle point (3.17) we found
before. this conrms the earlier mentioned claim that at all orders the scattering is
dominated by the same saddle point (3.17).

for the zn curves the classical spacetime surface swept out by the strings at loop

level n is

82

x  =

1

2n xi

ip

i log|z  zi|2,

(3.29)

3.3 matrix string interactions

where i = 1 for incoming respectively outgoing strings. we see that the coordinate
elds grow with increasing energy, so that strings cannot be used as probes to explore
string theory at small distances (high momenta). the classical trajectory of a higher
order saddle point (3.29) has the same shape as the tree level trajectory, but its size
is n times smaller. the intuitive reason is that they describe multiple wound strings,
so that the eective string tension is n times bigger than usual. correspondingly,
since the dierent trajectories are weighted by the world-sheet area, the higher order
trajectories give contributions proportional to eec /n (with ec dened by (3.15)). the
higher genus contributions are thus quite strongly enhanced at high energy.
it is worth pointing out that the structure of the zn curves and the corresponding
space-time trajectories, as depicted in gure 3.2, are quite reminiscent of the description
of the long string boundary conditions in section 1.2. in our view, this (proposed)
structure of the higher order interactions is one of several indications that the gross-
mende approach to high energy string scattering may have a natural implementation
in the matrix string context.

3.3 matrix string interactions

in this section we will prepare the ingredients for the semi-classical study of high energy
scattering in the matrix string framework. to begin with, we notice that the above
light-cone gauge description of the dominant string world-sheet trajectories can rather
easily be put into a matrix form, by the procedure introduced in section 1.1.4. starting
from equations (1.16) and (1.17), we represent the classical string trajectory by means
of a diagonal n  n matrix (with n = n1 + n2) by rst writing the transversal coor-
dinates ~x as a function of w dened in (3.11), and then roll up the spatial interval
0  < n onto the short interval 0  < 1. concretely, we dene the diagonal matrix
elements of x() via xkk() = x( + k), and in this way we indeed create matrix
congurations that, away from the interaction times, satisfy the long string boundary
condition (1.29) and (1.30).

figure 3.4 the string interaction relating a one string to a two string state.
this interaction occurs when two eigenvalues xi and xj coincide, we enter a
phase where an unbroken u (2) symmetry is restored. figure taken from [89].

these diagonal matrix congurations represent particular solutions to the sym equa-
tions of motion, that are regular everywhere except at the interaction points.
if at
some point in the (,  ) plane two eigenvalues xi and xj coincide, we enter a phase
where locally the gauge symmetry is restored to u(2). in general we should thus ex-
pect that in this local region the semi-classical sym solution will need to become truly

83

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

non-abelian.

it is readily seen that the diagonal matrix congurations constructed via the above
procedure from the cft solution (1.17) is not single valued around the interaction
points. instead, as explained in section 1.3.1, in going around the interaction point, the
matrix x undergoes a simple transposition of the two degenerating eigenvalues. this
transposition changes the long string boundary conditions and therefore corresponds
to an elementary string interaction.

in the gauge theory language, the diagonal cft solution (1.17) in fact hides a
delta-function yang-mills curvature at the interaction point, such that the innitesi-
mal wilson line around it coincides with this permutation group element [89]. in this
section we will describe how the yang-mills dynamics smoothes out this singularity.

  

  


 

 


  

  
  


 

 




figure 3.5 the shaded areas are the interaction regions where the singularity
of the abelian string conguration is smeared out by an instanton-like solution.
the diagram corresponds to a four string scattering process at tree level.

concretely, we will now exhibit a smooth and single-valued yang-mills conguration
that describes the local splitting or joining of one or two matrix strings. the idea
is to glue this solution into the abelian cft conguration in a neighborhood of the
interaction points (see gure 3.5). the conditions we have to impose for this gluing
procedure will help us to nd the yang-mills conguration.

ultimately, we will be interested in obtaining global classical solutions to the sym
equations of motion that minimize the yang-mills action for given asymptotic condi-
tions on the matrix elds x, as written in equations (3.1) and (3.2) in the introduction.

3.3.1 sym solution near interaction point

it seems reasonable to assume that, at least in the immediate neighborhood of the
interaction point, these minimal action congurations of the sym model are described
by supersymmetric congurations. hence, instead of trying to solve the full yang-
mills equations, we will restrict ourselves to the special class of solutions satisfying a
dimensionally reduced version of the self-duality equations from four to two dimensions.
we will choose to work with complex variables

x =

1
2

(x 1 + ix 2) , x =

1
2

(x 1  ix 2) ,

(3.30)

84

setting the remaining x is to zero. the self-duality conditions then become

3.3 matrix string interactions

i
g2
s

[ x, x ],

fww = 
dwx = 0, dwx = 0.

the above equations are most conveniently analyzed by writing

aw(w, w) = igwg1,
aw(w, w) = i(w g1) g,

(3.31)

where g(w, w) denotes an element of the complexied ( g 6= g1) gauge group. this
parameterization of a allows one to solve the second and third equation of (3.30), via

the rst equation in (3.30) then takes the following form

x(w, w) = gbx(w)g1 .

with

w(w1) = 

1
g2
s

[bx(w)1,bx(w)]

 = gg.

(3.32)

(3.33)

(3.34)

let us now look at the local neighborhood of an interaction point. for convenience, we
choose coordinates such that it is located at w = 0. since the interaction involves only
two eigenvalues, it is sucient to consider only the corresponding su(2) part of the

matrices. the matrix bx, which parameterizes the local coordinate distance between

the two interacting strings, can be chosen of the following form

(3.35)

bx(w)  b  w 3,

for some constant b. the  indicates that the interaction point w = 0 represents
multi-valued.

a square root branch point for the diagonal matrix bx in (3.35) , which therefore is
the diagonal matrix bx(w), together with a = 0, represents a valid solution of the

sym equations (3.30) except at the interaction point, where analyticity fails. therefore
we will look for a true solution of the form (3.32), where g  1 asymptotically far
from w = 0. a helpful ansatz for g(w, w) is

g = e

1

2  1,

(3.36)

where for (w, w) we choose a real function (so that g = g and  = exp(1)) that
tends to zero far away from the interaction point. we now compute

sinh 2  cosh 2(cid:19) .
bx1 = bwe13e1 = bw(cid:18)cosh 2  sinh 2

(3.37)

85

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

hence

hbx1,bxi = 2|b|2|w| sinh 2 1

(3.38)

and thus we nd that under the present ansatz the equation of motion (3.33) reduces
to

ww =

2
s |b|2|w| sinh 2,
g2

(3.39)

which is essentially the familiar sinh-gordon equation. (it can be transformed to the
exact sinh-gordon equation after a (multi-valued) coordinate transformation w  w =
w3/2.)
the boundary condition that we must impose on (w, w) at w = 0 follows from the
requirement that the yang-mills conguration be regular. this condition is most easily
understood in the gauge where x is single-valued near w = 0; in this gauge the ym
curvature fww should be a regular function at w = 0. the conguration (3.32)(3.36),
however, is (for single-valued and real ) multi-valued. we can make x single-valued
by applying the singular gauge transformation

with gauge parameter

x  uxu 1,
aw  iudwu 1,

u = ei1/4,

with  = 1

2i log(w/w) the azimuthal angle around w = 0. in this gauge

(3.40)

(3.41)

(3.42)

(3.43)

using that w

1

w = (2)(w), this gives

1

1

2

2

w 

w 

aw = ih 1
aw = ih 1
fww = i1(cid:16)ww 

8wi 1,
8wi 1.
(2)(w)(cid:17).


4

the regularity requirement at w = 0 is therefore that ww   
4 (2)(w). we thus
deduce that the solution to equation (3.39) that we want must satisfy the following
asymptotic condition

w  0,
while at large distances from the interaction point  must tend to zero.

log |w| + const.

(w, w)  

1
2

(3.44)

now let us write  = (r) with r = |w|. the equation of motion (3.39) reduces to

the ordinary non-linear dierential equation

(2

r +

1
r

r) =

8
s |b|2r sinh 2 .
g2

(3.45)

86

3.4 high energy scattering of matrix strings

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

figure 3.6 the numerical solution (s) to (2
s s) = s sinh 2, as a
function of the distance s from the interaction point. the initial condition
for small s, that after integrating leads to the correct asymptotic behavior for
large s, reads (s) =  1

2 log s + 0.0305070(1).

s + 1

a numerical solution to this equation is depicted in gure 3.6. 3 for large r = |w| the
solution looks like

(r)  1

|w|3/4 exp(cid:16)

8|b|

3gs |w|3/2(cid:17) .

from this asymptotic behavior we read o the typical instanton size

inst  g2/3

s

|b|2/3.

(3.46)

(3.47)

3.4 high energy scattering of matrix strings

the matrix solution of the string interaction constructed in the previous subsection,
should be viewed as a local description in the immediate neighborhood of the interaction
point. in general, it must therefore be glued via an appropriate patching procedure
into a complementary cft type solution (e.g. as described in section 3.2) that matches
with the asymptotic scattering data at the far past and future. the idea here is that
(as we will see shortly) at suciently high collision energies, the size of the interaction
regions are small compared to the rest of the matrix string world-sheet. hence, while
the behavior (3.35) provides the asymptotics for large |w| at the uv scale of the matrix
solution, it also provides the local boundary condition near the interaction point for
the cft solution for x that describes the ir part of the saddle point.

3we thank pierre van baal for pointing out an error in the original gure in [40].

87

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

the solution (3.30) that we described is not the most general sym description of
a string splitting and joining event, but rather the most symmetric one, with smallest
action. this means therefore that there is a non-trivial matching condition on the
corresponding matrix string world-sheet:
from (3.35) we see that we must require
that the transverse string coordinates x behave holomorphically near the interaction
point. remarkably, this is exactly the same condition as (3.21), which tells us that the
shape of the string world-sheet must be precisely that of the gross-mende saddle point!
therefore these solutions seem appropriate to a ym generalization of the high-energy
scattering of [49]. in this section, we ll in a few more details of this connection.

3.4.1 evaluation of the classical action

in order to estimate scattering amplitudes via the instanton processes, one must calcu-
late the instanton action. the bosonic part of the sym action (with only two x-elds
non-vanishing) can be written as

s =z d2w(cid:26)g2

i
g2
s

+ 4dwxdwx(cid:27)
s(cid:16)fww +
+i (xdx + xdx  xdx  xdx)

[ x, x ](cid:17)2

and thus for the supersymmetric conguration that satisfy (3.30), the total classical
action reduces to a boundary term

(3.48)

(3.49)

scl =i (xx + xx)

identical to the boundary term needed to glue the non-abelian matrix solution described
in the previous section into the cft type solution. hence we claim that, in the limit
that the matrix interaction points become suciently small, the sym action for the
above saddle point congurations coincides with the cft action, i.e. for the case of a
tree level string diagram it equals the coulomb energy (3.15), where me must insert
the saddle-point value for locations zi. it is perhaps worth pointing out that this saddle
point actions is fully lorentz invariant, as it should be. while this is not surprising
once we have established the connection with the gm saddle point, it does seem to
represent a rather non-trivial statement from the sym point of view!

more generally we see that from (3.48) we can derive (as usual) an inequality, which
suggests that whenever the interaction does not take place at a holomorphic point for
the x-elds, the sym action is always larger than the corresponding cft action. this
provides additional evidence for the conjecture that the above type of congurations
represent dominant saddle-points, that minimize the sym action.

obviously, there exist a large number of cft-type solutions for which x varies
(anti-) holomorphically near all interaction points. in particular, there are the higher
genus zn -curves of [49]. in addition it is also possible to write down sym solutions
that describe multiple string world-sheets, but nonetheless still satisfy the appropriate
boundary conditions, as specied in equations (3.1) and (3.2) in the introduction.
ideally, one would like to know which (sub-class) of these solutions provide the truly
dominant contribution to the scattering amplitude.

88

3.5 one loop fluctuation analysis

3.4.2 minimal distance
the parameter |b| that governs the size of the interaction vertex, as seen in (3.46),
can be straightforwardly determined in terms of the momenta of the external states.
the coordinate system (w, w) on the yang-mills cylinder that we used in the analysis
of the self-dual yang-mills equation (3.30), coincides with the light-cone coordinates
dened in (3.11). from this and (3.35) we immediately nd

|b|2 = 2 |zx(z+
0 )|2
z x +(z+
|2
0 )|

.

a straightforward calculation then gives

|b|2 = |p1p3  p1p3|(n1 + n2)

n1n2n3n4

.

(3.50)

(3.51)

it is interesting to note that for this solution, even though the eigenvalues of the complex
coordinate matrix x vanish at the interaction point, the full matrix coordinate x in
fact does not!
instead, near w = 0 it approaches the constant non-diagonalizable
matrix

x(w, w)  const. g1/3

s b2/3(cid:18) 1 1
1 1(cid:19)

w  0.

(3.52)

the value of the overall constant can be determined numerically. from this we read
o that the minimal distance between the two interacting strings is in fact non-zero!
instead, we have

dmin =qtr(x(0)x(0))  g1/3

s

|b|2/3.

(3.53)

although it is tempting to speculate (as indeed we will do in the concluding section),
the precise physical signicance of this result is as yet unclear to us. we do notice,
however, that the typical world-sheet size inst of the matrix interaction region, as can
be read o from (3.46), is naturally expressed in terms of this minimal relative distance
as inst = (gs/|b|)2/3 = gs/dmin.

3.5 one loop fluctuation analysis

in principle it is now possible to do a computation of the one-loop determinant of the
quantum uctuations around the semi-classical saddle-point congurations. an impor-
tant motivation for performing such an analysis is to obtain a semi-classical estimate for
the absolute strength of the splitting and joining interactions in matrix string theory.
duality symmetries of m-theory give the precise prediction that this strength should
be governed by the string coupling gs. to verify this, one needs to compare the sym
one-loop determinant with the gross-mende uctuation determinant, coming from the
gaussian integration over the riemann surface moduli around the saddle-point.

89

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

this comparison has been done for tree level xed angle scattering in the high
energy limit [91]. the result is that all of the expected structure of the high energy
scattering amplitude is reproduced, including the power of the string coupling constant
gs and the kinematical factor.

when one does an expansion around a classical background one has to do two
things: a calculation of the uctuation determinant and a separate treatment of the zero
modes. in our case the uctuation determinant is approximately equal to one, because
the background eld is taken to be self-dual in a neighborhood of the interaction points.
then the fermionic and bosonic contributions cancel each other. note however that
non self-dual corrections to the background will change this simple result.

in the approximation where the uctuation term is equal to one, the zero modes
determine the form of the scattering amplitude. below we will discuss them briey.
for an extensive and detailed treatment we refer to the work of wynter in [91].

3.5.1 zero modes of the instanton

the strategy of the zero mode analysis of [91] is based on the philosophy we sketched
in section 3.3 : we have no explicit solution of the full ym saddle-points, but we
know their form near the interaction points and their asymptotics far away from the
interaction points. the instanton type solutions near the interaction points satisfy
boundary conditions that are compatible with the abelian matrix string congurations.
these congurations consist of commuting matrix elds, together with an abelian gauge
eld that generates the appropriate monodromies around the interaction points [89].
their singular behavior at the interaction points is smoothened out by the instanton
solutions. the same is true for the non-trivial zero modes: the abelian matrices have
non-trivial zero modes with singularities at the interaction points. these singularities
are, however, smoothened out by the instanton zero modes.

to make this more explicit, we will now review the zero modes of the instanton

solutions. for this, it is convenient to write them in the multi-valued gauge

x = b w [cosh 3  i sinh 2] .

1
2

aw =

iw 1,

(3.54)

we distinguish between four types of bosonic zero modes [91], namely those associated
to translations and deformations of the instanton solution (the zero modes of the elds
x and x), gauge eld zero modes, the zero modes of the six transversal coordinates
x i and those of the ghost elds.

all bosonic zero modes satisfy the eigenvalue equation for quadratic uctuations
around the classical instanton background which reads (after inclusion of the back-
ground gauge xing term ( da)2 to the action)

d2v + fv = 0.

(3.55)

here we are using a ten dimensional notation; d2 and f are taken with respect to
the instanton background eld.

90

3.5 one loop fluctuation analysis

the gauge eld zero modes originate from the left-over gauge degree of freedom;
they can be written as pure gauges, vw = dw. they will prove to be of particular
interest in the following, because they determine the gs coupling constant dependence
of the contribution to the scattering amplitude at g-loop order [18][91]. plugging the
expression for the instanton and the pure gauge vw in equation (3.55) , we get the
following condition for 

dwd w + d wdw 

1
g2 ([x, [ x, ]]  [ x, [x, ]]) = 0.

solutions to this equation are n and (n) [91], given by

n =(cid:26) bwn(cosh  3  i sinh  2)

wn1l

n = 1, 2, 3 . . .

n =  1

2, . . .

2 , 1

2, 3

(3.56)

(3.57)

of particular relevance is the zero mode for which  coincides with the x-eld of the
instanton solution

v w =

1
2

b w1/2(cosh  3  i sinh  2).

(3.58)

though this zero mode has a branch starting at the origin, it is single-valued when we
go back to the gauge (3.41). away from the interaction region it behaves as an abelian
zero mode with w1/2 asymptotic behavior

v w 

1
2

b w1/23

( w  ).

(3.59)

hence the zero mode (3.58) can be glued into the zero mode of an abelian gauge eld
that is dened on the light-cone cylinder, except for an interaction point, where it
has a singularity. one can remove this singularity by going to the double cover. as
explained in section 1.1.2 the light-cone cylinder can be lifted to a double cover in a
neighborhood of an interaction point via w = z2. on the riemann surface the abelian
zero mode becomes

v = w1/2d w = d w = dz.

(3.60)

together with the other solutions (3.57) we get a complete set of abelian gauge eld
zero modes in the complex z-plane

vz = 1, z, z2, z3, . . .

(3.61)

the zero modes for the bosonic elds x 1 and x 2 correspond to translations of the
interaction points (branch points of the light-cone cylinder). an obvious guess for the
translation mode is

v = a  da = f,

(3.62)

which can be easily veried to be a solution of equation (3.55) ( runs over the light-
cone coordinates). the rst term in (3.62) corresponds to a translation in the -
direction, the second term is a gauge transformation which forces the zero mode to
satisfy the background gauge condition.

91

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

its asymptotic behavior is

vw  w1/23,

(3.63)

which is again smoothened out at the origin of the instanton solution in the regular,
single-valued gauge.

the remaining bosonic zero modes are those of the higgs elds x i (where now
i = 3 . . . 8), which correspond to translations in the (six) transverse directions; and
the ghost zero modes. both types of zero modes satisfy the equation (3.56) [91], so the
functions (3.57) form a basis for them. however there is no solution with asymptotic
w1/2 behavior that is nite at the origin (in the regular gauge). hence we have no
non-trivial zero modes for the ghost elds and the higgs elds.

finally we have fermionic zero modes. they are associated to the unbroken su-
persymmetry of the instanton conguration. there is one zero mode with abelian
asymptotic w1/2 behavior, which is nite at the origin [91].

now we know the local behavior of the zero modes in a neighborhood of the in-
teraction points. they are smooth at the interaction points, and behave like abelian
modes away from these points. this last property makes it possible to glue them into
the zero modes of the matrix string congurations. these were constructed in [91]. we
will not discuss them here; instead we refer to reference [91].

we conclude that not only the eld congurations of the instantons can be glued

into the abelian background eld, but their non-trivial zero modes as well.

3.5.2 tree level high energy scattering

for the four string scattering process illustrated in gure 3.5 the calculation of the
tree level amplitude amounts to a careful treatment of the bosonic and fermionic zero
modes.

integration of the bosonic zero modes corresponding to simple translations of the
string conguration in the six transverse directions x i, gives rise to transverse momen-
tum conservation. the non-trivial zero modes which are associated to simultaneous
translations of the two branch points, in the  respectively  direction, lead to in-
variance under shifts in  respectively conservation of light-cone energy p. relative
displacements of the two branch points in gure 3.5 are somewhat more involved. a
careful integration over these zero modes leads to a kinematic factor in the scattering
amplitude. this contribution has the form [91]

c
sut

e 1

4 (s log s+t log t+u log u),

(3.64)

where c is a constant. the expression (3.64) is a familiar term from the calculation by
gross and mende of tree level high energy scattering [49].

the integration over the ghost zero modes and the gauge eld zero modes together
s , the correct string coupling constant dependence for a four string

yield a factor g2
scattering amplitude at tree level.

finally the fermionic zero modes give rise to the right kinematical factor. thus the
high energy limit of the string theory scattering amplitude is reproduced by matrix

92

3.6 d-particle pair production

string theory, up to a numerical factor. this is an encouraging result; it gives clear
evidence for the matrix string theory conjecture of section 2.2.2. as a further check
one should compare loop contributions with the results of gross and mende as well.
in principle this calculation can be performed, but the large n limit should be taken
with great care (see also [90]).

we end this section with by remarking that, as was originally argued in [18], the gs
coupling dependence is reproduced by matrix string theory for any light-cone riemann
surface. the power of the string coupling is determined by integration over the gauge
eld zero modes and the ghost eld zero modes. each (abelian) gauge eld zero mode
contributes a positive power of gs. the constant ghost zero mode yields a factor g1
[18]. this reasoning is justied by the analysis of wynter, who veried the local
existence of the zero modes around the interaction points.

s

than it is just a matter of counting the number of independent abelian gauge zero
modes or equivalently the number of independent cycles on the riemann surface. when
we start with a tree level diagram with n external states, we have n  1 independent
cycles. for each loop (handle) we glue to the diagram, we have to add two cycles, so
that we have 2g + n 1 abelian gauge eld zero modes for a g genus light-cone diagram
with n external states. there is only one constant ghost eld zero mode, thus we come
to the conclusion that the string coupling dependence is g2g+n2
s where  is the
euler number of the riemann surface. this is the right power of gs, known from string
theory [49].

= g

s

this concludes our discussion of the one-loop uctuation analysis.
it seems even more worthwhile to look for true new physical eects that might
arise from the one-loop corrections. compared to the conventional perturbative string
description, the new degrees of freedom in matrix string theory are the charged com-
ponents of the x-elds, as well as the extra gauge potential a. these new degrees of
freedom are non-perturbative from the string perspective, and their quantum uctua-
tions could thus potentially lead to new physics. as we will show in the next section,
there is indeed such a new eect: the pair creation of d-particles.

3.6 d-particle pair production

in this section we turn to the process of pair creation of d charge, which is in our de-
scription x9 momentum or equivalently (under the matrix string duality) electric ux.
this can be viewed as a contribution to the uctuations about the high-energy scat-
tering processes of the preceding sections, or as a process worthy of interest in its own
right in the context of graviton scattering. there are several viewpoints from which
in the limit where x9 decompacties, this simply matches
this can be investigated.
onto the standard supergravity calculation [15]. in fact, we can work backwards from
this, using the method of images, and compute the amplitude at large nite r9, in
the special situation with source and probe particles, n1  n2. we will discuss this
calculation rst. alternately, one can study this process directly in the matrix string
approach, and derive the pair-production rate via a one-loop yang mills calculation.
this latter approach gives a leading order result valid for arbitrary n1 and n2, and also

93

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

more readily makes connection with the other results of this chapter. furthermore, the
yang-mills calculation also apparently extends beyond the region where supergravity
is a valid approximation.

figure 3.7 in matrix string theory strings can be adorned with an extra
quantum number, the d-particle number. this enables one to compute non-
perturbative corrections to perturbative string scattering amplitudes. the
gure illustrates the creation/annihilation of a d-particle pair, a process that
is reminiscent of electron-positron creation/annihilation.

3.6.1 supergravity calculation
consider 11-dimensional supergravity compactied on s1s1, where one s1 a light-like
circle of radius r

x  x + 4r

(3.65)

and the other s1 denotes a space-like circle of radius r9. as we have seen in section
2.2.2, in the m-theory/matrix string correspondence this second radius r9 is expressed
as r9 = gs in string units (cf. (2.21)).

consider in this set-up the scattering process of two massless particles of light-cone
momenta p+
i = ni/r and transverse momenta pi. let us rst consider the probe
situation n2  n1. then one can already get quite useful information about the
scattering process from considering the classical gravitational force between the two
particles. the boosted particle with p+ = n1/r produces via its stress-energy a non-
trivial gravitational background, described by the generalized aichelburg-sexl shock-
wave geometry of the form [2][14]

with

 + g2

s da2,

ds2 = dx(dx+ + f (r, a)dx) + dx2
f (r, a) =xk

15n1g3

2r2(r2 + g2

s

s(2k + a)2)7/2 .

(3.66)

(3.67)

here a denotes the coordinate distance from the gravitational source in the compact
x9 direction, and the sum over k arises from the image points in this direction.

94

3.6 d-particle pair production

the momentum four vector of the second massless particle moving in this back-

ground geometry will satisfy a dispersion relation of the form

2p(p+ + f (r, a)p) = p2 + e2/g2
s ,

(3.68)

where e denotes the quantized momentum in the x9 direction. we can solve for the
light-cone hamiltonian p of the particle and obtain

p =

p+

2f (r, a)(s(cid:16)1 +

2f (r, a)
(p+)2 (p2 + e2/g2

s )(cid:17)  1) .

(3.69)

substituting p+ = n2/r, (and rescaling the light-cone time by a factor of r) we can
write this as

h = h0 + hint,

h0 =

1

2n2

(p2 + e2/g2

s),

where

and

hint  

(3.70)

(3.71)

(3.72)

15n1g3
s

8n 3

2 xk

(p2 + e2/g2

s )2

(cid:16)r2 + g2

s(2k + a)2(cid:17)7/2 + . . . .

hence the motion of the second particle in terms of the light-cone time x+ looks like
that of a particle with mass n2 moving in r8 s1 under the inuence of an interaction
potential given by (3.72).
from this description we can now quite easily extract a low energy prediction for the
d-pair production rate. to this end, it is useful to rewrite the interaction hamiltonian
via a poisson resummation as

hint  

1
2

n1
n 3
2

g2
s (p2 + e2/g2

s )2xn

exp(ina)z dt t 2 exp(t r2) exp(n2/4g2

st ).

(3.73)

the n = 1 term in this series is the term that corresponds to changing the compact
momentum by one unit, i.e. to d-charge production. working to rst order in pertur-
bation theory, we can then compute the corresponding phase shift, using

 = z d hint(b2 + p2 2) ,

where b is the impact parameter and  the light-cone time.

(3.74)

95

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

3.6.2 d-pair production via electric flux creation

we now study this problem of d-charge creation in the matrix string framework. more
generally, we consider scattering states which asymptotically have momenta of the form

p = (p, ~p, p9 = n/r9, p+ = n/r) .

(3.75)

these include both gravitons (n = 0) and d0-branes  or anti-branes  (n = 1). the
case of current interest begins with an initial state of two gravitons, and pair produces
a d particle pair. this process is intrinsically non-perturbative from the point of view
of string theory.
it is also a process not accessible in the standard matrix theory
approach, where the anti-branes are boosted away to innite energy.

in principle (for example on a suciently large computer) it appears possible to
calculate such amplitudes to arbitrary order in the coupling g = gy m = 1/gs, and
calculate the d-pair production rate even for small gs. in the coming sections we will
work to leading non-trivial order (one-loop), and leave further calculations to other
work. similar calculations have been performed in the context of matrix theory in [13].

3.6.3 d-particles in matrix string theory

as we have indicated in chapter 2, an important new feature of the matrix string theory
formalism (relative to standard light-cone string theory) is that via the electric ux,
string states can be adorned with a non-vanishing d-particle charge. in this subsection
we will describe this in somewhat more detail.

to add to this interpretation, let us rst show that each separate string can carry
only one type of electric ux. consider a single long string in matrix string theory with
length n. dene the u(n) matrix u such that

uv = v ue

2i

n ,

(3.76)

with v the usual cyclic permutation matrix on the n eigenvalues dened in (1.30).
hence we can take

1

2i
n

e

. . .

u =
u| e i = exp(cid:16) 2ie





2(n 1)i

n

.



e

n (cid:17)| e i,

(3.77)

(3.78)

the su(n) part of the electric ux in this sector is dened as

with e  zn and u the quantum operator that implements the constant gauge rotation
(3.79)

(a, x)  (uau 1, uxu 1).

96

3.6 d-particle pair production

since diagonal matrices are inert under this gauge rotation, we conclude that the
su(n) part of the electric ux dynamically decouples from the diagonal matrix string
congurations (1.23) that describe the separate freely propagating strings. now recall
that in u(n) sym theory, the overall u(1) part of the electric ux is related to the
su(n) part e via

tre = e

(mod n) .

(3.80)

supersymmetry ensures that the ground state in the su(n) sector has zero energy
even for e 6= 0. hence the total ground state energy receives only a contribution from
the overall u(1) ux. in the following we will thus identify e with the total u(1) electric
ux. from the above description it is further clear that we can turn on only one electric
ux per long string, as is appropriate for its identication with d-particle charge.

the energy of the ground state in this electric ux sector is equal to

general ground state congurations

h0 =

e2

2ng2
s

.

|n (i), p(i)

 , e(i)i

(3.81)

(3.82)

of s separate strings of individual length n (i), transverse momenta p(i)
charge e(i) have a sym energy equal to

 , and d-particle

h0 =

sxi=1

1

2n (i)h(p(i)

 )2 + (e(i)/gs)2i,

(3.83)

which, when rescaled by r, is the sum of the p light-cone momenta of the correspond-
ing collection of string ground states

sxi=1

1
2p(i)

+ h(p(i)

 )2 + (m (i))2i.

(3.84)

in particular, we read o from (3.83) that the states with d-particle charge e(i) each
have mass

m (i) =

e(i)
gs

=

e(i)
r9

,

(3.85)

in accordance with their identication as graviton states with non-zero kk momentum
in the compact direction.

97

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

3.6.4 one-loop calculation, n = 2

for simplicity we begin with the case where the incoming and outgoing particles all
have n = 1. the next subsection will generalize to arbitrary n. the asymptotic states
take the form

x 1 =

1

0 p(cid:19) , x 2 =
2(cid:18)p

0

0

1

0 b(cid:19) ,
2(cid:18)b

(3.86)

corresponding to two particles with center of mass momentum p and impact parameter
b (measured in string units).
it will also be useful work with a non-trivial gauge
background

a =(cid:18)a/2 + e /g2

0

s

0

a/2  e /g2

s(cid:19) , e =(cid:18)e

0 e(cid:19) .

0

(3.87)

the constant electric eld corresponds to a non-zero d-charge for the incoming and
outgoing particles, with quantization

the prototypical example of production of d-charge is in processes where this changes
by one unit,

e  z .

(3.88)

e =(cid:18)1

0 1(cid:19) .

0

(3.89)

introducing the constant background potential a will help keep track of such changes.
in the large string coupling/small yang-mills coupling limit, the leading contribu-
tion to d-charge producing processes is easily computed via a one-loop super-yang
mills calculation. calculations at higher loop order then give subleading corrections in
g = 1/gs.

our starting point is the yang-mills action (1.81), although it will be simpler to
begin with it written in its un-dimensionally reduced form in terms of the gauge eld

am = (a, gx i),

(3.90)

with m = 0,   , 9,  = 0, 9 and i = 1,  , 8. we will decompose the gauge eld into
background and uctuation pieces,

the feynman background gauge-xed lagrangian is

am = am + g am .

l = tr(cid:26) 1

4g2 (f 2

m n )+

1

2g2 ( dm am )2i /d(cid:27) ,

where dm = m + i am . using the decomposition (3.91) we nd

l = tr( f 2

4g2 +

1
2

( dm an )2 + i f m n [ am , an ]i /d +

98

(3.91)

(3.92)

(3.93)

3.6 d-particle pair production

g /a + ig dm an [ am , an ]

[ am , an ]2).

g2
4

the amplitude in question is given by

a(a, e) =z d ad x ideis,

(3.94)

where the boundary conditions on the functional integral are chosen to correspond to
the asymptotic behavior given in (3.86),(3.87).

if we write

am =

1
2

am aa =

1
2

am ++ +

1
2

am +

1
2

am 33,

with  dened in terms of the usual pauli matrices via

 =

1  i2

2

,

(3.95)

(3.96)

then the couplings in (3.93) include the standard charged minimal couplings of a+,
a, +, and  to the u(1) eld a3. the amplitude to create unit electric ux
is therefore given by summing the loop contributions to (3.94) in which one of these
charged particles circulates once around the -direction; higher encirclings yield more
ux. therefore we need the contribution of the charged state windings to the one-loop
amplitude.

this immediately follows by reading o the spectrum from the second through

fourth terms of (3.93) in the backgrounds (3.86) and (3.87). we begin by dening

in the bosonic sector we nd the massless, neutral elds

p2 = g2p2 + 4g4e2 .

x 3
i ,

a3
,

i = 1,   , 8; m2 = 0
m2 = 0

and the charged elds

, i = 2,   , 8 ;
;

x 
i
(gp a92eg2 x 1)
(2eg2 a9 + gp x 1)

(2eg2 a9 + gp x 1)

1
p

a0 +

a0 

i
p
i
p

m2 = r2  p2 2 + a2 + g2b2

m2 = r2

;

;

m2 = r2 + 2p

m2 = r2  2p.

(3.97)

(3.98)

(3.99)

99

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

for the fermions, we have 16 massless uncharged states, 8 charged states with masses
m2 = r2 + p, and 8 charged states with masses m2 = r2 p, as in [13]. finally, including
the ghosts gives one complex, uncharged eld c 3 with m2 = 0 and one complex charged
eld c  with m2 = r2.

all of the charged elds are minimally coupled to the background eld a9  a.

at one loop level, we have

a1(a, e) =z yi

dieis(2)[i],

(3.100)

where i labels the charged elds enumerated above (the uncharged contributions can-
cel), arbitrary winding is allowed, and where s(2) is the quadratic part of the action
 through d. working with phase shifts, we then
(3.93) including the coupling to a3
have

i1 = lna1 =xi

lnxn zn dieis(2)[i ] =
ds(cid:2) 2/2  a3

s zn dd exp iz s

0

ds

xi

(1)fixn z 

0

 (s)  m2

i( )/2(cid:3).

(3.101)

here we have used the functional integral representation in terms of the rst-quantized
trajectory (s) = ( (s), (s)), n is the winding number about the cylinder, and fi
denotes fermion number of the eld.

for general winding n the functional integrals in (3.101) are readily rewritten in

terms of functional determinants. for example, with m2 = r2 we have

zndd eir s

0 ds(cid:2) 2/2g2(p2 2+b2)/2 a3

 (s)(cid:3) = eina+in2/2sig2b2s/2(p, e, s),

where

(3.102)

(3.103)

s (cid:19) .
s  g2p2 2g2es
2g2es
2
combining such expressions and dening s = 2t then gives

(p, e, s) = det1/2(cid:18)2
einaz 

dt
t

0

i1(a, p, e) =xn

ein2/4t ig2b2t (p, e, t )(cid:20)6  2cos(2gpt ) + 8cos(gpt )(cid:21).

(3.104)

recalling the quantization rule (3.88) , we see that as long as gp  1 the electric
background only contributes at higher order in g; neglecting this, the determinant is
readily evaluated using

1

2 i(2

s + g2p2) = gp

s !2
yn=1"  2n

+ g2p2# = 2sinh (gpt ) ,

(3.105)

det

100

det

1

2 i(2

s ) = r 2t

i

3.6 d-particle pair production

.

here we used -function regularization.

the phase shift then becomes

i1(a, p, e) =

1

2r i
2xn

einaz 

0

dt
t

1

ein2/4t ig2b2t

t sinh(gpt )
(cid:20)6  2cos(2gpt ) + 8cos(gpt )(cid:21).

(3.106)

in the full amplitude a1 = exp{i1}, the coecient of the term eina is the amplitude
to make a transition from a state with electric ux e to e + n:

a1(a, e) =xn

einahe + n|ei .

(3.107)

we have found that this is independent of e to order g2. the amplitude for a change by
one unit of charge (e.g. two gravitons to d d pair), as well as the eective interaction
hamiltonian, can be derived from these expressions in the range p  b2. there the
integrand in (3.106) can be expanded in pt to nd

g3p3

2 r i

xn

einaz dt t 3/2ein2/4t ig2b2t ;

(3.108)

i1(a, p, e)  

the leading order d d production amplitude is just the coecient of eia in the se-
ries. from (3.108) and (3.74) we can also work backwards to extract the eective
hamiltonian. we nd

hint = 

15
8

g3p4xk

1

[r2 + (a + 2k)2/g2]7/2 ,

(3.109)

in agreement with (3.72).

3.6.5 generalization to arbitrary n

the one-loop calculation of the preceding subsection is readily generalized to the case
where the incoming and outgoing particles have arbitrary (though discretized) p11, or
equivalently, n. in this case there are a variety of dierent boundary conditions that
may be placed on the nn blocks. two that we will consider are the trivial boundary
condition,

x( + 1) = x() ,

and the single long string boundary condition,

x( + 1) = v 1x()v,

(3.110)

(3.111)

101

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

where v is given in (1.30).

in the case of two incoming states with momenta n1, n2, we write

(3.112)
where x i is an (n1 + n2)(n1 + n2) matrix. in particular, the background is taken
to be

x i = x i + x i,

p

x 1 =

x 2 =

b
2

td,

(3.113)

where we have split the matrix into n1n1 and n2  n2 blocks corresponding to two
clusters, and i represents the corresponding identity matrices.

a useful decomposition of the uctuations x i is in terms of the matrices

td

0

i/n1

2 
t a1 =

0

p
2

i/n2 
0 , t a2 =

ta1 0
0

+

, t 12
)12 = 211n1+22,
)12 = 2n1+1122;

(t 12

1

(t 12

2

0

0

0 ta2 ,



(3.114)

(3.115)

where tai are hermitian generators of su(ni); t 12

, which have matrix elements

and td:

x i =

xd
2

td +

xa1
2

t a1 +

xa2
2

t a2 +

x+12

2

t 12
+ +

x12

2

t 12


.

(3.116)

following the preceding subsection (and working with e = 0 for simplicity) we nd that
the charged states now have an extra n1n2 in their multiplicities, and have masses

x i

12 : m2

= r2
42

a9

12 : m2
12 : m2 = r2

= r2
42

42 + gp



12 : m2 = r2

42  gp



12 + x 1
a0
a0
12  x 1

where

1


=

1
n1

+

1
n2

.

(3.117)

(3.118)

likewise, the charged fermions and ghosts have masses as in the n = 2 case with the
trivial rescalings to

p =

p
2

, b =

b
2

.

(3.119)

102

3.6 d-particle pair production

therefore, in the case of trivial boundary conditions the amplitude (and hamiltonian)
is exactly as computed in (3.106) with the only dierence being multiplication by n1n2
and replacement of p and b as in (3.119). note that 2p = p
is simply relative
n1
velocity of the two clusters, and b = 1
) is precisely the impact parameter
between the clusters.

+ p
n2

+ b
n2

2 ( b
n1

in the case of long-string boundary conditions, this result is modied. now

x( + 2) =

v 1
1
0

v 1

0

2  x()

v1

0

0 v2

(3.120)

and in particular the charged o-diagonal blocks satisfy twisted boundary conditions

x+( + 1) = v 1

1 x+()v2,

x( + 1) = v 1

2 x()v1 .

(3.121)

the matrices v can be diagonalized by working on basis vectors

1
k
2k
...

(n 1)k





wk =

1
n

,  = e2i/n , k  z

(3.122)

and in this basis simply give phases k. thus the amplitude (3.106) is modied to

i1 =

1

2r i

2

nixi=1xn

ein[2(1/n12/n2)+a]z 

0

1

dt
t

ein2/4t ig2b2t

t sin(g pt )
(cid:20)6  2 cos(2g pt ) + 8 cos(g pt )(cid:21) ,

(3.123)

and the interaction hamiltonian takes the form

hint 

g4p4

2i xn,1,2

ein[2(1/n12/n2)+a]z dt t 2ein2/4t ir2t .

(3.124)

for non-zero n, the supergravity correspondence no longer holds when n > 2: the
matrix string then yields a dierent result. in (3.124) the expression in the summation
only gives a non-zero contribution when the integer n is a multiple of both n1 and n2.
hence we see that the minimal exchanged d-particle number between two long strings
of length n1 and n2 must be proportional to n1n2 (if the lengths are relatively prime),
else the amplitude will be simply zero.

this leads us to the conclusion that the long strings do not give an eective means
of creating d-particles. for two strings to create a minimally charge d-pair, the strings

103

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

apparently rst need to each emit a minimal length string such that two short strings
of both collections can exchange a single d-particle. in the sym language, this last
process is eectively an su(2) process, where correspondence with 11-dimensional
supergravity is found.
it is important to note, however, that the electric ux thus
created must then subsequently spread out over the complete u(ni) gauge group, since
otherwise it would not carry the sym energy appropriate for the massive d-particle
with p+ = ni/r.

furthermore, in the sector with a xed p+ momentum, we now have an improved
idea of what state contributes most to d-charge production: it is the state with trivial
boundary conditions, (3.110), corresponding to a collection of minimal length strings.
since this is the state that yields amplitudes agreeing with low-energy supergravity in
the limit g  0, it is apparently this state (or a bound version of it when nite g eects
are taken into account) that dominates the wave-function of the graviton in the small
g region, rather than the state with the long string boundary conditions (3.111).

3.6.6 ranges of validity

in this section we will give a preliminary discussion of the relevant scales and ranges
of validity of the calculations of the preceding sections. this analysis is preliminary in
that the systematics of the perturbation theory for the yang-mills lagrangian (1.81)
has not been performed at the level of that for pure matrix theory [14] and additional
subtleties are possible. we leave such analysis for future work. for simplicity we will
consider the case where the p+ momentum of the two incoming states are comparable,
n1  n2  n. our arguments readily generalize to the probe situation n1  n2.
we begin by considering the expansion of the action about a classical background as
in (3.93); such a treatment is relevant both for corrections to the saddle-point solutions
of section four as well as for the systematic treatment of d-pair production.

this expansion is governed by the yang-mills coupling gy m , and naively one expects
the condition gy m  1 for corrections to be small. however, as mentioned in the
introduction, the yang-mills coupling is scale dependent and one expects the relevant
scale to be set by the physics one is considering.

for example, in the scattering with background (3.86), loops of the charged, massive
states of the ym theory play a central role. one either has a loop localized on the
cylinder, whose calculation leads to the o(v4/r6) supergravity potential, or the loop
can encircle the cylinder leading to the d-pair production that we have computed.
these massive states receive masses of minimum size b/gs through the higgs eect,
setting the length scale b  gs/b. at this scale, we expect the relevant dimensionless
parameter to be

gy m b 

1
b

.

smallness of this parameter thus requires

b  1 .

104

(3.125)

(3.126)

3.6 d-particle pair production

for the case of pair creation, there is another requirement arising from the condition
that the back reaction due to the created electric eld be small. one way of stating
this is to require that the ym energy be large as compared to the energy stored in the
electric eld,

finally, in the case of the string interactions of section four, we see from (3.46) that

p2  g2

y m .

(3.127)

the relevant scale is set by the parameter |b|, and is given by

at this scale the dimensionless coupling is given by

sn

|b|(cid:19)2/3

inst (cid:18) gs
p2 sin (cid:19)1/3
(cid:18) g2
gsp2 sin (cid:19)1/3
gy m inst (cid:18) n

.

.

(3.128)

(3.129)

another condition to apply the methods of section four is that the size of the instanton
be small as compared to the size of the cylinder, inst  1, or

p2 

g2
s n
sin 

.

(3.130)

it is certainly possible to simultaneously satisfy the conditions (3.126), (3.127) and
(3.130), as well as the more stringent condition gy m  1, for nite n and large s  p2.
if all important corrections are governed by expansions in the parameters of (3.125)
and (3.129), then it appears possible to even push the calculations into the range gs<1.

a more complete analysis can be performed in the large gs (large r9) case in the

restricted energy range

1
gs  e  gs .

(3.131)

the lower bound corresponds to the energy threshold to create d charge, and the
upper bound is the energy to create winding states wrapping x9.
in between these
bounds the theory can be eectively described by matrix theory dlcq quantized in
10 dimensions.

as explained in [14], the matrix expansion is an expansion in terms of the form

  n

plr3!l  v2

r2m 6

plr4!n

m 3

,

(3.132)

where l counts loops and mpl is the eleven dimensional planck mass. the terms with
l = n are readily identied with terms in the corresponding supergravity expansion,
and the small parameter justifying this expansion is [14][8]

nv2
r2m 9

plr7  1.

(3.133)

105

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

this has a simple physical interpretation, which is easily seen by estimating the net
transverse momentum transfer due to the potential

this gives

n 2v4
r3r7 ;

p =

n 2v3
r3b7 .

(3.134)

(3.135)

the condition (3.133) is then easily seen to be p  p, or equivalently   1 where
 is the scattering angle.

expansion terms with n > l are then suppressed for

and terms with n < l for

p2  g2

s n 2r4 ,

r  (ngs)1/3 .

(3.136)

(3.137)

it is unclear whether the latter condition is strictly necessary; the rst term in this
expansion vanishes [13][14], and the other terms have been conjectured to vanish in [8].
to better understand these conditions, we convert them into statements relating
the mandelstam parameter s  p2 and the angle . it is easily seen that condition
(3.136), using (3.135), becomes

s  n 2(cid:18)n

(cid:19)4/3

g14/3
s

and the condition (3.137) becomes

s  g7/3

s n 10/3 .

(3.138)

(3.139)

comparing (3.130) with (3.138) and (3.139) , we see that within the energy range
given by (3.131) the instanton and d-particle production calculations are not obviously
simultaneously valid. however by relaxing the restrictions by giving up (3.137) (and
(3.139)), which maybe justied due to a non-renormalization theorem, it seems that
it is possible that the calculations are simultaneously valid. outside the energy range
(3.131) we appeal to the preceding (less rigorous) analysis which suggests that these
calculations are indeed simultaneously valid at large s, and may even be extendable
it is partly on this basis that we will, in the next section, consider the

to gs<1.

consequences of combining these two calculations.

3.7 discussion and conclusions

we begin this section by recalling several observations from our preceding discussion.
the rst is that, as pointed out in section 3.6.5, string scattering only eciently pro-
duces d charge if the strings break o at least one minimal length string. furthermore,

106

3.7 discussion and conclusions

sections four and ve discussed saddle-point congurations that are expected to make
important contributions to high energy, xed angle scattering. combining these yields
a picture of how the important non-perturbative process of d-charge production can
arise in high-energy string scattering.

the analysis of gross and mende [49] found saddle-points believed to dominate
scattering at high energy. these saddle-points have a common structure at arbitrary
genus, and the contributions of these saddle-points grows with the genus suggesting the
relevance of non-perturbative eects. we have found a new version of their analysis in
which a mechanism appears that can cut o this growth. the cuto originates from the
minimal string length, which is in our language the minimal p+. string fragmentation
is stopped when the string breaks into the maximal number of minimal-length strings.
it is precisely in the context of minimal length string scattering that we have found
that d-charge pair production can become an important eect. we therefore have
a very nice picture in which the instantons of section four and ve lead to maximal
fragmentation of the strings, and this is followed by the production of d-charge via
the process of section six. here we expect that the size (3.46) of the instanton, as
well as the corresponding minimal distance (3.53), may be an important ingredient in
determining the size of both these eects.

from the stringy viewpoint this is an intrinsically non-perturbative process. this
is suggestive that there is in fact a basic connection between these two processes,
and in particular that the non-perturbative production of d-charge is an important
correction to the high-energy scattering analysis of [49]. while we believe that, by
combining the various ingredients presented in this paper, it may be possible to obtain
denite quantitative estimates of these corrections, we leave further analysis of this
connection for future work.

next we turn to several other observations and connections.
first, recall that banks and susskind [12] previously considered the d d system
in the context of perturbative string theory. there they found an instability with un-
known outcome. in the present framework we have been able to treat the same system
analytically, at least in the large gs limit, without signs of pathology. in principle, the
matrix string calculations appear to extend to arbitrary gs. one might hope that some
extrapolation of our approach could shed further light on the discussion of [12].

it is an interesting conceptual question under which circumstances one needs to
include the virtual eects of d-particles propagating in loops. although in the literal
sense of an expansion about gs = 0 they do not contribute, since they have innite mass
there, there is clearly a strong sense in which d-particles can be found in intermediate
states when gs is nite. indeed, intermediate states with d-charge are distinguished
from other intermediate states only by the presence of electric ux, and there is no
apparent reason why these should be suppressed at nite gs. in fact, looking at the
results of section 3.6, leads one to suspect that it may be possible to extend the matrix
string interactions as discussed in chapter two, to include the possibility of electric ux
pair creation. the eleven dimensional symmetry of m-theory, in particular, suggests
as a possible generalization of the dvv string-interaction vertex, an expression of the
form vint = vtwist(a12) (with a12 the dierence between the u(1) gauge elds on the
two strings that are created). with this choice of vertex, the couplings between string

107

high energy scattering in matrix string theory

and all n-d-particle bound states are all of the same strength. this would suggest
that there may possibly exist a systematic semi-classical expansion in string theory 
generalizing the standard perturbative expansion  in which the d-particle-loop con-
tributions play the role of instanton-like corrections. indeed, in other recent studies
of non-perturbative contributions to string scattering amplitudes [44][45][46][48] it was
suggested that d-particle loops are related via t-duality to d-instanton contributions
in iib string theory. it clearly would be interesting to see if the suggestive formulas
obtained in these works can possibly be reproduced via the matrix string methods
developed in this paper.

to conclude, we have succeeded in using the matrix string approach to begin an
investigation of aspects of high energy string scattering, and in particular to begin to
explore the role of important non-perturbative (from the string viewpoint) processes
such as d-charge production. further investigation along these lines is expected to
unravel a rich structure at substringy scales, and may shed further light on the short
distance structure and fundamental degrees of freedom and dynamics of m-theory.

108

bibliography

[1] m. aganagic, c. popescu and j.h. schwarz, gauge-invariant and gauge-fixed

d-brane actions, nucl. phys. b495 (1997) 99, hep-th/9612080.

[2] p.c. aichelburg and r.u. sexl, on the gravitational eld of a massless particle,

gen. rel. grav. 2 (1971) 303.

[3] d. amati, m. ciafaloni, and g. veneziano, superstring collisions at planckian

energies, phys. lett. b197 (1987) 81.

[4] g.e. arutyunov and s.a. frolov, virasoro amplitude from the sn r24 orbifold
sigma model , theor. math. phys. 114 (1998) 43, hep-th/9708129 ; four graviton
scattering amplitude from sn r8 supersymmetric orbifold sigma model, nucl.
phys. b524 (1998) 159, hep-th/9712061.

[5] g.e. arutyunov s.a. frolov and a. polishchuk, on lorentz invariance and su-
persymmetry of four particle scattering amplitudes in sn r8 orbifold sigma
model, hep-th/9812119.

[6] c. bachas, d-brane dynamics, phys. lett. b374 (1996) 37, hep-th/9511043.

[7] c. bachas, (half ) a lecture on d-branes, in gauge theories, applied supersym-
metry and quantum gravity ii , eds. a. sevrin, k.s. stelle, k. thielemans and
a. van proeyen, imperial college press (1997), hep-th/9701019.

[8] v. balasubramanian, r. gopakumar and f. larsen, gauge theory, geometry and

the large n limit, nucl. phys. b526 (1998) 415, hep-th/9712077.

[9] t. banks, w. fischler, s.h. shenker and l. susskind, m theory as a matrix

model: a conjecture, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 5112, hep-th/9610043.

[10] t. banks and n. seiberg, strings from matrices, nucl. phys. b497 (1997) 41,

hep-th/9702187.

[11] t. banks, n. seiberg, and s. shenker, branes from matrices, nucl. phys. b490

(1997) 91, hep-th/9612157.

[12] t.banks and l.susskind, brane - anti-brane forces, hep-th/9511194.

[13] k. becker and m. becker, a two-loop test of m(atrix) theory, nucl. phys. b506

(1997) 48, hep-th/9705091.

[14] k. becker, m. becker, j. polchinski, and a. tseytlin, higher order graviton scat-

tering in m(atrix) theory, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 3174, hep-th/9706072.

bibliography

[15] d. berenstein and r. corrado, m(atrix)-theory in various dimensions, phys. lett.

b406 (1997) 37, hep-th/9702108.

[16] e. bergshoe, c.m. hull and t. ortin, duality in the typeii superstring eec-

tive action, nucl. phys. b451 (1995) 547, hep-th/9504081.

[17] d. bigatti and l. susskind, review of matrix theory, hep-th/9712072.

[18] g. bonelli, l. bonora and f. nesti, string interactions from matrix string the-

ory, nucl. phys. b538 (1999) 100, hep-th/9807232.

[19] p. j. braam and p. van baal, nahms transformation for instantons, comm.
math. phys. 122 (1989) 267; p. van baal, instanton moduli for t 3  r, nucl.
phys. proc. suppl. 49 (1996) 238, hep-th/9512223.

[20] a. connes, m.r. douglas and a. schwarz, noncommutative geometry and matrix
theory: compactication on tori, j. high energy phys. 9802 (1998) 003, hep-
th/9711162.

[21] e. cremmer, b. julia and j. scherk, supergravity theory in eleven-dimensions,

phys. lett. 76b (1978) 409.

[22] j. dai, r. leigh and j. polchinski, new connections between string theories, mod.

phys. lett. a4 (1989) 2073.

[23] u.h. danielsson, g. ferretti and b. sundborg, d-particle dynamics and bound

states, int. j. mod. phys. a11 (1996) 5463, hep-th/9603081.

[24] b. de wit, j. hoppe and h. nicolai, on the quantum mechanics of supermem-

branes, nucl. phys. b305 (1988) 545.

[25] b. de wit, m. luscher and h. nicolai, the supermembrane is unstable, nucl.

phys. b320 (1989) 135.

[26] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde and h. verlinde, bps spectrum of the five-brane and

black hole entropy, nucl. phys. b486 (1997) 77, hep-th/9603126.

[27] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde and h. verlinde, bps quantization of the five-brane,

nucl. phys. b486 (1997) 89, hep-th/9604055.

[28] r. dijkgraaf, g. moore, e. verlinde and h. verlinde, elliptic genera of symmet-
ric products and second quantized strings, comm. math. phys. 185 (1997) 197,
hep-th/9608096.

[29] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, and h. verlinde, matrix string theory, nucl. phys.

b500 (1997) 43, hep-th/9703030.

[30] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde and h. verlinde, notes on matrix and micro strings,

nucl. phys. b (proc. suppl.) 62 (1998) 348, hep-th/9709107.

110

[31] m. dine, p. huet and n. seiberg, large and small radius in string theory, nucl.

phys. b322 (1989) 301.

[32] l. dixon, j. harvey, c. vafa and e. witten, strings on orbifolds, nucl. phys.

b261 (1985) 678; nucl. phys. b274 (1986) 285.

[33] m. douglas and c. hull, d-branes and the noncommutative torus, j. high energy

phys. 9802 (1998) 002, hep-th/9711165.

[34] m. douglas, d. kabat, p. pouliot and s. shenker, d-branes and short distance

in string theory, nucl. phys. b485 (1997) 85, hep-th/9608024.

[35] m. douglas and g. moore, d-branes, quivers and ale instantons, hep-th/9603167.

[36] o. ganor, s. ramgoolam and w. taylor, branes, fluxes and duality in m(atrix)

theory, nucl. phys. b492 (1997) 191, hep-th/9611202

[37] s.b. giddings, conformal techniques in string theory and string eld theory,

phys. rep. 170 (1988) 167.

[38] s.b. giddings, fundamental strings, in particles, strings, and supernovae, eds. a. je-

vicki and c.-i. tan, world scientic (1989).

[39] s.b. giddings and s. wolpert, a triangulation of moduli space from light-cone

string theory, comm. math. phys. 109 (1987) 177.

[40] s.b. giddings, f. hacquebord and h. verlinde, high energy scattering and
d-pair creation in matrix string theory, nucl. phys. b537 (1999) 260, hep-
th/9804121.

[41] p. ginsparg, applied conformal field theory, in fields, strings and critical

phenomena, ed. e. brezin and j. zinn-justin, north-holland, 1988.

[42] l. girardello, a. giveon, m. porrati and a. zaaroni, s-duality in n=4 yang-
mills theories with general gauge groups, nucl. phys. b448 (1995) 127, hep-
th/9502057.

[43] a. giveon, m. porrati and e. rabinovici, target space duality in string theory,

phys. rep. 244 (1994) 77, hep-th/9401139.

[44] m.b. green, eects of d-instantons, nucl. phys. b498 (1997) 195, hep-th/9701093.

[45] m.b. green, connections between m-theory and superstrings, nucl. phys. b

(proc. suppl.) 68 (1998) 242, hep-th/9712195.

[46] m.b. green, m. gutperle, and p. vanhove, one loop in eleven dimensions, phys.

lett. b409 (1997) 177, hep-th/9706175.

[47] m.b. green, j.h. schwarz and e. witten, superstring theory vol.1 and 2, cam-

bridge university press, cambridge, 1987.

111

bibliography

[48] m.b. green and p. vanhove, d-instantons, strings and m-theory, phys. lett.

b408 (1997) 122, hep-th/9704145.

[49] d. gross and p. mende, the high-energy behavior of string scattering amplitudes,
phys. lett. 197b (1987) 129 ; string theory beyond the planck scale, nucl. phys.
b303 (1988) 407.

[50] f. hacquebord and h. verlinde, duality symmetry of n=4 yang-mills theory on

t 3, nucl. phys. b508 (1997) 609, hep-th/9707179.

[51] j. harvey, g. moore and a. strominger, reducing s-duality to t -duality, phys.

rev. d52 (1995) 7161, hep-th/9501022.

[52] f. hirzebruch and t. hofer, on the euler number of an orbifold, math. ann.

286 (1990) 255.

[53] c. hofman and e. verlinde, (1997) unpublished.

[54] c. hofman and e. verlinde, u-duality of born-infeld on the noncommutative

two-torus, j. high energy phys. 12 (1998) 010, hep-th/9810116.

[55] c. hofman and e. verlinde, gauge bundles and born-infeld on the noncommu-

tative torus, hep-th/9810219.

[56] c. hofman, e. verlinde and g. zwart, u-duality invariance of the four-dimensional

born-infeld theory, j. high energy phys. 10 (1998) 020, hep-th/9808128.

[57] e. dhoker and s.b. giddings, unitarity of the closed bosonic polyakov string,

nucl. phys. b291 (1987) 90.

[58] g. t hooft, a property of electric and magnetic flux in non-abelian gauge

theories, nucl. phys. b153 (1979) 141.

[59] c.m. hull and p.k. townsend, unity of superstring dualities, nucl. phys. b438

(1995) 109, hep-th/9410167.

[60] d. kabat and p. pouliot, a comment on zero-brane quantum mechanics, phys.

rev. lett. 77 (1996) 1004, hep-th/9603127.

[61] e. keski-vakkuri and p. kraus, m-momentum transfer between gravitons, mem-
branes, and vebranes as perturbative gauge theory processes, nucl. phys. b530
(1998) 137, hep-th/9804067.

[62] a. konechny and a. schwarz, 1/4-bps states on noncommutative tori,

hep-th/9907008.

[63] r. leigh, dirac-born-infeld action from dirichlet sigma models, mod. phys.

lett. a4 (1989) 2767.

112

[64] s. mandelstam, lorentz properties of the three-string vertex, nucl. phys. b83
(1974) 413; interacting-string picture of the fermionic string, prog. theor.
phys. suppl. 86 (1986) 163; dual-resonance models, phys. rep. 13 (1974) 259.

[65] l. motl, proposals on nonperturbative superstring interactions, hep-th/9701025.

[66] c. montonen and d. olive, magnetic monopoles as gauge particles, phys. lett.
72b (1977) 117; p. goddard, j. nuyts and d. olive, gauge theories and magnetic
charge, nucl. phys. b125 (1977) 1.

[67] w. nahm, monopoles in quantum eld theory, proceedings of the monopole meet-

ing, ed. craigie et al, world scientic, singapore, 1982.

[68] n. obers and b. pioline, u duality and m theory, hep-th/9809039.

[69] h. osborn, topological charges for n = 4 supersymmetric gauge theories and
monopoles of spin 1, phys. lett. 83b (1979) 321; a. sen, dyon-monopole bound
states, self-dual harmonic forms . . . , phys. lett. b329 (1994) 217, hep-th/9402032.

[70] j. polchinski, dirichlet-branes and ramond-ramond charges, phys. rev. lett.

75 (1995) 4724, hep-th/9510017.

[71] j. polchinski, tasi lectures on d-branes, hep-th/9611050.

[72] j. polchinski, string theory vols. 1 and 2, cambridge university press, cam-

bridge, 1998.

[73] j. polchinski and p. pouliot, membrane scattering with m-momentum transfer,

phys. rev. d56 (1997) 6601, hep-th/9704029.

[74] m. rozali, matrix theory and u-duality in seven dimensions, phys. lett. b400

(1997) 260. hep-th/9702136.

[75] j. schwarz, an sl(2,z) multiplet of type iib superstrings, phys. lett. b360

(1995) 13; erratum-ibid. b364 (1995) 252, hep-th/9508143.

[76] n. seiberg, why is the matrix model correct?, phys. rev. lett. 79 (1997) 3577,
hep-th/9710009; a. sen, d0 branes on t n and matrix theory, adv. theor. math.
phys. 2 (1998) 51, hep-th/9709220.

[77] s. sethi and l. susskind, rotational invariance in the m(atrix) formulation of

type iib theory, phys. lett. b400 (1997) 265, hep-th/9702101.

[78] s. h. shenker, another length scale in string theory?, hep-th/9509132.

[79] l. susskind, t duality in m(atrix) theory and s duality in eld theory,

hep-th/9611164.

[80] l. susskind, another conjecture about m(atrix) theory, hep-th/9704080.

113

bibliography

[81] w. taylor, d-brane field theory on compact spaces, phys. lett. b394 (1997)

283, hep-th/9611042.

[82] w. taylor, lectures on d-branes, gauge theory and m(atrices), hep-th/9801182.

[83] p. k. townsend, the eleven-dimensional supermembrane revisited, phys. lett.

b350 (1995) 184, hep-th/9501068.

[84] a. tseytlin, on non-abelian generalisation of born-infeld action in string theory,
nucl. phys. b501 (1997) 41, hep-th/9701125; d. brecher and m. j. perry, bound
states of d-branes and the non-abelian born-infeld action, nucl. phys. b527
(1998) 121, hep-th/9801127.

[85] c. vafa and e. witten, a strong coupling test of s-duality, nucl. phys. b431

(1994) 3, hep-th/9408074.

[86] e. witten, string theory dynamics in various dimensions, nucl. phys. b443

(1995) 85, hep-th/9503124

[87] e. witten, bound states of strings and p-branes, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 335,

hep-th/9510135.

[88] e. witten and d. olive, supersymmetry algebras that include topological charges,

phys. lett. 78b (1978) 97.

[89] t. wynter, gauge fields and interactions in matrix string theory, phys. lett.

b415 (1997) 349, hep-th/9709029.

[90] t. wynter, anomalies and large n limits in matrix string theory, phys. lett.

b439 (1998) 37, hep-th/9806173.

[91] t. wynter, high energy scattering amplitudes in matrix string theory,

hep-th/9905087.

[92] g. zwart, u-duality in supersymmetric born-infeld theory, j. high energy

phys. 06 (1999) 011, hep-th/9905068.

114

acknowledgements

on this last page i would like to thank a number of people for their contribution to
this thesis. first of all i want to thank my advisor herman verlinde.

herman, i admire your knowledge of physics and in particular your knowledge of
string theory. also, i appreciate your creativity and optimistic and friendly character
very much. besides that i got the opportunity to visit workshops, conferences and
universities abroad, with nancial support of your nwo pionier grant. thanks a lot
for everything.

it was a pleasure for me to write an article together with steve giddings and
herman verlinde. i thank them for enabling me to make my own (small) contribution
to a better understanding of the relation between matrix string theory and light-cone
string theory.

i thank jae-suk park for sharing his enthusiastic ideas and knowledge with me.
i admire his erudition and i enjoy our conversations about physics and beyond very
much. also, i would like to thank boksun han for delicious korean dinners.

the discussions with christiaan hofman and gysbert zwart were very important

for me. gysbert and christiaan: thanks a lot.

i benetted from useful discussions with bernd schroers, sander bais, tom wynter

and boris pioline.

bernd schroers, bert-jan nauta and ronald van elburg are acknowledged for read-

ing parts of the manuscript of this thesis.

i thank alain verberkmoes for his patience and his willingness to solve problems i
had with the amazing world of latex, tex, postscript and mathematica. in particular
i thank him for producing gure 3.7.

large parts of this thesis were written during two stays in princeton. i thank the
department of physics of princeton university for hospitality. furthermore i thank the
spinoza institute, utrecht university, for hospitality.

i thank the proprietors and crew of small world coee in princeton for kindly

supplying me with coee of reasonable quality.

last i thank my family and friends for their support.

