string representation and

nonperturbative properties of

gauge theories 

dmitri antonov  

infn-sezione di pisa, universita degli studi di pisa,

dipartimento di fisica, via buonarroti, 2 - ed. b - 56127 pisa, italy

abstract

recent progress achieved in the solution of the problem of connement in various (non-)abelian
gauge theories by virtue of a derivation of their string representation is reviewed. the theo-
ries under study include qcd within the so-called method of field correlators, qcd-inspired
abelian-projected theories, and compact qed in three and four space-time dimensions. various
nonperturbative properties of the vacua of the above mentioned theories are discussed. the rele-
vance of the method of field correlators to the study of connement in abelian models, allowing
for an analytical description of this phenomenon, is illustrated by an evaluation of eld correlators
in these models.

9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
9
2

 

 
 

1
v
9
0
2
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

based on the ph.d.

thesis
http://dochost.rz.hu-berlin.de.

at

the humboldt university of berlin (1999),

available under

e-mail addresses: antonov@physik.hu-berlin.de, antonov@vxitep.itep.ru.
permanent address: institute of theoretical and experimental physics, b. cheremushkinskaya 25, ru-117 218

moscow, russia.

1

contents

1 introduction

1.1 general ideas and motivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 wilsons criterion of connement and the problem of string representation of
gauge theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3 method of field correlators in qcd: theoretical foundations . . . . . . . . . . .

2 string representation of qcd in the framework of the method of field cor-

relators
2.1 gluodynamics string eective action from the wilson loop expansion . . . . . .
2.2
incorporation of perturbative corrections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 a hamiltonian of the straight-line qcd string with spinless quarks . . . . . . .

3 string representation of abelian-projected theories

3.1 the method of abelian projections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 nonperturbative field correlators and string representation of the dual abelian
38
higgs model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.2.1 london limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2.2 dual abelian higgs model beyond the london limit
44
. . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2.3 dynamical chiral symmetry breaking within the stochastic vacuum model 47

3
3

7
11

17
17
25
29

32
32

3.3 nonperturbative field correlators and string representation of the su(3)-
gluodynamics within the abelian projection method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
string representation for the partition function of the abelian-projected
3.3.1
su(3)-gluodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
string representation of field and current correlators . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 representation of abelian-projected theories in terms of the monopole currents

3.3.2

4 ensembles of topological defects in the abelian-projected theories and string

representation of compact qed
4.1 vacuum correlators and string representation of compact qed . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2 a method of description of the string world-sheet excitations
4.3 abelian-projected theories as ensembles of vortex loops

3d-case
4d-case

4.1.1
4.1.2

5 conclusion and outlook

6 acknowledgments

7 appendices

2

50

51
53
56

59
60
60
67
72
74

83

87

88

1 introduction

1.1 general ideas and motivations

nowadays, there is no doubt that strong interactions of elementary particles are adequately de-
scribed by quantum chromodynamics (qcd) [1] (see ref. [2] for recent monographs). unfortu-
nately, usual eld-theoretical methods are not adequate to this theory itself. that is because in
the infrared (ir) region, the qcd coupling constant becomes large, which makes the standard
feynman diagrammatic technique in this region unapplicable. however, it is the region of the
strong coupling, which deals with the physically observable colourless objects (hadrons), whereas
the standard perturbation theory is formulated in terms of coloured (unphysical) objects: quarks,
gluons, and ghosts. this makes it necessary to develop special techniques, applicable for the
evaluation of eects beyond the scope of perturbation theory. the latter are usually referred to
as nonperturbative phenomena. up to now, those are best of all studied in the framework of the
approach based on lattice gauge theory [3], which provides us with a natural nonperturbative reg-
ularization scheme. various ideas and methods elaborated on in the lattice eld theories during
the two last decades, together with the development of algorithms for numerical calculations and
progress in the computer technology, have made these theories one of the most powerful tools for
evaluation of nonperturbative characteristica of qcd (see ref. [4] for a recent review). however,
despite obvious progress of this approach, there still remain several problems. those include e.g.
the problem of simultaneous reaching the continuum and thermodynamic limits. indeed, physi-
cally relevant length scales lie deeply inside the region between the lattice spacing and the size of
the lattice. however, due to the asymptotic freedom of qcd, in the weak coupling limit, not only
the lattice spacing, but also the size of the lattice (for a xed number of sites) becomes small,
as well as the region between them. however, in order to achieve the thermodynamic limit, the
size of the lattice should increase. this makes it necessary to construct large lattices, which in
particular leads to the technical problem of critical slowing down of simulations on them. as
far as the problem of reaching the continuum limit alone is concerned, recently some progress
in the solution of this problem has been achieved by making use of the conception of improved
lattice actions [5] in ref. [6]. another problem of the lattice formulation of qcd is the appear-
ance of so-called fermion doublers (i.e., additional modes appearing as relevant dynamical degrees
of freedom) in the denition of the fermionic action on the lattice due to the nielsen-ninomiya
theorem [7]. according to this no-go theorem, would we demand simultaneously hermiticity,
locality, and chiral symmetry (which will be discussed later on) of the lattice fermionic action,
the doublers unavoidably appear, which means that all these three physical requirements cannot
be achieved together. this makes it necessary to introduce fermionic actions which violate one
of these properties (e.g. wilson fermions [8], violating chiral symmetry for a nite lattice or
staggered (kogut-susskind) fermions [9], violating locality for a single avour fermion), checking
afterwards lattice artefacts associated with a particular choice of the action. notice however, that
recently a signicant progress in the solution of this problem has been achieved (for a review
see [10] and refs. therein). finally, there remains the important problem of reaching the chiral
limit, which becomes especially hard if one accounts for dynamical fermions. that was just one of
the reasons why the main qcd calculations on large lattices have been performed in the quenched
approximation, i.e., when the creation/annihilation of dynamical quark pairs is neglected.

all these problems together with the necessity of getting deeper theoretical insights into non-
perturbative phenomena require to develop analytical nonperturbative techniques in qcd and

3

other theories displaying such phenomena. this is the main motivation for the present work.

it is worth realizing that up to now a systematic way of analytical investigation of nonper-
turbative phenomena in qcd is still lacking.
instead of that, there exist various approaches,
enabling one to take them into account phenomenologically for describing hadron interactions.
those approaches include e.g. the potential and bag models [11, 12], the large-n expansion meth-
ods [13], the eective lagrangian approach [14], the qcd sum rule approach [15], and later on its
generalization, the so-called method of field correlators [16, 17, 18, 19]. it is natural to compare
the situation in qcd appearing due to the absence of a systematic approach for the investigation
of nonperturbative phenomena with nonrelativistic quantum mechanics. one convinces himself
that the latter is the correct theory of atomic spectra by studying simple objects, like the hydro-
gen atom, though the practical calculation of the spectrum of a certain composite atom within
this theory is quite complicated. unfortunately, in qcd there exists no analogy of an isolated
hydrogen atom, which forces us to study the theory of strong interactions at quite sophisticated
examples.

the most fundamental problem associated with the ir dynamics of qcd, which is known
to be one of the most important problems of modern quantum field theory, is the problem
of explanation and description of connement (for a review see e.g. [20, 19]).
in general, by
connement one implies the phenomenon of absence in the spectrum of a certain eld theory of the
physical |ini and |outi states of some particles, whose elds are however present in the fundamental
lagrangian. it is this phenomenon in qcd, which forces quarks and antiquarks to combine into
colourless hadronic bound states. the important characteristic of connement is the existence of
string-like eld congurations leading to a linearly rising quark-antiquark potential as expressed
by the wilsons area law (see the next subsection). such a eld conguration emerging between
external quarks is usually referred to as qcd string. in the present review, we shall demonstrate
that the properties of this string can be naturally studied in the framework of the method of field
correlators and derive by virtue of this method the corresponding string lagrangian. notice, that
the advantage of the method of field correlators is that it deals directly with qcd, and therefore
enables us to express the coupling constants of this lagrangian in terms of the fundamental qcd
quantities, which are the gluonic condensate and the so-called correlation length of the vacuum.
this approach will also allow us to incorporate quarks and derive a hamiltonian of the qcd string
with quarks in the conning qcd vacuum.

another fundamental phenomenon of nonperturbative qcd is the spontaneous breaking of
chiral symmetry, i.e., the u (nf ) u (nf )-symmetry of the massless qcd action. indeed, though
one could expect this symmetry to be observed on the level of a few mev, it does not exhibit
itself in the hadronic spectra. were this symmetry exact, one would expect parity degeneracy of
all hadrons, whereas in reality parity partners are generally split by a few hundred mev. such a
spontaneous symmetry breaking has far-reaching consequences. in particular, it implies that there
exist massless goldstone bosons, which are identied with pions. the signal for chiral symmetry
breaking is the appearance of a nonvanishing quark condensate, which plays an important role in
many nonperturbative approaches [21, 22].

the non-abelian character of the gauge group su(3) makes it especially dicult to study
the problems of connement and chiral symmetry breaking in the qcd case. to explain the
mechanisms of these phenomena microscopically, a vast amount of models of the qcd vacuum
has been proposed (see [19] for a recent review). those are based either on an ensemble of classical
eld congurations (e.g. instantons [23, 24], see [25] for recent reviews) or on quantum background
elds [26, 27]. the most general demand made on all of them was to reproduce two characteristic

4

quantities of the qcd vacuum, which are nonzero quark [21] and gluon [15] condensates, related to
the chiral symmetry breaking and connement, respectively. however, at least the semiclassical
scenario possesses several weak points. first of all, since the topological charge of the qcd
vacuum as a whole is known to vanish, this vacuum cannot be described by a certain unique
classical conguration, but should be rather built out of a superposition of various congurations,
e.g. instantons and antiinstantons. however, such a superposition already does not satisfy classical
equations of motion and is, moreover, unstable w.r.t. annihilation of the objects with the opposite
topological charge. secondly, in order to reproduce the phenomenological gluon condensate [15],
classical congurations should be dense packed (about one conguration per (fm)4), which leads
to a signicant distorsion of the solutions corresponding to these congurations within the original
superposition ansatz [28] 1. and last but not least, a further counterargument against semiclassical
models of the qcd vacuum is that not all of them, once being simulated in the lattice experiments,
yield the property of connement (see discussion in ref. [19]).

another natural way of investigation of the nonperturbative phenomena in qcd might lie in
the simplication of the problem under study by considering some solvable theories displaying
the same type of phenomena. in this way, the problem of chiral symmetry breaking is best of all
analytically studied in the so-called nambu-jona-lasinio (njl) type models, which are models
containing local four-quark interactions [30, 31, 32, 33] (see ref. [34] for a recent review). these
models lead to a gap equation for the dynamical quark mass, signalling spontaneous breaking of
chiral symmetry. after applying the so-called bosonization procedure (which can be performed
either by making use of the standard hubbard-stratonovich transformation or within the eld
strength approach [35]) as well as a derivative expansion of the resulting quark determinant at
low energies, this leads to the construction of nonlinear chiral meson lagrangians [14]. the
advantage of the latter ones is that they summarize qcd low-energy theorems, which is the
reason why these lagrangians are intensively used in the modern hadronic physics [36, 34]. the
techniques developed for njl type models have been in particular applied to the evaluation of
higher-order derivative terms in meson elds [32, 33], which enabled one to estimate the structure
constants of the eective chiral lagrangians introduced in ref. [36]. furthermore, in this way in
refs. [31, 32, 33, 34] it has been demonstrated that the low-energy properties of light pseudoscalar,
vector, and axial-vector mesons are well described by eective chiral lagrangians following from
the qcd-motivated njl models. in addition, the path-integral bosonization of an extended njl
model including chiral symmetry breaking of light quarks and heavy quark symmetries of heavy
quarks has been performed [37] (see the second paper of ref. [38] for a review), which yielded the
eective lagrangians of pseudoscalar, vector, and axial-vector d or b mesons, interacting with
light , , and a1 mesons.

as far as the theories possessing the property of connement are concerned, those rstly in-
clude compact qed and the 3d georgi-glashow model [20] and, secondly, the so-called abelian-
projected theories [39] 2. in the present review, we shall concentrate ourselves on the conning
properties of the above mentioned non-supersymmetric theories. in all of them, connement oc-
curs due to the expected condensation of abelian magnetic monopoles, after which the vacuum
structure of these theories becomes similar to that of the dual superconductor (the so-called dual
meissner scenario of connement) [41]. such a vacuum then leads to the formation of strings
(ux tubes) connecting external electric charges, immersed into it. these strings are dual to the

1recently, some progress in the solution of this problem has been achieved in ref. [29].
2in what follows, we shall not consider recently discovered supersymmetric theories, also possessing the property

of connement [40].

5

(magnetic) abrikosov-nielsen-olesen strings [42]. the latter ones emerge as classical eld cong-
urations in the abelian higgs model, which is the standard relativistic version of the ginzburg-
landau theory of superconductivity.
it turns out that the properties of electric strings in the
dual superconductor are similar to the ones of the realistic strings in qcd, which connect quarks
with antiquarks and ensure connement.
it is worth noting that this analogy based on the t
hooft-mandelstam scenario led to several phenomenological dual models of qcd (see ref. [43]
for a review). thus, the properties of the qcd string can be naturally studied in the framework
of the abelian projection method. moreover, this approach turns out to provide us with the
representations for the partition functions of eective abelian-projected theories of the su(2)-
and su(3)-gluodynamics in terms of the integrals over string world-sheets. such an integration,
which is absent in the approach to the qcd string based on the method of field correlators,
appears now from the integration over the singular part of the phase of the magnetic higgs eld.
the reformulation of the integral over the singularities of this eld into the integral over string
world-sheets is possible due to the fact that such singularities just take place at the world-sheets.
in particular, an interesting string picture emerges in the su(3)-gluodynamics, where after the
abelian projection there arise three types of magnetic higgs elds, leading to three types of strings,
which (self)interact via the exchanges of two massive dual gauge bosons. an exact procedure of
the derivation of the string representations for the partition functions of abelian-projected theo-
ries in the language of the path-integral, the so-called path-integral duality transformation, will
be described in details below. in the framework of this approach, we shall also investigate eld
correlators in the abelian-projected theories and nd them to parallel those of qcd, predicted by
the method of field correlators and measured in the lattice simulations. topological properties
of abelian-projected theories will be also discussed. furthermore, the eects brought about by
the summation over the grand canonical ensembles of small vortex loops, built out of the paired
electric abrikosov-nielsen-olesen strings, in these theories will be studied. in particular in the
dilute gas approximation, the eective potential of such vortex loops will be derived and employed
for the evaluation of their correlators. besides that, we shall study the string representation and
eld correlators of compact qed in 3d and 4d. notice that due to the absence of the higgs eld
in this theory, the integration over the string world-sheets is realized there in another way than
in abelian-projected theories. namely, it results from the summation over the branches of the
multivalued eective monopole potential, which turns out to have the same form as the 3d ver-
sion of the above discussed potential of vortex loops. finally, similar forms of the string eective
actions in qcd, abelian-projected theories, and compact qed will enable us to elaborate for all
these theories a unied method of description of the string world-sheet excitations, based on the
methods of nonlinear sigma models, known from the standard string theory.

it is worth realizing, that the string theories, to be derived below, should be treated as eective,
rather than fundamental ones. the actions of all of them turn out to have the form of an interaction
between the elements of the string world-sheet, mediated by certain (nonperturbative) gauge eld
propagators. being expanded in powers of the derivatives w.r.t. world-sheet coordinates, these
actions yield as a rst term of such an expansion the usual nambu-goto action. the latter
one is known to suer from the problem of conformal anomaly in d 6= 26 appearing during its
quantization, which will not be discussed below. it this sense, throughout the present review, we
shall treat the obtained string theories as eective 4d ones. it is also worth noting that within
our approach only pure bosonic strings without supersymmetric extensions appear. as far as
superstrings are concerned, during the last fteen years, a great progress has been achieved in
their development (see e.g. [44] for comprehensive monographs). among the achievements of the

6

superstring theory it is worth mentioning such ones as the calculation of the critical dimension
of the space-time, inclusion of gravity in a common scheme, and, presumably, the absence of
divergencies for some of these theories. the aim of all the superstring theories is the unication of
all the four fundamental interactions. in another language, one should eventually be able to derive
from them both the standard model and gravity, whereas all the auxiliary heavy modes should
become irrelevant. therefore, the nal strategy of superstring theories is a derivation of the known
eld theories out of them. contrary to this ideology, the aim of the present review is the derivation
of eective string theories from gauge eld theories possessing string-like excitations. as it has
been discussed above, such string-like eld congurations naturally appear in the conning phases
of gauge theories.

another possible direction of investigation of connement and chiral symmetry breaking in
qcd is based on a derivation of self-coupled equations for gauge-invariant vacuum amplitudes
starting directly from the qcd lagrangian and seeking for solutions allowing for these proper-
ties [45, 46, 47, 48]. recently, this approach turned our to be quite useful for the investigation of
the problem of interrelation between these two phenomena [48]. once such an interrelation takes
place, there should exist a relation between quark and gluon condensates as well, which has just
been established in ref. [48]. we shall briey demonstrate the method of derivation of such a
relation later on.

the organization of the review is as follows. in the next subsection of the introduction, we shall
introduce the main quantitative parameters for the description of connement in gauge theories
and quote the criterion of this phenomenon in the sense of wilsons area law. this criterion will
then serve as our starting point in a derivation of certain string eective actions in various gauge
theories. in the last subsection, we shall consider theoretical foundations of the method of field
correlators. section 2 is devoted to a derivation and investigation of the qcd string eective
action within this method. in section 3, we investigate the problem of string representation of
qcd from the point of view of abelian-projected theories and demonstrate a correspondence
between the abelian projection method and the method of field correlators. in section 4, we
study the string representation and vacuum correlators of compact qed in 3d and 4d. all these
investigations eventually bring us to the conclusion that both qcd within the method of field
correlators, abelian-projected theories, and compact qed have similar string representations.
such an observation then enables us to consider strings in these theories from the same point of
view and elaborate for them a unied mechanism of description of string excitations. besides that
in section 4, by virtue of the techniques developed for the investigation of the grand canonical
ensemble of monopoles in compact qed, collective eects in similar ensembles of topological
defects emerging in the abelian-projected theories will be studied. finally, we discuss the main
results summarized in the review as well as possible future developments in the conclusion and
outlook. in four appendices, some technical details of transformations performed in the main
text are outlined.

1.2 wilsons criterion of connement and the problem of string rep-

resentation of gauge theories

as a most natural characteristic quantity for the description of connement one usually considers
the so-called wilson loop. for example in the case of qcd, this object has the following form

7

hw (c)i =

1

nc *tr p exp
igic

adx


+ ,

(1)

which is nothing else, but an averaged amplitude of the process of creation, propagation, and
annihilation of a quark-antiquark pair.
in eq. (1), a stands for the vector-potential of the
gluonic eld 3, g is the qcd coupling constant, c is a closed contour, along which the quark-
antiquark pair propagates, p stands for the path-ordering prescription, which is present only in
the non-abelian case, and the average on both sides is performed with the qcd action 4.

in order to understand why this object really serves as a characteristic quantity in qcd, let
us consider the case when the contour c is a rectangular one and lies for concreteness in the
(x1, t)-plane. let us also denote the size of c along the t-axis as t , and its size along the x1-axis
as r. then such a wilson loop in the case t  r is related to the energy of the static (i.e.,
innitely heavy) quark and antiquark, which are separated from each other by the distance r, by
the formula

in order to get eq. (2), let us x the axial gauge a4 = 0 5, so that only the segments of the
rectangular contour c parallel to the x1-axis, contribute to hwrti. denoting

hwrti  ee0(r)t , t  r.

ij(t)  

p exp
ig

r

z0

dx1a1 (x, t)



ij

,

(3)

where we have omitted for shortness the dependence of ij on x2 and x3, we are not interested
in, we get

(2)

(4)

(5)

hwrti =

1

nc dij(0)ji(t )e .

inserting into eq. (4) a sum over a complete set of intermediate states pn |nihn| = 1, we get

1

hwrti =

nc xn dij(0)|nih n| ji(t )e =

nc xn |hij(0)|ni|2 eent ,

1

where en is the energy of the state |ni. at t  , only the ground state with the lowest energy
survives in the sum over states standing in eq. (5), and we nally arrive at eq. (2).
the energy e0(r) in eq. (2) includes a r-independent renormalization of the mass of a heavy
(anti)quark due to its interaction with the gauge eld. to the rst order in g2, up to a colour
factor, it is the same as in qed [49] and reads

(6)
c  1, where ta = (ta)ij is the hermitean
generator of the colour group in the fundamental representation, whereas in the abelian case a is simply a vector
potential.

3from now on in the non-abelian case, a  aa

ta, a = 1, . . . , n 2

emass = c2

g2
4a

,

4in what follows, we call the object dened by eq. (1) for brevity a wilson loop, whereas in the literature it

is sometimes referred to as a wilson loop average.

5throughout the present review, all the investigations will be performed in the euclidean space-time.

8

c 1
2nc

where c2 = n 2
stands for the casimir operator of the fundamental representation, and a  0 is
a cuto parameter (e.g. lattice spacing). the dierence e(r) = e0(r) emass therefore denes
the potential energy of the interaction between a static quark and antiquark. in particular, the
exponential dependence of the wilson loop on the area of the minimal surface min.[c] encircled
by the contour c, which we shall denote by |min.[c]|,

(the so-called area law behaviour of the wilson loop) corresponds to the linearly rising potential
between a quark and an antiquark,

hw (c)i  e|min.[c]|

(7)

e(r) = r.

(8)

this is the essence of the wilsons criterion of connement [50].

the coecient  entering eqs. (7) and (8) is called string tension. this is because the gluonic
eld between a quark and an antiquark is contracted to a tube or a string (the so-called qcd
string), whose energy is proportional to its length, and  is the energy of such a string per unit
length. this string plays the central role in the wilsons picture of connement, since with the
increase of the distance r between a quark and an antiquark it stretches and prevents them from
moving apart to macroscopic distances.

in order to get an idea of numbers, notice that according to the lattice data [51] the distance
r, at which wilsons criterion of connement becomes valid, is of the order of 1.0 fm, and the
string tension is of the order of 0.2 gev2 (see e.g. [19]). it is worth realizing that the classical qcd
lagrangian does not contain a dimensional parameter of such an order (i.e., of hundreds mev) 6.
however, in quantum theory, there always exists a dimensional cuto (like the lattice spacing a in
eq. (6)), which is related to the qcd coupling constant g through the gell-mannlow equation

 a2

dg2(cid:16) 1
a2(cid:17)
da2 = g2qcd(cid:16)g2(cid:17) .

(9)

here qcd (g2) stands for the qcd gell-mannlow function, which at the one-loop level reads

qcd(cid:16)g2(cid:17) = (cid:18)11

3

nc 

2
3

nf(cid:19) g2
162 ,

(10)

where nf is the number of light quarks avours, whose masses are smaller than 1/a. it is eq. (10),
which tells us that qcd is an asymptotically free theory, provided that for nc = 3, nf  16,
which indeed holds in the real world. consequently, the high-energy limit of qcd (the so-called
perturbative qcd) is similar to the low-energy limit of qed, and the scale parameter following
from the integration of eq. (9),

2

qcd =

1

a2 exp



g2( 1

a2 )

z

dg2

g2 (g2)




,

(11)

is measurable in qcd as well as the qed ne-structure constant (=1/137) with the result
100 mev  qcd  300 mev [52]. the phenomenon of the appearance of a dimensional parameter
in qcd, which remains nite in the limit of vanishing cuto, is usually referred to as dimensional

6e.g. the masses of the light quarks are of the order of a few mev.

9

transmutation. all observable dimensionful quantities in qcd (e.g. widths of hadronic decays),
7. then
and, in particular, the string tension are proportional to the corresponding power of qcd
according to eqs. (10) and (11), we get

  2

qcd =

1

a2 exp


162

(cid:16) 11
3 nc  2

3nf(cid:17) g2(cid:16) 1
a2(cid:17)


 ,

(12)

which means that all the coecients in the expansion of the string tension in powers of g2 vanish.
this conclusion tells us that the qcd string has a pure nonperturbative origin, as well as the
phenomenon of connement, which leads to the process of formation of such strings in the vacuum
itself.

throughout the present review, we shall be mostly interested in the models and properties of
the qcd string and strings in other gauge theories, possessing a conning phase. in the literature,
this problem is usually referred to as a problem of string representation of gauge theories.

contrary to the linearly rising quark-antiquark potential, the coulomb potential, e(r)   g2
r ,
cannot conne quarks, since in this case the gauge eld between them is distributed over the whole
space. for such a potential, the wilson loop for the large contour c has the following asymptotic
behaviour

hw (c)i  econstl(c),

(13)

1

r0

dsq x2(s) stands for the length of the contour c, parametrized by the vector-
where l(c) 
function x(s), 0  s  1, x(0) = x(1). such a behaviour is called the perimeter law. it is
dominant at small distances, r  0.25 fm, where quarks can with a good accuracy be considered
as separate particles not connected by strings, i.e., in the framework of perturbative qcd.
it is worth noting that to each order of perturbation theory, it is the perimeter law (13), rather
than the area law (7), that holds for the wilson loops. because of the ultraviolet divergencies, for
such a perturbative expansion of eq. (1) in powers of g, one needs a (gauge invariant) regulariza-
tion. when such a regularization is introduced, the wilson loop for a smooth contour c (i.e., a
contour without cusps) takes the form

hw (c)i = exp"c2

g2
4

l(c)

a #hwren.(c)i ,

(14)

where hwren.(c)i is nite when expressed via the renormalized charge gren.. the exponential factor
in eq. (14) is due to the renormalization of the mass of a heavy (anti)quark, described by eq. (6).
such a multiplicative renormalization of the smooth wilson loop has been proved in refs. [53, 54,
55]. notice also that if the contour c has a cusp but no self-intersections, then hw (c)i is still
multiplicatively renormalizable [56]. namely, in that case hw (c)i = z()hwren.(c)i, where the
diverging factor z() depends on the cusp angle .
thus, we conclude that the wilson loop indeed plays the role of the quantity relevant to the
description of connement. its area law behaviour means that the gauge theory under study (e.g.
qcd) is in the conning phase, whereas the perimeter law behaviour means that the theory is in

7 the aim of all the nonperturbative phenomenological approaches to qcd, such as the method of field
correlators which will be described in the next subsection, is to calculate the g-independent dimensionless ratios
of these quantities, but not qcd itself.

10

the coulomb phase. we also see that due to eq. (2), the change of  lnhw (c)i determines the
change of the action due to the interaction of an (anti)quark with the gauge eld.

1.3 method of field correlators in qcd: theoretical foundations

the nonlinear character of the qcd action makes it impossible to calculate in this theory the vac-
uum averages of gauge-invariant quantities in a closed form, e.g. by making use of the path-integral
techniques. on the other hand, the standard perturbation theory also becomes unapplicable at
large distances, where the running coupling constant is around 0.5-1. this makes it necessary to
develop special approaches to nonperturbative qcd. in the present subsection, we shall briey
describe one of them, the so-called method of field correlators (mfc) in qcd. the idea, which
lies behind this approach, is that a large class of observables in qcd can be expressed in terms of
the wilson loops [50, 57]. in this respect, the calculation of some qcd observable consists of two
steps: the calculation of the wilson loop for an arbitrary contour and summation of the wilson
loops over contours with a certain weight, which is determined by the observable 8. for example,
the green function of a system consisting of a scalar quark and antiquark with equal masses m,
which propagates in the qcd vacuum from the initial state (y, y) to the nal state (x, x),

where

g (x, x; y, y)  dtr (cid:16)  (x)  (x, x) (x)(cid:17)(cid:16) (y) (y, y)  (y)(cid:17)e ,

(15)

(x, y) =

1
nc

a(u)du


p exp
ig

x

zy

stands for the parallel transporter factor along the straingt line 9, in the quenched approximation
reads [59, 60, 61]

g (x, x; y, y) =

+

z0

ds

+

z0

dsem2(s+s)z dzz dz exp


1
4

s

z0

z2d 

1
4

s

z0

z2d

hw (c)i .

(16)

in eq. (16), the dot stands for d
d , and the closed contour c consists of the trajectories z and z
of a quark and antiquark, z(0) = y, z(s) = x, z(0) = y, z(s) = x, and straight-line pieces, which
form the initial and nal states. one can see that the weight factor in the path-integral standing
in eq. (16) is completely determined by the free theory, and all the dependence on the gauge eld
factors out in the form of the wilson loop.

after that, the main idea of the mfc is not to directly evaluate the wilson loop, but to
express it via gauge-invariant irreducible correlators (the so-called cumulants) of the gauge eld
strength tensors. such correlators have been measured in lattice experiments both at large and
small distances [62, 63], which enables one to use them in practical calculations of various physical

8it should be mentioned that contrary to the classical theory (where only the electric and magnetic eld strengths
are observable, while the vector potential plays only an auxiliary role for their determination), in the quantum
theory wilson loops are observable themselves owing to the aharonov-bohm eect [58].

9from now on, for quantities including p -ordering along open paths, we adopt the convention that the matrices

are ordered from the second argument to the rst one.

11

quantities. in order to express the wilson loop (1) via cumulants, one should rst make use of
the non-abelian stokes theorem, derived in refs. [64, 65], which yields 10

hw (c)i =

1

nc *tr p exp
igz

d(x())f(x(), x0)
+ .

on the r.h.s. of eq. (17), the integration is performed over an arbitrary surface  bounded by
the contour c and parametrized by the vector x(). next,   (1, 2) is a two-dimensional
coordinate, and

stands for the innitesimal surface element, where g() is the determinant of the so-called induced
metric tensor of the surface, dened as

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

d(x()) = qg()t()d2

gab() = (ax())(bx()),

ab(ax())(bx())

1

qg()

where a  

a , a, b = 1, 2. next,

t() =

is the extrinsic curvature tensor of the surface, t2
() = 2, f(x, x0)  (x0, x)f(x)(x, x0) is
the covariantly shifted non-abelian eld strength tensor, f = a  a  ig [a, a], and x0
is an arbitrary but xed reference point, the dependence on which actually drops out.
the second step in expressing the wilson loop in terms of the cumulants is to rewrite
eq. (17) via the cumulant expansion theorem [66]. the aim of this theorem is to express cumu-
lants, which are usually denoted as hhf11(x1, x0)   fnn(xn, x0)ii, through the usual averages
hf11(x1, x0)   fnn(xn, x0)i. to this end, let us rst consider for simplicity the abelian case,
where

hf11(x1, x0)   fnn(xn, x0)i = hf11(x1)   fnn(xn)i 

 z da (a) f11(x1)   fnn(xn),

(21)

with  (a) standing for a certain o(4)-invariant integration measure, and introduce the following
generating functional for eld correlators

the eld correlators then obviously have the form

z [j] = (cid:28)exp(cid:18)igz d4xj(x)f(x)(cid:19)(cid:29) .

hf11(x1)   fnn(xn)i = (ig)n

by virtue of the taylor expansion,

nz [j]

j11(x1)   jnn(xn)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)j=0

.

10in the following equation, the summation is performed over  <  (cf. also eq. (26) below).

(22)

(23)

12

where it has been used that z[0] = 1, we obtain for the generating functional

z [j] = 1 +



xn=1

z [j] = 1 +



xn=1

1

nz [j]

n! z d4x1   z d4xnj11(x1)   jnn(xn) 

j11(x1)   jnn(xn)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)j=0! ,
n! z d4x1   z d4xnj11(x1)   jnn(xn)hf11(x1)   fnn(xn)i .

(ig)n

(24)

by denition, an n-th order cumulant is dened as follows

hhf11(x1)   fnn(xn)ii = (ig)n

n lnz [j]

j11(x1)   jnn(xn)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)j=0

.

(25)

in particular, if we specify a current to the form j(x) = r

d(x())(x  x()), where  is a
certain surface bounded by the contour c, then, by virtue of the stokes theorem, the partition
function (22) (where the summation is performed over  < ) is nothing else, but the wilson
loop. the denition (25) means that the cumulants of the eld strength tensors are the analogues
of usual irreducible (connected) green functions, which is quite in line with the interpretation of
 lnhw (c)i as a correction to the free energy due to the interaction of the gauge eld with an
external charged particle (cf. the end of the previous subsection). next, following the same steps
which led from eq. (23) to eq. (24), we obtain from eq. (25)

hw (c)i = exp




xk=1

(ig)k

k! z

d11(x1)  z

dkk(xk)hhf11(x1)   fkk(xk)ii
 .

(26)

eq. (26) is usually referred to as the cumulant expansion.

notice that in eqs. (24) and (26), it has been assumed that the series on their r.h.s. converge,
which is true for non-pathological models. to those belongs in particular qcd even at large
distances, i.e., at large g (see discussion in ref. [19]). this fact means that the cumulant expansion
in qcd is indeed a nonperturbative expansion. the important property of the cumulants in such
models, which distinguishes them from the usual correlators (thus associated with the usual green
functions), is that any cumulant decreases vs. the distance between any two points, in which the
elds in the cumulant are dened. an example of the model where the cumulant expansion
diverges is the instanton gas [67].

one can now write down the following generating equation for cumulants



1 +

xn=1
= exp  
xk=1

(ig)n

n! z d4x1   z d4xnj11(x1)   jnn(xn)hf11(x1)   fnn(xn)i =
k! z d4x1   z d4xkj11(x1)   jkk(xk)hhf11(x1)   fkk(xk)ii! ,

(ig)k

(27)

which means that varying eq. (27) several times w.r.t. j and setting then j = 0, one can get
relations between the cumulants and correlators of various orders.

13

in this way, the one-fold variation and setting j = 0 yield hhf(x)ii = hf(x)i. notice
that due to the o(4)-invariance of the euclidean integration measure  (a), this average vanishes.
next, the two- and three-fold variations and setting j = 0 yield the following relations

hf11(x1)f22(x2)i = hhf11(x1)f22(x2)ii + hf1(x1)ihf22(x2)i

(28)

and

hf11(x1)f22(x2)f33(x3)i = hhf11(x1)f22(x2)f33(x3)ii +

+hhf11(x1)f22(x2)iihf33(x3)i + hhf11(x1)f33(x3)iihf22(x2)i +

+ hf11(x1)ihhf22(x2)f33(x3)ii + hf11(x1)ihf22(x2)ihf33(x3)i ,

(29)

respectively. eq. (29) can be symbolically written as follows

hf11(x1)f22(x2)f33(x3)i = hhf11(x1)f22(x2)f33(x3)ii +

+ (3)hhf11(x1)f22(x2)iihf33(x3)i + hf11(x1)ihf22(x2)ihf33(x3)i ,

(30)

where the coecient in curly brackets denotes the number of the terms of the same type, which
dier from each other only by the order of the arguments (and indices, respectively). making use
of this notation, we can next write e.g. the following equation

hf11(x1)f22(x2)f33(x3)f44(x4)i = hhf11(x1)f22(x2)f33(x3)f44(x4)ii +

+(3)hhf11(x1)f22(x2)iihhf33(x3)f44(x4)ii +

+(4)hhf11(x1)f22(x2)f33(x3)iihf44(x4)i +

+(6)hhf11(x1)f22(x2)iihf33(x3)ihf44(x4)i+hf11(x1)ihf22(x2)ihf33(x3)ihf44(x4)i .
(31)
now one can see that on the r.h.s. of eqs. (30) and (31) stand with the coecient equal to unity
all possible terms, which correspond to various splittings of the set {f11(x1), . . . , fnn(xn)} into
subsets, so that to every subset corresponds a cumulant. this property holds also for the higher
correlators, which gives a simple mnemonic rule for calculation of the higher cumulants without
using eq. (27). this rule is the essence of the cumulant expansion theorem.

for the non-abelian case, the cumulant expansion theorem remains the same except for exclud-
ing the terms which violate the path-ordering prescription [65]. e.g. in the non-abelian version
of eq. (29), the term

will be absent for a given order of points x1, x2, x3.

hhf11(x1, x0)f33(x3, x0)iihf22(x2, x0)i

14

it looks natural to address the question on whether cumulants of various orders are indepen-
dent of each other or there exist any relations between them. such equations relating cumulants
of dierent orders indeed take place. they have been derived by making use of the stochastic
quantization method [68, 49] in ref. [46] and further investigated in refs. [69, 70, 71]. alternative
equations for cumulants following from the non-abelian bianchi identities, have been proposed in
refs. [65, 46] and further studied in ref. [72]. notice that quite recently, there has been proposed
one more approach for a derivation of a system of self-coupled equations for cumulants. this has
been done in ref. [47] by considering a eld of a certain colour in the gluodynamics lagrangian as
the one propagating in the background of the elds of all other colours by making use of the back-
ground eld methods. finally, besides equations for cumulants, there have recently been proposed
new equations for wilson loops [73] derived by virtue of the stochastic quantization method. sev-
eral techniques of the loop space approach, exploited in a derivation of these equations, have been
then applied to the solution of the cauchy problem for the loop equation in 3d turbulence [74].
by denition adopted in the theory of random processes, a set of random quantities is called
gaussian, provided that all the cumulants of these quantities higher than the quadratic one vanish.
according to the lattice data [62, 63], the stochastic ensemble of elds in qcd can with a good
accuracy be considered as a gaussian one, i.e., the bilocal cumulant

hhf(x, x0)f(y, x0)ii

(32)

is much larger than all the higher cumulants, so that the cumulant expansion converges fastly.
due to this property of the qcd vacuum, one can disregard all the cumulants except the bilocal
one, which leads to the bilocal or gaussian approximation in the mfc in qcd. however one can
immediately see, that the neglection of all the cumulants higher than the bilocal one in the non-
abelian analogue of eq. (26) leads to the appearance of the articial dependences of the r.h.s.
of this equation on the reference point x0 and on the shape of the surface .

the rst problem can be solved by noting that the bilocal cumulant (32) decreases fastly when
|x  y|  tg, where tg is the so-called correlation length of the vacuum, tg  0.13 fm in the
su(2)-case [75], and tg  0.22 fm in the su(3)-case [62]. on the other hand, as it has already
been discussed in the previous subsection, according to ref. [51], the area law of the wilson loop
takes place when its size r is of the order of 1.0 fm. this means that in the conning regime, i.e.,
for the loops of such size, one can in the general case (i.e., for the dominant amount of cumulants)
write down the following inequality

|x  x0|  |y  x0|  r  tg  |x  y| .

according to it, we can with a good accuracy neglect the dependence on the point x0 in the bilocal
cumulant (32), i.e., approximate this quantity by the gauge- and translation-invariant cumulant
as follows

trhhf(x, x0)f(y, x0)ii  trhhf(x)(x, y)f(y)(y, x)ii .

as far as the problem of the articial dependence on the shape of the surface  in the bilocal
approximation is concerned, it cannot be solved on the basis of simple theoretical arguments,
but one can choose  to be the surface of the minimal area for a given contour c. as we shall
see in subsection 2.1, this enables one to reproduce the area law behaviour of the wilson loop.
since such a surface min. is uniquely dened by the contour c, we nally arrive at the following
expression for the wilson loop in the bilocal approximation

15

hw (c)i  hw (min.)i 

1
nc



tr exp


g2

2 zmin.

d(x) zmin.

d(x)hhf(x)(x, x)f(x)(x, x)ii


,

(33)

where we have denoted for brevity x  x() and x  x(). due to the colour invariance of
the euclidean integration measure in qcd, the bilocal cumulant on the r.h.s. of eq. (33) is
proportional to the unity matrix in the fundamental representation, 1ncnc, and therefore the
p -ordering is not necessary any more.
the bilocal cumulant standing in the exponent on the r.h.s. of eq. (33) can be now

parametrized by two renormalization group-invariant coecient functions d and d1 as follows

g2

2 hhf(x)(x, x)f(x)(x, x)ii = 1ncnc((  )d(cid:16)(x  x)2(cid:17) +

+

1

2 " 

x

((x  x)  (x  x)) +


x

((x  x)  (x  x))# d1(cid:16)(x  x)2(cid:17)). (34)

the parametrization (34) of the bilocal cumulant is chosen in such a way, that the term containing
the function d1 yields a perimeter type contribution to the wilson loop (33). namely, by making
use of the (ordinary) stokes theorem, one can prove that 11

1

d(x)" 

d(x) zmin.

2 zmin.
((x  x)  (x  x))# d1(cid:16)(x  x)2(cid:17) = ic

x

((x  x)  (x  x))+

+


x

where

dxic

dyg(cid:16)(x  y)2(cid:17) ,

(35)

(36)

g(cid:16)x2(cid:17) 

+

zx2

dd1().

in particular, we see that the one-gluon-exchange diagram contribution to the wilson loop, equal
to

exp

c2

g2

42 ic

dxic

dy

1

(x  y)2


(which for the contour c without cusps yields the renormalization factor standing on the r.h.s.
of eq. (14)) is contained due to eq. (35) in the function d1. according to eq. (36), it is equal to

doge

1

(cid:16)x2(cid:17) = c2

g2
42

1

|x|4 .

(37)

11from now on, for simplicity, we restore in eq. (33) the usual agreement on the summation over all  and  (

and ), not only  < . this can always be done by the appropriate normalization of the functions d and d1.

16

eq. (37) is the leading contribution to the function d1. therefore the eects of renormalization
of the wilson loop, discussed at the end of the previous subsection, are taken into account in the
mfc by virtue of the function d1.

thus, the function d1 is nonvanishing already in the order g2, whereas the function d in this
order of perturbation theory vanishes. the nonvanishing contributions to the function d emerging
in the higher orders have been calculated in ref. [76]. from now on, we shall not be interested
any more in the perturbative contributions to these functions. the nonperturbative parts of the
functions d and d1 have been calculated in the lattice experiments in refs. [62, 63], where it has
been shown that they are related to each other as d1  1
due to the lorentz structure standing at the function d in eq. (34), its contribution to the
wilson loop (33) cannot be reduced to that of a perimeter type. this function is responsible for
the area law behaviour of the wilson loop and gives rise to the qcd string eective action. the
problems of a derivation of this action from eq. (33) and its further investigation will be the topic
of the next section.

3d.

2 string representation of qcd in the framework of the

method of field correlators

in the present section, we shall demonstrate the usefulness of the mfc for the derivation and
investigation of the local gluodynamics string eective action. our interpretation of this topic in
the next three subsections will mainly follow the original papers [77, 78] in subsection 2.1, [79]
in subsection 2.2, and [80] in subsection 2.3. a short review of all these papers can be found in
ref. [81].

2.1 gluodynamics string eective action from the wilson loop ex-

pansion

let us start with the problem of a derivation of the eective action of the gluodynamics string,
generated by the strong vacuum background elds in qcd, which ensure connement and yield a
dominant contribution to the bilocal cumulant. to this end we mention that, as it has already been
discussed in the previous section, the quantity  lnhw (c)i is nothing else, but a correction to the
gluodynamics free energy due to the interaction of a test quark, moving along the contour c, with
these background elds. this observation enables us to treat this quantity with hw (c)i dened
by eq. (33) as a nonlocal background-induced gluodynamics string eective action associated with
the minimal area surface min.. in what follows, by the terms local and nonlocal string eective
action, we shall imply the actions depending on a single string world-sheet coordinate  or on
two such coordinates, respectively.

substituting eq. (34) into eq. (33), one can see that the coecient function d plays the role
of a propagator of the background eld between the points x() and x(), which lie on min..
though this propagator cannot be completely found analytically, its nonperturbative part can be
parametrized with a good accuracy as

d(x) = s(cid:28)(cid:16)f a

(0)(cid:17)2(cid:29) e|x|/tg,

(38)

17

where the gluonic condensate s(cid:28)(cid:16)f a

(0)(cid:17)2(cid:29) is of the order of 0.038 gev2 [15] 12. this will

nally enable us to obtain the coupling constants of the few rst terms of the resulting local string
eective action expressed via the correlation length of the vacuum, tg, and the gluonic condensate.
in order to derive the desired local eective action, let us proceed with the taylor expansion

of the nonlocal action

se. (min.) = 2 zmin.

d(x) zmin.

d(x)d  (x  x)2

t 2
g

!

(39)

in powers of the derivatives w.r.t. the string world-sheet coordinates as. obviously, the nonlocal-
ity of the initial action will then display itself in the appearance of higher derivatives w.r.t. as in
the nal expression for the action. notice also that in eq. (39), we have explicitly emphasized the
form of the dependence on tg, since, as we shall eventually see, the parameter of this expansion
will be proportional to tg.

to perform an expansion, let us rst rewrite innitesimal surface elements on the r.h.s. of
eq. (39) by making use of eqs. (18), (19), and (20). next, we introduce instead of as new
integration variables  a  ()a
x()  x(), and nally d(cid:18) (xx)2

and expand in power series of  as the quantities qg(), t(),
g (cid:19). such an expansion will automatically be a formal series in

t 2

tg

powers of tg, e.g.

(x()  x())2 = t 2

g h a bgab() + tg a b c(ax)(bcx) + o(cid:16)t 2

g(cid:17)i .

in what follows, we shall be interested only in the terms in this series not higher than of the fourth

order in tg. then, taking into account that for an arbitrary odd n, r d2 i1     ind(y) = 0, where
y   a bgab(), we obtain

se. = 2t 2

g z d2qg()(2qg()z d2d(y) + t 2

g(qg()"

1
2

(at())(bt())z d2 a bd(y)+

+ 1

2

(abx)(cdx) +

2
3

(ax)(bcdx)!z d2 a b c dd(y)+

+(ax)(bcx)(dx)(ef x)z d2 a b c d e f d(y)#+

+2(cid:18)aqg()(cid:19) (bx)(cdx)z d2 a b c dd(y) +(cid:18)abqg()(cid:19)z d2 a bd(y))),

where    stands for the derivative w.r.t. the argument, and we have arranged the terms in powers

of the derivatives ofqg(). in order to simplify the integrals over  as as much as possible, it is very
useful to x by reparametrization the conformal gauge for the induced metric, gab() = qg()ab

(see e.g. ref. [20]). after that, by making use of the equality  a 

2g()
12the colour index a should not be confused with the index of the two-vector .

, it becomes possible

y = 1


a

18

to perform partial integrations over  as. it is also useful to replace the ordinary derivatives by
the covariant ones according to the gauss-weingarten formulae

dadbx = abx  c

abcx = k i

abni
.

here, ni
i, j = 1, 2, c

s stand for the unit normal vectors to the string world-sheet, ni

ax = 0,
ab is the second fundamental form of the world-sheet.
notice that in the conformal gauge adopted, all the quantities are greatly simplied, e.g.

ab is a christoel symbol, and k i

 = ij, ni

nj

2 (c

ab = 1
c
a )2  k i a
(k i a

ab + c
b k i b

ba  abc) lnqg(). in particular, the expression for the scalar curvature r =

a of the world-sheet in this gauge takes the form

and one can prove the validity of the following equations

r =

aa lnqg()

qg()

,

(40)

t abcd(abx)(cdx) = t abcd(dadbx)(dcddx) + 2(cid:16)a lnqg()(cid:17)2

qg()
t abcd(ax)(bcdx) = t abcd(dax)(dbdcddx) + 2r,

,

t abcd(dadbx)(dcddx) = 3(dadax)(dbdbx)  2r,

gab abqg()
qg()

= r + (cid:16)a lnqg()(cid:17)2

,

qg()

t abcd(cid:18)aqg()(cid:19) (bx)(cdx) = 2(cid:18)a lnqg()(cid:19)2

,

where t abcd  gabgcd + gacgbd + gadgbc. making use of all that, introducing a new integration
variable za  g1/4 a, and recovering the metric dependence by virtue of the equality

we arrive after some straightforward algebra at the following expression for the string eective
action up to the order t 4
g

(dadax)(cid:16)dbdbx(cid:17) = gab (at) (bt) ,

(41)

se. = z d2g + z d2gr +

1

0 z d2ggab(at)(bt) +o


t 6

g s(cid:28)(cid:16)f a

(0)(cid:17)2(cid:29)

r2

, (42)




where r is the size of the contour c in the conning regime (cf. eq. (8)).

in eq. (42), the coupling constants are completely determined via the zeroth and the rst
moments of the coecient function d (as well as the omitted higher terms of the expansion are
determined via the higher moments of the function d) as follows

19

and

 =

 = 4t 2

g z d2zd(cid:16)z2(cid:17) ,
6 z d2zz2d(cid:16)z2(cid:17) ,

t 4
g

making use of eq. (38), one can estimate them as

t 4
g

1
0

= 

4 z d2zz2d(cid:16)z2(cid:17) .

(43)

(44)

 = 4t 2

g s(cid:28)(cid:16)f a

(0)(cid:17)2(cid:29) ,  =


6

t 4

g s(cid:28)(cid:16)f a

(0)(cid:17)2(cid:29) ,

1
0


4

= 

t 4

g s(cid:28)(cid:16)f a

(0)(cid:17)2(cid:29) .

due to the lattice data quoted after eq. (32), we thus get for the su(2)-case the following values
of the coupling constants   0.2 gev2 (cf. the corresponding value before eq. (9)),   0.003,
and 1
= 0.005. the obtained value of the nambu-goto term string tension demonstrates the
0
agreement of the mfc with the present lattice results, while the two other obtained coupling
constants are simply small numbers, which conrms the validity of the performed expansion.

r(cid:17)2n

s(cid:28)(cid:16)f a

(0)(cid:17)2(cid:29) r4(cid:16) tg

before discussing various terms in eq. (42), let us comment on the parameter of the performed
expansion of the initial eq. (39). first of all, as it has already been mentioned, this is an expansion
in formal power series of tg, which means that it is valid only when tg is suciently small.
that was a reason for the author of ref. [48] to call the limit when tg is small but  is kept
xed as a string limit of qcd. an n-th term of the expansion has the order of magnitude
, which means that the parameter of the expansion is (tg/r)2. in the
conning regime, this parameter is of the order of 0.04 (see the lattice data after eq. (32)), i.e.,
is indeed a small number. therefore in the string limit, the operators of the lowerst orders in
the derivatives w.r.t. as dominate in the expansion of the full nonlocal action (39) 13. contrary,
in the qcd sum rule limit [15], the eects brought about by the nonlocality of the functions d
and d1 are disregarded, and these functions are simply replaced by the gluonic condensate. in
the language of the parametrization (38), this means that tg  , and our expansion diverges.
this observation claries once more the relevance of the string picture of qcd to the description
of connement. we also see, that it is the mfc (where the correlation length of the vacuum can
be considered as a variable parameter), which provides us with such a picture.

let us now proceed with the physical discussion of the obtained local string eective action (42).
the rst term on the r.h.s. of this equation is the celebrated nambu-goto term with the positive

string tension . this term ensures the area law behaviour of the wilson loop (7), since r d2qg()

is nothing else, but the area of the minimal surface, bounded by c. the obtained expression for
the string tension coincides with the one obtained in ref. [16]. notice also that though the nambu-
goto term alone is known to suer from the problem of appearing of a tachyon in its spectrum,
this problem is absent for the full nonlocal string eective action (39).

13examples of the geometric structures, emerging in the expansion in the order t 6

g , are listed in the appendix

to the rst paper of ref. [77].

20

the second term is known to be a full derivative in 2d, which can be most easily seen in the
conformal gauge adopted, i.e., from eq. (40). this term is a topological invariant proportional to
the euler character of the world-sheet

1

 =

4 z d2qg()r = 2  2  (number of handles)  (number of boundaries).

in particular, for the surface min. under study,  = 1.

the most interesting term in the obtained eective action (42) is the third one, which is usually
referred to as the rigidity term [82, 83]. this term is not a full derivative, since it can be rewritten
(just modulo full derivative terms) as

1

0 z d2qg()k i a

b k i b
a ,

i.e., the integrand does not contain the complete expression for gr. the rigidity term has been
introduced into string theory in the above mentioned papers from the general arguments as the
only possible one, which is invariant under the scale transformation x()  x().
it is worth noting that during the derivation of the eective action (42), we have not used
explicitly the fact that the surface min. = min.[c], described by the induced metric gab(), is
the one of the minimal area for a given contour c. however, this surface possesses an important
property distinguishing it from all the other surfaces bounded by c. namely, it is dened by the
(nonlinear) equation dadax() = 0 together with the boundary condition x()|c = x(s). due
to this exceptional property of min.[c] and eq. (41), we see that at this surface the rigidity term
vanishes. however, in a complete string picture of qcd including quantum uctuations above
conning background, there should appear an average over all world-sheets s bounded by the
contour c. it is natural to expect that the dominant contribution to this integral is brought about
by min.[c], i.e., eq. (33) can be represented as

hw (min.)i = z dx()hw ()i .

(45)

here, x() parametrizes the surface , and the measure of the average over world-sheets, dx(),
should just be determined by the above mentioned quantum uctuations. in writing down eq. (45),
we have assumed that the statistical weight of the average over world-sheets is given by the mfc-
inspired eq. (33) with the replacement min.  . if this assumption really holds, which should
be justied by further investigations, then eq. (42), with gab being the induced metric describing
, yields the rst few terms of the local string eective action associated with the statistical weight
hw ()i. since  here is no more the surface of the minimal area, the rigidity term in this string
eective action survives.
as it has been for the rst time mentioned in ref. [83] and then conrmed by related calcu-
lations in refs. [84] and [85], the negative sign of the coupling constant 0 of the rigidity term
is an important property relevant to the stability of the string world-sheet. a simple argument
in favour of this observation can be obtained by considering the propagator corresponding to the
action (42), which for a certain lorentz index  reads

hx()x(0)i = z

d2p
(2)2

eipaa
p2  1

0

p4 .

(46)

for negative 0, this integral yields

21

hx()x(0)i = 

1

2 (cid:20)ln ( ||) + k0(cid:18)q|0|  ||(cid:19)(cid:21)

with  denoting the ir momentum cuto and k0 standing for the modied bessel function, while
for positive 0 an unphysical pole in the propagator occurs. another arguments concerning the
necessity of the negative sign of 0 have been presented in the above mentioned papers. this
property (called there anti-rigidity or negative stiness) has been demonstrated to ensure
vanishing of the imaginary part of the frequencies of small uctuations of the world-sheet, which
might lead to the instabilities of the latter one. further, the requirement of the negative sign of
0 has been employed in ref. [86]. there, a new nonlocal string action, which manifests negative
stiness, has been proposed as a good candidate for modelling the gluodynamics string. however
contrary to our calculations, it remained unclear in that paper how the action introduced there can
be derived either from the wilson loop expansion or from some quantity relevant to gluodynamics
(e.g. another vacuum amplitude or the gluodynamics lagrangian).

once being integrated out, the small transversal uctuations of the world-sheet, mentioned
above, produce a renormalization of the string tension, which at the two-loop level has been
calculated in ref. [87] and reads

ren. = 

1 + 0

16  1 + ln
d  2

42
2

0! + 2

0

(d  2)(d  1)

2562

 ln

42
2

0!2
 ,

where  is an uv momentum cuto, and d is the dimension of the space-time. it is worth noting
that the appearance of the rigidity term yields also some modications in the quark-antiquark
potential, string tension behaviour at nite temperature, and thermal deconnement properties,
all of which have been surveyed in ref. [88].

however in the ir region, the rigidity term becomes irrelevant, and only the nambu-goto term
in the string eective action (42) survives. the propagator (46) then goes over into hx()x(0)i =
 1
2 ln(||). this means that in the ir region, normals to the string world-sheet are very short-
ranged, i.e., the world-sheet becomes extremely crumpled. that is the reason, why this problem
is usually referred to as the problem of crumpling of the string world-sheet.

let us now consider two possibilities of curing this problem. first of them has been put
forward in ref. [89] for the case of the eective string theory emerging from compact qed in
d space-time dimensions (the so-called conning string theory [90], which will be considered in
details in section 4). there, it has been demonstrated that for the case d  , the correlation
function of two transversal uctuations of the string world-sheet in this theory has an oscillatory
behaviour at large distances. such a behaviour indicates that the world-sheet is smooth rather
than crumpled. one might expect that the same mechanism works in all gauge theories, whose
conning phases admit a representation in the form of some eective string theory with a non-local
interaction between the world-sheet elements. however, it is not obvious whether this mechanism
can be extended to the non-abelian case of gluodynamics, where in the nonlocal string eective
action (39) instead of the propagator of the massive vector eld, appearing in the abelian case,
stands the coecient function d(x). though according to the lattice data [62, 63], the large
distance asymptotic behaviour of the latter is indeed similar to the one of the massive vector eld
propagator, there nevertheless remain signicant dierences.

let us therefore turn ourselves to the second possibility, proposed in ref. [82] and elaborated
on in ref. [78], which is more applicable to gluodynamics. it is based on the introduction of the
so-called topological term, which is equal to the algebraic number of self-intersections of the string

22

world-sheet, into the string eective action. then, by adjusting the coupling constant of this
term, one can eventually arrange the cancellation of contributions to the string partition function
coming from highly crumpled surfaces, whose intersection numbers dier by one from each other.
thus it looks natural to address the problem of a derivation of the topological term from the
gluodynamics lagrangian. such a term has been recently derived in ref. [91] for 4d compact
qed with an additional -term. in the dual formulation of the wilson loop in this theory (which
is nothing else but the 4d conning string theory mentioned above), the latter one occurred to be
crucial for the formation of the topological string term. however, such a mechanism of generation
of a topological term is dicult to work out in gluodynamics due to our inability to construct the
exact dual formulation of the wilson loop in this theory. therefore, it looks suggestive to seek for
some model of the gluodynamics vacuum, which might lead to the appearance of the topological
term in the string representation of the wilson loop in this theory.

in ref. [78], this idea has been realized by making use of recent results concerning the evaluation
of the eld strength correlators in the dilute instanton gas model [92]. in the latter paper, it has
been demonstrated that for the case of an instanton gas with broken cp -invariance, the bilocal
eld strength correlator contains a term proportional to the tensor . this term is absent
in the case of a cp -symmetric vacuum, since it is proportional to the topological charge of
the system, v (n4  n4), where v is the four-volume of observation, and within the notations
of ref. [92], n4 and n4 stand for the densities of instantons and antiinstantons (is and is for
brevity), respectively. similarly, the paper [78] also dealt with the approximation of a dilute i  i
gas with xed equal sizes  of is and is. in the remaining part of this subsection, we shall briey
consider the main points of this paper.

the new structure arising in the bilocal correlator in the i  i gas reads [92]
! .

 trhhf(x, x0)f(x, x0)ii = 8 (n4  n4) ir (x  x)2

2

(47)

in eq. (47), the asymptotic behaviour of the function ir (z2) at z  1 and z  1 has the following
form

and

respectively.

ir(cid:16)z2(cid:17) 

2
6

,

ir(cid:16)z2(cid:17) 

22

|z|4 ln z2,

(48)

(49)

in what follows, we are going to present the leading term in the derivative expansion of the

correction to the nonlocal string eective action (39), which has the form

se. =  ln hw (min.)i .

(50)
here, hw (min.)i is the corresponding correction to the expression (33) for the wilson loop,
following from eq. (47) in the cp -broken vacuum.
we shall not be interested in calculating corrections to the nambu-goto and rigidity terms
arising due to additional contribution from the i  i gas to the function d(x). this can be
easily done by carrying out the corresponding integrals (43) and (44) of the function d(x) in this

23

gas. notice only that, as it has already been mentioned in ref. [78], due to the reasons discussed
in details in refs. [67] and [19], a correction to the string tension (43), obtained in such a way
from the i  i gas contribution to the function d(x), should be cancelled by the contributions
coming from the higher cumulants in this gas. clearly, this does not necessarily mean that the
corresponding correction to the rigid string inverse bare coupling constant (44) vanishes. indeed,
one can imagine himself a function d(x), for which 
dttd(t) 6= 0, where
r0
t = z2. for example, this is true for the function d(t) dened as

dtd(t) = 0, whereas 
r0

d(t) =

1
2c3 , 0 < t < c; d(t) = 

1
t3 , t > c,

which can obviously be made continuous by smoothering the jump at t = c with some function,
odd w.r.t. the line t = c.

one can now expand the correction (50), emerging from the term (47), in powers of the
derivatives w.r.t. as in the same manner, as it has been done above for the nonlocal string
eective action (39). noting that an analogue of the nambu-goto term in this expansion vanishes
since tt = 0, we obtain

se. =  + o  6 (n4  n4)

r2

! .

here,

1
4

 

z d2ggab(at)(bt)

is the algebraic number of self-intersections of the string world-sheet and

 = 164 (n4  n4)z d2zz2ir(cid:16)z2(cid:17)

is the corresponding coupling constant.

note that the averaged separation between the nearest neighbors in the i  i gas is given by
l = (n4 + n4) 1
4 . according to phenomenological considerations one obtains for the su(3)-case,
/l  1/3 [93] (see also ref. [94], where the ratio /l has been obtained from direct lattice
measurements to be 0.37  0.40). the parameter l should then serve as a distance cuto in the
integral standing on the r.h.s. of eq. (51). taking this into account, we get from eqs. (48), (49),
and (51) the following approximate value of 

(51)

(52)

  (2)4 (n4  n4)


1
12

+ ln

l2

2!2
 .

noting that the second term in square brackets on the r.h.s. of eq. (52), emerging due to
eq. (49), is much larger than the rst one, emerging due to eq. (48), and making use of the value
1  0.6 gev [24], one obtains   57680.4gev4  (n4  n4).
in conclusion of this subsection, we have found that in the i  i gas with a nonzero topological
charge, there appears a topological term in the string representation of the wilson loop. the
coupling constant of this term is given by eq. (51). together with the nambu-goto and rigidity
terms (see eq. (42)), this term forms the eective lagrangian of the gluodynamics string following
from the mfc.

24

2.2

incorporation of perturbative corrections

as it has been discussed in the beginning of the previous subsection, the origin of the nonlo-
cal string eective action (39), which served as a starting point for the derivation of the local
action (42), is essentially nonperturbative. this is because the dominant contribution to the
coecient function d(x) is brought about by the strong background elds, which ensure con-
nement. however, as it has been argued in ref. [95], in order to get the exponential growth of
the multiplicity of states in the spectrum of the open bosonic string, one must account for the
perturbative gluons, which interact with the string world-sheet. in the present subsection, we
shall proceed with studying this interaction by making use of the so-called perturbation theory in
the nonperturbative qcd vacuum [26, 27, 70].

 + aa

  1

 = ba

 as aa

, where ba

to this end, we shall split the total eld aa

s are perturbative uctuations around the latter, aa

g is a strong
nonperturbative background, and aa
  gba
.
thus, our strategy should be to perform an integration over aa
s in the expression (17) for the
wilson loop, where  is replaced by min.. however due to the path-ordering, which remained
after rewriting the contour integral as a surface one in the version of the non-abelian stokes
theorem proposed in refs. [64, 65], such an integration is dicult to carry out starting with
eq. (17). that is why, we nd it convenient to adopt another version of this theorem, proposed
in ref. [96], where the path-ordering is replaced by the integration over an auxiliary eld from
the su(nc)/ [u(1)]nc1 coset space. in what follows, we shall consider the su(2)-case, where this
eld is a unit three-vector n, which characterizes the instant orientation in colour space, and the
non-abelian stokes theorem takes a remarkably simple form

ij

d(x())na(x())f a

hw (c)i = *z dn exp
2 
g zmin.


dabcna (dn)b (dn)c
+ zmin.


 is a strength tensor of the gauge eld, dab
2, 1, 3

 +gabcab

+.

(x())+

 = aa

  aa

 = abgabcac
ac
here, f a

is the covariant derivative, and j = 1
2, . . . is the colour spin of representation of the su(2)
group under consideration, dened via its generators t as as t at a = j(j + 1)1. the last term in
the exponent on the r.h.s. of eq. (53) is usually referred to as a gauged wess-zumino term.

as we shall see below, such a version of the non-abelian stokes theorem will indeed enable
us to carry out the one-loop integration over perturbative uctuations, which will then lead to
a new (w.r.t. eq. (39)) type of interaction between the string world-sheet elements. once being
expanded in powers of the derivatives w.r.t. as, this interaction will nally yield a correction to
the rigidity term, keeping the nambu-goto term untouched.

let us start with the above mentioned splitting of the total gauge eld aa

 in eq. (53), which

owing to the background eld formalism [97, 26, 27] yields

(53)

hw (c)i = n z dba

(cid:16)bb

(cid:17) dn exp(z d4x"
2 zmin.

 exp 

ig

25

1

(cid:17)2
4 (cid:16)f a

+

dnaf a

i

2 zmin.
!

dabcna (dn)b (dn)c#)

dab

 f b

 +

1
2

 dcb

aa

(cid:16)dac

z daa

 exp(z d4x"aa
4 (cid:18)aa
aa

ab

g2

+

(cid:17) ab
   2ig f ab
d nadab
 ab

  gacd(cid:16)dab
 ab

(cid:17) ac
ad
 (dn)a!)

 + aa

+

(cid:17)2(cid:19)#  ig zmin.

(cid:17)2(cid:16)ab
 (cid:16)aa
ab
z d ada exp z d4xadac

 b!.

 dcb

(54)

 and dab

here, f a
 are the background eld strength tensor and the corresponding covariant
derivative, dened identically to f a
. secondly, in
order to avoid double counting of elds during the integration and perform the averages over
the background elds and quantum uctuations separately, we have used the so-called t hooft
identity [27]

 with the replacement aa

 and dab

  ba

(cid:16)bb

f (cid:16)ab

z daa

(cid:17) = r dba

(cid:17)
 + ab
(cid:17) should be xed by the
valid for an arbitrary functional f . here, an integration weight (cid:16)bb
demand that all the cumulants and the string tension of the nambu-goto term acquire their
observed values. notice also that in what follows we shall work in the adjoint representation,
so that (t a)bc = iabc, and j = 1. finally, in a derivation of eq. (54) we have adopted the
background feynman gauge, lgauge x. =  1

(cid:17)r daa
r dba

, and denoted f ab

f (cid:16)bb

  f c

 (t c)ab.

 (bb
)

,

2 (cid:16)dab
 ab

(cid:17)2

notice that the term

 ig zmin.

daa

 (dn)a

(55)

in eq. (54) emerged from the expansion of the wess-zumino term as a result of the following
sequence of transformations



ig

2 zmin.

= ig zmin.

daa

 (dn)c + cdeae

dabcnandhbdeae
 hnanb (dn)b  (dn)ai = ig zmin.

 (dn)bi =

daa

 (dn)a ,

 and the wess-zumino term, cancel each other.

where in the last equality we have used the facts that n2 = 1 and bcdnbnc = 0. it is also worth
mentioning that the terms quadratic in quantum uctuations, which emerge from the expansion
of the eld strength tensor f a
in what follows, we shall work in the one-loop approximation, and thus disregard in eq. (54) the
terms cubic and quartic in quantum uctuations, as well as the ghost term. for simplicity, we shall
also neglect the interaction of two perturbative gluons with the eld strength tensor f a
 (gluon
spin term). notice that within the feynman-schwinger proper time path-integral representation
for the perturbative gluon propagator, which will be used immediately below, such a term leads
to insertions of the colour magnetic moment into the contour of integration (see ref. [26]).

26

bringing now together the term (55) and the term ig rmin.

performing gaussian integration over perturbative uctuations, we obtain

dnadab

 ab

 from eq. (54) and

hw (c)i = **exp


ig

2 zmin.

dnaf a




exp


g2

2 zmin.

d(x) zmin.

d(x)k(x, x)
+


+

n

.

ba

(56)

here,

h. . .in  z dn (. . .) exp" i

h. . .iba

  n z dba

2 zmin.
 (. . .) (cid:16)bb

dabcna (dn)b (dn)c#,
(cid:17)2#,
(cid:17) exp"

4 z d4x(cid:16)f a

1

and the (generally speaking, non-translation invariant) interaction kernel k(x, x) is expressed
via the perturbative gluon propagator as follows

z2d
p exp
ig

s

z0

d zb




bc

,

(57)

k(x, x) =

2

xx

nb(x)nc(x)

+

z0

 1
dsz dze

4

s

r0

where z(0) = x, z(s) = x. in the derivation of eq. (56), we have neglected the interaction of
the string world-sheet with the background sources of the type dab
(y), where y is an arbitrary
space-time point outside the world-sheet, which should be nally integrated over.

 f b

in order to derive a correction, emerging due to exchanges by perturbative gluons, to the
background-induced gluodynamics string eective action (39), let us apply to eq. (56) the following
formula [66]

deabe = deae hbi +



xn=1

1

n! hhanbii! ,

where a and b stand for two commuting operators, and h. . .i is an arbitrary average. then, the
leading correction, we are interested in, corresponds to the complete neglection of correlations
between the arguments of the rst and second exponential factors standing on the r.h.s. of
eq. (56). secondly, it corresponds to putting the n- and ba
-averages of the second exponential
factor inside it. taking all this into account and following our denition of the string eective
action se. as  lnhw (c)i, we obtain
se. =  ln**exp





2 zmin.

dnaf a

+ se.,

(58)

+

+

ig

n

ba


where the desired leading correction to the string eective action reads

se. =

g2

2 zmin.

d(x) zmin.

d(x)dhk(x, x)ineba



.

(59)

27

clearly, in the bilocal approximation, the rst term on the r.h.s. of eq. (58) yields pure back-
ground part of the string eective action (39) (cf. eq. (53) with aa

 replaced by ba

).

the obtained correction (59) to the pure background string eective action (39) corresponds to
a new type of interaction between the string world-sheet elements. namely, instead of the propa-
gator of the background gluon, represented by the function d(x), in eq. (59) stands a propagator
of the perturbative gluon in the nonperturbative gluodynamics vacuum. due to the statistical

s

 1

4

weight e

r0

z2d

p exp ig

d zb! of this gluon, it is the region where s is small, which mainly

contributes to the interaction kernel (57). this means that the dominant contribution to the
obtained correction (59) stems from those points x() and x() of the world-sheet, which are
very close to each other. that is in line with the performed derivative expansion of the nonlocal
string eective action (39), where |x  x|  tg  r. taking this into account, we can adopt the
simplest, local, approximation for the propagator dnb(x)nc(x)en

, i.e., replace it by

s

r0

bc

3 z dn exp" i

2 zmin.

ddef nd (dn)e (dn)f#.

this expression is a functional of the world-sheet as a whole (i.e., it is independent of x()) and
therefore can be absorbed into the irrelevant normalization constant n .
finally, in order to perform an expansion of the nonlocal correction (59) in powers of the
derivatives w.r.t. as and derive from it the rst few local terms, it is convenient to pass to the
integration over the trajectories u() = z() + 
s (x  x)  x. this enables one to extract
explicitly the dependence on the points x and x from the integral over trajectories (necessary
for the dierentiation w.r.t. these points), which yields

k(x, x) =

+

dse (xx)2

tr p exp
ig

s

z0

2

xx

z0
d x  x

s

+ u!

4

4s

 1
z due
b u + x +

s

r0

u2d




s

(x  x)!


4s

with u(0) = u(s) = 0. then, in the bilocal approximation, the dominant contribution to the
nambu-goto and rigidity terms comes about from taking the derivatives of the free propagation
factor e (xx)2
which has the form tr p exp"ig

d ub(u)#. finally, substituting the so-obtained expression

and replacing the parallel transporter factor by the one over the closed path,

for k(x, x) into eq. (59) and performing an expansion of this nonlocal correction in powers of
the derivatives w.r.t. as similarly to the previous subsection, we arrive at the desired correction
to the local eective action (42). in this way, it turns out that the nambu-goto term string tension
does not acquire any correction due to perturbative gluonic exchanges, whereas the correction to
the inverse bare coupling constant of the rigidity term reads

r0

s



1
0

g2
3

= 

+

z0

 1
dssz due

4

s

r0

u2d*tr p exp
ig

s

z0

d ub(u)
+


.

ba


(60)

28

it is also worth noting that since ba

note that since we have proved in the previous subsection that the rigidity term vanishes at the
surface of the minimal area, min., the obtained result means that accounting for perturbative
gluons in the lowest order of perturbation theory does not change the background-induced string
eective action (42) associated with this surface. however, the derived correction (60) is essential
for the action (42) corresponding to the statistical weight hw ()i in the integral over world-sheets
standing on the r.h.s. of eq. (45).
g , the parallel transporter factor on the r.h.s. of
eq. (60) cannot be expanded in powers of g and should be considered as a whole. the path-
integral on the r.h.s. of eq. (60) is not simply the perturbative gluon propagator, since the
integral over the proper time contains an additional power of s, which makes the whole quantity
dimensionless, as it should be. notice also that the sign of the obtained correction (60) to the
inverse bare coupling constant (44) depends on the form of background ba
 entering the wilson
loop (which is the most nontrivial content of this correction) on the r.h.s. of eq. (60). however,
since the derived correction is a pure perturbative eect (due to the factor g2 present in eq. (60)),
even in the case when it is positive, it cannot change the negative sign of the leading term (44).

  1

2.3 a hamiltonian of the straight-line qcd string with spinless

quarks

in the present subsection, we shall derive a hamiltonian corresponding to the quark-antiquark
green function (15) in the conning qcd vacuum. to this end, we shall rst write it down in
the feynman-schwinger proper time path-integral representation (16), after which substitute for
hw (c)i the above obtained expression exp (se.) with se. dened by eq. (42) (and inverse
bare coupling constant of the rigidity term (44) modied by eq. (60), i.e., 1
). it
is worth noting that for the rst time such a hamiltonian has been derived in ref. [98], where,
however, only the nambu-goto term in the string eective action (42) has been accounted for.
our aim below will be the derivation of a correction to this result due to the rigidity term, which
we assume to be nonvanishing. that means that the qcd string in the problem under study is
excited, since its world-sheet diers from the one of the minimal area. as a byproduct, we shall also
rederive the leading terms in the hamiltonian of the qcd string with quarks obtained in ref. [98].
however as we shall see, the rigid string theory, being the theory with higher derivatives, leads to
the interesting and phenomenologically relevant modications of the nambu-gotoinduced part
of the hamiltonian. we shall also generalize the result of ref. [98] by considering the case of
dierent masses of a quark and antiquark.

0  1

+  1
0

0

the two main approximations, under which we shall consider the green function (16), are the
same as the ones used in ref. [98]. first, we shall neglect quark trajectories with backward motion
in the proper time, which might lead to creation of additional quark-antiquark pairs. secondly,
we shall use the straight-line approximation for the string world-sheet [c], which, as it has been
argued in ref. [98], corresponds to the valence quark approximation. such a string may rotate and
oscillate longitudinally. this approximation is inspired by two limiting cases, l = 0 and l  ,
where l is the orbital quantum number of the system. the rst case will be investigated below in
more details, and the correction to the hamiltonian of the relativistic quark model [99] due to the
rigidity term in the limit of large masses of a quark and antiquark will be derived.

let us now proceed with a derivation of the desired hamiltonian. to this end, we shall start

with the expression for the green function (16) with hw (c)i dened via eq. (42) and

29

k  m2

1s +

1
4

s

z0

z2d, k  m2

2s +

1
4

s

z0

z2d

standing for the kinematical factors of a quark and antiquark, respectively. then, by making use
of the auxiliary eld formalism [20], one can represent it in the following form

g (x, x; y, y) =

+

z0

dt z dzdzd1d2dhab exp(cid:16)k  k(cid:17) exp(cid:20)( + 2 )z d2h(cid:21)

 exp"z d2hhab(aw)(bw) 

1

0 z d2hhab(at)(bt)#,

(61)

where we have integrated over the lagrange multiplier ab() = ()hab() + f ab(), f abhab = 0,
and  is the mean value of (). here t = 1h

ab (aw) (bw),

t

k + k =

t =

1
2

1
2

1

1( )

d" m2

+ 1( )(cid:16)1 + z2( )(cid:17) +

z0
(x0 + x0  y0  y0) , 1( ) =

m2
2
2( )

+ 2( )(cid:16)1 + z2( )(cid:17)#,

t
2s

z0( ), 2( ) =

t
2s

z0( ),

and the no-backtracking time approximation [98]

1( ) > 0, 2( ) > 0

(62)

(63)

has been used. similarly to ref. [98], we employ in the valence quark sector (63) the approximation
that the string world-sheet [c] can be parametrized by the straight lines, connecting points
z( ) and z( ) with the same  , i.e., the trajectories of a quark and antiquark are synchronized,
z = (, z), z = (, z), w(, ) = z( ) + (1  )z( ), 0    1.
introducing auxiliary elds [98] (, ) = t  h22h
q 
2  z, z  q 

and making a rescaling z 
2  z, one gets from the last exponent on the r.h.s. of eq. (61) the following action

of the string without quarks

, (, ) = 1
t

h12
h22

se. =

t

z0

d

1

z0

d



2( w2 +(cid:18)(cid:18)
(cid:19)2
+ 2(cid:19)r2  2( wr) +
(cid:19)2
+2(( w w)( rr)  ( w r)( wr)) +(cid:18)(cid:18)

t 2
0 2

1

h" w2r2  ( wr)2 + w2 r2  ( w r)2+

+ 2(cid:19)(cid:16) r2r2  ( rr)2(cid:17)

where a dot stands for 

 2(cid:16)( w r)r2  ( wr)( rr) + ( w r)( rr)  ( wr) r2(cid:17)#),
 , and r( ) = z( )  z( ) is the relative coordinate.
let us now introduce the centre of masses coordinate r( ) = ( )z( ) + (1  ( ))z( ),
2( ), 0  ( )  1, should be determined from the requirement that r

where ( )  1( ) + 1

(64)

0

30

decouples from r. these extremal values of 1 and 2 can be obtained from the corresponding
saddle-point equation. referring the reader for the details to appendix a, we shall present here
only the nal result for the path-integral hamiltonian of the straight-line qcd string with quarks.
it has the form

h = h (0) +

1
0

h (1).

here

with

h (0) =

1

2 


(pr

2 + m2
1)
1

(pr

+

2 + m2
2)
2

+ 1 + 2 + 2r2

1

z0

d


+ 0 +

l2

r2


 = 1 + 2 

(1 + 1)2
1 + 2 + 0

, i 

1

z0

di, p2

r 

(pr)2

r2

, l  [r, p]

(65)

(66)

is the hamiltonian of the nambu-goto string with quarks, which for the case of equal masses of
a quark and an antiquark has been derived and investigated in ref. [98]. the hamiltonian h (1),
which is a new one, reads

h (1) =

a1
2 l2 +

a2

r(cid:17)
23 |r|(cid:16)p2

3

2 +

a3

r(cid:17)2
4 (cid:16)p2

+

a4

22qp2
rl2
|r|

+

a5

222

rl2
p2
r2

,

(67)

where  = 12
1+2

, and the coecients aks, k = 1, . . . , 5, are listed in appendix a.

we see that the obtained hamiltonian (67) contains not only corrections to the orbital momen-
tum of the system, but also several operators higher than of the second order in the momentum.
the latter ones emerge as a consequence of the fact that the rigid string theory is a theory with
higher derivatives.

the obtained (path-integral) hamiltonian (65)-(67) contains auxiliary elds 1, 2 and . in
order to construct out of it the operator hamiltonian, which acts upon the wave functions, one
should integrate these elds out. this implies the substitution of their extremal values, which can
be obtained from the corresponding saddle-point equations, into eqs. (65)-(67) and performing
the weil ordering [100].

in conclusion of this subsection, let us apply hamiltonian (67) to a derivation of the rigid
string correction to the hamiltonian of the so-called relativistic quark model [99], i.e., consider
the case when the orbital momentum is equal to zero. let us also set for simplicity the mass of a
quark equal to the mass of an antiquark m1 = m2  m. in order to get h (1), one should substitute
2 = p2 + m2
the extremal values of the elds 1, 2, and  of the zeroth order in 1
0
and extr. =  |r|, into eq. (67). the limit of large masses of a quark and antiquark means that
m  . in this case, we obtain from eq. (67) the rigid string hamiltonian h (1) =  4|r|
r)2
m4 (p2
and then from eqs. (65) and (66) the following expression for the total hamiltonian h

1 = extr.

, extr.

h = 2m +  |r| +

p2

m   1

4m3 +

0m4!(cid:16)p2(cid:17)2
4 |r|

.

(68)

one can see that the new rigid string-inspired term, quartic in the relative momentum of the
quark-antiquark pair, may cause a sucient inuence to the dynamics of the system.

31

3 string representation of abelian-projected theories

3.1 the method of abelian projections

the mfc, exploited in the previous section, enabled us to investigate the string eective action
associated with a certain (e.g. minimal) world-sheet, but did not yield a prescription of a derivation
of the full string partition function in the form of an integral over all world-sheets (45). the
reason for that is that within the mfc one looses the meaning of the path-integral average over
the gluodynamics vacuum, replacing this average by the phenomenological one. as a consequence,
it looks dicult to extract singularities corresponding to qcd strings out of the resulting vacuum
correlation functions.

in the present section, we shall proceed with a derivation of such an integral over world-
sheets in the qcd-inspired eective abelian-projected theories and nd an exact eld-theoretical
analogue of the phenomenological background gluon coecient function d(x). we shall argue
that the general features of the gluodynamics vacuum are in line with the ones predicted by the
so-called dual meissner picture of connement, rst put forward by t hooft and mandelstam [41].
according to the t hooft-mandelstam scenario, the properties of the qcd string should be similar
to those of the electric vortex, which emerges between two electrically charged particles immersed
into a superconducting medium lled with a condensate of cooper pairs of magnetic monopoles. in
the case of the usual abelian higgs model (ahm), which is a relativistic version of the ginzburg-
landau theory of superconductivity, such vortices are referred to as abrikosov-nielsen-olesen
strings [42].

up to now, there does not exist any analytical proof of the existence of the condensate of
abelian monopoles in qcd, though in lattice qcd there are a lot of numerical data in favour
of this conjecture (see e.g. refs. [101, 102, 103, 104]). however in all theories allowing for an
analytical description of connement, the latter one is due to monopoles, which either form a gas
or condense. these examples include compact qed and 3d georgi-glashow model [105, 20], and
supersymmetric yang-mills theories [40]. as far as the origin of magnetic monopoles in qcd is
concerned, they appear in the so-called abelian projection method [39, 106], which we shall briey
describe below.

the essence of this method is based on a certain partial gauge xing procedure, which re-
duces the original gauge group su(nc) to the maximal abelian (or cartan) subgroup [u(1)]nc1,
i.e., leaves abelian degrees of freedom unxed. then, since the original su(nc) group is com-
pact, the resulting abelian subgroup is compact as well, which is just the origin of abelian
magnetic monopoles in the original non-abelian theory. to perform such a gauge xing, one
chooses a certain composite operator x, transforming by the adjoint representation of su(nc),
x  x = uxu, and diagonalizes it, i.e., nds such a gauge (unitary matrix u), that
x = diag (1, . . . , nc). as an example of such an operator may serve e.g. f12(x) or, at -
nite temperatures, the so-called polyakov line [107]

p exp


dx4a4(x, x4)


,

where  = 1/t is an inverse temperature. notice that the most interesting numerical results (see
e.g. [4]) have been obtained for the su(2)-case in the so-called maximal abelian gauge, dened
by the condition of maximization of the functional

ig



z0

32

r [a] = z d4x(cid:18)(cid:16)a1
(cid:17)2

+(cid:16)a2

(cid:17)2(cid:19) ,

u

the eld a as diagonal as possible.

which reads max
one after the gauge transformation with the matrix u. the condition of the local extremum for
 , means that in this gauge we make

rhai. here, a is the transformed vector potential following from the original

this functional, (cid:16)  iga3
the matrix u, which diagonalizes the operator x, is obviously dened up to a left multiplica-
tion by the diagonal su(nc) matrix, which belongs to the subgroup [u(1)]nc1. this is just the
way how the original non-abelian group reduces to the maximal abelian subgroup. if we now
perform a certain abelian projection, i.e., consider the transformed vector potential

(cid:17) a = 0, where a = a1

  ia2

a = u  a +

i
g

! u,

(69)

  (cid:16)a(cid:17)ii

then it is straightforward to see that under the remained maximal abelian subgroup, the diagonal
eld components of the matrix-valued vector potential ai
, i = 1, . . . , nc, transform as

g i, whereas the o-diagonal components cij

+ 1
  exp [i (i  j)] cij

abelian gauge elds, ai
  ai
transform
as charged matter elds, cij
 . the latter ones can be further disregarded in
a derivation of an eective ir abelian-projected theory owing to the so-called abelian dominance
hypothesis [108]. as far as the monopoles (w.r.t. the photon elds of diagonal elements of the
vector potential) are concerned, their role is played by the singularities of the matrix u, which
might occur if some of the eigenvalues 1, . . . , nc of the operator x coincide. this may happen
in some 3d point x0, which becomes a world-line of magnetic monopole in 4d.

 = (cid:16)a(cid:17)ij

let us start with illustrating the above described ideas at the simplest example of the su(2)-

gluodynamics. the initial yang-mills action reads

with f = f i
pauli matrices.

t i. here, f i

 = ai

symhai
  ai

1
2

i =
 + gijkaj

trz d4xf 2
ak



, t i =  i

2 , i = 1, 2, 3, and  is stand for

(70)



one can perform the gauge transformation (69) so that the gauge-transformed eld a obeys
e.g. the above-mentioned maximal abelian gauge xing condition (cid:16)  iga(cid:17) a = 0, where
 (cid:17) u,
a  a3
g (cid:16)[, ] u(cid:17) u. this contribution comes
where the singular contribution has the form f sing.
about from the generally singular character of the matrix u of the gauge transformation, mentioned
above, and describes world-sheets of the dirac strings [109]. clearly, integration over all possible
singular gauge transformations results to an integration over f sing.

14. the gauge transformed eld strength tensor then reads f  = u (cid:16)f + f sing.

 = i

s.
let us next single out the diagonal (neutral) component a  a3

 of the eld a by making



use of the decomposition

a = at 3 + aa

t a  a + c,

14 notice that the maximal abelian gauge xing condition can be written as follows d

ab
 =
ab gab3a. once being rewritten in this form, this gauge can be easily recognized as the standard background
gauge [97] with the eld a playing the role of the background.

 = 0, where d

ab
 a

b

33

where a = 1, 2. consequently, one has for the eld strength tensor

where

f  f [a + c] = f [a] + (d [a]  c)  ig [c,c] ,

(71)

eq. (71) can be straightforwardly rewritten as follows

(o  g)  og  og, and d [a] =   ig [a,] .

f = (f + c) t 3 + sa

t a.

here, f = (  a) and c = gab3aa
 stand for the contributions of diagonal and o-diagonal
components of the gluon eld to the diagonal part of the eld strength tensor, respectively, and
 = (cid:16)dab  ab(cid:17)
 = ab gab3a.
sa
this yields the following decomposition of the action (70) taken now on the gauge transformed
elds,

is the o-diagonal part of the eld strength tensor with dab

ab

i

symha
 (cid:17)i
where (cid:16)f sing.

i =
= 2 tr (cid:16)t if sing.
 (cid:17).

1

4 z d4x(cid:18)f + c +(cid:16)f sing.

 (cid:17)3(cid:19)2

+

1

4 z d4x(cid:16)sa

 +(cid:16)f sing.

 (cid:17)a(cid:17)2

,

next, since our aim will be the investigation of the conning (i.e., infrared) properties of the
abelian-projected su(2)-gluodynamics (rather than the problems of its renormalization, related
to the region of asymptotic freedom), we shall disregard the aa
-dependent terms [108]. within
this approximation, the resulting eective action takes the form

where we have denoted for brevity f sing.
modied bianchi identities as

,

(72)

. the monopole current is dened via the

se.ha, f sing.



1

i =

 (cid:17)2
4 z d4x(cid:16)f + f sing.
 (cid:17)3
  (cid:16)f sing.
 (cid:17) =

f sing.

1
2



jm

 = (cid:16) f + f sing.

with f = 1
2f. thus the obtained eective theory (72) can be regarded as a u(1) gauge
theory with magnetic monopoles. to proceed with the investigation of the monopole ensemble,
 daese., to the dual
it is reasonable to cast the partition function under study, z = r df sing.
form 15. this can be done by making use of the rst-order formalism, i.e., linearizing the square
f 2
 in eq. (72) by introducing an integration over an auxiliary antisymmetric tensor eld b as
follows

z = z df sing.

 dadb exp(cid:26)z d4x(cid:20) 1

4

b2

 +

i
2

bf +

1
2

ff sing.

 +

1

4 (cid:16)f sing.

 (cid:17)2(cid:21)(cid:27) .

(73)

15notice that the gauge xing term for the abelian eld is assumed to be included into the integration measure

da.

34

integration over the a-eld leads to the constraint (cid:16) b  if sing.
b = i f sing.
a. substituting this representation for b into eq. (73), we obtain

 (cid:17) = 0, whose resolution yields
 +(  b), where b is now the magnetic potential dual to the electric potential

z = (cid:28)z db exp(cid:26)z d4x(cid:20) 1

4

  ibjm
f 2

 (cid:21)(cid:27)(cid:29)jm



,

(74)

where from now on f denotes (  b). in eq. (74), the integration over f sing.
to a certain average over the monopole currents, h. . .ijm
immediately below.

s has transformed
, whose concrete form will be specied





clearly, the next crucial step necessary to proceed with the summation over the ensemble of
monopoles is to postulate the properties of their ensemble. in a derivation of eective abelian-
projected theories, it is usually assumed that those form a condensate of their cooper pairs of the
charge 2gm, where gm stands for the magnetic coupling constant 16. this assumption is realized
rstly by setting for the collective current of n magnetic cooper pairs the expression

jm (n )


(x) = 2gm

n

xn=1i dxn

(s) (x  xn(s)) ,

where the world-line of the n-th cooper pair is parametrized by the vector xn
by specifying the measure h. . .ijm
 (cid:19)(cid:29)jm

(cid:28)exp(cid:18)iz d4xbjm

to the following form [110, 111]

dsn
sn

e42sn

= 1 +

+







u(0)=u(sn)

xn =1

n

1

n! 
yn=1


z0

 exp


n

xl=1

sl

z0

dsl(cid:18)

1
4

u2(sl) + 2igm u(sl)b(u(sl))(cid:19)  4

n

xl,k=1

sl

z0

dsl

sk

z0

(s), and secondly

z

du(sn)

dsk [u(sl)  u(sk)]

 . (75)

here, the vector u(sn) parametrizes the same contour as the vector xn
(s). clearly, the world-line
action standing in the exponent on the r.h.s. of eq. (75) contains besides the usual free part
also a short-range interaction term, which after carrying out the path-integral yields the higgs
potential of magnetic cooper pairs.
indeed, eq. (75) can be rewritten as an integral over the
eective magnetic higgs eld describing cooper pairs as follows

(cid:28)exp(cid:18)iz d4xbjm

 (cid:19)(cid:29)jm



= z dd exp(cid:26)z d4x(cid:20) 1

2 |d|2 + (cid:16)||2  2(cid:17)2(cid:21)(cid:27) ,

(76)

where d =   2igmb is the covariant derivative, and an inessential constant factor has been
referred to the integration measure 17. finally, substituting eq. (76) into eq. (74), we arrive at
the following eective abelian-projected theory of the su(2)-gluodynamics

16 within this assumption, we restrict ourselves to the sector of the full yet unknown abelian-projected theory
where there do not exist antimonopoles. possible interference between these two sectors requires further investiga-
tions.

17a seeming divergency at large proper times produced in eq. (75) by the factor e42sn is actually apparent,

since the last term in the exponent on the r.h.s. of this equation yields the desired damping.

35

z = z || d || ddb exp(cid:26)z d4x(cid:20) 1

4

f +

1

2 |d|2 + (cid:16)||2  2(cid:17)2(cid:21)(cid:27) ,

(77)

where (x) = |(x)| ei(x). clearly, in eq. (77) one can recognize the partition function of the
dual ahm (dahm).
next, analogous considerations can be applied to the su(3)-gluodynamics. demanding the
condensation of magnetic monopoles, one can expect that in this case the resulting abelian-
projected theory should be also of the dahm type, but with the [u(1)]2 gauge invariance. to
derive it, let us start with the cartan decomposition of the action (70) in the su(3)-case. then,
f i
 = ai
2 , i = 1, . . . , 8, obey the
commutation relations [t i, t j] = if ijkt k, where is denote the gell-mann matrices. the cartan
decomposition of the eld a, which singles out its diagonal part, has the form

, and the su(3)-generators t i = i

  ai

 + gf ijkaj

ak

a = ah +(cid:16)ca
, a8

 ea + c a

ea(cid:17)  a + c,

(cid:17), and the diagonal su(3)-generators, which generate the cartan
a = 1, 2, 3, where a  (cid:16)a3
subalgebra, read h  (h1, h2) = (t 3, t 8). we have also introduced the so-called step operators
eas (else called raising operators for positive as and lowering operators otherwise) by redening
the rest (non-diagonal) su(3)-generators as follows

1

1

e1 =

2 (cid:16)t 1  it 2(cid:17) , e2 =

2 (cid:16)t 4  it 5(cid:17) , e3 =

2 (cid:16)t 6  it 7(cid:17) .

1

clearly, these operators are non-hermitean in the sense that (ea) = ea. the complete lie
algebra of the so-redened su(3)-generators reads

[h, ea] = eaea,

[ea, eb] = 
here, we have introduced the so-called root vectors
3
2 ! , e3 =  

e1 = (1, 0) , e2 =  

abcec,

,

1
2

3
2 ! ,

1
2

,

1
2

[ea, eb] = abeah.

which thus play the role of the structural constants in the rst of the above commutation relations.
eq. (71) then still holds, and we obtain for various terms on its r.h.s. the following expressions

f[a] = fh, f = (  a) , (d[a]  c) = ea (da  ca) + ea (da  ca) ,

ig [c,c] = ig(eah (c a  ca) +

1
2

abc(cid:16)ca

 cb

 ec  c a

c b

ec(cid:17)) ,

where da
decomposition of the eld strength tensor

 =  + igeaa. bringing all these expressions together, we arrive at the following cartan

where c = igea (c a  ca) and sa
the su(3)-version of the maximal abelian gauge, which for every index a reads da

 = (da  c a) + ig2 abccb

 . next, it is worth employing
 = 0.

c a

f = (f + c) h + sa

ea + sa

ea,
 cc

36

analogously to the su(2)-case, this leads to the appearance of the singular contributions to the
eld strength tensor. accounting for them as well as for the equations tr hea = tr eaeb = 0
and tr eaeb = 1
2ab, we nally obtain the following cartan decomposition of the su(3) yang-mills
action

1

sym =

4 z d4x(cid:20)(cid:16)f + c + f sing.
 (cid:17)2
 (cid:17)a
 (cid:17) and (cid:16)f sing.
= 2 tr (cid:16)eaf sing.

+ 2(cid:16)sa

 (cid:17)a(cid:17)(cid:16)sa

 +(cid:16)f sing.
 (cid:17). again, disregarding the o-diagonal

 +(cid:16)f sing.

 = 2 tr (cid:16)hf sing.

where f sing.
part of the action owing to the abelian dominance hypothesis, we are left with the su(3)-analogue
of the eective action (72), which reads

 (cid:17)a(cid:17)(cid:21) ,

next, by the dualization of the obtained theory we arrive at the following partition function (cf.
eq. (74))

se. =

1

 (cid:17)2
4 z d4x(cid:16)f + f sing.

.

z = (cid:28)z db exp(cid:26)z d4x(cid:20) 1

4

f2
  ibjm

 (cid:21)(cid:27)(cid:29)jm



,

where f = (  b) is the eld strength tensor of the eld b, which is dual to the eld a,
and jm

.

 = f sing.



at this point, it is worth mentioning that the root vectors dene the lattice at which monopole
charges are distributed. taking this into account, it is straightforward to write down the expression
for the collective current of n magnetic cooper pairs

jm (n )


(x) = 2gm

n

3

xn=1

xa=1

eai dx(a) n



(s)(cid:16)x  x(a) n(s)(cid:17) .

the average over magnetic currents then has the form

(cid:28)exp(cid:18)iz d4xbjm

 (cid:19)(cid:29)jm



n

 exp
xl=1


sl

z0

3

1

=



1 +

n! 


ya=1

xn =1



dsl(cid:18)
4 (cid:16) u(a)(sl)(cid:17)2

1

n

sl

sk

n

yn=1

+

z0

dsn
sn

e42sn

z

u(a)(0)=u(a)(sn)

du(a)(sn)


+ 2igm u(a)

 (sl)eab(cid:16)u(a)(sl)(cid:17)(cid:19)

4

z0
xl,k=1
= z dada exp(z d4x

dsl


dskhu(a)(sl)  u(a)(sk)i


2 |(  2igmeab) a|2 + (cid:16)|a|2  2(cid:17)2(cid:21)) ,

=

z0
xa=1(cid:20)1

3

where the vector u(a)
(s).
finally, it is worth taking into account that since the original su(3) group is special, the phases

 (sn) on the l.h.s. parametrizes the same contour as the vector x(a) n



as of three magnetic higgs elds as are related to each other by the constraint

a = 0. after

3

pa=1

37

that, we arrive at the following partition function describing an eective [u(1)]2 gauge invariant
abelian-projected theory of the su(3)-gluodynamics [106]

z = z |a| d |a| dadb  3
xa=1

a!

 exp(z d4x"1

4

f2

 +

3

xa=1(cid:20) 1

2 |(  2igmeab) a|2 + (cid:16)|a|2  2(cid:17)2(cid:21)#) ,

(78)

where a = |a| eia.
notice that in general for the gauge group su (nc), nc > 2, the number of independent
elds of distinct monopoles in the corresponding eective abelian-projected theory is equal to the
number of possibilities for the eigenvalues 1, . . . , nc of the operator x to coincide minus one,
 1, is just the number of

a = 0. this number, thus equal to nc(nc1)

owing to the constraint

nc

2

independent closed abrikosov-nielsen-olesen type strings in this theory.

pa=1

in the present section, we shall investigate string representations of the models (77) and (78)
and their extensions due to the introduction of external electrically charged particles, which we
shall call quarks, as well as various correlators in these models. various topological properties
of abelian-projected theories will be also considered. besides that, we shall briey discuss the
phenomenon of chiral symmetry breaking from the point of view of these theories.

3.2 nonperturbative field correlators and string representation of

the dual abelian higgs model

3.2.1 london limit

string representation for the partition function of extended dahm our rst aim in
the present subsection will be the derivation of a string representation for the partition function
of dahm, extended by introduction of external electrically charged (w.r.t. the maximal abelian
u(1) subgroup of the original su(2) group) particles, which we shall refer to as quarks. such
an extension can be performed by replacing f in eq. (77) with f  f e
 stands
for the eld strength tensor generated by quarks according to the equation  f e
 . here,
je
dx(s)(x  x(s)) stands for the conserved electric current of a quark, which moves
 (x)  ehc
along the closed contour c (cf. the notations to eq. (13)). the electric coupling constant e is
related to the magnetic one according to the dirac quantization condition egm = n
2 , where n is an
integer 18. in what follows, we shall for concreteness restrict ourselves to the case of monopoles
possessing the minimal charge, i.e., set n = 1.

, where f e
 = 4je

 = 4e , where (x) 
a solution to the above equation for f e

d(x())(x  x()) is the so-called vorticity tensor current [113] dened on the string world-
sheet . due to the stokes theorem, the vorticity tensor current is related to the quark current
according to the equation e = je
 . in particular, this equation means that in the case when
there are no external quarks, the vorticity tensor current is conserved, i.e., due to the conserva-
tion of electric ux all the strings in that case are closed. notice that when external quarks are

reads f e

r

18here, we have adopted the notations of ref. [112].

38

introduced into the system, some amount of closed strings might survive. in our investigations
of the extended dahm, we shall restrict ourselves to the sector of the theory with open strings
ending at quarks and antiquarks only.

let us now proceed with the string representation for the partition function of the theory (77),
extended by external quarks, in the so-called london limit,   . in this limit, the radial part
of the magnetic higgs eld becomes xed to its v.e.v., ||  , and the partition function under
study takes the form

z = z dbdsing.dreg. exp(z d4x"1

(cid:17)2
4 (cid:16)f  f e

+

2
2

(  2gmb)2#) ,

(79)

where from now on constant normalization factors will be omitted. in our further interpretation of
the topic of the string representation for the partition function and eld correlators of the extended
dahm, we shall mainly follow refs. [114, 115, 116] (for related investigations see refs. [85, 111,
112, 113, 117, 118]).

in eq. (79), we have performed a decomposition of the phase of the magnetic higgs eld
 = sing. + reg.. here, sing.(x) describes a certain electric string conguration and obeys the
equation (see e.g. [119])

sing.(x) = 2(x),

(80)

which is just the covariant formulation of the 4d analogue of the stokes theorem for the eld
sing.(x), written in the local form. on the other hand, the eld reg.(x) stands simply for a
single-valued uctuation around this conguration. note that as it has been argued in ref. [118],
the integration measure over the eld  factorizes into the product of measures over the elds sing.
and reg..

performing the path-integral duality transformation of eq. (79) along the lines described in

ref. [119], we get

z = z dbdx()dh exp(z d4x"

1
122 h 2

+

+ ih  (2e)22

 

1
4

f 2

  i f (gmh + 2ie)#),

(81)

where h  h + h + h is the eld strength tensor of a massive antisymmetric
tensor eld h (the so-called kalb-ramond eld [120]). this antisymmetric spin-1 tensor eld
emerged via some constraints from the integration over reg. and describes a massive dual gauge
boson. as far as the integration over string world-sheets, dx(), is concerned, it appeared
from the integration over sing. by virtue of eq. (80), owing to which there exists a one-to-one
correspondence between sing. and x(). physially this correspondence stems from the fact that
the singularity of the phase of the higgs eld just takes place at the string world-sheets (notice
that since in what follows we shall be interested in eective actions rather than the integration
measures, the jacobian emerging during the change of the integration variables sing.  x(),
which has been evaluated in ref. [118], will not be discussed below and is assumed to be included
into the measure dx().).

next, by carrying out the integration over the eld b in eq. (81), we obtain

39

z = z dx()dh exp(z d4x" 1

122 h 2

 +

1
4e2 h2

 + ih#) .

(82)

the details of a derivation of eqs. (81) and (82) are outlined in appendix b. thus, the path-integral
duality transformation is just a way of getting a coupling of the dual gauge boson, described now
by the eld h, to a string world-sheet, rather than to a world-line (as it takes place in the usual
case of the wilson loop).

finally, the gaussian integration over the eld h in eq. (82) (see appendix c) leads to the

following expression for the partition function (79)

d(y)d,(x  y)

in eq. (83), the propagator of the eld h has the following form d,(x)  d(1)
where

z = z dx() exp


d(x)z

2z

.

(83)

,(x)+d(2)

,(x),

and

d(1)

,(x) =

3
82e

k1

|x|   !,

(84)

d(2)

,(x) =

e

42x2 ("k1
|x|

+

m
2

(k0 + k2)#   ! +

1

2|x|

1

4

+

m2
4

3m
2|x|

(k0 + k2) +

x2!k1 +

"3  m2
k3# xx + xx  xx  xx!) .
(85)
from now on, ki  ki(m|x|), i = 0, 1, 2, 3, stand for the modied bessel functions, and m  
e is
the mass of the dual gauge boson generated by the higgs mechanism. due to the stokes theorem,
,(x  y) can be rewritten as a boundary one (see appendix c),
the term r
which nally leads to the following representation for the partition function of extended dahm
in the london limit

d(x)r

d(y)d(2)

z = exp

z dx() exp


e

2 ic
4e z

3

dy

dxic
d(x)z

k1(m|x  y|)

|x  y|



|x  y|


 .

d(y)

k1(m|x  y|)

(86)

note that since quarks and antiquarks were from the very beginning considered as classical
particles, the external contour c explicitly enters the nal result. would one consider them on
the quantum level, eq. (86) must be supplied by a certain prescription of the summation over
the contours. this can be done by linearizing the current  current interaction standing in the
rst exponential factor on the r.h.s. of eq. (86) by integration over an auxiliary massive electric
vector eld interacting with the current je
 s by virtue of some
formula a la eq. (75).

 and further averaging over je

40

clearly, the above mentioned exponential factor is the standard result, which can be obtained
without accounting for the abrikosov-nielsen-olesen type electric strings. contrary to that, the
integral over string world-sheets on the r.h.s. of this equation stems just from the contribution
of strings to the partition function and is therefore the essence of the desired string representation
(cf. eq. (45)). in particular, comparing the obtained nonlocal string eective action, standing
in the second exponential factor on the r.h.s. of eq. (86), with eq. (39) we obtain by virtue of
eqs. (43) and (44) the following values of the string tension of the nambu-goto term and the
inverse bare coupling constant of the rigidity term

 = 2k0(c)  2 ln

1
c

(87)

1

=  e2

and 1
8 , where c stands for a characteristic small dimensionless parameter. in the london
0
limit, this parameter is of the order of the ratio of m to the mass of magnetic cooper pair (which
plays the role of the uv momentum cuto somehow analogous to the inverse lattice spacing 1/a
(cf. eq. (9))), i.e., c  1
. moreover, in a derivation of eq. (87) we have assumed that not only
e
c  1, but also ln 1
c  1, i.e., the obtained expression for the string tension is valid with the
logarithmic accuracy. note that the logarithmic divergency of the string tension in the 3d version
of ahm, the ginzburg-landau model, is a well known result, which can be obtained directly
from the denition of this quantity as a free energy per unit length of the abrikosov vortex (see
e.g. [122]). the physical origin of this result is that in the centre of the vortex, the condensate
is destroyed, and dual gauge bosons remain massless. possible phenomenological consequences of
this phenomenon were recently discussed in [123].

clearly, both the string tension and the inverse bare coupling constant of the rigidity term
are nonanalytic in gm, which means that these quantities are essentially nonperturbative simi-
larly to the qcd case (cf. eq. (12)). notice also that the nite temperature behaviour of the
with tc standing for the critical temperature,
obviously governs the corresponding behaviour of the string tension (87) and, in particular, the
deconnement phase transition.

magnetic higgs eld v.e.v. [122], (t )  q1  t

tc

finally, it is worth noting that since contrary to the previous section, the obtained nonlocal
string eective action is no more associated with the world-sheet of the minimal area, min.[c],
the rigidity term generally does not vanish.

string representation for the generating functional of field strength correlators
in the present paragraph, we shall derive the string representation for the generating functional
of eld strength correlators in the london limit of extended dahm. from this we shall then
obtain an expression for the bilocal correlator and compare it with the one in qcd. our starting
expression for the generating functional reads as follows

z [s] = z dbdsing.dreg. exp(cid:26)z d4x(cid:20)1
(  2gmb)2 + is f#) ,

2
2

+

(cid:17)2
4 (cid:16)f  f e

+

(88)

where s is a source of the eld strength tensor f = 1
2 f, which obviously corresponds
to the eld strength of the usual gauge eld a. performing the same transformations which led
from eq. (79) to eq. (83), we obtain from eq. (88)

41

z [s] = exp(cid:18)z d4xs2

(cid:19)z dx() exp(cid:18)4iez d4xs(cid:19)

 exp(cid:26)z d4xz d4y(cid:18)(x) 

1
e

s(x)(cid:19) d,(x  y)(cid:18)(y) 

1
e

s(y)(cid:19)(cid:27) .

(89)

let us now derive from the general form (89) of the generating functional the expression for the
bilocal correlator of the eld strength tensors. the result reads

d f(x) f(y)e = 

1
z[0]

+ 42*

2e(x) +

i

e z

where

2z [s]

s(x)s(y)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)s=0
d(z)d,(z  x)


= (  ) (x  y) +

2
e2 d,(x  y)+


2e(y) +

i

e z

d(u)d,(u  y)
+

,

x()

(90)

h. . .ix()  r dx() (. . .) exp"2r
r dx() exp"2r

d(z)r
d(z)r

d(u)d,(z  u)#
d(u)d,(z  u)#

is the average over string world-sheets, and the term with the -function on the r.h.s. of eq. (90)
corresponds to the free contribution to the correlator. in what follows, we shall consider the case
x 6= y, so that this local term with the -function drops out.
one can now see that in the sense of the cumulant expansion (see eq. (28)), the second
term on the r.h.s. of eq. (90) corresponds to the bilocal cumulant of the eld strength ten-

sors dd f(x) f(y)ee. following the mfc, let us parametrize it by the two lorentz structures

similarly to eq. (34)

dd f(x) f(0)ee =    !d(cid:16)x2(cid:17) +
2" x  x! +  x  x!#d1(cid:16)x2(cid:17) .

1

+

(91)

then by virtue of eqs. (84) and (85), we arrive at the following expressions for the functions d
and d1

and

d(cid:16)x2(cid:17) =

m3
42

k1
|x|

d1(cid:16)x2(cid:17) =

m

22x2" k1
|x|
42

+

m

2  k0 + k2!#.

(92)

(93)

we see that in the limit |x|  1
and (93) is given by

m, the asymptotic behaviour of the coecient functions (92)

and

d 

m4
42

3
2

em|x|
(m|x|)

3
2

d1 

m4
22

3
2

em|x|
(m|x|)

.

5
2

for bookkeeping purposes, let us also list here the asymptotic behaviours of the functions (92)
and (93) in the opposite case, |x|  1

m. those read

and

d 

m2

42x2

(94)

(95)

(96)

(97)

d1 

1

2 |x|4 .

one can now see that according to the lattice data [62, 63], the asymptotic behaviours (94)
and (95) are very similar to the large distance ones of the nonperturbative parts of the functions
d and d1 (cf. eq. (38)). in particular, both functions decrease exponentially, and the function d
is much larger than the function d1 due to the preexponential power-like behaviour. we also see
that the dual gauge boson mass m corresponds to the inverse correlation length of the vacuum
t 1
. in particular, in the string limit of qcd, when tg  0 while the value of the string tension

g

is kept xed, m corresponds to q d(0)
 .

moreover, the short distance asymptotic behaviours (96) and (97) also parallel the results
obtained within the mfc of qcd in the lowest order of perturbation theory. namely, at such
|x|4 (see eq. (37)) and is much
distances the function d1 to the lowest order also behaves as
larger than the function d to the same order. however, it should be realized that the eects
of asymptotic freedom (which is the most important uv feature of qcd, distinguishing it from
all the abelian gauge theories) obviously cannot be obtained from dahm, which is essentially a
gaussian theory.

1

in conclusion of this paragraph, note that the found similarity in the large distance asymptotic
behaviours of the bilocal cumulant of the eld strength tensors in dahm and the gauge-invariant
cumulant in qcd supports the original conjecture by t hooft and mandelstam concerning the
dual meissner nature of connement.

string representation for the generating functional of the monopole current corre-
lators
in this paragraph, we shall present the string representation for the generating functional
of the monopole current correlators in the london limit of extended dahm. such a representation
can be derived by virtue of the same path-integral duality transformation studied above. after
that, we shall get from the obtained generating functional the correlator of two monopole currents
and by making use of it rederive via the equations of motion the coecient function d in the
bilocal cumulant of the eld strength tensors.

43

in the london limit, the generating functional of the monopole currents reads

z [j] = z dbdsing.dreg. exp(z d4x"1
where j  2gm2(  2gmb) is just the magnetic monopole current 19.

(cid:17)2
4 (cid:16)f  f e

2
2

+

(  2gmb)2 + jj#) ,

performing the duality transformation, we get the following string representation for z [j]

z [j] = exp"m2

2 z d4xj 2

(x)#z dx() exp

 exp(2gmz d4xz d4y"gm
+ (y)  

x

2

d(u)d,(z  u)


d(z)z
d,(x  y)!j(x)j(y)+

2z
  2
d,(x  y)!j(x)#).

xy

(98)

varying now eq. (98) twice w.r.t. j, setting then j equal to zero, and dividing the result by
z[0], we arrive at the following expression for the correlator of two monopole currents

hj(x)j(y)i = m2(x  y) + 4g2
+ 2*z

d(u)  

d (z)z

x

1
2

m"
d,(x  z)!  

y

2

xy

d,(x  y)+
#.

d,(y  u)!+

x()

(99)

further, owing to the appendix c, it is straightforward to see that the contribution of the
term (85) to the r.h.s. of eq. (99) vanishes. notice also that the second term in square brackets
on the r.h.s. of eq. (99) again corresponds to the non-cumulant (disconnected) type contribution
to the correlator. let us next make use of the following equation [19]

hj(x)j(y)i =   2

xy

 

2

xy!d(cid:16)(x  y)2(cid:17) ,

(100)

which follows from eq. (91) due to equations of motion. then, neglecting the local term on the
r.h.s. of eq. (99), and substituting this equation together with eq. (84) into eq. (100), we recover
the expression for the function d given by eq. (92).
the independence of the latter of the function d1.

notice in conclusion that only the function d can be obtained from the correlator (99) due to

3.2.2 dual abelian higgs model beyond the london limit

according to the previous subsection, in the london limit of dahm the bilocal correlator is
much larger than the higher-order ones, which conrms the validity of the bilocal approximation
to mfc in this limit. this can be seen from eq. (89) by varying it more than twice w.r.t. s and

19rigorously speaking, this is a current of the monopole cooper pairs.

44

setting then s equal to zero. indeed, let us again consider the limit of large distances between
any two points xi and xj, in which the elds in the correlator of a certain order are dened,
i.e., |xi  xj|  1
m. then, the next-to-leading order correlator (after the bilocal one) will be the
quartic one,

the dominant contribution to which comes about from the four-fold variation of the following term
in the expansion of the generating functional (89)

d f11(x1) f22(x2) f33(x3) f44(x4)e ,

1

2e4 z d4xd4yd4zd4us(x)d,(x  y)s(y)s(z)d, (z  u)s(u).

(101)

the 4! = 24 terms containing all possible combinations of indices and arguments, which one gets
during this variation, are obvious, and we shall not list them here for shortness. since at the
distances under consideration d,(x)  4
e2 , each of these terms has the order of magnitude m8.
this means that the bilocal correlator, which has the order of magnitude m4, is dominant in the
london limit.

the aim of this subsection is to address the question in which case the higher-order correlators
become relevant. namely, it will be demonstrated that it occurs in the vicinity of the london limit.
since in what follows we shall be interested only in the contributions to cumulants, rather than
to correlators, our strategy will be to pick up only the terms which do not contain the averages
over string world-sheets (cf. eq. (90)). therefore, let us consider unextended dahm, where the
string world-sheets s are closed, and  = 0.

in order to consider dahm in the vicinity of the london limit, we shall expand the radial
part of the magnetic higgs eld, |(x)|, in eq. (77) as |(x)| =  +  (x), where   1
  0, and
(x) is an arbitrary quantum uctuation. then neglecting the (trivial) jacobian emerging during
the change of the integration variables |(x)|  (x), which will be eventually cancelled after
division of the nal expression for the eld correlator by z[0], we arrive at the new expression for
the generating functional (88) (without external quark elds f e

)

z [s] = z dbdsing.dreg.d exp(z d4x" 1

4

f 2

 +

 2
2

()2 + 4 22+

+ (cid:18)

2

+  (cid:19) (  2gmb)2 + is f#).

(102)

following the same steps, which led from eq. (79) to eq. (83), we get from eq. (102) an additional
weight factor in the integral over string world-sheets standing in eq. (89). this weight factor stems
due to the -integration and reads

exp( m
here, m = 22 and h s.p.
h following from the action (cf. eq. (82))

28826 z d4xz d4yh s.p. 2

 (x)

k1(m|x  y|)

|x  y|

h s.p. 2

 (y)) .

(103)

 stands for the strength tensor of the saddle-point value of the eld

s =

1
122 h 2

 +

1
4e2 h2

  ih (cid:18) 

1
e

s(cid:19) .

taking into account that  = 0, we get the following result for this saddle-point value

45

hs.p.
 (x) =

im

22 z d4y

k1(m|x  y|)

|x  y|

(2(cid:20)(y) 

1
e

s(y)(cid:21) +

+ e [s(y)  s(y)]).

(104)

let us prove that the terms with the derivatives of s on the r.h.s. of eq. (104) yield zero.
due to the hodge decomposition theorem, s can be always represented in the form s =
ii+l, where i and l stand for some vector and an antisymmetric rank-3 tensor,
respectively. in the product s f, the contribution of the vector i obviously vanishes due to
the partial integration, and we are left with the representation of s of the form s = l.
substituting it into eq. (104) we see that the terms with the derivatives of s on the r.h.s. of
this equation indeed vanish.

finally, upon substitution of the rest of eq. (104) into eq. (103), we arrive at the following
additional term in the expansion of the generating functional, whose contribution to the quartic
cumulant is the leading one

mm2

322e2 z d4xd4yd4ud4vd4zd4w

k1 (m |x  y|)

|x  y|

d1(cid:16)(x  u)2(cid:17)d1(cid:16)(x  v)2(cid:17) d1(cid:16)(y  z)2(cid:17)

d1(cid:16)(y  w)2(cid:17) (x  u)(y  z)"(x  v)(y  w)s(u)s(v)s(z)s(w)+

+4(x  v)(y  w)s(u)s(v)s(z)s(w)+
+ 4(x  v)(y  w)s(u)s(v)s(z)s(w)#.

(105)

in eq. (105), d1 stands for the coecient function (93) entering the bilocal cumulant in the london
limit. even without explicit writing down the 3  4! = 72 terms following from eq. (105) after
its four-fold variation, we see that the resulting dominant contribution to the quartic cumulant
distinguishes from that of the london limit, which follows from eq. (101). the most crucial
dierence is due to the presence of the magnetic higgs boson exchange in eq. (105) (expressed by
the propagator factor k1(m|x  y|)/|x  y|), which is absent in eq. (101).
the other outcome of eq. (105) is that the leading 1/-correction to the quartic cumulant
can be completely described in terms of the coecient function (93). this is an example of
equation relating correlators of various orders to each other. it is worth noting that in the (non-
abelian-projected) su(2)-gluodynamics, there exists an analogous, albeit more nontrivial, relation
connecting the bilocal correlator with the threelocal one [65, 19], which reads

=

g
8

abcdf a

(0)f b

(0)f c

(0)e .

(106)

this equation means that would the threelocal correlator vanish, the function d vanishes too.
indeed, in this case d = const everywhere in space-time, and since d(|x|  )  0, this
constant is equal to zero. therefore, as it has been rst mentioned in ref. [72], the nonvanishing

dd(x)

dx2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)x=0

46

threelocal correlator is a necessary condition for the consistency of mfc. in particular, this means
that the bilocal approximation is not fully self-consistent and should be extended by the demand
that the threelocal correlator is nonvanishing as well. the resulting ensemble of elds, possessing
in addition the property of factorization of higher correlators into the products of bilocal and
threelocal ones, is thus fully self-consistent, and has been called in ref. [72] minimally extended
gaussian ensemble. in this respect, it looks very desirable to nd a certain relation between the
bilocal and threelocal correlators in dahm as well. such a relation turned out to take place in
the london limit of dahm with an additional term which describes an interaction of an axion
with two dual gauge bosons [124]. however, such a term is known to vanish in the real world,
since it violates cp -invariance, which makes such a model of only an academic interest.

3.2.3 dynamical chiral symmetry breaking within the stochastic vacuum model

the qcd lagrangian with nf massless avours is known to be invariant under the global symme-
try transformations, which are the u(nf )u(nf ) independent rotations of left- and right-handed
quark elds. this symmetry is referred to as chiral symmetry. the above mentioned rotations
of the two-component weyl spinors are equivalent to the independent vector and axial u(nf )
rotations of the full four-component dirac spinors, under which the qcd lagrangian remains
invariant as well. at the same time, the axial transformations mix states with dierent p -parities.
therefore, we conclude that if the chiral symmetry remains unbroken, one would observe parity
degeneracy of all the states, whose other quantum numbers are the same. the observed splittings
between such states occur, however, to be too large to be explained by the small bare or current
quark masses. namely, this splitting is of the order of hundreds mev, whereas the current masses
of light u- and d-quarks are of the order of a few mev 20. this observation tells us that the chiral
symmetry of the qcd lagrangian is broken down spontaneously. this phenomenon of the spon-
taneous chiral symmetry breaking (scsb) naturally leads to the appearance of light pseudoscalar
goldstone bosons, whose role is played by pions, which are indeed the lightest of all the hadrons.
besides connement, the explanation of scsb is known to be the other most fundamental problem
of the modern theory of strong interactions.

the order parameter of scsb is the so-called quark condensate (else called chiral condensate)

d e  (250 mev)3. this is nothing else, but the quark green function taken at the origin or a

closed quark loop in the momentum representation. clearly, if the quarks from the beginning are
treated as massless (i.e., only the kinetic term is present in their propagators), the phenomenon of
scsb leads to the appearance of a non-zero dynamical quark mass, which in general is momentum-
dependent. at zero momentum, the value of the dynamical quark mass is of the order of 350-400
mev, which is just the value of the so-called constituent quark mass.

let us now proceed to the quantitative description of scsb. integrating the quarks out of the

qcd lagrangian obviously yields

yf =1ddet(cid:16)i dfund. + imf(cid:17)eaa
where dfund.  dfund.
=   iga standing for the covariant derivative in the
fundamental representation. as it follows from its denition, the chiral condensate for a given

zqcd =



with dfund.



nf

,



20the current mass of the s-quark, which is around 150 mev, is still smaller than the typical splitting values at

least in a factor of three.

47

avour f then has the form

d f fe = 

1

v   

mf

lnzqcd!mf0

,

(107)

where v stands for the four-volume of observation. in what follows, let us for simplicity restrict
ourselves to the case of one avour only. next, let n be an eigenfunction of the dirac operator,
corresponding to a nonvanishing eigenvalue n, i dfund.n = nn. then, since 5 anticommutes
with i dfund., the function n = 5n is also an eigenfunction of the dirac operator, corresponding
to the eigenvalue n = n. owing to this observation, the determinant can be rewritten as
follows

det(cid:16)i dfund. + im(cid:17) = yn

(2

n + m2) = exp" 1

2 xn

ln(cid:16)2

n + m2(cid:17)# =

(n + im)  syn
= exp


z

+

1
2

d() ln(cid:16)2 + m2(cid:17)
 ,

where ()  pn

virtue of eq. (107), we thus obtain for the chiral condensate

(  n) stands for the so-called spectral density of the dirac operator. by

d e = 

1
v

+

dh()i

z



m

2 + m2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)m0

,

(108)

where h()i denotes the spectral density averaged over the full qcd partition function, includ-
ing the weight given by the determinant itself. the latter can be disregarded in the quenched
approximation (justied at large-nc), in which one neglects the backward inuence of quarks to
the dynamics.

for a nite-volume system, the r.h.s. of eq. (108) obviously vanishes. however, for the case

when the volume increases, the spectrum becomes continuous, and we should use the formula

taking this into account, one nally gets the celebrated banks-casher relation [125]

m

2 + m2 = sign (m)().

lim
m0

d e = 

1
v

sign (m) h(0)i .

(109)

thus, we see that the chiral condensate is proportional to the averaged spectral density of the
dirac operator at the origin. notice that the sign function in eq. (109) means that at small m,
the qcd partition function depends on m nonanalytically, which is typical for the situation when
the symmetry is spontaneously broken.

up to now, there exist several microscopic models of scsb in qcd [19]. the most elaborated
and therefore popular of them is the one due to instantons [23] 21. it is based on the observa-
tion that in the background eld of one (anti)instanton, the dirac operator has an exact zero

21 recently in ref. [126], there has been proposed a model based on the so-called dyonic gas. the advantage
of this model w.r.t. the instanton one is that, as it has been argued there, it yields not only scsb, but also the
connement property.

48

mode [127]. the estimate of h(0)i for the case of a gas of is and is has been performed in
ref. [23] directly by calculating the overlap of the zero modes and has the form h(0)i  v
22.
this result then has been rederived in ref. [128] by solving a closed equation for the averaged
quark propagator as an expansion in powers of the so-called packing fraction parameter n 4
,
v nc
where n stands for the total number of is and is. by virtue of eq. (109), the chiral condensate

l2

reads d e   1
l2.

notice that this result can be also derived if we rst average over the i  i gas and only after
that calculate the chiral condensate by making use of the so-obtained eective theory [24]. in that
case, quark interactions are due to the scattering of two or more (anti)quarks over the same i or
i, i.e., there arise four- (or more) fermion interaction terms. the range of such interaction, which
is usually referred to as t hooft interaction [127], is obviously of the order of . in the case of
two avours, this interaction is the four-fermion one and yields an eective theory similar to the
well known nambu-jona-lasinio model [30, 34].

there have been also derived other types of nonlocal njl models in an approximate way from
qcd by making use of path-integral techniques in bilocal elds. in particular, exact bosonization
of 2d qcd has been performed in ref. [129], and several attempts to bosonization of 4d qcd have
been proposed [130, 35]. the general strategy of these approaches includes several steps. firstly,
one casts the eective four-fermion interaction (which can be either local or nonlocal with a certain
interaction kernel) into the form of a yukawa interaction by introducing a set of collective bosonic
elds, which is just the essence of the bosonization procedure. secondly, one can integrate over
the fermions and derive an eective action in terms of these collective elds. next, for large-nc the
saddle-point of this eective action yields the so-called schwinger-dyson (or gap) equation, which
determines the dynamical mass, responsible for scsb. after that, an expansion of the resulting
meson action in small eld uctuations around this stationary solution yields the so-called bethe-
salpeter equation, which determines the spectrum of meson excitations. this nally leads to a
description of the chiral sector of qcd in terms of eective chiral hadron lagrangians [32, 34,
38] containing higher order derivative terms with xed structure constants. the form of these
lagrangians agrees with that of the phenomenological hadron lagrangians postulated at the
end of the sixties on the basis of pure group-theoretical arguments when considering nonlinear
realizations of chiral symmetry [14]. however, contrary to those lagrangians, the new ones are
not obtained by symmetry principles alone, but rather derived from an underlying microscopic
quark (diquark) picture, which enables one to estimate masses and coupling constants of composite
hadrons.

however, it is worth noting that though the qcd-motivated njl type models model well the
scsb phenomenon in qcd and describe with a good accuracy the hadron spectrum and coupling
constants, they do not reproduce the connement property. recently, an attempt of a derivation
of an eective lagrangian for a light quark propagating in the conning qcd vacuum, which
could account simultaneously for both phenomena, has been done [48]. within this approach, one
starts with an expression for the green function of a system consisting of an innitely heavy quark
and light antiquark. the propagation of a light (anti)quark alone in the qcd vacuum then leads
to scsb, whereas the presence of a heavy quark enables one to take into account the qcd string,
joining both objects, and thus to incorporate connement. averaging over gluonic elds by making
use of the cumulant expansion in the bilocal approximation, it is then straightforward to derive

22 here, we adopt the same notations as the ones at the end of subsection 2.1. however, now  and l stand not
for xed, but for the averaged size and separation in the i  i ensemble, respectively.

49

an eective njl-type lagrangian for the light quark with a certain nonlocal kernel. however,
the form of this kernel is now determined via the coecient function d(x) (cf. eq. (34)), which,
as it has been demonstrated above, yields the string picture (cf. eqs. (42), (43), (44)), i.e., is
responsible for connement. such an interpolation between connement and scsb within this
approach leads to a relation between chiral and gluonic condensates, which reads

d e  d(0)tg.

(110)

following ref. [48], let us briey demonstrate how this relation can be obtained in the abelian-
projected theories. to this end, we for simplicity consider the case of abelian-projected su(2)-
gluodynamics, studied above. (our analysis can be straightforwardly extended to the abelian-
projected su(3)-gluodynamics, which will be investigated in the next subsection.) to proceed
with, let us assume for a while that a monopole has an eective innitesimal size b (which is
known to become nite for the t hooft-polyakov monopole). then, every monopole with the
world-line of the length t produces t /b quasizero modes [131]. the total number of quasizero
modes produced by all the monopoles from the 3d volume v (3) in the interval of modes  thus
has the form h()i  = t
b v (3)n3, where n3 is the 3d density of monopoles. since v = t v (3),
one gets an estimate

h(0)i

v 

n3
b

.

(111)

since the quasizero modes of all the monopoles are mixed due to the interaction, the denominator
of the r.h.s. of this relation is of the order of unity. on the other hand, the 3d density of
monopoles can be estimated via eq. (100) as follows

n3  z d3xhj (x, x4) j (0, x4)i  d(0)tg.

(112)

here, as it has been argued after eq. (97), the correlation length of the vacuum, tg, for the abelian-
projected su(2)-gluodynamics is equal to the inverse mass of the dual gauge boson, m1. notice
also that in a derivation of the rst estimate in eq. (112), one uses the following observation [48].
the correlator hj(x)j(0)i estimates the probability of nding a monopole at the 4d point x, if
there is one at the origin. integrating over d3x, one nds the probability of having a monopole at
the origin, while another one is anywhere. fixing x4 means that the probability refers to a given
moment. it has been also assumed that one magnetic monopole yields one quasizero fermion mode
per unit length of its world-line. this is true for an isolated monopole, and this result has been
extrapolated to the qcd vacuum as a whole.

finally, substituting eq. (112) into eq. (111) and making use of eq. (109), we arrive at

eq. (110).

3.3 nonperturbative field correlators and string representation of

the su (3)-gluodynamics within the abelian projection method

in the present subsection, we shall extend the results of subsection 3.2.1 to the case of the su(3)-
gluodynamics. our interpretation of this subject will mainly follow ref. [132]. we shall start with
the string representation for the partition function (78) in the london limit.

50

3.3.1 string representation for the partition function of the abelian-projected

su(3)-gluodynamics

similarly to the su(2)-case, in the london limit, the monopole elds become innitely heavy,
and their radial parts can be integrated out. after that, we are left with the following partition
function

z = z dbdsing.

a dreg.

a dk  3
xa=1

sing.

a !

 exp(z d4x"

1
4

f2
 

2
2

3

xa=1

(a  2gmeab)2 + ik

reg.

a #).

3

xa=1

(113)

similarly to dahm, in the model (78), there exist string-like singularities of the abrikosov-
nielsen-olesen type. that is why, in eq. (113) we have again decomposed the total phases of the
monopole elds into singular and regular parts, a = sing.
, and imposed the constraint of
vanishing of the sum of regular parts by introducing the integration over the lagrange multiplier
k(x). analogously to the dahm, in the model (113), sing.
s describe a given electric string
conguration and are related to the world-sheets as of strings of three types via the equations

a + reg.

a

a

sing.

a

(x) = 2a

(x)  2za

d(xa())(x  xa()),

(114)

() is a four-vector, which parametrizes the world-sheet a.

where xa  xa
the path-integral duality transformation of the partition function (113) parallels that of sub-
section 3.2.1. the only nontriviality brought about by the additional integration over the lagrange
multiplier occurs to be apparent due to the explicit form of the root vectors. indeed, let us rst
cast eq. (113) into the following form

z = z dbe 1

4r d4xf2

 dsing.

a

  3
xa=1

sing.

a !

z dkdreg.

a dc a

 exp(z d4x"

1

(cid:17)2
22 (cid:16)c a

+ ic a

 (a  2gmeab) + ik

reg.

a #)

3

xa=1

(115)

and carry out the integration over reg.
which should hold for an arbitrary index a. the solution to this equation reads

s. in this way, one needs to solve the equation c a

a

 = k,

c a

(x) =

1
2

ha

(x) 

1
42



x z d4y

k(y)

(x  y)2 ,

where ha
3

 stands for the kalb-ramond eld of the a-th type. next, making use of the constraint

pa=1

sing.
a = 0, replacing then the integrals over sing.

()s by virtue of
eq. (114), and discarding again for simplicity the jacobians [118] emerging during such changes
of the integration variables, we arrive at the following representation for the partition function

s with the integrals over xa

a

z = z dbe 1

4r d4xf2



51

z dk exp( 1

42 z d4xz d4y"

3
22

k(x)k(y)

(x  y)2 + 2igm  

x

k(y)

(x  y)2! 3
xa=1

eab(x)#)

z dxa

a

! dha

()  3
xa=1
 + ha
 = ha

here, h a

 exp(z d4x"

1

122 (cid:16)h a

(cid:17)2

+ iha

a

  igmeabha

#).

 + ha

 stands for the eld strength tensor of the kalb-ramond eld

ha
. clearly, due to the explicit form of the root vectors, the sum
eab vanishes, and the
integration over the lagrange multiplier thus yields an inessential determinant factor. notice also

pa=1

3

that due to eq. (114), the constraint

sing.
a = 0 resulted into a constraint for the world-sheets

of strings of three types

 = 0. this means that actually only the world-sheets of two types
are independent of each other, whereas the third one is unambiguously xed by the demand that
the above constraint holds.

pa=1

integrations over the dual gauge eld b as well as over the kalb-ramond elds are now
straightforward. taking into account that due to the closeness of the world-sheets in the case
under study all the boundary terms vanish, we arrive at the following desired string representation
for the partition function

3

pa=1

3

a

()  3
xa=1

a

!

z = z dxa
d(xa())za

 exp


gm3

2 s 3
2 za

d(xa())

k1 (mb |xa()  xa()|)

|xa()  xa()|

.

(116)




here, mb = 6gm is the mass of the elds b, which they acquire due to the higgs mechanism.
finally, it is possible to integrate out one of the three world-sheets, for concreteness x3
(). this
yields the expression for the partition function in terms of the integral over two independent string
world-sheets

()dx2

()

z = z dx1
d(x1())z1

d(x1())

k1 (mb |x1()  x1()|)

|x1()  x1()|

+

 exp
2 
gm3s3
z1


+z1

d(x1())z2

d(x2())

k1 (mb |x1()  x2()|)

|x1()  x2()|

+

+z2

d(x2())z2

d(x2())

k1 (mb |x2()  x2()|)

|x2()  x2()|

.







(117)

52

according to eq. (117), in the language of the eective string theory, the partition function (113)
has the form of two independent string world-sheets, which (self-)interact by the exchanges of
massive dual gauge bosons. notice also that as it follows from eq. (117), the energy density
corresponding to the obtained eective nonlocal string lagrangian increases not only with the
distance between two points lying on the same world-sheet, but also with the distance between two
dierent world-sheets, which means that also the ensemble of strings as a whole displays conning
properties. this observation will be elaborated on in the next section, where the collective eects
in the string ensemble will be studied.

3.3.2 string representation of field and current correlators

in the present subsection, we shall derive string representations for eld correlators of gluonic
eld strength tensors and monopole currents. those will occur to be similar to the ones of
the su(2)-case studied in subsection 3.2.1, albeit carrying indices w.r.t. the [u(1)]2 maximal
abelian subgroup. let us start with the string representation for the generating functional of the
correlators of gluonic eld strength tensors. in the london limit, this object reads

z [s] = z dbdsing.

a dreg.

a dk  3
xa=1

sing.

a !

 exp(z d4x"

1
4

f2
 

2
2

3

xa=1

(a  2gmeab)2 + ik

reg.

a + is f#).

3

xa=1

(118)

here, s stands for the source of the tensor f  1
strength tensor f of the usual gluonic eld a = (cid:16)a3
integral duality transformation, we arrive at the following string representation for this generating
functional

2f, which is nothing else but the eld
(cid:17). performing in eq. (118) the path-

, a8

z [s] = exp(cid:18)z d4xs2

(cid:19)z dxa

()  3
xa=1

a

!

 exp(cid:20)z d4xz d4y (a

,(x  y)(cid:16)b
,(x) denotes the propagator of the kalb-ramond eld ha

(x)  2gmeas(x)) dab

(y)  2gmebs(y)(cid:17)(cid:21) . (119)

, dened as (cf. eqs. (84)

here, dab
and (85)) dab

,(x) + d(2)

,(x)  abhd(1)
d(1)

,(x) =

,(x)i, where
42 s 3

k1

gm3

2

d(2)

,(x) =



82gmx2s 2
2|x|"3  m2

b
4

+

1

+

3 (" k1
|x|
x2!k1 +

1

+

|x|   !,
(k0 + k2)#   !+

mb
2

(k0 + k2) +

m2
b
4

k3#

3mb
2|x|

53

 xx + xx  xx  xx!) ,

and ki  ki (mb|x|). in the last exponential factor on the r.h.s. of eq. (119), the term

2za

d (xa())za

d (xa()) d(2)

, (xa()  xa())

can be again rewritten as a boundary one and thus vanishes due to the closeness of the string
world-sheets.

the string representation for the bilocal correlator of the eld strength tensors is now straight-
forward to be read o from eq. (119) by making use of the equality ei
2ij, where i, j = 1, 2
are the [u(1)]2 indices referring to the cartan generators h. upon the two-fold variation of
eq. (119) w.r.t. si

a = 3

aej

, we obtain

(y)e = ijh(  ) (x  y) + 4g2

d f i
(x) f j
b*zc

 (4gm)2 ei
aej

d(xc())zd

mdaa

,(x  y)i
,(xd()  y)+

d(xd())dac

,(xc()  x)dbd

,

(120)

xa()

where

h. . .ixa() 

a

(cid:19) (. . .) exp" gm3
()(cid:18) 3
2 q 3
 r dxa
d(xa()) ra
2 ra
pa=1
(cid:19) exp" gm3
()(cid:18) 3
2 q 3
r dxa
d(xa()) ra
2 ra
pa=1

a

d(xa()) k1(mb|xa()xa()|)
#

d(xa()) k1(mb|xa()xa()|)

|xa()xa()|

|xa()xa()|

#

(121)
denes the average over string world-sheets, and the term with the -function on the r.h.s. of
eq. (120) corresponds to the free contribution to the correlator.

similarly to the dahm case, our aim below will be to compare the bilocal cumulant, given for
x 6= y by the second term on the r.h.s. of eq. (120), with the one of mfc, parametrized by two
lorentz structures as follows

(x) f j

(0)ee = ij(   ! d(cid:16)x2(cid:17) +
dd f i
2" x  x! +  x  x!# d1(cid:16)x2(cid:17)),

1

+

(122)

i.e., to nd the coecient functions d and d1. let us point out once more, that eq. (122) is
nothing else, but the cumulant of two usual gluonic eld strength tensors, f 3
(a).
direct comparison of eqs. (120) and (122) then yields d = d and d1 = d1, where d and
d1 are given by eqs. (92) and (93) with the replacement m  mb. besides that, we see that

(a) and/or f 8

54

the bilocal cumulant (122) is nonvanishing only for the gluonic eld strength tensors of the same
kind, i.e., for i = j = 1 or i = j = 2. hence, for these diagonal cumulants (whose large-distance
asymptotic behaviours match those of the su(3)-gluodynamics as well as eqs. (94) and (95)
correspond to the su(2)-case), the vacuum of the model (78) in the london limit does exhibit a
nontrivial correlation length tg = 1
mb

finally, it is again quite instructive to rederive the coecient function d from the string
representation for the correlator of two monopole currents, j = 2gm2ea (a  2gm (eab)).
this can be done by virtue of the equation

.

dji
(x)jj

(y)e = ij  2

xy

 

2

xy! d(cid:16)(x  y)2(cid:17) ,

(123)

which follows from the equations of motion. besides that, it is also useful to derive the string
representation for the generating functional of the monopole current correlators itself, which can
then be applied to a derivation of the bilocal correlator. such a generating functional reads

z [j] = z dbdsing.

a dreg.

a dk  3
xa=1

sing.

a !

 exp(z d4x"1

4

f2

 +

2
2

3

xa=1

(a  2gmeab)2  ik

reg.

a + jj#).

3

xa=1

once being applied to this object, the path-integral duality transformation yields for it the fol-
lowing string representation (cf. eq. (98))

z [j] = z[0] exp"m2

b

2 z d4xj2

(x)#
,(x  y)!j(x)j(y)+

*exp(2gmz d4xz d4y"gm

4

+eab

(y)  

x

dab

daa

xy

  2
,(x  y)!j(x)#)+xa()

,

(124)

where z[0] is dened by eq. (116). then, the string representation for the bilocal correlator,
following from eq. (124), reads

dji
(x)jj
*zc

(y)e = m2

bij(x  y) + 4g2

m(

1
4

ij

2

xy

aej
daa
,(x  y) + 2ei
b

d(xc())zd

d(xd())  

x

dac

, (x  xc())!  

y

dbd

, (y  xd())!+

xa()

(125)
by comparison of eq. (123) with the second term on the r.h.s. of eq. (125), we recover the
coecient function d. this conrms the consistency of our calculations.

in conclusion, note that the above mentioned similarity between the su(2)- and su(3)
abelian-projected gluodynamics makes it straightforward to translate in the same way all the
other results of subsection 3.2 to the su(3)-case.

55

.




3.4 representation of abelian-projected theories in terms of the

monopole currents

our investigations of the monopole current correlators in the previous subsection make it now a
challenge to derive a representation for the partition functions of the abelian-projected theories
directly in terms of the monopole currents. these so-called current representations will be
constructed in the present subsection. in our interpretation we shall follow ref. [133].

let us again start our analysis with the su(2)-case, i.e., dahm and for simplicity consider the
unextended case, where intuitively the resulting monopole eective action should contain besides
the free part, quadratic in the monopole currents, also the interaction of these currents with the
closed string world-sheets s. as our starting point will serve eqs. (b.2) and (b.3) of appendix
b, where, however, we shall not perform any (hyper)gauge xing for the eld h. then, the
partition function has the form

z = z dadx()dh exp(z d4x" 1

122 h 2

  ih + (gmh + a  a)2#).

(126)
notice that according to the equation of motion for the eld a, the absence of external electric
currents is expressed by the equation f = 0, where f  a  a + gmh. regarding
f as a full electromagnetic eld strength tensor, one can write for it the corresponding bianchi
identity modied by the monopoles,  f = gmh. this identity means that the monopole
current can be written in terms of the kalb-ramond eld h as

j = gm h,

(127)

which manifests its conservation. (notice that this current is related to the eld c from eq. (b.1)
of appendix b as j = gmc. this means that the -function in the last equality on the r.h.s.
of this equation just imposes once more the conservation of the current j.)
it is also instructive to write down the equation of motion for the kalb-ramond eld in
terms of the introduced full electromagnetic eld strength tensor. this equation has the form
f = gm
. by virtue of conservation of the vorticity tensor current for the closed
string world-sheets,  = 0, this equation again yields the condition of absence of external
electric currents, f = 0.
partition function of dahm. to this end, we shall rst resolve the equation gm
w.r.t. h, which yields

let us now turn ourselves to a derivation of the monopole current representation for the
2 h = j

m2 h + i

2gm

next, we get the following expressions for various terms on the r.h.s. of eq. (126)

h(x) =

1

22gm

z d4y

(x  y)
|x  y|4 j(y).

h 2

 =

6
g2
m

j2
,

z d4xh2

 =

1

m z d4xd4yj(x)

22g2

1

(x  y)2 j(y).

bringing all this together and performing in eq. (126) again the hypergauge transformation h 
h +    with the gauge function  =  1
a, which eliminates the eld a, we nally
arrive at the desired monopole current representation, which has the form

gm

56

z = z dx()dh exp(" 1

22 z d4xd4yj(x)
sint.(, j)#).

2i
gm

+

1

(x  y)2 j(y) +

2

m2 z d4xj2

+

(128)

the rst term in the exponent on the r.h.s. of eq. (128) has the form of the biot-savart energy
of the electric eld generated by monopole currents [111], the second term corresponds to the
(gauged) kinetic energy of cooper pairs, and the term

sint.(, j) =

1

42 z d4xd4yj(x)

(y  x)
|y  x|4 (y)
 , where h str.



(129)

describes the interaction of the string world-sheet with the monopole current j. obviously, this
is the four-dimensional

interaction can be rewritten in the form sint. = r d4xjh str.

analogue of the magnetic induction, produced by the electric string according to the equation

notice that if we approximate the current j by the classical expression, i.e., set

h str.

 = .

j(x) = 2gmi

dy( )(x  y( )),

(130)

(131)

the interaction term (129) takes the form sint. = 2gm l(, ), where l(, ) is simply the gauss
linking number of the world-sheet  with the trajectory of the monopole cooper pair,  23.

it is straightforward to extend the above analysis to the case of the abelian-projected su(3)-

gluodynamics, where the string representation for the partition function (113) has the form

z = z dxa

dha

a

()  3
! daa
xa=1
 +
gms 3

iha

a

2

 exp(z d4x" 1
122 (cid:16)h a

2

  aa




 + aa
ha

(cid:17)2



(132)

with aa
  eaa. analogously to the argumentation following after eq. (126), eq. (132) means
that the arising monopole currents can be expressed in terms of three kalb-ramond elds as
ja
24. finally, rewriting eq. (132) via these currents and resolving the constraint
3

2 ha



 = 0 by integrating over one of the world-sheets (for concreteness, again x3

()), we obtain

 = gmq 3
pa=1

a

z = z dx1

()dx2

()dha

 exp(" 1

22 z d4xd4yja

(x)

1

(x  y)2 ja

(y) +

2
m2

(cid:17)2
b z d4x(cid:16)ja

+

23topological interactions of this kind are sometimes interpreted as a 4d analogue of the aharonov-bohm eect.
in particular, this interaction, albeit for the current of an external electrically charged particle with the world-sheet
of magnetic string, emerges in the string representation for the wilson loop of this particle in ahm [118].

24clearly, these currents are related to the ones introduced at the end of the previous subsection as j = eaja
.

57

+ 2is 2

3

1

gm"sint.(cid:16)1, j1

(cid:17) + sint.(cid:16)2, j2

(cid:17)  sint.(cid:16)1, j3

(cid:17)  sint.(cid:16)2, j3

(cid:17)##).

(133)

we see that the last four terms on the r.h.s. of eq. (133) describe an interference between
various possibilities of the interaction between string world-sheets and monopole currents in the
abelian-projected su(3)-gluodynamics to occur.

for illustrations, let us establish a correspondence of the above results to the 3d ones. namely,
let us derive a 3d analogue of eq. (128), i.e., nd a representation in terms of the monopole
currents of the dual ginzburg-landau model. there, eq. (80) is replaced by [111]

sing.(x) = 2(x).

here, on the r.h.s. stands the so-called vortex density with (x)  rl

(134)
dx( )(x  x( )) being
the -function dened w.r.t. the electric vortex line l, parametrized by the vector x( ). this
line is closed in the case under study, i.e., in the absence of external quarks, which means that
 = 0. performing by virtue of eq. (134) the path-integral duality transformation of the
partition function of 3d dahm in the london limit,

z = z dbdsing.dreg. exp(z d3x" 1

4

f 2

 +

2
2

(  2gmb)2#),

(135)

we get for it the following representation

z = z dx( )dhd exp(z d3x" 1

42 (h  h)2 

 2ih +(cid:16)gm2h + (cid:17)2#).

(136)

notice that the kalb-ramond eld has now reduced to a massive one-form eld h with the mass
m = 2gm, as well as the a-eld has reduced to a scalar . analogously to the 4d case, the eld

e  gm2h + can be regarded as a full electric eld, dened via the full dual electromagnetic
eld strength tensor as e = 1
2f. the absence of external quarks is now expressed by the
equation e = 0, following from the equation of motion for the eld . correspondingly, the
monopole currents are dened as j = f = gm2h and are manifestly conserved.
notice also that the condition of closeness of the vortex lines,  = 0, unambiguously exhibits
itself as a condition of absence of external quarks, e = 0, by virtue of the equation of motion
gm2 h 1
for the eld h, which can be written in the form e = 1
next, after performing the gauge transformation h  h +  with the gauge function  =
 1
gm2, the eld  drops out. expressing h via j as follows
x z d3y

22  (h  h) + ii.

h(x) = 

42gm

1





j(y)
|x  y|

and substituting this expression into the r.h.s. of eq. (136), we nally arrive at the desired
representation for the partition function of 3d dahm in terms of the monopole currents

58

z = z dx( )dh exp(" 1
m2 z d3xj2

 +

4 z d3xd3yj(x)
2i
gm

sint.(l, j)#).

1

+

1

|x  y|

j(y)+

(137)

the interaction term of the electric vortex line with the monopole current now takes the form

sint.(l, j) =

1
4

z d3xd3yj(x)

(y  x)
|y  x|3 (y).

this interaction term can be again rewritten as sint. = r d3xjhvor., where the magnetic induction,
generated by the electric vortex line, obeys the equation h vor.
 = . note again that if we
set for the monopole current the classical expression (131), the interaction term takes the form
sint. = 2gm l(l, ) with l(l, ) standing for the gauss linking number of the contours l and .
in conclusion of this section notice that our results demonstrate the usefulness of the abelian
projection method and path-integral duality transformation for the solution of the problem of
string representation of non-abelian gauge theories and provide us with some new insights con-
cerning the vacuum structure of these theories. they give a new eld-theoretical status to the
mfc as well as to the t hooft-mandelstam scenario of connement.

4 ensembles of topological defects in the abelian-
projected theories and string representation of com-
pact qed

in the previous section, we have demonstrated the relevance of the massive kalb-ramond eld
coupled to the string world-sheet to the construction of the string representation of abelian-
projected su(2)-gluodynamics. we have also argued that the large-distance asymptotic behaviour
of the propagator of this eld matches the one of the bilocal eld strength correlator in mfc of
qcd. all this tells us that the kalb-ramond eld coupled to the string world-sheet is indeed
quite adequate for modelling the qcd string eective action.

in the present section, we shall nd the dual formulation of one more model allowing for the
analytical description of connement, which is compact qed [105, 20] in three and four space-time
dimensions. there, connement is also due to monopoles, which however form not a condensate
of their cooper pairs (as it is argued to take place in the abelian-projected theories), but a dilute
gas. the resulting dual action also turns out to be some kind of a kalb-ramond eld action, albeit
quite nonlinear one. as we shall see, this nonlinearity will eventually realize the independence of
the wilson loop, describing an external electrically charged test particle, of the form of a certain
surface bounded by the contour of this wilson loop. namely, it will be demonstrated that this
independence is achieved by the summation over the branches of a certain (highly nonlinear)
multivalued eective potential of the monopole densities in 3d or monopole currents in 4d, both
of which are unambiguously related to the kalb-ramond eld via the modied bianchi identities.
this is the essence of the string representation of compact qed, which is thus alternative to the
dahm one. note that the inapplicability of the method of a derivation of the string representation
of dahm to compact qed is clearly not surprising due to the absence of magnetic higgs eld in

59

the latter case (no condensation of monopole cooper pairs). correspondingly, there is no way of
getting the integration over string world-sheets from the integration over the singular part of the
phase of this eld.

however in the low-energy limit, the real branch of the above mentioned eective monopole
potential goes over into a simple quadratic functional, and the resulting action of the kalb-ramond
eld becomes analogous to the one of eq. (82). this will enable us to derive the string tension
and the bilocal eld strength correlator in 3d- and 4d compact qed in this limit. next, we
shall apply the partition function of the type (82) to the description of the string world-sheet
excitations in dahm, 4d compact qed, and qcd and derive the eective action quadratic in
these excitations. in our interpretation of the above mentioned topics, which will be covered in
the next two subsections, we shall mainly follow the papers [90, 134] and [133].

in the third subsection, we shall demonstrate that the developed techniques of investigation
of the grand canonical ensembles of monopoles are quite appropriate to the description of similar
ensembles of topological defects in the abelian-projected theories. this is a natural extension
of the results of the previous section, where these defects have been treated as individual (i.e.,
noninteracting) ones. here, contrary to that, collective eects in the dilute gases of such defects
will be studied. in our interpretation of this topic, we shall follow refs. [135, 136].

4.1 vacuum correlators and string representation of compact qed

4.1.1

3d-case

in the present subsection, we shall derive a representation of 3d compact qed in terms of
the monopole densities and then employ it for the construction of the string representation of
the wilson loop in this theory. besides that, vacuum correlators in the low-energy limit of 3d
compact qed will be also investigated.

the most important feature of 3d compact qed, which distinguishes it from the noncompact
case, is the existence of magnetic monopoles. their general conguration is the coulomb gas with
the action [105]

smon. = g2xa<b

qaqb(cid:16)1(cid:17) (za, zb) + s0xa

q2
a,

(138)

where  is the 3d laplace operator, and s0 is the action of a single monopole, s0 = const.
. here,
e2
similarly to ref. [105], we have adopted the standard dirac notations, where eg = 2n, restricting
ourselves to the monopoles of the minimal charge, i.e., setting n = 1. then, the partition function
of the grand canonical ensemble of monopoles corresponding to the action (138) reads

(139)



60



 n
n!

n

yi=1z d3zi exp"

2e2 z d3xd3ygas(x)

zmon. = 1 +

xn =1 xqa=1
qa (x  za) is the monopole density, corresponding to the gas conguration.
where gas(x) =
here, a single monopole weight   exp (s0) has the dimension of (mass)3 and is usually referred
to as fugacity. notice also that we have restricted ourselves to the values qa = 1, since at large
values of the magnetic coupling constant g, monopoles with |q| > 1 turn out to be unstable and
tend to dissociate into those with |q| = 1.

gas(y)# ,

1

|x  y|

n

pa=1

next, coulomb interaction can be made local, albeit nonlinear one, by introduction an auxiliary

scalar eld [105]

2

()2  2 cos(g)(cid:21)(cid:27) .

zmon. = z d exp(cid:26)z d3x(cid:20)1

(140)
the magnetic mass m = g2 of the eld , following from the quadratic term in the expansion of
the cosine on the r.h.s. of eq. (140), is due to the debye screening in the monopole gas. the next,
quartic, term of the expansion determines the coupling constant of the diagrammatic expansion
for this gas, which is therefore exponentially small and proportional to g4 exp (const.g2).
before proceeding with the investigation of 3d compact qed, let us present the derivation of
its partition function (139) (as well as the related eq. (140)) from the partition function of the
usual 3d qed extended by the external monopoles. the statistical weight of such a model (i.e.,
its partition function for the given monopole charges qas and the number of monopoles n, where
the summation over the grand canonical ensemble is not yet performed) is the same as the one
of the ginzburg-landau theory extended by external monopoles, but without the higgs eld (cf.
the previous section) and reads

z [gas] = z da(cid:20)

1

4e2 z d3x(cid:16)f + f gas

 (cid:17)2(cid:21) .

(141)

is the monopole eld strength tensor, responsible for the

here, f = a  a, and f gas
violation of the bianchi identities,



1
2

f gas

 = 2gas.

(142)

next, the term 1
the integration over an auxiliary vector eld b as follows

4e2 f 2

 in the lagrangian on the r.h.s. of eq. (141) can be linearized by introducing

exp(cid:18)

bf(cid:19)(cid:21) .
after that, the integration over the a-eld leads to a constraint  (ieb + f gas
resolution yields b = i

 ) = 0, whose
 + . substituting this representation for the eld b into the

(cid:19) = z db exp(cid:20)z d3x(cid:18)1

i
2e

 +

b2

2

remained action r d3x(cid:20) 1

following expression for the partition function (141)

4e2 (cid:16)f gas

 (cid:17)2(cid:21) and making use of eq. (142), we nally arrive at the

1

4e2 z d3xf 2
2e f gas
 + 1
2b2

z [gas] = z d exp(cid:26)z d3x(cid:20) 1

2

()2  iggas(cid:21)(cid:27) .

(143)

clearly, the summation over the grand canonical ensemble of monopoles leads now to eq. (140).
on the other hand, integration over the eld  in eq. (143) yields the argument of the exponent
standing on the r.h.s. of eq. (139). this conclusion completes the derivation of eqs. (139)
and (140) from the partition function (141).

let us now cast the partition function (139) into the form of an integral over the monopole

densities. this can be done by introducing into eq. (139) a unity of the form

1 = z d ((x)  gas(x)) = z dd exp(i" n
xa=1

qa(za) z d3x#) .

(144)

61

then, performing the summation over the monopole ensemble in the same way as it has been
done in a derivation of the representation (140), we get

zmon. = z dd exp(



2e2 z d3xd3y(x)

1

|x  y|

(y) +z d3x (2 cos   i)) .

(145)

finally, integrating over the lagrange multiplier  by resolving the corresponding saddle-point
equation,

sin  = 

i
2

,

we arrive at the following expression for the partition function

zmon. = z d exp(" 

2e2 z d3xd3y(x)

1

|x  y|

(y) + vreal[]#) .

here,

(146)

(147)

(148)

vreal[]  z d3x
 ln




2

2!2
2!2
  2vuut1 +  
+vuut1 +  


is the parabolic-type eective monopole potential, whose asymptotic behaviours at    and
   read

and

vreal[]  z d3x 2 +

2

4!

vreal[]  z d3x" ln



  1!# ,

(149)

respectively. owing to eq. (144), the obtained representation (147) is natural to be called as a
representation for the partition function in terms of the monopole densities.

note that the reason for the notation vreal[] is that during the integration over the eld  in
eq. (145) we have chosen only the real branch of the solution to the saddle-point equation (146) and
disregarded the complex ones. owing to this, eq. (147) describes actually not the full expression
for the partition function, but only its real part. the corresponding full expression will be discussed
below.

the obtained representation for the partition function can be straightforwardly applied to
the calculation of the coecient function dmon. (x2), related to the bilocal correlator of the eld
strength tensors as follows

hf(x)f(0)ia, =    !dmon.(cid:16)x2(cid:17) +
2" x  x! +  x  x!#dfull
1 (cid:16)x2(cid:17) ,

1

+

(150)

62

where the average over the monopole densities is dened by the partition function (147), whereas
the a-average is dened as

h. . .ia  r da (. . .) exp(cid:16) 1
r da exp(cid:16) 1

(cid:17)
4e2 r d3xf 2
(cid:17)
4e2 r d3xf 2

.

in eq. (150), f = f + f m
includes also the monopole part

 stands for the full electromagnetic eld strength tensor, which

this monopole part yields the r.h.s. of the bianchi identities modied by the monopoles,

f m
 (x) = 

1
2





x z d3y

(y)
|x  y|

.

(151)
2 f stands for the full magnetic induction. eqs. (150) and (151) then lead to

h = 2,

where h = 1
the following equation for the function dmon.

dmon.(cid:16)x2(cid:17) = 42 h(x)(0)i ,

(152)

which is a 3d analogue of the 4d equation (100). the correlator standing on the r.h.s. of
eq. (152) can be found in the limit of small monopole densities (low-energy limit),   . by
making use of eqs. (147) and (149), we obtain

h(x)(0)i = 


2



em|x|
|x|

.

then, demanding that dmon. (x2  )  0, we get by the maximum principle for the harmonic
functions the desired expression for the function dmon. in the low-energy limit

dmon.(cid:16)x2(cid:17) = 2

em|x|
|x|

.

(153)

we see that in the model under study, the correlation length of the vacuum tg, i.e., the distance
at which the function dmon. decreases, corresponds to the inverse debye mass of the eld , m1
(cf. the case of abelian-projected theories, where the role of tg was played by the inverse mass of
the dual gauge boson(s), generated by the higgs mechanism). the coecient function dfull
(x2)
will be derived later on.

1

let us now proceed to the problem of string representation of 3d compact qed. to this end,
we shall consider an expression for the wilson loop in this theory and try to nd a mechanism
realizing the independence of this object of the form of a certain string world-sheet , bounded by
the contour c. by virtue of the stokes theorem, the wilson loop can be rewritten in the following
form

i

2 z

df
hw (c)i = *exp
+


= hw (c)ia(cid:28)exp(cid:18) i

a,

= *exp
iz
2 z d3x(x)(x)(cid:19)(cid:29)

dh


+

a,

=

,

(154)

63

where the free photon contribution reads

e2

8 ic

dxic

dy

1

|x  y|


 .

(155)

hw (c)ia = *exp
iic

adx


+
2 d, and (x) = 
x r

a

= exp


in eq. (154), d  1
which the surface  shows up to an observer at the point x. notice that due to the gauss law,
in the case when  is a closed surface surrounding the point x, (x) = 4, which is the standard
result for the total solid angle in 3d.

stands for the solid angle under

d(y)

|xy|

1

eq. (154) seems to contain some discrepancy, since its l.h.s. depends only on the contour c,
whereas the r.h.s. depends on an arbitrary surface , bounded by c. however, this actually
occurs to be not a discrepancy, but a key point in the construction of the desired string represen-
tation. the resolution of the apparent paradox lies in the observation that during the derivation
of the eective monopole potential (148), we have accounted only for the one, namely real, branch
of the solution to the saddle-point equation (146). actually, however, one should sum up over all
the complex-valued branches of the integrand of the eective potential (148) at every space point
x. this requires to replace vreal[] by the total expression

v [] =

+

xn=z d3x




ln



2

2!2
+vuut1 +  


+ 2in

2!2
  2vuut1 +  


which, in particular, being substituted for vreal[] into eq. (147) yields the full partition function,
mentioned above. as far as the wilson loop, given by the expression

,

(156)

hw (c)i = hw (c)ia 

z d exp(" 

2e2 z d3xd3y(x)

1

|x  y|

(y) + v [] 

i

2 z d3x(x)(x)#) ,

(157)

is concerned, such a summation over the branches of v [] thus restores the independence of
this object of the choice of the world-sheet. (notice that from now on we omit an inessential
normalization factor, implying everywhere the normalization hw (0)i = 1.)
derived in another, more indirect, way in ref. [90].
correspondence between our approach and the one of that paper.

it is worth noting that the obtained string representation (157) has been for the rst time
it is therefore instructive to establish a

the main idea of ref. [90] was to calculate the wilson loop starting with the direct denition
of this average in the sense of the partition function (139) of the monopole gas. the corresponding
expression has the form

hw (c)imon. = 1+

+



xn =1 xqa=1

 n
n!

n

yi=1z d3zi exp"



2e2 z d3xd3ygas(x)

1

|x  y|

gas(y) +

i

2 z d3xgas(x)(x)# =

64

= z d exp(cid:26)z d3x(cid:20) 1
= z d exp(z d3x" e2

()2  2 cos(cid:18)g +
82 (cid:18) 

2(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:27) =
 2 cos #) ,

(cid:19)2

1
2

2



where   g + 
2 .

next, one can prove the following equality

(158)

(159)

1

e2

e2

dy

8 ic

dxic

exp

= z dh exp(cid:20)z d3x(cid:16)ih + g2h2

|x  y| 

82 z d3x(cid:18) 

(cid:19)2
 =
  2ih(cid:17)(cid:21) ,

1
2

which makes it possible to represent the contribution of the kinetic term on the r.h.s. of eq. (158)
and the free photon contribution (155) to the wilson loop as an integral over the kalb-ramond
eld. the only nontrivial point necessary to prove the equality (159) is an expression for the
derivative of the solid angle. one has

(x) = z

 d(y)


y  d(y)



y! 

y

1

|x  y|

+z

d(y)

1

|x  y|

.

(160)

applying to the rst integral on the r.h.s. of eq. (160) stokes theorem in the operator form,
d





y  d

y  dy, one nally obtains

(x) = 



x ic

dy

1

|x  y|  4z

d(y)(x  y).

making use of this result and carrying out the gaussian integral over the eld h, one can
demonstrate that both sides of eq. (159) are equal to

exp



e2

2 


1

42 z d3x ()2 +

1

 z

d +z

d(x)z


d(y)(x  y)



,

thus proving the validity of this equation.

substituting now eq. (159) into eq. (158), it is straightforward to carry out the integral over
the eld . since this eld has no more kinetic term, such an integration can be performed in
the saddle-point approximation. the corresponding saddle-point equation has the same form as
eq. (146) with the replacement   h. as a result, we obtain the following expression
for the full wilson loop

hw (c)i = hw (c)ia hw (c)imon. =
z d3x(cid:16)g2h2

 + v [h](cid:17) + 2iz

= z dh exp


,

(161)

dh


where the world-sheet independence of the r.h.s. is again provided by the summation over the
branches of the multivalued action, which is now the action of the kalb-ramond eld.

65

comparing now eqs. (157) and (161), we see that the kalb-ramond eld is indeed related
to the monopole density via the equation h = . thus, a conclusion following from the
representation of the full wilson loop in terms of the integral over the kalb-ramond eld is
that this eld is simply related to the sum of the photon and monopole eld strength tensors as
h = 1
4f. in the formal language, such a decomposition of the kalb-ramond eld is just the
essence of the hodge decomposition theorem.
let us now consider the low-energy limit of eq. (161) and again restrict ourselves to the real
branch of the eective potential, i.e., replace v [h] by vreal [h]. this yields the
following expression for the wilson loop

hw (c)ilowenergy = z dh exp(z d3x" 1

6

h 2

 + g2h2

  2ih#) .

(162)

notice, that the mass of the kalb-ramond eld resulting from this equation is equal to the debye
mass m of the eld  from eq. (140).

one can now see that eq. (162) is quite similar to the 3d version of eq. (126) (with the a-
eld gauged away) we had in the dahm case. however, the important dierence from dahm
is that restricting ourselves to the real branch of the potential, we have violated the surface
independence of the r.h.s. of eq. (162). this problem is similar to the one we met within the
mfc in subsection 1.3, where in the expression for the wilson loop, written via the non-abelian
stokes theorem and cumulant expansion, all the cumulants higher than the bilocal one were
disregarded. there, the surface independence was restored by replacing  by the surface of the
minimal area, min. = min.[c], bounded by the contour c. let us follow this recipe, after which
the quantity

can be considered as a low-energy string eective action of 3d compact qed.

the integration over the kalb-ramond eld in eq. (162) is now almost the same as the one

sstr. =  lnhw (c)ilowenergy(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)min.

(163)

of appendix c and yields

hw (c)ilowenergy(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)min.

= exp



1

8 zmin.

d(x) zmin.

d(y)hf(x)f(y)ia,


,

which is consistent with the result following directly from the cumulant expansion of eq. (154).
here, the bilocal correlator is dened by eq. (150) with the function dmon. given by eq. (153) and
1 = dphot.
dfull

, where the photon and monopole contributions read

+ dmon.

1

1

and

dphot.

1

(cid:16)x2(cid:17) =

e2

2|x|3

dmon.

1

(cid:16)x2(cid:17) =

e2

4x2  m +

1

|x|! em|x|,

(164)

respectively. since the approximation   , in which eq. (153) has been derived, is just the
low-energy limit, in which eq. (162) follows from eq. (161), coincidence of the function dmon.,

66

following from the propagator of the kalb-ramond eld, with the one of eq. (153) conrms the
consistency of our calculations.

notice that by performing an expansion of the nonlocal string eective action (163) in powers
of the derivatives w.r.t. the world-sheet coordinates as, one gets the following string tension of
the nambu-goto term

 = 22

g

.

(165)

similarly to the expression (87) for the string tension in the abelian-projected su(2)-
gluodynamics, which is nonanalytic in the magnetic coupling constant, eq. (165) is nonanalytic
in the electric coupling constant. this observation manifests the nonperturbative nature of string
representation of these theories.

=  2

note that the inverse bare coupling constant of the rigidity term corresponding to the string
eective action (163) can be also calculated by virtue of the results of section 2, and the result
82g3 . this expression is also nonanalytic in e, and its negative sign supports
reads 1
0
the stability of strings. however, as it has been demonstrated in section 2, at the surface of the
minimal area, min.[c], at which string eective action (163) is dened, the rigidity term vanishes.
we see that the long- and short distance asymptotic behaviours of the functions (153) and (164)
display the properties analogous to those of the corresponding functions in qcd within mfc [62,
63]. namely, at large distances both of the functions (153) and (164) decrease exponentially
with the correlation length m1, and at such distances dmon.
1  dmon. due to the preexponential
is much larger
factor.
than the function dmon., which also parallels the mfc results. notice, however, that the short-
distance similarity takes place only to the lowest order of perturbation theory in qcd, where its
specic non-abelian properties are not important. note also that the above described asymptotic
behaviours of the functions dmon. and dmon.
clearly match those of the corresponding functions,
which parametrize the bilocal correlator of the dual eld strength tensors in the abelian-projected
su(2)- and su(3)-gluodynamics (cf. the previous section).

in the same time, in the opposite case |x|  m1, the function dmon.

1

1

4.1.2

4d-case

in the present subsection, we shall generalize the above considerations to the case of 4d compact
qed. note that in this case, contrary to what happens in 3d, monopoles are no more point-
like particles at rest, but are rather represented by the closed loops. the disorder eects in the
ensemble of such loops, leading to the connement of an external electrically charged test particle,
become strong enough only in the so-called strong coupling limit, i.e., at suciently large values
of the electric coupling constant. this situation diers from the case of 3d compact qed, where
connement takes place at arbitrary values of the coupling constant (see ref. [20] for an extended
discussion).

the action we start with is again of the form of ahm without the higgs eld, extended by

external monopoles (cf. eq. (141))

here, the monopole eld strength tensor describes the violation of the bianchi identities by the
collective current of n monopoles, which form a dilute gas

sgas =

1

 (cid:17)2
4 z d4x(cid:16)f + f gas

.

(166)

67

 f gas

 (x) = jgas

 (x)  g

qai dza

 (x  xa( )).

(167)

n

xa=1

in eq. (167), we have parametrized the trajectory of the a-th monopole by the vector xa

( ) =

1

r0

 =

d xa

( ), where ya

( ) denotes the position of the trajectory, whereas the vector za

 + za
ya
( )
corresponds to its shape, both of which should be eventually averaged over. the procedure of a
derivation of the statistical weight entering the partition function of the grand canonical ensemble
of monopoles is analogous to the corresponding 3d one, described in the previous subsection.
firstly, one can linearize the term 1
 in the action (166) by introducing an integration
over an auxiliary antisymmetric tensor eld b as follows

4 r d4xf 2
zhjgas
= z dadb exp(cid:26)z d4x(cid:20)1

4

 i  z daesgas =

b2

 +

i
2

bf +

1
2

ff gas

 +

1

4 (cid:16)f gas

 (cid:17)2(cid:21)(cid:27) .

(168)

(169)

next, the constraint (cid:16) b  if gas
resolved by setting b = i f gas

 (cid:17) = 0 emerging after the integration over the eld a can be

 + f, where f = b  b. this nally yields
 i = z db exp(cid:26)z d4x(cid:20) 1

f 2
  ibjgas

 (cid:21)(cid:27) .

4

zhjgas

this expression should now be averaged over the monopole gas in the following sense

dohjgas

 iegas

=

n

yi=1z d4yidzihzii xqa=1ohjgas
 i .

here,  [zi] is a certain rotation- and translation invariant measure of integration over the shapes
of monopole loops, whose concrete form will not be specied here (for example, one can choose
it in the form of the properly normalized measure of an ensemble of random loops, representing
trajectories of scalar particles, i.e.,

z dzihziiohzii = n

+

z0

dsi
si

z

u(0)=u(si)

du(si) exp


1
4

si

z0

u2(si)dsi

 o [u(si)] ,

where the vector u(si) parametrizes the same contour as the vector zi

( ).).

one can now write down the contribution of n monopoles to the partition function of their

grand canonical ensemble. owing to eq. (169) it reads

z [b] = 1 +
(2)n



= 1 +

xn =1



xn =1

 n

n! (cid:28)exp(cid:18)iz d4xbjgas

 (cid:19)(cid:29)gas

=

n! (cid:26)z d4yz dz[z] cos(cid:18)gi dzb(x)(cid:19)(cid:27)n

.

(170)

here,   es0 again stands for the fugacity (boltzmann factor of a single monopole) of dimension
(mass)4 with the action of a single monopole given by s0 = const.
e2

.

68

in order to evaluate the path-integral over zs in eq. (170), let us employ the dilute gas ap-
proximation, which requires that typical distances between the monopole loops are much larger
. let us denote charac-

than their sizes. this means that generally |ya|  |za|, where |y|  qy2
teristic distances |y| by l, characteristic sizes of monopole loops  =

d z2! by a, and perform

1

the taylor expansion of b(x) up to the rst order in a/l (which is the rst one yielding a

r0

nonvanishing contribution to the integral h dzb(x) on the r.h.s. of eq. (170)),

b(x) = b(y) + l1znb(y) + o (cid:18) a

l(cid:19)2! .

(171)

here, we have denoted n = y
|y|
of expansion (171) into eq. (170) yields

and estimated the derivative /y as n/l. then, the substitution

z dz[z] cos(cid:18)gi dzb(x)(cid:19)  z dz[z] cos(cid:18) g
(1)n
(2n)! (cid:18) g
xn=0

l(cid:19)2n



l

n1b1(y)   n2nb2n (y)z dz[z]p11[z]   p2n2n[z],

nb(y)p[z](cid:19) =

=

(172)

where p[z]  h dzz stands for the tensor area associated with the contour parametrized by

z( ) 25. due to the rotation- and translation invariance of the measure [z], the average of the
product of the tensor areas can be written in the form

(a2)2n

z dz[z]p11[z]   p2n2n[z] =

(2n  1)!! h111,22    12n12n1,2n2n + permutationsi .
(173)
here, 1, = 1
2 (  ) (cf. appendix c), and the normalization factor (2n  1)!! is
explicitly extracted out since the sum in square brackets on the r.h.s. of eq. (173) contains
(2n  1)!! terms. substituting now eq. (173) into eq. (172), adopting for the eld b the fock-
schwinger gauge, yb(y) = 0, so that nb(y) = 0 26, and denoting ga2
l2 ( a) by 1, where 
acts as a natural uv momentum cuto, we nally obtain

z dz[z] cos(cid:18)gi dzb(x)(cid:19)  cos |b(y)|
 ! .

this yields the desired expression for the partition function of the grand canonical ensemble of
monopoles

zmon. = z db exp(z d4x"1

4

f 2

  2 cos |b|

 !#) .

(174)

the debye mass of the b-eld following from the expansion of the cosine in the action on the

r.h.s. of eq. (174) reads m =

2
 .

25one can check that for the plane contour, p = p = s,  < , where s is the area inside the contour.
26within the dilute gas approximation, where 
l , the fock-schwinger gauge is equivalent to the lorentz

y  n

one.

69

let us now turn ourselves to a derivation of the representation for the partition function (174)
in terms of the monopole currents similar to the representation of its 3d analogue (140) in terms
of the monopole densities, given by eqs. (147) and (156). such a representation will enable us to
obtain the bilocal correlator of the eld strength tensors and to construct the string representation
for the wilson loop of an external electrically charged test particle in the 4d-case under study. to
proceed with note that, analogously to the 3d-case, the integration over the eld b in eq. (168)
leads to the coulomb interaction between the monopole currents,

zhjgas

 i = exp"

1

82 z d4xd4xjgas

 (x)

1

(x  x)2 jgas

 (x)# .

averaging this expression over the grand canonical ensemble of monopoles we obtain

zmon. = 1 +



xn =1

 n

=

 (cid:17)z [j](cid:29)gas

n! (cid:28)z dj(cid:16)j  jgas
(x  x)2 j(x)  iz d4xj + 2z d4x cos ||

1

 !# ,

= z djd exp"

1

82 z d4xd4xj(x)

(175)
where the term xing the fock-schwinger gauge for the lagrange multiplier  is assumed to be
included into the integration measure. notice that dj here is the standard integration measure
over the vector eld, which is of the same form as d.

clearly in order to integrate now over , one should solve the saddle-point equation

sin ||

 ! = 

i
2

j.

(176)


||

this can be done by noting that its l.h.s. is a vector in the direction , which means that it
can be equal to the r.h.s. only provided that the direction of the vector  coincides with the
direction of the vector j. therefore, it is reasonable to seek for a solution to eq. (176) in the form
 = || j
. straightforward
|j|
solution of the latter one yields the desired current representation

 (cid:17) =  i|j|

2

. then, eq. (176) reduces to the scalar equation sin(cid:16)||
zmon. = z dj exp(" 1

82 z d4xd4xj(x)

1

(x  x)2 j(x) + v [j]#) ,

where the eective complex-valued potential of monopole currents reads

v [j] =



2 |j| +vuut1 +  

2 |j|!2


=

+

xn=z d4x
|j|
ln




+ 2in

  2vuut1 +  

2 |j|!2


(177)

.

(178)

analogously to the 3d-case, by virtue of the representation (177), (178) it is now possible to
construct the string representation for the wilson loop of an external electrically charged test
particle. once being written via the stokes theorem, the wilson loop reads

70

hw (c)i = *exp


i

2 z

df
+

a,j

= hw (c)ia*exp


i

2 z

dh
+

,

j

(179)

where f = ef + h is the full eld strength tensor, extended by the kalb-ramond eld h,
which obeys the equation h = j. next, on the r.h.s. of eq. (179), the a-average is dened
as

h. . .ia = r da (. . .) exp(cid:16) 1
r da exp(cid:16) 1

(cid:17)
4 r d4xf 2
(cid:17)
4 r d4xf 2

,

whereas the j-average is dened by means of the partition function (177)-(178). among the
two multipliers on the r.h.s. of eq. (179), the rst one is the standard perimeter (gaussian)
contribution to the wilson loop, brought about by the free photons, i.e.,

hw (c)ia = exp


e2

82 ic

dxic

dy

1

(x  y)2
 .

as far as the second one is concerned, expressing h via j, it is possible to rewrite it directly as

where

(cid:28)exp(cid:18)iz d4xj(cid:19)(cid:29)j

,

(x) =

1
82 



x z

d(x())

1

(x  x())2

(180)

(181)

stands for the 4d solid angle, under which the surface  is seen by an observer at the point x (if  is
a closed surface surrounding the point x than by virtue of the gauss law, d  ds  ds,
one can check that for the conserved current j, r d4xj = r dsj, as it should be. here,
ds stands for the oriented element of the hypersurface bounded by .). again, an apparent -
dependence of eq. (180) actually drops out due to the summation over branches of the multivalued
potential (178). this is the essence of the string representation of the wilson loop in the 4d
monopole gas.

let us now consider the low-energy limit of the wilson loop, i.e., the limit |j|  , and
investigate the (stable) minimum of the real branch of the potential. this corresponds to extracting
the term with n = 0 from the whole sum in eq. (178). then, since we have restricted ourselves to
the only one branch of the potential, the -independence of the wilson loop is spoiled. in order
to restore it, let us choose  to be the surface of the minimal area  = min. [c]. then the wilson
loop takes the form

hw (c)ilowenergy = hw (c)ia 

z dj exp(" 1

82 z d4xd4xj(x)

1

(x  x)2 j(x) +

71

2

4 z d4xj2

 + iz d4xj#) ,

(182)

where now  is dened by eq. (181) with the replacement   min.. recalling the expression
for j via h, eq. (182) can be written as follows

hw (c)ilowenergy = hw (c)iaz dh exp

z d4x  2

24

h 2

 +

1
4

h2

! +

i

2 zmin.

dh


.

(183)
note that the mass of the kalb-ramond eld following from the quadratic part of the action
standing in the exponent on the r.h.s. of eq. (183) is equal to the debye mass m of the eld b
following from eq. (174).

integrating over the kalb-ramond eld we obtain

hw (c)ilowenergy = exp




1

8 zmin.

d(x) zmin.

d(y)hf(x)f(y)ia,j


.

here, owing to the appendix c, the bilocal correlator, once being parametrized as

hf(x)f(0)ia,j
2" x  x! +  x  x!#dfull

=    !dmon.(cid:16)x2(cid:17) +
1 (cid:16)x2(cid:17)

1

+

1

1

1 = dphot.

+ dmon.

, yields for the coecient functions dmon. and dmon.

with dfull
the expressions
given by eqs. (92) and (93), respectively, with the higgs mass of the dual gauge boson replaced
by the debye one. consequently, similarly to the case of the abelian-projected theories, the large-
(and short) distance asymptotic behaviours of the functions dmon. and dmon.
1 match those of the
corresponding functions in qcd within the mfc (see discussion after eq. (93)). we also see that
in the case of 4d compact qed under study, the role of the correlation length of the vacuum tg
is played by the inverse debye mass of the b-eld, m1. as far as the function dphot.
(x2) is
concerned, it turns out to be equal to
82|x|4 (cf. eq. (37)). all this demonstrates the relevance of
concepts of the mfc to the description of connement in compact qed.

e2

1

1

4.2 a method of description of the string world-sheet excitations

the results of the previous sections tell us that strings in qcd within the mfc and the approach
based on the method of abelian projections, as well as in compact qed, can be with a good
accuracy described by the same action of the massive kalb-ramond eld interacting with the
string world-sheet. this makes it reasonable to develop a unied mechanism of description of the
world-sheet excitations in all these theories. this can be done on the basis of the background-eld
method proposed in ref. [137] for the nonlinear sigma models.

let us for concreteness work with the action standing in the exponent on the r.h.s. of eq. (82)
for the case when there are no external quarks, i.e., the string world-sheets are closed. this action
has the form

s = z d4x  1

122 h 2

 +

1
4e2 h2

  ih! ,

(184)

72

(cf. eq. (126) where the a-eld has been absorbed by xing the gauge of the eld h).
in
order to develop the background-eld method, one should dene a geodesics passing through the
background world-sheet y() and the excited one x() = y() + z(), where z() stands for
the world-sheet uctuation. such a geodesics has the form (, s) = y() + sz(), where s
denotes the arc-length parameter, 0  s  1. the expansion of the string eective action (184)
in powers of quantum uctuations z()s can be performed by virtue of the arc-dependent term
describing the interaction of the kalb-ramond eld with the string, which reads

s[(, s)] = iz d2h[(, s)]ab (a(, s)) (b(, s)) .

then the term containing n quantum uctuations has the form

in particular, we obtain

dn

.

1
n!

s(n) =

dsn s[(, s)](cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)s=0
s(0) = iz d(y())h[y()],

and

s(1) = iz d(y())z()h[y()],

(185)

(186)

s(2) = iz d2z()ab (ay()) (bz()) h[y()] +

1
2

z() (by()) h[y()]!, (187)

where during the derivation of eqs. (186) and (187) several full derivative terms were omitted.

notice that as it was discussed in ref. [137], the terms (185)-(187) are necessary and sucient
to determine all one-loop uv divergencies in the theory (184). that is why in what follows we
shall restrict ourselves to the derivation of the eective action, quadratic in quantum uctuations
z()s.

in order to get such an action, we shall rst carry out the integral

z dh exp"z d4x  1

122 h 2

 +

1
4e2 h2

!  s(0)  s(1)#.

it turns out to be equal to

exp"2z d(y())z d(y()) d(1)

, (y()  y()) +

+ 2z()



y()

d(1)
, (y()  y()) + z()z()

2

y()y()

, (y()  y())!#.
d(1)

(188)

here, we have taken into account that the world-sheets under study are closed, so that the bound-
ary terms vanish.

secondly, one should substitute the saddle-point value of the integral

73

z dh exp"z d4x  1

122 h 2

 +

1
4e2 h2

!  s(0)#

into eq. (187). this saddle-point value reads

hs.p.
 [y()] =

ie2m3

2 z d(y())

k1 (m|y()  y()|)

|y()  y()|

,

(189)

where m = 
e is again the mass of the kalb-ramond eld. upon the substitution of eq. (189) into
eq. (187) and accounting for eq. (188), we nally get the following action quadratic in quantum
uctuations

squadr. =

2e2m2

2

z d(y)z d(y)(2z()(y  y)d1(cid:16)(y  y)2(cid:17) +
 3d1(cid:16)(y  y)2(cid:17) +

(y  y)(y  y)

(y  y)2

+z()z()"d1(cid:16)(y  y)2(cid:17) 

+

m3

82 |y  y|

(3k1 (m|y  y|) + k3 (m|y  y|))!#)
2 z d(y)z()z()

1

2e2m2"z d2ab (ay) z()bz() +



y#

(z d(y)(y  y) + (  ,   ,   ) + (  ,   ,   ))d1(cid:16)(y  y)2(cid:17) ,
where y  y(), y  y(), and the function d1 is dened by eq. (93). it is remarkable that though
the interactions between the points lying on the background world-sheet are completely described
via the function d, the dynamics of the world-sheet uctuations is governed by the function
d1, which in the case of open world-sheets is responsible for the perimeter-type interactions.
this phenomenon can be interpreted as an interpolation between the world-sheet and world-line
dynamics, which is absent on the background level.

4.3 abelian-projected theories as ensembles of vortex loops

in our investigations of abelian-projected theories performed in the previous section, the interac-
tion of topological defects (abrikosov type electric vortices in 3d and nielsen-olesen type strings
in 4d) has not been taken into account, i.e., these objects have been treated as individual ones.
owing to that, string representations of the partition functions of abelian-projected theories as
well as various eld correlators in these theories were insensitive to the properties of the ensemble
of strings as a whole and depended actually on a certain xed string conguration only (e.g. a
single string). on the other hand, it is known [122] that in the case of zero temperature under
study abrikosov vortices in the ginzburg-landau theory form bound states, consisting of a vortex
and an antivortex, which are usually referred to as vortex dipoles. such vortex dipoles are short
living (virtual) objects, whose typical sizes are much smaller than the typical distances between
them. this means that similarly to monopoles in compact qed, vortex dipoles form a dilute

74

gas.
in the 2d-case, the summation over the grand canonical ensemble of such dipoles in the
dilute gas approximation has been performed in ref. [138], and the result has the form of the 2d
sine-gordon theory of the scalar eld similar to eq. (140), albeit with an additional mass term of
the eld . the aim of the present subsection is to perform analogous summations in the 3d- and
4d-cases of the abelian-projected su(2)- and su(3)-gluodynamics. besides the representations
in terms of the eective sine-gordon theories, the related direct representations in terms of the
integrals over the vortex dipoles (small vortex loops built out of two nielsen-olesen type electric
strings in the 4d-case) similar to eqs. (147), (156) ((177), (178) in 4d) will be derived, which will
enable us to evaluate correlation functions of vortex dipoles (loops).

let us start our analysis with the dual ginzburg-landau theory (3d abelian-projected su(2)-
gluodynamics) in the london limit, whose partition function is given by eq. (135). as it has
been demonstrated in the previous section, the path-integral duality transformation casts this
partition function into the form (136). after gauging away the eld  by the gauge transformation
h  h  1

gm2 the partition function takes the form
42 h 2

z = z dx( )dh exp(z d3x" 1

 + 2g2

mh2  2ih#) ,

(190)

where we have denoted for brevity h = h  h. note that all the manipulations with
eq. (190), which will be performed below, should be obviously done at the saddle-point of the
eld h, where due to the closeness of vortices, the second proca equation, h = 0, holds. to
proceed from individual vortices to the grand canonical ensemble of vortex dipoles, one should
replace  in eq. (190) by the following expression describing the gas of n vortex dipoles

gas
 (x) =

n

xa=1

nai dza

( ) (x  xa( )) .

(191)

1

r0

here, nas stand for winding numbers, and we have decomposed the vector xa( ) as xa( ) =
d xa( ) denotes the position of the a-th vortex dipole. in what follows,
ya + za( ), where ya =
we shall restrict ourselves to the vortices possessing the minimal winding numbers, na = 1.
that is because the energy of a single vortex is known to be a quadratic function of the ux [122],
and therefore the existence of two vortices of a unit ux is more energetically favorable than the
existence of one vortex of the double ux. besides that, as it has been mentioned above, we shall
work in the dilute gas approximation, according to which characteristic distances |y|, which we
d z2, which
shall denote by l, are much larger than the characteristic sizes of vortex dipoles,

1

r0

we shall denote by a.

within these two approximations, by substituting eq. (191) into eq. (190) one can proceed
with the summation over the grand canonical ensemble of vortex dipoles. this procedure can be
performed with quite general form of the measure of integration over the shapes of vortex dipoles,
which should obey only the requirements of rotation- and translation invariance. clearly, such a
summation essentially parallels the summation over the grand canonical ensemble of monopoles in
4d compact qed, described in subsection 4.1 27. as a result, we arrive at the following expression
for the grand canonical partition function

27 the only technical detail is that during the averaging over the shapes of monopole loops in compact qed
the terms of the type nb(y) with n = y
vanished due to the fock-schwinger gauge imposed on the eld b.
|y|
contrary to that, in the case under study these terms vanish since the dilute gas approximation allows for the

75

z = z dh exp(z d3x" 1

42 h 2

 + 2g2

mh2  2 cos |h|

 !#) .

(192)

here,   es0 again denotes the fugacity of a vortex dipole, which has the dimension (mass)3,
with s0 standing for the dipoles action 28, and  = l2a2 being the uv momentum cuto. thus,
the summation over the grand canonical ensemble of vortex dipoles, built out of electric abrikosov
vortices, with the most general form of the measure of integration over their shapes yields in the
dilute gas approximation the eective sine-gordon theory (192). in particular, this way of treating
the gas of vortex dipoles leads to increasing of the mass of the eld h. namely, expanding the
cosine in eq. (192) we get the square of the full mass, m 2 = m2 + m2
d  q22, where m = 2gm
2 is
is the usual mass of this eld (equal to the mass of the dual gauge boson), and md = 
the additional contribution coming from the debye screening. we have also introduced the full

magnetic charge q = q4g2

m + 2
2 .

our next aim is to derive the representation for the partition function (192) directly in the form
of an integral over the vortex dipoles. this can be done by making use of the following equality
(valid at the saddle-point of the eld h, corresponding to the action standing in the exponent on
the r.h.s. of eq. (190)),

exp(z d3x" 1
42 h 2
2 z d3xd3yj(x)

em|xy|
|x  y|

 + 2g2

mh2#) =
j(y) + 2iz d3xhj#) .

= z dj exp(" 2
 (cid:17) =  i

sin(cid:16)|h|
z = z dj exp(" 2

substituting it into eq. (192), one can straightforwardly resolve the resulting saddle-point equation
for the eld h, h
|h|

 j, which yields the desired vortex representation
j(y) + v [2j]#) .

2 z d3xd3yj(x)

em|xy|
|x  y|

(193)

here, the complex-valued potential of the vortex dipoles is given by eq. (178) with the replacement
d4x  d3x.
the obtained representation (193) can be now applied to the calculation of correlators of vortex
dipoles. indeed, it is possible to demonstrate that if we introduce into eq. (190) (with  replaced
by gas

 ) a unity of the form

1 = z dj(cid:16)j  gas

 (cid:17) = z djdl exp(cid:20)2iz d3xl(cid:16)j  gas
 (cid:17)(cid:21)

and integrate out all the elds except j, the result will coincide with eq. (193). this is the
reason why the correlators of js are nothing else, but the correlators of the vortex dipoles. such
correlators can be calculated in the low-energy limit, i.e., when |j|  . moreover, we shall
perform an additional approximation by restricting ourselves to the real branch of the eective
substitution n  l 
eld h corresponding to eq. (190).

. indeed, h = 0 owing to the second proca equation, valid at the saddle-point of the

y

28this action can be estimated as a, where  is the energy of the abrikosov vortex per its unit length, i.e., the
(cf. eq. (87)), where

3d analogue of the string tension. with the logarithmic accuracy one has [122]   2 ln
 is the magnetic higgs eld coupling constant.


gm

76

potential of vortex dipoles, which corresponds to extracting from the whole sum standing on the
r.h.s. of eq. (178) the term with n = 0. within these approximations, the bilocal correlator of
vortex dipoles reads

hj(z)j(0)i  r djj(z)j(0) expnh 2

2 r d3xd3yj(x) em|xy|

|xy|

r dj expnh 2

2 r d3xd3yj(x) em|xy|
422 "(z)  m2

1
4

|xy|

m2
d

d

= 

(cid:17)io

=



j(y) +r d3x(cid:16)2 + 22j2
(cid:17)io

j(y) +r d3x(cid:16)2 + 22j2
|z| # .

em|z|



this example illustrates how the vortex dipoles in the grand canonical ensemble are correlated to
each other. in particular, we see that their correlator decreases exactly according to the yukawa
law with the screening provided by the full mass m.

let us now proceed to the 4d-case of small electric vortex loops in the dahm. to investigate
the grand canonical ensemble of such loops, it is necessary to replace  in eq. (184) by the
following expression

gas

 (x) =

n

xa=1

naz d (xa())  (x  xa()) ,

(194)

where below in this section we shall set   [0, 1]  [0, 1]. after that, the summation over the
grand canonical ensemble of vortex loops is similar to the summation over the ensemble of vortex
dipoles in the dual ginzburg-landau theory. referring the reader for the details to appendix d,
we shall present here the result of this procedure, which has the form

z = z dh exp(z d4x" 1

122 h 2

 +

1
4e2 h2

  2 cos |h|

2 !#) .

(195)

here |h|  qh2
mension (mass)4. we have also introduced a new uv momentum cuto  equal toq l

, and the fugacity  (boltzmann factor of a single vortex loop) has now the di-
a3 with l and
a denoting the characteristic distances between vortex loops and their typical sizes, respectively.
the square of the full mass of the eld h following from eq. (195) reads m 2 = m2 + m2
d  q22.
here, m = 
is the debye contribution, and
e2 + 4

e is the usual higgs contribution, md =

4 is the full magnetic charge.

q = q 1
the representation for the partition function (195) in terms of the vortex loops can be obtained
by virtue of the following equality valid at the saddle-point of the action (184) (with   gas
 ),
at which h = 0,

2

2

exp(z d4x" 1
4e z d4xd4ys(x)

122 h 2

 +

1
4e2 h2

k1(m|x  y|)

|x  y|

#) =
s(y) + iz d4xhs#) .

= z ds exp(" 3

substituting this equation into eq. (195), we can integrate the eld h out, which yields the
desired representation for the partition function (195),

77

z = z ds exp(" 3

4e z d4xd4ys(x)

with the eective potential v given by eq. (178).

k1(m|x  y|)

|x  y|

s(y) + v [s]#)

(196)

similarly to the 3d case, correlation functions of ss, calculated by virtue of the partition
function (196), are nothing else, but the correlation functions of vortex loops in the gas. this can

be seen by mentioning that if we insert into the partition function z = r dx()dhes with

the action s given by eq. (184) and  replaced by gas

 the following unity

1 = z ds(cid:16)s  gas

 (cid:17) = z dsdl exp(cid:20)iz d4xl (cid:16)s  gas
 (cid:17)(cid:21)

and integrate out all the elds except s, the result will coincide with eq. (196). such correlation
functions of the vortex loops can be most easily calculated in the low-energy limit, 2 |s|  , by
restricting oneself to the vicinity of the minimum of the real branch of the potential (178), where
it reduces just to a quadratic functional of s.
in particular, the bilocal correlation function
reads

hs(z)s(0)i 

 r dss(z)s(0) expnh 3

4e r d4xd4ys(x) k1(m|xy|)

|xy|
s(y) + 24

4 r d4xs2

io

=

r ds expnh 3

4e r d4xd4ys(x) k1(m|xy|)
422 "(z)  m2

|xy|

m2
d

d

m
42

= (  )

s(y) + 24
4 r d4xs2
|z|

k1(m|z|)

# .

io

thus, we see that if electric nielsen-olesen strings are considered not as individual ones, but as a
gas of small vortex loops, the interaction between which has the yukawa form, the bilocal correlator
of the vortex loops in the low-energy limit has also the yukawa behaviour (albeit screened not by
the mass of the dual gauge boson, but by the full mass m).

let us now turn ourselves to the case of the abelian-projected su(3)-gluodynamics. in the case
when abrikosov-nielsen-olesen type electric strings in this theory are considered as noninteracting
objects, the expression for the partition function is given by eq. (117), which can be shortly written
as

z = z dx1

()dx2

()

gm3s 3

2 z d4xd4yh1

 exp


(x)1

(y) + 1

(x)2

 (y) + 2

(x)2

(197)
in order to proceed from the individual strings to the grand canonical ensemble of interacting
vortex loops, one should replace a

(x), where from now on a = 1, 2, in eq. (197) by

(y)i k1(mb|x  y|)

|x  y|

.




a gas

 (x) =

n

xk=1

na

kz d (xa

k())  (x  xa

k()) .

78

here, na
ks stand for winding numbers, which we shall again set to be equal 1. performing such
a replacement, one can see the crucial dierence of the grand canonical ensemble of small vortex
loops in the model under study from that in the abelian-projected su(2)-gluodynamics, studied
above. namely, the system has now the form of two interacting gases consisting of the vortex
loops of two kinds, while in the su(2)-case the gas was built out of vortex loops of the only one
kind.

analogously to that case, we shall treat such a grand canonical ensemble of vortex loops in
the dilute gas approximation. according to it, characteristic sizes of loops are much smaller
than characteristic distances between them, which in particular means that the vortex loops are
short living objects. then the summation over this grand canonical ensemble can be most easily
performed by inserting the unity

 (cid:17)
  a gas
into the r.h.s. of eq. (197) (with a
 ) and representing the -functions as the
integrals over lagrange multipliers. then, the contribution of n vortex loops of each kind to the
grand canonical ensemble takes the following form

1 = z dsa
 replaced by a gas

(cid:16)sa

(198)

zha gas

 i = z dsa

da



gm3s 3

2 z d4xd4yhs1

 exp


(x)s1

(y) + s1

(x)s2

(y) + s2

(x)s2

iz d4xa

 (cid:16)sa

  a gas

 (cid:17)(cid:27) .

(y)i k1(mb|x  y|)

|x  y|



(199)

after that, the desired summation is straightforward, since it technically parallels the one of
abelian-projected su(2)-gluodynamics. we have

(1 +

 n

n!   n



xn =1
exp"i

yi=1z d4y1
kz d (cid:16)z1

n1

n

xk=1

 xn1

k=1

i z dz1

i ()hz1

k()(cid:17) 1

 (cid:16)x1

ii!
k()(cid:17)#




{the same term with the replacement of indices 1  2} =

= exp





(y)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2 


2z d4y

cos


1

2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

.

(y)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2 
 + cos

k  r d2xa

here, the world-sheet coordinate of the k-th vortex loop of the a-th type 29 xa
k() has been decom-
posed as xa
k() describes the position of the vortex
loop, whereas the vector za
i ] again
stands for a certain rotation- and translation invariant measure of integration over the shapes of

k() describes its shape. next, on the l.h.s. of eq. (200),  [za

k(), where the vector ya

k() = ya

k + za

(200)

29for brevity, we omit the lorentz index.

79

vortex loops, and   es0 denotes the fugacity (boltzmann factor of a single vortex loop 30)
of dimension (mass)4 with s0 denoting the action of a single loop. in eq. (200), we have also
introduced the uv momentum cuto   q 
a3 ( a1), where a is a typical size of the vortex
loop, and l is a typical distance between loops, so that in the dilute gas approximation under
study a  l. finally in eq. (200), we have denoted (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2 
 = 

next, it is possible to integrate out the lagrange multipliers by solving the saddle-point equa-

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)  r(cid:16)a
(cid:17)2

tion following from eqs. (199) and (200),

after that, we arrive at the following representation for the partition function of the grand canon-
ical ensemble

sin


(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

a

a

i2
2

.

sa

a

a

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

.

zgrand = z dsa

 exp



gm3s 3

2 z d4xd4yhs1

(x)s1

(y) + s1

(x)s2

(y) + s2

(x)s2

(y)i

which owing to eq. (198) is natural to be referred to as the representation in terms of the vortex

k1(mb|x  y|)



i + v hs2
loops. in eq. (201), the eective potential of vortex loops v hsa

+ v hs1

|x  y|

i#) ,
i is given by eq. (178).

it is further instructive to illustrate the dierence of such a partition function of two interacting
gases of vortex loops from the case of abelian-projected su(2)-gluodynamics by studying a related
representation in terms of a certain eective sine-gordon theory. this can be done by introducing
the new integration variables s1
the quadratic form in square brackets on the r.h.s. of eq. (199). then eqs. (199) and (200) yield

(cid:17), which diagonalize

(cid:17) and s2

  s2

2 (cid:16)s1

 = 1

3

(201)

da

zgrand = z dsa
+2z d4x

 =

 + s2

2 (cid:16)s1
 exp
gm3s3

(x)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2 
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
cos
 + cos


(cid:17) and h2
 = 13 (cid:16)1

1

2

(x)

k1(mb|x  y|)

2 z d4xd4ysa
sa
(y)+
|x  y|
(x)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2 


  iz d4xha
sa


 = 1
  2

,

where we have denoted h1
. the partition function of
the desired sine-gordon theory can be obtained from eq. (202) by making use of the following
equality 31

 + 2

(202)

z dsa

 exp



gm3s 3

2 z d4xd4ysa

(x)

k1(mb|x  y|)

|x  y|

(y) + iz d4xha
sa

30it is natural to assume that the vortex loops of dierent kinds have the same fugacity, since dierent sing.

s

enter the initial partition function (113) in the same way.

31this equality is straightforward to be proved by mentioning that ha

 = 0, which follows from the equation

of motion corresponding to its l.h.s. and eq. (198), according to which s a

 = 0.

80

=


sa





a

= exp(

1

22 z d4x" 1

122 (cid:16)h a

(cid:17)2

+

3
2

g2

m(cid:16)ha

(cid:17)2#)

(cf. the r.h.s. with the quadratic part of the action of the kalb-ramond elds on the r.h.s. of
eq. (132) with the elds aa
 gauged away). substituting this equality into eq. (202) and performing
the rescaling ha
, we arrive at the following representation for the partition function of the
grand canonical ensemble of vortex loops in terms of the local sine-gordon theory, equivalent to
the nonlocal theory (201),

2  ha



zgrand = z dha
2"cos  
22 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

 exp(z d4x( 1
3h1

 + h2

(cid:17)2
122 (cid:16)h a
! + cos  
22 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

+

3
2
3h1

g2

(cid:17)2
m(cid:16)ha

!#)) .
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
  h2

(203)

as we now see, an essential property of the obtained sine-gordon theory, which distinguishes it
from an analogous theory describing the grand canonical ensemble of vortex loops in the abelian-
projected su(2)-gluodynamics, is the presence of two interacting kalb-ramond elds, while in
the su(2)-case there was only one self-interacting eld. notice that upon the expansion of the
cosines on the r.h.s. of eq. (203), it is straightforward to see that only the interaction terms of

(cid:17)2n(cid:16)h2

(cid:17)2k

the type (cid:16)h1

survive. in another words, despite of the mixing of the kalb-ramond
elds in the arguments of the cosines, no terms linear in any of these elds appear in the action. in
particular, the full masses of both kalb-ramond elds, m1 and m2, can be read o from eq. (203)
by expanding the cosines up to the quadratic terms. the result reads m 2
a2,
2  are the debye masses, and we have introduced the magnetic
where m1 = 2
, q2 = q6g2

eq. (201) can be now used for the evaluation of correlators of vortex loops, which due to
s. those are calculable in the low-energy

eq. (198), are nothing else but the correlators of sa

2 3, m2 = 2

m + 42
4 .

m + 122
4

a  q2

a = m2

b + m2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)  , by considering the real branch of the potential (178), i.e., extracting from

the sum over branches of this potential the term with n = 0. this branch has a simple parabolic
form, and in the vicinity of its minimum (corresponding to the low-energy limit) the generating
functional for correlators of sa

charges q1 = q6g2
limit, 2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

sa

s reads

zhj a

i = z dsa
2 z d4x(cid:20) 1

4

 exp

gm3s 3
2 z d4xd4ysa

(cid:17)2(cid:21) +z d4x"s1
(cid:17)2
3 (cid:16)s1
+(cid:16)s2
  j 2
, and j  j 1

+

k1(mb|x  y|)

(x)

sa
(y)+
j##) ,

|x  y|
+ s2

j +
3



where j a
by virtue of the following equality

 is a source of sa

. such two gaussian integrals can be calculated

z ds exp



gm3s 3

2 z d4xd4ys(x)

k1(mb|x  y|)

|x  y|

s(y) +z d4x  4
2 s2


 + js!



=

81

= exp(

and the result reads

m2

824 z d4xd4yj(x)j(y)(cid:16)2

x  m2

b(cid:17) k1(m2|x  y|)

|x  y|

) ,

zhj a

i = zgrand exp(



824 z d4xd4y"m1j +

+m2j(x)j(y)(cid:16)2

x  m2

(x)j +

(y)(cid:16)2
b(cid:17) k1(m2|x  y|)

|x  y|

x  m2

|x  y|

b(cid:17) k1(m1|x  y|)
#) .

+

the correlators of vortex loops following from this expression have the form

ds1
(x)s1

(0)e = ds2

(x)s2

(0)e = (  )



24 "2(x) 

m2
a

ma
42

2

xa=1

k1(ma|x|)

|x|

#

and

ds1
(x)s2

(0)e = (  )

m2
2

24 " m2

42

k1(m2|x|)

|x|

m1
42

 3

k1(m1|x|)

# .

|x|

at this point, it is worth recalling that the abelian-projected su(3)-gluodynamics under study is
an eective theory at large distances, where the asymptotic behaviours of the obtained correlators
read

ds1
(x)s1

(0)e = ds2

(x)s2

  (  )

(0)e  ds1
4!2 m2
2   
2r 
|x| 3

1

2

(x)s2

(0)e 

em2|x|.

this result illustrates how the vortex loops in the grand canonical ensemble are correlated to each
other. namely, their correlators decrease according to the yukawa type law with the screening
provided by the lightest of the two full masses, m2.

in conclusion, we have demonstrated that the grand canonical ensemble of vortex loops in the
eective abelian-projected theory of the su(3)-gluodynamics (being treated in the dilute gas ap-
proximation) exhibits an essential property distinguishing it from the one of the abelian-projected
su(2)-gluodynamics. namely, it consists of two interacting subsystems, corresponding to two in-
dependent types of strings, which emerge after the abelian projection. the average over shapes
of the vortex loops with the most general rotation- and translation invariant integration mea-
sure leads to two alternative eld-theoretical representations of such a grand canonical ensemble.
first of them is a representation in terms of an eective sine-gordon theory of two interacting
kalb-ramond elds (203).
it yields the (positive) contribution to the full masses mas of the
kalb-ramond elds, coming about from the debye screening, as well as to the magnetic charges
qas of these elds. the other representation given by eq. (201), which is the one in terms of the
integral over vortex loops, is useful for the evaluation of their correlators. while such a calcula-
tion is dicult to perform exactly due to the complicated form of the eective potential of the

82

vortex loops, it turns out to be possible to perform it in the low-energy limit within an additional
approximation when only the real branch of the potential is taken into account. as a result, the
correlators of vortex loops have a yukawa type asymptotic behaviours at large distances with the
screening governed by the lightest of the two full masses of the kalb-ramond elds.

it now looks reasonable to nd eld-theoretical representations for the grand canonical ensem-
bles of vortex loops emerging after the abelian projection in the general su(nc), nc > 2, case,
where there appear nc(nc1)
 1 independent strings (see subsection 3.1). it will therefore emerge
just this amount of interacting gases of vortex loops, leading to dierent debye masses.

2

5 conclusion and outlook

the main problem addressed in the present review was an attempt of an analytical description
of connement in qcd and other gauge theories. as a guiding principle for our investigations
served the so-called wilsons picture of connement, according to which this phenomenon can be
described in terms of some eective theory of strings, joining coloured objects to each other and
preventing them from moving apart to macroscopic distances. in this review, we have proceeded
with a derivation of such string theories corresponding to various gauge ones, including qcd,
i.e., with the solution of the problem of string representation of gauge theories. we have started
our analysis with the nonlocal string eective action, arising within the so-called method of field
correlators of qcd, where the interaction between the string world-sheet elements is mediated by
the phenomenological background gluon propagator. by performing the derivative expansion of
this action, we have derived the rst few terms of the string lagrangian. the rst two nontrivial of
them turned out to be the nambu-goto and rigidity terms with the coupling constants expressed
completely via the gluonic condensate and correlation length of the qcd vacuum. the signs of
these constants ensure the stability of strings in the so-obtained eective string theory. after
that, we have investigated the problem of crumpling of the string world-sheet by a derivation
of the topological string term in the instanton gas model of the gluodynamics vacuum. next,
by making use of perturbation theory in the nonperturbative qcd vacuum, we have calculated
perturbative corrections to the obtained string eective action. those led to a new form of the
nonlocal string eective action with the propagator between the elements of the world-sheet being
the one of a perturbative gluon in the conning background. by the derivative expansion of this
action, we got a correction to the rigidity term coupling constant, whereas the string tension of
the nambu-goto term occurs to get no corrections due to perturbative gluonic exchanges. finally,
we have derived the hamiltonian of qcd string with spinless quarks at the ends, associated with
the obtained string eective action including the rigidity term. in the particular case of vanishing
orbital momentum of the system, this hamiltonian reduces to that of the so-called relativistic
quark model, albeit with some modications due to the rigidity term, which might have some
inuence to the dynamics of the qcd string with quarks. all these topics have been elaborated
on in section 2, and form the essence of the string representation of qcd within the method of
field correlators.

in section 3, we have addressed the problem of string representation of abelian-projected
theories. in this way, we have started with the string representation for the partition function
of the simplest model of this kind, namely the abelian-projected su(2)-qcd, which is argued
to be the dual abelian higgs model with external electrically charged particles. the advantage
of this approach to the string representation of qcd w.r.t.
the one based on the method of

83

field correlators is a possibility to get an integration over string world-sheets, resulting from the
integration over the singular part of the phase of the higgs eld. after the string representation
for the partition function in the london limit, we have proceeded with the string representation for
the generating functionals of the eld strength and monopole current correlators, which enabled
us to nd the corresponding bilocal cumulants. in this way, it has been demonstrated that the
large-distance asymptotic behaviour of the bilocal eld strength cumulant matches the one of the
corresponding gauge-invariant cumulant in qcd, predicted by the method of field correlators
and measured in the lattice experiments. in particular, the role of the correlation length of the
vacuum, introduced in the method of field correlators as a phenomenological input, turned out
to be played in the abelian-projected su(2)-gluodynamics by the inverse mass of the dual gauge
boson. these results support the method of abelian projection on the one hand and give a new
eld-theoretical status to the method of field correlators on the other hand. after that, we have
extended our analysis beyond the london limit and studied the relation of the quartic cumulant,
which appears there, with the bilocal one in the london limit. besides that, we have also discussed
the other fundamental nonperturbative phenomenon of qcd, the chiral symmetry breaking, from
the point of view of the abelian-projected theories and the method of field correlators.
in
particular, in the su(2)-case under study, we have quoted the derivation of the relation between
the chiral and gluonic condensates, following from these two approaches.

next, by making use of the abelian projection method, we have addressed the problem of
string representation of the su(3)-gluodynamics. namely, we have casted the related dual model,
containing three types of magnetic higgs elds, into the string form. consequently, the latter
one turned out to contain three types of strings, among which, however, only two were actually
independent. as a result, we have found that both the ensemble of strings as a whole and
individual strings display conning properties in the sense that these two distinct types of strings
(self)interact via the exchanges of the massive dual gauge bosons. we have also derived bilocal
cumulants in the eective theory of the abelian-projected su(3)-gluodynamics, and they turned
out to be also in line with the ones predicted by the method of field correlators. in particular,
it has been demonstrated that only w.r.t. the diagonal cumulants of the eld strength tensors
(i.e. those, which are built out of gluonic elds referring to the same generator of the cartan
subalgebra) the vacuum of the model under study exhibits a nonvanishing correlation length. the
latter one again turned out to be equal to the inverse mass of the dual gauge bosons, which they
acquire by means of the higgs mechanism.

in conclusion of this topic, we have derived another useful representation for the partition
functions of the abelian-projected theories in the form of the integral over monopole currents.
besides the part quadratic in these currents, which represents the biot-savart interaction and
the kinetic energy of monopole cooper pairs, the obtained lagrangians contain also the terms
describing the long-range interaction of magnetic currents with the string world-sheets.
if one
localizes the (quantum) monopole currents along the classical trajectories, these terms take the
form of the gauss linking numbers between the currents and world-sheets. this means that the
latter objects may be viewed as solenoids, which scatter the former ones (cf. the aharonov-bohm
eect).

in section 4, we have studied another model, allowing for an analytical description of con-
nement, which is the compact qed. in this way, we have successively investigated the 3d- and
4d-cases and in both of them derived the string representations for the wilson loop of an external
electrically charged test particle. the essence of these representations is a certain mechanism
realizing the independence of the wilson loop of the shape of an arbitrary surface bounded by

84

its contour. in this way, it has been argued that this mechanism is based on the summation over
the branches of a certain multivalued eective potential, which in the 3d-case is the potential of
the monopole densities, whereas in the 4d-case it is the potential of the monopole currents. in
the former case, we have established a correspondence of this approach to another recently found
one, the so-called conning string theory. after that, in both cases, we have calculated the bilocal
cumulants of the eld strength tensors in the low-energy limit of the model under study. those
also turned out to be in line with the general concepts of the method of field correlators and
therefore match the corresponding results known from the lattice measurements in qcd and found
analytically for the eective abelian-projected theories in section 3. note only that contrary to
the abelian-projected theories, in compact qed monopoles are not condensed (no magnetic higgs
eld), but form a gas, and consequently the dual gauge eld acquires a nonvanishing mass due to
the debye screening in such a gas, rather than due to the higgs mechanism. correspondingly, the
correlation length of the vacuum in compact qed is equal to the inverse debye mass of the dual
gauge boson.

to summarize, the correspondence between various eld-theoretical models, considered in the
present review, as well as the approaches to their string representation may be established by
the table 1, presented at the end of this section. next, on the basis of this correspondence
and the above discussed similarities in the large-distance asymptotic behaviours of the bilocal
cumulants in qcd, abelian-projected theories, and (low-energy limit of) compact qed, as well
as the similarities in the string representations of these models, we have elaborated on a unied
method of description of the string world-sheet excitations in the respective string theories. this
method, which employed the techniques of nonlinear sigma models, enabled us to derive the
eective action, quadratic in the world-sheet uctuations.

finally, we have applied the methods of summation over the grand canonical ensemble of
monopoles in compact qed to the summation over the grand canonical ensemble of topological
defects (vortex dipoles built out of electric abrikosov vortices in 3d and vortex loops built out of
electric nielsen-olesen strings in 4d) in abelian-projected theories. in this way, we have evalu-
ated correlation functions of these defects in the low-energy limit and demonstrated that (contrary
to the su(2)-case) in the su(nc), nc > 2, abelian-projected theories the grand canonical en-
semble of topological defects consists of nc(nc1)
 1 interacting subsystems. in particular, the
consequences of this observation, which distinguish the su(3)-theory from the su(2)-one, have
been discussed in the language of two alternative eld-theoretical representations for the grand
canonical ensembles of topological defects in both theories.

2

in conclusion, the proposed nonperturbative techniques provide us with some new information
on the mechanisms of connement in qcd and other gauge theories and shed some light on the
structure of the vacua of these theories. they also demonstrate the relevance of the method of
field correlators to the description of this phenomenon and yield several prescriptions for the
construction of the adequate string theories from the corresponding gauge ones.

further investigations of the problems addressed in the present review are planned to follow in
at least two directions. first of them is a derivation of the string representation for the last up to
now known model allowing for an analytical description of connement, which is the low-energy
su(2) n = 2 supersymmetric yang-mills theory (the so-called seiberg-witten theory) [40]. the
second line of investigations is devoted to a better understanding of interrelation between conne-
ment and chiral symmetry breaking. in this way, it is planned to develop further the approach
proposed in ref. [48] by virtue of bosonization of the equations obtained there. this turned out
to be a rather hard topic due to the non-translation-invariant character of the corresponding in-

85

teraction kernel. however, it is this kernel, which is responsible for the conning eects in the
system, and therefore it should not probably be reduced to some more simple translation-invariant
one. investigations of this problem together with an application of other well elaborated methods
known from the theory of njl models might nally enable one to understand completely the
interrelations between the phenomena of connement and chiral symmetry breaking in qcd.

table 1. correspondence between various eld-theoretical models and approaches to
their string representation

model

qcd within mfc

abelian-projected
theories

compact qed

r dsing.  r dx() -independence

inverse mass of the
dual gauge bosons

inverse debye mass
of the dual gauge bo-
son

of
hw (c)i
is
realized
summation
by the
over branches in v []
in 3d or v [j] in 4d
debye screening in
the monopole gas
propagator
kalb-ramond eld

the

of

higgs mechanism

propagators of
kalb-ramond elds

the

to

integral

stochastic

no
over
string world-sheets.
string eective ac-
tion is dened only
w.r.t. min.
due
background elds
nonperturbative
propagator
gluon
or
(d-function)
propagator of per-
turbative
gluon in
the nonperturbative
background
correlation length of
the qcd vacuum, tg

mechanism of
the
string representation

the

mechanism of
mass generation
type of propagator
between the elements
of the world-sheet(s)

parameter of the ex-
pansion of the result-
ing nonlocal interac-
tion between the el-
ements of the world-
sheet(s)

86

6 acknowledgments

i am very grateful to profs. d. ebert and yu.a. simonov for many helpful discussions and cor-
respondence, useful criticism, suggestions, and encouragement at all stages of the present work.
i have also benetted from discussions with many people, especially with profs. a. di giacomo,
h. dorn, h.g. dosch, h. kleinert, yu.m. makeenko, m. muller-preussker, m.i. polikarpov, h.
reinhardt, m.g. schmidt, t. suzuki, and a. wipf. useful discussions with the participants
of the seminars at the theoretical high energy physics groups of itep, moscow, humboldt and
freie universities of berlin, universities of heidelberg, jena, pisa, and tubingen are greatfully
acknowledged. i would also like to thank the theory group of the quantum field theory depart-
ment of the institute of physics of the humboldt university of berlin, where an essential part of
the present work has been done, for kind hospitality and technical support. i am also greatful to
the graduiertenkolleg strukturuntersuchungen, prazisionstests und erweiterungen des standard-
modells der elementarteilchenphysik of this university for nancial support. and last but not
least, i thank my wife irina for all her love, support, and sacrices.

87

7 appendices

a. details of a derivation of the hamiltonian of the straight-line qcd
string with quarks

assuming that a meson as a whole moves with a constant speed (which is true for a free meson),
i.e., r = 0, and bringing together quark kinetic terms (62) and the pure string action (64), we
arrive at the following action of the qcd string with quarks

stot. =

t

z0

d( m2

1
21

+

m2
2
22

+

1
2

+

2
2

+

1

2 
1 + 2 +

1

z0

d


r2+

+
1(1  1)  21 +

1

z0

d(  1)

+

1

2 
1(1  1)2 + 2 2

1 +

1

z0

z0
(cid:16) r r(cid:17) 
d(  1)2

+

1

0"2(1(1  1) + 21) r2  2(1 + 2)(cid:16) r r(cid:17) +

1

d(cid:16) rr(cid:17) +

1

z0

d(1  )( rr)+

1



1
2

z0

d 2

+ 2! r2+

 r2 +
d 2(1  ) r2  2(cid:16) r r(cid:17) + 2( rr)+
z0

1

+

1
2

(  1)2 [r, r]2 +

1

1

1
2

r2 r2 

2 (cid:16) r r(cid:17)2

+ (  1)(cid:16)(cid:16)r r(cid:17) ( rr)  (r r)(cid:16) rr(cid:17)(cid:17) +

(cid:19)2
2(cid:18)(cid:18)
+(cid:18)(  1)(cid:16)(rr)( rr)  (r r)r2(cid:17) +(cid:16) rr(cid:17) r2 (cid:16) r r(cid:17) ( rr)(cid:19)!#),
t 2 z,   t 2

t 2 z, z  q h

+ 2(cid:19) [r, r]2 +

(a.1)

2h . integrating then

where we have performed a rescaling z  q h

over , one gets in the zeroth order in 1
0

which together with the condition r r = 0 yields

extr. =

( rr)

r2 (cid:18) 

1

1 + 2(cid:19),

1 +

 extr.
1 =

1

r0

d

1 + 2 +

d

1

r0

,  extr.

2 =

( rr)2

r2

1

1

1+2

r0

d 
r0
1 + 2 +

1

1

r0

d

.

d

finally, in order to obtain the desired hamiltonian, we shall perform the usual canonical

transformation from r to the total momentum p, which in the minkowski space-time reads

z dr exp(cid:20)iz l(cid:16) r, . . .(cid:17) d(cid:21) = z drdp exp(cid:20)iz (cid:16)p r  h (p, . . .)(cid:17) d(cid:21)

88

with h (p, . . .) = p r  l(cid:16) r, . . .(cid:17), and choose the meson rest frame as

= 0.

p =

l(cid:16) r, . . .(cid:17)

 r

after performing the transformation from r to p we arrive at the hamiltonian (65) of the main
text with the coecient functions ak, which read as follows

a1 =

2
2

1

z0

d


, a2 = 3




b  b,

a3 =

2(1 + 2)(1 + 2 + 0)" 0(10  1(1 + 2))2

(1 + 2)(1 + 2 + 0)  1(1 + 2)(1  22) 10(1 + 22)#,

1

a4 =




b  b,

a5 = 2 +

2
1 + 210  221

1 + 2 + 0

+

1

1 + 2"

1

1 + 2  (10  1(1 + 2))2(30 + 2(1 + 2))

(1 + 2 + 0)2

+

+1(10  21(1 + 2))! 

and

2

10

1 + 2 + 0#,

b 

1(1 + 2)(1  22) + 10(1 + 22)

(1 + 2)(1 + 2 + 0)

.

notice that during the derivation of h (1), we have chosen the origin at the centre of masses of
the initial state, so that rr  1, and the term  1
been disregarded.

on the r.h.s. of eq. (a.1) has

d 0(cid:16) rr(cid:17)2

r0

20

t

b. path-integral duality transformation

in this appendix, we shall outline some details of a derivation of eqs. (81) and (82) of the main
text. firstly, one can linearize the term 2
2 (  2gmb)2 in the exponent on the r.h.s. of
eq. (79) and carry out the integral over reg. as follows

z dreg. exp(

2

2 z d4x (  2gmb)2) =

= z dcdreg. exp(z d4x"
= z dc (c) exp(z d4x"

1
22 c 2

1
22 c 2

 + ic (  2gmb)#) =
 + ic(cid:16)sing.  2gmb(cid:17)#) .

(b.1)

89

the constraint c = 0 can be uniquely resolved by representing c in the form c =
1
2 h, where h stands for an antisymmetric tensor eld. notice, that the number of
degrees of freedom during such a substitution is conserved, since both of the elds c and h
have three independent components.

then, taking into account the relation (80) between sing. and , we get from eq. (b.1)

z dsing.dreg. exp(

2

2 z d4x (  2gmb)2) =

= z dx()dh exp(z d4x"

1
122 h 2

 + ih  igmbh#) .

(b.2)

in a derivation of eq. (b.2), we have replaced dsing. by dx() (since the surface , parametrized
by x(), is just the surface, at which the eld  is singular) and, for simplicity, discarded the
jacobian arising during such a change of the integration variable 32.

bringing now together eqs. (79) and (b.2), we arrive at eq. (81). in the literature, the above
described sequence of transformations of integration variables is usually referred to as a path-
integral duality transformation. in particular, it has been applied in ref. [119] to the model with
a global u(1)-symmetry.

let us now derive eq. (82). to this end, we nd it convenient to rewrite

1

exp(cid:18)

4 z d4xf 2

(cid:19) = z dg exp(cid:26)z d4xhg2

 + i fgi(cid:27) ,

after which the b-integration in eq. (81) yields

z db exp(cid:26)z d4x(cid:20) 1
= z dg exp(cid:18)z d4xg2

4

f 2

 + i f (gmh + 2ie)(cid:21)(cid:27) =

(cid:19)  ( (g  gmh  2ie)) =

= z da exp(cid:20)z d4x (gmh + 2ie + a  a)2(cid:21) .

(b.3)

in a derivation of the last equality on the r.h.s. of eq. (b.3), the constraint

 (g  gmh  2ie) = 0

has been resolved by setting g = gmh + 2ie + a  a. here a is just the usual
gauge eld, dual to the dual eld b.
finally, by performing in eq. (b.3) the hypergauge transformation h  h +   
a (see e.g. ref. [85]) 33, we arrive, omitting the

and xing the gauge by choosing  =  1
measure factor da, at eq. (82) of the main text.

gm

32for the case when the surface  has a spherical topology, this jacobian has been evaluated in ref. [118].

33 during this procedure, the term ir d4xh  in the action, standing in the exponent on the r.h.s. of
eq. (b.2), brings to the partition function an additional factor exp(cid:0)4ir d4xaje
(cid:1), which can be referred to

the measure da.

90

c. integration over the kalb-ramond field

let us carry out the following integration over the kalb-ramond eld

z = z dh exp"z d4x  1

122 h 2

 +

1
4e2 h2

 + ih!#.

(c.1)

to this end, it is necessary to substitute the saddle-point value of such a functional integral back
into the integrand. the saddle-point equation in the momentum representation reads

1

22 (cid:16)p2hextr.

 (p) + pphextr.

 (p) + pphextr.

 (p)(cid:17) +

1
2e2 hextr.

 (p) = i(p).

this equation can be most easily solved by rewriting it in the following way

where we have introduced the projection operators [121]

(cid:16)p2 p, + m21,(cid:17) hextr.

 (p) = 2i2(p),

with p    pp

1
2

(pp  pp) and 1, 

p, 
(  )
p2 . these projection operators obey the following relations
1, = 1, = 1, = 1,, 1,1, = 1,

1
2

(the same relations hold for p,), and

p,(cid:16)1  p(cid:17),

= 0.

(c.2)

(c.3)

(c.4)

by virtue of the properties (c.3) and (c.4), the solution to the saddle-point equation (c.2) reads

hextr.
 (p) = 

2i2

p2 + m2 "1 +

p2

m2 (cid:16)1  p(cid:17)#,

(p),

which, once being substituted back into the partition function (c.1), yields for it the following
expression

z = exp(22z

d4p
(2)4

1

p2 + m2 "1 +

p2

m2 (cid:16)1  p(cid:17)#,

(p)(p)).

(c.5)

rewriting eq. (c.5) in the coordinate representation we arrive at eq. (83) of the main text.

let us now prove that the term proportional to the projection operator (cid:16)1  p(cid:17) on the r.h.s.

of eq. (c.5) indeed yields in the coordinate representation eq. (85), which can be further reduced
to the boundary term. one has

1
2
by making use of eq. (c.6), the term

p2(1  p ), =

(pp + pp  pp  pp).

(c.6)

22z

d4p
(2)4

1

p2 + m2

p2

m2 (cid:16)1  p(cid:17),z d4xz d4yeip(yx)(x)(y)

91

under study, after carrying out the integration over p, reads

2

2m z d4x(x)z d4y(y)

2

xy

k1(m|x  y|)

|x  y|

.

(c.7)

acting in eq. (c.7) directly with the derivatives, we arrive at eq. (85) of the main text. however,
one can perform the partial integration, which yields the argument of the rst exponential factor
standing on the r.h.s. of eq. (86), i.e., the boundary term.

d. summation over the grand canonical ensemble of vortex loops in
the dual abelian higgs model

in the present appendix, we shall outline some steps of a derivation of eq. (195) of the main text.
let us rst consider the innitesimal world-sheet element of the a-th vortex loop, which has the
form

d(xa()) = (xa

())(xa

())d2.

here, in order to distinguish from the index enumerating the vortex loop, we have denoted the
indices referring to the world-sheet coordinate  by ,  = 1, 2. analogously to the 3d case,
it is reasonable to introduce the centre-of-mass coordinate (position) of the world-sheet ya
 
 + za
()
with the vector za
() describing the shape of the a-th vortex loop world-sheet. then, substituting
into eq. (184) instead of  the vorticity tensor current of the vortex loop gas (194), we can
perform the summation over the grand canonical ensemble of vortex loops as follows,

(). the full world-sheet coordinate can be respectively decomposed as xa

r d2xa

() = ya

1 +



xn =1

 n

n!   n

()hzii! xna=1

exp(i

n

xa=1

naz d(za())h(xa())) =

= 1 +

n! (cid:26)z d4yz dz()[z] cos(cid:18)z d(z())h(x())(cid:19)(cid:27)n

.

yi=1z d4yiz dzi
xn =1

(2)n



here,  is a certain rotation- and translation invariant measure of integration over shapes of the
world-sheets of the vortex loops. employing now the dilute gas approximation, we can expand h
up to the rst order in a/l, where a stands for the typical value of |za()|s (sizes of vortex loops),
which are much smaller than the typical value l of |ya|s (distances between vortex loops) 34. this
yields

z dz()[z] cos(cid:18)z d(z())h(x())(cid:19)  z dz[z] cos(cid:18) 

l

nh(y)p,[z](cid:19) =



=

(1)n
(2n)! (cid:18) 

l(cid:19)2n

xn=0

n1h11(y)   n2nh2n2n(y)z dz[z]p11,1[z]  p2n2n,2n[z],
34similarly to the 3d-case, the approximation a  l means that vortex loops are short living objects.

(d.1)

92

where n  y
|y|
of the measure [z], the last average has the form

and p,[z]  r d(z())z(). due to the rotation- and translation invariance

z dz[z]p11,1[z]  p2n2n,2n[z] =

(a3)2n

=

(2n  1)!! h111,2212    12n12n1,2n2n2n12n + permutationsi .

substituting this expression into eq. (d.1), we nally obtain

l !2n
(1)n
(2n)!   a3
z dz()[z] cos(cid:18)z d(z())h(x())(cid:19) 
where we have introduced a new uv momentum cuto   q l

this yields the desired eq. (195).



xn=0

2 ! ,
|h(y)|2n = cos |h(y)|

a3 , which is much larger than 1/a.

93

references

[1] d. gross and f. wilczek, phys. rev. lett. 30 (1973) 1343; s. weinberg, phys. rev. lett.
31 (1973) 494; h. fritzsch, m. gell-mann, and h. leutwyler, phys. lett. b 47 (1973) 365;
h.d. politzer, phys. rev. lett. 30 (1973) 1346; the opposite sign of the polarization of the
vacuum in non-abelian yang-mills theories w.r.t. qed, leading to the asymptotic freedom
in these theories, was discovered even earlier in: v.s. vanyashin and m.v. terentiev, zhetf
48 (1965) 565.

[2] f.j. yndurain, quantum chromodynamics: an introduction to the theory of quarks and
gluons (springer-verlag, berlin-heidelberg, 1983); d. ebert, eichtheorien (akademie-
verlag, berlin, 1989); j.f. donoghue, e. golowich, and b.r. holstein, dynamics of the
standard model (cambridge univ. press, cambridge, 1992); qcd: 20 years later, proceed-
ings, aachen, 1992, eds. p.m. zerwas and h.a. kastrup (world scientic, singapore, 1993).

[3] m. creutz, quarks, gluons, and lattice (cambridge univ. press, cambridge, 1983); h.j.
rothe, lecture notes in physics 43 (world scientic, singapore, 1992); i. montvay and g.
munster, quantum fields on a lattice (cambridge univ. press, cambridge, 1994).

[4] proc. lattice 95, nucl. phys. b 47 (proc. suppl.) (1996); lattice 96, ibid. b 53 (1997);

lattice 97, ibid. b 63 (1998); lattice 98, ibid. b 73 (1999).

[5] k.g. wilson, in: recent developments of gauge theories, eds. g. t hooft et al. (plenum

press, new york, 1980); k. symanzik, nucl. phys. b 226 (1983) 187, 205.

[6] w. bietenholz, e. focht, and u.-j. wiese, nucl. phys. b 436 (1995) 385; w. bietenholz
and u.-j. wiese, nucl. phys. b 464 (1996) 319; f. niedermayer, nucl. phys. b 53 (proc.
suppl.) (1997) 56; p. hasenfratz, nucl. phys. b 63 (proc. suppl.) (1998) 53; e.-m. ilgenfritz,
h. markum, m. muller-preussker, s. thurner, phys. rev. d 58 (1998) 094502.

[7] h.b. nielsen and m. ninomiya, nucl. phys. b 185 (1981) 20; ibid. b 193 (1981) 173.

[8] k.g. wilson, in: new phenomena in subnuclear physics, ed. a. zichichi (plenum press,

new york, 1977).

[9] j. kogut and l. susskind, phys. rev. d 11 (1975) 395.

[10] f. niedermayer, nucl. phys. b 73 (proc. suppl.) (1999) 105; m. luscher, preprint

hep-lat/9802029 (1998); nucl. phys. b 549 (1999) 295.

[11] a. le yaouanc, l. oliver, o. pene, and j.-c. raynal, phys. rev. d 31 (1985) 137.

[12] a. chodos, r.l. jae, k. johnson, c.b. thorn, and v.f. weisskopf, phys. rev. d 9 (1974)

3471.

[13] the large-n expansion in quantum field theory and statistical physics: from spin sys-
tems to 2-dimensional gravity, eds. e. brezin and s.r. wadia (world scientic, singapore,
1993).

94

[14] s. weinberg, phys. rev. lett. 18 (1967) 188; s. coleman, j. wess, and b. zumino, phys.
rev. 177 (1969) 2239; g.g. callan et al., phys. rev. 177 (1969) 2247; d. ebert and m.k.
volkov, fortschr. phys. 29 (1981) 35.

[15] m.a. shifman, a.i. vainshtein, and v.i. zakharov, nucl. phys. b 147 (1979) 385, 448; v.a.
novikov, m.a. shifman, a.i. vainshtein, and v.i. zakharov, fortschr. phys. 32 (1984) 585.

[16] h.g. dosch, phys. lett. b 190 (1987) 177; h.g. dosch and yu.a. simonov, phys. lett. b

205 (1988) 339.

[17] h.g. dosch and yu.a. simonov, z. phys. c 45 (1989) 147; yu.a. simonov, nucl. phys. b

324 (1989) 67; phys. lett. b 226 (1989) 151; ibid. b 228 (1989) 413.

[18] h.g. dosch, prog. part. nucl. phys. 33 (1994) 121.

[19] yu.a. simonov, phys. usp. 39 (1996) 313.

[20] a.m. polyakov, gauge fields and strings (harwood academic publishers, chur, 1987).

[21] m. gell-mann, r.j. oakes, and b. renner, phys. rev. 175 (1968) 2195.

[22] j. gasser and h. leutwyler, phys. rep. c 87 (1982) 79.

[23] e.-m. ilgenfritz and m. muller-preussker, phys. lett. b 99 (1981) 128; nucl. phys. b 184
(1981) 443; d. diakonov and v. petrov, nucl. phys. b 245 (1984) 259; ibid. b 272 (1986)
457.

[24] d.i. diakonov, m.v. polyakov, and c. weiss, nucl. phys. b 461 (1996) 539.

[25] d.i. diakonov, prog. part. nucl. phys. 36 (1996) 1; t. schafer and e.v. shuryak, rev.

mod. phys. 70 (1998) 323.

[26] yu.a. simonov, phys. atom. nucl. 58 (1995) 107, 309.

[27] yu.a. simonov, in: lecture notes in physics 479 (springer-verlag, berlin-heidelberg, 1997);

a.m. badalian and yu.a. simonov, yad. fiz. 60 (1997) 714.

[28] e.v. shuryak, phys. lett. b 153 (1985) 162; ibid. b 193 (1987) 319.

[29] e.-m. ilgenfritz and s. thurner, preprint hep-lat/9810010 (1998).

[30] y. nambu and g. jona-lasinio, phys. rev. 122 (1961) 345; v.g. vaks and a.i. larkin,

zhetf 40 (1961) 282.

[31] d. ebert and m.k. volkov, z. phys. c 16 (1983) 205.

[32] d. ebert and h. reinhardt, nucl. phys. b 271 (1986) 188.

[33] d. ebert et al., int. j. mod. phys. a 8 (1993) 1313.

[34] d. ebert, h. reinhardt, and m.k. volkov, prog. part. nucl. phys. 33 (1994) 1.

95

[35] m. schaden, h. reinhardt, p. amundsen, and m. lavelle, nucl. phys. b 339 (1990) 595;

h. reinhardt, phys. lett. b 248 (1990) 365; ibid. b 257 (1991) 375.

[36] j. gasser and h. leutwyler, nucl. phys. b 250 (1985) 465, 517, 539.

[37] d. ebert, t. feldmann, r. friedrich, and h. reinhardt, nucl. phys. b 434 (1995) 619; d.

ebert, t. feldmann, and h. reinhardt, phys. lett. b 388 (1996) 154.

[38] d. ebert and t. jurke, phys. rev. d 58 (1998) 034001; d. ebert, in: field theoretical tools
in polymer and particle physics, lecture notes in physics 508 (springer-verlag, berlin-
heidelberg, 1998), pp. 103-121.

[39] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 190 (1981) 455.

[40] n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl. phys. b 341 (1994) 484; ibid. b 426 (1994) 19.

[41] s. mandelstam, phys. lett. b 53 (1975) 476; phys. rep. c 23 (1976) 245; g. t hooft, in:

high energy physics, ed. a. zichichi (editrice compositori, bologna, 1976).

[42] a.a. abrikosov, sov. phys.- jetp 5 (1957) 1174; h.b. nielsen and p. olesen, nucl. phys.

b 61 (1973) 45.

[43] m. baker, j.s. ball, and f. zachariasen, phys. rep. 209 (1991) 73.

[44] m.b. green, j.h. schwarz, and e. witten, superstring theory, vols. 1,2 (cambridge univ.
press, cambridge, 1987); d. lust and s. theisen, lectures in string theory, lecture notes
in physics 346 (springer-verlag, berlin-heidelberg, 1989).

[45] a.a. migdal, phys. rep. 102 (1983) 199.

[46] d.v. antonov and yu.a. simonov, int. j. mod. phys. a 11 (1996) 4401.

[47] yu.a. simonov, preprint hep-ph/9712250 (1997).

[48] yu.a. simonov, phys. atom. nucl. 60 (1997) 2069.

[49] j. zinn-justin, quantum field theory and critical phenomena, 2nd ed. (oxford univ. press

inc., new york, 1993).

[50] k.g. wilson, phys. rev. d 10 (1974) 2445.

[51] i.-j. ford et al., phys. lett. b 208 (1988) 286; e. laermann et al., nucl. phys. b 26 (proc.

suppl.) (1992) 268.

[52] p. langacker, phys. rep. c 72 (1981) 185; w. marciano and a. sirlin, in: the second
workshop on grand unication, eds. j. leveille, l. sulak, and d. unger (birkhauser,
boston, 1981).

[53] j.l. gervais and a. neveu, nucl. phys. b 163 (1980) 189.

[54] a.m. polyakov, nucl. phys. b 164 (1980) 171.

[55] v.s. dotsenko and s.n. vergeles, nucl. phys. b 169 (1980) 527.

96

[56] r.a. brandt, f. neri, and m. sato, phys. rev. d 24 (1981) 879.

[57] yu.m. makeenko and a.a. migdal, nucl. phys. b 188 (1981) 269.

[58] y. aharonov and d. bohm, phys. rev. 115 (1959) 485.

[59] yu.a. simonov, nucl. phys. b 307 (1988) 512.

[60] yu.a. simonov, sov. j. nucl. phys. 54 (1991) 115.

[61] yu.a. simonov and j.a. tjon, annals phys. 228 (1993) 1.

[62] a. di giacomo and h. panagopoulos, phys. lett. b 285 (1992) 133.

[63] l. del debbio, a. di giacomo, and yu.a. simonov, phys. lett. b 332 (1994) 111; m.
delia, a. di giacomo, and e. meggiolaro, phys. lett. b 408 (1997) 315; a. di giacomo,
e. meggiolaro, and h. panagopoulos, nucl. phys. b 483 (1997) 371; a. di giacomo, m.
delia, h. panagopoulos, and e. meggiolaro, preprint hep-lat/9808056 (1998).

[64] m.b. halpern, phys. rev. d 19 (1979) 517; i.ya. arefeva, theor. math. phys. 43 (1980)

111; n. bralic, phys. rev. d 22 (1980) 3090.

[65] yu.a. simonov, sov. j. nucl. phys. 50 (1989) 134.

[66] n.g. van kampen, stochastic processes in physics and chemistry (north-holland physics

publishing, amsterdam, 1984).

[67] yu.a. simonov, sov. j. nucl. phys. 50 (1989) 310.

[68] g. parisi and y. wu, scienta sinica 24 (1981) 483; for a review see p.h. damgaard and h.
huel, phys. rep. 152 (1987) 227; m. namiki, stochastic quantization, lecture notes in
physics (springer-verlag, berlin-heidelberg, 1992).

[69] d.v. antonov, jetp lett. 63 (1996) 398.

[70] d.v. antonov, phys. atom. nucl. 60 (1997) 299.

[71] d.v. antonov, phys. atom. nucl. 60 (1997) 478.

[72] yu.a. simonov and v.i. shevchenko, phys. atom. nucl. 60 (1997) 1201.

[73] d.v. antonov, int. j. mod. phys. a 12 (1997) 2047.

[74] d.v. antonov, mod. phys. lett. a 11 (1996) 3113 (see preprint hep-th/9612005 (1996)

for an extended version).

[75] m. campostrini, a. di giacomo, and g. mussardo, z. phys. c 25 (1984) 173.

[76] m. eidemuller and m. jamin, phys. lett. b 416 (1998) 415; v.i. shevchenko and yu.a.

simonov, phys. lett. b 437 (1998) 131.

[77] d.v. antonov, d. ebert, and yu.a. simonov, mod. phys. lett. a 11 (1996) 1905; surveys

in high energy physics 10 (1997) 421.

97

[78] d.v. antonov and d. ebert, phys. rev. d 58 (1998) 067901.

[79] d.v. antonov and d. ebert, mod. phys. lett. a 12 (1997) 2047.

[80] d.v. antonov, jetp lett. 65 (1997) 701.

[81] d.v. antonov and d. ebert, in: theory of elementary particles, proceedings of the 31st
international symposium, ahrenshoop, september 2-6, 1997, buckow, germany, eds. h.
dorn, d. lust, and g. weigt (wiley-vch verlag, berlin, 1998), pp. 201-206.

[82] a.m. polyakov, nucl. phys. b 268 (1986) 406.

[83] h. kleinert, phys. lett. b 174 (1986) 335.

[84] k.i. maeda and n. turok, phys. lett. b 202 (1988) 376; s.m. barr and d. hochberg, phys.

rev. d 39 (1989) 2308.

[85] p. orland, nucl. phys. b 428 (1994) 221.

[86] h. kleinert and a.m. chervyakov, phys. lett. b 381 (1996) 286.

[87] g. german and h. kleinert, phys. rev. d 40 (1989) 1108.

[88] g. german, mod. phys. lett. a 6 (1991) 1815.

[89] m.c. diamantini and c.a. trugenberger, phys. lett. b 421 (1998) 196; nucl. phys. b 531

(1998) 151.

[90] a.m. polyakov, nucl. phys. b 486 (1997) 23.

[91] m.c. diamantini, f. quevedo, and c.a. trugenberger, phys. lett. b 396 (1997) 115.

[92] e.-m. ilgenfritz, b.v. martemyanov, s.v. molodtsov, m. muller-preussker, and yu.a. si-

monov, phys. rev. d 58 (1998) 114508.

[93] e. shuryak, nucl. phys. b 203 (1982) 93, 116, 140.

[94] m.-c. chu, j. grandy, s. huang, and j. negele, phys. rev. lett. 70 (1993) 255; phys. rev.

d 49 (1994) 6039.

[95] yu.a. simonov, nuovo cim. a 107 (1994) 2629.

[96] d.i. diakonov and v.yu. petrov, in: nonperturbative approaches to qcd, proceedings of
the international workshop at ect*, trento, italy, july 10-29, 1995, ed. d.i. diakonov
(pnpi, gatchina, 1995); preprint hep-th/9606104 (1996).

[97] b.s. de witt, phys. rev. 162 (1967) 1195, 1239; j. honerkamp, nucl. phys. b 48 (1972)
269; g.t hooft, nucl. phys. b 62 (1973) 444; l.f. abbot, nucl. phys. b 185 (1981) 189.

[98] a.yu. dubin, a.b. kaidalov, and yu.a. simonov, phys. lett. b 323 (1994) 41; nuovo cim.

a 107 (1994) 2499.

98

[99] p. cea, g. nardulli, and g. preparata, z. phys. c 16 (1982) 135; phys. lett. b 115 (1982)
310; g. carlson et al., phys. rev. d 27 (1983) 233; j.l. basdevant and s. boukraa, z.
phys. c 30 (1986) 103; s. godfrey and n. isgur, phys. rev. d 32 (1985) 189.

[100] t.d. lee, particle physics and introduction to field theory (harwood academic publishers,

chur, 1990).

[101] a.s. kronfeld, m.l. laursen, g. schierholz, and u.j. wiese, phys. lett. b 198 (1987) 516;

a.s. kronfeld, g. schierholz, and u.j. wiese, nucl. phys. b 293 (1987) 461.

[102] g.s. bali, v. bornyakov, m. muller-preussker, and k. schilling, phys. rev. d 54 (1996)

2863.

[103] m.n. chernodub and m.i. polikarpov, preprint hep-th/9710205 (1997).

[104] a. di giacomo, preprint hep-lat/9907010 (1999); preprint hep-lat/9907029 (1999).

[105] a.m. polyakov, nucl. phys. b 120 (1977) 429.

[106] s. maedan and t. suzuki, prog. theor. phys. 81 (1989) 229 (see also t. suzuki, prog.
theor. phys. 80 (1988) 929; s. maedan, y. matsubara, and t. suzuki, prog. theor. phys.
84 (1990) 130; h. monden, t. suzuki, and y. matsubara, phys. lett. b 294 (1992) 100).

[107] m. quandt, h. reinhardt, and a. schafke, phys. lett. b 446 (1999) 290; c. ford, u.g.
mitreuter, t. tok, a. wipf, and j.m. pawlowski, annals phys. 269 (1998) 26; c. ford, t.
tok, and a. wipf, phys. lett. b 456 (1999) 155.

[108] z.f. ezawa and a. iwazaki, phys. rev. d 25 (1982) 2681; ibid. d 26 (1982) 631.

[109] k.-i. kondo, phys. rev. d 57 (1998) 7467; ibid. d 58 (1998) 085013, 105016, 105019.

[110] k. bardakci and s. samuel, phys. rev. d 18 (1978) 2849; m. stone and p.r. thomas,

phys. rev. lett. 41 (1978) 351; s. samuel, nucl. phys. b 154 (1979) 62.

[111] m. kiometzis, h. kleinert, and a. m. j. schakel, fortschr. phys. 43 (1995) 697; h. kleinert,

gauge fields in condensed matter, vol. 1 (world scientic, singapore, 1989).

[112] h. kleinert, phys. lett. b 246 (1990) 127; ibid. b 293 (1992) 168.

[113] m. sato and s. yahikozawa, nucl. phys. b 436 (1995) 100.

[114] d.v. antonov, mod. phys. lett. a 13 (1998) 659.

[115] d.v. antonov, preprint hep-th/9804030 (1998).

[116] d. antonov and d. ebert, eur. phys. j. c 8 (1999) 343; in: problems of quantum field
theory, proceedings of the xith international conference, joint institute for nuclear re-
search, july 13-17, 1998, dubna, russia, eds. b.m. barbashov, g.v. emov, and a.v.
efremov (jinr, dubna, 1999), pp. 285-290.

[117] m.i. polikarpov, u.-j. wiese, and m.a. zubkov, phys. lett. b 309 (1993) 133.

99

[118] e.t. akhmedov, m.n. chernodub, m.i. polikarpov, and m.a. zubkov, phys. rev. d 53

(1996) 2087.

[119] k. lee, phys. rev. d 48 (1993) 2493.

[120] m. kalb and p. ramond, phys. rev. d 9 (1974) 2237.

[121] d.v. antonov, mod. phys. lett. a 12 (1997) 1419.

[122] e.m. lifshitz and l.p. pitaevski, statistical physics, vol. 2 (pergamon, new york, 1987).

[123] m. baker, n. brambilla, h.g. dosch, and a. vairo, phys. rev. d 58 (1998) 034010.

[124] d.v. antonov, phys. lett. b 434 (1998) 48.

[125] t. banks and a. casher, nucl. phys. b 169 (1980) 103.

[126] a. gonzalez-arroyo and yu.a. simonov, nucl. phys. b 460 (1996) 429.

[127] g. t hooft, phys. rev. lett. 37 (1976) 8; phys. rev. d 14 (1976) 3432; erratum: ibid. d

18 (1978) 2199.

[128] d.i. diakonov, v.yu. petrov, and p.v. pobylitsa, nucl. phys. b 306 (1988) 809.

[129] d. ebert and v.n. pervushin, teor. mat. fiz. 36 (1978) 313.

[130] d. ebert and v.n. pervushin, in: proceedings of the xviii international conference on
high energy physics, tbilisi, c 125 (1976); n.i. kartchev and a.a. slavnov, teor. mat.
fiz. 65 (1985) 192; r.t. cahill, j. praschifka, and c.j. burden, aust. j. phys. 42 (1989)
147, 161; a.a. andrianov and yu.v. novozhilov, phys. lett. b 153 (1985) 422.

[131] yu.a. simonov, sov. j. nucl. phys. 42 (1985) 352.

[132] d. antonov and d. ebert, phys. lett. b 444 (1998) 208; in: path integrals from pev
to tev: 50 years after feynmans paper, proceedings of the 6th international conference,
florence, italy, august 25-29, 1998, eds. r. casalbuoni, r. giachetti, v. tognetti, r. vaia,
and p. verrucchi (world scientic, singapore, 1999), pp. 267-271; d.a. komarov and m.n.
chernodub, jetp lett. 68 (1998) 117; d. antonov and d. ebert, preprint cern-th/99-294,
hep-th/9909156 (1999) (nucl. phys. b (proc. suppl.), in press).

[133] d. antonov and d. ebert, preprint hub-ep-98/73, hep-th/9812112 (1998).

[134] d.v. antonov, mod. phys. lett. a 13 (1998) 581.

[135] d. antonov, preprint hep-th/9906032 (1999) (int. j. mod. phys. a, in press).

[136] d. antonov, mod. phys. lett. a 14 (1999) 1829.

[137] e. braaten, t.l. curtright, and c.k. zachos, nucl. phys. b 260 (1985) 630.

[138] f.a. schaposnik, phys. rev. d 18 (1978) 1183.

100

