9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
7

 

 
 

1
v
8
3
0
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

on the fundamental structure of nature and the

unication of forces

j.witters

university of leuven,department of physics
celestijnenlaan 200d, 3001 leuven, belgium

october 9, 2013

abstract

a model for the fundamental structure of nature is presented. it is
based on two fundamental fermions moving with the velocity of light and
diering from each other by the projection of the spin on the momentum
vector. the energy of both fermions is proportional to the momentum,
which is scaled inversely with the size of a length quantum. all the known
forces are a manifestation of one elementary interaction, the spin exchange
or spin ip-op which takes place when two dierent elementary fermions
come together in the same space cell. at this stage the model can explain
the properties of the photon as a two-fermion particle and it can be shown
that the dirac theory for relativistic fermions could be deduced from this
model. the model predicts that particles like the electron or the quark
are stable combinations of a large number of the fundamental fermions,
but proof of that prediction has not been given.

introduction

todays theories and models of elementary particles and interactions are based
in part on ad hoc assumptions and have internal inconsistencies which are un-
accounted for. one of the main diculties is based on the fact that particles
like electrons or quarks, which have a relatively low rest energy, appear in all
experiments to be pointlike. the combination of low energy and connement
to a very small region in space should be impossible because basic laws tell us
that connement goes together with high momentum components and that high
momenta give a high contribution to the energy. this diculty arises also for
the photon which has zero rest mass and is so small in the plane perpendicular
to its momentum vector that it has virtually no cross section for collisions with
other photons.
the contradiction between connement and low energy can not be discarded by
an ad hoc introduction of negative potential energy as is done for systems of in-
teracting particles. negative potential energy is presented as resulting from the

1

presence of force-carrying particles like gravitons or photons or gluons. these
carriers of the interactions, if conned, should give themselves a high momen-
tum contribution to the energy. in a consistent model all particles should be
treated equal with respect to the general laws of physics.
a second point which has not been treated satisfactorily is the symmetry of neg-
ative and positive eigenvalues of the dirac hamiltonian for relativistic fermions.
the positive values have been attributed to real particles whereas the negative
ones are piled up in an innite sea of ghost particles and only the defects in that
sea of particles are thought to be real.
the model of the material world which is presented here deals with those di-
culties by introducing two fundamental fermions as universal building blocks for
all the particles, including those which carry the interactions. the combination
of high momenta with low energy is made possible by accepting negative energy
states as real. essential features of this model are a simplication of the dirac
hamiltonian by elimination of the rest mass term and a reinterpretation of the
hamiltonian, making the square of it responsible for the evolution of a system
of interacting particles.

1 the elementary fermions

to preserve the antisymmetry which is manifested in so many ways in natural
phenomena, the fundamental building blocks should be fermions. the uncer-
tainty relation

et  h

(1)

couples e, the uncertainty in the energy of a particle, to the time span t
during which the energy is measured. a similar relation holds between the un-
certainty of the momentum p and the dimension of the space cell in which it
is evaluated. it is therefore meaningless to dene the value for the momentum
or the energy of a fundamental building block at one instant or at one point in
space. the closer a building block of a particle with spherical symmetry comes
to the center, the higher the value of the azimuthal momentum component.
the maximum value depends on the choice of a quantum of space, conveniently
introduced to avoid innities which result from taking r, the distance from the
center, to zero. if we choose a quantum ro and a corresponding to , related
to it through ro = cto where c is the velocity of light, we set the maximum
momentum and energy of a fundamental building block equal to po = h/ro
and eo = h/to.
a spin 1/2 fermion has two orthogonal spin states. the spin up and the spin
down variant can therefore be dierent particles. they can be transformed into
one another by a spin ip-op. if the transformation occurs every half cycle
of a cyclic motion, an averaged value of the momentum and the energy can
be calculated by integration over the period of the cycle. it is a well known
phenomenon in atomic physics that in the presence of strong coupling a new
energy level halfway between two levels is formed as a result of fast switching
between these levels. a quantity measured by integration over a period which

2

is much longer than the switching time is determined by the properties of the
new intermediate level. if this fast switching occurs between a positive and a
negative energy state, the intermediate level can have an energy close to zero,
even if the unperturbed energy levels are far from zero.
the dierence between this model and diracs theory for elementary fermions,
which also uses the option of positive and negative energies, is that we start here
with elementary fermions moving at the velocity of light and therefore without
rest mass, and construct localised particles with them. in our model the rest
energy is a consequence of internal motion and it is very small compared to
the relativistic energies of the constituents. in diracs theory the rest energy is
introduced ad hoc.
we introduce two elementary fermions called ef and use the name particles
for stable or quasi-stable combinations of efs. one ef is righthanded (ref), the
other one lefthanded (lef). they move with the velocity of light and both have
spin 1/2. for the ref the momentum and spin vector are parallel and for the lef
they are antiparallel:
ref : momentum , spin 
lef : momentum , spin 

as will become clear by analysis of the velocity d~r/dt , the direction of motion
of each ef is along the spin vector rather than the momentum vector. a ref and
a lef meet each other by entering the same space cell. in that cell the spin
exchange leads to a scattering of the motion and this exchange is at the origin of
the fast ref-lef transitions which lower the energy of every fundamental fermion
bound in a particle. the fundamental interaction between efs can be dened
as a spin ip-op. the levels between which the fast switching takes place are
eo for a particle with the size of an elementary space cell. combinations of
equal numbers of refs and lefs form bosons. fermionic particles are formed by
combining n refs with m lefs where m and n dier by an uneven number. this
number dierence is probably only 1 for all the known fermions. fermions in
stable form are therefore bosons combined with one extra ref or lef.

2 short recapitulation of the dirac theory for

fermions

the dirac hamiltonian hd is a four by four matrix of the form:

hd = c(.~p) + mc2 

(2)

where  is a matrix composed of two pauli spin matrices  in o-diagonal
positions and  has two unit matrices with dierent sign on the diagonal:



 =(cid:18) 0

 0 (cid:19)

3

(3)

and

0

 =(cid:18) 1

0 1 (cid:19)

(4)

~p is the momentum operator ih ~grad = ih  . the pauli spin matrices

x, y, z for spin quantisation in the z-direction are given by:

x =(cid:18) 0 1
1 0 (cid:19)
y =(cid:18) 0 i
0 (cid:19)
z =(cid:18) 1
0 1 (cid:19)

0

i

(5)

(6)

(7)

hd operates on a four-vector as shown in the following equation:




operating

on

f1 | + >
g1 |  >
f2 | + >
g2 |  >







hd =


mc2

0

ich 
z

ich( 

x + i 

y )

0

ich( 

mc2
x  i 
ich 
z

y )

ich 
z

ich( 

x + i 
mc2

y )

0

ich( 

y )

x  i 
ich 
z

0

mc2

(8)
in the four-vector on which the hamiltonian hd operates f1, g1, f2, g2 are func-
tions of space and time coordinates. this four-vector can be interpreted as two
two-vectors  and  which are transformed into each other and the eigenvalue
 of hd for an isolated particle with rest mass m can be obtained from two
matrix equations:

c(.~p) = (  mc2)
c(.~p) = ( + mc2)

(9)

(10)

the operator c(.~p) is nondiagonal but the square of this operator is diagonal
with an eigenvalue (2  (mc2)2) which is equal to c2p2 . the eigenvalue  is
interpreted as the energy of the particle. it can have a negative as well as a
positive value, and there is no a priori reason to prefer one over the other.

3 the evolution operator in this model

an operator acting exclusively on efs, which have no rest mass, can have no
mc2 term as in diracs hamiltonian.

the operator c(.~p) ,based on pauli spin matrices  is a hamilton operator

when it is applied to isolated efs. its plane wave eigenfunctions are:

n ei~k.~r | + > with eigenvalue chk
n ei~k.~r |  > with eigenvalue chk
and |  > are for quantisation in the direction of ~k.

where n stands for a normalisation factor and the spin eigenstates | + >

4

all functions of space coordinates and the spin states for interacting efs can
be expanded in plane wave spinors. however, for localised particles which are
centered around one point or around an axis, spherical or cylindrical spinors
form a more natural basis.
the only type of spinor which is completely worked out in this paper is that of
the photon, with cylindrical symmetry. therefore the examples given below are
for cylindrical symmetry but the changes which have to be made for spherical
symmetry are straightforward.

in cylindrical coordinates the radius r is dened in the xy plane

z

y

  
r
 





x

c(.~p) can be conveniently written in terms of raising and lowering operators:

with

and

c.~p = ihc(zz + + + +)

 =

x  y2

 = ei(


r 

i
r




)

(11)

(12)

(13)

the spinor wavefunction  of a particle with two or more efs can be written as
a symmetrized combination of products of spinors, each spinor referring to the
coordinates of one ef:

 =(cid:18) u1

v1 (cid:19)(cid:18) u2

v2 (cid:19) . . .(cid:18) ui

vi (cid:19) + symmetric permutations

(14)

where the ui and the vi are fuctions of space and time coordinates.
the operator c(.~p) , which we will denote by h, although it is in general not
diagonal and therefore not an hamiltonian, must act consecutively on each of
the spinors and could therefore be represented as a sum:

h =x c(i.~pi)

(15)

the sum should run over all efs which are not excluded by antisymmetry from
the space occupied by the particle. it should therefore include efs in vacuum
states when they interact with the efs in a particle. h is a local operator and
so is also h h = h 2 . the ij product terms in h 2 refer to dierent efs when
i 6= j but the interaction must be local, referring to efs in the same space-time

5

(  a)(  b) = a  b + i  ( a  b)

< hh >=<x(ci.~pi)(ci.~pi) >= x c2p2

i

(16)

(17)

cell.
h 2 is the interaction operator in our model.
the combination of raising and lowering which transforms a lef in a
ref and vice versa, is induced by h 2 , more specically in the terms
producing a spin exchange in | + >|  > or |  >| + > combina-
tions.
the spinor function of a stable composite particle for which the lef-ref trans-
formations form closed vertices must therefore be an eigenfunction of h 2. the
zitterbewegung which was recognised shortly after the introduction of the
dirac hamiltonian is a consequence of this cyclic raising and lowering.
it is
easily interpreted in our model because d~r/dt can be evaluated by commuting
~r with c(.~p) , the result of this commutator being c . a bound ef executes
a zitterbewegung, a sort of spiraling motion which is guided by the spin
precession.

for non-interacting efs the cross terms in h 2 are absent and then we have,

by virtue of

:

where the pi are numbers and < ... > stands for integration in order to

calculate the expectation value of the operator.
then the operator h 2 measures minus the sum of the squares of the energies.
the interaction terms give contributions which reduce the norm of < h 2 > ,
the expectation value of h 2.
efs are never really isolated. even if they are subjected to strong localisation
in particles the tails of the spinors will extend in space and overlap with other
particles. the exchange of photons, which are described further on, is a form
of interaction through vacuum polarisation and is much more ecient than an
overlap by exponentially decaying tails. the products of spinors in the ex-
pression for the total wavefunction which describes several interacting particles
should always be completed by including all the photons allowed by the avail-
able degrees of freedom. the interaction may reduce < h 2 > , by increasing
the overlap for a ref-lef combination or decreasing it for ref-ref or lef-lef combi-
nations. it would leave < h 2 > unchanged if the particle would be isolated and
in an eigenstate of h 2. but this is never realised. any change in < h 2 > for the
initial system of efs will give rise to the emission of new particles and thereby
increase the entropy of the system, and this process goes on continuously.
the evolution of a system of particles is a consequence of a tendency towards
maximum entropy.
the physical interpretation of the h 2 operator which emerges from these consid-
erations is that it represents the negative square of the energy if applied to one
particle and minus the sum of the squares of energies for several non-interacting
particles. creation of new particles, a process which goes on continuously, re-
duces < h 2 > because the new particles are formed under conservation of total
momentum and the sum of the squares of fractions is smaller than the square

6

of the whole. in this process the entropy of the system is increased. < h 2 >
is therefore never really constant. it may be approximately constant for a given
restricted time scale and for corresponding restricted regions of space, in which
all the efs execute cyclic motions, being bound in well-dened particles. this
corresponds to having a set of closed vertices in feynman diagrams. < h 2 >
changes when the vertices are opened up and new particles are formed.
a proposition which is essential to our model is that a fermionic particle, con-
sisting of an ef with a cloud of refs and lefs in equal numbers bound to it, can
interact with a similar particle and form a new quasi-stable eigenstate of h 2 .
in that case the particles formed in the interaction are virtual particles, emit-
ted but also reabsorbed in a closed interaction vertex. this is at the origin of
the formation of structures like the proton with three fermionic particles or the
hydrogen atom with a proton interacting with an electron and so on.

4 the link with the dirac hamiltonian

for a particle with the center of mass c.m. at a position ~rm and momentum ~pm
corresponding to the motion of the c.m., and with internal position vector ~ri
and corresponding momentum ~pi for the efs in the particle, the total momentum
operator can be expressed as a sum ~pm + ~pi. the operator h can consequently
be split in two parts:

h =x ci.~pi +x ci.~pm

(18)

the rst part refers to an internal contribution to the energy of the particle
and can therefore be identied with the rest energy mc2. the second part refers
to the motion of the c.m. and is the kinetic term. the rest energy term is zero
if the contributions of refs and lefs cancel out.
it will be shown that this is
the case for the photon in our model, and it can be expected from symmetry
arguments that the same conclusion will hold for all single- particle bosons in
the ground state.
for fermionic particles with only a few refs and lefs the lowest possible value
for the rest mass term will be huge on account of the huge value of each pi.
only when large numbers of efs combine together and lead to almost complete
cancellation will the rest mass term be relatively small with respect to the
energies of the efs. with respect to the energy in the c.m. motion however,
the rest mass term of the particles studied in the laboratory is very big in most
experiments. that is the typical situation to which the dirac theory is applied.
the dirac hamiltonian shown in equation (8) hides the internal coordinates of
a fermionic particle. the transformation from positive to negative energy states
refers to the elementary interaction with the raising and lowering operators
which are combined with spin ips of the efs. each elementary interaction
causes a switching between these states. the total spin of the particle however
may or may not be changed by the interaction.

/z transforms f1 in (8) into f2 and leaves the spin unchanged, whereas
/x+i/y transforms f1 into g2 with a spin-ip and /xi/y transforms

7

g1 into f2 with a reverse spin-ip. the spins refer here to the total fermion, not
to the individual efs in it. some non-diagonal terms in the dirac hamiltonian,
non-diagonal terms which are responsible for the coupling between positive and
negative rest energies, cause spin ips whereas other terms leave the spin un-
changed. therefore the sign of the scalar spin-momentum product and the sign
of the energy may be dierent for the states described by a four-vector, in con-
trast with efs for whitch these signs are identical.
a fermionic particle therefore has dierent quantum numbers for the spin and
the charge, the latter discriminating between particles and antiparticles.
an ef on the contrary can be caracterised by one quantum number, the sign of
the projection of the spin on the momentum vector.
a particle has the same charge as the extra ef in it and diers from the corre-
sponding antiparticle by the fact that one has a ref and the other a lef combined
with an uncharged cloud.

5 the photon

in its ground state the photon has zero energy and it must consist of an equal
number of refs and lefs in very strong interaction, giving a complete cancellation
of + and - terms in the energy. excitation gives the photon an energy equal
to c times its momentum in the direction of propagation. when a photon is
exchanged between particles, the total angular momentum, orbital plus spin,
which is transmitted is equal to h. the photon exhibits cylindrical symmetry,
being delocalised in the direction of its angular momentum.
it is therefore
practical to use cylindrical spinor functions to describe the wave function of the
photon. these spinors must be eigenfunctions of h 2 , and therefore also of the
2 operator in cylindrical coordinates.this operator is:

z(cid:19)2
(cid:18) 

z(cid:19)2
+ + =(cid:18) 

r(cid:19)2
+(cid:18) 

+

1
r


r

+ (

1
r

)2(cid:18) 

(cid:19)2

(19)

the following cylindrical spinor function  is an eigenfuction with angular

momentum h , non-singular for r=0, and zero momentum in the z-direction:
spinor  : u(r, ) | + > +v(r, ) |  >
where r and  are cylindrical coordinates, the spin states are quantised in the
z-direction and u and v are given by:

u(r, ) = n

sin(kor)
kor

ei 

2

sin(kor)

p(kor)3! e3i 

(20)

(21)

v(r, ) = n  cos(kor)
kor 

2

it is interesting to note that in cylindrical symmetry the orbital angular mo-
menta are formed by half odd integer quantum numbers, as opposed to integers

8

for spherical symmetry.
the separate transformations of the raising and lowering operators are:

+v(r, ) |  >= kou(r, ) | + >
+u(r, ) | + >= kov(r, ) |  >

the spinor function  can be interpreted either as a stable bosonic state with
total angular momentum composed of a mixture of orbital- and spin contribu-
tions or as a function describing one fermion which alternates between ref and
lef so quickly that it loses identity. the alternation is caused by spin tumbling
through interaction with another ef with opposite spin and momentum, whose
wave function  is:

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

spinor  : u(r, ) |  > +v(r, ) | + >

u(r, ) = n

sin(kor)
kor

ei 

2

v(r, ) = n  cos(kor)
kor 

sin(kor)

p(kor)3! e3i 

2

in diagrammatic form the photon could be described as a string of closed ver-
tices, the interaction points referring to the spin ip-ops, as shown in the next
picture:

+











+

+











+

+











+

each ef changes sign regularly and the energy is zero when integrated over
a cycle. one single photon in a number state has a ref and a lef, with opposite
spin but in an undened phase of the cycle. its spinor function is a combination
of the up part of  with the down part of  and vice versa:

(26)

zero energy photon = u(1) | + > u(2) |  > +v(1) |  > v(2) | + >
where (1) and (2) refer to the spatial coordinates of the rst respectively the
second ef and the spin states are coupled to the preceding wavefunction. for
this spinor combination the energy, the total momentum and the total angular
momentum are zero. it is a spinor in the vacuum. to transform it into a real
photon which transmits energy the  and the  part in it must have a momentum
component in the z-direction:
photon = eikz1 u(1) | + > eikz2 u(2) |  > +eikz1v(1) |  > eikz2 v(2) | + >
(27)
transmitting an energy hkc and an angular momentum h . source-detector
exchange of a photon is a coupling of the source to the detector by a diagram

9

as shown above. the source and the detector interact with the same photon,
each on one end. when the source interacts with the  part, the detector takes
the  part and vice versa. this is shown symbolically in the next gure:

source

+



 


+


+











+

+






detector







+

for the photon the transmission event is simultaneous on both sides, the
time being relativistically contracted. in this picture there is no strange cor-
relation at a distance, an expression which is frequently used in the literature
when quantum correlations are examined. the detector and the source are on
equal terms here and there is nothing strange about the fact that the source
knows which detector, eventually far away from it, is going to be selected.

the appearance of half-integer quantum numbers for the orbital angular
momenta of the spinors is not in contradiction with the bosonic symmetry of a
photon. the spin is rotating synchronously with the orbiting ef and one turn
over the orbit must therefore change the sign of the wavefunction, this change
in sign being compensated by the spin rotation. the transformation formulae
for change of spin-quantisation axis, from parallel to the momentum (|>p ) to
parallel to z (|> ) are given by:

| + >p= ei 
|  >p= ei 

2 cos(

2 sin(


) | + > +ei 
2

) | + > +ei 
2

2 sin(

2 cos(


) |  >
2

) |  >
2

(28)

(29)

where  and  are the polar, resp. azimuthal angles of the spin vector with
respect to the z-axis. for  = 
2 , as in the cylindrical frame, and for the spin
of an ef rotating in the xy plane with an azimuthal part of the wavefunction
exp(i) , we obtain a combination of azimuthal functions as in the spinor  .
rotation described by exp(i) leads to spinor  .
the zero energy photonic spinors introduced above can ll up all the available
space in the vacuum. this representation of the vacuum is an alternative for
a representation with plane wave spinors, but is better suited to treat the in-
teraction between two particles. a system of particles can only be in a stable
conguration if all interactions with the photons which are allowed in the region
of space occupied by the system lead to closed vertices, i.e. to cyclic motion of
all the efs in the system.

eigenstates of the 2 operator in spherical symmetry are the spherical bessel
functions, quite similar to the functions in the cylindrical spinors but with inte-
ger rather than half integer powers of kor in the denominators, the lowest order
function being sin(kor)/kor .

10

6 fermions

combinations of ref-lef pairs and one extra ref or one extra lef which form sta-
ble localised particles are fermions. this follows from the rule for summing up
an odd number of half integer spins and the fact that localised particles with
spherical symmetry have an integer quantum number for the orbital angular
momentum.
for a ref-lef-ref trio in a c.m.
zero, as shown in the next gure:

frame the three momentum vectors add up to


p

lef




3


. . . . . . . . .







p




ref


ref





p


projection of the momenta leads to: pcos(0) + 2pcos( 

3 ) = 0 . projection
of the spin vectors give components with cosinus and sinus functions of half
angles. the combined spin of a ref-lef duo can not sum up with the spin of the
remaining ref to a zero spin state.
a simple argument, based on the idea that the extra ref can interact with the
photon-like ref-lef combination which has in itself acquired an energy of half the
energy of an ef indicates that the resulting <    > might be reduced by a
factor three.this would still mean a huge rest energy for the ref-lef-ref trio.
as more efs are combined in one particle, the space needed to preserve antisym-
metry, that is for the efs of the same type to avoid one another, must be larger.
by analogy with examples in atomic and nuclear physics a closed shell eect
can be expected, giving the largest energy reduction for efs in a closed packing
within a certain radius. starting with a given number of efs in interaction but
not in the lowest energy state, the dynamics leading to a stable particle will
involve the evaporation of photons or other particles. in this process the total
energy of the particle plus the photons is constant and the dynamics are there-
fore not dictated by a tendency to a minimum energy.
the number of entities contributing to the energy, and through that
number to the entropy of the system, is the driving factor for the
evolution towards stable localised structures.
particles like the electron, with a very low rest energy, must consist of a very
large number of efs. a rough estimate of the number n could be based on the
consideration that the ref-lef-ref trio of the example given above can in turn be
treated as a particle with momentum smaller than p, and coupled to new efs,

11

and so on. the trend of the energy as a function of n should then follow some
power law like ncpo , where  is smaller than 1. for  = 1
2 and n=100 the
reduction would be of order 1030 with respect to cpo.
in the framework of this model a proton should consist of three particles of
which one has a negative charge like the electron and two are positive like the
positron and all have spin 1
2 . the pauli exclusion principle is not violated by
considering two fermions with the same charge and spin in close interaction
because we are dealing with composite particles which need not be identical.
they might dier by even numbers of efs which are exchanged between them.
the forces binding the particles in a nucleus may be strong enough to disrupt
the internal structure of the particles and cause massive inter-particle transfers
of efs, giving rise to the weak and the strong nuclear interactions.
to include also neutrons and neutrinos in the model we must explain a com-
bination of spin 1
2 with zero charge. we identify the charge sign with the spin
of the extra ef, taking one sign for the ref and the opposite sign for the lef. a
fermion should therefore have a xed charge on a very short time scale. how-
ever, although the sign of the charge is preserved in a spin ip-op between two
efs , a collective interaction involving all the efs in a particle and inducing a
turnover of all the spins at once will change that sign. if this is repeated period-
ically and with a very short period, all measurements of electric interaction by
integration over a longer period will show zero charge. neutrinos could there-
fore be fermions in a state of rapid collective turnover from ref to lef character.
neutrons could dier from protons by having one fermion with the same rapid
turnover.
charge conjugation which transforms matter into antimatter is identied here
with ref-lef transition. given that particles are composed of ref-lef combinations,
matter and antimatter are intimately mixed in all structures. the asymmetry
in atoms here in our solar system, with all nuclei positive and all electron clouds
negative, must follow from an initial uctuation at the moment of formation of
these structures.

7 electromagnetism and gravitation

interaction between two particles, in the limit of large distance between the
centers, can be treated by an approximation in which the energy of the sep-
arate particles is determined independently, and subsequently the overlap of
the spinors from the two centers and the connection through photons from the
vacuum is considered. we can try to identify the two well-known long dis-
tance interactions: electromagnetism and gravitation. the rst is caused by
interparticle correlation of the extra efs in each particle, the extra efs carrying
the charge of the particle. the interaction between these extra efs is mediated
through ip-op interactions with the photon spinors in the vacuum and the
interaction strength is proportional to the momentum of the extra efs in the
interacting particles. the second one is due to the correlation of the total ref-lef
unbalance in each particle, unbalance which is expressed in the rest energy plus

12

eventually the kinetic energy of the c.m. of each particle. this is independent of
the charge sign and can be identied with gravitation. in the argument which
was used to explain the reduction in energy in the ref-lef-ref trio a gravitational
type of interaction was invoked. calculation of the interaction strength between
quasi-stable particles will be a formidable task, given that a very large number of
efs moving under conditions of strong correlation are involved. in a crude model
as indicated in the next gure the order of magnitude of the electromagnetic
correction can be estimated:

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

r











momentum p











momentum p

the largest value of the momentum p of efs in the interacting particles de-
pends on the size of the particles. the sizes of both particles are taken to
be equal. we identify cpro/r, the energy correction at distance r obtained by
switching the momentum p of the extra ef, with the electric energye2/4or and
obtain pro = h
137 . the reduction by 137 of the momentum p with respect to
the maximum po = h/ro might be an indication of the increased wavelength in
a larger particle. 137 could be related to the number of efs in a typical particle
like the electron. it might correspond to the number of cells, densely packed up
for instance to the third nearest neighbour.
to derive an order of magnitude for po we could take the gravitational inter-
action to the limit of interaction between two neighbouring efs and identify
ch/r with g(po/c)2/r, where g is the universal constant for gravitation and the
masses have been replaced by the full kinetic masses po/c. the value for cpo
comes out as 2.109 joule or  1028 ev, a huge value corresponding to ro of the
order of 1035 meters. this makes the cross section of the photon so small that
it escapes experimental verication.

concluding remarks:
the model proposed here puts particles and force carrying particles in one cat-
egory. it gives a simple and universal principle for all interactions: the spin
ip-op or exchange, which occurs when elementary fermions enter the same
space cell. elementary fermions have no rest mass and therefore the operator
for the energy depends only on spin and momentum operators. diracs rela-
tivistic hamiltonian for fermions is a special case when composite one-center
particles are considered and only the coordinates of the center of mass together
with the total angular momentum components are taken as variables. the model
can be applied successfully to explain the combination of angular momentum h
and zero rest mass and zero charge which we know as the photon. the photon

13

is the only particle which has been completely described in this model. an es-
timate of its cross-section is so small that it escapes experimental verication.
all this gives strong arguments for trying to transform this model into a theory
by calculating the ground state energy of a fermionic particle like the electron.

final note by the author:
this paper was presented in slightly dierent form for publication to annalen
der physik in july 1998 . the editors replied after a few months that two review-
ers had left it without comment and that a third reviewer would be contacted.
there was no further message up to now.

14

