9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
9

 

 
 

1
v
2
5
0
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

3d o(4)-sigma model scenario of the symmetry breakdown in nambujona-lasinio

model at nite temperature in analogy to strong-coupling superconductivity.

institute for theoretical physics, uppsala university box 803, s-75108 uppsala, sweden

email: egor@teorfys.uu.se

egor babaev

we analyse phase diagram of nambujona-lasinio model at nite temperature taking into ac-
count chiral uctuations. we show that phase diagram of the model possesses regions that are
characterised by two temperatures: t  that is temperature when nonzero gap modulus forms lo-
cally and an essentially lower temperature tc at which chiral symmetry gets broken spontaneously
via 3d o(4)-sigma model transition. region tc < t < t  where there exists local gap modulus but
no long-range order is similar to a phase of non-condensed cooper pairs in a strong-coupling or low
carrier density superconductors.

i. introduction

what is the motivation of employing nonperturbative sigma - model approach for study of symmetry breakdown in
nambujona-lasinio (njl) model? njl [1,2] model had as a source of inspiration the bcs model of superconductivity
and has in some sense quite a similar structure with it. in the papers [3] we have shown that nonperturbative sigma-
model approach analogous to employed in this paper describes symmetry breakdown in a strong-coupling or low
carrier density superconductors, where temperature of the pair formation may be arbitrarily higher than temperature
of the onset of phase coherence. separation of these two temperatures in strong-coupling superconductors is already
known for many years (crossover from bcs superconductivity to  bose-einstein condensation (bec) of tightly
bound fermion pairs) [4]. except for sigma -model approach this crossover was studied by variety of perturbative
methods (for references see [3]). moreover there exists strong experimental evidence of the existence of this crossover
with decreasing carrier density in cuprate high-temperature superconductors.

we will start with outlinig how within sigma-model approach (or more precisely 3d xy-model approach) we can
describe a symmetry breakdown in a strong-coupling superconductor. with it we can gain more insight whether one
can study phase diagram of njl model at nite temperatures within sigma-model approach.

ii. what are the lesson from strong-coupling and low carrier density

theories of superconductivity for njl model?

over long time bcs theory described perfectly metallic superconductors. however it failed to describe even qualita-
tively superconductivity in underdoped high-tc compounds. one of the most exotic properties of the later materials
is existence of a pseudogap in the spectrum of the normal state well above critical temperature that from experimental
point of view manifests itself as an essential suppression of low frequency spectral weight thus being in contrast to
exactly zero spectral weight in the case of superconductive gap. moreover spectroscopy experiments show that super-
conductive gap evolves smoothly by magnitude and wave vector dependence to a pseudogap in normal state. except
for it nmr experiments clearly indicate existence of incoherent cooper pairs well above tc. what is hidden behind
this circumstances, and why bcs theory is incapable to describe it? let us imagine for a moment that we were able
to bind cooper pairs in a superconductor innitely tightly - obviously this implies that characteristic temperature of
thermal pair decomposition will be also innitely high, however this does not imply that the long-range order will
survive at innitely high temperatures. as it was rst observed in [4], it will be destroyed in a similar way as it
happens say in superuid 4he i.e. tightly bound cooper pairs, at certain temperature will acquire a nonzero momen-
tum and thus we will have gas of tightly bound cooper pairs but no macroscopic occupation of zero momentum level
q = 0 and with it no long-range order. thus phase diagram of a strong coupling superconductor has three regions: (i)
superconductive phase where there are condensed cooper pairs, (ii) pseudogap phase where there exist cooper pairs
but no condensate and with it there is no symmetry breakdown and no superconductivity, (iii) normal phase with
thermally decomposed cooper pair. in order to describe superconductivity in a such system theory should incorporate
pairs with nonzero momentum and thus bcs mean-eld treatment is invalid for description of spontaneous symmetry
breakdown in a system with a moderately strong attractive interaction or low carier density (see [4], [3] and references
therein).

1

this can as well be understood in the following manner: at rst we can derive an eective potential for a strong-
coupling superconductor, say in the simplest case it will be a mexican hat potential that disappears at certain
temperature. the eective potential determines size of the modulus of the complex gap function  = ei(x).
the bcs theory postulates that phase is constant and thus if we have a mexical hat eective potential we have
spontaneous symmetry breakdown. however it will not be always the case if we have system with tightly bound
cooper pairs that can be seen if we go beyond mean-eld approximation by extracting lowest gradient terms and
then following to [5] writing partition function of as a functional integral over modulus and phase of the hubbard-
stratonovich eld:

where

z(, t ) =z dd exp [(t, (x), (x))],

((x), (x))  g(t, , (x)) + pot(t, ) =z d3x

j(t, (, t ))

2

()2 + pot(t, ).

(1)

(2)

in the above expression eective potential pot(t, ) coincides with the ordinary mean-eld eective potential.
gradient term g(t, , (x)) in our case of 3d superconductor coincides with hamiltonian of 3d xy model with
stiness j((, t )). so for description of the onset and disappearance of the phase coherence in this system we
should study phase transition of 3d xy-model with temperature dependent stiness coecient [3], which size should
be determined self-consistently with mean-eld equation for the modulus of the complex gap function. with it we
can see that in the weak-coupling limit, the temperature of the phase transition of the eective xy-model tends
from below to the characteristic temperature of the disappearance of the eective potential and merges with it for
innitesimally weak coupling strength. thus we arrive at some sort of aposteriori verication of bcs behavior in this
limit (i.e. in this limit if nonzero modulus of the complex gap function  = ei(x) appears at some temperature, at
the same temperature phase coherence is established and continuous symmetry is broken).
in the opposite limit of
strong coupling strength we can see that the temperature t  of the disappearance of the eective potential obviously
continues to grow with the coupling strength whereas the phase stiness of the eective xy model tends exponentially
that corresponds to the phase stiness of the bose gas with density n/2 and mass 2m (and
to the constant value
with it the temperature of the onset of phase coherence tc also tends to a constant value that depends only on the mass
and density of fermions and does not depend on the coupling strength). thus in a strong-coupling superconductor
we have a large region between t  and tc that is characterised by a complex gap function ||ei(x) with nonzero gap
modulus || but random phase (x) so the average < ||ei(x) > is zero and thus no continuous symmetry is broken,
as it happens in the o(2) sigma-model. 1 2
the same arguments were used also in our previous paper for description of condensate depletion by chiral uctu-
ations in the gross-neveu model with u(1) symmetry at low n at zero temperature [6] and at nite temperatures
[7]. there in the regime of low n existence of the analogous phase separation was shown. for example in the rst
paper we observed situation similar to the above discussion of the strong-coupling superconductor, namely that phase
stiness of the eective xy-model of the chiral gn model at low n tends to a plateau value n/4 that depends only
on the number of the eld components n and does not depend on the coupling strength and  that allows to show
existence of the pseudogap phase.

n
4m

important circumstance that makes bcs-bec crossover in superconductors to be a valuable example is that strong-
coupling limit can be studied as well perturbatively (see for example [4,8]). in particular interaction between composite
bosons can be taken into account in the next-next-to mean-eld approximation and an eective gross-pitaevskii
equation can be derived in the strong-coupling limit [8].

the lagrangian of the njl model reads [1]:

iii. model

1in the case of superconductor this crossover also takes place as a function of carrier density with bcs limit corresponding to
high carrier density
2even though in the pseudogap phase there is no superconductivity, this phase exhibit exotic non-fermi-liquid behavior due
to presence of the local gap.

2

l = i/ +

g0

2nc h(cid:0) (cid:1)2

+(cid:0) ai5(cid:1)2i .

the three 2 2-dimensional matrices a/2, generate the fundamental representation of avor su (2), and are normal-
ized by tr(ab) = 2ab.

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

one can introduce hubbard - stratanovich elds  and a:

l =  (i/    i5aa)  

nc

2g0 (cid:0)2 + 2
a(cid:1) .

after integrating out quark elds, standard mean-eld variation procedure gives the gap equation:

trtrf(cid:20)g(x, x)(cid:18) 1

ia5(cid:19)(cid:21) =

1

g0(cid:18) (x)
a(x)(cid:19).

one can choose pseudoscalar solution ato be vanishing and sclar solution   m given by a gap equation:

1
g0

= i(trf 1)(tr1)z

ddp
(2)d

1

p2  m 2

the constituent quark mass m in the limit nc   is analogous to superconductive gap in the bcs limit of the
theory of superconductivity
obviously in the case of njl model at nite temperature we will have 3d o(4)-sigma -model for nonperturbative
description of the onset and disappearance of the phase coherence in the system with preformed gap modulus instead
of 3d xy model in the case of a superconductor.

in the paper [9] following to our previous considerations of sigma-model approach for description of the symmetry
breakdown in 3d superconductors and gross-neveu model [3] [6], it was suggested that in order to account for dynamic
chiral uctuation in njl model at zero temperature one should set up 4d o(4) sigma-model. authors of [9] came to
conclusion that resulting stiness of the eective 4d o(4) sigma model is too small and thus eective sigma model is
always in disordered phase due to strong dynamic chiral uctuations. even though the conclusion [9] relies heavily
on the accuracy of approximation it at least may be regarded as an indication of the importance of the quantum
chiral uctuations in the njl model at zero temperature. another claim of the paper [9] was that this analysis
invalidates nite temperature studies of the njl model. however it is known that at nite temperature temporal
degree of freedom is cut o and one should employ dimensional reduction arguments in order to describe symmetry
breakdown at nite temperatures (see detailed discussion of the dimensional reduction in context of qcd in [10]).
in this paper employing dimensional reduction arguments we show that within 3d sigma-model approach njl model
at nite temperatures does display symmetry breakdown. most interesting circumstance, as it will be shown below,
is that the phase diagram of the njl model at nite temperature is dominated by a phase with behavior similar to
behavior of a strong-coupling or low-carrier density superconductor and the model possesses a phase analogous to
pseudogap phase of superconductor when symmetry is restored by a phase transition of 3d o(4) sigma model however
there exists nonzero local gap.

iv. classical chiral fluctuations

now let us recall a discussion of a superconductor. there we argued that when we spoiled bcs saddle point
(which is in fact assumption that fermi-energy is much bigger than bound state energy) either by increasing coupling
strength of by decreasing carrier density there appears a phase with preformed gap modulus but with no phase
coherence and thus no symmetry breakdown or what is the same phase with formed but not condensed cooper pairs.
let us now spoil mean-eld saddle point of n   treatment of njl model by assuming that number n is no
longer innite. then elds start to perform uctuations around the extremal value (, a) = (m, 0). we can expand
action in small deviations from mean-eld solution. the quadratic terms of this expansion are:

a0[, ] =

1

2z d4q"(cid:18)

(q)(cid:19)t(cid:18)g1

a(q)


0 g1

0

 (cid:19)(cid:18)

(q)(cid:19)# ,
a(q)

where (, 

a)  (  m, a) and g1

, are the inverse bosonic propagators:

3

g1

 = nc(cid:20)2  2d/2z d4pe
 = nc(cid:20)2  2d/2z d4pe

(2)4

(2)4

g1

(p2
e + peqe  m 2)

e + m 2)[(pe + qe)2 + m 2] 
(p2

(p2

e + peqe + m 2)

e + m 2)[(pe + qe)2 + m 2] 
(p2

1

g0(cid:21) .
g0(cid:21) .

1

(7)

(8)

at nite temperature we impose antiperiodic condition on the imaginary time variable with period 1/t and sub-

stitute momentum integral by a summation over matsubara frequencies n = t (2n + 1)

v. 3d o(4) sigma - model transition in the njl model at finite temperatures

following to 3d xy-model approach to strong-coupling superconductivity [3] we will extract lowest gradient terms
and set up an eective sigma model for description of the symmetry breakdown at nite temperatures in njl model
in the regime when mean-eld treatment is not applicable.

at nite temperature inverse bosonic propagator of the collective eld  for small q can be written as:

(p2 + m 2 + 2

t

n)2(cid:21) q2 =

g1

d3p

(2)3 xn (cid:20)
(2)3 " 1

d3p

8t

 = 2d/2ncz
 2d/2ncz
 k(t, , m )q2

1

(p2 + m 2)3/2 tanh pp2 + m 2

2t

! 

1

16t 2

1

p2 + m 2 cosh2 pp2 + m 2

2t

the propagator (9) renders the following gradient term of the eective action:

where

ag =

j(t, , m )

2

z d3x[ni(x)]2

!# q2 =

(9)

(10)

j(t, , m ) = k(t, , m ) m 2(t, )

(11)
is stiness of the phase uctuations, and we introduced following to [9] a unit vector eld ni  (n0, na)  (, a)/m .
the term (11) plays the same role as term g(t, , (x)) in (2).
it can be easily seen that when we approach
temperature t  where mass m (t ) becomes zero, the stiness j = k(t, , m )m 2(t, , m ) also tends to zero.
formula (10) denes generalised heisenberg model with temperature dependent stiness coecient.

let us recall standard method of estimation of the temperature of the phase transition in a o(n)-sigma model.
i = 1 and introduce an extra path integral over lagrange multiplier . after integrating

one can relax constraint n2
out ni elds one can nd the free energy:

extremum of this expression is given by the following gap equation:

f =

n
2

tr log[2 + (x)] 

j

2t z d3x(x)

j
t

= nz

d3k
(2)3

1

k2 + 

(12)

(13)

thus temperature of the phase transition of the three dimensional classical o(4) sigma model with stifness j is given
by:

tc =

2
2

j


(14)

where  is momentum cuto.

returning to njl model we should note that, in contrast to ordinary o(n)-sigma model, the term (10) has stiens
coecient that depends on temperature, mass and cuto. temperature of the phase transition in such a system should
be determined self-consistently with the equation (6), just like in the case of the bcs-bec crossover in superconductors
[3]. in the case of superconductor in the regime of innitesimally weak coupling strength temperature of the phase
transition of the eective xy model merges with temperature of the gap modulus formation (bcs limit) whereas in
the opposite bec limit we have growth of the separation of these characteristic temperatures.

4

a. phase diagram of njl model in the regime /m (t = 0) >> 1

let us start with consideration of symmetry breakdown via sigma-model transition in the njl model in the regime

/m (t = 0) >> 1. at nite temperatures the mean-eld equation for the gap modulus reads:

1
g0

= 2  2d/2xn z

d3p
(2)3

t

p2 + m 2 + 2
n

.

(15)

from the above expression one can easily nd the following formula for the temperature where the mass becomes zero
(which we will denote as t ):

t  

2
3



(16)

on the other hand from equations (9), (11), (14) one can observe that in the limit /m (t = 0) >> 1

tc is much

smaller than t . tc in this limit tends to the following value:

tc =

1
8

nc

m 2(0)

 (cid:20)log(cid:18)1 +

2

m 2(0)(cid:19) 

2

2 + m 2(0)(cid:21)

(17)

so in this limit ratio tc/ tends to zero whereas ratio t / tends to a constant value.thus we have found that in
the regime /m (t = 0) >> 1 njl model is similar to a bose superconductor, but not to a bcs superconductor.
symmetry breakdown in this regime can not be described by mean-eld theory but should be described by sigma-
model transition. another circumstance that we can observe from the above expressions is that the phase diagram
contains a phase (tc < t < t ) similar to the experimentally observed pseudogap phase of strong coupling (low
carrier density) superconductors where one has nonzero local gap but no symmetry is broken due to eective 3d
o(4)-sigma model is in disordered state above tc(m (tc), ). temperature should be increased up to characteristic
temperature t  to make gap modulus m (t ) vanish.

b. phase diagram of njl model in the regime /m (t = 0) < 1

let us now turn to opposite limit /m (t = 0) < 1 and estimate whether bcs behavior is restored in this regime.

from the mean-eld gap equation (15) we can nd the following behavior of the gap function near t :

in this limit one can nd that temperature t  can be expressed via gap function at zero temperature with the formula

m (t ) = 26t r1 

t
t 

(18)

t  

4
3

m 2(0)



(19)

from which it follows that in this regime t  > . stiness of the phase uctuations in this regime near t  is given
by the following expression:

expressions (20) (14) (18) yield the following self-consistent equation that connects temperatures t  and tc in the
regime /m (t = 0) < 1:

j =

nc
1442 m 2(t )

3
t 3

(20)

this equation can be rewritten as

tc =

nc
23

r1 

tc
t 

tc


=

nc
24



t  
s1 +


48t 2

nc2  1


5

(21)

(22)

from (22) we can see that crossover from bcs to sigma model scenario of symmetry breakdown in njl is
essentialy dierent from the similar crossover in superconductors. the main feature of this crossover in njl model
is that it is nonmonotonous function of the crossover parameter /m (t = 0) - the above estimate shows that with
decreasing crossover parameter /m (t = 0) separation of the temperatures tc and t  increases again, just like in
the case /m (t = 0) >> 1. in between the regimes /m (t = 0) < and /m (t = 0) >> 1, tc passes a value that
is situated closest to t  but in contrast to analogous crossover in superconductors we do not have a limit where we
can make ratio (t   tc)/t  arbitrarily small [3]. thus even though njl model has a region where for certain value
of /m (t = 0) critical temperature tc is situated close to t , in principle it has no strict bcs limit.
in is worth to note as well that even in the weak-coupling and high-carrier density superconductors one can always
distinguish region where there exist non-condensed cooper pair above tc even though this region shrinks when coupling
strength decreases. physical properties of the superconductor in this region can be obtained perturbatively [11] 3.

let us as well observe that from the above formulas for this crossover in njl model one can see that formally in the
limit of large nc system would recover bcs-like mean-eld behavior. similar situation when at low n symmetry
breakdown is described by sigma-model and the recovery of mean-eld scenario in the regime of large number of eld
components we observed in gross-neveu model with u (1) symmetry [6,7].

vi. conclusion

the nambuiona-lasinio model was proposed in analogy to bcs theory of superconductivity. bcs theory of super-
conductivity is a mean-eld theory and it describes superconductivity as a pair formation, i.e. when pairs are formed
at certain temperature they are condensed. however now it is a well-known fact in the theory of superconductivity that
away from the very special limit of large carrier concentration and innitesimally weak coupling strength temperature
of the pair formation and pair condensation do not coincide and moreover theoretically can be arbitrarily separated.
so in strong-coupling or low-carrier-density superconductors we can introduce two characteristic temperatures : t 
- where gap modulus forms but there is no phase coherence and tc where symmetry gets broken via 3d xy model
transition. crossover from bcs superconductivity to the phase with separated characteristic temperatures tc and t 
is known in condensed matter as  crossover from bcs superconductivity to bose-einstein condensation of tightly
bound fermion pairs

in this paper we study njl model taking into account classic chiral uctuations and proceeding along the same
lines like in our paper on strong-coupling superconductivity [3]. we show that the phase diagram of njl model
at nite temperatures is dominated by phase similar to bec phase of superconductor. in bec regime just like in
the strong-coupling and low-carrier density superconductors symmetry breakdown can not be described as a gap
modulus formation but it can be described as 3d o(4)-sigma model transition at certain temperature tc whereas gap
modulus forms at higher temperature t . another feature of the njl model is that this crossover is non-monotonous
as a function of the ratio of mass at zero temperature to cuto and in contrast to superconductors njl model at
nite temperatures, strictly speaking has no limit where bcs scenario can be recovered with arbitrary accuracy.
consequence of the circumstance that njl model is similar rather to be than bcs superconductor is existence of
a phase with nonzero local gap m (t ) but with no broken symmetry. another feature of the njl model is that
according to estimates in [9] at zero temperature long range order can be destroyed by dynamic uctuations. despite
what is claimed in [9] their arguments do not hold at nite temperature as we discussed in our paper, however njl
model should posses as well interesting crossover from the regime of strong classical static chiral uctuations studied
in this paper to the regime of strong quantum dynamic uctuations at zero temperature. it should be noted as well
that in contrast to [9] the results and conclusions present in this paper do not depend qualitatively on accuracy of
estimation of critical temperature of the eective sigma-model.

may it be considered as surprising circumstance that as it is claimed above temperature of the symmetry breakdown
in njl model may be distinct from the temperature where local gap modulus m (t ) vanishes? from the point of view
of condensed matter physicist it is not surprising. it would be surprising if symmetry breakdown in njl model would

3 merging of temperatures t  and temperature of the phase transition of the eective 3d xy-model in the limit of weak-
coupling strength or high carrier density should be understand as an estimate for restoration of the bcs behavior since in
contrast to bec limit we deal in this case with system of overlapping pairs and internal structure of composite boson is in
principle relevant for proper recovery o all the properties of this limit. however behaviour of critical temperature given by
xy model approach is qualitatively correct in the entire crossover region [3].

6

be described by a-la bcs scenario for any values of parameters, as we can conclude from extensive studies and
experimental results on bcs-bec crossover in superconductors. moreover in some sense similar situations are known
in large variety of condensed matter systems, in particular, except for bcs-bec crossover we can mention itinerant
and local-momentum theories of magnetism, exitionic condensate in semiconductors, ferroelectrics and josephson
junction arrays.

it is a pleasure to thank prof. a. j. niemi and dr. v.v. cheianov for useful discussions.

acknowledgments

[1] y. nambu and g. jona lasinio, phys. rev. 122, 345 (1961); 124, 246 (1961).
[2] s. p. klevansky, rev. mod. phys. 64, 649 (1992).

t. hatsuda and t. kunihiro, phys. rep. 247, 221 (1994).

[3] e.babaev and h.kleinert phys. rev. b 59 12083 (1999)

preprints cond-mat/9804206 and cond-mat/9907138
e. babaev crossover from bcs superconductivity to bose-einstein condensation of tightly bound fermion pairs in two and
three dimensions phd thesis a.f. ioe institute of the russian academy of sciences. st. petersburg 1999. to be partially
published.

[4] p. nozieres and s. schmitt-rink, j. low. temp. phys. 59,195 (1985).
[5] e. witten, nucl. phys. b 145, 110 (1978).
[6] h.kleinert and e.babaev preprint hep-th/9809112 phys.let. b. 438, 311 (1998)
[7] e. babaev preprint hep-th/9907089
[8] c. a. r. sa de melo, m. randeria, and j.r. engelbrecht, phys. rev. lett. 71, 3202 (1993).
[9] h. kleinert and b. van den bossche hep-ph/9907274 and hep-ph/9908284

[10] r. pisarski, f.wilczek phys. rev. d 29 338 (1983); f. wilczek int. j. mod. phys. a 7 3911 (1992); k. radjagopal, f.

wilczek nucl. phys d 404 577 (1993)

[11] l. g. aslamazov and a. i. larkin fiz. tverd. tela 10 1104 (1968) k. maki progr. teor. phys. 39 879 (1968); 40 193

(1968)
see also a.v. svidzinskii prostranstvenno-neodnorodnye zadachi teorii sverhprovodimosti.moskva.nauka (1982). (in
russian).

7

