9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
0
1

 

 
 

1
v
3
6
0
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

on ads3 string theory

p. marios petropoulos
centre de physique theorique

ecole polytechnique

f-91128 palaiseau cedex

marios@cpht.polytechnique.fr

abstract

string theory on curved backgrounds has received much attention on
account of both its own interest, and of its relation with gauge theories.
despite the progress made in various directions, several quite elementary
questions remain unanswered, in particular in the very simple case of
three-dimensional anti-de sitter space. i briey review these problems.

string theory is the most appropriate setting for studying quantum-
gravity phenomena. in the absence of a truly non-perturbative approach,
the usual method consists in analysing the string propagating on non-
trivial backgrounds, that satisfy the requirements of conformal invari-
ance of the corresponding sigma model.

three-dimensional anti-de sitter space was recognized long ago as a
case of interest [1][5]. it is a maximally symmetric solution of einsteins
equations with negative cosmological constant, and time is embedded
non-trivially in the curved geometry. alternatively, it corresponds to
the freedmangibbons electrovac solution of gauged supergravity, which
can be shown to leave space-time supersymmetry unbroken [6]. other
peculiar features of ads3 are the absence of asymptotically at regions,
the presence of boundaries, as well as a rich causal structure, which
makes it possible to obtain three-dimensional black holes after modding
out some discrete symmetry [7].

as far as string theory is concerned, ads3 is an exact background,
provided an nsns two-form is switched on. the underlying two-
dimensional theory is a wesszuminowitten model on the su (1, 1)

cpth-pc-735.0999/september 1999

1

2

group manifold. three-dimensional anti-de sitter space is the only ex-
act background  with a single time direction  where string propagation
leads to a wzw model. this property does not hold for more general
adsn.

despite many eorts, driven in particular by the recent activity on
ads/cft correspondence, and the apparent simplicity of the model
at hand, several important and elementary issues are still beyond our
understanding.

the analysis of string theory on ads3 plus torsion background can
be performed in two steps. we rst study the sigma model whose target
space has the above geometry. then, the latter has to be coupled to two-
dimensional gravity. at the level of the hilbert space, this amounts to
the decoupling of a certain subspace, which becomes unphysical. several
questions must then be answered, among which: is the physical spectrum
free of negative-norm states? is the operator algebra well-behaved, and
what are the vertex operators and their interpretation? what is the
one-loop modular-invariant partition function?

very little is known about wzw models on non-compact groups, at a
suciently rigorous and general level. most of our knowledge is based on
a formal extension of the compact case to some specic situations, and
in the framework of current-algebra techniques. target-space boundary
conditions, in particular, are treated somehow carelessly, although we
know how important they are for selecting various representations when
studying quantum mechanics on ads3 [8].

we usually assume that the so(2, 2) = su (1, 1)l  su (1, 1)r sym-
metry of the above model is realized in terms of an ane lie algebra, the
level of which is not quantized because 3(su (1, 1)) = 0. the world-
sheet energymomentum tensor is given by the ane sugawara con-
struction, and its modes satisfy the virasoro algebra with central charge
c = 3k
k+2 . choosing k < 2 leads to one time and two space directions,
while the central charge is positive.

finally, the hilbert space is formally constructed as in the compact
case: it is a direct sum of products of representations of the left and right
current algebras. highest-weight representations of the su (1, 1) current
algebra are labelled by the spin j of the primary elds (states of level
zero), which form a representation of the global algebra. higher-level
states are obtained by acting with negative-frequency current oscilla-
tors on the above primary states, which are annihilated by all positive-
frequency modes.

irreducible representations of the global algebra are of two kinds: dis-
crete or continuous. the discrete ones have highest or lowest weight,
whereas the continuous ones do not. they are all innite-dimensional,

on ads3 string theory

3

at least when unitarity is demanded. this is due to the non-compact
nature of su (1, 1), which also implies that the metric on the group
manifold is not positive-denite.

representations of the su (1, 1) current algebra have always innite
towers of negative-norm states. therefore the corresponding wzw
model cannot be unitary. nevertheless, since we are interested in the
string theory, the relevant question is whether the physical spectrum
is free of negative-norm states. the latter is dened as the subspace
of virasoro primaries, satisfying the mass-shell condition, at criticality,
namely when cint + 3k
k+2 = 26 (cint > 0, is the contribution of some in-
ternal cft, and we are considering here the bosonic case). within the
present framework, the following conclusions can be drawn: (i) represen-
tations based on continuous series contain only positive-norm states, but
they all describe tachyons; (ii) representations based on discrete series
contain tachyons, massless and massive excitations, but for suciently
large |j| (j is negative so as to ensure unitarity of level-zero states),
negative-norm states appear, which remain in the physical spectrum.

one possible solution to this problem is to cut the spin, hoping that
all negative-norm states are thus eliminated [2, 3]. a rened analysis
shows that a reasonable constraint is

k
2

 j < 0 .

straightforward norm computations up to level two indicate that unitar-
ity could be recovered [2], and there are even indications that a no-ghost
theorem could exist [9]. however, an important issue is whether the
above condition is consistent with other features of the string. the an-
swer to this question is not known. clearly such a constraint on the
allowed values of the spin introduces a cut-o on the mass of string ex-
citations. this is in obvious disagreement with the usual innite tower
of masssive states, and, to some extent, with what we have learned so
far from the ads/cft conjecture.

another relevant and related question we must face concerns the one-
in order to
loop partition function. several problems appear there.
avoid the divergence due to the innite degeneracy level by level, we
must switch on an external source coupled to the cartan generator.
this allows for a proper  though not physically clear  denition of the
characters of the discrete series [10]. it does not apply, however, succes-
fully to continuous series, whose contribution to the partition function
therefore remains undetermined. ignoring that contribution, and con-
centrating on the discrete series, is not very conclusive either. on the
one hand, one can seriously argue that, within the above unitarity con-
straint, modular invariance cannot be reached [11]. on the other hand,

4

even ignoring the unitarity bound, modular-invariant combinations of
the characters are known when k > 2, but it is technically dicult
to go beyond, since the characters themselves have not been computed,
except for the case of irreducible representations.

as a conclusion, one can summarize the situation as follows:

in the
framework of the current-algebra approach, unitarity seems to be in-
compatible with a consistent physical spectrum, since it introduces a
cut-o over the mass. this may be interpreted as a signal that, in the
present approach, we are missing other sectors, which could provide us
with positive-norm states, whose spin is j < k/2, and which might orig-
inate from a proper treatment of the target-space boundary conditions.
the latter are hard to implement within the current-algebra method,
but might be successfully explored following a path-integral approach
`a la gawedzki [5]. the role of continuous series could also be claried
in this way. although they are compatible with unitarity, the corre-
sponding excitations seem to be all tachyonic. it is fair to mention here
that one could try alternatively to avoid the mass/spin cut-o and the
purely tachyonic continuous representations in various ways, playing es-
sentially with the current algebra, and/or modifying the ane sugawara
construction [12]. however, it is not clear whether such modications
leave unaltered the interpretation of the theory as a string propagating
over ads3.

the motivations for studying the string on ads3 turn out to be wider
than expected in the early works. the analysis of the ads/cft conjec-
ture, in the framework of the ads3s3 background, in particular, has
attracted most attention. ideally, we would like to compute correlators
in both sides and compare them. in practice, correlators for ads3 string
states are out of reach, which makes any rigorous check quite intricate.
therefore, most of the work in that direction has been devoted to trying
to express the space-time as well as the asymptotic two-dimensional con-
formal symmetry, in terms of the elds of the wzw model whose target
space is the bulk ads3 theory, and to build in that way the boundary
conformal eld theory. it is fair to say, however, that this approach has
not shed any light on the structure of the ads3 string itself  at least re-
garding the questions raised here; as long as the ads3 side is not handled
exactly, the achievements are limited both on checking the ads/cft
correspondence and on building the boundary theory [13]. of course,
there still is the  weaker  alternative to work with the low-energy su-
pergravity, supplemented with all kaluzaklein excitations coming from
higher dimensions, thus trying to obtain some feedback for the string on
ads3. for example, there are signs that all su (1, 1) representations 
discrete and continuous  should appear without bound on the mass.

on ads3 string theory

5

if such a bound were present, assuming the ads/cft correspondence,
it would be hard to identify states in the bulk ads3 supergravity (or
string, as a fundamental theory), with states in the boundary conformal
eld theory.

acknowledgments

it is a pleasure to thank c. bachas and p. bain for the stimulating collaboration
we have been having on this subject. i would like to thank also the organizers of the
carg`ese 99 asi. the present note is a strict summary of a more extended version
[11], where a complete bibliography can be found. this work was supported in part
by eec tmr contract erbfmrx-ct96-0090.

references

[1] j. balog, l. oraifeartaigh, p. forgacs and a. wipf, nucl. phys.

b325 (1989) 225.

[2] p.m. petropoulos, phys. lett. 236b (1990) 151.
[3] n. mohameddi, int. j. mod. phys. a5 (1990) 3201.
[4] i. bars and d. nemeschansky, nucl. phys. b348 (1991) 89.
[5] k. gawedzki, proceedings of the carg`ese summer institute: new
symmetry principles in quantum eld theory, carg`ese, france, 16
27 july, 1991.

[6] i. antoniadis, c. bachas and a. sagnotti, phys. lett. 235b (1990)

255.

[7] m. banados, c. teitelboim and j. zanelli, phys. rev. lett. 69

(1992) 1849.

[8] v. balasubramanian, p. kraus and a. lawrence, phys. rev. d59

(1999) 046003.

[9] s. hwang, nucl. phys. b354 (1991) 100; m. henningson and
s. hwang, phys. lett. 258b (1991) 341; j. evans, m. gaberdiel
and m. perry, nucl. phys. b535 (1998) 152.

[10] v. kac and m. wakimoto, proc. nat. acad. sci. usa 85 (1988)

4956.

[11] p.m. petropoulos, hep-th/9908189.
[12] i. bars, phys. rev. d53 (1996) 3308.
[13] a. giveon, d. kutasov and n. seiberg, adv. theor. math. phys. 2
(1998) 733; j. de boer, h. ooguri, h. robins and j. tannenhauser,
jhep 9812 (1998) 26; d. kutasov and n. seiberg, jhep 9904
(1999) 8; a. giveon and m. rocek, jhep 9904 (1999) 19.

