9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
7
1

 

 
 

1
v
4
2
1
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

gauge theory scattering from
the ads/cft correspondence

romuald a. janik
service de physique theorique cea-saclay
f-91191 gif-sur-yvette cedex, france
and m.smoluchowski institute of physics, jagellonian university
reymonta 4, 30-059 cracow, poland

janik@spht.saclay.cea.fr

abstract we use the ads/cft correspondence to study near forward scattering
of colourless objects in gauge theory in the high energy limit. we nd an
1 behaviour
unexpected from the gauge theory perspective gravity-like s
of the amplitudes coming from bulk graviton exchange.

1.

introduction

in this talk we would like to present results on certain aspects of high
energy scattering in gauge theory from the point of view of the ads/cft
correspondence [1, 2]. the full account of these results appeared in [3].
the motivation for this study is twofold. firstly, the duality between
supergravity (string theory) on ads and supersymmetric gauge theory
allows for a completely new insight into the dynamics of gauge theory in
the strongly coupled regime. its consequences regarding the high energy
limit of gauge theory have not been explored so far (see [3, 4]). secondly,
expectations on the behaviour of high energy eld theory amplitudes can
shed some light on the behaviour of the string theory side and point out
some phenomenae unexpected from the gravity point of view.

the outline of this talk is as follows. first we identify a suitable
observable on the gauge theory side, then we apply the ads/cft cor-
respondence to calculate this quantity and nally we discuss the impli-
cations of our results.

talk presented at the nato asi progress in string theory and m-theory, cargese 1999.

1

2

t



l

y

x

a

a

figure 1.1 geometry of the wilson loops in euclidean space.

2.

gauge theory observable

in this section we will dene the gauge theory observable related to

the near foward scattering amplitude:

1
s

a(s, t) = z d2b eiqb ei2(b,s)  1

2i

t = q2

(1.1)

where b is the impact parameter (in the following we will denote its
modulus by l) and  is the phase shift.

2 = x

 + p

1  and w2  x

in qcd the scattering amplitude between quarks in the eikonal ap-
proximation (valid in the high energy s, xed (and small) momentum
transfer t) is given by a correlation function of two wilson lines which
follow the classical straight line quark trajectories [5, 6, 7]: w1 
x
1 = p
2  . the amplitude is in general
infrared divergent and to overcome this it is convenient to consider the
scattering of colourless qq pairs of transverse separation a. in this case
the two wilson lines are replaced by two rectangular wilson loops each
formed by the trajectories of the quark and antiquark forming the pair.
finally since we will be interested in using the ads/cft correspon-
dence for n = 4 sym, our quarks and antiquarks will be substituted
in the standard way by (massive) gauge bosons coming from higgsing
u (n + 1)  u (n )  u (1) through the inclusion of a probe d3 brane.

as a technical tool we will perform an analytical continuation to eu-
clidean space. thus we consider wilson loops which form an angle  in
the longitudinal t-y plane. the width of the loops is along the trans-
verse direction x (see gure 1.1).
explicitly we have to compute

2iz d2xeiqx (cid:28) w1w2

hw1i hw2i

 1(cid:29)

(1.2)

as a function of the angle , and after performing the calculation we

gauge theory scattering

3

analytically continue   i  i log(cid:16) s

2m2(cid:17) to obtain (1.1). in the

next section we apply the ads/cft correspondence to calculate (1.2).

3.

supergravity calculation

according to the now standard prescription, a wilson loop on the
gauge theory side corresponds to a minimal surface string worldsheet in
ads bounded by this loop [8]. the correlation function of two wilson
loops, in the case when their separation is much larger than their trans-
verse sizes, will be given by the exchange of supergravity elds between
the two associated minimal string worldsheets. the calculation is techni-
cally completely analogous to the one of [9], the only change is a dierent
-dependent geometry of the loops, and the resulting interpretation as a
gauge theory scattering amplitude. due to the analytical continuation it
turns out that the hiearchy of importance of various supergravity elds
is dierent from that in [9].

the calculation involves two steps:

(1) determination of the couplings of the various supergravity elds to
the string worldsheet,
(2) calculation of the interaction using the appropriate bulk to bulk
greens function.
the couplings are found by varying the nambu-goto action with respect
to the background supergravity elds. the resulting contribution of the
relevant eld to the gauge theory scattering phase shift is then given by

hw1w2i
hw1i hw2i

= exp(cid:18) 1

422 z 4dt1dt2

dzdw
zxwx

sn g



(t1, z)g(x, x)

sn g



(t2, w)(cid:19)

(1.3)
where  denotes a generic supergravity eld. using the symmetry prop-
erties of the ads geometry one can show that the whole - (and con-
sequently energy s-) dependence is encoded in the couplings. all the
detailed properties of the greens function only change the a/l depen-
dence of the amplitude.

we performed the calculations for the tachyonic scalars si , lightest
modes of the dilaton, of the 2-form eld and of the graviton. similarly
as in at space the energy dependence turns out to be related to the
spin of the exchanged particle.

the phase shift coming from the scalars behaves like kk  (a/l)2 

(1/ sin )  (a/l)2s1. from the 2-form eld b  (a/l)4(cos / sin ) 
(a/l)4  s0 and for the graviton we get grav  (a/l)6  (cos2 / sin ) 
(a/l)6  s1. thus the graviton dominates at high energies.

4

we would like to comment on the limitations of the above calculation.
we considered only single particle exchange. this is legitimate in the
large n limit but for high enough energies may be inadequate. in fact
analytically continuing to minkowski signature within the ads space
one can check that the gravitational eld produced by one of the world-
sheets can be considered as a small perturbation around the background
geometry only for s2  (l/a)7.

the surprising result from the gauge theory side is the s1 dependence
of the graviton contribution. in eld theory we do expect such higher
powers of s to be supressed by unitarity corrections, but it is a dicult
challenge to envisage how this would look like on the supergravity side,
where there is no obvious process cancelling the attractive graviton-
mediated interaction at high energies. probably something very specic
to string theory on ads would have to intervene.

acknowledgments

i would like to thank the organizers and participants of the cargese asi for a very
stimulating school, and robi peschanski with whom these results were obtained. this
work was supported in part by kbn grants 2p03b08614 and 2p03b01917.

references

[1] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231;

s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.m. polyakov, phys. lett. b428
(1998) 105;
e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 253.

[2] o. aharony, s.s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri and y. oz, large

n eld theories, string theory and gravity, hep-th/9905111.

[3] r.a. janik and r. peschanski, high energy scattering and the

ads/cft correspondence, hep-th/9907177.

[4] m. rho, s.-j. sin and i. zahed, elastic parton-parton scattering

from ads/cft, hep-th/9907126.

[5] o. nachtmann, ann. phys. 209 (1991) 436.
[6] h. verlinde and e. verlinde, qcd at high energies and two-

dimensional field theory, hep-th/9302104.

[7] g.p. korchemsky, phys. lett. b325 (1994) 459.
[8] j. maldacena, phys. rev. lett. 80 (1998) 4859;

s.-j. rey and j. yee, macroscopic strings as heavy quarks in large
n gauge theory and anti-de sitter supergravity, hep-th/9803001.

[9] d. berenstein, r. corrado, w. fischler and j. maldacena, phys.

rev. d59 (1999) 105023.

