hep-th/9909030
eth-th/99-24
esi-751
september 1999

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
2
1

 

 
 

2
v
0
3
0
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the geometry of wzw branes

giovanni felder , jurg frohlich , jurgen fuchs and christoph schweigert

eth zurich

ch  8093 zurich

abstract
the structures in target space geometry that correspond to conformally invariant
boundary conditions in wzw theories are determined both by studying the scat-
tering of closed string states and by investigating the algebra of open string vertex
operators. in the limit of large level, we nd branes whose world volume is a regular
conjugacy class or, in the case of symmetry breaking boundary conditions, a twined
version thereof. in particular, in this limit one recovers the commutative algebra
of functions over the brane world volume, and open strings connecting dierent
branes disappear. at nite level, the branes get smeared out, yet their approximate
localization at (twined) conjugacy classes can be detected unambiguously.
it is also established that in any rational conformal eld theory the structure con-
stants of the algebra of boundary operators coincide with specic entries of fusing
matrices.

1

1 introduction

conformally invariant boundary conditions in two-dimensional conformal eld theories have
recently attracted renewed attention. by now, quite a lot of information on such boundary
conditions is available in the algebraic approach, including boundary conditions that do not
preserve all bulk symmetries.
in many cases, the conformal eld theory of interest has also
a description as a sigma model with target space m.
it is then tempting to ask what the
geometrical interpretation of these boundary conditions might be in terms of submanifolds
(and vector bundles on them or, more generally, sheaves) of m. actually, this question makes
an implicit assumption that is not really justied: it is not the classical (commutative) geometry
of the target m that matters, but rather a non-commutative version [1] of it.

in the present note, we investigate the special case of wzw conformal eld theories. for
most of the time we restrict our attention to the case where the torus partition function is given
by charge conjugation. then the classical target space is a real simple compact connected and
simply connected lie group manifold g. in particular, the underlying manifold is parallelizable,
i.e. its tangent bundle is a trivial bundle.

the latter property of lie groups will allow us to apply methods that were developped in [2],
by which geometric features of the d-brane solutions of supergravity in at 10-dimensional
space-time were recovered from the boundary state for a free conformal eld theory. the basic
idea of that approach was to compute the vacuum expectation value of the bulk eld that
corresponds to the closed string state


1 

1|qi|qi

(1.1)

on a disk with a boundary condition  of interest. here our convention is that quantities
without a tilde correspond to left-movers, while those with a tilde correspond to right-movers.
the operator 
n is the nth mode of the u(1) current in the -direction of the free conformal
eld theory. the symmetric traceless part of the state (1.1) corresponds to the graviton, the
antisymmetric part of the state to the kalb--ramond eld, and the trace to the dilaton, all of
momentum q.

let us explain the rationale behind this prescription. at rst sight it might seem more
natural to employ graviton scattering in the background of a brane for exploring the geometry.
this would correspond, in leading order of string perturbation theory, to the calculation of a
two-point correlation function for two bulk elds on the disk. however, by factorization of bulk
elds such an amplitude is related to (a sum of) products of three-point functions on the sphere
with one-point functions on the disk. since the former amplitude is completely independent of
the boundary conditions, all information on a boundary condition that can be obtained by use
of bulk elds will therefore be obtainable from correlators involving a single bulk eld. similar
factorization arguments also encourage us to concentrate on world sheets with the topology of
a disk.

the idea of testing boundary conditions with vacuum expectation values of bulk elds
nds an additional justication in the following reasoning.
in terms of classical geometry,
boundary conditions are related to vector bundles over submanifolds of the target manifold
m, the chan--paton bundles. such bundles, in turn, should be regarded as modules over the
ring f (m) of functions on m. heuristically, we may interpret the algebra of (certain) bulk

2

elds as a quantized version of f (m). the expectation values of the bulk elds on a disk
then describe how the algebra of bulk elds is represented on the boundary operators or, more
precisely, on the subspace of boundary operators that are descendants of the vacuum eld. (as
a side remark we mention that boundary conditions are indeed most conveniently described in
terms of suitable classifying algebras. these encode aspects of the action of the algebra of bulk
operators on boundary operators.)

the relevant information for computing the one-point functions on a disk with boundary

condition  is encoded in a boundary state b, which is a linear functional

b : mq,q

hq  hq  c

(1.2)

on the space of closed string states. (for an uncompactied free boson, the left- and right-
moving labels of the primary elds are related as q = q.) we are thus led to compute the
function

g

 (q) := b(

1 

1|qi|qi) .

(1.3)

using the explicit form of the boundary state, this quantity has been determined in [2]. upon
fourier transformation, it gives rise to a function g
 (x) on position space. it has been shown
that the symmetric traceless part of the function g reproduces the vacuum expectation value of
the graviton in the background of a brane, while the antisymmetric part gives the kalb--ramond
eld, and the trace the dilaton.

in order to see how these ndings generalize to the case of (non-abelian) wzw theories, let
us discuss the structural ingredients that enter in these calculations. boundary states can be
constructed for arbitrary conformal eld theories, in particular for wzw models. moreover,
since group manifolds are parallelizable, it is also straightforward to generalize the oscillator
modes 
n of the non-abelian currents
j a(z). here the upper index a ranges over a basis of the lie algebra of g, a = 1, 2, ... , dim g,
and n  z. together with a central element k, these modes span an untwisted ane lie algebra
g, according to

n: they are to be replaced by the corresponding modes j a

[j a

n, j b

m] = xc

f ab

c j c

n+m + k abn+m,0 .

(1.4)

here f ab
c and ab are the structure constants and killing form, respectively, of the nite-
dimensional simple lie algebra g whose compact real form is the lie algebra of the lie group
manifold g. notice that the generators of the form j a
0 form a nite-dimensional subalgebra,
called the horizontal subalgebra, which can (and will) be identied with g.

we nally need to nd the correct generalization of the state |qi. to this end we note that
|qi is the vector in the fock space of charge q with lowest conformal weight. for wzw theories,
instead of this fock space, we have to consider the following space. first, we must choose a
non-negative integer value k for the level, i.e., the eigenvalue of the central element k. the
space of physical states of the wzw theory with charge conjugation modular invariant is then
the direct sum

mpk

h  h+ ,

(1.5)

3

where h is the irreducible integrable highest weight module of g at level k with highest weight
, and pk is the (nite) set of integrable weights  of g at level k. every such g-weight 
corresponds to a unique weight of the horizontal subalgebra g (which we denote again by ),
which is the highest weight of a nite-dimensional g-representation. however, for nite level
k, not all such highest weights of g appear; this truncation will have important consequences
later on.

unlike in the case of fock modules, the subspace of states of lowest conformal weight in
the module h is not one-dimensional any longer. rather, it constitutes the irreducible nite-
dimensional module h of the horizontal subalgebra g. therefore in place of the function (1.3)
we now consider

(1.6)

(1.7)

gab

 (vv) := b(j a
1

j b
1 |vi|vi)

for

v  v  mpk

h  h+ .

as a matter of fact, one may also look at analogous quantities involving other modes j a
n, or
combinations of modes, or even without any mode present at all. it turns out that qualitatively
their behavior is very similar to the functions (1.6); they all signal the presence of a defect at
the same position in target space. our results are therefore largely independent on the choice
of the bulk eld we use to test the geometry of the target.

the function gab

 can be determined from known results about boundary conditions in wzw
models. this allows us to analyze wzw brane geometries via expectation values of bulk elds.
another approach to these geometries is via the algebra of boundary elds. while the second
setup focuses on intrinsic properties of the brane world volume, the rst perspective oers a
natural way to study the embedding of the brane geometry into the target. both approaches
will be studied in this paper.

we organize our discussion as follows. in section 2 we compute the function gab

 for those
boundary conditions which preserve all bulk symmetries. to relate this function to classical
geometry of the group manifold g, we perform a fourier transformation. we then nd that
the end points of open strings are naturally localized at certain conjugacy classes of the group
g. at nite level k, the locus of the end points of the open string is, however, smeared out,
though it is still well peaked at a denite regular rational conjugacy class. the absence of
sharp localization at nite level k shows that, even after having made the relation to classical
geometry, the brane exhibits some intrinsic fuzziness. it should, however, be emphasized that
at nite level the very concept of both the target space and the world volume of a brane as
classical manifolds are not really appropriate.

the algebra of boundary elds for symmetry preserving boundary conditions is analyzed
in section 3. we show that for any arbitrary rational conformal eld theory the boundary
structure constants are equal to world sheet duality matrices, the fusing matrices, according to

c  a  b  c

 l 

= (flc,ab[  

 + ])

.

(1.8)

furthermore, we are able to show that in the limit of large k the space of boundary operators
approaches the space of functions on the brane world volume. in the same limit open strings

4

connecting dierent conjugacy classes disappear, while such congurations are present at every
nite value of the level.

in section 4 we discuss symmetry breaking boundary conditions in wzw theories for which
the symmetry breaking is characterized through an automorphism  of the horizontal subalge-
bra g. 1 it turns out that the end points of open strings are then localized at twined conjugacy
classes, that is, at sets of the form

c
g(h) := {gh(g)1 | g  g}

(1.9)

for some h  g. the derivation of our results on symmetry breaking boundary conditions
requires generalizations of weyls classical results on conjugacy classes. (the necessary tools,
including a twined version of weyls integration formula, are collected in an appendix.) in
section 5, we extend our analysis to non-simply connected lie groups. we nd features that
are familiar from the discussion of d-branes on orbifold spaces, such as fractional branes, and
point out additional subtleties in cases where the action of the orbifold group is only projective.

2 probing target geometry with bulk elds

we start our discussion with the example of boundary conditions that preserve all bulk sym-
metries. in this situation the correlators on a surface with boundaries are specic linear com-
binations of the chiral blocks on the schottky double of the surface [3]. the boundary state
describes the one-point correlators for bulk elds on the disk and, accordingly, it is a linear
combination of two-point blocks on the schottky cover of the disk, i.e., on the sphere. the lat-
ter  which in the present context of correlators on the disk also go under the name of ishibashi
states  are linear functionals

that are characterized by the ward identities

b : h  h+  c

(2.1)

(2.2)

b (cid:0)j a

n

 1 + 1  j a

n(cid:1) = 0 .

choosing an element vv  h h+, we can use the invariance property (2.2) and the commu-
tation relations (1.4) to arrive at

b(j a

1v  j b

1v) = b((1  j a

1 j b

1) (vv)) = b((1  [j a

1 , j b

1]) (vv))

= xc

f ab

c b(v  j c

0 v)  abk b(vv) .

(2.3)

there is one symmetry preserving boundary condition for each primary eld  in the theory
[4]. the coecients in the expansion of the boundary states with respect to the boundary blocks
are given by the so-called (generalized) quantum dimensions:

1 not all symmetry breaking boundary conditions of wzw theories are of this form.

b = xpk

s,
s,

b .

(2.4)

5

here s is the modular s-matrix of the theory and  refers to the vacuum primary eld. to
write the state (2.4) in a more convenient form, we use the fact that the generalized quantum
dimensions are given by the values of the g-character of h at specic elements y of the cartan
subalgebra of the horizontal subalgebra g or, equivalently, by the values of the g-character of
h at specic elements h of the maximal torus of the group g. concretely, we have

with

and

s,/s, = (h)

(h) := tr hr(h)

h := exp(2iy) with y := +
k+g

(2.5)

(2.6)

(2.7)

for any level k and g-weight . in formula (2.7),  denotes the weyl vector (i.e., half the sum
of all positive roots) of g and g  is the dual coxeter number. the boundary state thus reads

b = xpk

(h) b .

the function gab

 dened in formula (1.7) is then found to be

gab
 (vv) = (h)(cid:2)b(v  [j a

0 , j b

0]v) + abk b(vv)(cid:3)

(2.8)

(2.9)

for vv  h  h+.

we recall that the group character  is a class function, i.e. a function that is constant on

the conjugacy classes

cg(h) := {ghg1 | g  g}

(2.10)

of g. it is therefore quite natural to associate to a symmetry preserving boundary condition
the conjugacy class cg(h) of the lie group g that contains the element h. we would like to
emphasize that cg(h) is always a regular conjugacy class, that is, the stabilizer of h under
conjugation is just the unique maximal torus containing this element.

our next task is to perform the analogue of the fourier transformation between g and
g in [2]. to this end we employ the fact that left and right translation on the group manifold
g give two commuting actions of g on the space f (g) of functions on g and thereby turn this
space into a g-bimodule. by the peter--weyl theorem, f (g) is isomorphic, as a g-bimodule,
to an innite direct sum of tensor products of irreducible modules, namely

f (g) = mp

h  h+

(2.11)

here p  pk= is the set of all highest weights of nite-dimensional irreducible g-modules. we
may identify the conjugate module h+ with the dual of h. then the isomorphism (2.11)
sends vv  h  h+ to the function f on g given by

f (g) = v(r(g)v)  hv|r(g)|vi

(2.12)

6

for all g  g. using the scalar product on f (g), we can therefore associate to every linear
functional : f  c a function (respectively, in general, a distribution)  on the group manifold
by the requirement that

(vv) = zg

dg (g) hv|r(g)|vi

(2.13)

for v  h. after introducing dual bases {vi} of h and {vj} of h+, the orthonormality
relations for representation functions then allow us to write

(g) = xp xi,j

(vivj) hvj|r(g)|vii .

(2.14)

according to (1.7), at nite level we have to deal with the nite-dimensional truncations

fk(g) := mpk

h  h+

(2.15)

of the space (2.11) of functions on g. for every k, the space fk(g) can be regarded as a
subspace of f (g). we will do so from now on; thereby we arrive at a picture that is close
to classical intuition. the level-dependent truncation (2.15) constitutes, in fact, one of the
basic features of a wzw conformal eld theory. (this is a typical eect in interacting rational
conformal eld theories, which does not have an analogue for at backgrounds.)

next we relate the linear function gab on fk to a function gab on the group manifold g by

the prescription

gab(g) := xpkxi,j

gab(vivj) hvj|r(g)|vii

(2.16)

for g  g. by direct calculation we nd

gab(g) =  xpk

(abk

= abk xpk

s 
,
s,

tr hr(g) +xc
(h) (g)  xpk

f ab
c

s 
,
s,

tr hj cr(g))

(h) tr h[j a, j b]r(g) .

(2.17)

in analogy with the situation for at backgrounds [2] we are led to the following interpretation
of this result. the rst term in the expression (2.17) is symmetric and hence describes the
vacuum expectation value of dilaton and metric that is induced by the presence of the brane,
while the second term, which is antisymmetric, corresponds to the vacuum expectation value
for the kalb--ramond eld.

to proceed, we introduce, for every k  z>0, a function k on g  g by

k(g, h) := xpk

(g) (h) .

(2.18)

in the limit k   the integral operator associated to k reduces to the -distribution on the
space of conjugacy classes. indeed, because of limk pk = p , for every class function f on g
we have

zg

dh lim
k

k(g, h) f (h) = f (g) ,

(2.19)

7

which is a consequence of the general relation

zg

dg v (g) w (g) = dim(homg(v, w ))

(2.20)

valid for any two g-modules v, w . comparison with the result (2.17) thus shows that, in the
limit of innite level, the brane is localized at the conjugacy class cg(h) of g. it is worth
emphasizing, however, that this holds true only in that limit. in contrast, at nite level, the
brane world volume is not sharply localized on the relevant conjugacy class cg(h). rather, it
gets smeared out or, in more fancy terms, its localization is on a fuzzy version of a conjugacy
class. nevertheless, already at very small level the localization is suciently sharp to indicate
unambiguously what remains in the limit.

for concreteness, we display a few examples for boundary conditions with g = sl(2) in gure

1. the functions of interest are

fk,(h) := n j(h) |xpk

(h) (h)|2

,

(2.21)

where j is the weight factor in the weyl integration formula (see (a.3) and (a.8)) and n is a

normalization constant which is determined by the requirement that rt dh f (h) = 1. for sl(2),
we have t = [0, 2] and j(z) = sin2(z). the functions (2.21) are then given by

fk,x(z) = nk,x (

k

x=0

sin((+1)x) sin(z))2

(2.22)

for z  [0, 1), where k  z>0 and x = (+1)/(k+2) with   {0, 1, ... , k}. the examples plotted
in gure 1 are for conjugacy classes x = 1/6 and 1/2 and for levels k = 4, 10 and 28.

the integrated density ix,p :=r x+/p

closer inspection of the sl(2) data also shows that the sharpness of the localization scales
with k+g . more specically, for any given conjugacy class x and any fraction p of  = (k+2)1,
x/p dz f (z) depends only very weakly on the level. in fact, we
have collected extensive numerical evidence that even after taking this rescaling into account,
the localization improves when the level gets larger, i.e., that ix,p(k) is monotonically increasing
with k. (the improvement is not spectacular, though. for instance, ix=,1 rises from .9829 at
k = 3 to .9889 at k = 20, and ix=,3 rises from .6063 to .6074.)

note in particular that all brane world volumes are concentrated on regular conjugacy
classes, and that already at small level the overlap with the exceptional conjugacy classes (i.e.,
x = 0 and x = 1 for g = sl(2)) is negligible. indeed, as is clearly exhibited by the last mentioned
data, even the level-dependent allowed conjugacy classes that, at xed level, are closest to an
exceptional class (i.e., x =  for g = sl(2)) are not driven into the exceptional one in the innite
level limit. (thus, in this respect, our ndings do not agree with the prediction of the semi-
classical analysis in [5] and in [6]. the origin of this discrepancy appears to be the absence of
the shift k 7 k+g  in the classical setup. this shift occurs also naturally in other quantities
like e.g. in character formul and conformal weights.) this result will be conrmed by the
investigation of the algebra of boundary operators, to which we now turn our attention.

8

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

x = 1/6

k = 4

0.2

0.4

z

0.6

0.8

1

x = 1/6

k = 10

0.2

0.4

z

0.6

0.8

1

x = 1/6

k = 28

0.2

0.4

z

0.6

0.8

1

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

x = 1/2

k = 4

0.2

0.4

z

0.6

0.8

1

x = 1/2

k = 10

0.2

0.4

z

0.6

0.8

1

x = 1/2

k = 28

0.2

0.4

z

0.6

0.8

1

figure 1: the function (2.22) for branes centered at the conjugacy classes x = 1/6 and x = 1/2
for levels 4, 10, 28.

9

3 the algebra of boundary elds

in this section we focus our attention on the operator product algebra of (wzw-primary)
boundary elds. as a rst basic ingredient, we need to determine by which quantum numbers
such a eld is characterized. boundary points are precisely those points of a surface that
have a unique pre-image on its schottky cover. accordingly, on the level of chiral conformal
eld theory, boundary operators are characterized by a single primary label . 2 when all bulk
symmetries are preserved, this label takes its values in the set of chiral bulk labels. (in the
presence of symmetry breaking boundary conditions, the analysis has to be rened, see [7, 8].)
moreover, a boundary operator typically changes the boundary condition; therefore it carries
two additional labels ,  which indicate the two conformally invariant boundary conditions at
the two segments adjacent to the boundary insertion.

boundary operators are therefore often written as  

 (x). but, in fact, this is still not
sucient, in general. the reason is that eld-state correspondence requires to associate to
every state that contributes to the partition function

a (t) = x

a
 

( it
2 )

(3.1)

for an annulus with boundary conditions  and  a separate boundary eld. for symmetry
preserving boundary conditions, the annulus coecients a
  are known [4] 3 to coincide with
fusion rule coecients:

a

  = n 
 .

(3.2)

the fusion rules n 
 are not, in general, zero or one; as a consequence one must introduce
another degeneracy label a, taking values in {1, 2, ... , n+} [7, 6, 9]. the complete labelling
of boundary operators therefore looks like

 a 



(x) .

(3.3)

we remark in passing that in more complicated situations, like e.g. symmetry breaking bound-
ary conditions [7] or non-trivial modular invariants [10], the degeneracy spaces relevant for the
boundary operators still admit a representation theoretic interpretation that involves appropri-
ate (sub-)bundles of chiral blocks.

the boundary elds satisfy an operator product expansion which schematically reads

 a 



(x)  b 



(y)  x

n 


xl=1

n 


xc=1

c  a  b  c

 l 

[ c 



(y) + ... ] ,

(3.4)

where l  {1, 2, ... , n 
every (rational) conformal eld theory, the structure constants c  a  b  c

 } labels a basis of the space of chiral couplings from  and  to . for
appearing here are

 l 

2 for wzw models, we are actually also interested in the horizontal descendants, which have the same
conformal weight as the primary eld. then  should be regarded as a pair consisting of both the highest
weight and the relevant actual g-weight. correspondingly, in the operator product (3.4) below one must then
in addition include the appropriate clebsch--gordan coecients of g.

3 compare also [6] for arguments in a lagrangian setting.

10

nothing but suitable entries of fusing matrices f:

c  a  b  c

 l 

= (flc,ab[  

 + ])

.

(3.5)

recall that the fusing matrices describe the transition between the s- and the t-channel of
four-point blocks; pictorially, in our conventions, this relation looks like







  

 

k



 

l

  







n 


xm =1

n +



xn =1

= x

fkl,mn[  

  ] 








  



m
 




 
n



  








(3.6)

to establish the identity (3.5), we observe that the operator product coecients c  a  b  c
furnish a solution of the sewing constraint [11,12] that arises from the two dierent factorizations
of a correlation of four boundary elds. including all degeneracy labels, this sewing relation
reads

 l 

n 


xe=1

c  a  b  e

 k 

c  c  d  e

 l + c  e  e 
 + 

n 


xm =1

+




n

xn =1

n 


xf =1

= x

c  b  c  f

 m  c  a  f  d

 n + c  d  d 

+    fmn ,kl[  

  ] ,

(3.7)

where f[  
  ] is the fusing matrix which relates the two dierent factorizations. for wzw
models, the fusing matrices coincide with the 6j-symbols of the corresponding quantum group
with deformation parameter at a k+g th root of unity. the constraint (3.7) can be solved
explicitly in full generality, without reference to the particular conformal eld theory under
investigation. first note that the structure constants c  a  b  c
depend on six chiral and four
degeneracy labels, so that their label structure is precisely the same as the one of the fusing
matrices. the key observation is then to realize the similarity between the constraint (3.7) and
the pentagon identity

 l 

n 


xe=1

fk+

a,be[  +

 + ]  fl+

e,cd[  

 + ]

n 


xm =1

+





n

xn =1

n 


xf =1

= x

fmf ,bc[  

 + ]  fn +

a,f d[  

 + ]  fl+

k,mn [  
  ]

(3.8)

for the fusing matrices. (the structural similarity between the factorization constraint (3.7)
and the pentagon identity was already used in [9] to deduce the identication (3.5). in this
context, we would like to stress that the fusing matrices are entirely dened in terms of chiral
conformal eld theory.) indeed, it is not too dicult to show that under the identication (3.5)

11

the constraint (3.7) becomes  after exploiting the tetrahedral (s4-) symmetry [13] of the fusing
matrices in order to replace 4 some of the fusing matrix entries by dierent ones  nothing but
the (complex conjugated) pentagon identity (3.8).

a more direct way to understand the result (3.5) is by interpreting the boundary elds

 a 



as (ordinary) chiral vertex operators, which pictorially amounts to the prescription

 a 



=








a




the operator product (3.4) then describes the transition




 





a




b












  

 

l







c




(3.9)

(3.10)

from which one can read o the desired identication (3.5) between boundary structure con-
stants and fusing matrices.

thus we conclude that the boundary structure constants are indeed nothing but suitable
entries of fusing matrices. (for the case of virasoro minimal models, this has already been
observed in [14] using special properties of those models.) it should be noted, however, that the
fusing matrices are not completely determined by the pentagon identity and their tetrahedral
symmetry. rather, there is a gauge freedom related to the possibility of performing a change of
basis in the spaces of chiral three-point couplings. in the present setting, the gauge invariance
corresponds to the freedom in choosing a basis in the space of all boundary elds  a 
 with
xed  and , . once the gauge freedom has been xed at the level of chiral three-point
couplings, it is natural to make the same gauge choice also for the boundary elds.

we now show that, upon appropriately taking the limit of innite level, the algebra of
those boundary operators that do not change the boundary condition approaches the algebra
f (g/t ) of functions on the homogeneous space g/t , where t is a maximal torus of the lie
group g. this space g/t is of interest to us because every regular conjugacy class of g is, as
a dierentiable manifold, isomorphic to g/t . our result therefore perfectly matches the fact
that the fusing matrices of wzw models can be expressed with the help of k+g th roots of
unity, i.e. again the level k gets shifted by the dual coxeter number g . correspondingly, the
weights are shifted by the weyl vector so that, again, we are naturally led to regular conjugacy
classes.

4 note that the tetrahedral transformations that do not preserve the orientation of the tetrahedron involve
complex conjugation of f. also, by the tetrahedral symmetry, the structure constants involving the vacuum label
 are just combinations of quantum dimensions, and these precisely cancel against the quantum dimensions
coming from the other tetrahedral transformations that have to be performed. more details will be given
elsewhere.

12

we start our argument by regarding the algebra f (g/t ) as a left g-module only, rather
than as an algebra. the module f (g/t ) is fully reducible and can be decomposed as follows.
according to (2.11), the space f (g) of functions on g is a g-bimodule under left and right
translation. since the right action of t on g is free, we can then identify f (g/t ) with the
subspace of t -invariant functions on g,

f (g/t ) = f (g)t = mp

h  ( h+)t

.

(3.11)

h

(3.12)

furthermore, invariance under the maximal torus t just picks the weight space for weight zero.
thus we nd

mult()
0

f (g/t ) = mp
as an isomorphism of g-modules, where mult()
is the multiplicity of the weight  = 0 in the
0
irreducible module h with highest weight . thus, in particular, only modules belonging to
the trivial conjugacy class of g-modules appear in the decomposition (3.12). recall that the
boundary operators are organised in terms of modules h of the ane lie algebra g. our
aim is to show that the algebra of boundary elds that correspond to states of lowest grade in
the modules h, i.e. which are either primary elds or horizontal descendants, 5 carries a left
g-module structure that in the limit of innite level coincides with the decomposition (3.12).
when restricting to this nite subspace fk of boundary operators, via eld-state correspon-
dence the annulus amplitudes tell us that fk carries the structure of a g-module, and as a
g-module it is isomorphic to the direct sum

fk

= m,pk

a
 

h

(3.13)

of irreducible g-modules. thus to be able to perform a more quantitative analysis of the alge-
bra of boundary operators, we need to control the values of the annulus coecients a
 . since
according to the identity (3.2), as long as all bulk symmetries are preserved, these numbers
just coincide with the fusion rules coecients, a
 = n+, we are interested in concrete ex-
pressions for the fusion rules. it turns out that they can be expressed through suitable weight
multiplicities in the following convenient form:

n+ = 1

|w | xw1,w2w

(w1) (w2) xl

mult()

w1(+)+w2(+)(k+g) .

(3.14)

here w is the weyl group of g and  its sign function, and the sum over  extends over the
coroot lattice l of g. the relation (3.14) can be derived by combining the kac--walton formula
for wzw fusion coecients with weyls character formula and weyls integration formula. for
details, see appendix a.

5 in general conformal eld theories, there is no underlying horizontal structure, unlike in wzw models.
it is not clear whether, in general, it is the set of states of lowest conformal weight, or e.g. the quotient (called
special subspace) of h that was introduced in [15], that is relevant in this argument. but already for wzw
models this truncation is not suciently well understood.

13

we are interested in the behavior of the numbers (3.14) in the limit of large k. as for
boundary conditions, this limit must be taken with care. as we have seen, they can be labelled
either by conjugacy classes of group elements h or by the corresponding g-weights . but the
relation (2.7) between these two types of data involves explicitly the level k, so that we have
to decide which of the two is to be kept xed in the limit. in the present context, we keep
the conjugacy classes xed. accordingly we consider two sequences, denoted by k and k, of
weights such that

and y :=

k+
k+g

y :=

k+
k+g

(3.15)

do not depend on k (and exp(2iy) and exp(2iy) are regular elements of the maximal torus
t of g).

in terms of these quantities, in formula (3.14) the multiplicity of the weight

k := (k+g ) (w1(y) + w2(y)  )

(3.16)

appears, with xed y and y (and xed w1, w2 and ). at large k this weight becomes larger
than any non-zero weight of the module h, except when the relation

 w1(y) + w2(y)   = 0

(3.17)

is satised. as a consequence, at large level, the action of element w2 of the weyl group w
of g on the regular element y must coincide with the action of the element (w1, ) of the
corresponding ane weyl group w on y. this, however, is only possible when y = y, and
then it follows that  = 0 as well as w1 = w2. thus the requirement (3.17) has |w | many
solutions. we thus obtain in the limit of innite level

lim
k

n+

k k = y,y mult()

0

.

(3.18)

in view of the relation between fusion rules and annulus coecients we thus learn that, in
the limit of large level, only those pairs of boundary conditions contribute which correspond to
identical conjugacy classes, or in other words, only those open strings survive which start and
end at the same conjugacy class. (for every nite value of k, however, such open strings are
still present.) moreover, in this limit the non-vanishing annulus partition function become

so that (3.13) simplies to

lim
k

ay y(t) = xp

mult()

0 (it/2) ,

lim
k

fk

= mp

mult()
0

h .

(3.19)

(3.20)

this space is indeed nothing but f (g/t ) as appearing in (3.12). our result indicates in
particular that the algebra of boundary operators that do not change the boundary condition
is related to the space of functions on the brane world volume. this should be regarded as
empirical evidence for a statement that is not obvious in itself, since in general non-trivial
vector bundles over the brane can appear as chan--paton bundles, so that boundary operators
might as well be related to sections of non-trivial bundles rather than to functions.

14

in summary, in the limit of innite level those boundary operators that belong to states
in the nite-dimensional subspace h  h of lowest conformal weight furnish a g-module
that is isomorphic to the algebra f (g/t ) of functions on a regular conjugacy class, seen as a
g-module.

so far we have considered the spaces of our interest only as g-modules. but we would
like to equip both f (g) and the space of boundary operators also with an algebra structure.
the operator product algebra of boundary operators, whose structure constants are, as we
have seen, fusing matrices, obeys certain associativity properties. these properties are not
immediately related to ordinary associativity, because the denition of the operator product
involves a limiting procedure.

several proposals have been made recently for the relation between the operator product
algebra of boundary operators and the algebra f (g/t ). an approach based on deformation
quantization was proposed in [16]. the denition of the product then involves xing the
insertion points of the two boundary elds at prescribed positions in parameter space. as the
theory in question is not topological, one is thus forced to introduce arbitrary and non-intrinsic
data  in contrast to the situation with topological theories studied in [17]. another proposal
[18] starts from a restriction of the operator product algebra to elds that correspond to the
states of lowest conformal weight in the ane irreducible modules. this destroys associativity.
the prescription in [18] also allows only for open strings that have both end points on one and
the same brane. this is dicult to reconcile with the fact that (compare formula (3.19) above)
open strings connecting dierent branes can only be ignored in the limit of innite level.

4 symmetry breaking boundary conditions

we now turn to boundary conditions of wzw models that break part of the bulk symmetries.
one important class of consistent boundary conditions can be constructed by prescribing an
automorphism  of the chiral algebra that connects left movers and right movers in the presence
of a boundary. in this case the boundary condition is said to have automorphism type . we
point out, however, that also boundary conditions are known for which no such automorphism
exists. a wzw example is provided by so(5) at level 1; in this example, there is a conformal
embedding with a subalgebra isomorphic to sl(2) at level 10, and one can classify boundary
conditions (see [9]) that preserve only the sl(2) symmetries. however, no general theory for
such boundary conditions without automorphism type has been developped so far, and we will
not consider them in the present paper.

every boundary condition preserves some subalgebra a of the full chiral algebra a; because
of conformal invariance, a contains the virasoro subalgebra of a. for boundary conditions
that do possess an automorphism type , the preserved subalgebra a  a can be characterized
as an orbifold subalgebra, namely as the algebra a = a<> consisting of elements that are xed
under . a theory treating such boundary conditions for arbitrary conformal eld theories has
been developped in [7,8]. in the case of interest to us, the relevant automorphisms of the chiral
algebra are induced by automorphisms  of the horizontal subalgebra g of the untwisted ane
lie algebra g that preserve the compact real form of g. via the construction (1.4) of ane lie
algebras as centrally extended loop algebras, every such automorphism  extends uniquely to

15

an automorphism of g. by a slight abuse of notation we denote this automorphism by , too.
we briey summarize some of the results that we will derive in this section. in the same
way that symmetry preserving boundary conditions are localized at regular conjugacy classes,
the boundary conditions of automorphism type  are localized at the submanifolds

g(h) := {gh(g)1 | g  g} ,
c

(4.1)

to which we refer as twined conjugacy classes, with h  g of the form (2.7). 6 in the case of sl(2)
or, more generally, whenever  is an inner automorphism of g, the twined conjugacy classes are
just tilted versions of ordinary conjugacy classes. more precisely, they can be obtained from
ordinary conjugacy classes by right translation, cads

g (h) = cg(hs) s1.

0 , where t 
0

in the case of outer automorphisms, the dimension of twined conjugacy classes diers from
the dimension of ordinary ones. while ordinary regular conjugacy classes are isomorphic to
the homogeneous space g/t , twined conjugacy classes for outer automorphisms turn out to
be isomorphic to g/t 
is a subtorus of the maximal torus t . for instance, for
g = sl(3) the dimension of regular conjugacy classes is dim(g/t ) = 82 = 6, while for outer
automorphisms twined conjugacy classes have dimension dim(g/t 
0 ) = 81 = 7. the increase in
the dimension actually generalizes a well-known eect in free conformal eld theories, where all
automorphisms are outer, to the non-abelian case. namely, in a at d-dimensional background
the relevant automorphism, which is an element of o(d), determines the dimension of the brane
and a constant eld strength on it. in particular, non-trivial automorphisms can change the
dimension of the brane.

the boundary states b

 are built from twisted boundary blocks b
generalized to

 for symmetry breaking boundary conditions of automorphism type
 [8]. for the latter, the ward identities (2.2) get

 (cid:0)j a
b

n

 1 + 1  (j a

n)(cid:1) = 0 .

(4.2)

to proceed, we need some further information on automorphisms of g that preserve the compact
real form. such automorphisms are in one-to-one correspondence to automorphisms of the
connected and simply connected compact real lie group g whose lie algebra is the compact
real form of g. for each such automorphism  there is a maximal torus t of g that is invariant
under . the complexication t of the lie algebra of t is a cartan subalgebra of g. the torus
t is not necessarily pointwise xed under . the subgroup

t  := {t  t | (t) = t}

(4.3)

of t that is left pointwise xed under  can have several connected components [19, 20]. the
connected component of the identity will be denoted by t 
0 .

the automorphism  of g can be written as the composition of an inner automorphism,

given by the adjoint action ads of some element s  t , with a diagram automorphism :

6 note that when  is an involution, then the twined conjugacy class c 

g(e) of the identity element e of g
is the symmetric space g/g. but because of the shift k 7 k+g the element e  g is not of the form (2.7);
hence this space does not correspond to any boundary condition of the wzw model.

(g) = (sgs1) ;

(4.4)

16

without loss of generality, s can be chosen to be invariant under , (s) = s. let us recall the
denition of a diagram automorphism. any symmetry  of the dynkin diagram of g induces
a permutation of the root generators ei
 that correspond to the simple roots of g with respect
to the cartan subalgebra t, according to

ei

 7 (ei

) := e i
 .

(4.5)

this extends uniquely to an automorphism  of g that preserves the compact real form and
is called a diagram automorphism of g. when  is an inner automorphism then the diagram
automorphism in the decomposition (4.4) is the identity; in general,  accounts for the outer
part of . also note that, for inner automorphisms, t  is the full maximal torus t .

as  leaves a cartan subalgebra t invariant, there is an associated dual map  on the
weight space t of g. applying the condition (4.2) for the zero modes, i.e. n = 0, one sees that
non-zero twisted boundary blocks only exist for symmetric weights, i.e. weights  satisfying
() = . note that relation (4.4) implies that () = 
(), so that in the case of inner
automorphisms all integrable highest weights  contribute.

next, we explain what the coecients in the expansion of the symmetry breaking boundary
states with respect to the twisted boundary blocks are, i.e., what the correct generalization of
the numbers s,/s, appearing in formula (2.4) is. we have seen in (2.5) that for  = id,
these coecients are given by the characters  of g, evaluated at specic elements (2.7) of the
maximal torus t . for general , the analogous numbers have been determined in [21]. for the
present purposes it is most convenient to express them as so-called twining characters [22, 23],
evaluated at specic elements h of t .

let us explain what a twining characters is. to any automorphism  of g we can associate

twisted intertwiners , that is, linear maps

 :

h  h

between g-modules that obey the twisted intertwining property

  r(x) = r((x))  

(4.6)

(4.7)

for all x  g. by schurs lemma, the twisted intertwiners are unique up to a scalar. for
symmetric weights, () = , the twisted intertwiner  is an endomorphism. in this case we
x the normalization of  by requiring that  acts as the identity on the highest weight
vector. for symmetric weights, the twining character 
 is now dened as the generalized
character-valued index



(h) := tr hr(h) .

(4.8)

character formul for twining characters of arbitrary (generalized) kac--moody algebras have
been established in [22, 23].

finally we describe at which group elements g  g the twining character must be evaluated
in order to yield the coecients of the boundary state. the integral g-weights form a lattice
i=1 i(i) that obey i  z for all i.
both the weyl group w and the automorphism  act on this lattice. we will also need a
lattice m w
 of integral symmetric g-weights, i.e., of integral weights

lw consisting of all elements of t of the form  = prank g

 that contains the lattice lw

17

satisfying () =  or, equivalently,  i = i for all i = 1, 2, ... , rank g. the lattice m w
 consists
of symmetric g-weights as well, but we weaken the integrality requirement by imposing only that
nii  z for all i. here ni denotes the length of the corresponding orbit of the dynkin diagram
symmetry . for brevity we call this lattice m w
 the lattice of fractional symmetric weights.
by construction, the lattice m w
 is already determined uniquely by the outer automorphism
class of . in particular, when  is inner, then both m w
 and the symmetric weight lattice lw

just coincide with the ordinary weight lattice lw.

the lattice lw of integral weights of g has as a sublattice the lattice l of integral linear

combinations

 =

rank g

xi=1

i (i)

(4.9)

of simple coroots (i). in analogy to what we did before for weights, we also introduce another
, the lattice of fractional symmetric coroots, by requiring that () =  and nii  z
lattice m 
for all i. we have the inclusions l

 and lw

  m w
.

  m 

on both the lattice m w

 of fractional
symmetric coroots, we have an action of a natural subgroup w  of the weyl group w , namely
of the commutant

 of fractional symmetric weights and the lattice m 

w  := {w  w | w = w} .

(4.10)
the group w  depends only on the diagram part  of ; in particular, for inner automor-
phisms,  is the identity and hence w  = w . for outer automorphisms, w  can be described
explicitly [23] as follows. for the outer automorphisms of a2n, w  is isomorphic to the weyl
group of cn; for a2n+1 to the weyl group of bn+1; for dn to the one of cn1; and for e6 to the
weyl group of f4. finally, for the diagram automorphism of order three of d4 one obtains the
weyl group of g2. (this whole structure allows for a generalization to arbitrary kac--moody
algebras, and the commutant of the weyl group can be shown to be the weyl group of some
other kac--moody algebra, the so-called orbit lie algebra [22].) the group w  also acts on
the xed subgroup t  of the maximal torus t . one can show that the twining characters (4.8)
are invariant under the action of w , which generalizes the invariance of ordinary characters
under the full weyl group w .

to characterize the symmetry breaking boundary conditions, we now choose some fractional

symmetric weight   m w

. it is not hard to see that the group element

h := exp(2iy) ,

(4.11)

where y is the corresponding dual element in the cartan subalgebra, i.e. y := +
k+g , depends
on  only modulo fractional symmetric coroots. moreover, the subgroup w  of the weyl group
w acts freely on the set of all h; there are as many dierent orbits as there are symmetric
integrable weights. accordingly, we should actually regard the label  of a boundary condition
of automorphism type  as an element

  m w

/(w (k+g )m 

) .

(4.12)

a boundary condition is then uniquely characterized by an element of this nite set. letting
 run over this set, we obtain all conformally invariant boundary conditions of automorphism
type .

18

let us list a few other properties of the group element h. it is an element of the xed
0 of the

subgroup t  of the maximal torus, or more precisely, of the connected component t 
identity of t . moreover, it is a regular element of g.

furthermore, it should be mentioned that in the special case of outer automorphisms of
g = a2n, there is an additional subtlety in the description of the twined conjugacy classes. it
arises from the fact [21] that in this case the extension of the diagram automorphism of g to the
ane lie algebra g does not exactly give the diagram automorphism of g. the additional inner
automorphism of g is taken into account by the adjoint action of an appropriate element s of
the maximal torus. namely, denote by x the dual of the weight 1
4((n)+(n+1)), i.e. the cartan
subalgebra element such that (x, x) = 1
4((n)+(n+1))(x) for all x in the cartan subalgebra of
g. then, for outer automorphisms of a2n, formula (4.11) must be generalized to

h := exp(2iy) exp(2ix) .

(4.13)

we are now nally in a position to write down the boundary states explicitly; we have

 = xp 
b

k

(h) b



(4.14)

with p 
formula (2.4).

k the set of symmetric weights in pk. for trivial automorphism type,  = id, we recover

fortunately, all the group theoretical tools that we used in the previous sections have gen-
eralizations to the case of twining characters (for details see appendix b). therefore, once
we have expressed the boundary states in the form (4.14), we are also able to generalize the
statements of sections 2 and 3 to the case of symmetry breaking boundary conditions. for
instance, recall that ordinary characters are class functions,

(ghg1) = (h) ,

(4.15)

i.e. they are constant on conjugacy classes cg (2.10). combining the cyclic invariance of the
trace and the twisted intertwining property (4.7) of the maps , one learns that twining
characters are twined class functions in the sense that

as a consequence, the twined conjugacy classes

(gh (g)1) = 


(h) .

and the twined adjoint action

c
g(h) := {gh(g)1 | g  g}

ad

g :

h 7 g h (g)1

(4.16)

(4.17)

(4.18)

(i.e. the twined version of the adjoint action adg of g  g) will play exactly the roles for
symmetry breaking boundary conditions that ordinary conjugacy classes cg(h) and ordinary
adjoint action adg play in the case of symmetry preserving boundary conditions. we refrain
from presenting details of the calculations; for some hints and for the necessary group theoretical
tools, such as a twined version of weyls integration formula, we refer to appendix b.

19

we summarize a few properties of twined conjugacy classes (for details see appendix b).
every group element g  g can be mapped by a suitable twined adjoint map to t 
0 . for regular
elements h  g, the twined conjugacy class is isomorphic, as a manifold with g-action, to the
homogeneous space

g(h) = g/t 
c
0 .

(4.19)

for outer automorphisms, the following intuition appears to be accurate. the twined con-
jugacy classes are submanifolds of g of higher dimension. to characterize them by the intersec-
tion 7 with elements of the maximal torus, it is therefore sucient to restrict to the symmetric
part t  of the maximal torus (and even to the connected component t 
0 of it). in contrast, for
an inner automorphism  = ads with s  g, the twined conjugacy classes have the same shape
as ordinary conjugacy classes; indeed, they are just obtained by right-translation of ordinary
conjugacy classes:

cads
g (h) = cg(hs) s1 .

(4.20)

the twined analogue of the formula (3.17) requires only the symmetric part of the weight
to vanish (because in the twined analogue of (a.6) only equality of the symmetric parts of the
weights is enforced by the integration). as a consequence, at xed automorphism type  the
large level limit (3.20) of the boundary operators gets replaced by

lim
k

f 
k

= mp

mult()
0,

h ,

(4.21)

where mult()
0, stands for the sum of the dimensions of all weight spaces of h for weights whose
symmetric part vanishes. the limit limk f 
k again yields the algebra of functions on the
brane world volume which in this case is isomorphic, as a manifold, to the homogeneous space
g/t 
0 .

5 non-simply connected group manifolds

in this section we extend the results of the previous two sections to lie group manifolds g
that are not simply connected. before we present our results in more detail, we briey outline
them for the group g = so(3). as is well-known, so(3) is obtained as the quotient of the
simply connected group su(2) by its center z2. we will see that to every symmetry preserving
boundary condition for so(3) we can again associate a conjugacy class of so(3). the latter are
projections of orbits of conjugacy classes of the covering group su(2) under the action of the
center z2. thinking of the group manifold su(2) as the three-sphere s3 with the north pole
being the identity element +11 and the south pole the non-trivial element 11 of the center,
the action of the center is the antipodal map on s3. the conjugacy classes that are related
by the center are then those having the same latitude on s3. those conjugacy classes which
describe boundary conditions must obey the same integrality constraints as in the su(2) theory.
explicitly, at level k the two su(2) conjugacy classes (+)/(k+g ) and (k+)/(k+g )

7 one word of warning is, however, in order. the orbits of twined conjugation intersect t 

0 in several points,
but, in contrast to the standard group theoretical situation, the intersections are not necessarily related by the
action of w . rather, a certain extension w (t 

0 ) of w , to be described in appendix b, is needed [19, 20].

20

give rise to a single boundary condition for so(3). an additional complication arises for the
equatorial conjugacy class  = k/2, which is invariant under the action of the center; it gives
rise to two distinct boundary conditions. also note that all automorphisms of so(3) are inner,
and thus in one-to-one correspondence with automorphisms of su(2). symmetry breaking
boundary conditions of so(3) therefore correspond to tilted so(3) conjugacy classes.

this picture is reminiscent of the phenomena one encounters in orbifold theories, and indeed
the wzw theory based on the group so(3) can be understood [24,25] as an orbifold of the su(2)
wzw theory. branes of the orbifold theory correspond to symmetric brane congurations in
the covering space; branes at xed point sets give rise to several distinct boundary conditions,
known as fractional branes [26]. we point out, however, the following additional feature that
is revealed by our analysis. namely, in case the orbifold group admits non-trivial two-cocycles,
branes at xed points sets do not necessarily split. to what extent a splitting occurs is controlled
by the cohomology class of the relevant two-cocycles.

let us now describe our results more explicitly. for the time being, we restrict our attention
to boundary conditions that preserve all bulk symmetries. the compact connected simple lie
group g can be written as the quotient of a simply connected, compact and connected universal
covering group g by an appropriate subgroup  of the center of g. there is a natural projection

 :

g  g

(5.1)

whose kernel is the nite group . as a consequence, the wzw theory based on g can be seen
as an orbifold of the theory based on g. (it should be pointed out, however, that the term
orbifold is used in this context in a broader sense than is commonly done in the representation
theoretic formulation of orbifolds in conformal eld theory, compare e.g. to [27].)

it is known [24, 25] that the wzw theory on a non-simply connected group manifold is
described by a non-diagonal modular invariant that can be constructed with the help of simple
currents. the relevant simple currents are in one-to-one correspondence with the elements of
the subgroup  of the center of g. in the most general situation, the non-diagonal modular
invariant in question is obtained by applying a so-called simple current automorphism to a
chiral conformal eld theory that is itself constructed from the original diagonal theory by a
simple current extension [28]. for the sake of simplicity, in the sequel we will discuss only such
conformally invariant boundary conditions for which only one of the two mechanisms, i.e., either
a simple current automorphism or a simple current extension, is present. for g = su(2), both
cases correspond to the non-simply connected quotient so(3) = su(2)/z2; the former arises for
levels of the form k = 2 mod 4z, where one deals with a modular invariant of dodd-type, while
the latter appears for levels k = 0 mod 4z and corresponds a modular invariant of deven-type.
we rst consider simple current extensions. we can then invoke the general result that
boundary conditions preserving all bulk symmetries are labelled by the primary elds of the
relevant conformal eld theory, which is now not the wzw theory corresponding to g, but the
conformal eld theory that is obtained from it by the simple current extension. this extended
theory can be described as follows [29]. its primary elds correspond to certain orbits of the
action of  on the primary elds of the unextended theory. but only a certain subset of orbits is
allowed, e.g. for g = so(3) only those that correspond to integer spin highest weights. we will
see later, however, that the other orbits describe conformally invariant boundary conditions as

21

well. those boundary conditions do not preserve all symmetries of the extended chiral algebra,
but they still preserve all symmetries of the chiral algebra for the g-theory.

we also must account for the fact that the action of  on the set of orbits is not necessarily
free. 8 when it is not free, then there are several distinct primary elds associated to the same
orbit. for determining the number of primaries coming from such an orbit , one must take into
account the fact that the action of the simple current group is in general only projective; an
algorithm for solving this problem has been developped in [29]. we summarize these ndings
in the statement that the boundary conditions of the wzw theory based on g correspond to
orbits of conjugacy classes of g under the action of , with multiplicities when this action is
not free.

next, we study the case of automorphism modular invariants. for this situation the bound-
ary conditions that preserve all bulk symmetries have been found in [12] for g = su(2) and
in [10] for the general case. they are labelled by orbits of the action of  on primary elds,
or, equivalently, on conjugacy classes. again, when this action is not free, then there are sev-
eral inequivalent boundary conditions associated to the same orbit. on disks with boundary
conditions that come from the same orbit, bulk elds in the untwisted sector possess identical
one-point functions, but the one-point functions of bulk elds in the twisted sector are dierent
for dierent boundary conditions of this type. they dier in sign, and the absolute values are
controlled by the matrices sj that describe the modular s-transformation of one-point chiral
blocks on the torus with insertion of the relevant simple currents j [10].

to provide a geometrical interpretation of these results, we rst relate conjugacy classes of
the group g to conjugacy classes of its covering group g. the conjugacy class cg(h) of an
element h  g in the non-simply connected group g can be written as the image under the map
 (5.1) of several conjugacy classes c g of the universal covering group g. we claim that

1(cg(h)) = [

c g(h) ,

(5.2)

where h  g is any a lift of h, i.e. (h) = h. to see that the set on the right hand side of (5.2)
is contained in the set on the left hand side, we note that its elements are of the form g h g1
for some g  g and some   . further, we have

(g h g1) = (g) (h) (g1) = ghg1

(5.3)

where g is the projection (g); since ghg1 lies in cg(h), indeed g h g1 is contained in the
left hand side of (5.2). conversely, assume that h  g is conjugate to h  g, which means
that ghg1 = h for some g  g. there exists a g  g such that (g) = g, and every element of
1(ghg1) is of the form (1g) (2h) (3g1) for suitable elements 1, 2, 3  . using that the
i are central in g, this means that 1(h) lies in the set on the right hand side of (5.2).

let us now consider those conjugacy classes which are left invariant by some subgroup  of
. (for example, the group manifold g = su(2) is a three-sphere s3, and the regular conjugacy
classes are isomorphic to spheres s2 of xed latitude; thus there is a single conjugacy class
that is xed by the action of the center z2 of g, namely the equatorial conjugacy class. at
8 while the (left or right) action of  on individual group elements is obviously free, the action on conjugacy

classes can be non-free, since h and h with    can belong to the same conjugacy class.

22

level k, it corresponds to the weight  = k/2 that is a xed point with respect to fusion with
the non-trivial simple current of the sl(2) wzw theory.) the nite subgroup  acts freely
on such an invariant conjugacy class c. therefore the space f (c) of functions on c can be
decomposed into eigenspaces under the action of . in the simplest case, the subspaces just
consist of odd and even functions, respectively. in general, the decomposition reads

f (c) = m 

f(c) ,

(5.4)

where the eigenvalues  are given by characters of .

it follows that the boundary conditions for non-simply connected groups g can be described
by conjugacy classes of g itself, with the important subtlety that those conjugacy classes which
are invariant under the action of the group  give rise to several distinct boundary conditions.
our analysis reproduces, in particular, the following familiar features of d-branes on orbifold
spaces. brane congurations on the original space g that are symmetric under the action of 
give rise to boundary conditions in the quotient g. individual branes that are invariant under
a subgroup  of the orbifold group  yield several boundary conditions which dier in the
contribution from the twisted sector; the coecients in their boundary states are reduced by a
common factor, which is precisely the eect of fractional branes [26].

we can also describe the analogue of the decomposition (5.4) of functions on invariant
branes for boundary operators. again, we discuss simple current extensions and automorphisms
separately. in the case of automorphisms, it was shown in [10] that the annulus multiplicities are
given by the rank of the sub-vector bundle of chiral blocks with denite parity under the simple
current automorphism. in the case of simple current extensions, the annulus multiplicities are,
according to [4], fusion rules of the g-theory. moreover, general results [29] on the fusion rules
of a simple current extension show that the fusion rules of the extended theory  that is, in our
case, of the g-theory  are given by sub-bundles of denite parity as well. just like for simply
connected groups, our analysis therefore conrms the general idea that the algebra of boundary
operators should be a quantization of the algebra of functions on the brane world volume.

we also would like to point out one important subtlety in the analysis of invariant orbits.
the exact analysis [7] reveals that not all invariant orbits necessarily split o and give rise
to several boundary conditions. rather, it can happen that the action of the stabilizer of the
orbifold group in the underlying orbifold construction is only projective, and in this case even
an invariant conjugacy class can give rise to only a single boundary condition. an example is
given by g = spin(8)/z2z2; at level 2, there is a single conjugacy class that is xed under ,
and yet, due to the appearance of a genuine untwisted stabilizer [29], it gives rise to a single
conformally invariant boundary condition. for more details, we refer to [8].

we proceed to briey discussing some aspects of symmetry breaking boundary conditions
for wzw theories on non-simply connected group manifolds. we rst discuss which automor-
phisms can be used. while every automorphism of g that preserves the compact real form
gives rise to an automorphism of the universal covering group g, such automorphisms do not
necessarily descend to the quotient group g. rather, every automorphism of g restricts to
an automorphism of the center z( g) of g; for an inner automorphism this restriction is the
identity. the automorphisms of g that descend to automorphisms of g = g/ are precisely
those that map  to itself. notice that the group of inner automorphisms of g and g coin-

23

cide; in both cases this group is equal to the adjoint group g/z( g) = g/z(g). the symmetry
breaking boundary conditions for non-simply connected group manifolds that come from auto-
morphisms are therefore related to twined conjugacy classes of g in much the same way as in
the simply connected case, with the same subtleties arising for twined conjugacy classes that
are left invariant by some element of the center.

we nally remark that in the case of extensions, such as those for a1 at level k = 0 mod
4z, another type of symmetry breaking boundary condition exists for the g-theory, namely
boundary conditions which only preserve the symmetries of the unextended theory, i.e. of the
g-theory. these come from automorphisms of the extended chiral algebra that act as the
identity on the unextended one. it has been demonstrated [7] that such boundary conditions
are labelled by g-primaries as well. as already mentioned, they correspond to those -orbits
of conjugacy classes of g that are projected out in the g theory. for g = so(3), for instance,
they are obtained by projection from conjugacy classes of su(2) that are related to half-integer
spin highest weights. we can therefore describe also this type of boundary conditions by orbits
of g-conjugacy classes which by (5.2) project, in turn, to g-conjugacy classes.

acknowledgement
we would like to thank a. lerda, k. gawedzki, o. grandjean, and b. pedrini for stimulating discus-
sions.

24

a fusion rules

in this appendix derive the relation (3.14) between fusion rule coecients and weight multi-
plicities. we start with the observation that a character can, on one hand, be written in terms
of weight multiplicities

(h) = x

m()

 e(h) ,

and on the other hand can be expressed in terms of weyls character formula as

(h) = x 1(h) xww

(w) ew(+)(h) .

here the sum is over the weyl group w of g,  is the sign function on w , and

x(h) := e(h)y>0

(1  e(h))

(a.1)

(a.2)

(a.3)

is the well-known expression for the denominator. (up to an exponential e+, x 1 is just the
character of the corresponding verma module of highest weight .)



next we recall the kac--walton formula [30, 31] for wzw fusion rules.

it expresses the
of the ane weyl group
consists by denition of those elements of w that map the fundamental weyl alcove
furnishes a distinguished set
is not a group. the representatives can be

fusion coecients n as an alternating sum over a certain subset w
w . w

to some alcove in the fundamental weyl chamber. the set w
of representatives for the coset w /w , but w
characterized by the fact that they have minimal length. the kac--walton rule yields





n+ = x


w


w

(w) lw



(+),+,

(a.4)



where lw
of the three g-modules hw
of an integral over the corresponding characters as

()+ is the dimension of the space of singlets in the tensor product hw

()  h+  h
(), h+ and h. this dimension, in turn, can be expressed in terms





lw



(+),+, = zg
|w | zt
= 1

dg 

w

(+)(g) +(g) (g)

dh j(h) 

w

(+)(h) +(h) (h) ,

(a.5)

where in the second line we have used weyls integral formula to reduce the integral to an
integral over a maximal torus t of g.

the next step is to insert the formula (a.5) into the kac-walton rule (a.4) and to recombine
. at the same time, we use the weyl character formula to rewrite
(+) and +(g), while the third character is expressed in terms of weight


the summations over w and w
the characters 

w

25

space multiplicities. we then arrive at

n+ = 1

|w | zt

dh x


w


w

(w) j(h) 

w

(+)(h) +(h) (h)

= 1
|w | xw1,w2w
= 1
|w | xw1,w2w
= 1
|w | xw1,w2w

(w1)(w2) xlzt
(w1)(w2)x xlzt
(w1)(w2) xl

mult()

w1(+)+w2(+)(k+g) ,

dh ew1(+)w2(+)+(k+g)(h) (h)

dh ew1(+)w2(+)+(k+g)(h) mult()

 e(h)

(a.6)

so that we have nally arrived at the relation (3.14). here in the second line we have also used
the following two simple relations. first, the characters of two conjugate modules are related
as

+(h) = (h1) .


(a.7)

second, the jacobian factor j in weyls integration formula can be expressed in terms of x as

j(h) = x(h) x(h1) .

(a.8)

together they allow us to cancel the two weyl denominators against the volume factor j. the
-summation in the third line of (a.6) is over the weight system of h, and in the last line the
integral over the maximal torus t was evaluated explicitly.

b twined conjugation

to investigate the properties of the twined conjugation (4.18), it turns out to be helpful to
relate it to the theory of non-connected lie groups. the non-connected lie groups for which
the connected component of the identity is isomorphic to a given real, compact, connected and
simply connected lie group g can be related to subgroups of the group of automorphisms of the
dynkin diagram of the lie algebra g whose compact real form is the lie algebra of the group
g. (this should not be confused with the relation between non-simply connected groups and
automorphisms of the extended dynkin diagram.) namely, for every subgroup  of diagram
automorphisms of g, one can construct a lie group g with the group of connected components
given by 0( g) =  as the semi-direct product of the lie group g and the nite group .
conversely, if g is any element of a lie group g that is not in the connected component of the
identity, then the adjoint action of g on the lie algebra g is given by an outer automorphism
g and therefore corresponds to a symmetry of the dynkin diagram of g.

the non-trivial connected components of g are, as dierentiable manifolds with metric,
isomorphic to g. we x a connected component g  that corresponds to the element  of
the group of dynkin diagramsymmetries of g. the adjoint action of any element g  g of the
connected component of the identity maps g  to itself. taking any arbitrary element g   g ,

26

we can write every element in g  as hg  with h  g, and we have (g) = g gg1
adjoint action of g  g we then nd

 . for the

adg(hg ) = g h (g)1 g  = ad

g (h) g 

(b.1)

with   g  . we see that, after choosing an origin g  for g , ordinary conjugation by g  g
acts on h like twined conjugation. changing the origin g  changes the relevant automorphism
by an inner automorphism.

now denote by

n (t 

0 ) := {g  g | gt(g)1  t 

0 for all t  t 
0 }

(b.2)

the twined normalizer of the connected component t 
torus t . the quotient

0 in the xed subgroup of the maximal

w (t 

0 ) := n(t 

0 )/t 
0

(b.3)

is called the weyl group of t 
0 ) is the product of the
0 .
subgroup w  of the weyl group that was dened in (4.10) and a nite abelian group (g, ).
moreover, the mapping degree of the mapping

it can be shown [19, 20] that w (t 

q : g/t 
(gt 

0  g

0  t 
0 , t) 7 gt(g)1

(b.4)

is [19, 20] deg q = |w (t 
0 )|. in particular, the mapping degree is positive, so q is surjective.
this, in turn, implies that any group element of g can be mapped a suitable by twined conju-
gation (4.18) into t 
0 , which generalizes the well-known conjugation theorems for the maximal
torus.

the determinant of q can be computed. one nds at the point (1, h) with h  t 
0

det q = |(g, )| |y>0

(1  e2i (h))|2

=: |(g, )|  j (h) ,

(b.5)

where the product is over a set of weights that are constructed from -orbits of positive g-roots
and which can be shown [22] to be isomorphic to the set of positive roots of the so-called orbit
lie algebra that is associated to g and . (recall that w  is isomorphic to the weyl group of
the orbit lie algebra.) application of fubinis theorem then yields the twined generalization

zg

dg f (g) = 1

|w | zt 

0

dh j (h)(zg/t 

0

d(gt 

0 ) f (gt(g)1))

(b.6)

of weyls integration formula. here dg, dh and d(gt 
g and t 
is particularly useful for twined class functions  (see (4.16)), for which it reduces to

0 ) are the haar measures on the lie groups
0 , respectively. obviously, the integration formula

0 and on the homogeneous space g/t 

zg

dg (g) = 1

|w | zt 

0

dh j (h) (h) .

(b.7)

27

references

[1] j. frohlich and k. gawedzki, in: mathematical quantum theory i: field theory and many body

theory, j. feldman et al., eds. (american mathematical society, providence 1994), p. 57

[2] p. di vecchia, m. frau, i. pesando, s. sciuto, a. lerda, and r. russo, classical p-branes from

boundary state, nucl. phys. b 507 (1997) 259

[3] j. fuchs and c. schweigert, branes: from free elds to general backgrounds, nucl. phys. b 530

(1998) 99

[4] j.l. cardy, boundary conditions, fusion rules and the verlinde formula, nucl. phys. b 324 (1989)

581

[5] a.yu. alekseev and v. schomerus, d-branes in the wzw model, phys. rev. d 60 (1999) 1901

[6] k. gawedzki, conformal eld theory: a case study, preprint hep-th/9904145

[7] j. fuchs and c. schweigert, symmetry breaking boundaries i. general theory, preprint hep-

th/9902132, nucl. phys. b, in press

[8] j. fuchs and c. schweigert, symmetry breaking boundaries ii. more structure, examples, preprint

hep-th/9909025

[9] r.e. behrend, p.a. pearce, v.b. petkova, and j.-b. zuber, boundary conditions in rational

conformal eld theories, preprint hep-th/9908036

[10] j. fuchs and c. schweigert, a classifying algebra for boundary conditions, phys. lett. b 414

(1997) 251

[11] d.c. lewellen, sewing constraints for conformal eld theories on surfaces with boundaries, nucl.

phys. b 372 (1992) 654

[12] g. pradisi, a. sagnotti, and ya.s. stanev, completeness conditions for boundary operators in

2d conformal eld theory, phys. lett. b 381 (1996) 97

[13] j. fuchs, a.ch. ganchev, k. szlachanyi, and p. vecsernyes, s4-symmetry of 6j-symbols and

frobenius--schur indicators in rigid monoidal c -categories, j. math. phys. 40 (1999) 408

[14] i. runkel, boundary structure constants for the a-series virasoro minimal models, nucl. phys.

b 549 (1999) 563

[15] w. nahm, quasi-rational fusion products, int. j. mod. phys. b 8 (1994) 3693

[16] h. garca-compean and j.f. plebanski, d-branes on group manifolds and deformation quanti-

zation, preprint hep-th/9907183

[17] a.s. cattaneo and g. felder, a path integral approach to the kontsevich quantization formula,

preprint math.qa/9902090

[18] a.yu. alekseev, a. recknagel, and v. schomerus, noncommutative world volume geometries:

branes on su(2) and fuzzy spheres, j. high energy phys. 9909 (1999) 23

[19] r. wendt, eine verallgemeinerung der weylschen charakterformel, diploma thesis (hamburg,

march 1998)

[20] r. wendt, weyls character formula for non-connected lie groups and orbital theory for twisted

ane lie algebras, preprint math.rt/990959

28

[21] l. birke, j. fuchs, and c. schweigert, symmetry breaking boundary conditions and wzw orb-

ifolds, preprint hep-th/9905038, to appear in adv. theor. math. phys.

[22] j. fuchs, a.n. schellekens, and c. schweigert, from dynkin diagram symmetries to xed point

structures, commun. math. phys. 180 (1996) 39

[23] j. fuchs, u. ray, and c. schweigert, some automorphisms of generalized kac--moody algebras,

j. algebra 191 (1997) 518

[24] g. felder, k. gawedzki, and a. kupiainen, spectra of wess--zumino--witten models with arbi-

trary simple groups, commun. math. phys. 117 (1988) 127

[25] g. felder, k. gawedzki, and a. kupiainen, the spectrum of wess--zumino--witten models, nucl.

phys. b 299 (1988) 355

[26] d.-e. diaconescu, m.r. douglas, and j. gomis, fractional branes and wrapped branes, j. high

energy phys. 98-02 (1998) 013

[27] r. dijkgraaf, c. vafa, e. verlinde, and h. verlinde, the operator algebra of orbifold models,

commun. math. phys. 123 (1989) 485

[28] a.n. schellekens and s. yankielowicz, simple currents, modular invariants, and xed points, int.

j. mod. phys. a 5 (1990) 2903

[29] j. fuchs, a.n. schellekens, and c. schweigert, a matrix s for all simple current extensions, nucl.

phys. b 473 (1996) 323

[30] v.g. kac, innite-dimensional lie algebras, third edition (cambridge university press, cam-

bridge 1990)

[31] m. walton, fusion rules in wess--zumino--witten models, nucl. phys. b 340 (1990) 777; algo-
rithm for wzw fusion rules: a proof, phys. lett. b 241 (1990) 365 [ibid. 244 (1990) 580, erratum];
p. furlan, a.ch. ganchev, and v.b. petkova, quantum groups and fusion rules multiplicities,
nucl. phys. b 343 (1990) 205;
j. fuchs and p. van driel, wzw fusion rules, quantum groups, and the modular matrix s, nucl.
phys. b 346 (1990) 632

29

