9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
2
2

 

 
 

1
v
3
6
1
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

d-branes in group manifolds

sonia stanciu

abstract. in this paper we re-examine the geometric interpreta-
tion of gluing conditions in wzw models and the possible d-brane
congurations that they give rise to. we show how the boundary
conditions are encoded in the gluing conditions imposed on the chi-
ral currents. we analyse two special classes of gluing conditions:
the rst, which preserves the ane symmetry of the bulk the-
ory, describes d-branes whose worldvolumes are given by twisted
conjugacy classes; the second class describes congurations which
include subgroups and cosets.

contents

introduction

1.
note added in proof
2. boundary conditions and boundary states in at space
closed string
open string
3. gluing conditions and boundary states in group manifolds
closed string
open string
4. d-branes on group manifolds in the open string sector
5. type-d gluing conditions
6. type-n gluing conditions
7. conclusions and outlook
acknowledgements
appendix: (twisted) conjugacy classes
references

1
4
4
5
6
8
9
10
11
13
16
19
21
21
22

1. introduction

d-branes in group manifolds have received recently a great deal of
interest, as they provide an ideal laboratory for the study of the intri-
cacies related to the description of d-branes in general curved back-
grounds. there is already an extensive amount of literature devoted to
the analysis of d-branes in exact string backgrounds (see, for instance,
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]), where by using the methods of cft one can

date: july 24, 2013.
imperial/tp/98-99/59.

1

2

obtain a microscopic description of various d-brane congurations in
terms of conformally invariant boundary states and/or boundary con-
ditions. however the geometric interpretation of these congurations
proves to be a rather dicult problem, a fact reected, in particular, in
a number of partially contradicting results which appeared in the past
few years (e.g.
[3, 7, 8, 9]). this has generated a certain controversy
in the literature surrounding the very denition and meaning of the
neumann and dirichlet boundary conditions in curved backgrounds,
particularly in the case of a group manifold.

the aim of these notes is twofold. on the one hand, we describe an
improved approach to the geometric interpretation of d-branes cong-
urations in group manifolds obtained via the boundary state approach;
in this sense, this work is a direct continuation of [4, 7, 9]. some of the
results which we derive here were already used in [9] to determine the
possible d-branes in the type iib string background on ads3  s3  t 4
with an ns b eld. here, however, we describe this method in detail
and in as much generality as possible at the moment. on the other
hand, in the process of doing this, we hope to clarify some discrepan-
cies that can be found in the literature. in order to do this we nd it
useful to start by reviewing, in section 2, the well-understood case of
the free bosonic string and then work our way up to the more subtle
case of group manifolds. also, in order to be able to directly compare
dierent results we will work, when necessary, both in the closed and
in the open string pictures.

the central question in the geometric interpretation of a d-brane
conguration obtained via the boundary state approach is nding the
correct generalisation of the neumann and dirichlet boundary condi-
tions of the free case. as is well-known, boundary conditions in a free
bosonic theory are of the form

x (z) = r

 x (z) .

where the information about the neumann and dirichlet directions is
encoded in the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the constant matrix r.
on the other hand, at the quantum level, the above conditions are to be
understood as gluing conditions imposed on the chiral currents x(z)
and x(z), which are the free elds in terms of which the corresponding
conformal eld theory is dened. these conditions thus play a crucial
role in controlling the conformal invariance of the resulting d-brane
conguration.

this type of conditions can further be applied to the study of bound-
ary states in at backgrounds, or in calabi-yau manifolds [1, 2]. in
this latter case it has been shown that the geometry of the correspond-
ing d-branes, in the large volume limit, is encoded in the matrix of
boundary conditions.

3

if we want to study d-branes in curved backgrounds we are faced
with two possible avenues (assuming that we are dealing with back-
grounds for which we know both the cft and the corresponding sigma
model). we can try to impose gluing conditions on the chiral elds in
terms of which the cft is dened (and then interpret them geometri-
cally) or, alternatively, we can derive the boundary conditions from the
sigma model action (and then impose the requirement of conformal in-
variance). however, since the basic requirement of the boundary state
approach is the conformal invariance1 of the resulting d-brane cong-
uration, it appears natural to generalise the above gluing conditions in
such a way that conformal invariance remains under control.

in the particular case of strings moving on a group manifold, which
are described by the wzw model, the elds in terms of which the
conformal eld theory is realised are the ane currents. therefore the
natural nonabelian generalisation of the gluing conditions of the free
bosonic string takes the form

ja(z) = rb

a jb(z) .

this approach, which is described in section 3, does however create a
problem when it comes to the geometric interpretation of the solutions
to these gluing conditions. the reason is the following.
in the at
space case the gluing conditions on the free elds x  and x  are,
at the same time, boundary conditions taking values in the tangent
space of the target manifold at a given but otherwise arbitrary point.
by contrast, the nonabelian gluing conditions on the chiral currents
of the wzw theory are not, strictly speaking, boundary conditions;
rather, since the currents themselves are lie algebra-valued objects,
they take values in the tangent space to the group manifold at the
identity. it therefore follows that in order to interpret geometrically
the algebraic gluing conditions imposed on the ane currents we must
rst of all translate them into boundary conditions.
in section 4
we show how this is achieved. it turns out that, unlike the at space
case, the boundary conditions in a group manifold are point dependent,
and this fact is essentially due to the nonabelian nature of the target
manifold.

the simplest and, in some sense, the most natural class of gluing
conditions is the one characterised by the fact that it preserves the
innite-dimensional symmetry of the current algebra. in section 5 we
analyse in detail this type of gluing conditions, which we will refer to
as type-d. there we show that type-d gluing conditions dened by an

1this is not the only condition one must impose in order to get obtain a physically
acceptable d-brane spectrum, as it was pointed out recently in [10]. here, however,
we will see that at least in the case of group manifolds, already the conditions
imposed independent of a detailed knowledge of the spectrum of the quantum theory
restrict signicantly the possible d-brane congurations (that is, their geometry).

4

inner automorphism describe odd-dimensional d-branes whose world-
volumes are conjugacy classes translated by a certain group element.
in the most general case, the d-branes worldvolumes describe a gener-
alised version of conjugacy classes which we briey discuss.

in section 6 we analyse a dierent yet closely related type of gluing
conditions, which we call type-n. they do not preserve the current
algebra of the bulk theory and, generically, they give rise to more com-
plicated d-brane congurations for which we lack, at the moment, a
full picture. however we are able to discuss in detail a particular ex-
ample, for which we identify solutions including subgroups, cosets and
open submanifolds of the same dimension as the target manifold.

finally, in the appendix we collect a few useful facts about (twisted)

conjugacy classes.

note added in proof

while this paper was in its nal stages a paper [11] appeared where
the same problem of d-branes in wzw models is analysed. while
there is a certain overlap between some of the results, the two papers
use signicantly dierent techniques, and the exact relation between
them still remains to be claried.

2. boundary conditions and boundary states in flat space

the aim of this section is to review a few well-known facts about
d-branes in a at string background, in order to set the stage for the
discussion of the group manifold case later on.

d-branes can be studied in a variety of ways: by using the techniques
of perturbative string theory, they can be described either in terms
of boundary conditions of open strings or as boundary states in the
closed string sector. boundary conditions were initially derived from
the vanishing of the boundary term in the action of the free string (or,
more generally, in the case of a at background). a neumann boundary
condition imposed in a certain direction ensures that there is no ow
of momentum through the boundary of the string worldsheet, that is

nx ||(cid:12)(cid:12) = 0 .

here, the subscript n indicates the direction normal to the boundary
of the worldsheet , whereas the superscript || denotes the direction
parallel to the d-brane worldvolume. by contrast, a dirichlet boundary
condition in a given direction constrains the boundary of the string
worldsheet to lie within the hyperplane normal to that direction. this
implies the following condition

tx (cid:12)(cid:12) = 0 ,

where the subscript t refers to the direction tangent to the boundary of
the string worldsheet and  denotes the component of the background
eld normal to the worldvolume of the d-brane.

for what follows it will prove useful to write down the neumann and
dirichlet conditions explicitly, both in the closed and in the open string
pictures. for this we need the mode expansion of the free bosonic string

5

x (,  ) = x 

l( + ) + x 

r(  ) ,

where

+x 

l = xnz

n ein( +) ,


x 

r = xnz

n ein( ) ,


with the standard notation  =   . the canonical commutation
relations for the modes read
n, 
n, 
n, 

m] = n m+n,0  ,
m] = n m+n,0  ,
m] = 0 .

[
[
[

(1)

let us now consider the open and the closed string pictures sepa-

rately.

closed string. the boundary of the worldsheet in this case is taken
to be at  = 0. a neumann boundary condition in a given direction
say, x , is therefore given by the condition
 x | =0 = 0 .

by contrast, a dirichlet boundary condition in the same direction reads

x | =0 = 0 .

one can easily work out these conditions in terms of the modes and
obtain

n + 

n  


n = 0 ,
n = 0 .

(n)

(d)

notice that the above conditions on the modes are not to be taken
as operatorial relations on the quantum elds. in fact, one can easily
check that they do not yield automorphisms of the oscillator algebra
(1). rather, they are only satised on certain boundary states |bi,
which are characterised by the very property that they satisfy a certain
boundary condition, that is
(
(

n)|bi = 0 ,
n)|bi = 0 ,

n + 
n  

(d)

(n)

in a given direction x .

a boundary state |bi is specied by a complete set of boundary
conditions, for all the directions of the target manifold. a convenient
way of encoding this information is to introduce a set of linear operators

6

n} which annihilate |bi; they are given by 

{
n, depending
on whether we have a neumann or a dirichlet boundary condition in
the direction x . consistency then requires that a boundary state
which is annihilated by two operators, say 
m, must also be
annihilated by their commutator, that is

n and 

n = 

n  

[

n, 

m]|bi = 0 .

one can easily check that this is always satised, in other words, we
do not have any restriction on the choice of neumann and dirichlet
conditions that we impose.

since in practice we usually work in light-cone coordinates on the
cylinder or on the complex plane, it is useful to write down the neu-
mann and dirichlet boundary conditions in all these coordinates. this
is a straightforward exercise, and the results are summarised in the
left column of table 1. notice in particular that if we pass from the
cylinder worldsheet to the annulus in the complex plane, by dening
z = ei( +) and z = ei( ), then the boundary of the worldsheet is at
zz = 1.

the most important requirement that a boundary state must satisfy
is conformal invariance.
in the case of a bosonic theory this means
that the holomorphic and antiholomorphic sectors satisfy the following
condition at the boundary

(cid:0)t(z)  t(z)(cid:1) |bi = 0 ,

where, in this case, t = x  x. it is easy to see that any bound-
ary state characterised by an arbitrary combination of neumann and
dirichlet conditions does satisfy the above condition and therefore pre-
serves conformal invariance.

this set-up can be slightly generalised by introducing a matrix r

dening a boundary state of the form

(

n + r

 

n)|bi = 0 .

(2)

in this case the linear operators which annihilate |bi are given by

n = 
n, and the corresponding consistency conditions imply
that the matrix r must preserve the at metric of the target space

n +r

 

rt r =  .

open string. the boundary of the string worldsheet it is now at  =
0. the neumann boundary condition in the direction x  is therefore
given now by

whereas the dirichlet boundary condition reads

x |=0 = 0 ,

 x |=0 = 0 .

closed string

open string

7

 x | =0 = 0

x | =0 = 0

(

n  

n)|bi = 0

x |=0 = 0

 x |=0 = 0


n  

n = 0

(+x   x )|bi = 0

(+x   x )|=0 = 0

(z2x   x )|bi = 0

(x   x )(cid:12)(cid:12)z=z = 0
(x dz  x dz)|bi = 0 (x dz  x dz)(cid:12)(cid:12)z=z = 0

table 1. the neumann and dirichlet boundary condi-
tions for free elds.(in each row, the rst relation is a
neumann condition, whereas the second one is a dirich-
let condition.)

once again, we can write these conditions in terms of the modes, thus
obtaining


n  

n + 

n = 0 ,
n = 0 .

(n)

(d)

however in this case, by contrast to the closed string picture, both the
neumann and dirichlet boundary conditions preserve the algebra of
the modes.

for the sake of completeness, one can write the neumann and dirich-
let boundary conditions in light-cone coordinates or in the complex
plane, where the boundary of the worldsheet is this time at z = z. the
results can be found in the right column of table 1.

a short glance at the table reveals the basic rule of thumb that any
particular boundary condition in the closed string picture diers by a
relative minus sign from the corresponding open string condition. since
this may prove rather confusing in practice, it is maybe worth keeping
in mind that the neumann and dirichlet boundary conditions, written
in terms of the invariant geometric objects, xdz and xdz, have the
same form in the closed and open string cases.

also in this case we can dene generalised boundary conditions for

the open string by introducing a matrix r satisfying

(3)

the requirement of conformal invariance implies that the matrix r
must preserve the metric  of the target manifold. moreover, we have

(x   r

 x )(cid:12)(cid:12)z=z = 0 .

8

the option of imposing that the free eld algebra be preserved; however
in this case we do not obtain any additional condition on r.

3. gluing conditions and boundary states in group

manifolds

strings moving on a group manifold are described using the wzw
model [12, 13], which is a solvable theory, much in the same way as
a free theory is. the data necessary to describe such an exact string
background is a lie group g together with an bi-invariant metric, in
terms of which the corresponding wzw action is given by

i[g] = z

hg1g, g1 gi + 1

6 zb

hg1dg, [g1dg, g1dg]i ,

where the eld g is a map from a closed orientable riemann surface 
to the group g. we denote by g the corresponding lie algebra, and
we choose for it a basis of generators {ta}. the invariant metric on g
has components gab  hta, tbi. the exact conformal invariance of this
model is based, as is well known, on its innite-dimensional symmetry
group g(z)  g(z) characterised by the conserved currents

j(z) = gg1 ,

j(z) = g1 g ,

(4)

which are the natural dynamical variable in this case. if we introduce
the mode expansions for the two currents

ja(z) = xnz

jan zn1 ,

ja(z) = xnz

jan zn1 ,

we can write down the ane lie algebra that they satisfy

[jan, jbm] = fab
[ jan, jbm] = fab
[jan, jbm] = 0 .

cjc n+m + n n+m,0 gab ,
c jc n+m + n n+m,0gab ,

(5)

it is important to stress that the relative sign in the denition (4) of
the two chiral currents is not optional: this denition ensures that the
two currents satisfy the same chiral algebra.

the corresponding cft is then described by the energy-momentum

tensor

t(z) = ab(jajb)(z) ,

(6)

where ab are components of the inverse of the following invariant
metric with the components given by  = 2g + , where  is the
killing form of g [14, 15, 16]. the central charge of this cft is given
by c = dim g  abab. in the particular case of a simple lie group
(algebra), the metric  is a multiple of the killing form, say  = .
the usual formulas are then recovered by taking  = (x + 2g)/2g,
with g the dual coxeter number and x the level.

9

so far most attempts to the study of d-branes in group manifolds and
coset spaces have tried to exploit the similarities of the wzw model
with a free theory (the solvability, the innite-dimensional symmetry,
the exact conformal invariance), in order to construct some kind of
nonabelian generalisation of the boundary conditions and boundary
states in at space. in other words, one treats the group manifold case
as a generalisation of the at space case. this means that in the special
case of an abelian group one should recover the known results from the
at space case. in particular, the chiral currents of the wzw theory
are the nonabelian generalisation of the free bosonic currents, and the
ane algebra (5) satised by these currents is the natural nonabelian
generalisation of the algebra satised by the free bosonic elds (1).

in this framework, it appears natural to consider the nonabelian
generalisation of the neumann and dirichlet conditions written down
in the previous section; we will therefore briey discuss them below.
however, we should stress from the very beginning that these gluing
conditions for the chiral currents generically are not the same as the
neumann and dirichlet boundary conditions for a string moving in a
group manifold. the detailed derivation of the boundary conditions
from the algebraic gluing conditions will follow in the next section. we
hope however that the following discussion will shed some light on a
few controversial statements in the literature.

closed string. since the nonabelian analogues of x(z) and x(z)
are ja(z) and ja(z), respectively, one can immediately generalise the
neumann and dirichlet conditions for free elds written in terms of the
one-forms in the last row in table 1. one thus obtains

(ja(z)dz + ja(z)dz)|bi = 0 ,
(ja(z)dz  ja(z)dz)|bi = 0 .

(n)

(d)

for obvious reasons, as well as for convenience, we will refer to the
above conditions as neumann and dirichlet gluing conditions, re-
spectively. in terms of the modes, these yield the following

(jan  ja n)|bi = 0 ,
(jan + ja n)|bi = 0 .

(n)

(d)

notice that these conditions have an opposite relative sign with respect
to the ones written down in [3] (see also [17]). this discrepancy however
is not related to the geometric interpretation of these gluing conditions,
as implied in [8], but rather lies in the denition of the conserved
currents with which one starts [18]. it must be said that the relative
minus sign in the denition of the chiral currents (4) is often neglected
in the literature without major consequences; nevertheless, whenever
the relation between the holomorphic and the antiholomorphic sectors
of the theory comes into play, this sign becomes crucial.

10

alternatively, we can write these gluing conditions on the cylinder

where, by using the mode expansion

ja(w) = xnz

jan enw ,

ja( w) = xnz

jan en w ,

and the fact that the boundary is at w =  w, we obtain

(ja(w)  ja( w))|bi = 0 ,
(ja(w) + ja( w))|bi = 0 .

(n)

(d)

the same consistency conditions as in the case of the free theory yield
in this case nontrivial restrictions on the type of gluing conditions we
can impose in dierent directions. indeed, if we impose the same type of
gluing conditions in two dierent directions, say a and b, we must then
have dirichlet gluing conditions in the directions c of non-vanishing
fab

c since
[jan  ja n, jbm  jb m]|bi = fab

c(jc n+m + jc (n+m))|bi .

in particular, we cannot impose neumann gluing conditions in all
directions unless the group is abelian. moreover, from

[jan + ja n, jbm  jb m]|bi =fab

c(jc n+m  jc (n+m))|bi

+ 2knn+m,0 gab|bi ,

we deduce that we can only have dierent gluing conditions in or-
thogonal directions (that is, for which the corresponding element gab
vanishes), and in that case we must have neumann conditions in the
directions c of non-vanishing fab

c.

open string. in this case the nonabelian generalisation of the neu-
mann and dirichlet gluing conditions reads

(ja(z) + ja(z))(cid:12)(cid:12)z=z = 0 ,
(ja(z)  ja(z))(cid:12)(cid:12)z=z = 0 .

on the modes we obtain

jan + jan = 0 ,
jan  jan = 0 .

(n)

(d)

(n)

(d)

finally, on the cylinder, where the boundary is at w = w, we obtain
the following gluing conditions

(ja(w) + ja( w))(cid:12)(cid:12)w= w = 0 ,
(ja(w)  ja( w))(cid:12)(cid:12)w= w = 0 .

(n)

(d)

we remark that in the open string picture there are no consistency
conditions constraining the allowed gluing conditions. if one however
is interested in preserving the ane symmetry of the bulk theory then
one must keep in mind that, unlike the case of the free open string,
here it is only the dirichlet gluing conditions that preserve the ane

11

algebra. in other words, if we want to preserve the current algebra, we
cannot impose neumann gluing conditions in all directions.

this concludes our discussion of the generalisation of the standard
neumann and dirichlet gluing conditions to the group manifold case.
we can now consider the general case, and from now on we will work
in the open string picture. given a string background described by
a wzw model with target space g we consider the following gluing
conditions, where from now on we are implicitly evaluating both sides
of the condition at the boundary z = z

j(z) = r j(z) ,

(7)

where r is a linear invertible map r : g  g, with r(ta) = tbrb
a, for
any ta in g. the basic requirement imposed on r is that the result-
ing d-brane congurations be conformally invariant. this consistency
condition imposes that the holomorphic and antiholomorphic sectors
agree at the boundary, that is

t(z) = t(z) .

using the expression of the energy momentum tensor (6) we obtain
that the map r must preserve the metric :

rt r =  .

(8)

in the remaining of this paper we will implicitly assume that the matrix
of gluing conditions r satises this condition.

4. d-branes on group manifolds in the open string sector

one of the most subtle issues of this approach is extracting the geo-
metric information from a given set of gluing conditions. the precise
statement of the problem is the following: given a set of gluing con-
ditions (7) for the chiral currents and a xed but otherwise arbitrary
point g in the target group manifold g, nd the possible d-branes
which pass through g and are described by these gluing conditions.

it is clearly desirable to interpret the boundary conditions on group
manifolds in a similar manner with the at space case; after all, the
special case when g is abelian is a at space. however, in spite of the
fact that the gluing conditions (7) have been introduced as the non-
abelian generalisation of (3), there is an important distinction between
them. in the case of a free theory the gluing conditions are formally
identical with the boundary conditions dened in the tangent space of
the target manifold; therefore the corresponding eigenvalues and eigen-
vectors of the matrix r identify the neumann and dirichlet directions.
in the group manifold case the gluing conditions (7) take values in the
tangent space of g at the identity, that is teg  g. this is due to
the fact that the currents j and j are themselves lie algebra valued
objects. hence, in order to extract some geometric information out of
the algebraic gluing conditions we must rst of all translate them into

12

boundary conditions in tgg, and then determine what the neumann
and dirichlet directions are in this case.

let us consider the left- and right-invariant maurercartan forms
on g, which we denote by l, r. we can then use the maps g :
  g to pull these maurercartan forms back on , thus obtaining
gl = g1dg and gr = dg g1, which are g-valued 1-forms that
is, they belong to 1()  g. we therefore see that the holomorphic
current j(,  ) = gg1 takes values in t (1,0)  g, whereas the
antiholomorphic current j(,  ) = g1 g takes values in t (0,1)  g.
in order to obtain from the lie algebra valued gluing condition (7)
a boundary condition taking values in tgg, we need to translate the
chiral currents from t g to t tgg. this is done with the help of
the two well-known maps, obtained from the left- and right-translation
in the group g

(g) : g  tgg ,
(g)x = gx ,

(g) : g  tgg ,
(g)x = xg ,

which send elements of the lie algebra into tangent vectors at the point
g. if we now apply (g) to both sides of the gluing condition (7) we
obtain the following boundary condition in tgg:

g = r(g) g ,

where r(g) is the map r(g) : tgg  tgg, dened as

r(g) = (g)  r  (g)1


.

thus, for any given tangent vector v in tgg, we have r(g)(v ) =
r(g1v )g. first of all we must remark that, by contrast with the
at space case, the matrix of boundary conditions r(g) is not the
same as the matrix of gluing conditions r, and the former is point-
dependent. in general, for an arbitrary group g, r only agrees with r
at the identity (more generally, for any g in the centre). this implies,
in particular, that the identication of the neumann and dirichlet
boundary conditions used in [7] can only nd d-branes which pass
through the identity in the group manifold.

we can now safely identify the neumann and dirichlet directions.
in the same way as in at space, these are determined by the eigen-
values and eigenvectors of the corresponding matrix of boundary con-
ditions, in our case r(g). at a given point g, a dirichlet boundary
condition corresponds to a 1 eigenvalue of r(g), which means that
the directions normal to the worldvolume of the d-brane are spanned
by the corresponding eigenvectors of r(g). all the other eigenvalues
describe neumann boundary conditions and the corresponding eigen-
vectors span the tangent space of the worldvolume of the d-brane.

let us conclude this section by describing an alternative way of de-
riving the boundary conditions in group manifolds, which proves to
be useful in concrete applications. given a particular group manifold

g, we can parametrise it by introducing the coordinates x , with
 = 1, ..., dim g; we also introduce the left- and right-invariant viel-
beins dened by

g1dg = ea

 dx ta ,

dgg1 = ea

 dx ta .

13

these vielbeins are related by ea
b, where a denotes the
adjoint action of the group, gtag1 = ab
atb. using this set-up, one can
show that the gluing conditions (7) give rise to the following boundary
conditions for the component elds x :

 = eb

aa

x  = r(g)



 x  .

here, the matrix of boundary conditions r(g) is given by

r(g) = e1re .

(9)

(10)

the neumann and dirichlet directions are identied in a similar way
as before. moreover, one can see once again that the matrix which
describes the boundary conditions at a given point in the target space
depends on that point, in this case, through the invariant vielbeins.

our analysis so far has not made use of any particular property
that the map r may have.
in the remaining of these notes we will
concentrate on two special classes of gluing conditions, for which a
detailed analysis of the resulting d-brane congurations is possible.

5. type-d gluing conditions

the dening property of this type of gluing conditions is the fact

that the map r is taken to be a lie algebra automorphism, that is

[r(ta), r(tb)] = r([ta, tb]) .

(11)

this class can be thought of as a generalisation of d gluing conditions,
where the identity is replaced by a lie algebra automorphism

ja(z)  rb

a jb(z) = 0 .

(12)

they are in some sense the most natural conditions, in that they pre-
serve the innite-dimensional symmetry of the current algebra. indeed,
from (11) and (8) it follows that r also preserves the metric g and
hence the ane algebra (5).

let us now consider the geometry of the d-brane congurations they
describe. if we start with the simplest case, where r is taken to be the
identity matrix, then the corresponding matrix of boundary conditions
will be given by r(g) =  adg1, and the resulting d-branes can be
identied, as shown in [8], with the conjugacy classes of the group g.
indeed, in this case, provided that the metric g restricts nondegener-
ately to the conjugacy class c of g, the tangent space at g splits into

14

the tangent space to the conjugacy class and its perpendicular comple-
ment, which can be identied with the tangent space to the centraliser
subgroup z of g:

tgg = tgc  tgz with tgc  tgz .

moreover adg1 restricts to the identity on tgz, which means that the
dirichlet directions span tgz. furthermore, the neumann directions
span tgc, and hence the worldvolume of the d-brane can be identied
with c.

as the next step, let us now consider r to be an inner automorphism.
it therefore can be identied with adr, for some group element r, and
consequently the gluing conditions (12) become
gg1 = rg1 gr1 .

(13)

if we introduce a new eld g = gr1, we can write the corresponding
boundary conditions in the following form

g =  adg1 g .

by using the previous argument, applied this time to g, we are lead
to conclude that the corresponding d-brane conguration, which is
described by the eld g, has a worldvolume which lies along the right
translate cr of the conjugacy class of g by the element r. this result
diers from the one obtained in [8], where it was argued that inner
automorphisms, being symmetries of the model, cannot result in d-
brane congurations dierent from the the ones already described by
r = 1. although inner automorphisms are symmetries of the string
background, they are not necessarily symmetries of the theory con-
taining a d-brane. this fact does not constitute a novelty, as d-branes
break some of the bulk symmetries even in at space (e.g., translational
symmetry).

one remark is in order. one can alternatively apply adr1 in both
sides of the gluing condition (13) and obtain, using a similar argument,
that the corresponding d-brane lies along the left-translate rc of the
conjugacy class of g. since however cr = rc, this does not lead to any
ambiguity.

it is interesting to point out that conjugacy classes in groups admit-
ting bi-invariant metrics have always even dimension. indeed, conju-
gacy classes are the image under the exponential map of adjoint orbits
which are dieomorphic to co-adjoint orbits. co-adjoint orbits, on the
other hand, are symplectic manifolds relative to the natural kirillov
kostantsouriau symplectic structure and hence are even-dimensional.
therefore the d-branes whose worldvolumes can be identied with
shifted conjugacy classes have even-dimensional worldvolumes.

we now turn to the case of a general automorphism. we would like to
identify the submanifold n of g that corresponds to the worldvolume
of the d-brane described by (12). provided the metric on g restricts

15

nondegenerately to n, we can split the tangent space tgg into the
tangent space to n and its orthogonal complement:

tgg = tgn  tgn  .

let us consider a given but otherwise arbitrary vector v in tgn . as
we saw in the previous section, any vector v normal, at a point g, to
the worldvolume of the d-brane is an eigenvector of the matrix r(g)
corresponding to an eigenvalue equal to 1. it therefore satises

r(g1v ) = v g1 ,

which in turn implies that

hr(g1v )  v g1, r(x)i = 0 ,

for any element x in the lie algebra. from this relation, by using the
fact that r preserves the metric, as well as the fact that the metric is
bi-invariant, we can deduce that

hv, r(x)g  gxi = 0 .

this relation tells us that the vector wx  r(x)g gx, which belongs
to tgg, is normal to v , for any x. hence wx is tangent to n that is,
to the worldvolume of the d-brane.

if r = 1, then wx would simply be a vector tangent to the conjugacy
class c of g. in general, wx turns out to be tangent to a twisted
conjugacy class, which is dened as follows (for more details, see the
appendix)

where the map r : g  g is dened by

cr = (cid:8)r(h)gh1 | h  g(cid:9) ,

(14)

for t small enough and x any element in the lie algebra.

r(cid:0)etx(cid:1) = etr(x) ,

in order to see that wx is tangent to cr we consider a curve in cr

r(t) = r(h(t))gh1(t) ,

which is dened in terms of a particular curve h(t) in g, characterised
by h(0) = 1 and h(0) = x. this curve passes through g and its tangent
vector at g is nothing but wx

= r(x)g  gx .

dx(t)

dt

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)t=0

hence for any lie algebra element x there exists a tangent vector wx
to the d-brane, which is also tangent to the twisted conjugacy class
cr of g. if we could now show that any tangent vector to the d-brane
is of the form wx, for some x in g, then we would be able to conclude
that the corresponding d-brane can be identied with cr.

16

we know that tgn  is spanned by the dirichlet eigenvectors of r(g).
one can rephrase this by saying that any vector v in tgn  belongs to
the kernel of the following operator

1  (g)  r  (g)1


.

therefore tgn, which is the orthogonal complement of tgn , is noth-
ing but the image of the adjoint of the above operator which is given
by

(cid:0)1  (g)  r  (g)1

 (cid:1) = 1  (g)  r  (g)1

in order to obtain the above relation we used the fact that (g)  r 
(g)1
is an isometry and therefore its adjoint is given by its inverse.

this further implies that any vector w in tgn can be written as

.



w = u  gr1(ug1) ,

for some vector u in tgg. since, moreover, every such vector u in
tgg satises ug1 = r(x), for some lie algebra element x, it follows
that w = r(x)g  gx, for some x. we can therefore conclude that
the worldvolume of the d-brane can be identied with the twisted
conjugacy class cr.

until now we have assumed that the worldvolume of the d-brane
forms a submanifold n of g. in order to check that this is indeed the
case, one must show that the tangent vectors to n satisfy the frobenius
integrability condition, that is, [w1(g), w2(g)] belongs to tgn whenever
w1(g) and w2(g) do. if we compute this bracket explicitly in our case
we obtain

[r(x)g  gx, r(y )g  gy ] = r([xy ])g  g[xy ] ,

where we have used the fact that r is an automorphism. hence d-type
gluing conditions always give rise to d-branes which are submanifolds
of g. this implies, in particular, that such gluing conditions cannot
describe congurations consisting of intersecting d-branes.

notice that in this case we do not necessarily obtain odd-dimensional
d-branes, as the relation between conjugacy classes and co-adjoint or-
bits endowed with a symplectic structure cannot be generalised to the
twisted case.
in fact, in this case, one can nd explicit solutions
describing even-dimensional d-branes [19].

6. type-n gluing conditions

while the particular type of gluing conditions discussed in the pre-
vious section is in some sense the most natural, as it preserves the
current algebra of the bulk theory, it is certainly not the most general.
in this section we consider a dierent type of gluing conditions which
is dened in terms of the lie algebra automorphism (11). this case,

17

however, can be thought of as a generalisation of the neumann gluing
conditions, being dened as follows
ja(z) + rb

a jb(z) = 0 .

(15)

the coecients rb
a are, as before, the matrix elements of the map
r, with r(ta) = tbrb
a, for any ta in g. notice that here, although
the holomorphic and antiholomorphic sectors are related by a met-
ric preserving automorphism, the innite-dimensional symmetry of the
current algebra is not preserved, contrary to a statement made in [7].
in this case we do not yet understand the general picture of the possi-
ble d-brane congurations that one can obtain. for this reason, we will
restrict ourselves to considering a concrete example, which is the case
of the group g = su(2). it is convenient to choose a parametrisation
for su(2)

g = e2t2e1t1e3t3 ,

(16)

where 1, 2, 3 play the role of the spacetime elds, {t1, t2, t3} forms
a basis for su(2), and the brackets are [tatb] = abctc. the left- and
right-invariant vielbeins read

e = 


cos 3
 sin 3

0

cos 1 sin 3 0
cos 1 cos 3 0
1

 sin 1


 ,

e = 


cos 2

0

0 cos 1 sin 2
1

 sin 1

 sin 2 0 cos 1 cos 2


 .

notice, rst of all, that this parametrisation is singular whenever cos 1 =
0. one can in fact show that these singular points give rise to two
s1s inside s3, described by

g2(/2, 2, 3) = e/2y1e(32)y3 .

let us start with the simplest case, r = 1, for which the gluing

conditions read

j(z) =  j (z) .

(17)

this case can be thought of as the nonabelian generalisation of the
at space case where we have neumann boundary conditions in all
directions. as is well-known, in the at space case one obtains d-branes
whose worldvolume lls the whole target; here the possible d-branes
are described by the boundary conditions that (17) give rise to, namely

 = r(g)

  ,

(18)
where r(g) = e1e. if we evaluate the matrix of boundary conditions
at the identity we obtain r(1) = 1, which indicates that we have three
+1 eigenvalues and hence three neumann directions spanning su(2).
in other words, the identity in su(2) belongs to an euclidean d-brane
having a three-dimensional worldvolume. as soon as we move away
from the identity, r will will no longer be 1. in general, r will have

18

one +1 and two complex conjugate eigenvalues. therefore, at generic
points in the group manifold, there will be no 1 eigenvalues and thus
no dirichlet directions. nevertheless, there exist submanifolds of su(2)
where r has at least one -1 eigenvalue; in fact, since det r = 1, it
will necessarily have two such eigenvalues. these submanifolds can be
described as the zero locus of a function, f (g)  tr r(g) + 1; in our
parametrisation this is given by

f = 1 + cos 1 cos 2 + cos 2 cos 3 + cos 3 cos 1 + sin 1 sin 2 sin 3 .

let us denote by f the zero locus of f . since every point in f is
characterised by one +1 and two 1 eigenvalues of r, it follows that
through every point on f passes an euclidean d-particle, having as the
tangent vector to its worldline the eigenvector of r corresponding to
the +1 eigenvalue. two natural questions arise. first, we would like
to have a better geometric understanding of the surface f. second,
we have to determine whether or not these particular solutions are
consistent; in other words we must make sure that their worldlines lie
on the surface f.

in order to answer the rst question we consider the vector elds
that generate the adjoint action of a group g. as it is shown in the
appendix, these vector elds can be written in terms of the right- and
left-invariant vielbeins as follows

ha(g) = (cid:0)(e1)

a  (e1)

a(cid:1)  ,

a = 1, 2, 3.

(19)

it is now a straightforward calculation to check that that, in our case,
f is annihilated by the corresponding vector elds ha

ha(g)  f (g) = 0 ,

a = 1, 2, 3.

this shows that f is a class function on su(2), that is f (hgh1) =
f (g), for any group elements g and h. from this we can conclude
that the zero locus of f consists of adjoint orbitsthat is, conjugacy
classes.

let us now turn to the second question. since r only takes 1 eigen-
values on the surface f, it means that if we have a solution describing a
d-particle its worldline should lie the above surface. in order to check
that this is indeed the case we must show that the vector tangent to the
worldline is also tangent to f. if we compute explicitly the neumann
eigenvector v1 of r, we can easily check that

v1(g)  f (g)|f (g)=0 = 0 .

in other words, v1 is tangent to the zero locus of f , that is f.

let us summarise our ndings so far. we have seen that the gluing
conditions (17) give rise two types of euclidean d-branes. around the
identity we have a d2-brane which extends up to a surface dened as

19

the zero locus of a class function. moreover, this surface itself is foliated
by the worldlines of d-particles.

let us now consider the gluing conditions (15) with an arbitrary
r. since su(2) is a simple lie algebra, r is an inner automorphism;
hence it can be identied with adr, for some group element r. by
following the same type of argument as in the case of the d-type gluing
conditions, one can show that also in this case the eect of an inner
automorphism at the level of the gluing conditions is a translation in
the group manifold. indeed, now the matrix of boundary conditions
r = e1re gives rise to three neumann eigenvectors everywhere except
a submanifold which we denote by fr. this submanifold is identied as
the zero locus of a function fr(g) = tr r(g) + 1. clearly, this function
is related to the previous f , as it satises

fr(g) = f (gr1) .

therefore fr is nothing but the translation of f by the group element
r, that is fr = fr. hence through every point in fr passes a d-particle
whose worldline lies on fr. moreover, not only the surfaces f and fr
are related by translation, but so are the neumann eigenvectors tangent
to the worldlines of the corresponding d-particles on these surfaces.

a particularly interesting case is the one where r itself has two 1
eigenvalues. in this case, the corresponding surface fr passes through
the identity element in su(2); therefore there exists a particular d-
particle whose worldline passes through the identity. its tangent vector,
at the identity, is simply given by v1 = 3, as expected. the worldline
of this d-particle is nothing but the subgroup of su(2) generated by
t3. moreover, the translation of this particular solution gives rise to
d-particle congurations whose worldlines are cosets in su(2).

7. conclusions and outlook

in this paper we have analysed the geometric interpretation of d-
branes in group manifolds obtained via the boundary state formalism.
although the algebraic analysis of the possible gluing conditions is
quantum, the subsequent analysis of the geometry of the resulting d-
branes is essentially classical. (this situation is somewhat similar to
the analysis in [1, 2] of geometry of d-branes in calabi-yau manifolds
which was carried out in the large volume limit.) the picture that
emerges is the following. the algebraic gluing conditions that one
usually imposes on the chiral currents of the wzw model are not to
be understood as boundary conditions in the target space; however the
latter can be derived from the former by an appropriate translation
in the group manifold. the boundary conditions that one obtains in
this way are point dependent, by contrast to the more familiar case of
the at space.

20

determining the d-brane congurations that the most general gluing
conditions give rise to is a relatively dicult task. here we have anal-
ysed in detail the simplest case of gluing conditions, which preserve the
ane symmetry of the bulk theory. the so-called type-d gluing condi-
tions give rise to d-branes whose worldvolumes lie on twisted conjugacy
classes. these can be understood as a generalisation of the familiar no-
tion of a conjugacy class, which depends on the automorphism dening
the gluing conditions. in the particular case of inner automorphisms
we obtain d-branes with even-dimensional worldvolumes. we have also
considered a second class of gluing conditions, which we called type-n.
they give rise to more complicated congurations which, at least in
a particular case, include subgroups, cosets and open submanifolds of
dimension equal to the dimension of the target space.

the study carried out in this paper was restricted to the case where
the gluing conditions imposed on the ane currents are given in terms
of a constant map r. this implicit restriction has no conceptual ba-
sis, it is merely a practical one, dictated by our inability of working at
the level of the quantum theory with eld dependent quantities. field
dependent gluing conditions do however appear [7] in the study of the
boundary conditions coming from the classical sigma model action of
the the wzw model. it would therefore be interesting to consider a
generalisation of the formalism presented here in this particular direc-
tion.

here we have taken the point of view that the wzw model is a
typical example of an exact string background whose cft is known
explicitly (at least the generators of the conformal (super)algebra);
therefore the natural approach to the study of the possible d-brane
congurations is to impose gluing conditions on the elds in terms of
which the cft is dened, so that the requirement of conformal invari-
ance can be easily implemented. this is however only one side of the
story. the wzw model provides also a typical example of a string
background admitting a sigma model description. this allows one to
undertake a complementary study of the possible d-brane congura-
tions [20, 18]. furthermore, one must address the question concerning
the relation between the two approaches [7]. in this context it is per-
haps worth remarking that the results obtained here, in particular the
two types of d-brane congurations in the case of su(2), bear a cer-
tain similarity with the ones obtained in [20] from the analysis of the
open string wzw model. since the two classes of solutions obtained
there are related by poissonlie t-duality, it would be interesting to
investigate such a possibility in the framework of the boundary state
approach.

21

acknowledgements

it is a pleasure to thank jm figueroa-ofarrill and aa tseytlin for
many useful discussions and for a critical reading of the manuscript.
some of the motivation for undertaking this work came from discus-
sions with ay alekseev and v schomerus to whom i extend in this
way my thanks. this work was supported by a pparc postdoctoral
fellowship.

appendix: (twisted) conjugacy classes

let g be a connected lie group and g a xed but otherwise arbitrary
element of g. let c(g) denote the conjugacy class of the element g,
dened as the subset of g with the following elements:

c(g) := (cid:8)hgh1 | h  g(cid:9) .

the conjugacy class of an element g is therefore the orbit of that ele-
ment under the adjoint action of the group: adh : g  g, dened by
adh(g) = hgh1. each conjugacy class is a connected submanifold of
g. since every element g belongs to one and only one conjugacy class,
g is foliated by its conjugacy classes.

we have seen in section 5 that it is useful to consider a certain
generalisation of the notion of a conjugacy class which is dened as
follows:

where the map r : g  g is dened by

cr(g) := (cid:8)r(h)gh1 | h  g(cid:9) ,

(20)

r(cid:0)etx(cid:1) = etr(x) ,

for t small enough and x any element in the lie algebra. if we assume
that g is connected then r extends to a lie group automorphism.
moreover r preserves the bi-invariant metric on the lie group. the
twisted conjugacy class of a given element is therefore the orbit of that
element under the action of adr
h (g) =
r(h)gh1.

h : g  g, dened by adr

a curve in cr(g) is generically given by r(t) = r(h(t))gh1(t), with
h(t) an arbitrary curve in g. let us now consider a particular type of
curve in cr(g), such that h(0) = 1, and h(0) = y , with y = y ata an
element of the corresponding lie algebra g. the tangent vector to this
curve at the point g will be given by

d

dt (cid:0)r(h(t))gh1(t)(cid:1)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)t=0

= r(y )g  gy ,

which is an element of tgg. this denes a vector eld h r given by

h r(g) = r(y )r(g)  yl(g) ,

22

where we denote by yl,r the left- and right-invariant vector elds cor-
responding to y . one can further show that the components of these
invariant vector elds, dened by

yl(g) = y 

l (g) ,

r(y )r(g) = r(y )

r(g) ,

are given by

y 
l (g) = y a(e1)

a ,

r(y )

r(g) = y arb

a(e1)

b .

this implies that the vector eld h r(g) which is tangent, at every
point g to the curve r(t) in cr(g) is given by

h r(g) = y a(cid:0)(e1)

brb

a  (e1)

a(cid:1)  .

this allows us to dene dim g vector elds h r
of the generators ta of g:

a , corresponding to each

h r

a (g) = (cid:0)(e1)

brb

a  (e1)

a(cid:1)  .

these vector elds thus generate the twisted adjoint action of the
group g.

the particular case of the standard conjugacy class can be easily
obtained by setting r = 1. the vector elds that generate the adjoint
action of g read

ha(g) = (cid:0)(e1)

a  (e1)

a(cid:1)  .

references

[1] h. ooguri, y. oz, and z. yin, d-branes on calabiyau spaces and their

mirrors, nuc. phys. b477 (1996) 407430. hep-th/9606112.

[2] k. becker, m. becker, d. r. morrison, h. ooguri, y. oz, and z. yin,

supersymmetric cycles in exceptional holonomy manifolds and calabiyau
4-folds, nuc. phys. b480 (1996) 225. hep-th/9608116.

[3] m. kato and t. okada, d-branes on group manifolds, nuc. phys. b499

(1997) 583595. hep-th/9612148.

[4] s. stanciu, d-branes in kazamasuzuki models, nuc. phys. b526 (1998)

295310. hep-th/9708166.

[5] a. recknagel and v. schomerus, d-branes in gepner models.

hep-th/9712186.

[6] j. fuchs and c. schweigert, branes: from free elds to general

backgrounds. hep-th/9712257.

[7] s. stanciu and a. a. tseytlin, d-branes in curved spacetime: the

nappiwitten background, jhep 06 (1998) 010. hep-th/9805006.

[8] a. alekseev and v. schomerus, d-branes in the wzw model, phys. rev.

d60 (1999) 061901. hep-th/9812193.

[9] s. stanciu, d-branes in an ads 3 background. hep-th/9901122.
[10] j. harvey, s. kachru, g. moore, and e. silverstein, tension is dimension.

hep-th/9909072.

[11] g. felder, j. frohlich, j. fuchs, and c. schweigert, the geometry of wzw

branes. hep-th/9909030.

[12] d. gepner and e. witten, string theory on group manifolds, nuc. phys.

b278 (1986) 493549.

23

[13] v. knizhnik and a. zamolodchikov, wznw models, nuc. phys. b247

(1984) 83.

[14] n. mohammedi, on bosonic and supersymmetric current algebras for

nonsemisimple groups, phys. lett. b325 (1994) 371376. hep-th/9312182.

[15] j. m. figueroa-ofarrill and s. stanciu, nonsemisimple sugawara

constructions, phys. lett. b327 (1994) 4046. hep-th/9402035.

[16] j. figueroa-ofarrill and s. stanciu, nonreductive wzw models and their

cfts, nuc. phys. b458 (1996) 137164. hep-th/9506151.

[17] n. ishibashi, the boundary and crosscap states in conformal eld theories,

mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 251.

[18] k. gawedzki, conformal eld theory: a case study. hep-th/9904145.
[19] j. figueroa-ofarrill and s. stanciu, more d-branes in the nappiwitten

background. hep-th/9909164.

[20] c. klimcik and p. severa, open strings and d-branes in wznw models,

nuc. phys. b488 (1997) 653676. hep-th/9609112.

e-mail address: s.stanciu@ic.ac.uk

theoretical physics group
blackett laboratory
imperial college
london sw7 2bz, uk

