9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
7

 

 
 

2
v
7
8
0
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

anl-hep-99-78
yitp-99-48
hep-th/9909087

quantization and scattering in the iib sl(2, z)

covariant superstring

gordon chalmers1 and koenraad schalm 2

argonne national laboratory
high energy physics division

9700 south cass avenue
argonne, il 60439-4815

c.n. yang institute for theoretical physics
state university of new york at stony brook

stony brook, ny 11794-3840

abstract

we rewrite the sl(2, z) covariant worldsheet action for the iib string proposed by townsend
in a polyakov form. in a at background the formalism yields separate (p, q) sectors. in each
one the action is that of the iib string action with the string slope parameter  replaced by
its sl(2, z) analogue 
pq. sl(2, z) invariant graviton scattering amplitudes are obtained
from those of the fundamental (1, 0) string by summing over the dierent sectors. the
tree-level four-graviton amplitude in this formalism diers from a previously conjectured
non-perturbative form; both yield the same expansion in order 3.

1e-mail address: chalmers@pcl9.hep.anl.gov
2e-mail address: konrad@insti.physics.sunysb.edu.

address after september 15: nikhef, p.o box 41882, 1009 db amsterdam.

1 introduction

exploring the non-perturbative structure of the iib superstring is relevant for an understand-
ing of its dynamics and for a potential formulation of the conjectured m-theory. progress in
the pinning down of the derivative expansion of the iib eective action has been made in the
recent past, especially with regards to the conjectured self-duality of the iib theory. rele-
vant to this program is an attempt to reorganize the perturbative expansion in a manifestly
sl(2, z) invariant fashion and to nd further contributions or structure in the derivative
expansion.

the conjectured sl(2, z) s-duality of iib string theory maps the fundamental string into
a solitonic d-string. this led townsend to directly incorporate the self-duality at the string
level in an sl(2, z) covariant worldsheet action for the bosonic elds of the superstring [1].
a subsequent supersymmetric version was constructed by him together with cederwall [2].
these actions are special in that the tension is generated dynamically by a two-dimensional
worldsheet gauge eld that has no local degrees of freedom. classically these elds may
be integrated out and the solution to the eld equations contains an integration constant
which acts as the tension. it is the presence of this extra worldsheet gauge eld that allows
one to covariantize the action with respect to the conjectured sl(2, z) s-duality. one may
combine it with the born-infeld gauge eld of the d-string into an sl(2, z) doublet and a
hamiltonian analysis then shows that the tension of this self-dual string is promoted to its
sl(2, z) analogue [1, 3, 4]

tpq =

1
2
pq

=

1

2qq2e2 + (p + q)2 .

(1.1)

here  and  denote the vacuum expectation values of the dilaton and axion respectively
(the string coupling is gs = e).

in a separate development russo has made an ansatz for the non-perturbative four-
graviton amplitude of the ten-dimensional iib superstring theory [5, 6]. an origin of this
ansatz lays in an sl(2, z) invariant set of corrections to the iib low energy eective action
at order r4 in derivatives [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. as the non-perturbative action of s-duality
mixes the weak and strong coupling regimes of the string, these results generate full non-
perturbative answers for the low energy process of graviton scattering. an interesting feature
of russos ansatz is that it may be obtained from the standard four-graviton amplitude by
replacing the tension with its sl(2, z) covariant analogue tpq of equation (1.1) provided one
incorporates the dierent (p, q) sectors in an appropriate way. this has led to the speculation
that this amplitude may be computable from a sl(2, z) covariant worldsheet action.

1

in this letter we discuss quantization of this worldsheet action. by the appropriate intro-
duction of auxiliary elds we may linearize the nambu-goto form of the sl(2, z) covariant
action to a polyakov form, from which we know how to compute explicit amplitudes for the
fundamental string. we will see that in the sl(2, z) covariant polyakov formulation the
eld strengths of the required sl(2, z) worldsheet gauge elds appear linearly as they do
in the manifestly four-dimensional formulation in [14]. new is the presence of a lagrange
multiplier eld which forces the whole lagrangian to vanish. the lagrange multiplier times
linear eld strength term is familiar from lagrangian formulations of t -duality [15, 16, 17].
in particular gauge invariance forces the constant zero mode of the lagrange multiplier eld
to be quantized [17, 18, 19]. furthermore the constraint implied by the linear appearance of
the gauge eld requires the non-zero modes to vanish. as this lagrange multiplier appears
as an overall term in front of the whole lagrangian its constant part in eect becomes the
sl(2, z) covariant tension tpq. the remaining action is that of the free string. we thus
establish that amplitudes in the (p, q) sector are given by those of the fundamental string
after substitution with tpq, as is required by s-duality.

for the sl(2, z) covariant superstring the analysis is identical and yields the green-
schwarz string with tension tpq, but as usual kappa-symmetry prevents covariant quantiza-
tion. the believed equivalence between the gs string and the rns formalism allows us to
posit the use of the latter instead.

the tension arises dynamically in the sl(2, z) covariant formulation and each of the
(p, q) strings is a groundstate of the worldsheet theory. the worldsheet path integral then
requires the sum over each of these dierent sectors. the use of the naive perturbative
string vertex operators in each sector yields sl(2, z) covariant amplitudes as the sum over
the individual ones from each (p, q) string. the amplitude for four-graviton scattering derived
in this way reproduces the complete r4 term in the iib low energy eective action as does
the conjecture of russo. in summing over the amplitudes of the (p, q) strings one counts
the massless graviton tree exchange an innite number of times, but this has no eect on
the r4 higher derivative term in the eective action; that the innite summation over the
(p, q) strings gives rise to the r4 term was noticed in [12]. the conjectured form of russo
on the other hand resembles the product of the amplitudes over the dierent sectors and
contains just a single massless pole. a possible modication of the vertex operators with
factors depending on the worldsheet gauge elds is unlikely to change the sum over the (p, q)
sectors into a product. aside from the number of massless poles, which amplitude yields
the correct non-perturbative information for the iib string can only be determined at the
higher-derivative level.

the amplitude derived here is a tree-level result in the worldsheet genus expansion of
the sl(2, z) covariant string. russo has conjectured that the product form should receive

2

sl(2, z) covariant corrections as well. in the complete form of the non-perturbative iib
graviton scattering amplitude one would expect cuts required by unitarity as well as imagi-
nary parts arising from poles o the real axis due to the unstable states of the (p, q) strings.
the problem for both sl(2, z) covariant amplitudes is identifying the correct small parame-
ter which governs the perturbative expansion of the sl(2, z) covariant string; for each (p, q)
string the natural expansion parameter is the (p, q) dilaton, which measures the topology
of the riemann surface. there does exist a proposal by berkovits for a manifestly s-dual
worldsheet action for the iib string on a calabi-yau three-fold which contains a coupling to
the worldsheet curvature [14].

the organization of this work is as follows. first we derive a polyakov form of the
manifestly sl(2, z) covariant string. in section 3 we solve the constraints arising from the
eld equations and show that the resulting action is that of separate (p, q) strings. the iib
superstring is presented in section 4. in section 5 we generate amplitudes for the sl(2, z)
covariant superstring and analyze the results.

2 polyakov action for the sl(2, z) covariant iib string

we rst briey review the origins of the action that lends itself to an sl(2, z) covariant
formulation [1, 20]. this formulation is in terms of an action where the tension is generated
as a dynamical variable [1, 20],

st = z d2

2

2 "det(g)

(2)2 + (f)2# .

(2.1)

here  is the levi-civita symbol in two dimensions. the eld () transforms under
worldsheet coordinate transformations as    = |/|1/2; g is the pullback of the
space-time metric g = gx x  and f = [a] a worldsheet eld strength. the
equation of motion for a reads (2f) = 0. after substituting the general solution
f = t /2 for constant tension t back into the action one recovers the schild action.
this reduces to the nambu-goto form after one integrates out the remaining auxiliary eld
. the action (2.1) is in addition invariant under the rigid spacetime scale variations

x  x  = etx,    = e2t, a  a
this invariance was a motivation behind its construction [20].

 = e2ta .

(2.2)

the appearance of the extra worldsheet gauge eld a makes the above action a starting
point for a formulation of the sl(2, z) covariant iib string. a comparison of the regular

3

string action,

sf =

1

2 z d2q|g| +

1

2 z d2 bn s

 ,

with the born-infeld action of the d-string,

sd = td1z d2q|g + 2f + b| + td1z d2 brr

 ,

(2.3)

(2.4)

(2.5)

reveals that the absence of a gauge eld on the worldvolume of the fundamental string is
a fundamental dierence between the two. if one disregards considerations of the d-string
action as a solely eective one and implements s-duality at this level there should be a
way to also introduce a worldsheet gauge eld for the fundamental string, though without
changing its dynamics. this is what the action (2.1) accomplishes. the similarity between
the d-string action and the action (2.1) for the fundamental string with dynamical tension
can be made even more suggestive by realizing [20] that the action (2.1) is equivalent to the
born-infeld form

st = z d2

2

2(2)2 det(g + 2 f) .

the tilde over the eld-strength is added to distinguish this worldsheet gauge eld which
generates the tension from the born-infeld gauge eld of the d-string.

to construct the sl(2, z) covariant action [2] one thus introduces two worldsheet gauge
elds a(i)
 and combines them into a doublet. moreover, the eld strengths are now both
extended with the doublet of pullbacks of the ns-ns and r-r antisymmetric tensor elds

f (i)
 = [a(i)

] +

b(i)

2 ,

(2.6)

to the well-known f + b combination.

to complete the construction one also needs the background scalars of the theory: the
dilaton and the axion. these belong to the coset sl(2, r)/so(2)  su(1, 1)/u(1) and
are denoted by the doublet ui. they combine with the f (i)
 into an su(1, 1) invariant eld
strength

to relate this to a more familiar description of the background scalars one may make the
u(1) gauge choice u1 = e/2 and u2 = e/2 + ie/2.

the sl(2, z) covariant action is then given by,

f = uif (i)
 .

(2.7)

ssl(2,z) = z d2

2

2 " det(g)

(2)2 +  # .

(2.8)

4

here det(g) is the determinant of the pullback of the einstein frame metric; it is this metric
which is sl(2, z) invariant. the eld  is the hodge dual of the su(1, 1) invariant eld
strength:  = f.
to be able to quantize the theory and compute scattering elements we would rather work
with a polyakov form of the action. in order to rewrite the above action in such a manner,
we shall make use of the following exponential integral,

dx ex2 a2

x2 = e2a ,

z 



(2.9)

to change the unit power determinant det(g) to the square root qdet(g) and obtain a

nambu-goto form of the string action. the above integral illustrates the formal equivalence
of the schild action with the nambu-goto one. eq. (2.9) is the reason for using a square
for the worldsheet scalar eld. an analogous functional form of (2.9) is then also exact in
the path integral.

the rst step is to obtain a term in the action that behaves as 1/2. this is straightfor-
ward as the form of the gauge eld couplings in (2.8) may be reproduced by the introduction
of an auxiliary source eld k coupling to , whose kinetic term will then exhibit the desired
behaviour.

(2.10)

(2.11)

integrating out k gives back the previous sl(2, z) covariant action.

we next integrate out the scalar eld  using the identity in eq. (2.9). this yields

ssl(2,z) = z d2 

1

4q det(g)qkk +

1

2 (cid:16)k + k(cid:17) .

redening k = ei, we obtain the nambu-goto form of the iib sl(2, z) covariant action

ssl(2,z) = z d2 



4q det(g) +

1

2 (cid:16)ei +  ei(cid:17) .

(2.12)

rescaling the eld   (2) does not eliminate its eect in the action because the 
dependent terms will pick up this factor. (we ignore the jacobian eects due to the eld
redenitions since we are examining classical actions.)

it is now straightforward to introduce an auxiliary worldsheet metric g and obtain the
polyakov form of the action. the scalar eld  enters multiplicatively in (2.12) and therefore
does not alter the form of the worldsheet metric eld equations. the gauge eld terms

5

ssl(2,z) = z d2

2

2(2)2 det(g) 

1

1
22 kk +

2 (cid:16)k + k(cid:17) .

involving  are also worldsheet coordinate invariant provided the epsilon used to contract
the eld strength is the density and not the tensor

the polyakov form of the action is thus

 = 

levi-civitaf = gf .

sp ol

sl(2,z) = z d2



4ggg(x)x x  

and is worldsheet dieomorphism and weyl invariant.

1

2 z d2hei +  eii ,

(2.13)

(2.14)

3 iib (p, q) strings

to analyze the theory we choose a (conformally) at background in the einstein frame
ge

 = 0 and a constant dilaton and axion  and :

 = e

, b(i)

  e/2string



sp ol

sl(2,z) = z d2



4 ggx x   cos()e/2f (1)



h cos()e/2   sin()e/2i f (2)

 .

(3.1)

the preceding steps have linearized the nambu-goto form of the action to the more familiar
polyakov one from which we know in principle how to compute s-matrix elements of the string
elds (e.g. massless elds in the gravitational multiplet). note that naively integrating out
the world-sheet gauge elds forces the lagrange multiplier eld  to be constant: it yields
the tension of the string, just as in the action (2.1). we now make this last step more precise
and nd that the tension is in fact the (p, q) string tension tpq of equation (1.1).

the above form of the action is similar to that encountered in the path integral formu-
lation of t-duality [15, 16, 17]. in the latter one gauges the spacetime isometry of one of
the coordinates, xt = , by the introduction of a worldsheet gaugeeld. one also adds a
lagrange multiplier whose eld equation enforces the connection to be at. in other words
the gauge eld is pure gauge and there are no new local degrees of freedom. after choosing
the gauge where the potential vanishes one recovers the original action; integrating out the
gauge eld on the other hand yields the t-dual action.

it is this lagrange multiplier term that we see recurring twice in the last two terms in

(3.1). for each such term1

z if (i)

i = 1, 2

with

f (i) = f (i)


(3.2)

1a boundary term is required to make this and the following steps exact. this term has been suppressed

in all of the above. [1, 21]

6

we can split the scalar lagrange multiplier eld into a constant zero-mode and non-constant
piece (see e.g. [19])

i = (0)

i + i

(0)

i = 0 ;

= 0 .

(3.3)

i(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12), =0

on a non-trivial world-sheet single-valuedness of the path-integral under large gauge trans-
formations forces the constant part multiplying the eld strength (0)
to be an integer up to
an appropriate normalization

i

f (i)  z

zt2



(0)
i

 z .

(3.4)

this quantization follows from the gauge group being u(1) rather than r [18, 19].

integration by parts, however, removes the quantized constant part (0) from the terms

(3.2)

z ifi = z iai

  z  iai

 .

(3.5)

now integrating over the gauge eld as a lagrange multiplier forces the remaining part i to
vanish. this means that the full coecient elds i are constant and quantized; the gauge
elds have been accounted for as lagrange multipliers whose constraint has been explicitly
enforced.

in the context of the action in (3.1) the quantized constant parts are [17, 18]

(0)
1 = 0 cos(0)e/2 = q;

(0)
2 = 0 cos(0)e/2  0 sin(0)e/2 = p ,

(3.6)

or

0 sin(0) = pe/2 + qe/2

;

0 cos(0) = qe/2 .

in other words the constant part of  equals

0 = e/2q(p + q)2 + q2e2 = 2e/2tpq ,

and contains precisely the form of the sl(2, z) covariantized tension in eq. (1.1). note that
as the gauge eld f can be extended to the open string combination f + b the integers
p and q are indeed the charges under the ns-ns and r-r antisymmetric tensor eld. the
extra overall factor of e/2 is what is required to transform the einstein metric to the string
frame. the resulting theory is just that of the regular string but with the tension t replaced
by its (p, q) quantized value tpq.

(3.7)

(3.8)

7

4 iib sl(2, z) covariant superstring

so far we have discussed an approach to the sl(2, z) covariant iib superstring involving
the bosonic worldsheet degrees of freedom only. our focus, however, is the superstring as
it is the latter which is expected to possess the sl(2, z) s-duality. formally the sl(2, z)
covariant action for the iib superstring is identical to the action (2.8) containing only the
bosonic elds, except that one makes all elds spacetime supersymmetric [2]. the action is
thus again

ssl(2,z) = z d2

with

2

2 "det(g)

(2)2 +  # ,

  ui
f (i)

 +

b(i)


2
 ,

but the pullback of the metric and the antisymmetric tensor elds are now dened as

g = abea
b(i)

 = z m z n b(i)

m eb

n z m z n ,

m n .

(4.1)

(4.2)

(4.3)

1 , a

m = (ea

2 ) and ea

here z m = (x , a
m ) are the embeddings of the worldsheet
into the coordinates and the vielbeins for the target space of the iib superstring. super-
symmetrizing does not change the world-sheet lagrange multipliers ,  or the world-sheet
gauge elds f (i) [2]. the steps in section 3 then carry over unaltered to the supersymmetric
string. in particular, the polyakov action

m , e a2

m , e a1

ssuper





4ggz m z n ea
4ggz m z n ea

sl(2,z) = z d2
= z d2
eiui
 + z m z n b(i)
f (i)

2
 


2

m n


2



reduces to that of the green-schwarz string with again the tension t replaced by that of the
(p, q) string. indeed, as was noted in [2] the terms involving the supereld bm n containing
the antisymmetric tensor elds yield the wess-zumino-witten term in at superspace [22,

23]. note also the presence of the d-string r (f + b)(2) coupling [24].

8


2

ei 


2

ei 

m en a 
m en a

ei ui
 + z m z n b(i)
f (i)

2

m n

 , (4.4)

this action is almost identical to the one proposed by berkovits for the manifestly
sl(2, z) covariant iib string compactied on a calabi-yau three-fold [14]. the dierence
is roughly that in our case the sl(2, z) inert lagrange multiplier  also multiplies the term
involving the supervielbeins.

5 sl(2, z) amplitudes

we now turn to the computation of sl(2, z) invariant scattering amplitudes. the motivation
for working with an sl(2, z) invariant formulation is to obtain sl(2, z) invariant (and dual)
scattering expressions directly. however, a problem arises in that at present we do not yet
know how to covariantly quantize the ten-dimensional kappa-symmetric gs-string. following
the usual light-cone arguments that equate the gs-string with the rns spinning string we
may replace the tension t with that of the (p, q) string there as well; alternatively one may
quantize the gs-string on the light-cone directly.
in the rns form we can then use the
standard techniques of string perturbation theory.

a (p, q) string vacuum arises from solving the eld equations for the sl(2, z) elds 
and f (i) and spontaneously breaks the sl(2, z) covariance of the action: each of the possible
values for (p,q)
is an equally legitimate solution to the eld equations. in quantizing the
string action the functional integral over  is then equivalent to a sum over the contributions
of each of the (p, q) strings

0

z sl(2,z) = z [dx ][dg]
n

= x(p,q)z [dx ][dg]

etpqs0 ,

(5.1)

[d][da(i)] essl(2,z)

n

where the remaining integration is over the matter and gravitional superelds on the world-
sheet; n represents the modding out of the local worldsheet symmetries of the string. as
the notation indicates we have limited the sum to relatively prime pairs. if (p, q) were not
relatively prime then the tension tpq would be the multiple of that of a tpq string with
coprime charges; as this conguration is a superposition of independent (p, q) strings [3] we
consider this as overcounting in the functional integration. in addition, the charges (p, q)
should not be simultaneously zero as the action vanishes in this case.

the partition function thus remains invariant under an sl(2, z) transformation though
perturbative amplitudes in each individual (p, q) sector are not. sl(2, z) covariant am-
plitudes are obtained from the full partition function (5.1) after summing over the (p, q)

9

sectors,

asl(2,z)

n

= x(p,q)z [dxm][dg]
nn

etpqs0 v1v2 . . . vn .

(5.2)

for sl(2, z) invariant vertex operators the summation over  manifestly leads to sl(2, z)
invariant results through perturbation theory in the covariant string: the amplitudes are
the (sl(2, z) invariant) sum of (p, q) sub-amplitudes. as the (p, q) string only diers in the
tension from the fundamental string the naive choice is to use the regular perturbative string
vertex operators in each sector. amplitudes for the (p, q) string are then obtained from those
of the fundamental string by substituting t = 1/2 with tpq in accordance with s-duality.
for graviton scattering we use in each (p, q) sector the standard vertex operator for the
emission of a gravitational state.

one might argue that the use of the naive vertex operators is incorrect because of the
extra elds in the sl(2, z) covariant world-sheet action. for example in (4.4) the coupling
to the background einstein metric includes a factor of the lagrange multiplier eld . on-
shell this is constant but not (p, q) independent and amounts to a normalization condition
depending on (p, q). the vertex operator should in principle be compatible with sl(2, z)
invariance and we shall take the (p, q) normalization to be unity.

the four-graviton amplitude found from (5.2) is the sum over the (p, q) four-graviton

amplitudes ,

asl(2,z)

4

= x(p,q)

e22

pqe

pq)3
(
stu

(1  s)(1  t)(1  u)
(1 + s)(1 + t)(1 + u)

with the barred invariants given by,

s =


pq
4

s,

s + t + u = 0 .

(5.3)

(5.4)

here pq is the gravitational coupling constant, including a (p, q) dependent normalization
and e is the kinematic factor (e.g. [26]) depending on the polarizations (we shall normalize
the p, q dependence in p,q to unity). after transforming to the einstein frame, where
s = 2se, the sl(2, z) invariance is seen explicitly.

russo [6] has analyzed why this sl(2, z) invariant amplitude in (5.3) does not yield
complete non-perturbative results for string amplitudes. the form in (5.3) counts the pole
of the gravitational exchange (i.e. massless) an innite number of times, once from each of
the (p, q) sectors. also, when expanded around weak coupling, the expression contains odd

10

powers of gs which cannot occur in closed string perturbation theory. this is in contrast to
the ansatz in [5],

a4 = e22e

1

stu y(p,q)

(1  s)(1  t)(1  u)
(1 + s)(1 + t)(1 + u)

,

(5.5)

which is also given in string frame. instead of a summation over the various sectors it takes
the form of a product in such a way that the expression contains a single massless pole,
corresponding to the exchange of a single gravitational mode.2 it is unclear how a further
dressing with the sl(2, z) peculiar elds could change the sum in (5.3) into a product.

the massless excitations of the dierent (p, q) sectors are not independent but should be
identied under the duality. the current formalism does not contain this prescription, but
an analysis of the above action similar to that of the d-string in [25] could provide this. the
iib supersymmetry algebra of the d-string action contains central charges, which means that
the massless excitations - the gravitational multiplet - are projected out [25]. a projector
operator, similar to the gso, may be inserted by hand to eliminate the overcounting asso-
ciated with the massless tree exchange (although we do not have a world-sheet construction
of this).

after subtraction of the massless poles, both expressions (5.3) and (5.5) give rise to the
same r4 term in the eective action. our result in (5.3) bears out the interpretation of this
term given in [12]. aside from the indirect arguments of russo regarding the massless poles
and the powers of gs we cannot in this order tell which of the two results yields the correct
non-perturbative string scattering amplitudes. a comparison could be made at the next
order in the derivative expansion or for higher point amplitudes. the formalism presented
here allows one to compute these using the standard rules of string perturbation theory.

it would be interesting to nd a prescription for the computation of the scattering am-
plitude that leads to the conjecture of russo. for example, instead of summing over the
dierent sectors of the solution space of , i.e. (p,q)
, we could integrate naively with mea-
in the spirit of the heuristic proposal in [6]. a placement of the product

0

sure factor q d(p,q)

0

within the integration is then crucial. using the form

z d4

 y(p,q)

d(p,q)

0


 et(p,q)s

vi(z, z)

4

yi=1

(5.6)

2the product is reminiscent of the closed/open string amplitude relations at tree-level: aclosed

=
. however, because the graviton is spin-two it can not arise from an innite product of

aopen

4

4

p aopen

4

non-zero spin states.

11

gives an innite tension in the exponential; this occurs either including or not including the
vertex operators in the product (in the latter case one would have to normalize by dividing

by the innite helicity product q(p,q) e/stu, which does not seem sensible.).

though we have not analyzed the analytic structure of (5.3) in detail, it appears that
both expressions (5.3) and (5.5) have the fundamental problem that they do not contain
any cuts or poles o the real axis. at weak string coupling all the excited states of the
(p, q) 6= (1, 0) strings are expected to be unstable and the full non-perturbative four-graviton
amplitude should reect this. to this extent neither expression can be the full answer but
only a rst approximation. the natural extension of the results here would be to consider
amplitudes on higher genus surfaces as well; the amplitude (5.3) arose at string tree-level,
i.e. superspherical worldsheet. similarly, the product form is conjectured to be a tree-level
result [6]. the higher-genus corrections could generate the required cuts.

this poses the fundamental question as to what parameter governs the genus expansion
in this formulation. the correct dilaton coupling in the gs-string is not yet known. in the
rns formalism the dual (p, q) dilaton measures the expansion in each (p, q) sector and taking
p,q =  leads to explicit sl(2, z) invariant results. the expression (5.3) implictly takes each
of the (p, q) coupling constants, e, simultaneously innitesimally small. the amplitude
one generates this way is manifestly s-dual, though the worldsheet genus expansion of the
sl(2, z) string no longer corresponds to a perturbative expansion in gs.
it is not clear
whether there exists an extension of the dilaton that is able to govern the world sheet
expansion of the sl(2, z) covariant string in an invariant way. this problem has been solved
by the introduction of additional elds for the manifestly four dimensional formulation of
the iib sl(2, z) covariant superstring by berkovits [14] but a corresponding formalism is
as yet unknown for the ten-dimensional case.

6 conclusion

in summary we have shown that the sl(2, z) covariant action for the iib string of [1, 2] may
be rewritten in a polyakov form. this is a rst step on the way to quantization and manifestly
organizes the perturbative expansion in an sl(2, z) invariant fashion. an analysis of the
worldsheet eld equations shows that the groundstates of the worldsheet theory correspond to
individual (p, q) strings. one is required to sum over the various sectors in the rst quantized
partition function, with each term corresponding to the contribution for the individual (p, q)
superstring. sl(2, z) covariant four- and higher point amplitudes can be computed following
this approach by taking the sum over the individual (p, q) ones. we nd the four-graviton
scattering amplitude; it reproduces the modular f (,  ) coecient of the r4 term in the low

12

energy eective action of [8]. the conjectured sl(2, z) covariant amplitude of russo does
so as well but the latter contains a single massless pole, which is as one expects, whereas
ours counts an innite number before projection, one from each sector. these massless poles
ought to be identied under the action of sl(2, z). a problem is the identication of the
appropriate small parameter that measures the world-sheet genus expansion in an sl(2, z)
invariant way. this should be an extension of the (p, q) dilaton which governs the expansion
for each (p, q) sector.

acknowledgements

we would like to thank m. green, s. sethi and m. rocek for discussions. k.s. would
especially like to thank paul townsend for discussions during the string theory workshop in
amsterdam, whose organizers he wishes to thank. k.s. is also grateful to the organizers of
the nato asi quantum geometry in akureyri for their hospitality and an opportunity
to present results of this work. g.c. thanks the aspen center for physics for hospitality
during which time this work was completed. this work is supported in part by the u.s.
department of energy, division of high energy physics, contract w-31-109-eng-38.

references

[1] p.k. townsend, membrane tension and manifest iib s duality, phys. lett. b409,

131 (1997), hep-th/9705160.

[2] m. cederwall and p.k. townsend, the manifestly sl(2,z) covariant superstring,

jhep 09, 003 (1997), hep-th/9709002.

[3] j.h. schwarz, an sl(2,z) multiplet of type iib superstrings, phys. lett. b360, 13

(1995), hep-th/9508143. erratum in [4].

[4] j.h. schwarz, superstring dualities, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 49, 183 (1996), hep-

th/9509148.

[5] j.g. russo, an ansatz for a nonperturbative four graviton amplitude in type iib

superstring theory, phys. lett. b417, 253 (1998), hep-th/9707241.

[6] j.g. russo, construction of sl(2,z) invariant amplitudes in type iib superstring the-

ory, nucl. phys. b535, 116 (1998), hep-th/9802090.

[7] j.g. russo and a.a. tseytlin, one-loop four-graviton amplitude in eleven-dimensional

supergravity, nucl. phys. b508, 245 (1997), hep-th/9707134.

13

[8] m.b. green and m. gutperle, eects of d instantons, nucl. phys. b498, 195 (1997),

hep-th/9701093.

[9] m.b. green and p. vanhove, d instantons, strings and m theory, phys. lett. b408,

122 (1997), hep-th/9704145.

[10] m.b. green, m. gutperle and p. vanhove, one loop in eleven-dimensions, phys. lett.

b409, 177 (1997), hep-th/9706175.

[11] m.b. green and s. sethi, supersymmetry constraints on type iib supergravity, phys.

rev. d59, 046006 (1999), hep-th/9808061.

[12] a. kehagias and h. partouche, d-instanton corrections as (p,q)-string eects and non-

renormalization theorems, int. j. mod. phys. a13, 5075 (1998), hep-th/9712164.

[13] a. kehagias and h. partouche, the exact quartic eective action for the type iib

superstring, phys. lett. b422, 109 (1998), hep-th/9710023.

[14] n. berkovits, conformal compensators and manifest type iib s-duality, phys. lett.

b423, 265 (1998), hep-th/9801009.

[15] t.h. buscher, a symmetry of the string background field equations, phys. lett.

194b, 59 (1987).

[16] t.h. buscher, path integral derivation of quantum duality in nonlinear sigma mod-

els, phys. lett. 201b, 466 (1988).

[17] m. rocek and e. verlinde, duality, quotients, and currents, nucl. phys. b373, 630

(1992), hep-th/9110053.

[18] e. witten, bound states of strings and p-branes, nucl. phys. b460, 335 (1996),

hep-th/9510135.

[19] c. schmidhuber, d-brane actions, nucl. phys. b467, 146 (1996), hep-th/9601003.

[20] e. bergshoe, l.a. london and p.k. townsend, space-time scale invariance and the

superp-brane, class. quant. grav. 9, 2545 (1992), hep-th/9206026.

[21] p.k. townsend, world sheet electromagnetism and the superstring tension, phys.

lett. b277, 285 (1992).

14

[22] m.t. grisaru, p. howe, l. mezincescu, b. nilsson and p.k. townsend, n=2 super-

strings in a supergravity background, phys. lett. 162b, 116 (1985).

[23] p.s. howe and p.c. west, the complete n=2, d = 10 supergravity, nucl. phys.

b238, 181 (1984).

[24] m.r. douglas,branes within branes, in proceedings cargese 97, hep-th/9512077.

[25] r. kallosh, covariant quantization of d-branes, phys. rev. d56, 3515 (1997), hep-

th/9705056.

[26] m. green, j. schwarz, e. witten, superstring theory vol. 1,2; cambridge university

press, 1987.

15

