9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
9
2

 

 
 

1
v
2
1
2
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

cpht-cl741.0999
hep-th/9909212

mass scales in string and m-theory

centre de physique theorique (cnrs umr 7644),

i. antoniadis

ecole polytechnique,

f-91128 palaiseau, france,

e-mail: antoniad@cpht.polytechnique.fr

i review the relations between mass scales in various string theories and in
m-theory. i discuss physical motivations and possible consistent realizations
of large volume compactications and low string scale.
large longitudinal dimensions, seen by standard model particles, imply in
general that string theory is strongly coupled unless its tension is close to
the compactication scale. weakly coupled, low-scale strings can in turn
be realized only in the presence of extra large transverse dimensions, seen
through gravitational interactions, or in the presence of innitesimal string
coupling.
in the former case, quantum gravity scale is also low, while in
the latter, gravitational and string interactions remain suppressed by the
four-dimensional planck mass. there is one exception in this general rule,
allowing for large longitudinal dimensions without low string scale, when
standard model is embedded in a six-dimensional xed-point theory de-
scribed by a tensionless string.
extra dimensions of size as large as tev1
 1016 cm are motivated from
the problem of supersymmetry breaking in string theory, while tev scale
strings oer a solution to the gauge hierarchy problem, as an alternative
to softly broken supersymmetry or technicolor. i discuss these problems in
the context of the above mentioned string realizations, as well as the main
physical implications both in particle accelerators and in experiments that
measure gravity at sub-millimeter distances.

lectures given at the spring workshop on superstrings and related matters, ictp,
trieste, italy, 22-30 march 1999, and at the advanced school on supersymmetry in the
theories of fields, strings and branes, sandiago de compostela, spain, 26-31 july 1999.
a short version was given as an invited talk at strings 99, potsdam, germany, 19-24 july
1999 and at the european program meeting on quantum aspects of gauge theories, su-
persymmetry and unication, paris, france, 1-7 september 1999.

september 1999

1

1 outline

the outline of this review article is the following:

1.1 preliminaries
2. heterotic string and motivations for large volume compactications
2.1 gauge coupling unication
2.2 supersymmetry breaking by compactication
3. m-theory on s1/z2calabi-yau
4. type i/i string theory and d-branes
4.1 low-scale strings and extra-large transverse dimensions
4.2 relation type i/i  heterotic
5. type ii theories
5.1 low-scale iia strings and tiny coupling
5.2 large dimensions in type iib
5.3 relation type ii  heterotic
6. main experimental tests for particle accelerators
6.1 longitudinal dimensions
6.2 transverse dimensions and low-scale quantum gravity
6.3 low-scale strings
7. physics
7.1 gauge hierarchy
7.2 unication
7.3 supersymmetry breaking
8. gravity modication and sub-millimeter forces
references

1.1 preliminaries

in critical (ten) dimensions, any consistent superstring theory has two param-
eters: a mass (or length) scale ms (ls = m 1
), and a dimensionless string
coupling s given by the vacuum expectation value (vev) of the dilaton eld
e<> = s

1,2:

s

s .

(1)

d = 10 :

ms = l1

s

upon compactication in d = 4 dimensions on a compact manifold of vol-
ume v , these parameters determine the four-dimensional (4d) planck mass (or
length) mp (lp = m 1
p ) and the dimensionless gauge coupling g at the string
scale. for simplicity, in the following we drop all numerical factors from our
formulae, while, when needed, we use the numerical values:

d = 4 :

mp  1.2  1019 gev

g  1/5 .

(2)

2

moreover, the weakly coupled condition implies that s << 1. our method
in the following consists in expressing the 10d parameters (ms, s) in terms
of the 4d ones and the compactication volume, in heterotic (s = h), type i
(s = i) and type ii (s = ii) string theories, and then discuss the conditions
on possible large volume or low string scale realizations, keeping the string
coupling small.

an important point is that the compactication volume will always be
chosen to be bigger than unity in string units, v > l6
s. this can be done by a
t-duality transformation which exchanges the role of the kaluza-klein (kk)
momenta p with the string winding modes w. for instance, in the case of one
compact dimension on a circle of radius r, they read:

p =

m
r

;

w =

nr
l2
s

,

(3)

with integers m, n. t-duality inverts the compactication radius and rescales
the string coupling:

r 

l2
s
r

s  s

ls
r

,

(4)

so that the lower-dimensional coupling spls/r remains invariant. when r
is smaller than the string scale, the winding modes become very light, while
t-duality trades them as kk momenta in terms of the dual radius r  l2
s/r.
the enhancement of the string coupling is then due to their multiplicity which
diverges in the limit r  0 (or r  ).

2 heterotic string and motivations for large volume compactica-

tions

in heterotic string, gauge and gravitational interactions appear at the same
(tree) level of perturbation theory (spherical world-sheet topology), and the
corresponding eective action is 1,2:

s =z d4x

v
2
h

(l8
h r + l6

h f 2) ,

(5)

upon compactication in four dimensions. here, for simplicity, we kept only
the gravitational and gauge kinetic terms, in a self-explanatory notation. iden-
tifying their respective coecients with the 4d parameters 1/l2
p and 1/g2, one
obtains:

mh = gmp

h = g

3

v
l3
h

.

(6)

using the values (2), one obtains that the heterotic string scale is near the
planck mass, mh  1018, while the string is weakly coupled when the internal
volume is of order of the string scale, v  l6
s. however, despite this fact, there
are physical motivations which suggest that large volume compactications,
and thus strong coupling, may be relevant in physics 3. these come from
gauge coupling unication and supersymmetry breaking by compactication,
which we discuss below.

2.1 gauge coupling unication

it is a known fact that the three gauge couplings of the standard model,
when extrapolated at high energies assuming the particle content of its n =
1 minimal supersymmetric extension (mssm), they meet at an energy scale
mgut  2  1016 gev. at the one-loop level, one has:

1
g2
a()

=

1
g2 +

ba
4

ln

m 2
gut
2

,

(7)

where  is the energy scale and a denotes the 3 gauge group factors of the
standard model su (3)  su (2)  u (1). the value of mgut is very near the
heterotic string scale, but it diers by roughly two orders of magnitude. if one
takes seriously this discrepancy, a possible way to explain it is by introducing
large compactication volume.

consider for instance one large dimension of size r, so that v  rl5

h. iden-
tifying mgut with the compactication scale r1, this requires r  100lh.
alternatively, one can use string threshold corrections which grow linearly with
r 4. assuming that they can account for the discrepancy, one needs roughly
r/lh  ln(m 2
gut)  10. as a result, the string coupling (6) equals
h  0.5  2 which enters in the strongly coupled regime.

h /m 2

2.2 supersymmetry breaking by compactication

in contrast to ordinary supergravity, where supersymmetry breaking can be
introduced at an arbitrary scale, through for instance the gravitino, gaugini
and other soft masses, in string theory this is not possible (perturbatively).
the only way to break supersymmetry at a scale hierarchically smaller than
the (heterotic) string scale is by introducing a large compactication radius
whose size is set by the breaking scale. this has to be therefore of the order of
a few tev in order to protect the gauge hierarchy. an explicit proof exists for
toroidal and fermionic constructions, although the result is believed to apply
to all compactications 5,6. this is one of the very few general predictions of

4

perturbative (heterotic) string theory that leads to the spectacular prediction
of the possible existence of extra dimensions accessible to future accelerators 3.
the main theoretical problem is though the strong coupling, as mentioned
above.

the strong coupling problem can be understood from the eective eld
theory point of view from the fact that at energies higher than the compacti-
cation scale, the kk excitations of gauge bosons and other standard model
particles will start being produced and contribute to various physical ampli-
tudes. their multiplicity turns very rapidly the logarithmic evolution of gauge
couplings into a power dependence 7, invalidating the perturbative descrip-
tion, as expected in a higher dimensional non-renormalizable gauge theory. a
possible way to avoid this problem is to impose conditions which prevent the
power corrections to low-energy couplings 3. for gauge couplings, this implies
the vanishing of the corresponding -functions, which is the case for instance
when the kk modes are organized in multiplets of n = 4 supersymmetry,
containing for every massive spin-1 excitation, 2 dirac fermions and 6 scalars.
examples of such models are provided by orbifolds with no n = 2 sectors with
respect to the large compact coordinate(s).

the simplest example of a one-dimensional orbifold is an interval of length
r, or equivalently s1/z2 with z2 the coordinate inversion. the hilbert
space is composed of the untwisted sector, obtained by the z2-projection of
the toroidal states (3), and of the twisted sector which is localized at the two
end-points of the interval, xed under the z2 transformations. this sector is
chiral and can thus naturally contain quarks and leptons, while gauge elds
propagate in the (5d) bulk.

similar conditions should be imposed to yukawas and in principle to
higher (non-renormalizable) eective couplings in order to ensure a soft ul-
traviolet (uv) behavior above the compactication scale. we now know that
the problem of strong coupling can be addressed using string s-dualities which
invert the string coupling and relate a strongly coupled theory with a weakly
coupled one 2. for instance, as we will discuss below, the strongly coupled het-
erotic theory with one large dimension is described by a weakly coupled type
iib theory with a tension at intermediate energies (rlh )1/2  1011 gev 8.
furthermore, non-abelian gauge interactions emerge from tensionless strings 9
whose eective theory describes a higher-dimensional non-trivial infrared xed
point of the renormalization group 10. this theory incorporates all conditions
to low-energy couplings that guarantee a smooth uv behavior above the com-
pactication scale. in particular, one recovers that kk modes of gauge bosons
form n = 4 supermultiplets, while matter elds are localized in four dimen-
sions. it is remarkable that the main features of these models were captured

5

already in the context of the heterotic string despite its strong coupling 3.

in the case of two or more large dimensions, the strongly coupled heterotic
string is described by a weakly coupled type iia or type i/i theory 8. more-
over, the tension of the dual string becomes of the order or even lower than
the compactication scale. in fact, as it will become clear in the following, in
the context of any string theory other than the heterotic, the simple relation
(6) that xes the string scale in terms of the planck mass does not hold and
therefore the string tension becomes an arbitrary parameter 11. it can be any-
where below the planck scale and as low as a few tev 12. the main advantage
of having the string tension at the tev, besides its obvious experimental inter-
est, is that it oers an automatic solution to the problem of gauge hierarchy,
alternative to low-energy supersymmetry or technicolor 13,14,15.

3 m-theory on s1/z2calabi-yau
the strongly coupled e8  e8 heterotic string compactied on a calabi-yau
manifold (cy) of volume v is described by the 11d m-theory compactied
on an interval s1/z2 of length r11 times the same calabi-yau 16. gravity
propagates in the 11d bulk, containing besides the metric and the gravitino a
3-form potential, while gauge interactions are conned on two 10d boundaries
(9-branes) localized at the two end-points of the interval and containing one
e8 factor each. the corresponding eective action is

it follows that

sh =z d4xv (

r11
m r +
l9

1
l6
m

f 2) .

lm = (g2v )1/6

r11 = g2 l3
m
l2
p

.

(8)

(9)

the validity of the 11d supergravity regime is when r11 > lm and v > l6
m
implying g < 1 by virtue of eq.(9). comparison with the heterotic relations
(6) yields:

lm = lh 1/3
h

r11 = lh h ,

(10)

which shows in particular that r11 is the string coupling in heterotic units. as
a result, at strong coupling h > 1 the m theory scale and the 11d radius are
larger than the heterotic length: r11 > lm > lh.

imposing the m-theory scale l1

m to be at 1 tev, one nds from the relations
(9) a value for the radius of the 11th dimension of the size of the solar system,
r11  108 kms, which is obviously excluded experimentally. on the other
hand, imposing a value for r11  1 mm which is the shortest length scale that

6

gravity is tested experimentally, one nds a lower bound for the m-theory scale
l1
m

 107 gev 17.
>
while the relations (9) seem to impose no theoretical constraint to lm ,
there is however another condition to be imposed beyond the classical approx-
imation 11. this is because at the next order the factorized space s1/z2  cy
is not any more solution of the 11d supergravity equations, which require the
size of the calabi-yau manifold to depend on the 11th coordinate x11 along
the interval. this can be seen for instance from the supersymmetry transfor-
mation of the 3-form potential (with eld-strength g(4)) which acquires non
vanishing contributions from the 10d boundaries:

g(4) = l6

m (x11)(cid:18)trf  f 

1
2

trr  r(cid:19) + (x11  r11  x11, f  f ) .

(11)
as a result, the volume of cy varies linearly along the interval, to leading
order:

v (x11) = v (0)  x11l3

  (trf   f   trf  f ) ,

(12)

mzcy

where   v 1/3 is the kahler form on the six-manifold cy.
it follows that there is an upper bound on r11, otherwise the gauge cou-
pling in one of the two walls blows up when the volume of cy shrinks to
zero size. choosing v (0)  v and imposing v (r)  0, eq.(12) yields
r11

m and through the relations (9):

 v 2/3/l3
<

lp

 g5/3lm = g2v 1/6 .
>

(13)

this implies a lower bound for the m-theory scale l1
 g5/3mp , or equiva-
>
m
lently for the unication scale mgut  v 1/6 >
 g2mp . taking into account
the numerical factors, on nds for the lower bound the right order of magni-
tude mgut  1016 gev, providing a solution to the perturbative discrepancy
between the unication and heterotic string scales, discussed in section 2.1 11.
note that this bound does not hold in the case of symmetric embedding, where
one has trf   f   trf  f = 0 and thus the correction in eq.(12) vanishes.
4 type i/i string theory and d-branes

in ten dimensions, the strongly coupled so(32) heterotic string is described by
the type i string, or upon t-dualities to type i 18,2.a type i/i is a theory of
closed and open unoriented strings. closed strings describe gravity, while gauge

ain lower dimensions, type i theories can also describe a class of m-theory compactications.

7

interactions are described by open strings whose ends are conned to propagate
on d-branes. it follows that the 6 internal compact dimensions are separated
into longitudinal (parallel) and transverse to the d-branes. assuming that the
standard model is localized on a p-brane with p  3, there are p3 longitudinal
and 9  p transverse compact dimensions. in contrast to the heterotic string,
gauge and gravitational interactions appear at dierent order in perturbation
theory and the corresponding eective action reads 1,2:

si =z d10x

1
2
i l8

i r +z dp+1x

1

i lp3

i

f 2 ,

(14)

where the 1/i factor in the gauge kinetic terms corresponds to the disk dia-
gram.

upon compactication in four dimensions, the planck length and gauge

couplings are given to leading order by

1
l2
p

=

vkv
2
i l8
i

,

1
g2 =

vk

i lp3

i

,

(15)

where vk (v) denotes the compactication volume longitudinal (transverse)
to the p-brane. from the second relation above, it follows that the requirement
of weak coupling i < 1 implies that the size of the longitudinal space must
be of order of the string length (vk  lp3
), while the transverse volume v
remains unrestricted. one thus has

i

m 2

p =

1

g4vk

m 2+n

i rn

 ,

i = g2vk ,

(16)

>
to be compared with the heterotic relations (6). here, vk
 1 is the longitudinal
volume in string units, and we assumed an isotropic transverse space of n =
9  p compact dimensions of radius r.

4.1 low-scale strings and extra-large transverse dimensions

from the relations (16), it follows that the type i/i string scale can be made
hierarchically smaller than the planck mass at the expense of introducing ex-
tra large transverse dimensions that interact only gravitationally, while keeping
the string coupling weak 14,19. the weakness of 4d gravity mi/mp is then at-
tributed to the largeness of the transverse space r/li. an important property
of these models is that gravity becomes strong at the string scale, although
the string coupling remains weak. in fact, the rst relation of eq.(16) can be

8

understood as a consequence of the (4 + n)-dimensional gauss law for gravity,
with

= g4l2+n

i

vk

(17)

g(4+n)

n

the newtons constant in 4 + n dimensions.

to be more explicit, taking the type i string scale mi to be at 1 tev,
one nds a size for the transverse dimensions r varying from 108 km, .1 mm
(103 ev), down to .1 fermi (10 mev) for n = 1, 2, or 6 large dimensions,
respectively. the case n = 1 corresponds to m-theory and is obviously exper-
imentally excluded. on the other hand, all other possibilities are consistent
with observations, although barely in the case n = 2 20. in particular, sub-
millimeter transverse directions are compatible with the present constraints
from short-distance gravity measurements which tested newtons law up to
the cm 21. the strongest bounds come from astrophysics and cosmology and
concern mainly the case n = 2. in fact, graviton emission during supernovae
cooling restricts the 6d planck scale to be larger than about 50 tev, imply-
>
ing mi
 7 tev, while the graviton decay contribution to the cosmic diuse
gamma radiation gives even stronger bounds of about 110 tev and 15 tev for
the two scales, respectively.

if our brane world is supersymmetric, which protects the hierarchy in the
usual way, the string scale is an arbitrary parameter and can be at higher
energies, in principle up to the planck scale. however, in the context of type
i/i theory, the string scale should not be higher than intermediate energies
 1011 gev, due to the generic existence of other branes with non super-
<
mi
symmetric world volumes 22.
indeed, in this case, our world would feel the
eects of supersymmetry breaking through gravitationally suppressed interac-
tions of order m 2
i /mp , that should be less than a tev. in this context, the
value mi  1011 gev could be favored, since it would coincide with the scale of
supersymmetry breaking in a hidden sector, without need of non-perturbative
eects such as gaugino condensation. moreover, the gauge hierarchy would be
minimized, since one needs to introduce transverse dimensions with size just
two orders of magnitude larger than li (in the case of n = 6) to account for
the ratio mi /mp  108, according to eq.(16). note also that the weak scale
mw  m 2
4.2 relation type i/i  heterotic

i /mp becomes t-dual to the planck scale.

we will now show that the above type i/i models describe particular strongly
coupled heterotic vacua with large dimensions 24,8. more precisely, we will
consider the heterotic string compactied on a 6d manifold with k large di-
mensions of radius r  lh and 6 k string-size dimensions and show that for

9

k  4 it has a perturbative type i description 8.

in ten dimensions, heterotic and type i theories are related by an s-duality:

i =

1
h

li = 1/2

h lh ,

(18)

which can be obtained for instance by comparing eqs.(6) with eqs.(15) in the
case of 9-branes (p = 9, v = 1, vk = v ). using from eq.(6) that h 
(r/lh)k/2, one nds

i (cid:18) r

lh(cid:19)k/2

li (cid:18) r

lh(cid:19)k/4

lh .

(19)

it follows that the type i scale mi appears as a non-perturbative threshold
17. for k < 4, it
in the heterotic string at energies much lower than mh
appears at intermediate energies r1 < mi < mh , for k = 4, it becomes of
the order of the compactication scale mi  r1, while for k > 4, it appears
at low energies mi < r1 24. moreover, since i  1, one would naively
think that weakly coupled type i theory could describe the heterotic string
with any number k  1 of large dimensions. however, this is not true because
there are always some dimensions smaller than the type i size (6  k for k < 4
and 6 for k > 4) and one has to perform t-dualities (4) in order to account
for the multiplicity of light winding modes in the closed string sector, as we
discussed in section 1.1. note that open strings have no winding modes along
longitudinal dimensions and no kk momenta along transverse directions. the
t-dualities have two eects: (i) they transform the corresponding longitudinal
directions to transverse ones by exchanging kk momenta with winding modes,
and (ii) they increase the string coupling according to eq.(4) and therefore it
is not clear that type i theory remains weakly coupled.

indeed for k < 4, after performing 6  k t-dualities on the heterotic size
dimensions, with respect to the type i scale, one obtains a type i theory with
d(3 + k)-branes but strong coupling:

l2
i

lh (cid:18) r

lh(cid:19)k/2

i  i = i(cid:18) li

lh(cid:19)6k

lh  lh =

lh

1 .
(20)
for k  4, we must perform t-dualities in all six internal directions.b as a
result, the type i theory has d3-branes with 6  k transverse dimensions of

(cid:18) r

lh(cid:19)k(4k)/4

bthe case k = 4 can be treated in the same way, since there are 4 dimensions that have type
i string size and remain inert under t-duality.

10

radius lh given in eq.(20) and k transverse dimensions of radius r = l2
(r/lh)k/21, while its coupling remains weak (of order unity):

i /r 

i  i = i(cid:18) li

r(cid:19)k
lh(cid:19)6k(cid:18) li

 1 .

(21)

it follows that the type i theory with n extra-large transverse dimensions
oers a weakly coupled dual description for the heterotic string with k = 4, 5, 6
large dimensions 8. k = 4 is described by n = 2, k = 6 (for so(32) gauge
group) is described by n = 6, while for n = 5 one nds a type i model
with 5 large transverse dimensions and one extra-large. the case k = 4 is
particularly interesting: the heterotic string with 4 large dimensions, say at
a tev, is described by a perturbative type i theory with the string scale at
the tev and 2 transverse dimensions of millimeter size that are t-dual to the
2 heterotic string size coordinates. this is depicted in the following diagram,
together with the case k = 6, where we use heterotic length units lh = 1:

h: k = 4

lh , r5,6

r1,2,3,4 = r

l

i: n = 2

h: k = 6

l

i: n = 6

1

lh

1

5 type ii theories

r2

r5,6

-

-

li

r1,,6 = r

r3/2

r2

li

r1,,6

upon compactication to 6 dimensions or lower, the heterotic string admits
another dual description in terms of type ii (iia or iib) string theory25,2. since
in 10 dimensions type ii theories have n = 2 supersymmetry,c in contrast to
the heterotic string which has n = 1, the compactication manifolds on the two
sides should be dierent, so that the resulting theories in lower dimensions have
the same number of supersymmetries. the rst example arises in 6 dimensions,
where the e8  e8 heterotic string compactied on the four-torus t 4 is s-dual
to type iia compactied on the k3 manifold that has su (2) holonomy and
breaks half of the supersymmetries. in lower dimensions, type iia and type
iib are related by t-duality (or mirror symmetry).

ctype iia (iib) has two 10d supercharges of opposite (same) chirality.

11

here, for simplicity, we shall restrict ourselves to 4d compactications of
type ii on k3  t 2, yielding n = 4 supersymmetry, or more generally on
calabi-yau manifolds that are k3 brations, yielding n = 2 supersymmetry.
they are obtained by replacing t 2 by a base two-sphere over which k3
varies, and they are dual to corresponding heterotic compactications on k3
t 2. more interesting phenomenological models with n = 1 supersymmetry
can be obtained by a freely acting orbifold on the two sides, although the
most general n = 1 compactication would require f-theory on calabi-yau
fourfolds, which is poorly understood at present 26.

in contrast to heterotic and type i strings, non-abelian gauge symmetries
in type ii models arise non-perturbatively (even though at arbitrarily weak
coupling) in singular compactications, where the massless gauge bosons are
provided by d2-branes in type iia (d3-branes in iib) wrapped around non-
trivial vanishing 2-cycles (3-cycles). the resulting gauge interactions are local-
ized on k3 (similar to a neveu-schwarz ve-brane), while matter multiplets
would arise from further singularities, localized completely on the 6d internal
space 27.

5.1 low-scale iia strings and tiny coupling

in type iia non-abelian gauge symmetries arise in six dimensions from d2-
branes wrapped around non-trivial vanishing 2-cycles of a singular k3.d it
follows that gauge kinetic terms are independent of the string coupling iia
and the corresponding eective action is 2:

siia =z d10x

1
2
iial8

iiar +z d6x

1
l2
iia

f 2 ,

(24)

which should be compared with (8) of heterotic and (14) of type i/i. as a
result, upon compactication in four dimensions, for instance on a two-torus
t 2, the gauge couplings are determined by its size vt 2 , while the planck mass
is controlled by the 6d string coupling 6iia:

1
g2 =

vt 2
l2
iia

1
l2
p

=

vt2
2
6iial4

iia

=

1
2

6iia

1
g2l2

iia

.

(25)

the area of t 2 should therefore be of order l2

iia, while the string scale is

expressed by

miia = g6iiamp = giiamp

l2
iiavk3

,

(26)

dnote though that the abelian cartan subgroup is already in the perturbative spectrum of
the ramond-ramond sector.

12

with vk3 the volume of k3. thus, in contrast to the type i relation (16) where
only the volume of the internal six-manifold appears, we now have the freedom
to use both the string coupling and the k3 volume to separate the planck mass
from a string scale, say, at 1 tev 12,8. in particular, we can choose a string-size
internal manifold, and have an ultra-weak coupling iia = 1014 to account
for the hierarchy between the electroweak and the planck scales 8. as a result,
despite the fact that the string scale is so low, gravity remains weak up to the
planck scale and string interactions are suppressed by the tiny string coupling,
or equivalently by the 4d planck mass. thus, there are no observable eects in
particle accelerators, other than the production of kk excitations along the two
tev dimensions of t 2 with gauge interactions. furthermore, the excitations of
gauge multiplets have n = 4 supersymmetry, even when k3  t 2 is replaced
by a calabi-yau threefold which is a k3 bration, while matter multiplets are
localized on the base (replacing the t 2) and have no kk excitations, as the
twisted states of heterotic orbifolds.

above, we discussed the simplest case of type ii compactications with
string scale at the tev and all internal radii having the string size. in principle,
one can allow some of the k3 (transverse) directions to be large, keeping the
string scale low. from eq.(26), it follows that the string coupling iia increases
making gravity strong at distances lpvk3/l2
iia larger than the planck length.
in particular, it becomes strong at the string scale (tev), when iia is of order
unity. this corresponds to vk3/l4
iia  1028, implying a fermi size for the four
k3 compact dimensions.

5.2 large dimensions in type iib

above we assumed that both directions of t 2 have the string size, so that its
volume is of order l2
iia, as implied by eq.(25). however, one could choose one
direction much bigger than the string scale and the other much smaller. for
instance, in the case of a rectangular torus of radii r and r, vt 2 = rr  l2
with r  liia  r. this can be treated by performing a t-duality (4) along
r to type iib: r  l2
iia/r and iia  iib = iialiia/r with liia = liib.
one thus obtains:

iia

1
g2 =

r
r

1
l2
p

=

vt2
2
6iibl4

iib

=

r2

2

6iib

1
g2l4

iib

.

(27)

which shows that the gauge couplings are now determined by the ratio of the
two radii, or in general by the shape of t 2, while the planck mass is controlled
by its size, as well as by the 6d type iib string coupling. the string scale can

13

thus be expressed as 8:

m 2

iib = g6iib

mp
r

.

(28)

<

comparing these relations with eqs.(25) and (26), it is clear that the sit-
uation in type iib is the same as in type iia, unless the size of t 2 is much
larger than the string length, r  liib. since t 2 is felt by gauge interac-
tions, its size cannot be larger than o(tev1) implying that the type iib
string scale should be much larger than tev. from eq.(28) and 6iib < 1, one
 pmp /r, so that the largest value for the string tension, when
nds miib
r  1tev1, is an intermediate scale  1011 gev when the string coupling is
of order unity.
as we will show below, this is precisely the case that describes the heterotic
string with one tev dimension, which we discussed is section 2.
it is the
only example of longitudinal dimensions larger than the string length in a
weakly coupled theory. in the energy range between the kk scale 1/r and
the type iib string scale, one has an eective 6d theory without gravity at
a non-trivial superconformal xed point described by a tensionless string 9,10.
this is because in type iib gauge symmetries still arise non-perturbatively
from vanishing 2-cycles of k3, but take the form of tensionless strings in 6
dimensions, given by d3-branes wrapped on the vanishing cycles. only after
further compactication does this theory reduce to a standard gauge theory,
whose coupling involves the shape rather than the volume of the two-torus, as
described above. since the type iib coupling is of order unity, gravity becomes
strong at the type iib string scale and the main experimental signals at tev
energies are similar to those of type iia models with tiny string coupling.

5.3 relation type ii  heterotic

we will now show that the above low-scale type ii models describe some
strongly coupled heterotic vacua and, in particular, the cases with k = 1, 2, 3
large dimensions that have not a perturbative description in terms of type
i theory 8. as we described in the beginning of section 5, in 6 dimensions
the heterotic e8  e8 superstring compactied on t 4 is s-dual to type iia
compactied on k3:

6iia =

1
6h

liia = 6h lh ,

(29)

which can be obtained, for instance, by comparing eqs.(25) with (6), using
h/vt 4 . however, in contrast to the case of heterotic  type i/i
6h = h l2
duality, the compactication manifolds on the two sides are not the same and

14

a more detailed analysis is needed to study the precise mapping of t 4 to k3,
besides the general relations (29).

this can be done easily in the context of m-theory compactied on the
product space of a line interval of length ri with four circles of radii r1,,
28,8: s1/z2(ri )  s1(r1)  t 3(r2, r3, r4). one can then interpret this
r4
compactication in various ways by choosing appropriately one of the radii as
that of the eleventh dimension. considering for instance ri = r11, one nds
the (strongly coupled) heterotic string compactied on t 4(r1, , r4), while
choosing r1 = r11, one nds type iia compactied on k3 of squashed
shape s1/z2(ri )  t 3( r2, r3, r4), where the 3 radii ri will be determined
below. in each of the two cases, one can use the duality relations (10) to obtain

ri = h lh = 6h

v 1/2
t 4
lh

r1 = iialiia = 6iia

v 1/2
k3
liia

,

(30)

while using eqs.(29) one nds a mapping between the volume of the internal
4-manifold of one theory and a preferred radius of the other, in corresponding
string units:

ri
liia

=

v 1/2
t 4
l2
h

r1
lh

=

v 1/2
k3
liia

.

(31)

the correspondence among the remaining 3 radii can be found, for instance,
by noticing that the s-duality transformations leave invariant the shape of t 3:

ri
rj

=

ri
rj

i, j = 2, 3, 4 ,

(32)

m /(rjrk) with i 6= j 6= k 6= i and l3

which yields ri = l3
h . this
relation, together with eq.(31), gives the precise mapping between t 4 and k3,
which completes the s-duality transformations (29). we recall that on the type
ii side, the four k3 directions corresponding to ri and ri are transverse to
the 5-brane where gauge interactions are localized.

m = h l3

using the above results, one can now study the possible perturbative
type ii descriptions of 4d heterotic compactications on t 4(r1, , r4) 
t 2(r5, r6) with a certain number k of large dimensions of common size r
and string coupling h  (r/lh )k/2  1. from eq.(29), the type ii string
tension appears as a non-perturbative threshold at energies of the order of
the t 2 compactication scale, lii  r5r6. following the steps we used in

the context of heterotic  type i duality, after t-dualizing the radii which are
smaller than the string size, one can easily show that the t 2 directions must
be among the k large dimensions in order to obtain a perturbative type ii
description.

15

it follows that for k = 1 with, say, r6  r  lh , the type ii threshold
appears at an intermediate scale lii  rlh, together with all 4 directions of
k3, while the second, heterotic size, direction of t 2 is t-dual (with respect to
lii ) to r: r5  l2
ii /lh  r. thus, one nds a type iib description with two
large longitudinal dimensions along the t 2 and string coupling of order unity,
which is the example discussed in sections 2.2 and 5.2.

h: k = 1

lh , r1,,4, r5

r

r6 = r

1

liib, k3

iib, 1
for k  2, the type ii scale becomes of the order of the compactication scale,
lii  r. for k = 2, all directions of k3  t 2 have the type ii size, while
the type ii string coupling is innitesimally small, ii  lh /r, which is the
example discussed in section 5.1.

t 2( r5, r6)

-

-

l

l

h: k = 2

lh , r1,,4

r5,6 = r

1

ii,1/r
for k = 3, lii  r5,6  r, while the four (transverse) directions of k3 are
extra large: ri  ri  r3/2/lh .

lii , k3, t 2(r5,6)

h: k = 3

lh , r2,3,4

r1 = r5,6 = r

l
ii, 1

1

lii , t 2(r5,6)

r3/2

k3

-

for k = 4, the type ii dual theory provides a perturbative description
alternative to the type i with n = 2 extra large transverse dimensions. for
k = 5, there is no perturbative type ii description, while for k = 6, the heterotic
e8  e8 theory is described by a weakly coupled type iia with all scales of
order r apart one k3 direction (ri ) which is extra large. this is equivalent to
type i with n = 1 extra large transverse dimension. note that this case was
not found from heterotic so(32)  type i duality since the heterotic so(32)
string is equivalent to e8e8 only up to t-duality, which cannot be performed
when k = 6 and there are no leftover dimensions of heterotic size. in table
1, we summarize the weakly coupled dual descriptions of the heterotic string
with large (tev) dimensions, which also provide all possible (perturbative)
low-scale string realizations.

16

6 main experimental tests for particle accelerators

the main predictions of string theories with large volume compactications
and/or low fundamental scale discussed above follow from the existence of
(i) large longitudinal dimensions felt by gauge interactions, (ii) extra large
transverse transverse dimensions felt only by gravity that becomes strong at
low energies, and (iii) strings with low tension.

6.1 longitudinal dimensions

they exist generically in all realizations of table 1, with the exception of type
i/i tev strings with six transverse dimensions in the fermi region. their
main implication is the existence of kk excitations (3) for all standard model
gauge bosons and possibly the higgs 3. they couple to quarks and leptons
which are localized in the compact space, and generate at low energies four-
fermion and higher dimensional eective operators 29. the coupling of a bulk
to two boundary elds contains a form factor which suppresses exponentially
the heavy kk modes while in the large radius limit it reduces to the 4d gauge
coupling. thus, the sum over the exchange of kk excitations, which diverges
when the number of extra (longitudinal) dimensions dk  2, is regulated by the
form factor and yields for the strength of 4-fermion operators  r2(r/ls)dk2,
in the large radius limit; for dk = 2, there are logarithmic corrections. the
current limits on the size of extra longitudinal dimensions arise from the bounds
of compositeness or from other indirect eects, such as in the fermi constant
and z-width, and lie in the range of a couple of tev, if the string scale is not
far from the compactication scale 29,30. otherwise, for dk > 2, the limits are
obviously much higher.

the most exciting possibility is of course their discovery through direct
production of kk excitations, for instance in hadron colliders such as the
tevatron and lhc, via drell-yan processes 31. the corresponding kk reso-
nances are narrow with a width-to-mass ratio /m  g2  a few per cent, and
thus the typical expected signal is the production of a double (or multiple)

table 1: realizations of large dimensions and/or low string scale.

theories
type i/i
type iia

type iib

k tev1 dims

 dims

strong gravity

string scale

6  n

2

6  n

2

n  2 (mm - fm)

tev1

2  n  4 (mm - fm)

1011 gev

tev

1019 gev

tev

1011 gev

tev
tev
tev

1011 gev

17

100

v
e
g

/
 
s
t
n
e
v
e

10-2

10-4

lhc

( 1/r = 3 tev )

d=2

d=1

10-6

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

7000

dilepton mass (gev)

figure 1: first resonances in the lhc experiment due to a kk state for one and two extra
dimensions at 3 tev.

resonance for dk = 1 (or dk > 1), corresponding to the rst kk mode(s) of the
photon and z, very nearly spaced one from the other. this is depicted in g. 1
using logarithmic scale. on the other hand, the non-observation of deviations
from the standard model prediction for the total number of lepton pairs at
lhc would translate into a lower bound of about 7 and 9 tev, for one and
two large dimensions, respectively.

6.2 transverse dimensions and low-scale quantum gravity

they exist generically in all type i/i realizations of tev strings and their size
can be as large as a millimeter, which is the shortest distance up to which
gravity has been directly tested experimentally, as we discussed in section 4.1.
the main experimental signal in particle accelerators is graviton emission into
the higher-dimensional bulk, leading to jets and missing energy events 14.

for illustration, the simplest process is the gluon annihilation into a gravi-
ton which escapes into the extra dimensions. the corresponding cross-section
is given by (in the weak coupling limit) 14:

(e) 

en

m n+2

i

i(cid:1)2
(cid:0)1  2e2/m 2
i )4 ,
 (1  e2/m 2
18

(36)

where e is the center of mass energy and n the number of extra large trans-
verse dimensions. the above expression exhibits 3 kinematic regimes with
dierent behavior. at high energies e  mi , it falls o exponentially due
to the uv softness of strings. at energies of the order of the string scale,
it exhibits a sequence of poles at the position of regge resonances. finally,
at low energies e  mi , it falls o as a power (e)  en/m n+2
, dictated
by the eective higher dimensional gravity which requires the presence of the
(4 + n)-dimensional newtons constant g(4+n)
from eq.(17).

i

n

 ln+2

i

since at low energies the eective (higher dimensional) eld theory is valid,
one can do reliable computations within it and obtain model independent pre-
dictions that take into account graviton emission in the bulk 32. it turns out
that lhc will be sensitive to higher-dimensional gravity scales in the range
of 3 to 5 tev, when the number of transverse dimensions varies from six at
the sub-fermi to two at the sub-millimeter region (where the eect becomes
stronger). when the available energy becomes higher than the gravity scale,
gravitational interactions are strong and particle colliders can become the best
probes for quantum gravity.

6.3 low-scale strings

the main experimental signal of low-scale strings is the production of higher-
spin regge excitations for all standard model particles, with same (internal)
quantum numbers and mass-squared increasing linearly with spin. for in-
stance, the excitations of the gluon could show up as a series of peaks in jet
production at lhc. however, the corresponding resonances might be very nar-
row, with a width-to-mass ratio /m  2
i  a few per thousand if vk  1
[see eq.(16)], and thus dicult to detect. on the other hand, in the type
ii realization of tev strings of table 1 using an innitesimal string coupling
ii  1014, string interactions are extremely suppressed and there are no
observable eects other than kk excitations of gauge particles, all the way up
to (4d) planckian energies.

7 physics

7.1 gauge hierarchy

in the context of tev strings, the question of gauge hierarchy, i.e. of why the
planck mass is much bigger than the weak scale, is translated into the question
of why there are transverse dimensions much larger than the string scale, or
why the string coupling is innitesimally small. from eq.(16) in type i/i
strings, the required hierarchy r/li varies from 1015 to 105, when the number

19

of extra dimensions in the bulk varies from n = 2 to n = 6, respectively, while
in type ii strings with no large dimensions, the required value of the coupling
ii is 1014.

besides the hard dynamical question on the origin of the hierarchy, there is
a technical aspect, which consists of understanding its stability against possible
large quantum corrections. this is precisely the problem that supersymmetry
solves, softly broken at the tev scale. in our context, this problem can be
studied by examining the limit of decompactication r/li  , or of van-
ishing coupling ii  0. as we will see below, in general this limit does not
exist, implying for instance that the transverse space does not decouple in the
decompactication limit 15. the reason is that the uv cuto of the eective
eld theory on the brane is not always the string scale but the winding scale
rm 2
i , dual to the large transverse dimensions, which is much larger than the
type i/i string tension 33. this can happen when the number of transverse
dimensions is less or equal to two, or more generally when there is eective
propagation of gravity in one or two transverse dimensions.

the source of this divergence is the emission of (massless) closed string
tadpoles in the bulk, which can be attached to any physical amplitude involving
open string elds living on our world-brane. thus, the potential divergence
is a string infrared eect but, from the point of view of the brane theory, it
looks as a uv correction that modies its low-energy eective couplings. the
contribution of these local tadpoles t to the world-brane amplitudes can be
estimated easily as follows 15:

t 

1

v x|p|<ms

1
p2


f (~p) ,

(37)

d is the volume of the transverse space, ~p = (m1/r
where v = r
md/r) is the transverse momentum carried away by the massless closed
string, and the sum is restricted to transverse distances l large compared
to the string length l  1/p  ls. f (~p) are the local tadpoles, fourier-
transformed to momentum space, arising from the distribution of the d-branes
and the orientifolds that act as classical point-like sources in the transverse
space. consistency of the theory requires the global tadpole cancellation con-
dition f (0) = 0, implying the vanishing of the total charge (d-branes versus
orientifolds) 1. in the simplest toroidal compactication (with vanishing anti-
symmetric tensor), this xes the number of d-branes to 32 and tadpoles take
the generic form:

f (~p)  32

d

yi=1

1 + ()mi

2

 2

cos(~p~xa)! ,

16

xa=1

(38)

20

where the orientifolds are located at the corners of the cell [0, r]d, and ~xa
are the transverse positions of the 32 d-branes, which correspond to wilson
lines of the t-dual picture.

for generic positions of the d-branes, the tadpole contribution (37) has

the following behavior in the decompactication limit:

o(r)
o(ln r)
o(1)

for
for
for

d = 1
d = 2
d > 2

,

(39)

t 


p /m 3

which is dictated by the large-distance behavior of the two-point function in
the d-dimensional transverse space. it follows that when there is one dimen-
sion much larger than the others (d = 1), there are in general large linear
corrections yielding through eq.(16) quadratic uv divergences regulated by the
4d planck mass, r  m 2
i . in general, one expects such large corrections
to occur in particular in gauge kinetic terms, that drive the theory rapidly to a
strong coupling singularity and, thus, forbid the size of the transverse space to
become much larger than the string length. this is precisely the phenomenon
we studied in section 3, for the 11th dimension of m-theory compactied on
s1/z2  cy.
the conclusion is that the technical aspect of gauge hierarchy is solved
without the need of supersymmetry in the following two cases 15. (i) in spe-
cial models in which tadpoles cancel locally in the transverse space. in the
one-dimensional case (d = 1), this happens when d-branes are equally dis-
tributed at the two xed points of the orientifold, generalizing the condition
of symmetric embedding in m-theory compactications discussed in section 3.
(ii) when d  2. the limiting case d = 2 is particularly attractive because
it allows the eective couplings of the brane theory to depend logarithmically
on the size of the transverse space, or equivalently on mp , exactly as in the
case of softly broken supersymmetry. moreover, similarly to renormalizable
quantum eld theories, the logarithmic divergences can be absorbed into a -
nite number of parameters, that correspond to the values of bulk elds at the
(transverse) position of our world-brane which determine all eective couplings
of the brane theory. in addition, the renormalization group resummation is
replaced by the classical equations of motion of the eective 2d supergravity
in the transverse space, with higher-derivative terms being ignored because
the variations of elds are logarithmic. as a result, the case of d = 2 leaves
open the possibility of dynamically determining the hierarchy, by minimizing
an eective potential on our world-brane that depends logarithmically on the
size of transverse space 34. this is again in analogy to the inverse hierarchy
idea in supersymmetric eld theories.

21

it turns out that low-scale type ii theories with innitesimal string coupling
share many common properties with type i when d = 2 8. in fact, the limit
of vanishing coupling does not exist due to subtleties related to the singular
character of the compactication manifold and to the non perturbative origin of
gauge symmetries. in general, there are corrections depending logarithmically
on the string coupling, similarly to the case of type i strings with 2 transverse
dimensions.

7.2 unication

one of the motivations for supersymmetry comes from the apparent unication
of gauge couplings discussed in section 2.1. it is then important to study this
issue in the context of the new framework of low-scale strings. one possibility is
to use power-law running that may accelerate unication in an energy region
where the theory becomes higher dimensional 35. within the eective eld
theory, the summation over the kk modes above the compactication scale
and below some energy scale e  r1 yields:

1
g2
a(e)

=

1

a(r1) 
g2

bsm
a
2

ln(er) 

bkk
a

2 (cid:8)cd(cid:2)(er)d  1(cid:3)  ln(er)(cid:9) ,

(40)

where cd = d/2/d(1 + d/2) for d extra (longitudinal) dimensions. the rst
logarithmic term corresponds to the usual 4d running controlled by the stan-
dard model beta-functions bsm
, while the next term is the contribution of
the kk tower dominated by the power-like dependence (er)d associated to
the eective multiplicity of kk modes and controlled by the corresponding
beta-functions bkk

a

.

a

in supersymmetric theories, the kk excitations have at least n = 2 ex-
tended supersymmetry obtained by standard dimensional reduction of the
higher-dimensional theory. assuming the mssm particle content below the
compactication scale, its minimal n = 2 extension requires gauge boson ex-
citations to form n = 2 vector multiplets, containing for every spin-1 a dirac
fermion and 2 real scalars, while higgs and matter multiplets do not apriori
need to have excitations if they belong to boundary (twisted-like) states. it
was observed however that if higgs excitations form, level by level, one n = 2
hypermultiplete (containing 1 dirac fermion and 4 scalars), the unication
of gauge couplings is approximately maintained for any value of r, but it
arises very rapidly above the compactication scale due to the power evolu-
tion (40) 35. for instance, when d = 1 and r1  1 tev, the gauge couplings

ethis is the case when for instance one higgs doublet comes from the bulk and the other
from the boundary.

22

meet around 50 tev within 2%, while the ve-dimensional coupling ga(er)1/2
remains perturbative. the main disadvantage of this approach is that the re-
sult is very sensitive (power-like) to the initial conditions and thus to string
threshold corrections, in contrast to the usual unication based on logarithmic
evolution.

this scenario requires obviously that the string scale is low and, therefore,
should be analyzed in the context of type i/i superstring theory.
it turns
out that in supersymmetric vacua string loop corrections to gauge couplings
diverge at most quadratically with the radius, even if there are more than
two large dimensions (d > 2). moreover, in type i/i theory the quadratic
terms are included in the tree-level expression of the couplings, leaving only
the possibility of linearly divergent corrections when d = 1 33,36.

on the other hand, following the analysis of the previous subsection 7.1,
there is an alternative possibility to obtain large threshold corrections when
the eective transverse dimensionality of the bulk is d  2.
in particu-
lar, when d = 2, there are logarithmic corrections that could restore the
old unication picture with a gut scale given by the winding scale, which
for millimeter-size dimensions has the correct order of magnitude 33,15,37. in
this way, the running due to the large desert in energies is replaced by an
eective running due to the large desert in transverse distances from our
world-brane. however, an explicit computation of string threshold corrections
in n = 1 orientifolds shows that both the linear and logarithmic contributions
are controlled by the corresponding n = 2 -functions and, thus, are model
dependent 36.

indeed, the one-loop corrected gauge couplings in n = 1 orientifolds are

given by the following expression:

1
g2
a()

=

1
g2 + sam +

ba
4

ln

m 2
i
2 

bn =2
a,i
4 {ln ti + f (ui)} ,

(41)

3

xi=1

where the rst two terms in the r.h.s. correspond to the tree-level (disk) contri-
bution and the remaining ones are the one-loop (genus-1) corrections. here, we
assumed that all gauge group factors correspond to the same type of d-branes,
so that gauge couplings are the same to lowest order (given by g). m denotes
a combination of the twisted moduli, whose vevs blow-up the orbifold singu-
larities and allow the transition to smooth (calabi-yau) manifolds. however,
in all known examples, these vevs are xed to m = 0 from the vanishing of
the d-terms of anomalous u (1)s.

as expected, the one-loop corrections contain an infrared divergence, reg-
ulated by the low-energy scale , that produces the usual 4d running con-
trolled by the n = 1 beta-functions ba. the last sum displays the string

23

a,i

threshold corrections that receive contributions only from n = 2 sectors, con-
trolled by the corresponding n = 2 beta-functions bn =2
. they depend on
the geometric moduli ti and ui, parameterizing the size and complex struc-
ture of the three internal compactication planes. in the simplest case of a
rectangular torus of radii r1 and r2, t = r1r2/l2
i and u = r1/r2. the

function f (u ) = ln(cid:0)reu|(iu )|4(cid:1) with  the dedekind-eta function; for large
u , f (u ) grows linearly with u . thus, from expression (41), it follows that
when r1  r2, there are logarithmic corrections  ln(r1/li), while when
r1 > r2, the corrections grow linearly as r1/r2. note that in both cases, the
corrections are proportional to the n = 2 -functions. obviously, unication
based on logarithmic evolution requires the two (transverse) radii to be much
larger than the string length, while power-low unication can happen either
when there is one longitudinal dimension a bit larger than the string scale
(r1/r2  rk/li keeping i < 1), or when one transverse direction is bigger
than the rest of the bulk.

7.3 supersymmetry breaking

following the discussion of subsection 7.1, tev scale strings oer a solution to
the technical (at least) aspect of gauge hierarchy without the need of super-
symmetry, provided there is no eective propagation of bulk elds in a single
transverse dimension, or else closed string tadpoles should cancel locally. it
is then natural to ask the question whether there is any motivation leftover
for supersymmetry or not. this comes from the problem of the cosmological
constant 14.

in fact, in a non-supersymmetric string theory, the bulk energy density
behaves generically as bulk  m 4+n
, where n is the number of transverse
dimensions much larger than the string length. in the type i/i context, this
induces a cosmological constant on our world-brane which is enhanced by the
volume of the transverse space v  rn
. when expressed in terms of the
4d parameters using the type i/i mass-relation (16), it is translated to a
quadratically dependent contribution on the planck mass:

s

brane  m 4+n

i rn

  m 2

i m 2
p ,

(42)

where we used s = i. this contribution is in fact the analogue of the quadratic
divergent term strm2 in softly broken supersymmetric theories, with mi play-
ing the role of the supersymmetry breaking scale.
the brane energy density (42) is far above the (low) string scale mi and
in general destabilizes the hierarchy that one tries to enforce. one way out
is to resort to special models with broken supersymmetry and vanishing or

24

exponentially small cosmological constant 38. alternatively, one could conceive
a dierent scenario, with supersymmetry broken primordially on our world-
brane maximally, i.e. at the string scale which is of order of a few tev. in
this case the brane cosmological constant would be, by construction, o(m 4
i ),
while the bulk would only be aected by gravitationally suppressed radiative
corrections and thus would be almost supersymmetric 14,39. in particular, one
would expect the gravitino and other soft masses in the bulk to be extremely
small o(m 2
i /mp ). in this case, the cosmological constant induced in the bulk
would be

  m 6+n

i

i /rn

bulk  m 4

(43)
i.e. of order (10 mev)6 for n = 2 and mi  1 tev. the scenario of brane
supersymmetry breaking is also required in models with a string scale at inter-
mediate energies  1011 gev (or lower), discussed in section 4.1. it can occur
for instance on a brane distant from our world and is then mediated to us by
gravitational (or gauge) interactions.

/m 2

p ,

brane supersymmetry breaking

in the absence of gravity, brane supersymmetry breaking can occur in a non-
bps system of rotating or intersecting d-branes. since brane rotations corre-
spond to turning on background magnetic elds, they can be easily generalized
in the presence of gravity, in the context of type i string theory 40. the main
problems of this approach are the generic appearance of tadpoles, the presence
of tachyons and the lack of gaugino masses. stable non-bps congurations of
intersecting branes have been studied more recently 41, while their implemen-
tation in type i theory was achieved only very recently 39.

the simplest examples are based on orientifold projections of type iib, in
which some of the orientifold 5-planes have opposite charge, requiring an open
string sector living on anti-d5 branes in order to cancel the rr (ramond-
ramond) charge. as a result, supersymmetry is broken on the intersection
of d9 and anti-d5 branes that coincides with the world volume of the latter.
the simplest construction of this type is a t 4/z2 orientifold with a ip of the
-projection (world-sheet parity) in the twisted orbifold sector. it turns out
that several orientifold models, where tadpole conditions do not admit naive
supersymmetric solutions, can be dened by introducing non-supersymmetric
open sector containing anti-d-branes. a typical example of this type is the
ordinary z2  z2 orientifold with discrete torsion.
the resulting models are chiral, anomaly-free, with vanishing rr tadpoles
and no tachyons in their spectrum 39. supersymmetry is broken at the string
scale on a collection of anti-d5 branes while, to lowest order, the closed string

25

bulk and the other branes are supersymmetric. in higher orders, supersymme-
try breaking is of course mediated to the remaining sectors, but is suppressed
by the size of the transverse space or by the distance from the brane where
supersymmetry breaking primarily occurred. the models contain in general
uncancelled ns (neveu-schwarz) tadpoles reecting the existence of a tree-level
potential for the ns moduli, which is localized on the (non-supersymmetric)
world volume of the anti-d5 branes.

as a result, this scenario implies the absence of supersymmetry on our
world-brane but its presence in the bulk, a millimeter away! the bulk super-
gravity is needed to guarantee the stability of gauge hierarchy against large
gravitational quantum radiative corrections.

low-scale type ii models

iib/mp

note that the above destabilization problem does not exist in low-scale type
ii vacua with no large dimensions but innitesimal string coupling, since in
this case the (one-loop) vacuum energy behaves as   m 4
ii. on the other
hand, in type iib vacua with two large (tev1) longitudinal dimensions and
string scale at intermediate energies, discussed in section 5.2, supersymmetry
breaking could arise for instance by scherk-schwarz compactication at a scale
6,3.f this is in line with the original motivation
msusy  r1  m 2
of large dimensions in the context of the heterotic (dual) theory, discussed in
section 2.2, and leads to a vacuum energy that behaves as   1/r4, up to
logarithmic corrections 3,43. this behavior is due to the extreme softness of the
mechanism of supersymmetry breaking realized through a change of boundary
conditions, similarly to the eects of nite temperature upon the identication
t  r1. indeed, the summation over the kk excitations amounts to inserting
the boltzmann factors ee/t to all thermodynamic quantities or equivalently
to the soft breaking terms that suppresses exponentially their uv behavior.
the extreme softness of supersymmetry breaking by compactication im-
plies a particular spectroscopy of superparticles that diers drastically from
other scenarios 3,44. in the simplest case, supersymmetry breaking generates a
universal tree-level mass for gaugini, while scalar masses vanish to lowest or-
der. moreover, the latter are insensitive to the uv cuto at one loop, and thus
squarks and leptons are naturally an order of magnitude lighter than gaugini.
on the other hand, if the higgs scalar lives in the bulk of the extra (tev)
dimension(s), a heavy higgsino mass is automatically generated and there is
no -problem. these models oer also the possibility of determining the hi-

f this mechanism can also be used to break supersymmetry in type i/i models along a
compact dimension of size not very dierent from the string length 42.

26

erarchy by minimizing the eective potential which acquires at higher loops
logarithmic corrections in r.

8 gravity modication and sub-millimeter forces

besides the spectacular experimental predictions in particle accelerators, string
theories with large volume compactications and/or low string scale predict
also possible modications of gravitation in the sub-millimeter range, which can
be tested in tabletop experiments that measure gravity at short distances.
there are two categories of such predictions:
(i) deviations from the newtons law 1/r2 behavior to 1/r2+n, for n extra
large transverse dimensions, which can be observable for n = 2 dimensions of
sub-millimeter size. this case is particularly attractive on theoretical grounds
because of the logarithmic sensitivity of standard model couplings on the size
of transverse space, but also for phenomenological reasons since the eects in
particle colliders are maximally enhanced 32. notice also the coincidence of
this scale with the possible value of the cosmological constant in the universe
that recent observations seem to support.
(ii) new scalar forces in the sub-millimeter range, motivated by the problem of
supersymmetry breaking discussed in section 7.3, and mediated by light scalar
elds  with masses 45,43,14,39:

m 

susy

m2
mp  104  102 ev ,

(44)

for a supersymmetry breaking scale msusy  1  10 tev. these correspond to
compton wavelengths in the range of 1 mm to 10 m. msusy can be either
the kk scale 1/r if supersymmetry is broken by compactication 43, or the
string scale if it is broken maximally on our world-brane 14,39. a model
independent scalar mediating the force is the radius modulus (in planck units)

  ln r ,

(45)

with r the radius of the longitudinal or transverse dimension(s), respectively.
in the former case, the result (44) follows from the behavior of the vacuum
energy density   1/r4 for large r (up to logarithmic corrections). in the
latter case, supersymmetry is broken primarily on the brane only, and thus its
transmission to the bulk is gravitationally suppressed, leading to masses (44).
the coupling of these light scalars to nuclei can be computed since it arises
dominantly through the radius dependence of qcd, or equivalently of the
qcd gauge coupling. more precisely, the coupling  of the radius modulus

27

(45) relative to gravity is 43:

 =

1
mn

mn


=

 ln qcd

 ln r

= 

2



bqcd

 ln r

qcd ,

(46)

with mn the nucleon mass and bqcd the one-loop qcd beta-function coef-
cient. in the case where supersymmetry is broken via scherk-schwarz com-
pactication, the couplings are radius-independent in the supersymmetric limit
and thus qcd = (bqcdbsqcd)/2, with bsqcd the supersymmetric beta-
function. using bsqcd = 3 and bqcd = 7, one nds that the force between two
pieces of matter mediated by the radius modulus is 2
 = (4/7)2  1/3 times
the force of gravity. on the other hand, in the case where supersymmetry is
broken primordially on our world-brane at the string scale while it is almost
unbroken the bulk, the force (46) is again comparable to gravity in theories
with logarithmic sensitivity on the size of transverse space, i.e. when there is
eective propagation of gravity in d = 2 transverse dimensions. the resulting
forces can therefore be within reach of upcoming experiments 21.

in principle there can be other light moduli which couple with even larger
strengths. for example the dilaton , whose vev determines the (logarithm
of the) string coupling constant, if it does not acquire large mass from some
dynamical supersymmetric mechanism, can lead to a force of strength 2000
times bigger than gravity 46.

in g. 2 we depict the actual information from previous, present and up-
coming experiments 21. the vertical axis is the strength, 2, of the force rela-
tive to gravity; the horizontal axis is the compton wavelength of the exchanged
particle; the upper scale shows the corresponding value of the supersymmetry
breaking scale (large radius or string scale) in tev. the solid lines indicate
the present limits from the experiments indicated. the excluded regions lie
above these solid lines. measuring gravitational strength forces at such short
distances is quite challenging. the most important background is the van der
walls force which becomes equal to the gravitational force between two atoms
when they are about 100 microns apart. since the van der walls force falls
o as the 7th power of the distance, it rapidly becomes negligible compared
to gravity at distances exceeding 100 m. the dashed thick line gives the
expected sensitivity of the present and upcoming experiments, which will im-
prove the actual limits by roughly two orders of magnitude and at the very
least they will, for the rst time, measure gravity to a precision of 1% at
distances of  100 m.

28

33

1015

10

1

0.3

l s [ tev ]

3.3

sparnaay

derjaguin et al.

x
u
a
e
r
o
m
a
l

dilaton

1010

a  2

105

100

other
moduli

.
l

a

 
t

e
 
v
o
n
a

f

o
r
t
i

m

radius
modulus

proposed 
experiments

10-5

10-6

10-5

10-4
l    [m]

hoskins et al. 

10-3

10-2

figure 2: strength of the modulus force relative to gravity (2) versus its compton wave-
length ().

acknowledgments

research supported in part by the eec under the tmr contract erbfmrx-
ct96-0090.

references

1. m. green, j. schwarz and e. witten, superstring theory, cambridge
university press, 1987; j. polchinski, string theory, cambridge univer-
sity press, cambridge, 1998.

2. for recent reviews, see a. sen, hep-th/9802051, i. antoniadis and g.

ovarlez, hep-th/9906108.

3. i. antoniadis, phys. lett. b 246, 377 (1990).
4. l. dixon, v. kaplunovsky and j. louis, nucl. phys. b 355, 649 (1991);

i. antoniadis, k. narain and t. taylor, phys. lett. b 267, 37 (1991).

5. i. antoniadis, c. bachas, d. lewellen and t. tomaras, phys. lett. b

207, 441 (1988).

6. c. kounnas and m. porrati, nucl. phys. b 310, 355 (1988); s. ferrara,
c. kounnas, m. porrati and f. zwirner, nucl. phys. b 318, 75 (1989);
e. kiritsis and c. kounnas, nucl. phys. b 503, 117 (1997).

29

7. t. taylor and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b 212, 147 (1988).
8. i. antoniadis and b. pioline, nucl. phys. b 550, 41 (1999), hep-

th/9902055.

9. e. witten, proceedings of strings 95, hep-th/9507121; a. strominger,

phys. lett. b 383, 44 (1996), hep-th/9512059;

10. n. seiberg, phys. lett. b 390, 169 (1997), hep-th/9609161.
11. e. witten, nucl. phys. b 471, 135 (1996), hep-th/9602070.
12. j.d. lykken, phys. rev. d 54, 3693 (1996), hep-th/9603133.
13. n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. lett. b 429, 263

(1998), hep-ph/9803315.

14. i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys.

lett. b 436, 263 (1998), hep-ph/9804398.

15. i. antoniadis and c. bachas, phys. lett. b 450, 83 (1999), hep-

th/9812093.

16. p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b 460, 506 (1996), hep-

th/9510209.

17. e. caceres, v.s. kaplunovsky and i.m. mandelberg, nucl. phys. b 493,

73 (1997), hep-th/9606036.

18. j. polchinski and e. witten, nucl. phys. b 460, 525 (1996), hep-

th/9510169.

19. g. shiu and s.-h.h. tye, phys. rev. d 58, 106007 (1998), hep-
th/9805157; z. kakushadze and s.-h.h. tye, nucl. phys. b 548, 180
(1999), hep-th/9809147; l.e. ibanez, c. munoz and s. rigolin, hep-
ph/9812397.

20. n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. rev. d 59, 086004
(1999), hep-ph/9807344; s. nussinov and r. shrock, phys. rev. d 59,
105002 (1999), hep-ph/9811323; s. cullen and m. perelstein, phys. rev.
lett. 83, 268 (1999), hep-ph/9903422; l.j. hall and d. smith, hep-
ph/9904267.

21. see for instance: j.c. long, h.w. chan and j.c. price, nucl. phys. b

539, 23 (1999), hep-ph/9805217.

22. l.e. ibanez, proceedings of strings 99.
23. k. benakli, hep-ph/9809582; c.p. burgess, l.e. ibanez and f. quevedo,

phys. lett. b 447, 257 (1999).

24. i. antoniadis and m. quiros, phys. lett. b 392, 61 (1997), hep-

th/9609209.

25. c.m. hull and p.k. townsend, nucl. phys. b 438, 109 (1995), hep-
th/9410167 and nucl. phys. b 451, 525 (1995), hep-th/9505073; e.
witten, nucl. phys. b 443, 85 (1995), hep-th/9503124.

26. for a recent review, see p. mayr, hep-th/9904115.

30

27. s. katz and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b 497, 146 (1997), hep-th/9606086;
for a recent review, see p. mayr, fortsch. phys. 47, 39 (1998), hep-
th/9807096.

28. for a recent review, see n.a. obers and b. pioline, phys. rep. 318, 113

(1999), hep-th/9809039.

29. i. antoniadis and k. benakli, phys. lett. b 326, 69 (1994), hep-

th/9310151.

30. v.a. kostelecky and s. samuel, phys. lett. b 270, 21 (1991); p. nath
and m. yamaguchi, hep-ph/9902323 and hep-ph/9903298; w.j. mar-
ciano, hep-ph/9902332 and hep-ph/9903451; m. masip and a. pomarol,
hep-ph/9902467.

31. i. antoniadis, k. benakli and m. quiros, phys. lett. b 331, 313 (1994),
hep-ph/9403290 and phys. lett. b 460, 176 (1999), hep-ph/9905311; p.
nath, y. yamada and m. yamaguchi, hep-ph/9905415; t.g. rizzo and
j.d. wells, hep-ph/9906234; a. strumia, hep-ph/9906266.

32. see for instance: g.f. giudice, r. rattazzi and j.d. wells, nucl. phys.
b 544, 3 (1999), hep-th/9811292; e.a. mirabelli, m. perelstein and
m.e. peskin, phys. rev. lett. 82, 2236 (1999), hep-ph/9811337; t.
han, j. lykken and r.-j. zhang, phys. rev. d 59, 105006 (1999),
hep-ph/9811350; j.l. hewett, phys. rev. lett. 82, 4765 (1999),
hep-ph/9811356; t.g. rizzo, phys. rev. d 59, 115010 (1999), hep-
ph/9901209, phys. rev. d 60, 075001 (1999), hep-ph/9903475 and hep-
ph/9904380; p. mathews, s. raychaudhuri and k. sridhar, phys. lett.
b 450, 343 (1999), hep-ph/9811501 and hep-ph/9904232; g. shiu, r.
shrock and s.-h.h. tye, phys. lett. b 458, 274 (1999), hep-ph/9904262;
e. halyo, hep-ph/9904432; m. besancon, hep-ph/9909364.

33. c. bachas, jhep 9811, 23 (1998), hep-ph/9807415.
34. see also g. dvali, phys. lett. b 459, 489 (1999), hep-ph/9905204.
35. k.r. dienes, e. dudas and t. gherghetta, phys. lett. b 436, 55 (1998),
hep-ph/9803466 and nucl. phys. b 537, 47 (1999), hep-ph/9806292; d.
ghilencea and g.g. ross, phys. lett. b 442, 165 (1998); z. kakushadze,
nucl. phys. b 548, 205 (1999), hep-th/9811193; a. delgado and m.
quiros, hep-ph/9903400; p. frampton and a. rasin, phys. lett. b 460,
313 (1999), hep-ph/9903479; a. perez-lorenzana and r.n. mohapatra,
hep-ph/9904504; z. kakushadze and t.r. taylor, hep-th/9905137.

36. i. antoniadis, c. bachas and e. dudas, hep-th/9906039.
37. n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and j. march-russell, hep-th/9908146.
38. s. kachru and e. silverstein, jhep 11, 1 (1998), hep-th/9810129; j.
harvey, phys. rev. d 59, 26002 (1999); r. blumenhagen and l. gorlich,
hep-th/9812158; c. angelantonj, i. antoniadis and k. foerger, nucl.

31

phys. b 555, 116 (1999), hep-th/9904092.

39. i. antoniadis, e. dudas and a. sagnotti, hep-th/9908023; g. aldazabal

and a.m. uranga, hep-th/9908072.

40. c. bachas, hep-th/9503030; j.g. russo and a.a. tseytlin, nucl. phys.

b 461, 131 (1996).

41. for recent reviews, see a. sen, hep-th/9904207; a. lerda and r. russo,

hep-th/9905006.

42. i. antoniadis, e. dudas and a. sagnotti, nucl. phys. b 544, 469 (1999);
i. antoniadis, g. dappollonio, e. dudas and a. sagnotti, nucl. phys.
b 553, 133 (99), hep-th/9812118 and hep-th/9907184.

43. i. antoniadis, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, nucl. phys. b 516, 70

(1998), hep-ph/9710204.

44. i. antoniadis, c. munoz and m. quiros, nucl. phys. b 397, 515
(1993); a. pomarol and m. quiros, phys. lett. b 438, 225 (1998), hep-
ph/9806263; i. antoniadis, s. dimopoulos, a. pomarol and m. quiros,
nucl. phys. b 544, 503 (1999), hep-ph/9810410; a. delgado, a. po-
marol and m. quiros, hep-ph/9812489.

45. s. ferrara, c. kounnas and f. zwirner, nucl. phys. b 429, 589 (1994).
46. t.r. taylor and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b 213, 450 (1988).

32

