0
0
0
2

 

n
u
j
 

0
3

 
 

2
v
2
1
1
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

pupt-1893

chern-simons gravity, wilson lines and

large n dual gauge theories

l.d. paniak

joseph henry laboratories, department of physics

princeton university

princeton, new jersey 08544, usa

e-mail: paniak@feynman.princeton.edu

abstract

a ve-dimensional chern-simons gravity theory based on the anti-de sitter group

so(4, 2) is argued to be a useful model in which to understand the details of holography

and the relationship between generally covariant and dual local quantum eld theories.

dened on a manifold with boundary, conformal geometry arises naturally as a gauge

invariance preserving boundary condition. by matching thermodynamic quantities for

a particular background geometry, the dimensionless coupling constant of the chern-

simons theory is directly related to the number of elds in a putative dual theory at

high temperature. as a consistency check, the semiclassical factorization of wilson

line observables in the gravity theory is shown to induce a factorization in dual theory

observables as expected by general arguments of large n gauge theory.

holography in d-dimensional generally covariant system is the general proposition which

states that the number of degrees of freedom in the system is bounded from above by the
area (in planck units) of a d  2-dimensional spatial surface surrounding the system [1, 2, 3].
an ambitious extension of this concept is the organization of the so-called boundary degrees

of freedom into a local quantum eld theory which eectively describes the physics of the

d-dimensional system. the existence of such dual theories to certain generally covariant

systems has been supported by much recent work, especially in the case of compactied

string theory and its relation to supersymmetric gauge theory. initial evidence from d-brane

scattering calculations [4, 5] has been formalized in the ads/cft correspondence principle

[6, 7, 8] (see [9] for a comprehensive review with exhaustive reference list). unfortunately,

due to the complexities of explicit calculations on both the string and gauge theory sides of

the duality, the details of the relationship between these theories remain uncertain.

since holography is considered to be a generic feature of generally covariant systems and it

can be argued theories which admit anti-de sitter space-times also admit dual interpretations

[10], it may be useful to examine examples outside of string theory with these properties. with

these conditions in mind, we propose to examine a generally covariant system in ve space-time

dimensions which is based on a pure chern-simons gauge theory. with the particular choice of

the anti-de sitter group so(4, 2) as the gauge group, the chern-simons theory denes a higher

curvature generalization of einstein gravity [11, 12, 13] which naturally admits anti-de sitter

space-times. in addition, when dened on space-times with a boundary, the natural gauge

invariance preserving boundary condition of a at connection immediately leads to a boundary

manifold on which unrestricted gauge transformations generate conformal symmetries.

in

this way, the chern-simons gravity theory is similar to low-energy string theory eective

actions which admit anti-de sitter backgrounds with conformally invariant boundaries, but

there are dierences. unlike higher curvature terms which are expected due to stringy 

corrections to einstein gravity, in chern-simons gravity higher curvatures are not suppressed

relative to the linear curvature term. consequently, the chern-simons gravity theory we will

discuss here does not follow in an obvious way as the low energy eective description of a

string theory conguration. unfortunately this means we will not have at our disposal the

well-known machinery to identify the conjectured dual gauge theory. moreover, since chern-

simons gravity is not renormalizable in ve space-time dimensions we will restrict ourselves

1

to the semiclassical regime and consider the theory in the vicinity of solutions of the classical

equations of motion.

while it may seem paradoxical to use a gauge theory to dene a gravitational theory,

the chern-simons gravity theory we will consider is a direct generalization of the 2 + 1-

dimensional theory which describes einstein gravity in three dimensions [14, 15]. as in the

three-dimensional case, the relationship to a gauge theory leads to the most intriguing prop-

erty of a chern-simons formulation of gravity - wilson line observables. these are natural

gauge-invariant observables in the chern-simons theory and are carried over to the gravity

theory as a concrete and eective denition of non-local, dieomorphism-invariant observ-

ables. assuming there exists a dual (holographic) theory which describes the same physics

as the gravitational theory, such observables should have a natural interpretation in terms of

observables of a local quantum eld theory.

hxics = hy iqf t

(1)

here we will show explicitly this relationship implies the factorization of eld theory observ-

ables consistent with the expectations for large rank gauge theories. this will be accomplished

in the semiclassical regime of the chern-simons gravity theory by nding a specic background

geometry which is argued to control the system at high temperatures. the matching of free

energies between the gravitational theory and a hot, rank n gauge theory leads to an iden-

tication between the number of gauge degrees of freedom and the coupling constant of the

chern-simons gravity theory. in this way, the large n limit of the gauge theory is shown to

correspond to the semiclassical limit of the gravity theory and the factorization of observables

follows.

chern-simons gravity is a higher curvature generalization of einstein gravity [11, 12,

13] based on a ve-dimensional pure chern-simons theory with anti-de sitter gauge group,

so(4, 2). the ve-dimensional chern-simons form is dened via the relation

here f is the curvature two-form related to the gauge connection a in the familiar way

dcs = hf  f  fi

f = da + a  a

2

(2)

(3)

the bracket h  i denes an invariant trace operation on the gauge algebra. in general, it is
not unique and, in particular, depends on the representation of the gauge group chosen. the

choice which will be used in the sequel is that of the fully anti-symmetric tensor invariant of

so(4, 2)

hjb1c1jb2c2    jbncni = b1c1b2c2bncn

(4)

here jbc are generators of the gauge group and b, c = 1, . . . , 6 label so(4, 2) algebra indices.

the chern-simons form can be explicitly calculated in terms of the connection

cs = ha  da  da +

3
2

a  a  a  da +

3
5

a  a  a  a  ai

the action is simply the integral of this ve-form over a given manifold m

s = kzm

cs

(5)

(6)

where k is a dimensionless coupling constant. we will restrict ourselves to topologically trivial
m for simplicity.

of primary interest are manifolds with boundary. in order to maintain gauge invariance

of the action on a manifold with boundary, it is necessary to impose boundary conditions on

the gauge elds and gauge transformations. under a gauge transformation

ag = g1ag + g1dg

the chern-simons form transforms as

cs(ag) = cs(a) + d(a, g) +

1
10h(g1dg)5i

(7)

(8)

the last term in (8) has the form of a winding number and upon integration over m takes
values in the fth cohomology group h 5(m, 5(so(4, 2))). since 5(so(4, 2)) is pure torsion
the cohomology group is trivial and there is no quantization of the coupling constant k.

consequently, for manifolds without boundary the action is gauge invariant. with a boundary,

there generically is a non-vanishing contribution from the four-form 

(a, g) = h 

1
2

dgg1(af + f a) +

1
2

dgg1a3 +

1
4

(dgg1a)2 +

1
2

(dgg1)3ai

(9)

gauge invariance requires the integral of  over the four- dimensional boundary m to
vanish. there are a number of ways to achieve this result. one way is to follow as in the

3

three-dimensional case [17] and restrict the gauge transformations allowed at the boundary

to be trivial and leave the gauge eld unconstrained. the restriction we will use here is

dierent and has an appealing interpretation in terms of a conformal geometry induced on

the boundary. we will constrain the curvature f to vanish on the boundary which allows one

to choose the connection a to be pure gauge. gauge transformations at the boundary are left

unrestricted. it can be shown that under this restriction the chern-simons form transforms

invariantly up to winding terms which we have previously argued are irrelevant for the gauge

group so(4, 2).

having specied the action and associated boundary conditions on the elds, the equations

of motion follow from a bulk variation of the action (6) and are conveniently given by

b1c1b2c2b3c3f b1c1  f b2c2 = 0

(10)

on a manifold with boundary, the variational principle for an action is typically ill-dened due

to boundary contributions. in the present case the boundary contribution can be calculated

as

fortunately, the choice of at boundary conditions can be argued to eliminate these contri-

zm ha  a  a  ai

(11)

butions [16].

the relation of the chern-simons action to a theory of gravitation follows from decom-

posing the connection a on a basis of the anti-de sitter algebra {pa, jab}.

a =

ea


pa + abjab

the coecients of this expansion are identied with the funfbein and spin connection

aab = ab

, aa5 =

ea


a,b =0,1, . . . ,4

(12)

(13)

an extra length scale parameter , related to the cosmological constant, has been introduced

in the denition of the funfbein. these denitions lead to the following identications for the

gauge eld curvature in terms of geometric curvature and torsion

ea  eb
2  rab +

ea  eb
2

(14)

f ab = dab + ac   b
f a5 = dea + a

c +
c  ec  t a
4

the atness condition f = 0 from the gauge theory translates to a restriction to torsion-

free congurations with a specic curvature two-form

rab +

ea  eb
2 = 0 , t a = 0

(15)

this curvature two-form describes a space with constant, negative curvature - an anti-de

sitter space - and we see our choice of gauge invariance preserving boundary conditions

f = 0 produces the natural setting for the duality between a bulk gravitational theory and

some local quantum eld theory associated with the boundary. as is well-known by now,

taking the boundary of the manifold to be dened as the surface on which the anti-de sitter
metric becomes singular induces a conformal structure on the boundary m. moreover, the
unrestricted so(4, 2) gauge freedom at the boundary acts on this space as conformal motions

[8].

the result of substituting the decomposition of the gauge eld (14) into the chern-simons

form (5) is a higher curvature generalization of the einstein-hilbert action which has been

investigated previously [11, 12, 13]

s = kabcdezm"ea  rbc  rde



+

2ea  eb  ec  rde

33

+

ea  eb  ec  ed  ee

55

#

and the equations of motion in gravitational variables are given by

abcde(rab +

ea  eb
2

) = 0

ec  ed
2
)  t c = 0

)  (rcd +
ea  eb
2

abcde(rab +

(16)

(17)

since chern-simons theory in ve dimensions is not renormalizable, we restrict ourselves

to the semiclassical approximation where the coupling constant k is large. hence, we will be

interested in the behaviour of the theory in the vicinity of solutions of the classical equations of

motion. immediately the symmetry of the theory suggests a background which is consistent

with the boundary condition, namely anti-de sitter space. unlike the more familiar cases

of low energy approximations to string theory, here the anti-de sitter background is not

physically appealing. to see that the chern-simons gravity theory is pathological in this

background one needs to look no further than the classical equations of motion (10) and

recall anti-de sitter space corresponds to vanishing curvature in the gauge theory. since the

equations of motion are quadratic in the curvature f , all uctuations about the anti-de sitter

5

background vanish identically. in terms of an eective quantum theory about this background

it means there are no propagating degrees of freedom and the theory is perturbatively sterile.

moreover, when calculating observables of chern-simons gravity we would nd they are all

trivial (up to topology of the space-time). in short, chern-simons gravity in the anti-de sitter

background cannot describe any non-trivial eld theory.

fortunately, other solutions of chern-simons gravity are known to exist. of most inter-

est to the current situation are those which are analogous to asymptotically anti-de sitter

schwarzschild black holes in einstein gravity [18]. these have been discussed in detail for

chern-simons gravity in [19] and for similar theories in [20]. in particular, we are interested in

a black hole, with mass m related to a dimensionless parameter a, dened by the line-element

ds2 = (1  a + (r/)2)dt2 +

dr2

1  a + (r/)2 + r2d2

(18)

where d2 is the volume element of the three-sphere. it is easily checked that this solution of

(17) leads to a at chern-simons connection on the boundary at innity radius in accordance

with our boundary conditions. since this solution represents a black hole geometry, there is

a natural temperature associated with the system which can be calculated by continuing to

euclidean time with the result [19, 21]

 =

1
t

=

2

a  1

(19)

as well, the euclidean action of chern-simons gravity can be calculated in this background

relative to zero temperature and vanishing mass m(a) at a = 1

ie = m(a) 

162

3

(3 +

422

2

)

(20)

important to note is that as the temperature is increased, the contribution of thermal

gravitons [22] to the action in the second term of (20) becomes arbitrarily negative. therefore,

it seems reasonable to conclude for suciently high temperature that the background (18) will

dominate the semiclassical calculation of the partition function. this is completely analogous

to the domination of the partition function at high temperatures by the schwarzschild anti-de

sitter black hole as investigated in quantum gravity by hawking and page [18] and witten

[8, 23] in the context of the ads/cft correspondence. consequently, at high temperatures

the partition function and free energy of the system can be easily calculated semiclassically

6

with the result

fcs =  log z = kie

(21)

if there exists a dual, local quantum eld theory dened on the boundary of the ve-

dimensional space-time which is described by chern-simons gravity in the background (18)

then we should compare the free energy to that of a high temperature quantum theory.

in general we expect the boundary theory to contain gauge elds and in the limit of high

temperature we expect the system is in a (quark-gluon) plasma phase where fundamental

degrees of freedom are not conned.

if the gauge group is of rank n there are order n 2

gluonic degrees of freedom and possibly as many matter degrees of freedom. an estimate of

the free energy of such a system on a four-sphere of length scale  can be given by dimensional

arguments

fqf t = n 23t 4

(22)

where  is a proportionality constant of order one. equating the free energies in (21) and

(22), we nd in the limit of high temperature the chern-simons coupling constant is directly

related to the number of degrees of freedom in the boundary eld theory

k =

3
644 n 2

(23)

this identication of the coupling constant with the number of degrees of freedom is reminis-

cent of the work of [24] and [25] on eleven-dimensional chern-simons gravity and m-theory. in

that case the degrees of freedom were taken to lie in the gravitational theory, not its dual and

the relation to the gravitational coupling constant followed from machs principle. like that

case, our arguments only hold if the number of degrees of freedom n is large: machs princi-

ple requires a uniform background and we have done all our calculations in the semiclassical

limit of large k which, by (23), is equivalent to large n.

a novel consistency check of the relationship between chern-simons gravity and an un-

known, dual, local quantum eld theory which describes the same physics can be formulated

in terms of the observables of each theory. using the relationship (23), we will derive the large

n factorization of gauge-invariant observables in the dual theory from semiclassical gravity

calculations.

while it is not understood in general how to dene observables in a generally covariant

theory, chern-simons gravity contains a natural family of observables in wilson lines inherited

7

from its gauge theory formulation

wr[] = trrp eih

adx

= trrp eih

(ea

pa/+ab

 jab)dx

(24)

for nite-dimensional representations r of so(4, 2), this expression is simply the trace of

the holonomy around the closed path . of course for a non-compact gauge group like

so(4, 2) there are innite dimensional irreducible representations as well. in this case, the

naive picture breaks down and the trace of the path ordered matrix integral must be realized

as a dynamical system of innite degrees of freedom [26, 27]. physically, these observables

describe the trajectories of external test particles in the gravitational background. as in a

compact gauge theory, the invariant properties of these test particles are given in terms of the

irreducible representations of the gauge group which for so(4, 2) are labelled by mass and

spin.

the expectation value of a collection of wilson lines is given by the standard formula

hwr1[1]   wrn[n]ics =

1

z z da eikrm

cs[a]trr1p e

ih1

adx

   trrnp eihn

adx

(25)

if one assumes there exists a dual local quantum eld theory to the chern-simons gravity, this

expectation value has an alternate interpretation in terms of some gauge invariant quantity,

v dened in the dual theory

hwr1[1]   wrn[n]ics = hvr1,...,rn[1, . . . n]iqf t

(26)

unfortunately, there are at least two diculties with this identication in the present

situation. first, the wilson lines in the chern-simons gravity theory, being observables in a
generally covariant theory cannot depend on the geometry of paths {i}. they should only
be sensitive to the topological properties of the paths. this is not what one expects from a

dual local quantum gauge theory in which similar path-dependent objects would be generic.

in those cases one expects the wilson line would depend on the length, or enclosed area of

the paths. second, the calculation of such observables in the chern-simons gravity theory

appears to be beyond reach in the general case and the conjectured dual local eld theory is

completely unknown.

fortunately, in the semiclassical limit of large k these concerns are absent. leading con-

tributions to expectation values come from the vicinity of denite geometries satisfying both

8

the gauge invariance preserving boundary condition, f = 0 and the classical equations of

motion (17). in this way the topological nature of the wilson lines is broken and we expect

these observables (25) to depend on geometric information.

in particular, in the limit of

high temperature we have argued the black hole geometry (18) dominates the semiclassical

partition function. this remains true when calculating the semiclassical contributions to the

correlation function (25) as well since, to leading order in large k, the wilson lines do not

contribute to the saddle-point. evaluating (25) in the background of the classical solution

(18), the expectation value of wilson lines in chern-simons gravity factorizes to leading order

in large k

hwr1[1]   wrn[n]ics = hwr1[1]ics   hwrn[n]ics + o(cid:18) 1
k(cid:19)

(27)

consequently, the factorization of the gravitational observables induces a factorization in the

dual theory. identifying the chern-simons coupling constant k with n 2 as in (23), (27) implies

hvr1,...,rn[1, . . . n]iqf t = hvr1[1]iqf t   hvrn[n]iqf t + o(cid:18) 1
n 2(cid:19)

(28)

which is the factorization property of gauge invariant observables in a large n rank gauge

theory, as expected from very general considerations.

the purpose of these brief arguments is to motivate further investigation of the chern-

simons gravity theory, and its supersymmetric extension [12, 13], for the purposes of gaining

a better understanding of the relationship between generally covariant and quantum eld

theories. first and foremost, one would like to know more details about the conjectured

dual quantum theory. this information may be obtained by a close investigation of explicit

wilson line calculations for the black hole background (18) we have considered, in analogy
with calculations for n = 4 super yang-mills theory [23]. it may even be possible to deduce a
loop equation for path-dependent objects in the dual theory from the chern-simons action.

acknowledgements

we would like to thank m. costa, m. gutperle, m. henningson, i. klebanov, l. smolin and d.

waldram for discussions. this work was completed with the support of the natural sciences

and engineering research council of canada, nsf grant phy98-02484 and the james s.

mcdonnell foundation grant no. 91-48.

9

references

[1] g. thooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity; gr-qc/9310026.

[2] l. susskind, the world as a hologram j. math. phys. 36 (1995), 6377; hep-

th/9409089.

[3] r. bousso, holography in general space-times jhep 9906 (1999) 028; hep-th/9906022.

[4] i.r. klebanov, world volume approach to absorption by nondilatonic branes nucl.

phys. b496 (1997) 213; hep-th/9702076.

[5] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.a. tseytlin, string theory and classical absorption

by three-branes nucl. phys. b499 (1997) 217; hep-th/9703040.

[6] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field theories and supergravity

adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231; hep-th/9711200.

[7] s. gubser, i. klebanov and a. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from non-critical

string theory phys. lett. b428 (1998) 105; hep-th/9802109.

[8] e. witten, anti-de sitter space and holography adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998)

253; hep-th/9802150.

[9] o. aharony, s.s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri and y. oz, large n field theories,

string theory and gravity; hep-th/9905111.

[10] l. susskind and e. witten, the holographic bound in anti-de sitter space; hep-

th/9805114.

[11] a.h. chamseddine, topological gauge theory of gravity in five and all odd dimen-

sions phys. lett. b233 (1989) 291.

[12] a.h. chamseddine, topological gravity and supergravity in various dimensions nucl.

phys. b346 (1990) 213.

[13] m. banados, l.j. garay and m. henneaux, the dynamical structure of higher dimen-

sional chern-simons theory nucl. phys. b476 (1996) 611; hep-th/9605159.

10

[14] a. achucarro and p.k. townsend, a chern-simons action for three-dimensional anti-

de sitter supergravity theories phys.lett. b180 (1986) 89.

[15] e. witten, (2+1)-dimensional gravity as an exactly soluble system nucl. phys. b311

(1988) 46.

[16] j. gegenberg and g. kunstatter, boundary dynamics of higher dimensional ads space-

time; hep-th/9905228.

[17] e. witten, quantum field theory and the jones polynomial comm. math. phys. 121

(1989) 351.

[18] s. hawking and d. page, thermodynamics of black holes in anti-de sitter space

comm. math. phys. 87 (1983) 577.

[19] m. banados, c. teitelboim and j. zanelli,  dimensionally continued black holes phys.

rev. d49 (1994) 975; gr-qc/9307033.

[20] d.g. boulware and s. deser, string-generated gravity models phys. rev. lett. 55

(1985) 2656;

j.t. wheeler, symmetric solutions to the gauss-bonnet extended einstein equations

nucl. phys. b268 (1986) 737;

d.l. wiltshire, spherically symmetric solutions of einstein-maxwell theory with a

gauss-bonnet term phys. lett. 169b (1986) 36; black holes in string-generated

gravity models phys. rev. d38 (1988) 2445.

[21] r.c. myers and j.z. simon, black-hole thermodynamics in lovelock gravity phys.

rev. d38 (1988) 2434; black hole evaporation and higher derivative gravity gen.

rel. grav. 21 (1989) 761;

b. whitt, spherically symmetric solutions of general second-order gravity phys.

rev. d38 (1988) 3000;

t. jacobson and r. c. myers, entropy of lovelock black holes phys. rev. lett. 70

(1993) 3684; hep-th/9305016.

[22] g.w. gibbons and s.w. hawking, action integrals and partition functions in quantum

gravity phys. rev. d15 (1977) 2752.

11

[23] e. witten, anti-de sitter space, thermal phase transition, and connement in gauge

theories adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 505; hep-th/9803131.

[24] r. troncoso and j. zanelli, new gauge supergravity in seven and eleven dimensions,

phys. rev. d58, 101703 (1998); hep-th/9710180.

[25] p. horava, m-theory as a holographic field theory phys. rev. d59 (1999) 46004;

hep-th/9712130.

[26] e. witten, topology-changing amplitudes in 2+1 dimensional gravity nucl. phys.

b223 (1989) 113.

[27] s. carlip, exact quantum scattering in 2+1 dimensional gravity nucl. phys. b324

(1989) 106.

12

