iassns-hep-99/82

d-branes in a topologically nontrivial b-eld

anton kapustin

school of natural sciences, institute for advanced study

olden lane, princeton, nj 08540

abstract

we study global worldsheet anomalies for open strings ending on several coinci-
dent d-branes in the presence of a b-eld. we show that cancellation of anomalies
is made possible by a correlation between the thooft magnetic ux on the d-branes
and the topological class of the b-eld. one application of our results is a proper
understanding of the geometric nature of the gauge eld living on d-branes: rather
than being a connection on a vector bundle, it is a connection on a module over
a certain noncommutative algebra. our argument works for a general closed string
background. we also explain why in the presence of a topologically nontrivial b-eld
whose curvature is pure torsion d-branes represent classes in a twisted k-theory, as
conjectured by e. witten.

9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
6
1

 

 
 

2
v
9
8
0
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

email: kapustin@ias.edu

1 introduction and summary

the goal of this paper is to understand the conditions for cancellation of global world-
sheet anomalies for open strings ending on d-branes. in the case when all d-branes are
noncoincident, this has been achieved in [1]. it turns out that interesting new phenomena
arise when one considers coincident d-branes with nonabelian gauge elds. in particular,
noncommutative geometry makes an appearance. recently, it has been argued by many
authors that the gauge eld on d-branes is better understood as a connection on a module
over some noncommutative algebra rather than as a connection on a vector bundle. this
has been demonstrated for d-branes in at space in the presence of a constant b-eld [2].
our setup is much more general (arbitrary metric and b-eld), so it is nice to see that
the same interpretation of the gauge eld arises again. on the other hand, we will be
concerned only with the topological properties of the gauge eld, leaving its dynamics
aside.

1.1 review of twisted k-theory

the main motivation for this study was the interpretation of d-brane charges in terms of
k-theory [3, 4], so we begin by reviewing it. it has been suspected for some time that d-
brane charges are most naturally understood as classes in k-theory rather than as integer
cohomology classes [3]. the basic reason for this is that d-branes carry vector bundles.
in ref. [4] e. witten showed that the relation between d-branes and k-theory can be
understood very simply using some ideas of a. sen [5]. for iib string theory one considers
a conguration of equal number of d9 and anti-d9-branes carrying vector bundles e and
f . the pair (e, f ) denes a class in k-theory. it is easy to see that creation of virtual
brane-antibrane pairs from vacuum does not change the k-theory class. thus the stable
state into which the brane-antibrane system settles after tachyons condense can be labeled
by this class. it is also very plausible that if pairs (e, f ) and (e, f ) have the same k-
theory class, then they lead to the same stable state, as one can be converted to the other
by a virtual process. conversely, witten explained how, given a d-brane wrapped on a
submanifold, one can construct a k-theory class it represents.

in the presence of the neveu-schwarz b-eld these arguments should be modied. one
way to see this is to note [4, 1] that a single d-brane can be wrapped on a submanifold q
if and only if the normal bundle n of q satises:

(1)
here w3(n)  h 3(q, z) is the image of the second stiefel-whitney class w2(n) under the

w3(n) = [h]q.

1

bockstein homomorphism, [h] is the integer cohomology class whose de rham representa-
tive is h = db, and [h]q is its restriction to q. eq. (1) is the condition of cancellation of
global anomalies for open strings ending on q [1]. it renes the usual statement that the
restriction of h to the worldvolume of a d-brane must be trivial in de rham cohomology.
when [h]q = 0 the condition (1) says that n has spinc structure, and enables one to
construct a class in the k-theory of space-time x corresponding to a d-brane wrapped on
q [4]. when [h]q is nonzero, the submanifold q does not represent a k-theory class.

in ref. [4] it has been proposed that when [h] belongs to a torsion subgroup of
h 3(m, z), d-brane charges take values in a certain twisted version of k-theory kh(m).
(in mathematical literature it is sometimes called k-theory with local coecients.) to mo-
tivate the denition of kh (m), let us recall that the space of global sections (m, e) of
a (nite-dimensional) vector bundle e is a (nitely generated) projective module over
the algebra of continuous c-valued functions on m contm (c). (a projective module is
a module which is a direct summand of a free module. (m, e) is projective for any e
because any e is a direct summand of a trivial vector bundle.) since m is completely
determined by the algebra contm (c), it should be possible to dene k(m) directly in
terms of contm (c). such a denition is indeed possible: for any algebra a one can dene
its k-group k(a) as the grothendieck group of nitely generated projective modules over
a. by a theorem of serre-swan [6, 7] the category of nitely generated projective modules
over contm (c) is equivalent to the category of nite-dimensional vector bundles over m,
hence k(contm (c)) = k(m).

now it is plausible that when the b-eld is present, we must replace contm (c) with
some other (noncommutative) algebra a and consider k(a). morally speaking, this follows
from the lore that when the b-eld is switched on, m becomes a noncommutative space
in the sense of connes [8, 2].

a natural class of algebras is provided by so-called azumaya algebras [9]. an azu-
maya algebra of rank m over m is a locally trivial algebra bundle over m whose ber is
isomorphic to the algebra of m  m matrices matm(c). a trivial example of an azumaya
algebra over m is matm(c)  contm (c), i.e. the algebra of matm(c)-valued functions on
m. a slightly less trivial example is the algebra end(e) of all endomorphisms of a vector
bundle e over m. two azumaya algebras a and a over m are said to be equivalent if
there exist two vector bundles e and e over m such that a  end(e) is isomorphic to
a  end(e). in particular, an azumaya algebra of the form end(e) is equivalent in this
sense to contm (c) for any e. this denition of equivalence is useful because the k-group
of an azumaya algebra depends only on its equivalence class [10]. moreover, by a theorem
of serre [9] equivalence classes of azumaya algebras over m are classied by the torsion

2

subgroup of h 3(m, z).1 we will denote by (a) the class in h 3(m, z) corresponding to a.
to summarize, for any torsion class [h]  h 3(m, z) there is a unique equivalence class of
azumaya algebras and the corresponding k-group kh(m). it is natural to conjecture [4]
that kh(m) classies d-brane charges when [h] is a torsion class.

it possible to give a more down-to-earth description of azumaya algebras and their
modules. let us pick an open cover {ui} such that all ui and their multiple overlaps are
contractible. an element of an azumaya algebra a of rank m is a section of a vector
bundle with ber matm(c), i.e.
it is a collection of functions ri : ui  matm(c) such
that on double overlaps ui  uj = uij we have

ri = gijrjg1
ij .

(2)

gijgjkgki = ijk,

here gij are gl(m, c)-valued functions over uij. consistency of (2) on triple overlaps
uijk requires
(3)
where ijk are c-valued functions. it is easy to see that ijk dene a cech cocycle, and
therefore an element   h 2(m, contm (c)). here c is the group of nonzero complex
numbers.  is a measure of nontriviality of the azumaya algebra a. by a well-known
isomorphism h 2(m, contm (c))  h 3(m, z) we can reinterpret  as a class in h 3(m, z);
this is the class (a) mentioned above.
a module over an azumaya algebra can be described as follows. suppose we are given

a set of functions hij : ui  gl(n, c) satisfying on triple overlaps

hijhjkhki = ijk,

(4)

where the cocycle  is the same as in (3). consider a vector bundle with ber cnm and
transition functions

h1 t
ij  gij.

(5)

first of all, such a bundle makes sense since the transition functions satisfy the usual
untwisted gluing condition on triple overlaps. second, its ber

cnm  cm      cm

(6)

is naturally a module over matm(c), the ber of a. third, it is easy to check that the
obvious berwise action of a makes it into a module over a. it can be shown that this
module is projective if m is a nice enough space (compact, for example). moreover, all
projective modules of a arise in this way.2

1this subgroup is called the topological brauer group of m and is denoted br(m ).
2let us give a sketch of a proof. first, a projective module over a is also a projective module over

3

1.2 azumaya algebras and d-branes

now we are going to explain the relation between global worldsheet anomalies and azu-
maya modules. the basic idea is rather simple. the starting point for the sen-witten
construction of stable d-branes in iib string theory is a conguration containing n d9-
branes and n anti-d9-branes. when [h] = 0, the d-branes carry a principal bundle with
structure group u(n). we will show that when [h] is nonzero, the d-branes carry a princi-
pal su(n)/zn bundle which cannot be lifted to a u(n) bundle. the obstruction to lifting
an su(n)/zn bundle to a u(n) bundle is a certain class in h 3(m, z) closely related to
the thooft magnetic ux. we will prove that cancellation of global worldsheet anomalies
requires that this class be equal to [h].

an su(n)/zn bundle without u(n) structure can described in terms of transition
functions as follows. take an associated vector bundle in the adjoint representation of
su(n)/zn. its section is given by a collection of functions fi : ui  u(n), where u(n) is
the lie algebra of su(n)/zn, i.e. the space of all hermitian n  n matrices. on double
overlaps they satisfy
(7)

fi = hijfjh1
ij ,

where hij are u(n)-valued matrices. consistency on triple overlaps requires

hijhjkhki = ijk,

(8)

where ijk are u(1)-valued functions. the cohomology class of  in h 2(m, contm (u(1))) 
h 3(m, z) is the obstruction to lifting the su(n)/zn structure to a u(n) structure.
comparing (8) and (4) we discover that an su(n)/zn bundle without u(n) structure
corresponds naturally to a module over an azumaya algebra a with (a) = . since we
have both d9-branes and anti-d9-branes, we get a pair of modules over the same algebra
a which dene a class in kh(m). it is also easy to see that creation and annihilation of
branes does not change this class.

furthermore, the gauge eld in the fundamental representation of u(n) (whose holon-
omy enters the open string path integral, see below) cannot be a connection on a rank n

contm (c) and therefore corresponds to a vector bundle e over m . second, it can be shown that the ber
of e must be a module over matm(c). third, any module over matm(c) has the form (6) for some n [11].
fourth, the action of a on any given ber ex of e generates a subalgebra ax of end(ex)  matnm(c)
isomorphic to matm(c). fifth, let the transition functions for e be gij. it is easy to see that in order for
the berwise action of a to be consistent on double overlaps, g1
ij gij must be in the centralizer c(ax) of ax.
since both ax and end(ex) are central simple algebras, by corollary 3.16 of [11] end(ex)  ax  c(ax),
and it follows that there exists a trivialization of e such that gij have the form (5).

4

vector bundle over m, since there is no such bundle around. instead, the gauge eld is a
connection on the azumaya module dened above.

thus cancellation of global worldsheet anomalies for open strings ending on d9-branes
is the reason why d-brane charges take values in kh(m). more generally, one can analyze
these anomalies for open strings ending on d-branes of arbitrary dimension. this yields
consistency conditions for wrapping multiple d-branes on a submanifold q  m. to
formulate these consistency conditions we need to be more precise about the relation
between the thooft magnetic ux and the obstruction to having u(n) structure. the
thooft magnetic ux is a cohomology class y  h 2(q, zn) which measures the obstruction
to lifting an su(n)/zn structure to an su(n) structure. consider a short exact sequence
of groups

where the second arrow is multiplication by n and the third arrow is reduction modulo n.
it leads to a long exact sequence in cohomology

0  z  z  zn  0,

(9)

. . . h 2(q, zn)  h 3(q, z)  h 3(q, z) . . .

(10)

the homomorphism h 2(q, zn)  h 3(q, z) is a bockstein homomorphism and will be
denoted . as explained in more detail below, the obstruction to having a u(n) structure
is precisely (y). we will show that for bosonic strings cancellation of global anomalies
requires

for superstrings we nd that global anomalies cancel if

(y) = [h]q.

(y) + w3(n) = [h]q.

(11)

(12)

this generalizes (1). we will also explain the analogue of these conditions for type i
d-branes.

1.3 the mechanism of anomaly cancellation

showing that global worldsheet anomalies cancel if (11) or (12) are satised is unfortu-
nately rather tedious. (for an analogous argument in the abelian case see [1], section 6.
the argument for type i d9-branes was sketched in [12].) this is because we tried to keep
the discussion elementary yet reasonably rigorous. let us briey explain what is involved

5

in the argument. for simplicity, consider the path integral for an open bosonic string in
the presence of d9-branes:

z d exp(cid:20)1sn g[] + 1z

b(cid:21) tr hol(a).

(13)

here  is the map from the worldsheet  to the target space m, sn g[] is the nambu-
goto action, a is the u(n) gauge eld on the d9-branes, hol(a) is the holonomy of a
along the loop , and tr is the trace taken in the fundamental representation of u(n).
it will be sucient to consider the case when  is a disc. the nambu-goto action is a
well-dened function on the space of maps map(, m) from  to m, but the other two
factors are more problematic. indeed, while h = db is a well-dened 3-form, b itself
may have dirac string singularities. similarly, since the su(n)/zn bundle cannot be
lifted to a u(n) bundle, the trace of holonomy of the gauge connection in the fundamental
representation of u(n) is not well-dened. this can be traced back to the twisted gluing
condition (8).

in fact, both of these factors make perfect sense if we interpret them as sections of
certain line bundles over map(, m) rather than as mere functions. recall that the trace
of holonomy of a connection on an ordinary vector bundle is a function on a free loop space
lm of m. we can dene the trace of holonomy for our connection as well, but it turns
out that it takes values in a certain nontrivial line bundle over lm. similarly, the phase
factor coming from the b-eld is a section of a well-dened line bundle over map(, m).
we are actually interested not in holonomy around arbitrary loops s1  m, but around
those loops which extend to a map   m where  is a disc. thus we are interested not
in the above-mentioned line bundle over lm but in its pull-back to map(, m). we will
show that the pull-back is trivial, and the phase factor coming from the b-eld provides its
trivialization. as a result, although neither the trace of holonomy nor the phase coming
from the b-eld are functions on map(, m), their product is a well-dened function.
this implies that the open string path integral is well-dened.

1.4 outline of the paper

the paper is organized as follows.
in section ii we recall how to dene b-eld in a
topologically nontrivial situation. in section iii we describe the topology of the gauge elds
living on d-branes. in section iv we explain how one is supposed to understand the trace
of holonomy of a connection in the fundamental representation of u(n) in the presence of

thooft magnetic ux. in section v we dene the phase factor exp(1r b) following

6

[13, 14] and show that the open string path integral for bosonic strings is well-dened if
the condition (11) is satised. in section vi we extend the discussion to superstrings and
show that anomalies cancel if (12) is satised. as explained above, this implies that stable
d-branes in type iib string theory are classied by kh(x). in section vii we discuss
what happens when [h] is not a torsion class.

a word about conventions. we denote by r the eld of real numbers, and by z the
abelian subgroup of r generated by 2. of course, z is canonically isomorphic to the
group of integers z. it is also a module over the ring z. we will normalize h = db so
that its periods are integer multiples of 2. thus [h] will be a class in h 3(m, z) rather
than in h 3(m, z).

2 the denition of the b-eld

the precise denition of the b-eld is most conveniently formulated in the language of
cechde rham cohomology [13, 1]. choose an open cover ui, i  i, of m, such that all
ui, the double overlaps uij = ui  uj, the triple overlaps uijk, etc., are contractible (such
a cover exists for any manifold.) on each ui there is a well-dened real 2-form bi. on
double overlaps uij we have the relation

bj  bi = dij,

(14)

where ij are real 1-forms. these 1-forms satisfy a consistency condition on triple overlaps
uijk:

ij + jk + ki = 1d log ijk,

(15)

(16)

where ijk are u(1)-valued 0-forms. in turn, ijk satisfy a further constraint on quadruple
overlaps uijkl:

ijk1

jklikl1

ijl = 1.

equations (14-16) mean that b-eld is a connection on a gerbe [15], as dened in [16].
however, we will not use this terminology here.

equation (16) implies

 log ijk + log jkl  log ikl + log ijl = 1mijkl,

(17)
where mijkl  z. mijkl form a cech cochain with values in z. moreover, it is easy to see
from (17) that m is a cech cocycle and therefore represents a class in h 3(m, z). this
class will be called [h], because its de rham representative is h = db.

7

note that the condition (16) means that the functions ijk form a 2-cocycle with values
in contm (u(1)), the sheaf of u(1)-valued continuous functions on m. one can construct
the corresponding class in h 2(m, contm (u(1)) directly from [h] by the following standard
argument. consider an exponential exact sequence of sheaves

0  z  contm (r)  contm (u(1))  0.
it induces a long exact sequence in cohomology which reads in part
. . . h 2(m, contm (r))  h 2(m, contm (u(1)))  h 3(m, z)  h 3(m, contm (r)) . . . .
(19)
but the sheaf contm (r) is ne, so h p(m, contm (r)) = 0 for all p > 0. it follows that
h 2(m, contm (u(1))) is isomorphic to h 3(m, z). the cohomology class of  is mapped
to [h] under this isomorphism.

(18)

we are interested in the situation when we are given a submanifold q  m and the
restriction of h to q is trivial in de rham cohomology, i.e.
[h]q is pure torsion. until
section 5 we are going to work exclusively with objects on q, so in order not to clutter
notation we will omit the subscript q until further notice. hopefully this will not cause
confusion.

an open cover {ui} of m induces an open cover of q indexed by the same set i. by
abuse of notation, we will continue to refer to the elements of the cover as ui. if h is trivial
in de rham cohomology, there exists a 2-form b such that h = db. then bi = b + i,
where i is a real 1-form on ui. from (14) it follows that on double overlaps we have

j  i  ij = dij,

(20)

for some real 0-forms ij. from (15) and (20) it follows that on triple overlaps we have

 1(ij + jk + ki) = log ijk  log ijk,

(21)

where ijk are complex numbers with unit modulus. the numbers ijk form a cech cochain
with values in u(1). in fact (17) implies that  is a cech cocycle and so denes a class
in h 2(q, u(1)). the origin of this class can be understood more abstractly as follows.
consider an exponential exact sequence of groups

it leads to a long exact sequence in the cohomology of q which reads in part

0  z  r  u(1)  0.

. . . h 2(q, u(1))  h 3(q, z)  h 3(q, r) . . .

8

(22)

(23)

the rst arrow here is a bockstein homomorphism which we will call . since the co-
homology class of h in h 3(q, r) is trivial, exactness implies that there is an element
  h 2(q, u(1)) such that () = [h].  is precisely the class we have constructed above
using cech cocycles.

3 the topology of the gauge bundle on d-branes.

it is usually said that a (the gauge eld on d-branes) is a connection on a u(n) vector
bundle over q, but transforms nontrivially under the gauge transformation b  b + d,
to wit a  a . we need a more precise statement which would tell us how 1-forms ai
on various patches are glued together. we regard a as a collection of 1-forms ai, i  i.
we postulate that on double overlaps they satisfy

ai = gij ajg1

ij + 1gijdg1

ij  ij.

(24)

here ij are the same 1-forms as in (14), and gij are u(n)-valued functions. the transfor-
mation law (24) is not the correct transformation law for a connection on a vector bundle.
it is not even immediately clear how to dene the holonomy of such a connection a
around a loop. a natural denition exists only when the restriction of h to q is trivial
in de rham cohomology. it will turn out that the trace of holonomy of a takes values in
a line bundle over the loop space lq rather than in complex numbers.

apart from the last term in (24), the transformation law for ai is that of a connection
on a vector bundle. to be precise, for a vector bundle the gluing functions gij must satisfy

we will impose instead

gijgjkgki = 1.

gijgjkgki = ijk,

(25)

(26)

where ijk were dened in (15). the reason for this peculiar denition is that it will make
the open string path integral well dened.

in order to understand in what sense a is a connection, we need to get rid of the
last term in (24). recall that when b is at, ij satisfy (20). we dene new 1-forms ai
by

ai = ai  i.
their transformation law follows from (24) and (20):

ai = hijajh1

ij + 1hijdh1

ij ,

9

(27)

where

hij = gije

1ij .

(28)

the transformation law for ai looks like that of an ordinary connection on a vector bundle.
however, the gluing functions hij do not satisfy the usual condition (25) on triple overlaps.
instead one can show, using (26),(21), and (17) that they satisfy

hijhijhki = ijk.

(29)

thus hij do not dene a u(n) vector bundle over q. instead, as explained in section i,
they dene a module  over an azumaya algebra a with (a) = () = [h].

although the transition functions hij taken in the fundamental representation of u(n)
do not dene a vector bundle, they do dene a vector bundle when taken in the adjoint
representation of u(n). this is because hij fail to glue properly only modulo the elements
of the center of u(n), which is immaterial once one passed to the adjoint representation.
thus we obtain a rank n2 bundle over q which we call adj. it is easy to see that the
1-forms ai lead to a well-dened connection on adj. this enables one to dene the
holonomy of a in the adjoint representation in the usual manner.

the bundle adj has u(n)/u(1) = su(n)/zn as its structure group. one can dene
a class y in h 2(q, zn) which measures the obstruction to lifting it to an su(n) bundle.
this class is called the thooft magnetic ux in the physics literature. let us construct a
cech cocycle representing y. set

qij = (det hij)1/n ,

and dene su(n)-valued transition functions

hij = q1

ij hij.

in general, they do not glue properly over triple overlaps; instead we have

hijhjkhki = yijk.

(30)

(31)

(32)

taking the determinant of both sides of (32) we see that yijk is a 2-cochain with values
in zn. furthermore, it follows directly from the denition of y that it is a 2-cocycle. this
cocycle is the cech representative of the thooft magnetic ux.

for our purposes it is more useful to know if adj can be lifted to a u(n) bundle. this
may be possible even if y 6= 0. indeed, suppose y is nonzero, but is a reduction modulo n

10

of an integer cohomology class z. this means that there exists a z-valued cech cocycle
zijk such that

yijk = exp(cid:18)1zijk

n

(cid:19) .

(33)

a standard argument shows there exists a line bundle l over q whose rst chern class is
z.3 let its transition functions be tij, i.e.

log tij + log tjk + log tki = 1zijk.

then the u(n)-valued functions uij = hijt1/n
ij

satisfy

uijujkuki = 1.

(34)

(35)

this means that uij dene a vector bundle with structure group u(n). it follows that a
sucient condition for being able to lift adj to a u(n) bundle is

z  h 2(q, z)

y = z mod 2n.

(36)

it is easy to see that this condition is also necessary.

there is a convenient way to rewrite this criterion. consider a short exact sequence of

groups

where the second arrow is multiplication by n. this exact sequence leads to a long exact
sequence in cohomology

0  z  z  zn  0,

(37)

. . . h 2(q, z)  h 2(q, zn)  h 3(q, z)  h 3(q, z) . . . .

(38)

the second arrow here is a bockstein homomorphism which we call . exactness implies
that y is in the kernel of  if and only if it satises (36). thus the necessary and sucient
condition for being able to lift adj to a u(n) bundle is

(y) = 0.

(39)

we now claim that (y) = [h]. indeed, it easily follows from our denitions that

ijk = yijkqijqjkqki.

(40)

3first one uses the exact sequence (19) and the fact that contq(r) is a ne sheaf to show that
h 1(q, contq(u (1)))  h 2(q, z). let t be the preimage of z  h 2(q, z) under this isomorphism. the
cech cocycle tij representing t yields the transition functions for l.

11

taking the logarithm of both sides of (40) yields

log ijk = log yijk + log qij + log qjk + log qki + 1pijk,

(41)

where pijk are z-valued numbers. next we apply the cech coboundary operator to both
sides and get

 log ijk + log jkl  log ikl + log ijl =  log yijk + log yjkl  log yikl + log yijl + . . . , (42)
where the dots denote a cech 3-coboundary with values in z. the left-hand side is a cech
cocycle representing ()  [h], while the right-hand side is a cech cocycle representing
(y) plus a coboundary. thus we get

(y) = [h].

(43)

an important consequence of this relation is n[h] = 0, i.e.

[h] is an n-torsion class.
indeed, the third arrow in (38) is multiplication by n, so exactness implies n  0, hence
n[h] = 0.
let us summarize what we have learned so far. the postulated transformation law for
the connection 1-forms ai (24) leads to a well-dened vector bundle adj of rank n2 with
structure group su(n)/zn. the 1-forms ai = ai  i taken in the adjoint representation
in general adj carries a nontrivial thooft
of u(n) dene a good connection on adj.
magnetic ux y  h 2(q, zn) which prevents lifting it to an su(n) bundle. even if y 6= 0,
it may still be possible to lift adj to a u(n) bundle; the obstruction to doing this is
(y)  h 3(q, z). we showed that the bockstein of y is precisely [h]. this means that
adj can be lifted to a u(n) bundle if and only if [h] is trivial. (caution: remember that
all objects here are restricted to q, i.e. [h] is really [h]q.)

4 the denition of the trace of holonomy

in the previous section we remarked that the 1-forms ai enable one to compute the holon-
omy and its trace in the adjoint representation of u(n). what we really need, however, is
the trace of holonomy in the fundamental representation.

we have seen that when ()  [h] is nonzero, it is impossible to lift the su(n)/zn
bundle adj to a u(n) bundle. in such a situation the 1-forms ai cannot be interpreted
as connection 1-forms for a u(n) vector bundle. nevertheless, they do have a geometric
meaning: they dene a connection on an azumaya module . roughly speaking, a con-
nection on an azumaya module  is a connection on the underlying vector bundle which is

12

compatible with the action of a on . a more precise denition goes as follows. suppose
we are given a connection on an azumaya algebra a. this means that we are given a
covariant derivative a on the underlying vector bundle such that for any two elements
r1, r2  a and any vector eld x we have
a
x(r1r2) = a

x(r1)r2 + r1a

x(r2).

(44)

then a connection on a module  over a is a covariant derivative  on the underlying
vector bundle such that for any s  , r  a and any vector eld x we have


x(rs) = a

x(r) s + r

x(s).

(45)

by

in terms of an open cover {ui} and transition functions (2), a connection on a is given
(46)

(r)i = ri  1 [bi, ri] ,
a

where bi = bidx are u(m)-valued 1-forms which satisfy on double overlaps

bi = gijbjg1

ij + 1 gijdg1

ij .

then a connection on a module  is given by

(s)i = si  1 (1  bi  at


i  1)si,

(47)

(48)

where ai are the u(n)-valued 1-forms dened in the previous section. the property (45)
is easily veried.

a crucial dierence between a connection on the module  and a connection on an
ordinary vector bundle arises when one tries to dene the holonomy of a connection along
a loop   lq. from (29) one readily sees that any natural denition of holonomy will
produce an object which is well-dened only modulo multiplication by a complex number
with unit modulus. for this reason we anticipate that the trace of holonomy of a will
actually take values in a line bundle over lq.

to dene the trace of holonomy of a we will work locally on lq. we have already
picked an open cover ui, i  i, of q. an open cover of lq will consist of sets vp, p  p. p
is the set of pairs (t, f ), where t is a triangulation of s1 and f is a map from the simplices
of t to i. by denition v(t,f )  lq is the set of loops  : s1  q such that for any simplex
  t ()  uf (). now pick any p = (t, f )  p. let t consist of r simplices 1, . . . , r.
since s1 is oriented, the simplices are also oriented. let v,  = 1, . . . , r be the vertices of
t numbered so that the boundary of  is v+1  v. we will use a shorthand f = f ().

13

suppose we are given a   vp. we denote by a the pull-back of the 1-form af to
. we denote by h,1 the matrix hff1((v)). we now dene a function fp : vp  c
by the following formula:

fp() = tr" 1
y=n

hol(a)h,1# ,

(49)

where tr is the trace in the fundamental representation.

suppose the intersection vp  vp = vpp is nonempty. we want to compare fp and fp

on the double overlap vpp. let   vpp; then a short computation shows that

fp() = hppfp(),

(50)

where hpp is a u(1)-valued 1-cochain on lq. in order to write it down we need to intro-
duce some more notation. let 1, . . . , r be the simplices of t. we dene a nondecreasing
sequence of integers i0, . . . , ir by

v1  i1,

v2  i2,

. . . ,

vr  ir .

the cochain h is given by
 jr=ir1+1
yjr=ir
 jr=i1+1
yj1=i2

f 

j1

f 

jr

frfr1


jr1=ir2+1

yjr1=ir1

f 

jr1

fr1f 

jr11
 . . .

(51)

frf 

jr 1! f 
j11! f 

i1

f1f 

ir1

f1fr .

from (50) it follows that on triple overlaps vppp the transition functions hppp satisfy
(52)

hpphpphpp = 1.

in other words, h is a 1-cocycle over lq with values in u(1).
the cocycle h denes a line bundle la over lq. the rst chern class of this
bundle c1(la)  h 2(lq, z) is the image of h under the bockstein homomorphism
 : h 1(lq, u(1))  h 2(lq, z). since the transition functions hpp are constant, the
line bundle la is at and its rst chern class is pure torsion.
we dene the trace of holonomy of a in the fundamental representation to be the global
section of the line bundle la which is given locally by fp. thus the trace of holonomy of
a is a section of a at line bundle over lq.

14

5 cancellation of global anomalies for bosonic strings

in this section we establish that the path integral for an open bosonic string ending on
d-branes is well-dened if the transition functions hij satisfy the twisted gluing condition
(29).

recall that  maps  to a submanifold q  m on which the d-branes are wrapped.
from now on we will reinstate subscripts q where necessary. we assume that [h]q is a
torsion class.

consider the space map(, m) of maps from the worldsheet  to m such that  is
mapped to a submanifold q  m. we are dealing with oriented strings, so  and 
are oriented. it will be sucient to consider the case when  has a single component,
i.e.  is a riemann surface with a single hole. if we choose a dieomorphism s1  ,
there is a natural projection  : map(, m)  lq. in the previous section we showed
that the trace of holonomy of a is a section of a certain line bundle la over lq. this
bundle is at, but in general nontrivial. for string theory applications we need to consider
the pull-back of la to map(, m) by . it turns out that the pull-back is trivial, and

and extended to worldsheets with boundaries in [14]. below we describe the construction
of [13, 14] as it applies to our particular situation. a version of this construction which
does not depend on the choice of open cover is explained in chapter 6 of [15].

its trivialization is given by exp(1r b). to prove this, we should rst accurately
dene exp(1r b). this has been done for worldsheets without boundaries in [13]
we warn the reader that the accurate denition of exp(1r b) is rather lengthy,
exp(1r b) is a trivialization of the line bundle (la). moreover, our denition of
exp(1r b) is such that the product of the last two factors in (13) is a well-dened

so on rst reading he or she may want to jump to the next section. the upshot is that

function on map(, m).

5.1 the case of a closed worldsheet

we will start by dening exp(1r b) when  is a closed oriented surface. in this
case we want exp(1r b) to be a well-dened function on map(, m). moreover, we

expect that this function is invariant with respect to gauge transformations b  b + d,
where  is a globally dened 1-form.
recall that we have a good cover of m indexed by a set i. let s be the set of pairs
(, ) where  is the triangulation of  and  is a map from the simplices of  to i. for any
s  s we dene a set ws  map(, m) consisting of all the maps  :   m such that
for any simplex s   (s)  u(s). the sets ws, s  s form an open cover of map(, m).

15

we will work locally on map(, m). we want to dene a collection of functions
s : ws  u(1) indexed by elements of s and show that they agree on double overlaps
wss = ws  ws. to do this we have to introduce some more notation. let us x a
triangulation  of . let {sa}, a  a, be the set of all simplices of  , let {eb}, b  b, be
the set of all edges, and let {vc}, c  c be the set of all vertices. any edge belongs to
exactly two simplices. a vertex can belong to two or more simplices. we will say that v
is n-valent if it belongs to exactly n simplices.

an orientation of  induces an orientation on all the simplices of  . an edge eaa =

sa  sa can be oriented if we specify an ordering of a, a.
let us x a map  : a  i. let   w(,). then we can use  to pull back a 2-form
b(a) on u(a) to a 2-form ba on the simplex sa. similarly, we can pull back a 1-form
(a)(a) to a 1-form b on the edge eb, where eb is shared by the simplices sa and sa.
finally, suppose we have a vertex v shared by simplices sa1, . . . , san. for any three indices
a, a, a  {a1, . . . , an} we will dene a complex number aaa as (a)(a)(a)(v).

given s = (, ) and   ws we now dene a u(1)-valued function on ws:

s() = exp"1xaazsa

ba  1xbbzeb

b# .

(53)

the functions s are not quite what we need because they do not agree on double overlaps.
however, this can be xed by introducing a correction factor cv for each vertex of the
triangulation which depends on the 2-cocycle  from (15). the correction factor is dened
as follows.

1. if a vertex v is divalent, cv = 1.
2. suppose v is trivalent. since  is oriented, the simplices sharing v have a natural

cyclic order sa, sa, sa. we set cv = aaa.

3. suppose the vertex v belongs to n simplices sa1, . . . , san, n > 3. we pick an arbitrary

index a  {a1, . . . , an} and set

cv = a1a2aa2a3a . . . ana1a.

(54)

it is easy to check that cv does not depend on the choice of a because of (16).

a patient reader should be able to prove that the functions s thus dened agree on

double overlaps wss. the proof uses the relations (14)-(16). we dene exp(1r b)

to be the global function which is given locally by s. it is obvious that the global function
thus dened is invariant with respect to gauge transformations b  b + d.

16

5.2 the case of a worldsheet with a boundary

let  be a riemann surface with a single hole such that the boundary  is mapped to
q. for any triangulation  we divide the edges and vertices into internal and boundary
ones. the sets b and b will label the internal and boundary edges, respectively, while
the sets c and c will label the internal and boundary vertices, respectively. the set a
will label the simplices of  , as before. a boundary edge belongs to exactly one simplex
and has a natural orientation induced by that of . a boundary vertex belongs to one
or more simplices. suppose that a boundary vertex v belongs to n simplices sa1, . . . , san.
orientation of  induces a natural order on a1, . . . , an (not just cyclic order!)

we dene functions s : ws  u(1) as a product of internal and boundary
contributions. the internal contribution is the same as for a closed . to dene the
boundary contribution we need to introduce some more notation. we use  to pull back
1-forms i on ui to 1-forms b, b  b on eb. similarly, to every boundary vertex shared
by the simplices sa1, . . . , san we associate a set of numbers aa where a, a  {a1, . . . , an}
by pulling back 0-forms ij (see (20). the boundary contribution is a product of a factor
associated with boundary edges and a factor associated with boundary vertices. the rst
factor is

exp"1xbbzeb

b# .

cv = a3a2a1a4a3a1 . . . anan1a1 exp(cid:0)1a1an(cid:1) .

the functions s : ws  u(1) are now completely dened. it remains to compute
the transition functions on double overlaps. a very patient reader should be able to prove
that

(57)
where h is the 1-cocycle (51) and  is a natural projection  : s  p induced by the
natural projection  : map(, m)  lq. recall that h dened a line bundle la over

s = h(s)(s)s,

17

the second factor is a product over all boundary vertices; a factor cv associated with an
individual vertex is dened by the following rules:

1. if the vertex v is univalent, cv = 1.
2. if the vertex v is divalent and belongs to an ordered pair of simplices sa and sa,

3. suppose the vertex v is n-valent, n > 2. let sa1, . . . , san be the ordered simplices

then cv = exp(cid:0)1aa(cid:1) .

sharing v. we set

(55)

(56)

lq. it follows that the collection of functions {s}, s  s dene a section of the pull-back
line bundle (la).

we now dene exp(1r b) as a global section of (la) which is given locally
by s. since s take values in u(1), exp(1r b) is a trivialization of (l1

a ). from

(57) and (50) it follows that

exp(cid:18)1z b(cid:19) tr hol(a)

(58)

is a well-dened function on map(, m). hence the open string path integral is well-
dened. moreover, it is easy to see that this function is invariant with respect to gauge
transformations b  b + d, a  a  , where  is a globally dened 1-form.
ponents. the details are left as an exercise for the reader.

the above argument can be trivially extended to the case when  has several com-

6 generalizations

we are of course much more interested in superstrings rather than bosonic strings.
in
superstring theory m is a spin manifold, while q  m is not necessarily spin. as explained
in [1], the superstring path integral contains an extra problematic factor pfa(d), the
pfaan of the dirac operator on the worldsheet. this object is a section of a line bundle
over the space

x = met()  map(, m)

(59)

where met() is the space of metrics on . we will call this line bundle pfa. pfa is
at, but in general nontrivial.

one of the results of [1] is the computation of the chern class of pfa. namely, the

rst chern class is given by

c1(pfa) = 

t (w3(n)).

: x  lq, t is the transgression homomorphism 4
here  is natural projection 
t : h 3(q, z)  h 2(lq, z), and w3(n) is the bockstein of the second stiefel-whitney

4let us remind the denition of the transgression homomorphism. let x be a class in h 3(q, z).
consider the evaluation map e : s 1  lq  q given by e : (t, ) 7 (t). we can use e to pull back x to
s 1 lq. the transgression of x is a class in h 2(lq, z) by obtained by integrating e(x) over s 1. more
formally, given a homology class a  h2(lq, z) we dene t (x)(a) = e(x)(w  a), where w  h1(s 1, z)
is the fundamental homology class of s 1.

18

class w2(n) of the normal bundle of q. since w3(n) is a 2-torsion class, c1(pfa) is also
a 2-torsion class.

in section iii we have also explained that the trace of holonomy of a connection on an
azumaya module takes values in a line bundle la over lq. we have explicitly computed
its transition functions in terms of a 2-cocycle  on q. since the transition functions hpp
are constant, la is at, but in general nontrivial. a natural question is whether one can
express the chern class of la directly in terms of data on q. the answer to this question
can be inferred from the results of [14, 15] where it is shown how to construct a line bundle
lh over lq given a class [h]  h 3(q, z). the 1-cocycle (i.e. the transition functions)
it is easy to see that when [h] is a torsion
dening lh is given in eq. (6-19) of [15].
class, this cocycle is cohomologous to our cocycle h and therefore lh is isomorphic to
la. it is explained in [14, 15] that the rst chern class of lh (and therefore la) is the
transgression of [h].
consider now the product of pfa(d) and the trace of holonomy of a in the fundamen-
tal representation. the rst factor is a section of the line bundle pfa over x. the second
factor is a section of a line bundle 
t (()),

where  is the 2-cocycle entering the twisted gluing condition (29). in section iv we have
shown that if ()  h 3(q, z) is a restriction of a class in h 3(m, z), then 
la is trivial,
t (()) = 0. in this section we do not assume that ()  h 3(q, z) is
and therefore 
a restriction of a class in h 3(m, z), hence 
t (()) need not vanish. the product of
pfa(d) and the trace of holonomy of a takes values in a line bundle pfa  
(la) with

rst chern class
(60)

(la) over x. the chern class of 


(la) is 


t (w3(n) + ()) .

cancellation of global worldsheet anomalies requires this class to vanish. from section iv
we know that if

w3(n) + () = [h]q

given by exp(1r b). thus (61) is a sucient for cancelling the global worldsheet

(61)
for some class [h] = h 3(m, z), then pfa  
(la) is trivial and its trivialization is

anomalies. it is very plausible that that it is also a necessary condition. from section iii
we know that () = (y), where y  h 2(q, zn) is the thooft magnetic ux, therefore
eq. (61) is equivalent to eq. (12).
in the special case of d9-branes the condition (12) reduces to (y) = [h]. this means
that if [h] 6= 0, the bundle on d9-branes is an su(n)/zn bundle which cannot be lifted
to a u(n) bundle, and the obstruction to the lift is precisely [h]. as explained in the
introduction, this implies that a system of equal number of d9-branes and anti-d9-branes

19

denes a class in kh(m). arguments analogous to those in [4] then suggest that stable
d-branes in iib string theory are classied by kh (m).

it is possible to extend the discussion to type i strings. type i strings are unoriented,

so the denition of exp(1r b) given in section iv must be modied. in addition,

for type i strings h = db vanishes and [h] is always a 2-torsion class. we will not go
into the details of the anomaly cancellation mechanism for type i strings, but it is easy to
guess what the analogue of (61) should be. consider rst the case when only d9-branes
are present. they carry a spin(32)/z2 bundle which in general cannot be lifted to a
spin(32) bundle. the obstruction to doing this is the generalized second stiefel-whitney
class w2  h 2(m, z2) [17]. however, in order to dene the open string path integral, we
need the trace of holonomy in the vector representation of spin(32). we expect that this
object is a section of a line bundle over lq whose rst chern class is the transgression of
( w2). we thus expect that the path integral is well-dened if

( w2) = [h],

(62)

this relation was rst noticed in [12].

consider now n type i d5-branes wrapped on a submanifold q  m. it is usually
said that type i d5-branes carry a principal bundle with structure group sp(n). we
expect that this statement will be modied when [h]q 6= 0 and the bundle will be an
sp(n)/z2 bundle without sp(n) structure. the obstruction to having sp(n) structure is
measured by a class y  h 2(q, z2), and we expect that cancellation of anomalies requires
w3(n) + (y) = [h]q.

7 discussion

in this paper we have shown that when the restriction of [h] to the d9-brane worldvolume
is nonzero, cancellation of worldsheet anomalies forces the d9-brane bundle to be an
su(n)/zn bundle without u(n) structure. as a consequence of this the geometric meaning
of the gauge eld changes: it becomes a connection on a module over an azumaya algebra.
this fact is responsible for the appearance of twisted k-groups kh in string theory.

more generally, we showed that cancellation of global worldsheet anomalies imposes a
correlation between the thooft magnetic ux on d-branes and [h]q. this correlation is
summarized in (11) and (12).

a natural question is whether it is possible to extend the present discussion to the case
when [h] is not a torsion class. witten has argued [4] that the answer must be negative.
we give two more arguments supporting this conclusion.

20

first, it must be clear from our discussion that when [h] is not a torsion class, it is
impossible to wrap any nite number of d9-branes on m. this means that there is no
good starting point for the sen-witten construction of d-branes.

second, even assuming that one can somehow make sense of an innite number of
d9-branes (and anti-d9-branes), there seems to be no good candidate for a k-theory
for general [h].
indeed, for any [h] one would like to nd an algebra bundle over m
such that its k-theory classies the d-brane charges. the structure group of this algebra
bundle should be some suitable version of su(n)/zn as n  . a natural class of
algebra bundles is suggested by a theorem of dixmier and douady [18, 15] which states
that algebra bundles whose ber is the algebra of compact (or hilbert-schmidt, or trace
class) operators on a separable innite-dimensional hilbert space v are in one-to-one
correspondence with elements of h 3(m, z). the corresponding gauge group is p u(v ),
the projective unitary group of v . unfortunately, the corresponding k-theories are not
the right ones. for example, the k-group corresponding to the trivial class in h 3(m, z)
would be the grothendieck group of hilbert bundles on m with structure group u(v ), the
unitary group of v . but this k-group is very dierent from the expected answer k(m):
it is trivial for any manifold m because all hilbert bundles over m are isomorphic to a
trivial one. this happens because the gauge group u(v ) is contractible [19]. more
generally, one can consider bundles or sheaves of von neumann algebras; however none
of them seems to lead to an acceptable k-theory, because their automorphism groups
have the wrong homotopy type. in order to get the correct k-theory, one has to work
with much smaller gauge groups. for example, one could try a subgroup of the unitary
group u c(v )  u(v ) whose elements have the form 1 + k, where k is compact (or
hilbert-schmidt, or trace-class.) one can show that the k-group of hilbert bundles with
structure group u c(v ) is the same as k(m) [20, 21]. unfortunately, unlike u(n), u c(v )
does not have a center, so this k-theory does not have a twisted version.

acknowledgements:
this work was supported by a doe grant de-fg02-90er40542.

i would like to thank mikhail khovanov for useful discussions.

references

[1] d.s. freed and e. witten, anomalies in string theory with d-branes, hep-

th/9907189.

[2] m.r. douglas and c. hull, d-branes and the noncommutative torus, jhep 02,
008 (1998), hep-th/9711165; v. schomerus, d-branes and deformation quantiza-

21

tion, jhep 06, 030 (1999), hep-th/9903205; for a more extensive list of references
see n. seiberg and e. witten, string theory and noncommutative geometry, hep-
th/9908142.

[3] r. minasian and g. moore, k-theory and ramond-ramond charge, jhep 11, 002

(1997); hep-th/9710230.

[4] e. witten, d-branes and k theory, jhep 12, 019 (1998); hep-th/9810188.

[5] a. sen, so(32) spinors of type i and other solitons on brane-antibrane pair, jhep

09, 023 (1998); hep-th/9808141.

[6] j.p. serre, modules projectifs et espaces bres `a bre vectorielle, exp. 23, seminaire

dubreil-pisot, paris, 1958.

[7] r.g. swan, vector bundles and projective modules, trans. amer. math. soc. 105

(1962) 264-277.

[8] a. connes, m.r. douglas and a. schwarz, noncommutative geometry and matrix

theory: compactication on tori, jhep 02, 003 (1998); hep-th/9711162.

[9] a. grothendieck, le groupe de brauer i, seminaire bourbaki, exp. no. 290

(1964/1965) 01-21.

[10] p. donovan and m. karoubi, graded brauer groups and k-theory with local coe-

cients, ihes pub. 38 (1970) 5.

[11] b. farb and r.k. dennis, noncommutative algebra, graduate texts in mathemat-

ics 144, springer-verlag, new york, 1993.

[12] a. sen and s. sethi, the mirror transform of type i vacua in six-dimensions, nucl.

phys. b499, 45 (1997); hep-th/9703157.

[13] o. alvarez, topological quantization and cohomology, commun. math. phys.

100, 279 (1985).

[14] k. gawedzki, topological actions in two-dimensional quantum field theories,
in nonperturbative quantum field theories, eds. g. thooft, a. jae, g. mack,
p.k. mitter, and r. stora, nato series 185, plenum press, 1988, p. 101-141.

22

[15] j.-l. brylinski, loop spaces, characteristic classes, and geometric quantization,

progress in mathematics 107, birkhauser, boston, 1993.

[16] n. hitchin, lectures on special lagrangian submanifolds, math.dg/9907034.

[17] m. berkooz, r.g. leigh, j. polchinski, j.h. schwarz, n. seiberg and e. witten,
anomalies, dualities, and topology of d = 6 n=1 superstring vacua, nucl. phys.
b475, 115 (1996); hep-th/9605184.

[18] j. dixmier and a. douady, champs continues despaces hilbertiens et de c-

alg`ebres, bull. soc. math. fr. 91 (1963) 227-284.

[19] n.h. kuiper, the homotopy type of the unitary group of hilbert space, topology

3 (1965) 19-30.

[20] a.s. schwarz, on the homotopic topology of banach spaces, dokl. akad. nauk

sssr 154 (1964) 61-63.

[21] r. palais, on the homotopy type of certain groups of operators, topology 3 (1965)

271-279.

23

