runhetc-99-31, pupt-1886

hep-th/9909101

9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
4
1

 

 
 

1
v
1
0
1
9
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

ir dynamics of d = 2, n = (4, 4) gauge theories

and dlcq of little string theories

ofer aharony1 and micha berkooz2

1department of physics and astronomy, rutgers university, piscataway, nj 08855

2department of physics, jadwin hall, princeton university, nj 08544

we analyze the superconformal theories (scfts) which arise in the low-energy limit of
n = (4, 4) supersymmetric gauge theories in two dimensions, primarily the higgs branch
scft. by a direct eld theory analysis we nd a continuum of throat-like states localized

near the singularities of the higgs branch. the throat is similar to the throat found

in the coulomb branch of the same theories, but the full superconformal eld theories of
the two branches are dierent. a particular example is the scft of the ir4/zz2 sigma
model with zero theta angle. in the application of the higgs branch scfts to the dlcq

description of little string theories (lsts), the throat continuum is identied with

the continuum of throat states in the holographic description of the lsts. we also

match the descriptions of the string interactions (in the throat region) in the dlcq and
holographic descriptions of the n = (2, 0) lsts.

9/99

1. introduction

gauge theories with eight supercharges in various dimensions have been an interesting

subject for several years now, mostly because supersymmetry severely restricts the quan-

tum corrections in these theories and allows many exact computations to be made. the

two dimensional case is especially interesting because these gauge theories appear in linear

sigma model descriptions of some string theory compactications and in discrete light-cone

(dlcq) descriptions of little string theories (lsts).

the moduli space of gauge theories with eight supercharges (below 6 dimensions)

has two general types of branches : the coulomb branch, where the scalars in the vector

multiplets obtain vacuum expectation values, and the higgs branch, where the scalars in

the hypermultiplets obtain vacuum expectation values. to the extent that the metric on

the moduli space is a useful notion (i.e., it is the leading term in a systematic expan-

sion), it is very much constrained by supersymmetry.

in theories with 8 supercharges,

supersymmetry forbids any quantum corrections to the higgs branch moduli space metric.

on the coulomb branch, in perturbation theory only one-loop corrections to the metric

are possible, and often the non-perturbative corrections are also understood (or forbidden

altogether). thus, it is generally possible to compute exactly the metric on the moduli

space in these theories. naively, this means that we have good control over the low-energy

behavior in these theories. however, there are some cases where the moduli space approxi-

mation breaks down, and more information is needed to give a full low-energy description.

although this break-down can happen in a variety of ways, which are generally indicated

by higher-order terms in the eective action becoming important, it certainly occurs when

the metric becomes negative, and often also when it is singular.

in gauge theories with 8 supercharges, such singularities of the metric occur near the

meeting points of the higgs and coulomb branches, where additional degrees of freedom

classically (and in some cases also quantum mechanically) become massless. the signi-

cance of the singularities changes in dierent dimensions. above two dimensions, there is

a real moduli space of vacua, and once a point on the moduli space is chosen the theory is

well-described (at low enough energies) by uctuations on the moduli space around that

point. away from singular points in the moduli space the theory is typically free in the

ir, while at singular points it is typically described by a non-trivial superconformal eld

theory (scft). in two or less dimensions the situation is dierent, since there is no real

moduli space of vacua due to quantum uctuations (the moduli space metric is still often

1

relevant as part of a born-oppenheimer approximation). singularities in the metric indi-

cate that the sigma model approximation breaks down (although one can sometimes still

obtain sensible answers for a carefully chosen restricted class of questions).

in this paper we will discuss the 1 + 1 dimensional superconformal eld theories which
are the low-energy limit of n = (4, 4) supersymmetric gauge theories in two dimensions.
the low-energy dynamics in this case is described by two superconformal eld theories,

one corresponding to the higgs branch and one to the coulomb branch; the two theories

decouple at low energies [1,2,3]. the moduli space metrics of the two ir theories have

singularities (and can even become negative on the coulomb branch), indicating that

higher order terms are important, and one requires a dierent description of the theory

near the singular regions. in particular, there are various reasons to believe that there is

a continuous spectrum associated with the singularities in the higgs branch (one example
of such a singularity is the ir4/zz2 singularity with zero theta angle). in this paper we
will develop, following [3,4], a eld theory method which yields a useful description of the

behavior of the theory near the singularities. this is done by means of a simple eective

eld theory which explicitly exhibits the continuous spectrum, and in some cases also the

leading interaction term in a systematic expansion.

the method we use involves an explicit lagrangian for the higgs branch scft, in

which the coulomb branch elds appear as auxiliary variables. we can then integrate out

the hypermultiplets to obtain an eective action for these auxiliary elds. this method was

outlined in [4]. the main dierence will be that whereas there the hamiltonian formulation

was emphasized (which is more convenient in the case of quantum mechanics), here we

will focus on the lagrangian approach, and we will take advantage of the power of 1 + 1

dimensional superconformal symmetry. the approach we use is also similar to that of [5],

although the interpretation is quite dierent, and the methods we use are similar to those

of [6].

in our description the singularity will be replaced by a semi-innite throat1, as in

the coulomb branch when the one-loop corrections are taken into account [9]. a similar

throat was found [10] in the analysis of d1-d5 theories which have the same singularities

as the higgs branch theories we discuss here; however, their analysis used the ads/cft

1 for the case of ir4/zzk singularities embedded in a space with a compact circle transverse
to the singularity, there is a t-duality relating them to an ns5-brane conguration which has a

similar semi-innite throat [7,8].

2

correspondence and a large n approximation, while our analysis will be directly in the eld

theory and valid for any value of n . furthermore, our method is applicable for any higgs
branch of a n = (4, 4) theory (although we will focus on u (n ) gauge theories, which are
related to the d1-d5 system), and we will discuss both the r-r and the ns-ns sectors of

the theory.

we will focus mainly on the u (n ) gauge theory with an adjoint hypermultiplet and

nf fundamental hypermultiplets (which arises as the low-energy theory on d1-branes

inside d5-branes in at space). one of our motivations for studying this theory is to ex-

amine its usefulness as a dlcq description [2,3] of little string theories (lsts) with

16 supercharges [11,12,13]. the little string theories are known from their holographic

description (which includes a linear dilaton background) to have a continuous spectrum

above some mass gap [14,15]. we will show that in the dlcq this continuous spectrum

may be identied with the continuous spectrum appearing at the singularities in the cor-

responding scfts, and that we can also reproduce the string interactions in the weakly

coupled region of the holographic description.

the organization of the paper is as follows. in section 2 we review n = (4, 4) gauge
theories in two dimensions and their low-energy limits2, and we give an explicit lagrangian

description for the conformal theory of the higgs branch which is also useful near the

singularities. in section 3 we analyze the behavior of this theory near the singularities of

the higgs branch in u (n ) gauge theories, and show that it develops a throat region

which can be explicitly exhibited and analyzed.

in section 4 we analyze the dlcq of

the (2, 0) lsts, which corresponds to a particular higgs branch scft. we match the

continuous part of the spectrum to that which arises in the linear dilaton region of the

holographic description of the lsts, and we also reproduce the string interactions there.

in section 5 we analyze the dlcq of (1, 1) lsts [18,19], which is a particular coulomb

branch scft. in this case we can easily exhibit the low-energy states of the (1, 1) lsts

(which are free w-bosons), but it is more dicult to obtain a precise understanding of the

continuum states since the throats of the relevant coulomb branch theories are less well

understood. we end in section 6 with a summary and some remarks.

2 these theories were analyzed using brane constructions in [16,17], and were argued to be

dual to the dimensional reduction of some non-trivial 2 + 1 dimensional eld theories in [18].

3

2. two dimensional n = (4, 4) gauge theories and their low energy limits
2.1. n = (4, 4) gauge theories

gauge theories with n = (4, 4) supersymmetry in two dimensions may be viewed as
the dimensional reduction of four dimensional n = 2 gauge theories, or of six dimensional
n = (1, 0) gauge theories. like the other theories with eight supercharges, their matter
content includes vector multiplets in the adjoint representation of the gauge group and

hypermultiplets which can be in arbitrary representations of the gauge group. the six

dimensional gauge theories have an su (2)r r-symmetry. upon dimensional reduction to
two dimensions there is an additional so(4)  su (2)r  su (2)l symmetry acting on the
four reduced dimensions. this is also an r-symmetry since the supercharges are a spinor

of this so(4) group; the left-moving (positive chirality) supercharges are in the (2, 1, 2)
representation of su (2)l  su (2)r  su (2)r while the right-moving (negative chirality)
supercharges are in the (1, 2, 2) representation.

the matter content of the vector multiplets and the hypermultiplets may be easily

derived using the dimensional reduction from six dimensions :

su (2)l su (2)r su (2)r

vector

real scalar

lef t moving f ermion
right moving f ermion

complex scalar

1
1
2
2
2
1
1

vector multiplet : a
v
l
v
r
v
hypermultiplet : h
l
h
r
h

1
2
1
2
1
2
1

1
2
2
1
1
1
2

complex lef t moving f ermion
complex right moving f ermion.
(2.1)
the parameters of n = (4, 4) gauge theories in two dimensions include the gauge cou-
pling (or gauge couplings for non-simple gauge groups), fayet-iliopoulos terms and theta

angles for abelian components of the gauge group, and masses for the hypermultiplets.

we will discuss here mostly the case where the fayet-iliopoulos terms, theta angles and

masses all vanish, so that the only parameter is the gauge coupling constant gy m , whose

scaling dimension is [gy m ] = 1. because of this scaling dimension, the gauge theories

become free in the uv, but are strongly coupled in the ir, where the perturbative gauge

theory description is not valid. schematically, the gauge theory lagrangian (suppressing

4

all indices) is given by

l =z d2x{

1
4g2

y m

tr(cid:2)f 2

 + (dv )2 + [v, v ]2 + v dv + v [v, v ] + d2(cid:3) +

xhypers(cid:2)(dh)2 + (v h)2 + hdh + h v h + v hh + dhh(cid:3)},

(2.2)

where d are the three auxiliary elds in the vector multiplet (in the 3 of su (2)r) and
d   + a is the covariant derivative. the scaling dimensions of the various elds in
this lagrangian are [a] = [v ] = 1, [v ] = 3/2, [d] = 2, [h] = 0 and [h] = 1/2.

the classical moduli space of these theories, like that of other theories with eight super-

charges (below six dimensions), includes two types of congurations : the coulomb branch,

where the scalars in the vector multiplets obtain vacuum expectation values (vevs), and

the higgs branch, where the scalars in the hypermultiplets obtain vevs (in general there

are also mixed branches but they do not seem to raise any new issues so we will limit

ourselves here to a discussion of the two extreme cases). of course, quantum eld theories

in two dimensions do not actually have a moduli space of vacua, since wave functions tend

to spread out on the classical moduli space; hence, one needs to treat the ir limit more

carefully.

2.2. basic properties of the ir limit(s)

the low-energy (ir) limit of the gauge theory involves taking gy m  , and one
expects to obtain in this limit an n = (4, 4) superconformal eld theory (scft)3. however,
it is believed [1,22,2,3] that the low-energy limit is in fact two decoupled superconformal

eld theories, one describing the higgs branch of the theory and the other corresponding

to the coulomb branch; for nite gy m wave functions can spread from one branch to the
other, but it is believed that in the gy m   limit the distance between the branches
goes to innity and they decouple.

the simplest general argument for this [3] comes from an analysis of the r-symmetries
of the ir n = (4, 4) scft. the n = (4, 4) superconformal algebra includes left-moving
and right-moving su (2) kac-moody algebras. both the higgs and the coulomb branches

have semi-classical regions for large vevs, whose description includes scalar elds with

3 the ir theory is (by denition) a scale-invariant theory. for theories with a compact moduli
space this implies [20,21] that it is also a conformally invariant theory; we expect this to be true

also in our case, even though the moduli space is non-compact.

5

a at metric; a symmetry which rotates such scalar elds cannot be separated into left-

moving and right-moving pieces, so it cannot be part of the r-symmetry of the ir scft.

this determines that in a scft of the higgs branch su (2)r cannot be (part of) an r-
symmetry, since the scalars in the hypermultiplets are charged under this group. similarly,
su (2)r  su (2)l cannot be an r-symmetry in the theory of the coulomb branch. it is
natural to expect that the r-symmetry of the higgs branch is exactly su (2)r  su (2)l,
while the r-symmetry of the coulomb branch is an su (2)1  su (2)2 symmetry which
is not visible in the gauge theory but which has su (2)r as its diagonal subgroup. since
the coulomb and higgs branch superconformal theories have dierent r-symmetries it is

clear that they cannot be identied. in the higgs branch scft we can use the identi-

cation of the su (2) r-symmetries and the relation between their chiral anomaly and the
central charge to compute the central charge, c = 6(nh  nv ) where nh is the number of
hypermultiplets and nv is the number of vector multiplets [3].

as discussed in [3], the higgs and coulomb branch theories have dierent scaling

dimensions for the various elds. in the higgs branch the hypermultiplets obtain vevs so

[h] = 0, while in the coulomb branch the vector multiplet scalars obtain vevs so [v ] = 0.

in the higgs branch theory, the scaling dimensions of the various elds agree with their

classical scaling dimensions in (2.2); the fact that [v ] = 1 follows from the fact that it is
in the (2, 2) representation of the su (2)  su (2) r-symmetry group in the n = (4, 4)
superconformal algebra. thus, we claim (following [4,3]) that the exact lagrangian for the
higgs branch scft is obtained by the naive limit of gy m   in (2.2), which removes
the rst line and leaves us only with the second line :

lh =z d2x xhypers

{(dh)2 + (v h)2 + h dh + h v h + v hh + dhh}. (2.3)

in this limit the kinetic terms of the vector multiplet elds all vanish, so they become

auxiliary elds.

one description of the higgs branch scft is as a supersymmetric sigma model on

the higgs branch moduli space : this is recovered if one integrates out the auxiliary elds

in (2.3). this can be done explicitly since the action is quadratic in these elds. the

integration over the d elds and the gauge elds gives the constraints which limit the

conguration space to the classical higgs branch, while the integration over v gives rise to

the 4-fermi interactions of the supersymmetric non-linear sigma model. however, following

[4], in order to describe the theory near the singularities in the moduli space it is more

6

useful to regard the vector multiplet elds, which (using (2.3)) are composite operators
on the higgs branch of the form v  l
h/h 2, as the basic objects, and to perform a
change of variables to these new coordinates. note that these variables are all invariant

hr

under any global symmetries acting on the hypermultiplets, so we cannot describe states

which are charged under such global symmetries in terms of the new variables.

in the lagrangian approach this procedure amounts to integrating over the hyper-

multiplet elds and inducing an eective action for the vector multiplet elds [3]. this
is basically the same technique as in the cpn 1 model (described in [23] and references

therein). obviously, in this approach we are throwing away most of the dynamical degrees

of freedom of the theory, and naively one might expect the resulting (non-local) eective

action to be uncontrollable. however, since a non-zero value of v gives a mass to h and

h, there is actually a systematic expansion in e/v (where e is the energy), which gives

a good description of the states which are localized near the singularities. this will be

carried out in section 3, and used for dlcq applications in section 4.

when is this description expected to be valid ? using (2.3) we can think of v 2 as

the mass squared of the hypermultiplets, so we expect such a description to be valid for

energies below this mass scale. this is just the usual born-oppenheimer approximation.

alternatively, the eective action for the vector multiplets may be expanded in a power
series in the dimensionless dv /v 2, and we can neglect the higher order terms in this
expansion when dv  v 2. thus, we expect to get a good description in terms of the
vector multiplets for low-energy wave functions concentrated around large values of v . if

we integrate out the vector multiplets instead of the hypermultiplets, we nd that v is
equal to a bilinear in the hypermultiplet fermions divided by h 2, so in some sense large
values of v correspond to small values of h, close to the singularity of the higgs branch4.

therefore, we expect the eective vector multiplet theory to give a good description of the

region near the singularities of the higgs branch.

if, alternatively, we want to focus on the coulomb branch theory, we would like to have
[v ] = 0, so we need to take v   as gy m   keeping the dimensionless   v /gy m
constant. this will be the coordinate on the moduli space of the coulomb branch scft.

note that this means that any nite value of  in the coulomb branch theory corresponds

to an innite v from the point of view of the original gauge theory and of the higgs branch

theory, which is consistent with the innite separation between the two branches in the ir.

4 related observations were made in [24].

7

it is not clear whether the same procedure we used for analyzing the higgs branch can also

be used for the coulomb branch, i.e., whether we can treat the hypermultiplets as auxiliary

variables in the coulomb branch scft and use them to understand its singularities. we

have not been able to write down an explicit lagrangian for the coulomb branch scft,

analogous to (2.3). the approach we will use to analyze the coulomb branch scft in

section 5 will be to rst integrate out the hypermultiplets for nite gy m , and then take
gy m   with the scaling which keeps  nite. this scaling keeps both the tree-level
and the one-loop terms in the coulomb branch moduli space metric nite.

3. the throat of the higgs branch

the moduli space metric on the higgs branch does not receive any quantum correc-

tions. thus, unlike the situation in the coulomb branch, which we will discuss in section

5, the singularities in the higgs branch (where classically it meets the coulomb branch)

remain a nite distance away. nevertheless, there are many reasons to believe that the

moduli space description breaks down near the singularities [1]. a special case of such
a singularity, which arises in the u (1) theory with two hypermultiplets, is the ir4/zz2
singularity with zero theta angle. when this scft is used for string theory compact-

ications, some correlation functions diverge, as is evident from the existence of light

non-perturbative states in space-time. in [10] it was claimed, using the ads/cft corre-

spondence [25,26,27,28], that at the singularities the higgs branch develops a semi-innite

throat in appropriate variables. such a throat (which appears also in the perturbative

analysis of the coulomb branch metric [9]) leads to a continuous spectrum of dimensions of

primary operators (beyond the continuum associated with the classical non-compactness

of the moduli space) and to divergences in various correlation functions. in this section

we will discuss a eld theory analysis of the singularities which, among other things, re-

produces this claim directly (without using a large gauge group approximation as in [10]),

as the leading term in a systematic expansion.

3.1. the throat in the abelian case

let us begin by analyzing the superconformal theory corresponding to the higgs

branch of a u (1) gauge theory with nf charged hypermultiplets, with nf > 1 (otherwise
there is no higgs branch). this is an n = (4, 4) scft with central charge c = 6(nf  1).
as explained before, we would like to obtain an eective description of the singularity

8

in terms of the vector multiplet elds. this eective theory is expected to give a good

description of some states which are localized near the singularities. we begin with the

case of a u (1) gauge eld as the easiest implementation of our approach, and discuss the

additional features of the non-abelian u (n ) gauge theory in the next subsection. the

u (1) case is also interesting in its own right since, as mentioned above, the nf = 2 higgs
branch theory gives the ir4/zz2 sigma model with zero theta angle.

the eective theory

we would like to integrate out the fundamental hypermultiplets and obtain an eective

action for the vector multiplet elds. as explained above, the appropriate expansion is in
terms of dv /v 2. the leading terms in this expansion, which are the metric term and its

supersymmetric partners, are known because of supersymmetry, and they are expected to

dominate at energies much smaller than v . supersymmetry and so(4) symmetry [22,9]

constrain the metric for the four scalar elds in the vector multiplet to be of the form

ds2 =(cid:18)a +

b

2|v |2(cid:19) dv 2.

(3.1)

since [v ] = 1, a is dimensionful and so must be zero in the superconformal theory we are

discussing. on the other hand, b can be non-zero, and a 1-loop computation using either
the original action or the action (2.3) gives5 b = nf . in the original theory dimensional
analysis determines that b cannot depend on gy m so the one-loop result for b must be

exact; we claim that this is true also in the ir theory (2.3). similarly, a torsion term also

arises at one-loop [9].

together, these terms lead to a throat metric. changing to radial coordinates

dv 2 = dv2 + v2d2

m , we nd a sigma model with metric

3, and dening a new variable  =pnf /2 log(v/m ) for some mass scale

and torsion

ds2 = d2 +

nf
2

d2
3

h = nf d,

(3.2)

(3.3)

5

it is clear that b must be proportional to nf , since the whole induced action for the vector

elds is proportional to nf , arising from integrating over nf independent hypermultiplets. this

form of the metric also follows (up to a constant) from conformal invariance, since [v ] = 1.

9

where d2
3 is the metric and d is the volume form on the 3-sphere. the metric and torsion
on the s3 coordinates give exactly (after adding in the fermions) a level nf supersymmetric
su (2) wzw model. from the construction it is clear that the left-moving and right-
moving su (2) symmetries of this model are part of the su (2)r  su (2)l symmetries
(acting on v ) that are in the superconformal algebra; we will discuss the exact form of the

su (2) currents below.

however, the description above cannot be the whole story. the simplest way to see
this is to note that it does not have the correct central charge, c = 6(nf 1). the throat
theory describes the region of very large , where it diers from the full superconformal

theory only by higher derivative terms that do not contribute to the conformal anomaly,

so it must have the same conformal anomaly as the full theory. we would like to argue

that the central charges are matched by having in the eective lagrangian a background
charge for , of the form l  q
2-dimensional metric g), with

8 gr (where r is the scalar curvature of the background

q = (nf  1)s 2

nf

.

(3.4)

the arguments for this are the following:
1. in the original action (2.3), a conformal transformation takes v  ev (along with
some action on the fermions and the auxiliary elds), and is known to change the action
8 gr. after the change of variables, this transformation acts
by c
on  as    + pnf /2; thus, to get the correct variation of the action, it must
gr, giving (3.4). this is nothing but the

include a term of the form nf 1
usual argument of adding a background charge to obtain the correct central charge.

48 gr = nf 1

8 q 2

nf

using the fact that the supersymmetric level nf su (2) wzw model may be written
as the sum of a bosonic level (nf  2) su (2) wzw model plus three free fermions,
we nd that in order to have the correct central charge we require

6(nf  1) = 2 +

3(nf  2)

nf

+ (1 + 3q2),

(3.5)

giving q = (nf  1)q 2

nf

strong coupling region with the region near the singularity).

(as in [9], the positive sign is determined by identifying the

2. the throat theory (ignoring all the higher order corrections) in fact has a large
n = 4 algebra [29,30,31,32], as reviewed for example in section 4 of [10]. this large
n = 4 algebra has two superconformal n = 4 subalgebras, one with c = 6 and the

10

other with c = 6(nf  1). the rst algebra appears in the throat which is found in
the coulomb branch [9]; in this algebra, the su (2) currents (of level 1) do not involve

the bosonic su (2) wzw model but only the free fermionic elds (recall that these
are, for the left-movers, in the (1, 2, 2) representation of su (2)l  su (2)r  su (2)r,
and that su (2)r is related to the superconformal algebra of the coulomb branch).
however, it is the other n = 4 subalgebra which is relevant for the higgs branch,
for example because it includes the su (2)r  su (2)l currents of level (nf  1) which
are in the superconformal algebra of the higgs branch (in the throat theory these
currents are the sum of the bosonic level (nf  2) currents and a level one current
from the free fermions). the dierence between the two subalgebras involves exactly

a shift in the energy-momentum tensor which changes the background charge of the

 eld from the value q = p2/nf of the coulomb branch throat [9] to the value
q = (nf  1)p2/nf of the higgs branch throat.

thus, we conclude that the eective theory in the region of large v is given by four

free fermions, a free scalar with background charge q = (nf  1)p2/nf , and a level
(nf  2) bosonic su (2) wzw model. for nf = 2 this throat, with its continuum of
states (given by states with any momentum in the  direction), is part of the ir4/zz2 sigma
model with zero theta angle.

relation to the coulomb branch throat

the theory we found in the throat seems very similar to the theory found in the

coulomb branch throat of the same gauge theories [9], except for the dierent back-
ground charge for the scalar6. this similarity should not be surprising, since before we

take the low-energy limit the two throats are actually connected to each other, and we

can have states which start out as some wave packet (with energy well below gy m ) in the

coulomb branch moving towards the singularity, then enter the throat and eventually

come out of the throat into the higgs branch. this suggests that there should be a

one-to-one mapping between the states propagating in the throat regions of the two the-

ories, although there is no direct relation between the throats after taking the ir limit.

studying this mapping will lead us to discover an extra vacuum energy in the throat of

the higgs branch scft on a cylinder (in the rr sector).

6 corrections to the throat in the two cases will be very dierent, occurring at small v for

the higgs branch throat and at large v for the coulomb branch throat.

11

let us look at the nite coupling gauge theory on a cylinder with periodic boundary

conditions for the fermions (the rr sector). at energies well below the yang-mills coupling

(but still above a mass gap which will be discussed shortly, which is a number times the

inverse radius of the circle), there are four distinct regions in the moduli space :

(1) the asymptotic at region of the coulomb branch.

(2) the throat of the coulomb branch, which includes a scalar with background charge

(3) the throat of the higgs branch, which includes a scalar with background charge

q = p2/nf .
q = (nf  1)p2/nf .

(4) the asymptotic region of the higgs branch.

we would like to compute the energy gap between the lowest states in regions (3) and

(4), which become part of the higgs branch scft when we take the low-energy limit. in

all regions there is no normalizable ground state, but there are delta-function normalizable

states whose energy is bounded from below, and we will refer to this lower bound as the

ground state energy of the appropriate region.

we begin by reviewing the energies of states in general throat (linear dilaton) cfts.

in a throat region, if we normalize the state corresponding to the identity operator

to have zero energy, then the energy of a state with momentum q, corresponding to an
operator eiq, is given by e = q(q +iq) (in units determined by the radius of the cylinder).
in order to have a real energy we require q = iq/2 + q0 where q0 is real, and then
e = q2
0 + q2/4, leading to an energy gap (ground state energy) of q2/4 for states
propagating in the throat (and a continuum above this gap). of course, throat states
can also include some operators involving the fermions and the level (nf 2) wzw model,
but we will ignore these for now (since these sectors are the same in the coulomb branch

and higgs branch throats).

we will now compute the ground state energies in regions (1), (2) and (4), and then

by matching the throat states we will compute the ground state energy in region (3).

in regions (1) and (4) supersymmetry tells us that the ground state energies (in the

rr sector) vanish. in region (2) the theory is just a throat theory [9] given in terms of

the original coulomb branch variables (with no additional energy shifts), so the ground
state energy there is q2/4. we claim that this can be identied with the ground state
energy in the higgs branch throat, since states going into one come out of the other (the

scalar  in the throat theory is free, and this approximation becomes better and better

down the throat). thus, we conclude that the higgs branch throat has a constant

12

contribution q2/4  q2/4 to its vacuum energy, so that the hamiltonian for the higgs
branch throat is given by (ignoring the fermions and the wzw model)

h = q(q + iq) + ( q2  q2)/4.

(3.6)

using this hamiltonian, any state corresponding to an operator eiq and a wave-function
ei(q+i q/2) in the coulomb branch throat can be mapped into a state with the same
wave-function and energy in the higgs branch throat, corresponding to the operator
eiq where q + iq/2 = q + i q/2.

the discussion in the previous paragraph may appear to be at odds with the discussion
of [10], where it was argued that the higgs branch throat does have a mass gap of q2/4
(and not q2/4 as we nd above) above the ground state energy in region (1). however,
the discussion of [10] was in the ns-ns sector of the superconformal eld theory and not in

the r-r sector which we analyzed above (in the ads3/cft2 correspondence, the ns-ns
sector vacuum is identied with the ads3 vacuum, while the r-r vacuum is identied with
the btz black hole). the vacuum (ground state) energy of the ns-ns sector is shifted
compared to the r-r sector by (c/12). thus, if we were to repeat the same analysis we
did above in the ns-ns sector, we would nd that the coulomb branch throat states
would have e = q(q + i q)  cc/12, which means that when they exit from the higgs
branch throat they would have an energy of

e = q(q + i q) + (ch  cc)/12

(3.7)

over the higgs branch vacuum (the ground state energy of region (4)). the mass gap in

the higgs branch throat in this sector should thus be

q2
4

+

ch  cc

12

=

1

2nf

+

(6nf  6)  6

12

=

q2
4

,

(3.8)

which is the naive mass gap of the higgs branch. thus, in this sector we do not need

any vacuum energy to match the coulomb branch throat to the higgs branch throat;

the vacuum energy we found disappears when we do the appropriate shift relating the

r-r and ns-ns sectors. therefore, our results are in perfect agreement with those of

[10]. in the r-r sector of the higgs branch scft the mass gap (the energy dierence

between the ground state and the continuum) is 1/2nf , while in the ns-ns sector it is
(nf  1)2/2nf .

13

3.2. the throat in the non-abelian case

for n > 1, the exact analysis of the throat becomes more complicated. however,

we still expect integrating out the hypermultiplets to lead to an eective action for the

vector multiplets which is similar to the action we got in the abelian case; gauge invariance

and dimensional analysis severely limit the possible terms that can appear.

the term which we would like to focus on in the non-abelian case is a commutator

term, i.e., a potential term which is non-zero when the v matrices do not commute. we

will not discuss this term in general, but only in the vicinity of the point in conguration

space in which the v matrices are all proportional to the identity matrix (this case will

be the most interesting for the dlcq application discussed below). note that in general

this potential term suggests that the dominant congurations in the ir are such that the

v matrices commute (and can be taken to be diagonal). the computation of the potential

and the eective theory under such more general circumstances is also straightforward,

but we will not discuss it here.

let us expand the matrix v as

v = v0(cid:18)i +s 2

nf

v(cid:19),

(3.9)

where i is the n  n identity matrix and we normalized v so it will have a canonical
kinetic term in the throat. now, we have a double expansion in v and in d(v )/v0,
and the leading potential term in this expansion is of the form

nf

tr([v, v ]2)

2v 2
0

=

2
nf

0 tr([v, v ]2).
v 2

(3.10)

this term is related by susy to the kinetic term nf tr(dv )2/2v 2
0 which we can obtain as
in the abelian case, but we can also compute it directly. the mass squared matrix for the
bosonic elements of the hypermultiplets is a matrix of the form v 2, while for the fermionic
elements we nd matrices of the form v 2 + i[v, v ] (with appropriate so(4) indices). the
one-loop computation of the vacuum energy measures the dierence in energy between the

ground states of the bosons and fermions in the hypermultiplet, and we nd exactly the

potential (3.10).

if we have only fundamental hypermultiplets then generally, for n > 1, a moduli
space approximation is not expected to be valid using the vector multiplet variables7, since

7 the moduli space approximation would include only the diagonal elements of the vector

multiplet matrices, integrating out the o-diagonal elements.

14

integrating out the o-diagonal vector multiplets gives rise to a negative metric whenever

two eigenvalues approach each other [9]. as long as we keep the full vector multiplet

matrices (as above) this problem does not arise. however, we do not fully understand the

ir dynamics of these vector multiplets. we expect a moduli space approximation to be
valid only when all the eigenvalues of v are far separated from each other8.

3.3. the adhm sigma model

for applications described later in the paper to little string theories it will be useful

to analyze also theories with an adjoint hypermultiplet, in addition to the nf multiplets

in the fundamental representation of u (n ). in this case the higgs branch scft is, by

the adhm construction, the same as a sigma model on the moduli space of n instantons
in su (nf ) (on ir4). note that in this case the problem with the moduli space of the v
matrices described in the previous paragraph does not arise, since the positive contribution

of the adjoint hypermultiplet to the moduli space metric cancels the negative contribution

of the vector multiplet. the action for the adjoint hypermultiplet, which we will denote

by x, is of the same form as (2.3) :

h =z d2xtr{(dx)2 + ([x, v ])2 + x dx + x [v, x] + v [x, x] + d[x, x]},
l(adj)

(3.11)

and the full action of the higgs branch scft will be the sum of (2.3) and (3.11). now,

we expect to get an eective throat theory involving both the vector multiplet and the

adjoint hypermultiplet elds, since the adjoint hypermultiplet does not become massive

for large v .

to derive the eective potential for x in the throat region we note that the vector

multiplet kinetic term which we obtain by integrating out the hypermultiplets includes
(using supersymmetry) a term of the form nf tr(d2)/2v 2
(using (3.11)) to a potential of the form

0 . now, integrating out d leads

2
nf

tr([x, x]2)v 2
0 .

(3.12)

8 this is not to be confused with the situation relevant for dlcq, which we will discuss
momentarily. we have so far been discussing the system with only fundamental hypermultiplets.

in the dlcq application there is an additional adjoint hypermultiplet.

15

combining our results, we nd that the bosonic potential of the adjoint elds in congu-

rations close to v = v0i is of the form

2
nf

v 2

0 (cid:2)tr([v, v ]2) + tr([v, x]2) + tr([x, x]2)(cid:3) .

(3.13)

the ir limit of the eective action

in the case of the adhm sigma model, we can proceed further and discuss the low-

energy limit of the eective action for large n .

in this case, if we discuss the theory

on a cylinder, the lowest energy congurations are given by long string congurations,

which can carry energies proportional to 1/n in the large n limit. since our throat

theory is a u (n ) gauge theory, with 8 scalar adjoint matrices (4 in v and 4 in x), we

can construct such long string congurations [33,34,35] just like in the dlcq of type

iia string theory [36,37,38,39], by looking at congurations which change by a non-trivial

u (n ) gauge transformation when going around the circle. this relies on the potential

term (3.13), which forces the low-energy congurations to sit on the moduli space where

all 8 of the matrices commute and can be simultaneously diagonalized (when we x v0 and
look at congurations with energies of order 1/n ).

we expect that the low-energy eective theory on these long strings will be exactly

the theory we found in the higgs branch throat for n = 1. since the long strings

eectively live on a circle which is larger by a factor of n , the mass gap for such cong-
urations is lower by a factor of n than what we found in the n = 1 case9. we can also

compute the leading correction to this eective action, which corresponds to the interac-

tion by which long strings split and join. the analysis is a slight variant of the same

analysis in the context of the dlcq of the iia string [33,34,35], and the main idea is still

that this interaction is given by a twist operator [35] whose coecient is determined by

dimensional analysis.

in the case of the dlcq of type iia string theory, the uv is given by given by the 1+1
dimensional n = (8, 8) u (n ) gauge theory. the theory in that case includes interactions
of the form g2
y m tr([x, x]2), where the 8 x matrices have canonical kinetic terms. the
low-energy theory is an (ir8)n /sn orbifold, in which the string coupling may be described
as a twist operator. the coecient of this operator can be determined by dimensional

analysis; since the operator has dimension 3, its coecient must scale as 1/gy m .

9 recall that we measure energy in units of the inverse size of the circle.

16

0 /nf replacing g2

the throat region is similar, but with 2v 2

in our case, we claim that the eective theory for long strings propagating far along
y m . this follows from the
eective potential (3.13) for congurations where v is close to v0i. we conclude that
again the correction to the low-energy theory, expanded around the conguration v  v0i
(which breaks conformal invariance), will be governed by a twist operator in the low-energy
orbifold theory, but that this time its coecient will be proportional to pnf /2/v0. note
that we can really only justify this description for large nf , since we are ignoring here the
metric and torsion terms which cause the space the v s live in to really be ir s3 and not
ir4; however, for large nf this space is almost at and we can trust the analysis we made.

3.4. blowing up the singularities

in the previous subsections we saw how a careful analysis of the behavior of the higgs

branch scft near the singularities of the moduli space leads to a simple description

involving a continuous spectrum localized near the singularities. another way to analyze

the theory near the singularities, which was used for the 0 + 1 dimensional theory in [40],

is to blow up the singularities of the higgs branch by adding fayet-iliopoulos (fi) terms

of the formr d2xtr(d) to the lagrangian (of course, this is only possible for u (n ) gauge

theories, while we expect most of our previous discussion to be more general). the fi

term , like d, is a triplet of su (2)r, and it is an exactly marginal deformation of the
higgs branch scft. adding such a term lifts the origin of the higgs branch (h = 0),

and schematically the minimal allowed value for h now becomes h  . the coulomb

branch is also lifted, so we expect the throat in the higgs branch, which originally

connected the two branches, to no longer be innite. for large n this eect was discussed

in [10], here we will see how it works for any value of n .

the eect of  on the eective throat theory is as follows. as described above, when
we integrate out the hypermultiplets we get a one-loop term proportional to tr(d2)/v 2
0 .
now, if we integrate out d, we nd a potential of the form  2v 2
0 . this potential prevents
states from going to large values of v , as expected. in fact, the leading potential which is
generated is precisely the potential appearing in the n = 4 super-liouville theory [32], as
found also in [10]. this potential, which preserves n = 4 superconformal symmetry, can
be written using the throat variables (for nf  3) in the form  2r d2xddo1/2, where
oj = ej2/nf vj,j and vj,j are the primaries of the bosonic su (2) level (nf  2) wzw

model. it is easy to check that this deformation is marginal, and it includes in particular

a term which is exponential in  and serves as a liouville wall.

17

a similar behavior is expected when we turn on a theta term of the formr d2xtr(f01),

which is related by supersymmetry to the fi terms, but we will not analyze this in detail
here. for u (1) with nf = 2 and  =  we expect to reproduce the free ir4/zz2 orbifold
theory [41], but we will not attempt to show this here.

4. the dlcq of n = (2, 0) little string theories

the rest of this paper will involve applying our results concerning the higgs and

coulomb branch scfts to the dlcq of little string theories (lsts) [11,12,13]. the
original denition of lsts with 16 supercharges, as gs  0 limits of ns5-branes or of ale
singularities, is not very useful for making computations in these theories. however, we

now have two more explicit descriptions which allow computations, one which is a dlcq

description at nite momentum on a compact light-like circle [2,3,18,19], and the other

which is a holographic dual of the lsts [15] (see also [42,43], and see [44,45,46,47] for

similar holographic duals to lsts with less supersymmetry). the latter description makes

several predictions about lsts, and we will attempt here to verify one of these predictions

in the dlcq description of the lsts, using what we learned above about the behavior

of the corresponding 1 + 1 dimensional eld theories. in this section we will analyze the
dlcq of n = (2, 0) supersymmetric lsts, and in the next section that of n = (1, 1)
lsts.

4.1. derivation of the dlcq of (2, 0) lsts

there are two simple derivations of the dlcq of the ak1 (2, 0) lst [2,3] (we will
not discuss the d or e cases here, since they seem to present no new issues). the rst
uses the denition of the lst as the gs  0 limit of the theory on k ns5-branes in type
iia string theory. the dlcq of type iia string theory (with momentum p = n/r) is
given by a 1 + 1 dimensional n = (8, 8) u (n ) gauge theory on a circle. the radius of the
circle and gauge coupling are given by (up to numerical constants)

 =

1

rm 2
s

,

gy m =

rm 2
s

gs

.

(4.1)

longitudinal ns5-branes are described by adding hypermultiplets in the fundamental rep-
resentation [48], and the limit gs  0 corresponds to the limit gy m  , or the ir limit
in this limit, the n = (4, 4) u (n ) gauge theory with an adjoint
of the gauge theory.

18

hypermultiplet and k fundamental hypermultiplets ows to two dierent scfts, one de-

scribing the coulomb branch and the other describing the higgs branch; it is natural to

identify the scft of the higgs branch with the dlcq of the decoupled theory on the

ns5-branes.

we can derive the same result also directly in the lst, using seibergs description
of the dlcq as equivalent to a compactication on a space-like circle of radius rs  0
with appropriate boosts to keep the energy nite [49]. in this description we are led to
discuss the ak1 n = (2, 0) little string theory on a small space-like circle with n
units of momentum on the circle; by t-duality this is equivalent to the ak1 n = (1, 1)
little string theory on a large space-like circle with n strings wrapped on the circle. in

the dlcq limit we are interested in very low energies in this conguration; then, we can

identify the strings as instantons in the low-energy u (k) gauge theory, whose low-energy

modes are described by motion on the instanton moduli space, and so we nd that the

dlcq is the 1 + 1 dimensional sigma model on the moduli space of n u (k) instantons.

using the adhm construction, this is equivalent to the previous result.

as in the 0 + 1 dimensional case [40], we can identify in the dlcq description all

the space-time symmetries which commute with p = n/r. we will not discuss this in

detail here since most identications are similar to those described in [40]. let us mention
just how the su (2) symmetries match between the two theories. the su (2)r  su (2)l
symmetry, which is the r-symmetry of the n = (4, 4) superconformal algebra, is identied
with the so(4)r global symmetry of the six dimensional lst (which originates from
rotations transverse to the branes). the su (2)r symmetry and an additional su (2)x
symmetry which is the avor symmetry of the adjoint hypermultiplet are identied with

the so(4) symmetry rotating the four spatial dimensions transverse to the compact light-

like direction. in the 1 + 1 dimensional case there is a much larger algebra than that which
is required by the dlcq, including full super-virasoro and su (2)r  su (2)l super-kac-
moody algebras. the space-time role of the additional generators is unclear.

4.2. the throat states of the (2, 0) lsts

the throat states in the holographic description

the holographic description of the ak1 (2, 0) lsts [15], which is given by the near-
horizon limit of k type iia ns5-branes, includes a throat region given by a linear dilaton

background of type iia string theory [50]. the full background interpolates between an

19

ads7  s4 background of m theory and the throat region. the string metric in the
throat region of the holographic description of the ak1 lst is

ds2 = dx2

ir6 + d2 +

k
2

d2
3.

(4.2)

that the string world-sheet theory in this region is the sum of a free scalar with background

there is also a 3-form eld h = kd, and the string coupling behaves as gs  e2/k, so
charge q = p2/k, four free fermions and a bosonic level (k  2) su (2) wzw model

(and six more free scalars and fermions corresponding to the space-time of the lst).

the throat contains a continuum (from the six dimensional point of view) of states

corresponding to particles (supergravity particles or more general string states) with some

momentum (incoming, outgoing or some combination) in the throat () direction. these

states are delta-function normalizable in the throat, and may presumably be extended to

the strong coupling region in such a way that they are still delta-function normalizable in

the full theory. thus, we can take linear combinations of these states that are normalizable.

since these states can be given any longitudinal momentum we want (subject to the mass-

shell constraint) we should be able to nd these states also in the dlcq description.

the spectrum of chiral operators in the throat region includes one chiral multiplet
for every primary eld of the corresponding bosonic su (2) wzw theory10. the lowest

multiplet is the supergraviton multiplet. for this multiplet the on-shell condition is of the

form

e2  p2  q(q + i q) = 0,

(4.3)

where e is the energy, p (a 5-vector) is the spatial momentum and q is the momentum in
the  direction (i.e. the vertex operator is eiq), all dimensionless and measured in string

units. the s-matrix for these states was discussed in [51].

in the dlcq of this theory, we should nd such states with longitudinal momentum

p = n/r and with any q and transverse momentum ~p. the dlcq hamiltonian p+ for

these states should be of the form

p+ = (~p2 + q(q + i q))/p = r(~p2 + q(q + i q))/n.

(4.4)

10 for the g lst, where g is a group of ade type, we have the corresponding su (2) modular

invariant.

20

the minimal value of this hamiltonian, which occurs for ~p = 0 and q = i q/2, is given by
r q2/4n = r/2n k. similar equations (with a larger mass gap) arise for the other chiral
multiplets.

in addition to the spectrum, we also know how the string interactions are supposed

to behave like in the throat. the linear dilaton causes the string coupling to behave as

gs  e q, and we should be able to reproduce this behavior in the dlcq.

the throat states in the dlcq description

matching the spectrum and string interactions in the throat region between the

dlcq and the holographic description is straightforward in view of the eld theoretic

analysis in sections 2 and 3. as an initial step it is interesting to compare the higgs

branch scaling of v with the near-horizon scaling of the coordinates [4]. in dlcq the
lagrangian for the coordinates ri transverse to the brane is naturally of the form

ldlcq 

1

rz d2x(ri)2,

(4.5)

corresponding to a low-energy quantum-mechanical hamiltonian proportional to r. the

relation to the sym lagrangian (2.2) variables is thus given by

v i =

gy m ri
r

= r(cid:18) m 3

s
gs

ri(cid:19).

(4.6)

the quantity in parenthesis is precisely what we keep xed in the near-horizon limit [42,15]
of ns 5-branes11. hence, keeping the dimension one v xed is equivalent to taking the

near-horizon limit.

we begin our discussion of the throat states in the dlcq description with the

simplest case of the ak1 lst with n = 1. the dlcq is then simply the higgs branch

scft of the u (1) gauge theory with nf = k hypermultiplets, discussed earlier. in addition

there is also an adjoint hypermultiplet, which in the u (1) case is just a free hypermultiplet,
giving rise to states of momentum ~p with energy ~p2. we found above that this theory has

a region in moduli space which looks like a throat, involving a supersymmetric level k

su (2) wzw model and a scalar eld with background charge q = (k  1)p2/k. we also
found a zero-point energy in these variables, so that the hamiltonian (3.6) is of the form
hdlcq = (1/)(~p2 + q(q + iq) + 1  k/2), where we reintroduced the correct units for
11 it is the tension of the strings that originate from stretched d2-branes.

21

the hamiltonian by using the radius of the circle in the scft, which is  = 1/rm 2

s . as

described at the end of section 3.1, we can dene q = q + i(q  q)/2 (where q = p2/k

s (~p2 + q(q +i q)). this is exactly
as above), and rewrite this hamiltonian as hdlcq = rm 2
the same equation we found above for p+ = hdlcq (for n = 1). thus, we nd the same
in section 3 we
continuum of supergraviton states in both descriptions of the lsts.

described the change of variables from q to q in the context of relating the higgs branch

and coulomb branch throats of the same theory; here we see that the same change

of variables relates the dlcq higgs branch variables and the space-time variables, even

though there is no direct relation (in the dlcq context) between the space-time throat

and the coulomb branch after we take the decoupling limit. we can easily generalize this

analysis to the other chiral states of the lsts. in both descriptions they are in a one-to-

one correspondence with the primaries of the (same) bosonic su (2) wzw model, and it

is easy to check that we nd exactly the same states in both cases.

for higher n the situation is similar, for states localized near some position in the

throat which are the congurations we discussed in section 3.2. as in the dlcq of

critical string theories, we need to look at long string congurations that can carry

energies proportional to 1/n in the large n limit. we have discussed in section 3 how to

go to the long strings for large n and what is the coecient of the twist operator in

the eective theory. translating the results there to the language of the current section

leads to exactly the correct hamiltonian for the throat states, and to a string coupling

in space-time of the form

gs  1/v0  e2/k.

(4.7)

this is exactly the same string coupling found in the holographic description of the little
string theories [15] (note the factor of 2 dierence in the normalization of  between
our paper and [15]). thus, we see that both the low-energy states (in the throat) and

their interactions are correctly reproduced in the dlcq.

4.3. blowing up the singularities in the dlcq

in section 3.3 we discussed blowing up the singularities in the higgs branch by turning

on fi terms (or theta angles) in the gauge theories, and we showed that this turns on a

liouville wall in the throat which prevents states from propagating deep into the

throat (this description is useful for small fi terms, when the throat approximation

is still valid near the wall). in the dlcq context we can give this blow-up a space-time

22

interpretation. following the derivation of the dlcq, using the denition of the lst as
the gs  0 limit of ns5-branes, we can show that the fi terms correspond in this denition
to turning on 3-form rr elds parallel to the ns5-branes (which are non-trivial, despite

having zero eld strength, due to their interaction with the 3-form elds on the ns5-

branes). this is a generalization of the analogous deformation of the (2, 0) six dimensional

scft discussed in [40,52] (and more precisely in [53]), and of the deformations used for

constructing non-commutative yang-mills theories.

presumably, the decoupling limit of the ns5-branes in the presence of this rr eld

leads to some analog of a non-commutative little string theory. since we identied the

throat of the higgs branch with the linear dilaton region in the holographic dual of the

lsts, we see that turning on the deformation turns on a wall that prevents states from

going into the weak coupling region in space-time; thus, we expect this deformation in
the holographic description to leave the ads7  s4 region and the strong coupling part of
the linear dilaton region, but to lift the weak coupling region (this is opposite from the

standard liouville wall). this should be visible also in the appropriate near-horizon

limit of the ns5-brane with rr elds (generalizing the results of [54,55]). this is opposite

to the deformations recently discussed in [46]; they discussed deformations which change

the ir behavior of the lsts, while the deformation discussed here does not change the

ir behavior but seems to signicantly change the uv behavior. it would be interesting to

study these theories further.

5. the dlcq of n = (1, 1) little string theories
5.1. derivation of the dlcq of (1, 1) lsts

to derive the dlcq of the ak1 (1, 1) lsts, it is simplest to start from their denition
as the gs  0 limit of the theory on an ak1 singularity in type iia string theory. in
[18,19] it was shown that the dlcq description of this is given by the low-energy theory
of d-strings near a similar singularity in type iib string theory12. unfortunately, there is

12 to derive this most directly, we start with this theory on a small space-like circle with n
units of momentum (and with nite gs); it is natural to t-dualize this to type iib string theory

(with the same singularity) on a large circle with n fundamental strings, but now we get a large

coupling for the type iib string theory so it is natural to s-dualize, and we end up with n d-

strings near an ak1 singularity at weak coupling. the gs  0 limit is again the low-energy

(gy m  ) limit.

23

no simple description of this theory. however, if we deform the singularity to the ir4/zzk
orbifold, then the theory on the d-strings is [56] the n = (4, 4) u (n )k sqcd theory with
bi-fundamental hypermultiplets for adjacent group factors (when we arrange the gauge

groups on a circle). at the orbifold point the gauge couplings of all u (n ) factors are equal

and they are inversely proportional to the original type iia string coupling. thus, the
gs  0 limit again corresponds to taking the ir limit of this theory, which ows to two
decoupled scfts. in this case it is the coulomb branch theory which we identify with the

dlcq of the lst, since the higgs branch describes the motion of the strings away from

the singularity.

one still needs to discuss the eects of the deformation from the ak1 singularity
to the non-singular ir4/zzk orbifold. this deformation corresponds to turning on specic
non-zero b elds on the various vanishing 2-cycles of the singularity. if we follow the chain

of dualities, we nd that in the original description turning on these b elds corresponds
to turning on a longitudinal wilson line in the low-energy u (k) gauge theory13. more

precisely, the orbifold point corresponds to a wilson line of the form

ra =

0
0
0
...
0





0
1
k
0
...
0

0
0
2
k

...
0

  
  
  
. . .
  

0
0
0
...

k1

k

.





(5.1)

this wilson line has the eect of shifting the longitudinal momentum of charged particles.

the elds in the cartan subalgebra (corresponding to diagonal matrix elements) still have

integer longitudinal momentum, but the other elds now have a fractional momentum; the

space-time elds (e.g. w bosons) coming from the (i, j) element of a u (k) matrix have
rp = (i  j)/k (mod 1).

changing the value of this wilson line corresponds to changing the b elds in the

ak1 singularity used to dene the dlcq theory. in the eld theory of the d-strings, this
corresponds to changing the ratios between the yang-mills couplings of the k u (n ) gauge

groups. in particular, turning o the wilson line (or some components of it, leading to

an unbroken low-energy non-abelian gauge group in space-time) corresponds to making

ratios of gauge couplings innite. at rst sight, since to describe the lst we are taking

13 the b elds correspond to the longitudinal components of the rr vector elds in the twisted

sector of the ir4/zzk orbifold, which are the cartan subalgebra of the low-energy u (k) theory.

24

the gauge couplings to innity, these ratios of gauge couplings seem to be unimportant;

however, we will see below that they show up in the moduli space metric.

the identication of the su (2) symmetries between the dlcq eld theory and the
space-time lst is the following. the su (2)r su (2)l group in the two dimensional gauge
theory is now identied with the longitudinal so(4) of the six dimensional theory in the

light-cone frame, while su (2)r is identied with a diagonal subgroup of the global so(4)r

symmetry group of the lst. as discussed above, we expect that in the coulomb branch
scft the su (2)r symmetry will be enhanced to an su (2)su (2)  so(4)r kac-moody
algebra, although we cannot exhibit this symmetry directly in the gauge theory.

5.2. the low energy theory

the metric on the moduli space

the moduli space of the coulomb branch is given by the scalars v in the u (n )k vector

multiplets; the four scalars of each u (n ) factor are commuting on the moduli space, so

they can be simultaneously diagonalized. we can thus parametrize the moduli space by
the vectors ~v (j)
, where v is a 4-vector, i = 1,    , k labels the dierent u (n ) groups, and
j = 1,    , n labels the eigenvalues of the corresponding matrices (in some order). the
moduli space metric gets contributions only from tree level and 1-loop. thus, following

i

[9], it is easy to compute the exact metric, which is

ds2 =

1
g2
y m

k

n

xi=1

(d~v (j)

i

xj=1

)2 +

k

n

xi=1

xj,l=1

i  ~v (l)
d(~v (j)
|~v (j)
i  ~v (l)

i+1)2
i+1|2 

k

n 1

n

xi=1

xj=1

xl=j+1

i

2d(~v (j)
i  ~v (l)
)2
|~v (j)
i  ~v (l)
|2
(5.2)

,

i

where (i + 1) is taken modulo k.

in the dlcq of the lst we are interested in the limit gy m  , so naively the
tree level term drops out; however, as discussed in section 2, we should also take the v s
to innity such that   v /gy m remains constant in the ir limit. this can be seen in
various ways. we justied this in section 2 by requiring zero dimension for the moduli

space variables, but in the dlcq context we can also see this by noting that the space-

time distance between states is proportional to  and not to v . it will be convenient to

normalize   kv /gy m (because gy m in this theory is actually k times what it was

25

for the d-strings without the orbifold), and then we nd that the actual metric which is

relevant for the dlcq of the lst is of the form

ds2 =

1
k

k

n

xi=1

xj=1

(d~(j)

i )2 +

k

n

xi=1

xj,l=1

d(~(j)
|~(j)

i  ~(l)
i  ~(l)

i+1)2
i+1|2 

k

n 1

n

xi=1

xj=1

xl=j+1

2d(~(j)
|~(j)

i  ~(l)
i )2
i  ~(l)
|2

i

. (5.3)

as mentioned above, if we change the longitudinal wilson line in space-time, we need to

change the ratios of yang-mills couplings in the dlcq description; we see that in the
moduli space metric this corresponds to having dierent coecients for the d~2 terms

corresponding to dierent gauge groups (the coecients in the normalization we chose are

exactly the values of the b-elds in a particular basis for the 2-cycles). in particular, if we
try to turn o some of the wilson line components, some of the d~2 terms vanish, leaving

only the 1-loop contributions (and changing the asymptotic form of the moduli space).

the singularities

in the presence of the wilson line, the metric is at when all the eigenvalues are far

from each other, but develops various singularities when some of the eigenvalues come close
together. when a vector ~(j)
i+1 the theory looks like a u (1) theory
with one charged hypermultiplet. naively this theory has a throat-like singularity, but

approaches a vector ~(l)

i

in fact the moduli space description in the throat breaks down [9], and there is no good

description of this singularity. we do not expect to have a throat emerging from this sort

of singularity; at least, there is no other branch emanating from such a point (before taking

the ir limit) which would indicate such a throat. it is believed that this singularity is

smoothed out [9,57].

a hint to the way by which this singularity is smoothed out is given by the fact that
at low energies (i.e, restricting to the quantum mechanics of the zero-modes14) it is known

that there is a bound state living at this singularity (the d0-d4 bound state). this suggests

that there is also a ground state of the 1 + 1 dimensional theory which is localized near

the singularity (this was referred to as a quantum higgs branch in [3]). we will later

motivate this expectation using dlcq considerations.

additional singularities arise when several vectors ~(ln)

i+n, n = 0,    , j, (j < k  1)
approach each other. there is no good description of these singularities, but by analogy

14 we assume that supersymmetry protects the zero-mode dynamics from being renormalized

by integrating out the non-zero momentum modes.

26

with the previous case we would expect the moduli space description to break down, and

the existence of a bound state at low energies (again, this expectation will be supported

by the dlcq analysis below).

another type of singularity occurs when a vector ~(j)
. in this case the eective theory is like the pure su (2) theory, for which again the

~(l)
i
moduli space description breaks down since the metric becomes negative [9]. also in this

approaches a dierent vector

i

case it is believed that there is no throat emanating from such a singularity, since there

is no other branch coming out of it prior to taking the low-energy limit. presumably, this

singularity is also smoothed out in appropriate variables.

a more serious singularity arises when k vectors coming from dierent gauge groups

approach each other; in this case we expect a real throat to develop in the moduli space

(as is evident in the metric), since such a singularity connects (before taking the ir limit)

to the higgs branch of the theory, in which the hypermultiplets acquire vevs. we will

discuss this throat in section 5.3.

dlcq applications

for now, let us return to the question of the low-energy states. we will analyze them

in detail for n = 1; the analysis of other cases is similar for congurations where the

dierent eigenvalues of each matrix are far from each other (giving n copies of the n = 1

case), and is not clear for other congurations.

the simplest conguration involves slow motion on the asymptotic region of the mod-
uli space, where all k of the ~s are far from each other and the metric is at. restricting to
the zero modes on the circle, we identify this conguration with a space-time conguration
involving k w-bosons15, coming from the (1, 2), (2, 3),    , (k  1, k) and (k, 1) elements of
the low-energy u (k) matrices. each vector ~i may be identied with the transverse po-
sition of one of these particles, each of which carries 1/k units of longitudinal momentum

(such that the total longitudinal momentum is p = 1/r), and the hamiltonian is consis-
tent with this interpretation16. if we change the longitudinal wilson line, the description
remains the same; the coecients of the d~2 terms in the moduli space metric now change
in the asymptotic region, corresponding to the dierent longitudinal momenta now carried

by the k particles, and we still get an exact agreement between the space-time and dlcq

15 we use the term w-boson to denote any element of the space-time vector multiplet. the

precise element in space-time will be determined by the fermion zero modes.

16 a related discussion of w-boson states appears in [19].

27

theories. if we try to turn o a component of the wilson line we see that this at region of

the metric goes o to innity, as we expect since then one of the particles we describe has
p  0 and we would not expect to describe it as a simple particle in the dlcq. from
here on we will discuss only the maximal wilson line (5.1).

we still need to account for the rest of the w-bosons in space-time. our proposal

is that these are described by bound states which are the same bound states discussed

above in the context of resolving the singularities in the moduli space. for example, the

w-boson corresponding to (1, 3) elements of the matrices may be viewed as a bound state

at threshold of the (1, 2) and (2, 3) w-bosons, so we identify it with a conguration in
which two adjacent vectors, say ~1 and ~2, come together and form a bound state in the
region where naively there is a throat. from the space-time description we see that the

eective dynamics of this bound state should be (when it is far from the other states) just
a sigma model on ir4, with a metric whose coecient is twice that of the original two
vectors. this would reproduce the space-time dynamics of a particle with rp = 2/k, as

desired. similarly, by taking various combinations of such bound states, we can describe

any other conguration of w-bosons whose total momentum is rp = 1.

from this description it is clear that states corresponding to photons (vectors in the

cartan subalgebra), which have rp = 1, live in the throat region, where all the

eigenvalues come together. we will discuss this region in the next subsection.

5.3. the throat states of the n = (1, 1) lst

in the n = (1, 1) case the coulomb branch metric receives one-loop corrections that
cause it to include semi-innite throats, so it seems that it may be possible to identify
the throat states more directly than in the n = (2, 0) case discussed above. however,
surprisingly, it actually seems more complicated to obtain a precise understanding of the

throat states in this case.

there is one case in which we can precisely identify the throat states, which is
the a1 n = (1, 1) lst with one unit of longitudinal momentum. from the holographic
description [15] we learn that in this case there is (since the bosonic wzw model in the
space-time string theory has level ksu(2) = 2  2 = 0) just one chiral multiplet of states
propagating in the throat, which is the graviton multiplet. the scalar  parametrizing
the throat coordinate has a background charge of q = p2/k = p2/2 = 1. the on-
shell condition (or the condition for the corresponding vertex operator to be of dimension
(1, 1)) for these states is e2  p2  q(q + i q) = 0, where p (a 5-vector) is the spatial

28

momentum and q is the momentum in the  direction (i.e. the vertex operator is eiq), all

measured in string units.

for n = 1 we can nd exactly the same states in the dlcq. the dlcq description
of this theory is the ir limit of the coulomb branch of the u (1)  u (1) n = (4, 4) gauge
theory with 2 bifundamental hypermultiplets, which is equivalent to a free u (1) gauge
theory (which is just a sigma model on ir4) and another u (1) theory with two charged
hypermultiplets. as described in [9], when we integrate out these hypermultiplets the

metric develops a throat. in the throat, the theory of u (1) with nf = 2 is a single

boson  with background charge q = p2/nf = p2/2 = 1, and (after the chiral twist
of the fermions) a bosonic wzw model at level ksu(2) = 22 = 0 (there are also some free
fermions). thus, in the dlcq we can construct states (localized in the throat region)

with an arbitrary transverse 4-momentum ~p (from the free u (1) part) and an arbitrary 

momentum q. such a state will have a dlcq hamiltonian of the form

hdlcq = r[~p2 + q(q + i q)],

so that

p+p  ~p2 = hdlcq  1/r  ~p2 = q(q + i q),

(5.4)

(5.5)

which is exactly the same answer we found above from the holographic description. thus,

in this case we have exactly the right throat states (the fermion zero modes give these

states the correct multiplicities in space-time). note that in space-time the dilaton be-

comes smaller as we go out in the throat (away from the 5-branes), while in the dlcq
description it becomes larger as we go into the throat ( in the dlcq is () in space-
time), but there is no obvious relation between the two dilatons (as discussed above, the

string interactions in space-time are related to a dierent world-sheet operator).

for higher values of n and/or k things become much more complicated. let us start
by discussing higher k. in this case, ignoring the free u (1) multiplet, the 4k4 dimensional
moduli space has a co-dimension 4k4 singularity at which, as described above, the metric
seems to develop a semi-innite throat. however, for k > 2 it is not clear how to go to a

simpler description of the throat theory as we did for k = 2. we expect to still have one

coordinate labeling the distance down the throat, but it is not clear what would be a
good description of the 4k  5 angular variables in this throat (or whether some of them
decouple). one expects these variables to be equivalent to a level (k  2) bosonic su (2)
wzw model, corresponding to the throat theory we have in space-time (similar to what

29

we found for the (2, 0) lst). however, except for answer analysis and the fact that this
description has the correct su (2)  su (2) symmetries (which we have in space-time, as
discussed in the next paragraph), there is no good argument for it. encouraged by the clean

picture that arises in the (2, 0) case, we will view the throat states of the holographic

description as a prediction about the behavior of throat states in the coulomb branch

of these gauge theories.

the su (2) that is part of the su (2) su (2) symmetry of the putative su (2) wzw
model in the eective theory of the throat is what we called before su (2)r. since this
group acts only on fermions in the coulomb branch, the wzw model cannot come directly

from the bosonic moduli space coordinates, but must involve the fermionic variables. pre-

sumably, again the appropriate throat variables are some combinations of the fermions.

by now this is not surprising, since this is how we got the throat wzw model in the
higgs branch, and similar bifermionic coordinates were found in the dlcq of n = (2, 0)
scfts [4] and in instanton computations on ads5  s5 (see [5] and references therein).
for higher values of n we again expect to nd long string congurations which can

be identied with the strings propagating in the throat of the holographic description.
since on the coulomb branch we have a u (n )k gauge symmetry it is easy to construct

long string congurations which vary by a gauge transformation when going around the

circle, but we do not know how to show that they are described by the correct theory and
that they have the correct interactions (as we showed for the n = (2, 0) case above).

6. summary and discussion

in this paper we analyzed the superconformal theories arising as the low-energy limit
of n = (4, 4) gauge theories. we wrote down an explicit lagrangian for the higgs branch
scft, and showed how it leads on one hand to the description of this scft as the sigma

model on the higgs branch moduli space, and on the other hand to throat states local-

ized near the singularities of this space. we analyzed these throat states in detail for

the cases of u (1) and u (n ) gauge theories, and matched them in the dlcq context to

throat states of the (2, 0) lsts. it would be interesting to generalize this analysis to

higher order terms and to dierent gauge groups. our analysis of the u (1) theory with
two hypermultiplets applies to the ir4/zz2 sigma model with zero theta angle. a similar
analysis of ir4/zzk singularities requires studying u (1)k theories with bifundamental mat-
ter, which we leave for further study. we could not write down an explicit lagrangian for

30

the coulomb branch scft, but we wrote down its moduli space metric and used it to

analyze some states in the scft in section 5.

the coulomb and higgs branch scfts of the same gauge theory both contain (when

they both exist) isomorphic throat regions, though the full theories are quite dierent
and have dierent asymptotic regions. the throat theory has a large n = 4 algebra, and
dierent small n = 4 subalgebras of this are realized as the superconformal symmetries of
the higgs and coulomb branch theories.

it is important to note that the throat states generally account for just a small

fraction of the density of states in the higgs branch scft. for example, in the case of

u (1) with nf hypermultiplets, the density of states of the full theory is governed by the
central charge c = 6(nf  1), while the density of throat states is that of a c = 6 theory
(the throat theory in itself does not obey cardys formula for the asymptotic density of

states). this may be related to the fact that in the throat we can only see states that

are invariant under the su (nf ) avor symmetry of the higgs branch theory.

in the dlcq context the density of states in the higgs branch scft (for the case of

u (n ) gauge group with an adjoint and k fundamental hypermultiplets) is related to the

density of states in the ak1 lsts at high energy densities [58], which in turn is related to
the density of states of cghs black holes [59,14]. the relevant states in the higgs branch

scft are those whose energy scales as 1/n in the large n limit. as discussed in [58], in

order to reproduce the black hole entropy one needs the density of these states to behave

like that of a conformal theory with c = 6k. in the sigma model description of the higgs

branch theory it is hard to see states with an energy scaling as 1/n ; however, we saw in

section 3 that in the throat region we have states whose energy scales like 1/n , which

are the long string states. unfortunately, as discussed above, the density of these states

is much smaller (for k > 2) than the full density of states which we need to reproduce

the black hole entropy. we predict that appropriate states exist in the full higgs branch

scft, perhaps corresponding to states with non-trivial avor su (k) transformations, but

we do not know how to exhibit them directly. it would be interesting to nd these states

and try to use the dlcq description to learn about the high-energy behavior of the lsts.

acknowledgements

we would like to thank m. aganagic, v. balasubramanian, t. banks, j. brodie, s.

kachru, a. kapustin, a. karch, d. kutasov, r. plesser, a. rajaraman, m. rozali, s.

sethi, s. shenker, e. silverstein, a. strominger, and especially n. seiberg and h. verlinde

31

for useful discussions. the work of o.a. was supported in part by #de-fg02-96er40559,

and that of m. b. by nsf grant 98-02484. we would like to thank the aspen center for

physics for hospitality during the nal stages of this work.

32

references

[1] e. witten, some comments on string dynamics, hep-th/9507121, strings 95

(world scientic, 1996), ed. i. bars et. al., 501.

[2] o. aharony, m. berkooz, s. kachru, n. seiberg, e. silverstein, matrix description
of interacting theories in six dimensions, hep-th/9707079, adv. theor. math. phys.
1 (1998) 148.

[3] e. witten, on the conformal field theory of the higgs branch, hep-th/9707093,

j. high energy phys. 9707 (1997) 003.

[4] m. berkooz and h. verlinde, matrix theory, ads/cft and higgs-coulomb equiv-

alence, hep-th/9907100.

[5] n. dorey, t. j. hollowood, v. v. khoze, m. p. mattis and s. vandoren, multi-
instanton calculus and the ads/cft correspondence in n = 4 superconformal
field theory, hep-th/9901128, nucl. phys. b552 (1999) 88.

[6] a. kapustin and m. j. strassler, on mirror symmetry in three dimensional abelian

gauge theories, hep-th/9902033, j. high energy phys. 9904 (1999) 021.

[7] h. ooguri and c. vafa, two dimensional black hole and singularities of cy mani-

folds, hep-th/9511164, nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 55.

[8] r. gregory, j. a. harvey and g. moore, unwinding strings and t-duality of kaluza-

klein and h-monopoles, hep-th/9708086, adv. theor. math. phys. 1 (1998) 283.

[9] d.-e. diaconescu and n. seiberg, the coulomb branch of (4, 4) supersymmetric
field theories in two dimensions, hep-th/9707158, j. high energy phys. 9707
(1997) 001.

[10] n. seiberg and e. witten, the d1/d5 system and singular cft, hep-th/9903224,

j. high energy phys. 9904 (1999) 017.

[11] n. seiberg, new theories in six dimensions and matrix description of m-theory on

t 5 and t 5/z2, hep-th/9705221, phys. lett. 408b (1997) 98.

[12] m. berkooz, m. rozali and n. seiberg, matrix description of m theory on t 4 and

t 5, hep-th/9704089, phys. lett. 408b (1997) 105.

[13] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde and h. verlinde, bps quantization of the fivebrane,
hep-th/9604055, nucl. phys. b486 (1997) 77; 5d black holes and matrix strings,
hep-th/9704018, nucl. phys. b506 (1997) 121.

[14] j.m. maldacena and a. strominger, semiclassical decay of near extremal five-

branes, hep-th/9710014, j. high energy phys. 9712 (1997) 008.

[15] o. aharony, m. berkooz, d. kutasov and n. seiberg, linear dilatons, ns five-

branes and holography, hep-th/9808149, j. high energy phys. 9810 (1998) 004.

[16] j. brodie, two dimensional mirror symmetry from m theory, hep-th/9709228,

nucl. phys. b517 (1998) 36.

33

[17] m. alishahiha, n = (4, 4) 2d supersymmetric gauge theory and brane congu-
ration, hep-th/9710020, phys. lett. 420b (1998) 51; m. alishahiha, on the brane
conguration of n = (4, 4) 2d supersymmetric gauge theories, hep-th/9802151,
nucl. phys. b528 (1998) 171.

[18] s. sethi, the matrix formulation of type iib five-branes, hep-th/9710005, nucl.

phys. b523 (1998) 158.

[19] o. j. ganor and s. sethi, new perspectives on yang-mills theories with sixteen

supersymmetries, hep-th/9712071, j. high energy phys. 9801 (1998) 007.

[20] a. b. zamolodchikov, irreversibility of the flux of the renormalization group in a

2d field theory, jetp lett. 43 (1986) 730.

[21] j. polchinski, scale and conformal invariance in quantum field theory, nucl. phys.

b303 (1988) 226.

[22] m. r. douglas, j. polchinski and a. strominger, probing five dimensional black

holes with d-branes, hep-th/9703031, j. high energy phys. 9712 (1997) 003.

[23] s. coleman, 1/n , in the proceedings of the 1979 erice school on subnuclear physics

and in aspects of symmetry, cambridge university press.

[24] d. marolf and a. peet, brane baldness vs. superselection sectors, hep-th/9903213.
[25] j. m. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field theories and super-

gravity, hep-th/9711200, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231.

[26] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov and a. m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from

non-critical string theory, hep-th/9802109, phys. lett. 428b (1998) 105.

[27] e. witten, anti-de-sitter space and holography, hep-th/9802150, adv. theor.

math. phys. 2 (1998) 253.

[28] o. aharony, s. s. gubser, j. m. maldacena, h. ooguri and y. oz, large n field

theories, string theory and gravity, hep-th/9905111, to appear in phys. rep.

[29] k. schoutens, o(n ) extended superconformal field theory in superspace, nucl.

phys. b295 (1988) 634.

[30] a. sevrin, w. troost and a. van proeyen, superconformal algebras in two dimen-

sional with n = 4, phys. lett. 208b (1988) 447.

[31] e. a. ivanov, s. o. krivonos and v. m. leviant, a new class of superconformal
sigma models with the wess-zumino action, nucl. phys. b304 (1988) 601; quan-
tum n = 3, n = 4 superconformal wzw sigma models, phys. lett. 215b (1988)
689.

[32] c. kounnas, m. porrati and b. rostand, on n = 4 extended super-liouville the-

ory, phys. lett. 258b (1991) 61.

[33] l. motl, proposals on nonperturbative superstring interactions, hep-th/9701025.
[34] t. banks and n. seiberg, strings from matrices, hep-th/9702187, nucl. phys. b497

(1997) 41.

34

[35] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde and h. verlinde, matrix string theory, hep-th/9703030,

nucl. phys. b500 (1997) 43.

[36] t. banks, w. fischler, s. h. shenker and l. susskind, m theory as a matrix model:

a conjecture, hep-th/9610043, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 5112.

[37] w. taylor, d-brane field theory on compact spaces, hep-th/9611042, phys. lett.

394b (1997) 283.

[38] l. susskind, t-duality in m(atrix) theory and s-duality in field theory, hep-

th/9611164.

[39] o. ganor, s. ramgoolam and w. taylor, branes, fluxes and duality in m(atrix)

theory, hep-th/9611202, nucl. phys. b492 (1997) 191.

[40] o. aharony, m. berkooz and n. seiberg, light cone description of (2, 0) super-
conformal theories in six dimensions, hep-th/9712117, adv. theor. math. phys. 2
(1998) 119.

[41] p. s. aspinwall, enhanced gauge symmetries and k3 surfaces, hep-th/9507012,

phys. lett. 357b (1995) 329.

[42] n. itzhaki, j. m. maldacena, j. sonnenschein and s. yankielowicz, supergravity and
the large n limit of theories with sixteen supercharges, hep-th/9802042, phys.
rev. d58 (1998) 046004.

[43] h. j. boonstra, k. skenderis and p. k. townsend, the domain wall / qft corre-

spondence, hep-th/9807137, j. high energy phys. 9901 (1999) 003.

[44] d. diaconescu and j. gomis, neveu-schwarz five-branes at orbifold singularities

and holography, hep-th/9810132, nucl. phys. b548 (1999) 258.

[45] d. kutasov, f. larsen and r. g. leigh, string theory in magnetic monopole back-

grounds, hep-th/9812027, nucl. phys. b550 (1999) 183.

[46] a. giveon, d. kutasov and o. pelc, holography for noncritical superstrings, hep-

th/9907178.

[47] m. gremm and a. kapustin, heterotic little string theories and holography, hep-

th/9907210.

[48] m. berkooz and m. douglas, five-branes in m(atrix) theory, hep-th/9610236, phys.

lett. 395b (1997) 196.

[49] n. seiberg, why is the matrix model correct ? hep-th/9710009, phys. rev. lett.

79 (1997) 3577.

[50] c. callan, j. harvey and a. strominger, supersymmetric string solitons, hep-
th/9112030, in trieste 1991, proceedings, string theory and quantum gravity 1991,
208.

[51] s. minwalla and n. seiberg, comments on the iia ns five-brane, hep-th/9904142,

j. high energy phys. 9906 (1999) 007.

[52] m. berkooz, nonlocal field theories and the non-commutative torus, hep-

th/9802069, phys. lett. 430b (1998) 237.

35

[53] n. seiberg and e. witten, string theory and noncommutative geometry, hep-

th/9908142.

[54] a. hashimoto and n. itzhaki, noncommutative yang-mills and the ads/cft cor-

respondence, hep-th/9907166.

[55] j. m. maldacena and j. g. russo, large n limit of noncommutative gauge theo-

ries, hep-th/9908134.

[56] m. r. douglas and g. moore, d-branes, quivers and ale instantons, hep-

th/9603167.

[57] n. seiberg, private communication.
[58] o. aharony and t. banks, note on the quantum mechanics of m theory, hep-

th/9812237, j. high energy phys. 9903 (1999) 016.

[59] c. g. callan, s. b. giddings, j. a. harvey and a. strominger, evanescent black

holes, hep-th/9111056, phys. rev. d45 (1992) 1005.

36

