9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
8
1

 

 
 

1
v
6
4
1
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

cgpg-99/10

holography in a quantum spacetime

fotini markopoulouand lee smolin

center for gravitational physics and geometry

department of physics

the pennsylvania state university
university park, pa 16802, usa

and

the blackett laboratory

imperial college of science, technology and medicine

south kensington

london sw7 2bz, uk

october 18, 1999

abstract

we propose a formulation of the holographic principle, suitable for a back-
ground independent quantum theory of cosmology. it is stated as a relationship
between the ow of quantum information and the causal structure of a quantum
spacetime. screens are dened as sets of events at which the observables of a
holographic cosmological theory may be measured, and such that information
may ow across them in two directions. a discrete background independent
holographic theory may be formulated in terms of information owing in a
causal network of such screens. geometry is introduced by dening the area
of a screen to be a measure of its capacity as a channel of quantum informa-
tion from its null past to its null future. we call this a weak form of the
holographic principle, as no use is made of a bulk theory.

fotini@phys.psu.edu
smolin@phys.psu.edu

1

1 introduction

in this paper, we present a framework for a planck-scale, cosmological, background-
independent theory which is holographic in a sense appropriate to a quantum space-
time. this is motivated by the fact that the formulations of the holographic principle
given to date[1]-[6] are conned to the semiclassical regime. at the same time, results
of several approaches to quantum gravity indicate that the description of spacetime
based on smooth manifolds can provide only an approximate description[7]-[12]. if
it is true, the holographic principle ought then to be more than a conjecture about
the classical and semiclassical theory. rather, it should be an important part of the
framework of a planck-scale, background independent quantum theory.

our goal is to give a form of the holographic principle that could be satised by
a background independent quantum theory of gravity, and reduces to the standard
holographic principle in the semiclassical limit. to guide us, we make two assump-
tions. first, the theory must be cosmological, in the sense that whatever structure
replaces the smooth spacetime geometry will have no xed external boundary or
asymptotic regions. this means that we must keep in mind what has been learned
about how to formulate the holographic principle at the semiclassical level in cosmo-
logical spacetimes. one important lesson, discovered rst by fischler and susskind[3]
and developed by bousso[4], is that in a cosmological spacetime the holographic prin-
ciple must be formulated in a way that employs the lightcones of the spacetime.
otherwise, paradoxes arise which are discussed in [3, 4, 6]. some of these paradoxes
concern cases in which the number of bulk degrees of freedom associated with non-null
surfaces fails to be bounded, or even fails to be well dened. these same problems
arise when we attempt to formulate a version of the holographic principle suitable
for a background independent theory[13]. to avoid them, we assume here that there
is a fundamental causal structure which plays a role in the background independent
theory and that in the classical limit this becomes the causal structure of a spacetime.
this is our second assumption.

to proceed, we need a framework for a cosmological quantum theory which in-
corporates causal structure. we require that this framework be suciently general
that it can accomodate a background independent quantum theory of gravity. such
a framework, called quantum causal histories, was dened in [14]. it is cosmological
in the sense that any physically meaningful observable corresponds to some observer
(represented as an event or collection of events) inside the closed universe. (in the
classical case, see [15]). as each observer receives information from a distinct past, the
algebra of observables they can measure, and hence the (nite-dimensional) hilbert
spaces on which what they observe can be represented, vary over the history. con-
sequently, the algebra of observables of the theory is represented on a collection of
hilbert spaces. these replace the single wavefunction and single hilbert space of
other approaches to quantum cosmology.

quantum causal histories were originally motivated by the need to provide a

2

general framework to understand what observables are in background independent
approaches to quantum gravity, such as those proposed in [16, 18, 19, 20]. in these
theories a causal quantum spacetime is constructed from local changes in a spin
network or a network of abstract surfaces. the hilbert spaces used to describe such
changes are nite-dimensional because only a nite amount of information about the
quantum geometry is involved in each elementary causal process. as one expects
from a scheme of this type, in which a fundamental discreteness in the structure of
spacetime appears at planck scales, a key question the theory must answer is whether
a smooth spacetime geometry is recovered in the continuum limit.

the question we address in this paper is what properties such a theory must
have in order that its semiclassical limits, when they exist, are holographic in the
sense dened in [1, 2, 3, 4, 6]. a central element in the semiclassical formulations
of the cosmological holographic principle is that of a screen, a spacelike 2-surface on
which the relevant degrees of freedom of the theory live1[4]. we require that there
are analogues of these 2-surfaces in the quantum spacetime. in the next section we
dene what we call an elementary screen, these are certain collections of events in
a quantum causal history. we then dene a class of quantum spacetimes consisting
of causal networks of such screens. we call these screen networks. we show in section
4 that there are examples of them which may be constructed by imposing certain
restrictions on the class of background independent theories of quantum gravity and
string theory given in [16, 18, 19, 20].

an obvious fact about 2-dimensional surfaces turns out to be key in this work,
namely, that each 2-surface has two sides. we nd below that this has two important
consequences. first, the additional structure in a screen network which follows from
the two-sided nature of the elementary screens allows a distinction between null and
timelike propagation, something that an ordinary causal set history does not provide.
second, this makes it possible to incorporate chirally asymmetric theories in the causal
quantum history framework.

an essential element of the holographic principle in its semiclassical forms is the
bekenstein bound[21]. this must be recovered in the semiclassical limit of any holo-
graphic theory. this seems to present a potential problem, as metric plays no role in
the denition of a screen network. given that the metric is unied with other degrees
of freedom in string theory, it is not even clear that the notion of area should be well
dened at the background independent level. the only property a screen has beyond
its place in the causal network is the dimension of its hilbert space. this leads us
to suggest that the bekenstein bound may be inverted and area be dened to be a
measure of the capacity of a screen for the transmission of quantum information.

the result is a form of the holographic principle which makes no use at all of the
notion of a bulk theory, and instead posits only a relationship between the informa-
tion capacity and the geometrical area of a screen. we call this a weak holographic

1 in dimensions other than 4, a screen is a spacelike surface of codimension 2 in the spacetime.

3

principle, and reserve strong for those formulations of the principle that posit rela-
tionships between bulk and boundary theories, or limits on the amount of information
on spacelike or null surfaces bounded by the screens. we believe that strong forms
of the principle are only relevant in the semiclassical theory, when the bound is on
the number of matter degrees of freedom in a region of a single xed spacetime and
that, once the gravitational degrees of freedom are introduced, either classically or
quantum mechanically, only weak forms of the principle are possible.

a key feature of the weak holographic principle is that a complete description
of the universe requires more than one screen. this is simply because in a generic
cosmological history there is no single screen whose past is the entire universe. thus, a
cosmological holographic theory must be a many-screens theory, each screen recording
information about its causal past. it is important to note that such a many-screens
theory gives us the possibility to dispense with the notion of the bulk theory. rather
than formulate the holographic principle in terms of a relationship between a bulk
theory and a boundary, as is done in its strong forms, we can formulate it entirely in
terms of screen observables and relationships between them.

a question left open for future work is the exact relationship between weak and
strong forms of the holographic principle. it may be conjectured that when the weak
holographic principle applies to a quantum causal history which has a good classical
limit, the strong holographic principle holds in that limit. we expect that, when the
limit exists, 2-dimensional surfaces in the continuum spacetime will originate from
ensembles of elementary screens and that their area will satisfy the bekenstein bound
in the standard way. at the same time, we expect that no cosmological form of the
holographic principle, even one that holds in the semiclassical limit, can escape the
fact that many screens are necessary to give a complete description of a cosmological
spacetime.

the outline of this paper is as follows. in the next section we dene screens and
in section 3, a quantum screen network is dened, following the
screen networks.
general prescription of [14], as a functor from the edge-sets of a screen network to the
hilbert space category. in section 4 we show what restrictions are imposed on the
background independent formulations of quantum gravity and string theory given in
[16, 18, 19, 20] if one requires that all events are elementary screens. in section 4 the
essential features of this approach to the holographic principle are then abstracted
and formulated as a proposal for the weak holographic principle. comments on the
correspondence to the semiclassical holographic principle as well as on the conditions
required, were a strong form of the holographic principle to hold in a background
independent theory, can be found in the nal section.

4

2 elementary screens and screen networks

we begin by recalling the denition of a causal set, as used by sorkin, t hooft
and others to describe the discrete analogue of the causal relations of events in a
lorentzian spacetime (see [23, 25, 24, 26]). then we explain what causal histories
are, and dene elementary screens and screen networks.

a causal set c is a locally nite, partially ordered set of events. that is, if we
denote the events by p, q, r, . . . and, say, p precedes q, we write p  q. the equal
option is used when p coincides with q. the causal relation is reexive, i.e. p  p
for every event p and transitive, i.e. if p  q and q  r, then p  r.
it is also
antisymmetric, that is, if p  q and q  p, then p = q, which ensures that there are
no closed timelike loops in the causal set. local niteness means that, given p  q,
there is a nite number of events which are both in the future of p and in the past of
q.

a causal relation p  q is called an edge or a covering relation if it is not

implied by transitivity from other relations in the history.

in our previous work, we have used the term causal history to describe causal
sets whose events carry additional structure. for example, in causal histories of
spin networks [16, 18, 19] the events are local changes in spin networks, while in
[19] they are local changes in (p, q) string networks. for the reasons we explained
in the introduction, in this paper we are concerned with histories whose events are
elementary screens. an elementary screen s is a quadruple

(1)

s ns

l , s

r, s+

l , s+

ro .

it has four components, the past left, s
right s+
future right one, and from the past right to the future left, namely,

l and future
r. within each quadruple there are maps from the past left component to the

l , past right, s

r, future left, s+

lr : s
rl : s

l  s+
r,
r  s+
l .

(2)

these maps are the contribution of the screen s to the dynamics of the causal history.
a special case of a causal history is when all the events are elementary screens.
we will call such a history a screen network. it is a partially ordered set of screens,
in which two screens are related, s  t, when one of the future components of s
precedes one of the past components of t. the following condition is imposed on a
screen network: there can be at most one edge (covering relation) from s to t. this
means that, if s is in the immediate past of t, t can only see one side of s.

thus, the network describes signals exchanged amongst a set of elementary sur-
faces that make up a quantum version of a spacetime. we have called the two sides
of a screen l and r, and each has a future and a past. according to (2), information

5

that comes into the past of the left side of a screen in the network may exit only from
the right side of a screen, and vice versa. thus, information is carried from one side
of the screen to the other by the internal maps lr and rl. components of dierent
screens are related by the external (to the screen) maps . these relations encode
the causal structure of the screen network.

having dened the screen network, the following sets can be constructed from it

and will be used in the remaining of this paper.

 the causal past, p(s), of a screen s is the set of screens t in the screen network

with t  s.

 the left null past, lnp, of a component of a screen s is the set of those screens
in its causal past that are related to s by a sequence of alternating lr and 
maps. its right null past, rnp, is the set of those past screens that are related
to s by a sequence of alternating rl and  maps. the null past of s is the
union of these two sets.

 the timelike past tp(s) of a screen s is the screens in its causal past that are

not null related to s, that is, tp(s) = p(s)  np(s).

 the causal future f(s), null future nf(s) and timelike future tf(s) of s are

similarly dened.

it is interesting to note that the two sides of a screen (the two internal maps) allow
this natural distinction between null and timelike. of course, for a general screen
network, there is no global decomposition into left and right ows of information.
still, the two-sided nature of the screens gives the elementary processes and the ow
of information in the network a chiral aspect, as left and right ows can always be
distinguished locally.

a screen network can be reduced to its underlying causal set by removing the
internal lr and rl maps and compressing the four screen components to a single
causal set event.

3 the quantum screen network

we next wish to turn a screen network s into a network of elementary quantum-
mechanical systems. in doing so, we will assume that quantum information propa-
gates without change between screens and undergoes non-trivial evolution only when
going through a screen. we express this by assigning a hilbert space to every edge
of the screen network, and two (unitary) evolution operators to each screen.2

2 another possibility is to do the reverse, namely, turn each screen into a nite-dimensional
hilbert space and each edge into an evolution map. however, as it was discussed in [14], as soon

6

before we give the denition of the quantum screen network3, we list the two of
its desired features that serve as the starting point. first, we wish to replicate the
fact that, in quantum mechanics, the composite state space of spacelike separated
systems is the tensor product of the individual state spaces. the individual systems
in the screen network case are the edges ei connecting dierent screens. each edge is
represented by a nite-dimensional state space h(ei). two such edges are spacelike
separated when there is no null or timelike path from the one to the other. thus,
given a set of spacelike separated edges, a = {e1, e2, . . . , en}, the composite state
space is h(a) = h(e1)  h(e2)  . . .  h(en).

second, if such a set of edges a is in the past of another set b, we can only expect to
have a unitary evolution map from h(a) to h(b) if there has been no loss or gain
of information from a to b. what this means for a screen network is the following.
consider two edge-sets a and b containing no common edges. let every edge in a be
in the past of some edge in b. furthermore, let every edge in b be in the future of
some edge in a. then, in the notation of [14], a and b are a complete pair. since there
are no edges in the future of a that are spacelike to b and no edges in the past of b
that are spacelike to a, a complete pair serves as a model of information conservation.
in a quantum screen network, we expect to have unitary evolution only between edge
sets that are complete pairs.

keeping the above in mind, we dene the edge screen network, es, to be the
partially ordered set whose elements are edge-sets, sets of spacelike separated edges
a, b, . . . in the screen network s. two edge-sets are related in es when they are a
complete pair.

we may now dene the quantum screen network as a functor from the edge screen
network to the category of hilbert spaces (which has hilbert spaces for its objects
and unitary operators as its arrows). hence, a quantum screen network qs, is the
functor

qs : es  hilb,

(3)

such that for every edge-set a in es there is a nite-dimensional hilbert space h(a)
if a and a are spacelike separated (have no common edges), h(a  a) =
in qs.
h(a)  h(a). for every complete pair a  b in es, dimh(a) = dimh(b), and there
is a unitary evolution operator e : h(a)  h(b) in qs.

according to the above, for some screen s in the screen network, h(s

l ) is the
state space of the edges going into the left of the screen, and h(s
r) the state space
of the edges going into the right of the screen. a screen has the same information

as this is done, acausal evolution becomes possible and the quantum mechanical information ow
does not reect the underlying causal set anymore. the solution that was proposed in [14] is the
recipe used here, i.e. attach the hilbert spaces on the edges and the operators to the events. this
is well-motivated physically as it agrees with the intuition that events should represent change, and
so their quantum-mechanical counterpart should be an operator rather than a state space.

3we may note that this diers from the quantum causal sets dened by criscuolo and

waelbroeck[22].

7

capacity on both sides, which implies that

dimh(s

l ) = dimh(s

r).

(4)

clearly, s

l and s+

r is a complete pair, and so is s

r and s+

l . the unitary operators in

qs corresponding to these two complete pairs are dlr(s) and drl(s). by the unitarity

of the operators in qs we have

dimh(s

l ) = dimh(s+

r) and dimh(s

r) = dimh(s+

l ).

(5)

thus, the state spaces of all the components of a screen s have the same dimension,
which we denote d(s).

we dene the area of a screen s to be a measure of the information capacity of
a screen. this is proportional to the dimension of the hilbert space of any of the
components of s:

a(s)  al2

p lanck ln d(s).

(6)

where a is a constant, which we may take to be equal to 1/4 to agree with the
semiclassical bekenstein bound. finally, any evolution operator eab : h(a)  h(b)

we claim that a quantum screen network is a holographic theory because the

in qs can be decomposed into drl and dlr operators in the screens between a and b.
generating evolution operators drl and dlr act on hilbert spaces on one side of some

screen. simply because a screen has two sides, we regard it as the quantum spacetime
analogue of a spacetime object of codimension 2.

4 causal spin network evolution

we turn now to the question of what restrictions may be imposed on candidates for
background independent quantum theories of gravity by the requirement that the
corresponding quantum causal histories are screen networks. we consider here the
example of causal histories of spin networks, in the original form given in [16], or
the extensions in [18, 19, 20]. we rst review why the histories in such theories
are quantum causal histories[14], and then ask what additional conditions must be
satised to ensure that they are screen networks.

in these histories, the analogue of a spatial region in a spacetime is an open spin
network . this is an oriented graph (or, in [18, 19, 20], a punctured two-dimensional
surface) with free ends whose edges are labeled by representations of a quantum
group or supergroup. in the case of quantum general relativity this is taken to be
suq(2). extensions to supergravity[27] or other dimensions are described by dierent
quantum groups. we denote the labelled edges by ei, ej, etc.

an important observation is that  labels a state in the space of intertwiners v{ei}
of the representations labeling its free edges. the dimension of v{ei}, given the labels
on the free edges, can be calculated using the verlinde formula in [28].

8

the open labelled graph  is generally a piece of a closed spin network  which
denes the quantum geometry of a complete spacelike slice of a spacetime history.
see [16, 18] for details.

a local evolution move replaces  with a new open graph, , which has the same
free ends {ei} as . the result is a bubble evolution move, in which only the local
region  evolves, leaving unchanged the remaining (  ). as a result, the history
is a quantum version of many-ngered time evolution.

by construction,  and  have the same labeled free edges and therefore live in the
same space of intertwiners v{ei}. the move which replaces  by  is then represented
by a transition in the hilbert space, v{ei}. the dynamics of the theory can then be
given by a rule which assigns an evolution operator to each such space of intertwiners.
in this case,

(7)

be : v{ei}  v{ei}.

to ensure that there is no loss of information locally, these operators are required to
be unitary. all the generating evolution moves listed in [16], the so-called pachner
moves for abstract spin networks, are operators of this type.

this shows that to each causal spin network history m, as described in [16, 18,
19, 20], there corresponds a quantum causal history qm. each open spin network
piece  in m is a hilbert space v{ei} in qm. every time there is an evolution move
 to  in m,  and  are a complete pair.  lives in the same hilbert space v{ei}
as  and thus the move is a unitary operator in qm.

now we turn to the additional requirements that arise if we want each such move
to correspond to an elementary screen. this requires that we do two things. first,
in each transition it must be possible to pick out four sets of edges, corresponding to
the four components of a screen. second, hilbert spaces must be associated to them
in such a way that the evolution splits into two parts according to eq. (2).

to accomplish this we note that the space of intertwiners v{ei} can be split as
follows. we divide the external edges ei into two sets, which we will call the left set
el and the right set er. we may then write

v{ei} =mj

v{el}j  vj{er}

(8)

where j is short for ej, the the sum is over a complete set j of the representations
and j is the complex conjugate representation.

we require that this choice be made so that for at least one j,

dimv{el}j = dimvj{er}.

(9)

we then pick a particular j = j0 that satises this and restrict  and  to lie in the

subspace v{el}j0  vj0{er}. the evolution operator be is then required to be of the

form,

(10)

be =  0 dlr
drl 0 ! .

9

this agrees with the general form implied by the application of eq.(3) to eq.(2) if

and

h(s

l ) = v{el}j0

h(s

r) = v{er}j0.

(11)

(12)

the two restrictions (9) and (10) are non-trivial, so most causally evolving spin net-
work histories are not screen networks. but it is not dicult to construct examples
that do satisfy the conditions. for example, for suq(2) spin networks we may re-
strict all labels to spin 1 and all nodes to be four valent, then the splitting may be
accomplished with j0 = 1 at all transitions. finally, we note that since there is no

requirement that dlr = drl the resulting theory may be chiral.

5 the weak holographic principle

it is not dicult to abstract from the denition of a quantum screen network the
main elements of what we propose make a theory holographic, and formulate them
as the weak holographic principle.

these are:

1. a discrete holographic theory is based on a causal history, that is, the events in
the quantum spacetime form a partially ordered set under their causal relations.

2. among the elements of the quantum spacetime, a set of screens can be identied.

screens are 2-sided objects with two past sides and two future sides.

3. there is a hilbert space for each past or future side of a screen. observables
on this hilbert space describe information that an observer at the screen may
acquire about the causal past of the screen, by measurements of elds on that
side of the immediate past of the screen. there is an algebra of such observables
for each side of the screen.

4. since screens are 2-sided, each has an orientation reversal operation that sends

the state space of one side to its complex conjugate on the other side.

5. all observables in the theory are operators in the algebra of observables a(s)

for some screen s.

6. the area of a screen s is either a xed number as, or an operator bas in a(s).

if it is a number, it is proportional to the dimension d(s) of the hilbert space
of either screen side,

as  l2

p lanck ln d(s).

(13)

10

if it is an operator,

where each factor ha
satisfy (13).

s is the eigenspace of a[s] with eigenvalue a[s] which each

hs =ma

ha
s

(14)

6 conclusions

in this paper, we listed and analyzed the main features that can be expected of a
holographic theory of quantum cosmology. based on this, we stated the holographic
principle in a discrete, background independent form.

more can be said about the relationship of the weak holographic principle to its
strong forms given elsewhere [1, 2, 3, 4]. as we mentioned in the introduction,
what needs to be checked is that, when the weak holographic history has a good
continuum limit, the strong holographic principle holds in this limit continuum theory.
at this stage, little is known about the continuum limit of discrete causal theories
like (quantum) screen networks[17, 29]. ambjorn, loll, anagnostopoulos and others
have shown that lorentzian 1 + 1 gravity belongs to a universality class dierent that
liouville gravity [30, 31]. similar calculations in higher dimensions are technically
very demanding, and it is expected that the results in the causal/lorentzian case are
very dierent than the euclidean ones.

requiring that a theory is weakly holographic places constraints on both its dy-
namics and the algebras of observables. the way it aects the measurement theory
that is appropriate in background independent theories of quantum cosmology will
be discussed in [33].

before closing, we briey consider the possibility that there be a version of the
strong holographic principle that may hold at the background independent level.
given the formalism developed here it is possible to state a strong form of the holo-
graphic principle for a background independent theory. this makes it possible to
identify a problem that would have to be overcome to realize it in the kinds of theo-
ries we have considered here.

the strong form of the holographic principle has been stated in certain back-
grounds, such as ads/cf t as a conjecture about an equivalence between a bound-
ary theory and a bulk theory[32]. there is no boundary in a cosmological theory,
but a screen network such as dened here plays the role of the boundary theory as it
describes evolution in terms of a ow of information between hilbert spaces attached
to screens.

a strong form of the holographic principle then requires that there be a bulk
theory which has the property that its kinematics and dynamics is exactly equivalent
to some screen network theory. since the theory is expected to be cosmological, so
that there is no boundary, the screens are embedded in the bulk. this means that

11

the bulk theory must have the property that it is equivalent to a dierent theory that
involves only a subset of events which are its screens.

it is easy to imagine that there is a sense in which a sub-history of any history
may be dened which gives an approximate description of that history. this could be
accomplished by an appropriate coarse-graining. but the strong holographic principle
requires more, the screen theory must not just arise from a coarse-graining of the bulk
theory, it must be completely equivalent to it.

we can formulate this in the class of theories considered here. for the bulk theory,
we consider a general quantum causal history qc. we know from the above that this
includes some candidates for background independent quantum theories of gravity.
the strong holographic principle would state that for every qc satisfying a certain
list of conditions, there is a quantum screen network qs which is equivalent to it.
equivalence requires that the relationship be 1-to-1 so that qc can be recovered from
qs.

while this is not impossible, it is not dicult to see what kinds of obstacles would
have to be overcome to accomplish it. to do this we consider how the results of this
paper may be extended to the case of a general quantum causal history, some of whose
events satisfy the conditions to be screens. let then qc be a quantum causal history
as described in [14]. namely, if c is the underlying causal set, qc is the functor

qc : ec  hilb

(15)

where ec is the poset of edge-sets of c, in which two edge-sets are related when they
form a complete pair as dened in section 3. we call a causal history complete when
there is an initial edge-set a0 such that future(a0) = c. an initial state is a choice
of |i  h(a0). given qc, each such initial state determines a density matrix in the
hilbert space of any other edge-set in the causal history. it follows that, if a quantum
causal history contains quadruples of events which are screens, a choice of initial
state will determine a density matrix in each screen hilbert space, corresponding to
information owing across the screen.

for the strong holographic principle to hold in the form just stated, two things
are required. first, it must be possible to nd a screen network containing the subset
of events of c that are screens, and with the property that the density matrix in any
screen hilbert space is fully determined by the density matrices on its past screens.
second, it should be possible to reconstruct qc from qs.

even if the rst can be done, there is a general diculty with the second. the
problem is that there is no natural notion of a quantum causal history which is a
subhistory of another. where one causal set may be a subset of another, the same is
not the case for the corresponding quantum causal histories, as the covering relations
are singled out in the construction. since not all covering relations of the screen
subset are covering relations in the causal set, there is no natural restriction of the
functor qc that reduces the quantum causal history to a quantum causal history on
the subset.

12

this is related to the fact that the ow of information through a quantum causal
history is path-dependent, which is also a feature of the ow of information in the
semiclassical theory on a general, curved, spacetime. the quantum information that
ows between two screens will in general be a superposition of the eects of several
evolution operators.

since there are always fewer screens in s than events in the original c, the number
of covering relations in s are less than those in c. thus, it will not, in general,
be possible to invert the procedure and use the data in qs to determine a unique
quantum causal history qc. rather, a denition of a subhistory of qc should involve
a suitable notion of coarse-graining in which information about the original history
is lost. unless this can be avoided, there will not be a unique bulk history qc which
is determined from the screen network history qs.

in either case, what will be true is that the theory will satisfy the weak holographic

principle, in the form we have given it here.

acknowledgments

we would like to thank raphael bousso, louis crane, sameer gupta, chris isham,
ted jacobson, yi ling, mike reisenberger and carlo rovelli for useful discussions
and correspondence. ls thanks in addition willy fischler and reza tavakol for
stimulating discussions. we are also grateful to david gross and jim hartle for
hospitality at the institure for theoretical physics and physics department at ucsb,
where this work was begun. this work was supported by nsf grants phy/9514240
and phy/9423950 to the pennsylvania state university and a gift from the jesse
phillips foundation.

references

[1] g. thooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity gr-qc/9310006.

[2] l. susskind, the world as a hologram, hep-th/9409089, j. math. phys. (1995) ;
strings, black holes and lorentz contractions hep-th/9308139; phys. rev. lett.
71 (1993) 2367; phys. rev. d 49 (1994) 6606; d 50 (1994) 2700; l. susskind and
p. grin, partons and black holes hep-th/9410306

[3] w. fischler, l. susskind, holography and cosmology, hep-th/9806039.

[4] bousso r, holography in general space-times , hep-th/9906022, jhep
9906 (1999) 028; a covariant entropy conjecture, hep-th/9905177, jhep
9907:004,1999.

13

[5] ideas closely related to the holographic principle were presented by l. crane,
clocks and categories, is quantum gravity algebraic? j.math.phys. 36 (1995)
6180-6193, gr-qc/9504038; topological eld theory as the key to quantum gravity,
hep-th/9308126, in knot theory and quantum gravity ed. j. baez, (oxford
university press); categorical physics, hep-th/9301061.

[6] other discussions of the holographic principle in cosmological contexts in-
clude, nemanja kaloper, andrei linde, hep-th/9904120; eanna e. flana-
gan, donald marolf and robert m. wald, hep-th/9908070; richard dawid,
hep-th/9907115; ram brustein, stefano foa and riccardo sturani, hep-
th/9907032; g. veneziano,hep-th/9907012; sougato bose, anupam mazumdar,
gr-qc/9909008; dongsu bak, soo-jong rey, hep-th/9811008; p. a. zizzi, gr-
qc/9907063; herman verlinde, hep-th/9906182; k.-h. rehren, hep-th/9905179;
dongsu bak, soo-jong rey, hep-th/9902173; richard easther, david a.
lowe, hep-th/9902088; phys.rev.lett. 82 (1999) 4967-4970; p. horava, hep-
th/9712130; phys.rev. d59 (1999) 046004.

[7] r. penrose, theory of quantized directions unpublished manuscript.; in quan-
tum theory and beyond ed t bastin, cambridge u press 1971; in advances in
twistor theory, ed. l. p. hughston and r. s. ward, (pitman,1979) p. 301; in
combinatorial mathematics and its application (ed. d. j. a. welsh) (academic
press,1971).

[8] d. finkelstein, spacetime code 1-6 phys. rev. d5:320,1972, d5:2922,1972,

phys.rev.d9:2219,1974, phys.rev.d9:2231,1974

[9] l. smolin, the future of spin networks in the geometric universe (1997), oxford
university press, 1998, ed. s. a. huggett et al. gr-qc/9702030;
in quantum
gravity and cosmology, eds j perez-mercader et al, world scientic, singapore
1992.

[10] c. rovelli and l. smolin discreteness of area and volume in quantum gravity
nuclear physics b 442 (1995) 593. erratum: nucl. phys. b 456 (1995) 734;
spin networks and quantum gravity gr-qc/9505006, physical review d 52
(1995) 5743-5759.

[11] c. rovelli, gr-qc/9710008, also in the electronic journal living reviews.

[12] t. banks, w. fishler, s. h. shenker, l. susskind, m theory as a matrix model:
a conjecture hep-th/9610043; phys. rev. d55 (1997) 5112; lubos motl, propos-
als on nonperturbative superstring interactions, hep-th/9701025; tom banks,
nathan seiberg, strings from matrices, nucl.phys. b497 (1997) 41-55,h ep-
th/9702187 ; r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, matrix string theory,
nucl.phys. b500 (1997) 43-61, hep-th/9703030; m kato: phys lett b245 (1990)

14

43. k konishi g pauti p provero: phys lett b234 (1990) 276. g veneziano:
europhys lett 2 (1986)199. d amati m ciafaloni g veneziano phys. lett. b216
(1989) 41; r guida k konishi p provero: mod phys lett a6 (1991)1487; j j
atick e witten, nucl phys b310 (1988) 291 ; d gross and pf mende, phys lett
b197 (1987) 129 ; nucl phys b303 (1988) 407

[13] support for this conclusion can be found in the results of, reza tavakol and
george ellis, on holography and cosmology, hep-th/9908093; ted
jacobson, on the nature of black hole entropy. to be published
in the proceedings of 8th canadian conference on general relativity and rela-
tivistic astrophysics, montreal, quebec, canada, 10-12 jun 1999, gr-qc/9908031;
l. smolin weak vrs strong forms of the holographic principle, preprint to appear,
1999.

[14] markopoulou f, 1999, quantum causal histories, hep-th/9904009.

[15] markopoulou f, 1998, the internal logic of causal sets: what the universe looks

like from the inside, gr-qc/98011053.

[16] markopoulou f, 1997, dual

formulation of spin network evolution, gr-

qc/9704013.

[17] markopoulou f and smolin l, 1997, causal evolution of spin networks, nucl

phys b508 409.

[18] markopoulou f and smolin l, 1998, quantum geometry with intrinsic local

causality, phys rev d 58, 084032.

[19] markopoulou f and smolin l, 1998, nonperturbative dynamics for abstract

(p, q) string networks, phys rev d 58, 084033.

[20] l. smolin, a candidate for a background independent formulation of m theory,

hep-th/9903166.

[21] j. d. bekenstein, lett. nuovo cim 11 (1974).

[22] criscuolo a and waelbroeck h, 1998, causal set dynamics: a toy model,

gr-qc/9811088.

[23] bombelli l, lee j, meyer d and r, 1987, space-time as a causal set, phys rev

lett 59 521.

[24] meyer d a, 1988, the dimension of causal sets, phd thesis, massachusetts

institute of technology.

[25] sorkin r, 1990, space-time and causal sets in proc. of silarg vii conf.,

coyococ, mexico.

15

[26] g. t hooft, quantum gravity: a fundamental problem and some radical ideas.
carg`ese summer school lectures 1978. publ. recent developments in gravita-
tion. carg`ese 1978. ed. by m. levy and s. deser. plenum, new york/london,
323; quantization of space and time in 3 and in 4 space-time dimensions,
lectures held at the nato advanced study institute on quantum fields and
quantum space time, carg`ese, july 22  august 3, 1996. gr-qc/9608037; the
scattering matrix approach for the quantum black hole: an overview. j. mod.
phys. a11 (1996) pp. 4623-4688. gr-qc/9607022.

[27] y. ling and l. smolin, supersymmetric spin networks and quantum supergrav-

ity, hep-th/9904016, to appear in physical review d

[28] e. verlinde, fusion rules and modular transformations in 2d conformal eld

theory nucl. phys. b 300 (1988) 360

[29] s. kauman and l. smolin, combinatorial dynamics in quantum gravity hep-
th/9809161, to appear in the proceedings of the karpaz 99 winter school, 1999.

[30] ambjorn j and loll r, 1998, non-perturbative lorentzian quantum gravity,

causality and topology change nucl phys b536 407.

[31] ambjorn j, nielsen jl, rolf j and loll r, 1998, euclidean and lorentzian

quantum gravity - lessons from two dimensions, hep-th/9806241.

[32] juan m. maldacena, hep-th/9711200, hep-th/9803002;e. witten, hep-
i.r. klebanov, a.m. polyakov,
th/9802150, hep-th/9803131; s.s. gubser,
phys.lett. b428 (1998) 105-114, hep-th/9802109; for a review, see, o. aharony,
s. s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri, y. oz, large n field theories, string
theory and gravity hep-th/9905111.

[33] markopoulou f and smolin l, 1999, causal quantum cosmology, to appear.

16

