9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
8
2

 

 
 

1
v
8
3
2
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

ru-nhetc-99-38
hep-th/9910238

hypermultiplet moduli space and three

dimensional gauge theories

moshe rozali

department of physics and astronomy

rutgers university

piscataway, nj 08855

august 11, 2013

abstract

we establish a relation, conjectured recently by e. witten, between
the hypermultiplet moduli space in compactications of the heterotic
string on an a-d-e singularities, and the moduli spaces of three di-
mensional pure gauge theories with the corresponding a-d-e gauge
groups. it is possible to add a bounded number of heterotic vebranes
) keeping the het-
sitting in the singularity, while (in leading order in 
erotic string perturbative. the corresponding hypermultiplet moduli
space is given by the moduli space of a three dimensional gauge theory
with matter.

e-mail: rozali@physics.rutgers.edu

1

1 introduction

the duality between the heterotic string on k3  t 2 and type ii string
theory on cy manifolds [1] can be used to study the moduli space of four
dimensional string vacua with 8 supercharges. the moduli space factorizes
locally into the hyper- and vector multiplet moduli spaces. it is then possible
to study the hypermultiplet moduli space classically in the heterotic string
side, since the heterotic string dilaton is a member of a vector multiplet. this
is to be compared with calculations on the type ii side, as in [2].

the detailed study of singularities in the moduli space is, however, not
always possible at tree level. there are some singularities that drive the
string coupling to diverge, no matter how small it is asymptotically. in those
cases the metric on moduli space can be computed reliably, but the physics
of the singularity is non-perturbative. well-known singularities of that sort
are the type ii conifold [3], and the non-perturbative gauge symmetry at the
core of a small instanton [4].

in [5], a detailed study of singularities which do not involve non per-
turbative string physics was initiated. an example is the heterotic string
near an a-d-e type singularity of a k3 surface. since the heterotic string
dilaton becomes weak near the singularity, one may study the singularity in
the heterotic cft. indeed, for the case of a1 singularity, the moduli space
was found to be the atiyah-hitchin manifold. the classical singularity is
resolved by a combination of one loop and worldsheet instanton eects, with
no recourse to stringy corrections.

the pattern in which the  corrections smooth out the classical singu-
larity is reminiscent of the work in [7]. this analogy suggested a relation
between the two frameworks [5]1. therefore it was conjectured in [5] that
the hypermultiplet moduli space of the heterotic compactication on an a-
d-e type singularity is identical to the moduli space of a three dimensional
pure gauge thery with 8 supercharges and the corresponding a-d-e gauge
group.

in this note we establish this relation by using the duality between the
heterotic string on t 3 and m-theory on k3. furthermore, one can construct
slightly more general backgrounds which keep the heterotic coupling pertur-
bative (in leading order in ). this is done by putting a number of heterotic

1the relation between the hypermultiplet moduli space and three dimensional gauge

theory was noted in the type ii context in [6].

1

vebranes at the a-d-e singularity. this does not break the supersymme-
try further. in order for the heterotic string coupling to be small near the
singularity, the number of vebranes is bounded, as discussed below. the
hypermultiplet moduli space in this case turns out to be the moduli space of
a three dimensional gauge theory with matter.

dualities in three dimensional gauge theories exchanging the coulomb
and higgs branches were discussed in [8], and were named mirror symmetry.
realization of the mirror symmetry by an embedding in string theory [9] has
concentrated mainly on realizing the gauge theory on d-branes (see, however,
[10] for a closely related discussion). here, the embedding in m-theory (or
string theory) involves the dynamics of coincident membranes in m-theory,
or coincident 5-branes (compactied on t 3) in the heterotic string theory.

as is shown below in a particular case, the requirement of the heterotic
string to be perturbative is a necessary condition for the absence of singu-
larities in the hypermultiplet moduli space. it would be interesting to verify
that this is also a sucient condition, along the lines of [5], or using the
gauge theory representation. for an singularities with no small instantons,
there is an independent argument for the smoothness (and identication) of
the hypermultiplet moduli space [11].

2 heterotic string on a-d-e singularities

we consider a compactication of the heterotic string on k3, in the limit
where the k3 developes an a-d-e type singularity, associated with a gauge
group which we call g. concentrating on the behavior near the singularity
allows one to replace the k3 surface by a non-compact ale space which looks
identical near the singularity. one therefore is allowed to ignore constraints
of tadpole cancellation which arise upon further compactication to lower
dimensions [12]. we call this ale space xg.

concentrating on the singularity results in a low energy six dimensional
theory which decouples from gravity. the hypermultiplet moduli space is an
hyperkahler manifold in this limit. upon further toroidal compactication,
the moduli space factorizes into the vector- and the hypermultiplet moduli
spaces. this factorization follows from the dierent r-symmetry transfor-
mation laws for the scalars in the corresponding multiplets.

we are interested in particular in compactifying further on t 3, yielding
a three dimensional theory with 8 supercharges. the low energy theory has

2

an r-symmetry so(4) = su(2)l  su(2)r. the scalars in the vector- and
hypermultiplets transform in dierent su(2) factors. therefore the moduli
space factorizes. in particular, the hypermultiplet moduli space is indepen-
dent of the value of vector moduli, such as the radii of t 3 and the heterotic
string coupling.
it is the same in all dimensions [8] and does not receive
stringy corrections.

for the heterotic string background discussed here, the three dimensional
r-symmetry su(2)l  su(2)r originates from the factors t 3 and xg, re-
spectively. the scalars in the hypermultiplet moduli space are distinguished
by a transformation law under su(2)r, that is the one that rotates the 3
complex structures of xg.

since one can safely go to strong heterotic coupling, it is natural to con-
sider the situation in dual variables. in m-theory variables the background
in question is k3  xg. the rst factor comes from the duality between
m-theory on k3 and the heterotic string on t 3, and the second factor is the
ale space introduced above. since the moduli space in question does not
depend on the moduli of k3, we can take it to be a generic, non-singular
surface.

m-theory near an a-d-e singularity is well known to yield a seven di-
mensional gauge theory with a gauge group g [13]. further reduction on a
smooth k3 surface (with a trivial gauge bundle) yields in low energies a pure
gauge theory in three dimensions, 8 supercharges, and gauge group g.

the scalars in the vector multiplet transform under the r-symmetry
su(2) which originates from xg. this identies the hypermultiplet moduli
space on the heterotic side, with the moduli space of the three dimensional
gauge theory with gauge group g.

the analogy between the calculations in [5] and [7] can be explained
by this identication. for example an heterotic worldsheet instanton is an
elemantary string wrapped around a 2-cycle in xg, which we call . this
maps to an m5-brane wrapping k3 and the 2-cycle . this 5-brane is a
magnetic source for the 2+1 dimensional gauge eld which comes from the
11 dimensional 3-form reduced on the harmonic 2-form poincare dual to .
in the gauge theory therefore one gets the usual instantonic monopole, which
corrects the moduli space metric, as in [7].

3

3 small instantons and matter

in [5], the question of resolutions of classical singualrities by the heterotic
cft was investigated. one then is interested in classical singularities which
do not drive the heterotic string coupling to be strong. a general set of
examples can be obtained following [5].

the condition for the heterotic string to remain perturbative near the

singularity can be derived from [5], equation (1.1):

 = tr(fijf ij)  tr(rijrij)

(1)

this relates the variation of the dilaton to the curvature sources of the

metric and gauge bundle near the singularity.

the dilaton blows up near a small instanton singularity, and tends to
it is therefore possible to add a number
zero near an a-d-e singularity.
of small instantons sitting at the a-d-e singularity, such that the heterotic
coupling does not blow up. the number of small instantons is bounded. this
bound can be found by integrating equation (1) around the singularity. the
condition for the dilaton not to blow up at the singularity is found to be:

s = nf  nc  0

(2)

where the instanton number at the singularity is denoted by nf (a no-
tation to be explained shortly), and the rank of the a-d-e gauge group by
nc  1, (nc equals the euler characteristic of the corresponding ale space).
this bound may be modied by  corrections to (1), and is therefore
only a necessary condition for the string coupling to stay small. whether
or not the string coupling is small near the singularity has to be decided
dynamically in the worldsheet theory, or alternatively in the gauge theory
description.

with instantons included, the local factorization of the moduli space is
less eective. for example, even though the wilson lines on t 3 are vector
multiplets in three dimensions, they do aect the hypermultiplet moduli
space. as the wilson lines are tuned to enhance the gauge symmetry to
any gauge group h, the hypermultiplet moduli space contains a part which
is the moduli space of h instantons. it is only locally, away fron enhanced
symmetry points, that the hypermultiplet moduli space is independent of the
wilson lines.

4

for the set of examples dened above one may be able to study the res-
olution of the classical singularity by the heterotic cft. using the duality
above, it is straightforward to map the small instanton to the dual variables.
one gets m-theory on k3  xg with nf membranes spanning the 2+1 non-
compact directions. the low energy limit is then a gauge theory with matter,
in a limit described below.

an alternative representation of the membranes is as follows. the 7
dimensional theory obtained by concentrating near the singularity is a gauge
theory with a gauge group g. one of the terms in the action is (normalizing
the m-theory membrane tension to 1):

i =

1
82 c  tr(f  f )

(3)

where c is the m-theory 3-form and f is the seven dimensional gauge eld.
this term comes from the term c  dc  dc in 11 dimensional supergravity.
therefore, gauge instantons in seven dimensions carry membrane charge: the
membranes spanning the 2+1 noncompact directions can be represented as
g-instantons on k3.

the low energy theory now has additional elds, representing the moduli
of the instantons. those elds are hypermultiplets, identied as such by their
r-symmetry representation. the instantons have a nite size on the higgs
branch, and become membranes on the coulomb branch of the gauge theory.
a precise identication of the matter content on the coulomb branch
(where the instantons are of zero size) requires a better understanding of
coincident membranes in m-theory. the cases relevant to the six dimen-
sional heterotic hypermultiplet moduli space require tuning the second k3
to an enhanced symmetry point before taking the limit corresponding to a
decompactication of the t 3 on the heterotic side. results relevant to the
identication of the matter content in those cases can be found in [10, 9].

we conclude by commenting on the case of anc singularities, with a
generic k3 surface, and membranes seperated on it. we concentrate on this
case in order to interpret the bound (2) in the gauge theory.

the space xg can be described locally by a multi-taub-nut metric in
the limit of nc coincident centers, since both of these space have an anc
singularity at the origin. the taub-nut metric is a circle bration, and one
can use the circle to reduce to type iia theory. in type iia language this is a
d2-d6 system, where the d6 brane wraps the k3 surface. the gauge theory
on the d2-branes is u(1)nf , with an innite classical gauge coupling, related

5

to the innite asymptotic radius of the circle ber in the ale space. the
gauge theory on the 6-branes is su(nc), as before. the 2-6 strings generate
nf hypermultiplets in the fundamental representation of su(nc).

for the anc case, nc and nf are the number of colors and avors in
the gauge theory su(nc). one can then identify the number s = nf  nc
dened above as half the number of fermionic zero modes in the presence
of an su(nc) monopole. in [7], s was required to be positive on order to
have (multi-) monopole corrections to the metric on the coulomb branch.
such monopoles in the present case correct the metric of both the su(nc)
and u(1)nf factors , providing therefore a possibility for smoothing out the
complete vector moduli space.

in the absence of those corrections, the moduli space is singular, and the
origin of the coulomb branch represents a non-trivial conformal eld theory.
returning to the heterotic string frame, we see that the condition for the
heterotic string to be perturbative is complementary to the condition in [7].
it is then a necessary condition (at least for the anc case) for the absence of
singularities on the hypermultiplet moduli space. it is not clear whether this
condition also guarantees a smooth moduli space.

4 acknowledgments

we thank t. banks, m. douglas, k. intriligator, a. rajaraman , e. witten
for useful conversations, and o. aharony for collaboration in parts of this
paper.

6

references

[1] s. kachru and c. vafa, exact results for n=2 compactications of
heterotic strings, nucl. phys. b450, 69 (1995) hep-th/9505105; s. fer-
rara, j.a. harvey, a. strominger and c. vafa, second quantized mirror
symmetry, phys. lett. b361, 59 (1995) hep-th/9505162.

[2] k. becker, m. becker and a. strominger, five-branes, membranes and
nonperturbative string theory, nucl. phys. b456, 130 (1995) hep-
th/9507158; b.r. greene, d.r. morrison and c. vafa, a geomet-
ric realization of connement, nucl. phys. b481, 513 (1996) hep-
th/9608039; a. strominger, loop corrections to the universal hyper-
multiplet, phys. lett. b421, 139 (1998) hep-th/9706195; p.s. aspin-
wall, aspects of the hypermultiplet moduli space in string duality,
jhep 04, 019 (1998) hep-th/9802194; k. becker and m. becker, in-
stanton action for type ii hypermultiplets, nucl. phys. b551, 102
(1999) hep-th/9901126.

[3] p. candelas, x.c. de la ossa, p.s. green and l. parkes, a pair
of calabi-yau manifolds as an exactly soluble superconformal theory,
nucl. phys. b359, 21 (1991); a. strominger, massless black holes and
conifolds in string theory, nucl. phys. b451, 96 (1995) hep-th/9504090.

[4] e. witten, small instantons in string theory, nucl. phys. b460, 541

(1996) hep-th/9511030.

[5] e. witten, heterotic string conformal field theory and a-d-e sin-

gularities, hep-th/9909229.

[6] n. seiberg and s. shenker, hypermultiplet moduli space and string
compactication to three dimensions, phys. lett. b388, 521 (1996)
hep-th/9608086

[7] n. seiberg and e. witten, gauge dynamics and compactication to

three dimensions, hep-th/9607163.

[8] k. intriligator and n. seiberg, mirror symmetry in three dimensional

gauge theories, phys. lett. b387, 513 (1996) hep-th/9607207.

[9] j. de boer, k. hori, h. ooguri, y. oz and z. yin, mirror symmetry in
three-dimensional gauge theories, sl(2,z) and d-brane moduli spaces,

7

nucl. phys. b493, 148 (1997) hep-th/9612131; j. de boer, k. hori,
h. ooguri and y. oz, mirror symmetry in three-dimensional gauge
theories, quivers and d-branes, nucl. phys. b493, 101 (1997) hep-
th/9611063; a. hanany and e. witten, type iib superstrings, bps
monopoles, and three-dimensional gauge dynamics, nucl. phys. b492,
152 (1997) hep-th/9611230.

[10] n. seiberg, ir dynamics on branes and space-time geometry, phys.
lett. b384, 81 (1996) hep-th/9606017; m. porrati and a. zaaroni, m-
theory origin of mirror symmetry in three dimensional gauge theories,
nucl. phys. b490, 107 (1997) hep-th/9611201;

[11] a. sen, dynamics of multiple kaluza-klein monopoles in m- and
string theory, adv. theor. math. phys. 1(1998) 115, hep-th/9707042.

[12] s. sethi, c. vafa and e. witten, constraints on low-dimensional string

compactications, nucl. phys. b480, 213 (1996) hep-th/9606122.

[13] e. witten, string theory dynamics in various dimensions, nucl. phys.

b443, 85 (1995) hep-th/9503124.

8

