non-commutative unication in brane world

yitp-99-52

zurab kakushadze

c.n. yang institute for theoretical physics

state university of new york, stony brook, ny 11794

(october 9, 1999)

abstract

we point out that in (open) string compactications with non-zero ns-ns
b-eld we can have large kaluza-klein thresholds even in the small volume
limit. in this limit the corresponding gauge theory description is in terms of
a compactication on a non-commutative space (e.g., a torus or an orbifold
thereof). based on this observation we discuss a brane world scenario of non-
commutative unication via kaluza-klein thresholds.
in this scenario, the
unication scale can be lowered down to the tev-range, yet the correspond-
ing compactication radii are smaller than the string length. we discuss a
potential application of this scenario in the context of obtaining mixing be-
tween dierent chiral generations which is not exponentially suppressed - as we
point out, such mixing is expected to be exponentially suppressed in certain
setups with large volume compactications. we also point out that t-duality
is broken by certain non-perturbative twisted open string sectors which are
supposed to give rise to chiral generations, so that in the case of a small vol-
ume compactication with a rational b-eld we cannot t-dualize to a large
volume description. in this sense, the corresponding eld theoretic picture of
unication via kaluza-klein thresholds in this setup is best described in the
non-commutative language.

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
4
1

 

 
 

2
v
7
8
0
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

typeset using revtex

e-mail: zurab@insti.physics.sunysb.edu

1

with the advent of d-branes [1] it has become evident that there might exist a logical
possibility where the standard model gauge and matter elds reside inside of p  9 spatial
dimensional p-branes (or a set of overlapping branes), while gravity lives in a larger (10 or
11) dimensional bulk of space-time. this brane world picture1 a priori appears to be a viable
scenario [11]. one of the implications of the brane world scenario is that the string scale ms
can be much lower than the four dimensional planck scale mp [24]. in fact, in [4] it was
proposed that ms as well as the fundamental (10 or 11 dimensional) planck scale mp f can
be in the tev range2. the observed weakness of the four dimensional gravitational coupling
(that is, the fact that the four dimensional planck scale mp  ms, mp f ) then requires the
presence of at least two large ( 1/ms) compact directions3 (which are transverse to the
branes on which the standard model elds are localized). a general discussion of possible
brane world embeddings of such a scenario was given in [7,8,11]. in [10] various non-trivial
phenomenological issues were discussed in the context of the tev-scale brane world scenario,
and it was argued that this possibility does not appear to be automatically ruled out.

the gauge coupling unication in such a scenario would have to arise in a way drastically
dierent from the usual mssm unication.
in fact, a higher dimensional mechanism for
gauge coupling unication in the tev-scale brane world context was proposed in [5]. in this
mechanism the unication scale is lowered compared with the usual mssm unication scale
if one assumes that the standard model elds are localized on p-branes with p > 3 (actually,
p = 4 or 5 [12]), and the sizes of p  3 compact directions inside of these p-branes are
somewhat large compared with 1/ms. then the evolution of the gauge couplings above the
corresponding kaluza-klein (kk) thresholds is no longer logarithmic but power-like [18]. in
[12] a tev-scale supersymmetric standard model (tssm) was proposed, where the gauge
coupling unication indeed occurs via such a higher dimensional mechanism. moreover, the
unication in the tssm, which occurs in the tev-range, is as precise at one loop as in
the mssm, and it would also explain why the unication in the mssm is not an accident.
furthermore, higher loop eects in the tssm were shown in [12] to be subleading due to
the underlying n = 2 supersymmetry at the heavy kk levels.
concrete realizations of the above higher dimensional mechanism for gauge coupling
unication in the tev-scale brane world are expected to be non-trivial. in particular, it is
unclear at present how to explicitly embed models such as the tssm in the string theory
framework. this, in turn, is not so surprising as a completely successful embedding of, say,
the mssm in string theory is still lacking. in part this might be due to the lack of necessary

1for recent developments, see, e.g., [212]. the brane world picture in the eective eld theory
context was discussed in [13,14]. large radius compactications were originally considered in [15]
in the context of supersymmetry breaking.

2by the tev-range we do not necessarily mean ms  1 tev.
in fact, as was argued in [12],
the gauge coupling unication constraints seem to imply that ms cannot really be lower than
10  100 tev.
3recently it was proposed in [16] that gravity could also be localized and such compact directions
might actually not be required. for subsequent works along these lines, see, e.g., [17].

2

technology for the corresponding model building as such string vacua are expected to be
rather non-trivial. semi-realistic n = 1 supersymmetric examples which possess some (but
not all) desirable phenomenological features (such as three chiral generations and standard
model-like gauge groups) were constructed in [6,9] via type i/orientifold compactications4.
however, as was pointed out in [12], examples of this type do not quite seem to t in
the context of unication via kaluza-klein thresholds.
in particular, some matter elds
(such as some of the chiral generations) must not propagate in the aforementioned extra
p 3 dimensions or else the corresponding one-loop -function coecients for the power-like
running become too positive, and the gauge couplings blow up before they unify. that
is, in order to have a successful unication in the tev-range, we must assume that some
(more precisely, at least one) of the chiral generations is localized at a point in the extra
p  3 dimensions (see the rst reference in [12] for details).
it is then not dicult to
see that such a model cannot be constructed in the perturbative orientifold framework.
indeed, within this framework the only way to have matter localized in a smaller dimensional
subspace is if it comes from open string sectors where one of the two ends of the open
string is attached to one set of d-branes, while the other end is attached to a dierent set
of d-branes, with these two sets of d-branes overlapping in the subspace of the desired
localization. for instance, consider two sets of d5-branes, call them d51- and d52-branes,
in5 r3,1 t 2  t 2  t 2. let d51-branes wrap the rst t 2 while d52-branes wrap the second
t 2. then the 5152 matter is localized at a point in the compact space where these two sets
of branes intersect. now, let us assume that the standard model gauge group comes from
the same set of branes, say, d51-branes. note that this is essentially unavoidable or else we
would have no unication prediction to begin with - indeed, if dierent gauge subgroups of
the standard model gauge group come from dierent sets of branes (with generically dierent
corresponding compactication volumes), then the gauge couplings for these subgroups at
the string scale (which we would eventually like to identify with the unication scale) are
not supposed to be the same. thus, at least some of the 5152 matter would have to be
charged under three dierent gauge factors - su(3)c  su(2)w (here we are being overly
generous with u(1)y whose more careful treatment could only worsen the situation) as well
as a gauge subgroup of the d52-brane gauge group. in particular, left-handed electroweak
doublet quarks would have to be such states. this is, however, impossible in the perturbative
orientifold framework as there open strings have only two ends, hence only one type of
distinct chan-paton factors is allowed for a given set of d-branes.

thus, we must nd other possible mechanisms for matter localization which would take
us outside of the perturbative orientifold construction. in [12] it was pointed out that an
adequate framework for such model building might be that of non-perturbative orientifolds
examples of which have been recently constructed in [20]. in such vacua, which (generically)
are non-perturbative from both type i and heterotic viewpoints, there are additional twisted

4for other recent developments in four dimensional type i/orientifold compactications, see, e.g.,
[19,20].

5here we choose a simple toroidal compactication only for illustrative purposes. in more realistic
cases one could equally successfully consider, say, toroidal orbifolds.

3

open string sectors (which do not possess perturbative orientifold description) giving rise
to states charged under, say, the gauge group coming from some set of d5-branes and, at
the same time, localized at orbifold xed points. this is analogous to what happens in
perturbative heterotic superstring where some of the states charged under the appropriate
subgroups of spin(32)/z2 or e8  e8 come from twisted closed string sectors. in fact, this
is not just a mere analogy but has more substance as using type i-heterotic duality one can
in certain cases map twisted open string sectors to twisted closed string sectors which have
perturbative heterotic description [20]. in more complicated cases where no perturbative
description exists in either pictures one can still understand such states using a hybrid
approach which involves utilizing some geometric aspects of orbifold compactications.

as we have already mentioned, the matter localized at orbifold xed points in non-
perturbative orientifold compactications essentially behaves as twisted closed string states
in heterotic string theory. in particular, couplings of such twisted open string matter elds
localized at orbifold xed points obey the point-group and space-group selection rules (see,
e.g., [21] for details).
in the following we will mostly be interested in the space-group
selection rules, so let us briey review their essence using a simple example.

thus, consider a t 2/z3 orbifold, where the generator g of the orbifold group acts crys-

tallographically on t 2 by 2/3 rotations. the metric on t 2 is given by gab = (v/3)ea  eb,
a, b = 1, 2, where v is the volume of t 2, and ea are the vectors generating the su(3) root
lattice   {naea|na  z} (note that e2
2 = 2, and e1  e2 = 1). the z3 twist acts
with three xed points. one of them is located at the origin, 0 = 0, while the other two

1 = e2

are located (up to immaterial torus identications) at  = qv/3ee2, where eea, a = 1, 2,
generate the su(3) weight lattice e  {maeea|ma  z} (note that (ee1)2 = (ee2)2 = 2/3,
and ee1  ee2 = 1/3). the space-group selection rules imply that, for instance, three-point
couplings of twisted elds ta, tb and tc, where a, b, c = 0, label the corresponding
xed points, are non-vanishing if and only if a = b = c or a 6= b 6= c 6= a [21]. the
couplings of twisted elds coming from the same xed point are unsuppressed. however, the
couplings of twisted elds coming from dierent xed points are exponentially suppressed.
in particular, they are suppressed by an exponential factor exp(cvm 2
s ) [21], where c is a
numerical coecient of order 1. thus, in the large volume limit, that is, when v  m 2
, the
o-diagonal twisted sector couplings are exponentially small. in the closed string theory
language this can be understood from the fact that such couplings come from world-sheet
instantons arising from strings wrapping the corresponding 2-cycles in the orbifold. the ac-
tion of such world-sheet instantons is proportional to the volume v of these two-cycles, hence
the above exponential factor. however, we can also understand this from the eld theory
viewpoint - the overlap of wave-functions for the states localized at dierent xed points is
exponentially (more precisely, gaussian-like) suppressed with the distance between the xed
points (which is proportional to v). in fact, this way of thinking about this point makes it
clear why in non-perturbative orientifolds some of the aspects of twisted open strings such
as twisted sector couplings should mimic the corresponding statements in conformal eld
theory of twisted closed strings.

s

the above discussion might have interesting phenomenological implications for the uni-
cation via kaluza-klein thresholds. thus, as was pointed out in [12], to have a meaningful
unication prediction we must ensure that higher loops are subleading compared with the
leading one-loop threshold corrections to the gauge couplings. this is by no means au-

4

tomatic in these scenarios. thus, the number of heavy kk modes propagating in loops
n  vm 2
s  1. the actual loop expansion parameter then is not given by the low energy
gauge coupling /4. instead, the loop expansion parameter is  n/4  s, where s is
the string expansion parameter (which in the conventions of [22] is related to the string cou-
pling gs via s = gs/4). in fact, even though the low energy gauge coupling  is relatively
small, the loop expansion parameter s  1. then without any additional cancellations
higher loop corrections to the gauge couplings would be as large as the one-loop threshold
contribution, hence lack of unication prediction.

there is, however, a way to make unication via kk thresholds predictive. thus, as was
pointed out in [12], if we consider n = 1 supersymmetric theories, the heavy kk modes
have n = 2 supersymmetry in the sense that their spectrum as well as their couplings to
each other are n = 2 supersymmetric. then non-renormalization properties of n = 2
gauge theories beyond one loop result in additional suppression of higher loop corrections
to the gauge couplings due to (partial) n = 2 cancellations so that higher loop eects are
subleading compared with the leading one-loop threshold correction. this renders unication
via kk thresholds predictive.

a way to obtain n = 1 supersymmetric gauge theories with n = 2 supersymmetry at
heavy kk levels is via certain orbifold compactications. in particular, one can consider
generalized voisin-borcea orbifolds dened as

m = (t 2  k3)/zm ,

(1)

where the generator g of zm acts crystallographically on t 2 by 2/m rotation gz1 = z1,
and it is a symmetry of k3 acting on the holomorphic 2-form 2 on k3 via g2 = 12.
here z1 is the complex coordinate parametrizing t 2, and   exp(2i/m). note that m can
only take values m = 2, 3, 4, 6 (or else the action of g on t 2 would not be crystallographic).
the calabi-yau three-fold m, which is an elliptic bration of t 2 over the base b  k3/zm ,
has su(3) holonomy, so, say, type i compactied on m has n = 1 supersymmetry in
four dimensions (provided that the corresponding tadpoles can be canceled). now consider
d5-branes wrapping the bre t 2. the four dimensional massless modes of the gauge theory
in the world-volume of the d5-branes have n = 1 supersymmetry. however, the heavy kk
modes on t 2 actually come in n = 2 supersymmetric multiplets, and, as was shown in
[12], interactions involving only heavy kk modes are also n = 2 supersymmetric. this is,
therefore, a setup where we could consider unication via kk thresholds.
as we have already mentioned, at least one of the chiral generations must come from
the twisted open string sectors6 localized at xed points of t 2/zm . now, let us assume for
a moment that all chiral generations arise from such twisted open string sectors. then, as
we pointed out above, couplings between dierent generations would be exponentially sup-
pressed in the limit of large volume t 2. that is, mixing between dierent generations would
be unacceptably small contradicting the observed ckm matrix. thus, at least naively, hav-
ing large threshold corrections seems incompatible with the desired mixing between dierent
chiral generations if all of them arise in zm twisted open string sectors.

6as was pointed out in [20], non-perturbative twisted open string sectors arise in zm orbifolds
with m = 3, 4, 6, but not with m = 2.

5

a priori we could assume that two of the chiral generations arise in untwisted (with
respect to the action of the g twist7) open string sectors while one generation comes from a
twisted open string sector to possibly avoid the above diculty with small mixing. however,
in certain cases it might be desirable to have all three generations coming from twisted open
string sectors. for instance, in the tssm to ensure proton stability in [12] a generation-
blind discrete z3  z3 gauge symmetry was proposed. this discrete symmetry can be
identied with the corresponding orbifold discrete symmetry, which would imply that all
three generations would have to arise in zm twisted open string sectors (m = 3 in this case
- see the second reference in [12] for details). the question we would like to address next
is whether we can have large threshold corrections with all three generations coming from
xed points in the bre t 2.

here we would like to point out that there indeed seems to exist such a setup.

in
particular, in the above discussion we have made an implicit assumption that the untwisted
ns-ns b-eld in the directions of t 2 is trivial. let us, however, consider the case where
we have a non-trivial b-ux on the bre t 2.
in this case the kaluza-klein spectrum is
modied, and the behavior of the corresponding threshold corrections with the volume of
t 2 can be quite dierent from the case without the b-eld. in particular, as we will see in a
moment, if there is a non-trivial b-ux, we can have large threshold corrections even if the
volume of t 2 is small compared with  = m 2

.

s

for the reasons which will become clear in the following, we will mostly be interested in
the z3 and z6 cases, where the bre t 2 must have the appropriate z3 symmetry. however,
for illustrative purposes we will discuss the case of a square torus t 2 = s 1  s 1 (with
identical radii of the two circles) with a non-zero b-eld as this simple example captures
all the key points relevant for the subsequent discussions. thus, the metric on t 2 and the
b-eld are given by

gab =  v 0

b 0! ,
0 v! , bab =  0 b

(2)

where v is the volume of t 2, and the b-eld is dened up to unit shifts b  b + 1. without
the b-eld the metric felt by the open string sector is simply gab. in particular, the kk
m  gabmamb (here
modes coming from d5-branes wrapping t 2 have mass squared m 2
m  (m1, m2)), where gab is the inverse of gab. however, if the b-eld is non-trivial, the
metric felt by open strings is given by (we are working in the units 2 = 1)8

gab = gab  bacgcdbdb =  v + b2/v

0

0

v + b2/v! ,

(3)

7note that in the case of orbifold k3 these generations could still come from open string sectors
twisted with respect to another twist  which is the generator of the k3 orbifold group zm  (here
k3 = t 4/zm ).

8for a recent discussion of d-branes wrapped on tori with non-zero b-ux using the boundary
state formalism, see [23].

6

m  gabmamb, where gab = (v/(v2 +
and, in particular, the kk modes have mass squared m 2
b2))ab is the inverse of gab. note that if the volume of t 2 is small (that is, v  ), in
the case with the b-eld (such that b  1) we have light kk modes with masses of order
v/b  ms. this is to be contrasted with the case without the b-eld where the lightest
massive kk mode has a mass of order 1/v  ms. thus, in the case with the b-eld

we have a large number of massive kk modes below the cut-o (that is, string) scale ms
which contribute into the threshold corrections to the gauge couplings. in fact, the leading
one-loop threshold contribution is of order n   b2/v  1, the number of massive kk
modes below the cut-o ms.
the above discussion can be straightforwardly generalized to the case of the most general
t 2. in fact, we are going to give the general expressions for the one-loop threshold corrections
to the gauge couplings in the small volume limit in the presence of a non-trivial b-ux. first
let us consider d5-branes wrapping t 2 with the space transverse to the branes being k3.
the corresponding gauge theory has n = 2 supersymmetry at both massless and massive
kk levels. let the gauge group be ni gi with the low energy gauge couplings i() (here
 is the energy scale at which the gauge couplings are measured). the gauge couplings in
this case are renormalized only at one loop, and are given by:

1

i () = 1 + ebi

2

 ! + ei ,
ln ms

(4)

where   gs/2 (we will dene  in a moment) is the unied gauge coupling at the string
scale ms,ebi are the corresponding n = 2 one-loop -function coecients, and the threshold
corrections corresponding to the massive kk modes are given by (here we assume that
  1)

ei = ebi

4

 2  ebi

4

ln () + o(1) .

(5)

here  parametrizes the subtraction scheme dependence. in particular, the infra-red (ir)
cut-o in the loop integrals is taken as , while the ultra-violet (uv) cut-o is taken as
ms.

in the above expressions the quantity  is dened as

  (ms/2)2qdet(gab) = (ms/2)2 det(gab + (2)bab)/qdet(gab) .

(6)

note that in the small volume limit v   we have   b2(/v). in the large volume limit
the b-eld does not play any important role, and we recover the usual result   (ms/2)2v
[12].
next, let us consider the case where d5-branes are wrapping the bre t 2 in the com-
pactication on a generalized voisin-borcea orbifold (1). in this case we have n = 1 super-
symmetry at the massless level, while the heavy kk modes are still n = 2 supersymmetric.
the gauge couplings are now given by

1
i () = 1 +

ln ms

 ! + i ,

bi
2

(7)

7

where bi are the n = 1 one-loop -function coecients for the massless modes. the one-loop
threshold corrections in this case are given by9

where m is the order of the generalized voisin-borcea orbifold.

i = ei/m ,

(8)

thus, in the presence of the b-eld we can have large threshold corrections to the gauge
couplings, so that unication via kk thresholds can occur at low scales as in [5,12]. the
key point here, however, is that this is also the case for compactications on small (rather
than only large) tori (or, more precisely, orbifolds thereof). that is, the mixing between the
chiral generations coming from (non-perturbative) twisted open string sectors localized at
the corresponding orbifold xed points need no longer be exponentially suppressed.

the above discussion of d5-branes wrapping t 2 with non-zero b-ux has one loose end
which we would like to tie up next. in particular, so far we have been assuming that the the
b-eld is taking generic values. however, at special values of the b-eld, namely, at certain
rational values of b, we can perform a t-duality transformation which maps a small volume
t 2 to a large volume dual torus - for a recent comprehensive discussion and references,
see [24]. the corresponding kk threshold corrections in the case of a large volume t 2 are
still expected to be large, and, as we will see in a moment, they are identical in this t-
dual description to those in the language of the original small volume torus. however, at
least naively, there might seem to be a puzzle as for a large volume t 2 we expect twisted
open string sector states to have exponentially small o-diagonal couplings, which is not the
same as what we have concluded for a small t 2 compactication. as we will explain in a
moment, there is no puzzle here as t-duality is a good symmetry in the perturbative (from
the orientifold viewpoint) open string sectors but is broken in the non-perturbative twisted
open string sectors whenever we have the corresponding o-diagonal couplings.

the reason why the above point is especially important is that if we consider type
i/orientifold compactications, the b-eld cannot take arbitrary values but must be quan-
tized. indeed, let  be the orientifold action interchanging the left- and right-movers on
the closed string world-sheet. the ns-ns b-eld is antisymmetric under the action of .
taking into account that it is dened only up to unit shifts, it is then clear that b can only
take two values consistent with the orientifold action: b = 0 and b = 1/2.
in fact, the
massless closed string states corresponding to the b-eld moduli are projected out by the
orientifold action which implies that b cannot take continuous values. however, it can take
the above quantized values, so from now on we will focus on backgrounds with b = 1/2.
(for more details on orientifolds with non-zero b-eld, see, e.g., [25]10.)

9here we ignore heavy string oscillator thresholds which are o(1) in n = 1 theories but still
non-vanishing. note that in n = 2 theories such thresholds are absent - see [12] for details and
references.

10in [25] it was assumed that the closed strings that couple to d-branes wrapping, say, a 2-torus
with b = 1/2 satisfy the no momentum ow condition in the directions of t 2, that is, these states
have left- and right-moving momenta satisfying pla = pra. this is only one of the two consistent

8

for the sake of simplicity we will consider the case of a square torus with the metric and
the b-eld given by (2). we will assume that b = 1/k, where k  n  {1}. in this case, if
we start from a torus with small volume, via a t-duality transformation we can map it to
a torus with large volume. to describe this t-duality transformation, let us introduce the
following matrix (here we are working in the units 2 = 1, and we are closely following
the discussion in [26,24]):

eab  gab + bab .

(9)

the t-duality group in the case of t 2 is so(2, 2, z) whose elements can be described in
terms of 4  4 matrices

   
  ! ,

(10)

where , , ,  are 2 2 matrices with integer entries, and satisfy the following constraints:

t  + t  = 0 ,
t  + t  = 0 ,
t  + t  = i .

here the superscript t stands for transposition, and i denotes the 2  2 identity matrix.
the above t-duality element acts on eab as follows:

e  e  = (e + )(e + )1 .

(11)

note that we can write e = vi + b, where  is the 2  2 antisymmetric matrix with
12 = 1. next, consider the t-duality transformation with (recall that k = 1/b)

 = i ,

 = 0 ,

 = k ,

 = i .

(12)

we will denote this t-duality transformation by p . the corresponding matrix e  is given
by:

e  =

b2
v

i  b .

(13)

bprb,
choices. in particular, the second choice corresponds to imposing the condition pla = ra
where the matrix r is given by r  et e1 (see the next paragraph in the main text for notations).
in the former case the closed string states that couple to d-branes satisfy ma  babnb = 0, which,
in particular, implies that the winding numbers na must be even. this, as explained in [25], leads
to the rank reduction for the chan-paton gauge group. on the other hand, if we impose the
bprb, then the corresponding closed strings satisfy ma = 0 with arbitrary
condition pla = ra
winding numbers na. in this case the rank of the chan-paton gauge group is not reduced. these
and other related issues will be discussed in mored detail elsewhere.

9

note that the t-duality transformation p amounts to v  b2/v, b  b. in particular, a
small volume torus with the b-eld is mapped to a large volume torus with the opposite
b-eld.

so far we have not said anything about what happens to d5-branes under the t-duality
transformation p . as we will see in a moment, d5-branes wrapping the original t 2 transform
into d5-branes wrapping the dual torus under the transformation p . this is consistent with
the discussion after (6), in particular, the threshold corrections computed on the original
small volume torus are identical to those on the dual large volume torus, which can be seen
by recalling that the t-duality transformation p acts as v  (2b)2/v (here we have
restored the appropriate factors of 2).
to explicitly see that the transformation p maps d5-branes to d5-branes (and not, say,
d3-branes), let us analyze the structure of p in terms of the familiar t-duality transforma-
tions s and t . the s-transformation corresponds to taking  = 0,  = i,  = i and  = 0,
and amounts to mapping a 2-torus with metric g and zero b-eld to another 2-torus (with
zero b-eld) whose metric is given by the inverse of g. this is just the usual r  1/r
type of t-duality transformation. on the other hand, the t -transformation corresponds to
taking  = i,  = ,  = 0 and  = i, and amounts to unit shifts of the b-eld (but
does not aect the metric on t 2). it is not dicult to see that the transformation p can be
written as

p = st ks .

(14)

thus, under the rst s-transformation d5-branes are mapped to d3-branes, the subsequent
t -transformations do not aect the dimensionality of branes, and the last s-transformations
maps d3-branes back to d5-branes.

as we see, in the t-dual picture we have d5-branes wrapping a large volume torus. we
must then explain how come the twisted open string sector states localized at the xed
points of the corresponding zm orbifold of t 2 have unsuppressed o-diagonal couplings in
the original picture while in the dual picture we expect them to be exponentially small.
to understand this point better, let us review some facts about twisted open string states
in non-perturbative orientifolds discussed in detail in [20]. first, non-perturbative twisted
open string states do not arise in the z2 twisted sectors. there are twisted open string
states arising in the z4 twisted sectors, that is, g and g1 twisted open string sectors,
where g is the generator of z4. however, only one of the two xed points of g acting on t 2
gives rise to such states, namely, that at the origin. as pointed out in [20], the other xed
point does not give rise to non-perturbative twisted open string states as there is a twisted
half-integer b-ux stuck inside of the corresponding p1 along the lines of [27]. in fact, this
is consistent with the fact that in the z4 case t-duality on the bre t 2 is a good symmetry
of the corresponding background, which is unbroken by the non-perturbative twisted open
string states [20]. thus, in the z4 case we have no aforementioned puzzle with the o-
diagonal couplings of twisted open string states as there are no such couplings to begin with
- all twisted open string states come from the xed point at the origin of t 2. thus, using
t-duality in this case we can map the original compactication with a small volume t 2 to
the dual compactication with a large volume 2-torus.

however, the situation is quite dierent in the z3 and z6 cases. we will focus on the
z3 case as the z6 case is similar. thus, in the z3 case we have twisted open string states

10

arising at all three xed points of t 2/z3, and they do possess o-diagonal couplings. in
the original small volume torus compactication these are unsuppressed, whereas in the
dual large volume torus compactication they would be exponentially suppressed, which
would lead to a puzzle. the resolution of this point is that, as was originally pointed out
in [20], t-duality is not a good symmetry of this background. in particular, it is broken by
non-perturbative twisted open string sectors (albeit the perturbative (from the orientifold
viewpoint) open string sectors do possess the corresponding t-duality symmetry). this
can be seen from, say, the corresponding explicit z6 examples constructed in [20]. thus,
for instance, if we consider the non-perturbative orientifold corresponding to type i on
k3 = t 4/z6, it contains both d9- and d5-branes (the former wrap k3, while the latter
are transverse to k3). the perturbative (from the orientifold viewpoint) 99 and 55 open
sting sectors have identical spectra as they should - t-duality is a good symmetry in these
sectors. however, the twisted 99 and 55 open string spectra are dierent.
in fact, the
correctness of these spectra follows from type i-heterotic duality plus anomaly cancellation
requirements. in particular, had the twisted 99 and 55 open string spectra been the same,
the six dimensional gravitational anomalies would not have canceled. thus, t-duality is
indeed broken by twisted open string sectors. the physical reason for this can be intuitively
understood by noticing that the aforementioned t-duality transformation s in the orientifold
language maps  to r(1)fl, where r is the reection on the bre t 2 (rz1 = z1), and
fl is the left-handed space-time fermion number operator. the two of the three t 2/z3 xed
points  (that is, those not located at the origin) are not invariant under the action of the
reection r, hence the lack of t-duality symmetry in such backgrounds11. the upshot of
this discussion is that we cannot use t-duality transformation p to map a small volume t 2
compactication to a large volume dual 2-torus compactication, and this avoids the puzzle
with the o-diagonal couplings between the twisted open string states in these backgrounds.
practically, this means that if we start from a compactication with a small volume bre
t 2, we are stuck with this description where the b-eld plays a crucial role for unication
via kaluza-klein thresholds.

before we nish our discussion, we would like to make the following remark. first, we
can ask if we could understand the kk thresholds without appealing to string theory at all
- after all, computation of kk thresholds without the b-eld can be carried out without
any reference to string theory except when discussing the uv cut-o, which is chosen to be
 ms. in the case with non-zero b-eld we can also give a purely eld theoretic description.
in particular, in the regime of a small volume t 2 with the b-eld we have a description
in terms of the corresponding gauge theory on a non-commutative torus12 (see [24] and

11a breakdown of t-duality due to non-perturbative eects was also argued in a dierent context
in [28]. it would be interesting to understand if there is any relation between the results of [28]
and the earlier observations in [20].

12as we have argued above, in the z3 and z6 cases we would have no choice but to stick to
the non-commutative description if we chose to work within the eld theory language.
in the
z4 case, however, t-duality is a good symmetry of the corresponding background, and we could
rewrite the theory in the commutative language. more precisely, the corresponding gauge theory

11

references therein) with the uv cut-o at  ms. this is the motivation for the title of this
paper.
i would like to thank martin rocek and tom taylor for discussions. this work was
i would like to thank the string
supported in part by the national science foundation.
theory group at harvard university for their kind hospitality while this work was completed.
i would also like to thank albert and ribena yu for nancial support.

is still described in terms of the compactication on a non-commutative torus (since the b-eld is
still non-zero in the t-dual picture), but it is well approximated by the commutative description
as the volume of the torus is large (this is, in a sense, equivalent to the zero string slope limit
  0). at any rate, the z3 and z6 cases might be appealing for solving the proton stability
as well as neutrino mass problems in the tssm (where we have three chiral generations), see the
second reference in [12] for details. on the other hand, these discrete symmetries might be relevant
(see the second reference in [29]) for gauge coupling unication in the recently proposed tssm4
model [29], where we have four chiral generations, and the electroweak higgs is identied with a
fourth generation slepton. another potential use for such discrete symmetries might be within the
context of (discrete) avor gauge symmetries proposed in [30] as a solution to the problem of avor
changing neutral currents (for other related works, see, e.g., [31]). in fact, it is likely that such
(discrete) avor symmetries would require that the corresponding chiral generations come from
non-perturbative twisted open string sectors as it is dicult to imagine how they would arise in
the perturbative orientifold framework.

12

references

[1] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724.
[2] e. witten, nucl. phys. b471 (1996) 135.
[3] j. lykken, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 3693.
[4] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. lett. b429 (1998) 263; phys.

rev. d59 (1999) 086004.

[5] k.r. dienes, e. dudas and t. gherghetta, phys. lett. b436 (1998) 55; nucl. phys.

b537 (1999) 47; hep-ph/9807522.

[6] z. kakushadze, phys. lett. b434 (1998) 269; nucl. phys. b535 (1998) 311; phys. rev.

d58 (1998) 101901.

[7] i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. lett. b436 (1998)

257.

[8] g. shiu and s.-h.h. tye, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 106007.
[9] z. kakushadze and s.-h.h. tye, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 126001.
[10] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 086004.
[11] z. kakushadze and s.-h.h. tye, nucl. phys. b548 (1999) 180.
[12] z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b548 (1999) 205; nucl. phys. b552 (1999) 3;

z. kakushadze and t.r. taylor, hep-th/9905137.

[13] v. rubakov and m. shaposhnikov, phys. lett. b125 (1983) 136;
a. barnaveli and o. kancheli, sov. j. nucl. phys. 52 (1990) 576.

[14] g. dvali and m. shifman, nucl. phys. b504 (1997) 127; phys. lett. b396 (1997) 64.
[15] i. antoniadis, phys. lett. b246 (1990) 377.
[16] m. gogberashvili, hep-ph/9812296; hep-ph/9812365.
[17] l. randall and r. sundrum, hep-ph/9905221; hep-th/9906064;

h. verlinde, hep-th/9906182;
n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, g. dvali and n. kaloper, hep-th/9907209.

[18] t.r. taylor and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b212 (1988) 147.
[19] m. berkooz and r.g. leigh, nucl. phys. b483 (1997) 187;

c. angelantonj, m. bianchi, g. pradisi, a. sagnotti and ya.s. stanev, phys. lett. b385
(1996) 96;
z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b512 (1998) 221; nucl. phys. b529 (1998) 157;
z. kakushadze and g. shiu, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 3686; nucl. phys. b520 (1998) 75;
g. zwart, nucl. phys. b526 (1998) 378;
g. aldazabal, a. font, l.e. ibanez and g. violero, nucl. phys. b536 (1998) 29;
z. kakushadze, g. shiu and s.-h.h. tye, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 25;
j. lykken, e. poppitz and s.p. trivedi, nucl. phys. b543 (1999) 105;
r. blumenhagen and a. wisskirchen, phys. lett. b438 (1998) 52;
l.e. ibanez, r. rabadan and a.m. uranga, nucl. phys. b542 (1999) 112.

[20] z. kakushadze, phys. lett. b455 (1999) 120; hep-th/9904211; phys. lett. b559 (1999)

497.

[21] s. hamidi and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b279 (1987) 465;

l. dixon, d. friedan, e. martinec and s. shenker, nucl. phys. b282 (1987) 13.

[22] j. polchinski, tasi lectures on d-branes, hep-th/9611050.
[23] j.a. harvey, s. kachru, g. moore and e. silverstein, hep-th/9909072.
[24] n. seiberg and e. witten, jhep 9909 (1999) 032.

13

[25] m. bianchi, g. pradisi and a. sagnotti, nucl. phys. b376 (1992) 365;

z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b512 (1998) 221;
m. bianchi, nucl. phys. b528 (1998) 73;
e. witten, jhep 9802 (1998) 006;
z. kakushadze, g. shiu and s.-h.h. tye, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 086001;
z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b444 (1999) 265;
c. angelantonj, hep-th/9908064.

[26] a. giveon and m. rocek, nucl. phys. b380 (1992) 128.
[27] p.s. aspinwall, phys. lett. b357 (1995) 329.
[28] p.s. aspinwall and m.r. plesser, jhep 9908 (1999) 001.
[29] a.k. grant and z. kakushadze, hep-ph/9906556;

z. kakushadze, hep-th/9908016.

[30] z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b551 (1999) 549.
[31] n. arkani-hamed and s. dimopoulos, hep-ph/9811353;

z. berezhiani and g. dvali, phys. lett. b450 (1999) 24;
t. banks, a. nelson and m. dine, jhep 9906 (1999) 014;
n. arkani-hamed and m. schmaltz, hep-ph/9903417;
n. arkani-hamed, l. hall, d. smith and n. weiner, hep-ph/9909326.

14

