taup-2590-99
hep-th/yymmddd

9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
1

 

 
 

1
v
7
6
2
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

dieomorphisms and holographic anomalies 

c. imbimboa, a. schwimmerb, s. theisenc and s. yankielowiczd

a dipartimento di fisica dell universit`a di lecce, via arnesano, i-73100, lecce, italy

b department of physics of the complex systems, weizmann institute, rehovot 76100, israel

c sektion physik, universitat munchen, germany

d school of physics and astronomy, beverly and raymond sackler faculty of exact sciences,

tel-aviv university, ramat aviv, tel-aviv 69978, israel

abstract

using the relation between dieomorphisms in the bulk and weyl transforma-
tions on the boundary we study the weyl transformation properties of the bulk
metric on shell and of the boundary action. we obtain a universal formula
for one of the classes of trace anomalies in any even dimension in terms of the
parameters of the gravity action.

november 1999



partially supported by gif, the german-israeli foundation for scientic research, by the european com-

mission tmr programme erbfmrx-ct96-0045, minerva foundation, the center for basic interactions of the

israeli academy of sciences and the us-israel binational science foundation

1. introduction

the ads/cft correspondence oers remarkable insights into nonperturbative phenom-
ena in gauge theories [1]. many of the proposed tests of the correspondence rely on the
symmetry algebras being isomorphic.

among the tests going beyond the mapping of the algebraic structure the correct map-
ping of the trace anomalies is one of the most impressive [2],[3],[4]. on the supergravity
side the correspondence involves a classical calculation: one solves the equation of motion
using the metric at the boundary as initial condition. the action evaluated for this clas-
sical solution gives the eective action in terms of the boundary metric. taking a weyl
variation of the eective action gives the anomalous terms. an anomaly appears in a clas-
sical calculation due to the apparently infrared logarithmically divergent terms obtained
when the action is evaluated with the classical solution. for the ve dimensional einstein
action with a cosmological constant the coecients of the two independent trace anomaly
structures match correctly the trace anomalies of the four dimensional n=4 super yang
mills theory calculated in the large n limit.

in the present note we study further the structure of this correspondence. following
penrose [5] and brown and henneaux [6] we remark that the weyl transformations of the
boundary metric can be understood as a certain subgroup of the bulk dieomorphisms.
this observation allows us to derive a general transformation rule for the bulk metric when
the boundary metric is changed by a weyl transformation. we will call it in the following
the pbh transformation. the transformation doesnt use explicitly the solution of the
equation of motion and, therefore, it is valid for a general bulk eective action including
all the stringy corrections. we analyze the action evaluated for this general bulk metric
and we uncover some universal properties of the trace anomaly which follow from it. in
particular the coecient of the euler structure present in any dimension (the so called type
a trace anomaly) has a universal dependence on the action, being given by the value of
the action evaluated for the ads solution. this allows us to calculate this particular trace
anomaly for a general bulk action. the universal structure we nd has general features
reminiscent of the descent equations for the axial anomaly and probably has implications
for the general understanding of the structure of trace anomalies, independent of the
ads/cft correspondence.

in section 2 we discuss the algebraic structure of the pbh transformation. in section
3 we classify the terms in the eective action using the symmetry. the relation between
the terms in the eective action and trace anomalies and a general formula for the type
a trace anomaly are discussed in section 4. the general conclusions we have reached and
possible implications and open questions are discussed in the last section.

most of the results of this paper were already presented at strings 99 [7].

1

2. the pbh transformation

consider a manifold in d + 1 dimensions with a boundary which is topologically sd.
following feerman and graham [8], one can choose a set of coordinates in which the

d + 1 dimensional metric has the form:

ds2 = g dx dx  =

l2

 (cid:19)2
4 (cid:18) d

+

1


gij(x, )dxidxj .

(2.1)

here ,  = 1, . . . , d + 1 and i, j = 1, . . . , d. the coordinates are chosen such that  = 0

corresponds to the boundary. we will assume that gij is regular at  = 0, gij(x,  = 0)
being the boundary metric.

we now look for those (d + 1)-dimensional dieomorphisms which leave the form of the

metric invariant. we make the ansatz

 = e2(x)  (1  2(x)) ,
xi = xi + ai(x, ) .

(2.2)

the ai(x, ) are innitesimal, and are restricted by the requirement of form invariance of
the metric. we will work to o(, ai). we insert (2.2) in (2.1) and require that the dxd
components of the metric vanish. this gives

ai =

l2
2

gijj .

with the boundary condition ai(x,  = 0) = 0 this integrates to

ai(x, ) =

l2

2 z 

0

dgij(x, )j(x) .

(2.3)

(2.4)

performing the dieomorphism dened by (2.2), gij will generally transform:

gij(x, ) = 2(1  )gij(x, ) + iaj(x, ) + jai(x, ) .

(2.5)

the covariant derivatives are with respect to the metric gij(x, ) where  is considered a
parameter.

the equations (2.2), (2.4), (2.5), dene the bph transformation, i.e. a subgroup of bulk

dieomorphisms which leave the metric in the form (2.1) and which on the boundary

reduce to a weyl transformation.

2

we assume that ai(x, ) and gij(x, ) have power series expansions in the vicinity of

 = 0, i.e. we write

and

ai(x, ) =



xn=1

ai
(n)(x)n

gij(x, ) =



xn=0

g(n)ij(x)n .

(2.6)

(2.7)

for a general bulk metric the coecients in the expansion are arbitrary. if however, the
metric is the solution of an equation of motion, the coecients of the expansion are all
expressible in terms of the boundary metric g(0)ij . this result was proven by feerman and
graham for the equation of motion following from the einstein action with cosmological
term; we will assume that it holds for any action which admits an ads solution. for d
an even integer, the expansion for g has also logarithmic terms. using dimensional reg-
ularization (i.e. d non-integer) these terms are absent in the feermangraham case; we
assume that this feature holds also for the general case. the coecients in the expansion
of gij(x, ) are covariant tensors built from the boundary metric g(0)ij(x) = gij(x,  = 0),
since general covariance in d dimensions is explicitly kept. moreover by a simple scaling
argument g(n) contains 2n derivatives with respect to the x variables. the pbh trans-
formation implies that the behavior of g(n) under a weyl transformation of the boundary
metric is known. this determines to a great extent the expressions of g(n) in terms of
covariant tensors built of g(0)ij. we perform now the calculation outlined above.

we rst express the a(n) in terms of the g(n). the rst few terms are

ai
(1) =

l2
2

gij
(0)j ,

l2
4

gij
(1)j ,

(2.8)

ai
(2) = 
l2
ai
(3) =

ai
(4) =

(1)g(1)k

l2

6 (cid:2)gik
8 (cid:2)gij

(3) + gik

(2)(cid:3)j ,

j  gij
(1)g(2)k

j + gik

(2)g(1)k

i

j  g(1)

k

kg(1)

lglj
(1)(cid:3)j .

the variations of g(n) under a weyl transformation of g(0)ij are easily obtained by com-
bining (2.2), (2.8) and (2.5) with the expansion (2.7). we give again just the rst few
terms:

g(0)ij = 2g(0)ij ,

(0)

(0)

g(1)ij =

i a(1)j+

j a(1)i ,

g(2)ij = 2g(2)ij + ak

(1)

(0)

k g(1)ij+

(0)

i a(2)j+

(0)

j a(2)i + g(1)ik

3

(0)

j ak

(1) + g(1)jk

(0)

i ak
(1) .
(2.9)

the covariant derivative
the rst two non-trivial terms in the expansion (2.7) we nd

i is w.r.t. g(0). these equations can be integrated w.r.t. . for

(0)

g(1)ij =

l2

d  2hrij 

1

2(d  1)

rg(0)iji ,

g(2)ij = c1l4cijklc ijklg(0)ij + c2l4ciklmcj
1

l4

1

klm

+



+

1

4(d  2)2rij 

d  4n
2(d  2)
4(d  2)2 rklrklg(0)ij 

8(d  1)ijr +
d  4
2(d  2)2 ri
16(d  1)2(d  2)2 r2g(0)ijo .

rklrikjl +

krjk +

3d

1

1

(d  1)(d  2)2 rrij

1

8(d  1)(d  2)2rg(0)ij

(2.10)

here the curvature r, the weyltensor in d dimensions c and the covariant derivative 
are all those of the boundary metric g(0).1

starting from g(2), there are solutions to the homogeneous equations, i.e. curvature in-
variants which transform homogeneously under weyl transformations. e.g. for g(2) there
are two free parameters. of course we have complete agreement with the explicit calcula-
tion of ref.[3].

we stress that the above expressions do not assume any specic form of the action. the
dependence on the action enters only through the arbitrary coecients of the homoge-
neous terms. our goal will be to extract the universal (i.e. independent on the arbitrary
coecients) information about the trace anomalies.

3. the pbh transformation and the eective boundary action

we study now the implications of the symmetry dened above for a general gravitational

action s which is invariant under d + 1 dimensional dieomorphisms:

s =

1
22

d+1 z dd+1xgf (r(g)) ,

(3.1)

where f is a local function of the curvature and its covariant derivatives. for the application
we have in mind, we must choose f (r) such that adsd+1 with radius l is a solution of the
equations of motion. if we insert (2.1) into (3.1) we get an expression of the form

22

d+1s =

l

2 z d ddx  d

2

1qg(0)(x)b(x, ) ,

(3.2)

1 we use the following curvature conventions: [i, j]vk = rijk

lvl and rij = rikj

k.

4

where the specic form of b(x, ) does depend on f (r).

since the integrand is a scalar under dieomorphisms, the action satises

22

d+1s =

l

2 z d ddx  d

2

1qg(0)(x) b(x, ) =

l

2 z d ddx  d

2

1qg 

(0)(x) b(x, ) .

(3.3)

on a solution of the equation of motion b(x, ) becomes a functional of g(0) and therefore

using (3.3) for the dieomorphisms (2.2) we obtain its behavior under a weyl transforma-

tion:

b(x, ) = b(x, )  b(x, ) = 2(x)  b(x, )+

(0)

i (cid:0)b(x, )ai(x, )(cid:1) .

(3.4)

using the explicit expression (2.8), it is now straightforward to show that b(x, ) satises

the wz consistency condition:

z ddxg(0) (12 b  21 b) = 0 .

(3.5)

we will see below that b(x, ) may be considered as a generating function for weyl anom-

alies in all (even) dimensions.

in order to use explicitly the weyl transformation properties we expand the generating

function b(x, ) in a power series in :

b(x, ) =



xn=0

bn(x)n .

(3.6)

using (3.6) the  integrations can be explicitly performed and the boundary action s

expressed in terms of the bn:

2
d+1s =



xn=0

l

2n  d z ddxqg(0)(x)bn(x) .

(3.7)

for a b(x, ) evaluated on a solution g(x, ) the coecients bn(x) become scalar local

functionals of g(0). the bph transformation (3.4) gives the transformation of bn(x) under

a weyl transformation:

bn = 2nbn + i(cid:16)

n1

xm=0

bmai

(nm)(cid:17) .

(3.8)

5

explicitly, for the rst few coecients, we nd

b0 = 0 ,

b1 = 2b1 +

b2 = 4b2 

l2
2

b0  ,

b0l4

4(d  2) (cid:20)rijij 

1
2

r (cid:21) .

(3.9)

b3, which is a rather unwieldy expression, contains the two arbitrary parameters c1 and
c2 in g(2)ij.

the weyl variation determines to a certain extent the dependence of bn(x) on g(0). we
will argue in the next section that local expressions for bn which satisfy (3.9) can always
be found. we give here again only the rst few explicit expressions:

b0 = const ,
l2

b1 = b0

4(d  1)
l4b0

b2 =

32(d  2)(d  3)

e4 + cl4cijklc ijkl ,

r ,

(3.10)

where as before cijkl is the weyl-tensor corresponding to g(0) in d dimensions and e2n is
the euler density, which is dened in d = 2n dimensions as

e2n =

1
2n ri1j1k1l1    rinjnknln i1j1i2j2...injn k1l1...knln .

(3.11)

once the product of the epsilon-tensors has been expressed in terms of products of the
metric, this expression makes sense in any dimension.

again, starting from the second coecient b2 there is an increasing number of solutions to
the homogeneous equations which enter with free parameters. these arbitrary coecients
and those appearing in the integration of g(n) will appear in the expressions for b(n) for
n > 2. 2 in the next section we will discuss the various constraints on these coecients
following from their relation to trace anomalies.

the coecients bn depend on the action through the constant b0 and through the con-
stants which enter through the solutions to the homogeneous equations. for b0 we can
obtain a general formula. indeed, if we write the action (3.1) in the form

22

d+1s = z d ddxgf (r(g)) =

l

2 z d ddx d

2

1gf (r(g))

(3.12)

2 for instance, the homogeneous equation b3 = 6b3 has three solutions.
depends on the two parameters already present in the inhomogeneous piece of b3.

in addition, b3

6

then

b0 = lf (r)|=0 = lf (ads) ,

(3.13)

where in the last expression f is to be evaluated at the action of adsd+1 space with

r =

1
l2 (gg  gg) .

(3.14)

to see this one simply has to realize that gf (r) has an expansion in positive powers
of  and that only the most singular (in ) contributions of r contribute to b0. it is
straightforward to show that this contribution is as given in (3.14).

we see, therefore, that the eective action of the boundary metric has a structure

determined to a large extent by the action of the weyl transformations which at their

turn are xed by the pbh transformation. the specic form of the bulk action manifests
itself through a set of constants: b0 which has the universal structure given by (3.13) and
the coecients of the terms involving the weyl tensors in (3.8) and (3.10).

we remark that the general expressions (3.10), being based on symmetry considerations,
dont assume that the action which gives the equation of motion which determines gij(x, )
and the action which determines b should be the same, provided both are dieoinvariant.
the explicit expression (3.13) for b0 needs of course the identity of the two actions.

in the next section we will exploit the relation between the eective action and trace

anomalies in order to constrain the ambiguities on one hand and to extract universal

properties of the trace anomalies from the eective action, on the other.

4. trace anomalies and the eective action

we start this section with a brief summary of the general structure of trace anomalies,

c.f. [9],[10],[11], and the appearance of trace anomalies in boundary actions [3].

the trace anomalies can be characterized by the anomalous weyl variation of a dieoin-

variant eective action depending on a metric in d = 2n dimensions. this action reects

the properties of a conformally invariant matter theory and it is obtained, in principle, by

coupling the matter to a classical background metric and integrating the matter elds out.

in general the eective action is a nonlocal functional of the metric. its weyl variation,

however, representing an anomaly is necessarily local. the second variation of the action,

i.e. the rst variation of the anomaly, is a symmetric functional of the two innitesimal

7

weyl parameters. this integrability condition is the wess -zumino condition the anomaly

must satisfy.

the above stated structure oers a general classication of trace anomalies in any even

dimension :

a) there is always the type a anomaly whose expression is the euler characteristic in the

respective dimension. this type doesnt reect any real logarithmic ultraviolet divergence.

in dimensional regularization however, out of the term in the eective action giving rise
to it, a piece having a simple pole in 2n  d multiplying the euler characteristic, can be
separated, giving a clear signature for this type of anomaly.

b) there is an increasing (with dimension) number of type b anomalies: they originate

in true logarithmic divergences in correlators of lower order than the anomalous ones.

their signature is an expression which is exactly weyl invariant. the simplest way to

construct weyl invariant expressions is through the contraction of weyl tensors but there

are invariants starting with covariant derivatives of weyl tensors, etc.

in dimensional

regularization, these terms appear directly in the eective action multiplying poles in
2n  d.

in addition there are cohomologically trivial local expressions, i.e. obtained by weyl

variations of local, weyl non-invariant, pieces in the eective action. these terms, repre-

senting arbitrary real parts (subtraction constants) in the underlying matter theory, cannot

contain any dynamical information and their explicit form depends on the regularization

chosen.

going now back to (3.7) we observe that bn appears multiplying a pole in 2nd: therefore
bn is a trace anomaly in d = 2n dimensions, i.e. it could be expanded as a linear combination
of a type a, the type b appropriate to the dimension and cohomologically trivial terms.

indeed, as mentioned in the previous section, the bns satisfy the wz condition, eq.(3.5).

a rst conclusion we could reach is that eq.(3.8) always have a solution in terms of local

expressions which are linear combinations of type a, type b and cohomologically trivial.

of course this puts constraints on the terms which could appear on the r.h.s. of (3.8).

we will be more interested, however, in the way we could extract universal information

about trace anomalies from the eective action. the anomaly of type a is a clear candidate

for this type of information. indeed, as we remarked before, terms involving contractions
of weyl tensors (i.e. type b) appear with arbitrary coecients in bn; therefore we couldnt
expect any simple, general expression for type b.

8

in order to isolate the general expression we are looking for in type a, we use the

following simple observation: an exactly weyl invariant expression vanishes identically for

a metric which is conformally at, i.e. which has the form:

g(0)ij = exp(2)ij .

(4.1)

therefore the terms with arbitrary coecients in the various recursion relations (the

homogeneous terms) will disappear. as a consequence, the unambiguous solution of the

equations for a metric of the form (4.1) will give us the information about the surviving

type a anomaly.

we will expand the solutions in powers of  dened in (4.1). in particular the euler

characteristic in d = 2n starts with the n-th power of :

e2n 

1
2n ri1j1k1l1 . . . rinjnknln i1j1...injn k1l1...knln

= n! 2n (i1 j1 )    (in jn )i1...in

j1...jn + o(n+1) .

(4.2)

now, our main problem is to isolate the contribution of the type a anomaly (proportional

to the euler characteristic) from the cohomologically trivial pieces. we rewrite the basic

recursive relation (3.8) in an integrated form by multiplying it with an innitesimal weyl
parameter 1 the variation being with a new weyl parameter 2:

z ddxqg(0)(x) 12bn = 2nz ddxqg(0)(x) 12bn z ddxqg(0)(x)i1

n1

xm=0

bmai

(nm) ,

(4.3)
where ai contains 2. for a metric of the form (4.1) and expanding in powers of  it is
easy to see that bn starts with a term containing n powers of  and that ai starts with
terms as follows:

ai
(1) =

l2
2

ai
(2) = 
l6
ai
(3) =
8

i + o() ,
l4
(ij)j + o(2) ,
4
(ik)(kj)j + o(3) .

(4.4)

using induction it is straightforward to prove that (4.4) generalizes as expected, i.e. that

the term of order n has the form:

ai

(n) = ()n+1 l2n

2n [(2)n1]ij j + o(n) .

(4.5)

9

now, in an expansion in  of bn the cohomologically trivial pieces come from the weyl
variation of a local expression containing n+1 powers of . the variation replaces each eld
 at its turn by 1. as a consequence the result will be symmetric under the interchange of
each  with 1. the euler characteristic multiplied with 1 doesnt share this symmetry
property. therefore, if we antisymmetrize eq.(4.3), i.e. if from the equation multiplied
with n we subtract n terms where 1 was interchanged with each factor  and with 2
respectively, we will be left on the l.h.s. with the contribution of the euler term only. 3

we can now specialize even further and pick one particular term in the euler character-
istic e.g. the contribution n!2n( )n. this term will give a contribution 1 2( )n1
to the integrand of the l.h.s. of (4.3), antisymmetrized of course, and with a numerical
coecient following from our normalizations.

we can try to match this term with terms on the r.h.s. of (4.3). from the explicit
form of ai we see that all terms on the r.h.s. except the last, (n  1)  th one in the sum,
. in the last term however, we
will have two partial derivatives not contracted into a
have after a partial integration a contribution to the integrand of the form: 1 2bn1
antisymmetrized. again the antisymmetrization projects out from bn1 all contributions
but the euler one in (n1)th order in . in particular the ( )n1 contribution to e2(n1)
matches nicely the l.h.s.

we obtained, therefore a recursion relation between the euler contributions alone, in
dierent orders. reintroducing the numerical factors we left out in the previous argument
the recursion can be easily solved and we obtain for the euler contribution the general
formula:

bn =

l2nb0
22n(n!)2 e2n+cohomologically trivial terms .

(4.6)

using the expression (3.13) for b0 evaluated for d = 2n we have now a general formula for
the type a trace anomaly in any even dimension corresponding to a given gravity action
which admits an ads solution. we have to think about the gravity action given abstractly
as a polynomial in the curvature without specifying the dimension. the specic form of
the action enters in determining the radius of the ads solution and then in the evaluation
of the action on the solution, to give b0. all the factors depending on the dimension d = 2n
in the expression for the coecient of the type a anomaly are then explicit.

as we remarked already in the previous section the symmetry considerations do not
require that the action which determines g and the one which determines b should be
the same. the universal dependence on the dimension appears, however, only if the two
actions are identied.

3 the term with 1 interchanged with 2 automatically cancels the original term, this being the
content of the wz condition; we could have left it out and changed the normalization to n  1

10

5. discussion

through the pbh argument the weyl transformations of the eective boundary theory
can be understood to follow from the dieomorphisms of the bulk theory. the dependence

on the odd variable  in the bulk gets translated into the dependence on the dimension,
b(x, ) playing the role of a generating function for the type a trace anomalies in various
dimensions.

the nal result is very similar in spirit to the elliptic genus which gives, through the
descent equations, a unifying expression for the chiral anomaly in various dimensions.

the elliptic genus gives an expression for the chiral anomaly of gauge theories with chiral
fermions in various dimensions which have the same gauge group and representation con-
tent of the fermions. in this analogy there is, however, a part we really dont understand,

i.e. which is the common feature of the conformal eld theories in various dimensions
whose trace anomalies are represented by the same gravitational action. it is tempting

to conjecture that general properties like e.g.
the ow as measured by the anomaly
coecient, are common in these theories. this would suggest that the type a anomaly

coecient in d = 4 related to c in d = 2 gives the right generalization of the c-theorem as
rst proposed by cardy [12].

beginning with b3 the euler characteristic appears accompanied by cohomologically
trivial terms which are determined by the recursion relations. we dont understand the
physical signicance, if any, of these terms. more generally, it would be interesting to

study the exact mathematical structure of the cohomological equations (2.8), (2.9) and
(3.9).

finally, the special role the type a anomaly plays in the discussion suggests that it should

be singled out for the understanding of the non-leading 1/n corrections in the ads/cft
correspondence which are still not under control [13]. we postpone the discussion of this

problem to a later publication.

11

references

[1] o. aharony, s.s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri and y. oz, large n eld theories,

string theory and gravity, hep-th/9905111.

[2] e. witten, anti-de sitter space and holography, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998)

253, hep-th/9802150.

[3] m. henningson and k. skenderis, the holographic weyl anomaly, jhep 07 (1998)

023, hep-th/9806087.

[4] o. aharony, j. pawelczyk, s. theisen and s. yankielowicz, a note on anomalies in

the ads/cft correspondence, phys. rev. d60 (1999) 066001, hep-th/9901134.

[5] r. penrose and w. rindler, spinors and spacetime, vol 2, cup 1986, chapter 9.

[6] j.d. brown and m. henneaux, central charges in the canonical realization of
asymptotic symmetries: an example from three-dimensional gravity, commun.
math. phys. 104 (1986) 207.

[7] http://strings99.aei-potsdam.mpg.de/cgi-bin/viewit.cgi?speaker=theisen

[8] c. feerman and r. graham, conformal invariants, ast`erisque, hors serie, 1995,

p.95.

[9] l. bonora, p. pasti and m. bregola, weyl cocycles, class. quantum. grav. 3 (1986)

635.

[10] a. cappelli, d. friedan and j.i. latorre, c theorem and spectral representation,

nucl. phys. b352 (1991) 616.

[11] s. deser and a. schwimmer, geometric classication of conformal anomalies in ar-

bitrary dimensions, phys. lett. b309 (1993) 279, hep-th/9302047.

[12] j.l. cardy, is there a c theorem in four-dimensions?, phys. lett. b215 (1988)

749.

[13] s. nojiri and s.d. odintsov, on the conformal anomaly from higher derivative gravity
in ads/cft correspondence, hep-th/9903033; m. blau, k.s. narain and e. gava,
on subleading contributions to the ads/cft trace anomaly, jhep 09 (1999) 018
hep-th/9904179.

12

