nyu-th/99/08/01
tpi-minn-99/38-t
umn-th-1813/99
hep-th/9910050

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
6

 

 
 

1
v
0
5
0
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

d-walls and junctions in supersymmetric gluodynamics

in the large n limit

suggest the existence of heavy hadrons

gregory gabadadze1, mikhail shifman2

1department of physics, new york university, 4 washington place, new york,

2theoretical physics institute, university of minnesota, minneapolis, mn 55455

ny 10003

abstract

a number of arguments exists that the minimal bps wall width in large n
supersymmetric gluodynamics vanishes as 1/n. there is a certain tension between
this assertion and the fact that the mesons coupled to  have masses o(n 0). to
reconcile these facts we argue that there should exist additional soliton-like states
with masses scaling as n. the bps walls must be made predominantly of these
heavy states which are coupled to  stronger than the conventional mesons. the
tension of the bps wall junction scales as n 2, which serves as an additional argument
in favor of the 1/n scaling of the wall width. the heavy states can be thought of
as solitons of the corresponding closed string theory. they are related to certain
vebranes in the m-theory construction. we study the issue of the wall width in toy
models which capture some features of supersymmetric gluodynamics. we speculate
that the special hadrons with mass scaling as n should also exist in the large n
limit of non-supersymmetric gluodynamics.

1

1 introduction

supersymmetric gluodynamics is the simplest non-abelian supersymmetric (susy)
gauge theory which turns out hardest to handle. the only global symmetry in
this model (besides susy itself) is z2n discrete symmetry which is spontaneously
broken by the gluino condensate down to z2 (the gauge group here is assumed to
be su(n)). the lack of a continuous moduli space of vacua with a rich set of global
symmetries prevents one from studying the theory in the spirit of seiberg [1].

possible existence of the bps domain walls in susy gluodynamics [2, 3, 4] adds
a signicant, albeit indirect, information to a rather fragmentary knowledge of the
strong coupling dynamics of this theory. what is the most surprising property of
the bps walls?

it was argued in [5] that the width l of the minimal wall (i.e. the wall connect-
ing the neighboring vacua) must scale as 1/n in the large n limit. by the width
we mean the transverse dimension saturating the wall tension. at rst sight it is
natural to expect this dimension to be of order 1 rather than 1/n.
indeed, the
order parameter  is a source of particles with mass o(1), the gluinoballs. this
means that at large separations from the wall, z  1, the wall tails should fall
o as exp( z), implying that the wall width is o(1). (here and below the scale
parameter is denoted by .)
the conclusion that l  1/n was further supported in ref. [5] by constructing
the bps walls in a certain model for susy gluodynamics. one may wonder to
which extent this construction is model-independent. we rst summarize evidence
in favor of l  1/n. a new argument comes from a rather unexpected side. it was
pointed out recently that several walls can join together and form a wall junction
conguration preserving 1/4 of the original susy [6, 7] (see fig. 1). the models
considered in the literature previously are those of the wess-zumino type. we will
assume that the bps junctions with n minimal walls exist in su(n) supersymmetric
gluodynamics. then, the n dependence of the junction tension comes out natural
if l is assumed to be o(1/n); on the contrary, it is very hard to get the proper
junction tension under any other scaling law for l.
given that the bps wall width l  1/n one can raise a legitimate question how
this can possibly be explained in terms of the physical excitations of the theory. we
will argue that there should exist certain distinguished (soliton-like) excitations in
the theory with mass m  o(n). these excitations are coupled to  stronger that
the conventional mesons, so that the wall is made predominantly of these heavy
states. some arguments in favor of the existence of such states can be found within
the d-brane construction of susy gluodynamics due to witten [8], which also leads
to the conclusion, that l  1/n. we believe that this conclusion is general  as long
as the minimal wall is bps saturated, its width has to be o(n 1), which entails,
in turn, that matter of which it is (predominantly) built has mass o(n). various
simple toy models illustrate this assertion.
if one introduces the gluino mass, supersymmetry is broken. at small masses

2

1a.

1b.

figure 1: domain wall junctions

the breaking is small  we are pretty close to the supersymmetric picture. once the
gluino mass becomes larger than , the gluinos decouple, and we nd ourselves in
non-supersymmetric yang-mills theory. one can try to extrapolate in the gluino
mass, assuming that there is no phase transition. speculating along these lines,
we have to conclude that the m  n hadrons of a special nature must exist in
non-supersymmetric gluodynamics too. this conclusion can also be supported by
the d-brane construction in non-supersymmetric yang-mills theory where domain
walls can be continuously extrapolated to a certain wrapped d-brane.

the paper is organized as follows. in sec. 2 we briey summarize what is known
about the minimal bps wall width in susy gluodynamics. the n counting for the
bps junction is discussed. in sec. 3 we give a eld-theoretic argument in favor of
m  n (here m is the mass of the quantum of which the wall is built). in sec. 4
we identify possible (soliton-like) candidates for the building blocks of the minimal
walls within the d-brane construction. in sec. 5 we introduce a (susy violating)
gluino mass, and perform the extrapolation to large masses. this gives us a hint of
the existence of the m  n hadrons in the large n limit of non- supersymmetric
gluodynamics. we ameliorate these arguments by an evidence coming from the
d-brane construction. finally, sec. 6 is devoted to toy models. the bps wall
junctions are studied in this section as well.

2 why the minimal wall width must scale as 1/n

there are at least three dierent arguments supporting this conclusion. first, as
is well-known, a natural behavior of the volume energy density inside the wall is

3

1   n 2 (since there are n 2 degrees of freedom in the theory). then, the fact
that the bps wall tension is  n [2] implies that l  1/n [5]. this conclusion is
supported by the solutions found in [9] and [5].
the second argument is based on the d-brane construction [8], which also implies

that l  1/n (see sec. 4 for further details).
here we will focus on a new argument based on the wall junction [6, 7]. we will
assume that the bps saturated junction of n minimal walls exists in supersymmetric
gluodynamics. then, as was shown in ref. [10], the junction tension tjunction is

tjunction  i ak dxk  n 2 .

(1)

here a is the axial current of gluinos (which scales as n 2), and the integration
contour runs over the large circle in the plane perpendicular to the wall junction.
let us try to understand geometrically how this behavior could occur.

let us examine the spokes and the hub in fig. 1a. if the width of the spokes
is 1/n, and there are n of them, then the diameter of the hub is o(n 0). the area
of the hub is o(n 0) too. given that the volume energy density scales as n 2, we
naturally arrive at tjunction  n 2.
at the same time, if the width of the spokes is o(n 0), as was naively believed
before [5], the diameter of the hub is o(n) while the area of the hub is o(n 2). to
explain eq. (1) one must assume that the volume energy density inside the hub dif-
fers from the vacuum energy density by o(n 0), which is extremely counterintuitive.
although, the arguments listed above are qualitative and present only circum-
stantial evidence, taken together they seem compelling. we will accept that the
bps wall width l  1/n as a starting point. the conclusion of the existence of
heavy soliton-like hadrons with mass scaling as n will ensue [11].

3 suggestive arguments from field-theoretic

consideration

supersymmetric gluodynamics is a strongly coupled theory. this means that we have
no reliable tools for addressing the problem we are interested in at the quantitative
level. however, we can consider the issue at the qualitative level if, instead of susy
gluodynamics, we will deal with a simpler theory belonging to the same universality
class. the most natural choice seems to be sqcd with nf = n  1. if the matter
mass term is small, m  0, this is a weakly coupled theory (in the higgs phase). it
explicitly exhibits the zn structure of the vacuum state. the minimal bps walls
can be treated quasiclassically. we will show that their width shrinks with n as
1/n, while the mass of the quantum they are built of grows linearly with n.

1more accurately, one should speak of the dierence between the volume energy density inside

the wall and in the vacuum. the latter vanishes, however, in supersymmetric theories.

4

at the same time, since all matter elds are in the fundamental representation,
it seems reasonable to assume that there is no phase transition that would separate
the higgs phase at small m from the strongly coupled phase at large m. at large m
the matter elds decouple, and we return to susy gluodynamics. it is natural to
think that the interpolation is smooth in this transition. the eld with mass  n
comprising the wall at small coupling goes into a gluon/gluino soliton with mass
m  n in susy gluodynamics.
in more detail, the construction is as follows. one introduces nf chiral superelds
qf (f = 1, 2, ..., nf ) which are fundamentals of su(n) and nf chiral superelds qg
(g = 1, 2, ..., nf ) which are antifundamentals. here nf = n  1. we then introduce
the tree level superpotential

where

wtree = m

nf

xf =1

m f

f ,

f  qf qg
m g

(2)

(3)

are the moduli, and the mass term m is assumed to be very small and diagonal.
then the theory is fully higgsed [12]. a superpotential is generated on the moduli
space (via instantons) once the heavy elds are integrated out,

winst =

2n +1
detm

,

(4)

where  is a scale parameter of sqcd (it will drop out in what follows).

if the mass term is chosen as in eq. (2), the vacuum expectation values of the

moduli are diagonal too,

there are n solutions for v2,

hm g

fi = v2g
f .

(5)

v2 = |v2| exp  2ik

n ! ,

k = 1, 2, ..., n.

the absolute value of v2 is very large in the limit of small m. this explains why
the vector bosons and their superpartners are heavy and can be integrated out.
equation (5) implies that although there are n 2
f light moduli elds, the domain
walls occur only for the eld p
1 or
1  m 2
2 , etc., oscillate near zero; they do not experience the wall-type transition.
next, we combine eqs. (2) and (4), nd the stationary points of the superpoten-
f elds on the moduli
f is the interpolating eld is

tial to determine the vacua, and then nd the masses of all n 2

f  1 moduli elds, say m 2

space. the mass of the quantum for which p

nm; all other mass eigenvalues do not contain the n factor.

nf
f =1 m f

f . all other n 2

m 1

nf
f =1 m f

5

these works that the wall is built of the eld p

nf
f =1 m f

the minimal bps walls in this model were considered in ref.

[13]. although
the n dependence of the wall width was not explicitly discussed, one can infer from
f , and its width is (mn)1.
nf
f =1 m f
although other n 2
f
through eq. (4), they are not excited on the wall. this explains why there is no
wall broadening. the same phenomenon will be discussed in details in sec. 6.

f  1 genuinely light moduli do couple to the eld p

to avoid confusion, a remark is in order here concerning the relation between
the argument above and the results of ref. [13]. smilga and collaborators did nd a
phase transition in the matter mass parameter m. this is explained by the fact that
they were forced to deal with the taylor-veneziano-yankielowicz model on the large
m side, rather than with genuine sqcd. in the description of walls this model is not
adequate (in fact, it is inadequate both in the small and in the large m domains).
if m is small, and one retains only moduli, the corresponding eective theory is
an exact low-energy expansion, in the wilsonean sense. as such, it describes the
dynamics of the moduli in full. thus, when m is small, (more exactly, nm has
to be small) and the wall prole is broad, it is fully legitimate to use the eective
theory of the moduli to exhaustively describe the walls. as nm approaches , the
description of the walls in the eective theory of moduli becomes wrong. at this
point we must roll over from the theory of moduli to full sqcd. then, there will
be no phase transition in m. thus, the observation of this phase transition in ref.
[13] is the artifact of the approximation used.

4 suggestive arguments from d-branes

the aim of this section is to use the d-brane construction of the bps domain wall
[8] to study the origin of the states with the mass of order o(n). these states
should be responsible for the 1/n scaling of the domain wall width.
in the large n limit susy gluodynamics is expected to be described by a certain
non-critical closed string theory (let us call it tentatively the closed qcd string).
this theory is hard to formulate precisely. however, it is believed to lie in the
universality class of the theory obtained via d-brane construction [8]. excitations
of the closed qcd string should give rise to the colorless bound state spectrum
of susy gluodynamics. these are gluino-gluino, gluino-gluon and pure gluonic
bound states (including higher radial excitations). all these states have masses
of order o(1). moreover, they couple to each other with couplings suppressed by
powers of 1/n. this exhausts the perturbative part of the closed qcd string theory.
in addition, there should exist a nonperturbative sector of the closed qcd string
theory. in analogy with type iia, b strings, one might expect to nd point-like or
extended objects in the nonperturbative sector 2. these objects have little to do
with mesons and glueballs  they represent independent degrees of freedom of the
theory.

2 in the given context the reference to point-like objects means that their size is 1/n .

6

as a particular consequence of this fact, the bps domain walls in susy gluo-
dynamics manifest themselves as certain d-branes, on which the open qcd strings
can end [8]. notice, that (naively) the open strings are not expected in susy yang-
mills (sym) theory, since in this theory there are no fundamentals on which the
open strings could end. nevertheless, the open strings appear at nonperturbative
level, precisely as it happens in type iia, b critical closed string theories. as was
mentioned, these open strings terminate on the d-branes, i.e., on the bps domain
walls of the underlying sym theory [8] (see fig. 2). for these reasons, in what
follows let us call these bps walls d-walls. it seems clear that one could not nd a
d-wall in the theory where only mesons with masses o(1) are included.
the eective meson theory for the large n gluodynamics is believed to be the
theory of a closed qcd string (as opposed to the open string theory of conventional
qcd with quarks). what kind of new nonperturbative point-like objects exist in
the closed string theory? a point-like soliton of the closed string theory with the
mass of order o(n) reminds a zero-brane. unfortunately, the question whether the
qcd string has zero-branes is hard to study in the fundamental theory (since no
consistent string theory is known for this). what we could study instead is the theory
which is in the same universality class, and, which can be realized in a particular
d-brane construction [8]. we will argue below that the brane construction calls for
the inclusion of the states with mass o(n) in order to be able to describe the bps
domain walls.
consider two parallel bps walls at a certain distance from each other. one
can stretch between them one, two, and so on, open qcd strings. at the point
of each string-wall junction one observes a lump of energy which corresponds to an
object similar to a quark in the fundamental representation. this lump of energy
is localized on the wall. when the number of the qcd strings stretched between
the walls becomes equal to n, the lumps can fuse forming an object which is color
singlet, has mass m  n and reminds a baryon. since it is color singlet, there are no
reasons why it should be localized on the wall  it seems likely that it will propagate
in the bulk.

thus, we come to a conclusion that there might exist some new states in sym
theory which are neither mesons nor glueballs; nevertheless, they couple to the bps
domain wall.

in the eld-theoretic language one may recall that the baryons in conventional
qcd emerge as the skyrme solitons in the eective meson theory [14]. their masses
scale as o(n) in the large n limit, although the masses of the original mesons are
o(1) [15].
to reiterate the argument at a slightly more quantitative level we rst briey
review the construction of ref. [8]. following [16, 17, 8] we start with type iia string
theory. the brane setup is as follows. there is one neveu-schwarz (ns) vebrane
which spans the worldvolume (x0, x1, x2, x3, x4, x5) and which lives at the point
x6 = x7 = x8 = x9 = 0. another vebrane (called ns) with the worldvolume
(x0, x1, x2, x3, x7, x8) is separated form the ns vebrane at some distance s0 along

7

x6 (x6 = s0). there are n coincident d4-branes suspended between the vebranes
(see fig. 3). the worldvolume of these branes is in the (x0, x1, x2, x3, x6) part of
space-time. one denes v = x4 + ix5, w = x7 + ix8. this conguration is argued to
describe n = 1 sym theory without chiral multiplets at low energies. in the infrared
limit this eld theory lives in the (x0, x1, x2, x3) subspace. the gauge coupling of
this model is related to the string coupling constant, gs, as follows: g2
ym  gsls/s0,
where ls is the type iia string length. the model is studied by elevating the type
iia construction to m-theory. thus, one takes gs to be large so that the eleventh
dimension opens up 3 in the form of a circle s1 of radius r,

closed string
propagating in
the bulk

open string
terminating on
domain walls

figure 2: open strings are attached to domain walls.

r = gs ls .

(6)

in this case, the d4-branes discussed above are just the m-theory vebranes wrapped
on the circle s1. thus, all the branes in fig. 3 are the m-theory vebranes. all these
vebranes can be described as r4, where r4 stands for space of sym theory and
 is a complex riemann surface in a space with the following complex variables:
v, w and t  exp(s) = exp(r1(x6 + ix10)). from the d-brane construction

3 below, we will see that in the particular case at hand the coupling which eectively denes
the transition to m-theory is n gs instead of gs. this is related to a membrane which is wrapped
n times around the compact eleventh dimension.

8

described above one nds that the curve  is dened by the equations [8]

w = v1

wn =  n t1 ,

(7)

where  is some complex constant. the discrete zn transformations of susy gluo-
dynamics are realized as

w  exp(cid:18)i2

n (cid:19) w,

t  t,

v  v.

the qcd strings discussed above are identied in this picture with the boundary of
the m-theory membrane [8] which intersects the corresponding vebrane [18]. the

ns5

ns5

d4

.  .  .  .  .  .

figure 3: the d-brane setup.

m-theory membrane lives in r4  y  r, where y is a complex three-fold which
contains . one can consider a membrane which is a product of a onebrane in r4
and a onebrane in y . this membrane would look as a string to the four-dimensional
observer living in r4. using this construction one identies both the type iia and
qcd strings (more precisely the strings which are in the same universality class).
the type iia string, from the m-theory standpoint, would correspond to a membrane
wrapped on the eleventh-dimensional circle s1. this gives just conventional type
iia string in the double dimensional reduction of m-theory [19]. the tension of this
string in terms of the m-theory variables is

tiia 

r
l3
m

,

9

(8)

where, lm denotes the fundamental length of m-theory (inverse of the eleven-dimensional
planck scale).

using the relations between the m-theory parameters and type iia parameters,
s, as is expected for the fundamental

m = gsl3

r = gsls and l3
type iia string.

s, one nds that tiia  1/l2

let us now turn to the qcd strings; their existence is more subtle to see. con-
sider an open curve c in y parametrized by some parameter 0    1. one chooses
c in such a way that the endpoints of the curve are in  dened by eq. (7). picking
one particular c we determine a string in space-time. if there are n dierent curves
ck (k = 0, ..., n  1), they dene n strings. cks can be parametrized as follows:

v  exp(i2/n)exp(i2k/n),
w = v1 .

as a result, in this construction the qcd string tension is [8]

tqcd  ||1/2

nl3
m

.

(9)

(10)

since pn 1

k=0 exp(i2k/n) = 0, the boundaries of ck add up to zero. thus, n qcd
strings can join to create a closed loop in the complex v plane which, subsequently,
can be contracted with no obstruction, to a point. thus, the qcd strings determined
above can annihilate in groups of n [8].

let us now turn to the issue of how the bps domain walls of sym theory can
be seen in the d-brane construction. if the domain wall interpolates between x3 
 to x3  +, it can be described by a m-theory vebrane which interpolates
between the vebranes used to set the vacuum states at two ends. thus, one can
construct a domain wall as a vebrane with the worldvolume r3  s, where r3 is
just the wall worldvolume x0, x1, x2, and s is a certain three-surface embedded in
the m-theory space- time. when x3 approaches , s looks as r  , with 
being dened by w = v1, vn = t. when x3  +, s = r  , where  is
dened by w = exp(i2/n)v1, vn = t. thus, the brane interpolates between the
neighboring chirally asymmetric vacua of the model. the tension of this wall can
be also calculated [8], namely,

td 

r||
l6
m

.

(11)

the requirement for the wall dened by r3  s to be a bps state is equivalent
to the condition that s is a supersymmetric three-cycle [20]. given these walls, it
can be shown explicitly that the open qcd string which interpolates from v = v0 to
v = v0exp(i2/n) can actually terminate on the domain wall [8]. as a consequence,
there should exist some degrees of freedom on the wall, the open string endpoints,
which transform in the fundamental representation of the gauge group. these states

10

are not present in the lagrangian, but appear at the nonperturbative level in the
theory. since qcd strings can annihilate in groups of n, this indicates that n
copies of fundamental representation can form a singlet baryon [8]. the mass of
this state will scale as n.

could the properties of these states be understood within sym theory or in the
brane construction given above? in eld theory this would be a dicult task, since
it requires solution at strong coupling. one might hope that the problem is easier in
the brane construction. however, as we will argue below, the corresponding eective
string coupling is large in the regime we deal with. thus, the problem is equally
complicated. the qcd string tension is given in eq. (10). on the other hand,
tqcd  2. using these two expressions one nds

||  n 24l6

m .

(12)

moreover, the domain wall tension (11) must be proportional to n3 [2]. combining
this assertion with (11) and (12), we obtain

r 
finally, using the relation (6) we get

1

n

.

ngs 

1
ls

.

(13)

(14)

first of all, we see that the string coupling scales as gs  1/n in the large n
limit. moreover, since l1
s  , the combination ngs  1. this is the eective
coupling in the large n limit. it is turns out to be large. therefore, quantitative
studies are not feasible 4 (for more detailed discussions of these and related issues
see ref. [21]). nevertheless, we can draw certain qualitative conclusions.

the result most important for our purposes can be summarized as follows. the
qcd strings, as well as type iia strings, are described by the m-theory membranes.
a vebrane describes the domain wall of sym theory. the domain wall is a bps
state. this is guaranteed by the fact that the three-surface s in the domain wall
construction is a supersymmetric three-cycle. as we mentioned above, the presence
of this state in the theory is intrinsically related to the possibility of interpolation
between distinct vacuum states of the theory. therefore, if one is to describe the
d-walls using some order parameter eective lagrangian approach in the large
n limit, the heavy states should necessarily be included in consideration (despite

4 note that there is another reason why the brane construction cannot be used for quantitative
studies. in addition to the d0-branes of type iia, which decouple from sym theory, there are
kaluza-klein states of the membrane worldvolume elds which are wrapped n times on s1. the
masses of these states scale as 1/(n r)  ; they do not decouple from the sym degrees of freedom
[8]. that is why the model obtained in the d-brane construction is not sym theory per se, but
rather its close relative [8].

11

the fact that they are very heavy and, naively, should decouple). in other words,
all conventional mesons are perturbative excitations of the closed qcd string. if
one writes down an eective lagrangian including these elds only, one would not
be able to describe the bps domain walls. to get such walls we should necessarily
include a eld (or elds) with mass of order o(n). such a model lagrangian was
introduced in [22], and used in [5] to study the bps domain walls 5.
in sec. 6 we discuss simple toy models engineered for the purpose of studying
the problem of interaction of the d-walls and wall junctions with the light hadronic
states. before we proceed to these models, however, we will make a remark regarding
non-supersymmetric yang-mills theory.

5 large n (non-supersymmetric) gluodynamics

if supersymmetry is broken, the degeneracy of the vacuum states inherent to susy
gluodynamics is gone. gone with it are the (perfectly stable) walls. recently it was
argued, however [23, 24], that in the large n limit there exist innitely many qua-
sistable vacua [the decay rate of the false vacua was argued [24] to be suppressed
as exp(const n 4)]; the walls interpolating between them are quasistable. their life
time is exponentially large,   exp(const n 4). one may ask how the width of such
walls scales with n.
the arguments of ref. [23] were based on the d-brane picture; similar arguments
were presented in sec. 4. in ref. [24] a eld-theoretic approach was exploited. one
starts from supersymmetric gluodynamics, adds the gluino mass to break susy,
and then continuously interpolates from the limit of small masses where reliable
estimates are possible to the limit of large masses when gluinos decouple, and one
nds oneself in non-supersymmetric gluodynamics. if no phase transition happens
en route, then the qualitative dependences obtained in the small mass limit persist
in non-supersymmetric gluodynamics.

adopting the same approach and making the same assumption of no phase tran-
sition in the problem at hand, we arrive at the conclusion that in the large n limit
of non-supersymmetric gluodynamics the width of the (quasistable) domain walls
scales as l  (n)1. as in the supersymmetric case, this implies that the dominant
degrees of freedom comprising the wall have masses m  n. in other words, in
the large n limit there should exist some distinguished hadrons with mass scaling
as n in pure yang-mills theory.

one can supplement the eld-theoretic argument above by d-brane considera-
tions which point in the same direction: the wall width in (non-susy) gluodynam-
ics scales as 1/n. let us briey review this construction. one starts with type iia
string theory on r4  s1  r5. to obtain the low-energy gauge theory one puts n
d4-branes on top of each other. the d4-brane worldvolume is taken to be r4  s1.
the boundary conditions for fermions on s1 are chosen to be antiperiodic. as a

5the reasoning for introducing a new eld in [22] was based on symmetry arguments.

12

result, susy is broken on the worldvolume and the low-energy theory is nothing
but non-supersymmetric yang-mills theory with the gauge group u(n).

as follows from the results of refs. [25, 26, 27, 28], the large n behavior of the
su(n) part of this theory can be described by string theory on a certain background
x. the topology of x is r4  d  s4, where d is a two-dimensional disc. the
metric of x can be found explicitly [28]. we just emphasize here the feature which
is crucial for our discussion. the metric on x depends on a certain parameter, let
us call it . a (non-supersymmetric) gauge theory is expected to emerge [28] in the
limit   0. on the other hand, if   1, one expects supergravity to be a good
description of the string theory on x. thus, in order to use supergravity results for
studying the gauge theory, one has to assume that there is no phase transition in
. given this assumption, it is possible to identify an object in string theory which
corresponds to a domain wall separating a given pair of distinct vacua. this is a
d6-brane which is wrapped on the s4 factor of x [23]. as a result, one can easily
establish the large n scaling of the domain wall tension. the d6-brane tension is
proportional to  1/gsl7
s. the string coupling gs scales as 1/n. hence, the domain
wall tension should scale as  n. on the other hand, the volume energy density
generically scales as n 2. in order to make the surface energy (tension) of the domain
wall scale as n it is necessary to accept that its width is proportional to 1/n.

these arguments, combined with the eld-theoretic arguments based on extrap-
olation from the supersymmetric limit, reinforce each other and indicate that there
is no phase transition in the gluino mass. indeed, in the d-brane consideration one
assumes that there is no phase transition in the parameter  which, in general, has
nothing to do with the gluino mass.

we conclude that the scaling law for the non-supersymmetric walls is the same as
in the supersymmetric case, l  1/n. the consequence which immediately follows
is the existence of the solitonic glueballs which build the wall and have mass of
order n.

the question as to the nature of these hadrons remains open. as far as we know,
the wall-based consideration presented above presents the rst hint that such special
hadrons may exist; so far they have never been discussed in the literature.

6 modeling the zn vacua in the large n limit

as we discussed above, the vacua in susy gluodynamics are dened by the vac-
uum expectation value (vev) of the order parameter . the eective lagrangian
for this order parameter contains, generally speaking, an innite number of mas-
sive elds.
it is not known at present how to truncate self-consistently this la-
grangian. however, in the large n limit certain simplications are expected to
happen. namely, the couplings of all physical states in the eective lagrangian are
expected to be suppressed by powers of 1/n. thus, it seems that in the large n
limit one could concentrate on the part of the eective lagrangian which includes

13

 (and its susy partners) only.

in terms of the closed qcd string theory, this would correspond to a certain
truncated perturbative approximation to the string spectrum. however, as was
discussed in the previous sections, this is not enough for the description of the d-
walls of the model. as we established above, one should also include in the eective
lagrangian certain states (with mass of the order o(n)) which have something to
do with the zn structure of the ground state. let us study how this feature can
actually be realized. below we will work in the large n limit, to the leading order
in 1/n. in fact, one appropriate toy model has been already discussed in sec. 3.
here we dwell on some other toy models with the appropriate zn structure.

6.1 a model ascending to the veneziano-yankielowicz la-

grangian

the order parameter eective lagrangian can be written in terms of the chiral
supereld [29]

s  htr(ww )i = htr()i + . . .  hi + . . . ,

where s is regarded as a classical supereld and the matrix elements above are
dened in the presence of an appropriate coordinate- dependent background (su-
per)source. the eective superpotential reproducing all the anomalies of the model
is given by [29]

wv y = ns"ln n3

s ! + 1# .

(15)

as far as dynamics of a single supereld s is concerned, the superpotential (15) is
(locally) exact. the corresponding scalar potential describes the spontaneous chiral
symmetry breaking, with a nonzero gluino condensate 6 [29].

in terms of the closed qcd string theory, the expression (15) includes only a
single supereld of the closed qcd string perturbative spectrum. from this per-
spective it becomes clear that (15) should not be adequate for description of the
d-walls, since these require some nonperturbative stringy input as well.

from the eld-theoretical standpoint this is reected in the fact that the super-
potential (15) does not respect the zn discrete symmetry and should be modied
[30]. for the purpose of studying the vacuum structure per se, the modication
by a constant integer-valued lagrange multiplier is good enough [30]. however, to
describe the domain walls, a smoother modication is required [31]. this conclu-
sion is supported by extensive analysis [13, 32] of the domain walls emerging in the
kovner-shifman lagrangian per se.

6it also supports, for nonsingular kahler potentials, a chirally symmetric vacuum (the so-called

kovner-shifman vacuum), with the vanishing gluino condensate [30].

14

one possibility to deal with this problem is to introduce an additional supereld
x which would restore the zn invariance of the model [22]. from the physical point
of view, as we elucidated above, this would correspond to some eective parametriza-
tion of the zn structure and the properties of the d-walls. in general, it might be
more relevant to introduce more than a single supereld, let us say x1, x2, ..., to
parametrize the strong coupling dynamics of sym theory. a new superpotential
with multiple elds will be discussed in the next section.
in the present section
we concentrate on the case of a single supereld x in order to elucidate how the
construction works. the zn symmetric superpotential with s and x elds can
be regarded as the veneziano-yankielowicz superpotential (15) in which the scale
parameter 3 is promoted to some x dependent chiral supereld, 3n  3f (x)
[22]. then, dynamics of the x eld determines the phase of the gluino condensate.
the zn symmetric superpotential can be written as follows [22]:

wzn = ns"ln  3f (x)

s

! + 1# .

here the function f (x) can be presented as 7

f (x) = x exp" 1

n xn

cn(cid:18)x
n(cid:19)

nn# .

the following properties are required:

f (x vac

k  n exp(2ik/n) .

k ) = 0 , f (x vac

k ) = x vac

(16)

(17)

(18)

it is not dicult to see that the superpotential (16) respects the zn discrete sym-
metry (with the transformations s  s exp(2il/n), x  x exp(2il/n)). the
corresponding vacua are given by

svac = sk = 3x vac

k

, x vac = n exp(2ik/n) ,

k = 1, 2, . . . , n .

(19)

thus, the superpotential (16) can be used to describe the bps domain walls inter-
polating between two distinct chirally asymmetric vacua at large n. moreover, one
can argue that, for the purpose of description of the nearest-neighbor wall transition,
the superpotential (16) can be simplied further [5]. indeed, the following relation
holds for the vacuum state labeled by the phase k:

s|k = 3f (x)|k .

this relation is nothing but the denition of the gluino condensate with the phase
set by the vacuum value of the x supereld.

it is useful to introduce the chiral supereld s/f (x). in all vacua this supereld
takes the same value equal to 3. let us now concentrate on interpolation between

7for simplicity we use notations of [5] instead of those of [22].

15

a pair of the nearest-neighbor vacua. in this case the relative change in the gluino
bilinear is of order 1/n. hence, the chiral supereld s/f (x) can only deviate from
its vacuum value by a quantity of order 1/n. thus, we introduce the parametrization

s

f (x)

= 3 (cid:18)1 



n(cid:19) ,

(20)

with  being a new chiral supereld. substituting eq. (20) in the superpotential
(16), one nds

wzn = n3f (x)"1 

2

n 2 + o(cid:18) 1

n 3(cid:19)# .

(21)

the supereld  enters this superpotential in the subleading order in 1/n. thus,
it is the supereld x which should describe the domain walls between the adjacent
vacua in the large n limit. neglecting higher-order terms, the superpotential then
is given by

wzn = n3f (x) .

(22)

in addition, one should keep in mind that on a solution the s supereld is related
8 to the x supereld as follows:

s = 3f (x)(cid:16)1 + o(1/n 2)(cid:17).

(23)

the superpotential (22) can be further reduced to the landau-ginzburg superpo-
tential [5]

f (x) = x 

n +1

n

n + 1 (cid:18)x
n(cid:19)

.

(24)

for this expression, the bps domain wall solution, with the width l  1/n, can
be explicitly found [9, 5]. indeed, if one introduces a new variable   x/n, the
corresponding bps equation in the large n limit takes the form

this equation can be solved in the large n limit. introducing the notation

z = i (cid:16)1  n(cid:17) .

(25)

  (cid:18)1 



n(cid:19) ei /n ,

where  and  are two real functions of z with the boundary conditions () = 0
and  () = 0,  (+) = 2, one nds the solution [9],

cos( ) = (1  )exp(),

z (z)

(0)

dthexp(2t)  (1  t)2i

1

2 = n |z| .

(26)

8the subleading corrections in this expression are suppressed as 1/n 2 since the  eld vanishes

on the solution as 1/n [5].

16

the width of the wall is of order 1/n. in this case, the presence of the d-wall
in the theory is guaranteed by the presence of the eld x (which has mass o(n))
in the superpotential (22). in reality, however, there might exist some light states
with masses of order o(1), which would couple to x with couplings suppressed by
the 1/n factors. the s particle (or ) is the example of such a state. we would like
to study the impact of this state on the energy density and the width of the wall.

6.1.1 the energy density and the wall width

in this subsection we study how the presence of the s (or ) eld aects the energy
density and the width of the bps wall. let us make a step back and consider the
superpotential (16) before the eld s (or ) is eliminated. the tension of the wall
is the sum of the kinetic and potential energy contributions. the bps equations
guarantee that these two contributions are equal. therefore, we can study only the
potential energy. the expression for the energy density of the wall takes the form

e  z dz
xx  (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
g1

wzn

x (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

+ g1

xs 

wzn
x

zn

ss (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
s  + h.c.! + g1
w 

wzn

s (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2 
 .(27)

generically, the kahler potential is of order n 2. the elds s and x scale as n.
hence, the kahler metric is of order n 0 (more precisely, it cannot be larger than
n 0). on the other hand, the derivatives of the superpotential with respect to x
and s have a distinct large n behavior. indeed,

and,

wzn
s

= n ln  3f (x)

s

!  n 0 ,

wzn
x

= ns

f (x)
f (x)  n .

(28)

(29)

we observe a very special pattern here. the superpotential (16) scales as n 2,
while the s eld scales as n. nevertheless, the corresponding derivative scales as
n 0. this is a consequence of a very specic dependence of the superpotential on
the s supereld.

from these results we nd the contributions of each term in the energy (27).
the rst term scales as  n 2, the second and third terms scale as n (at most),
and the last term scales as n 0. all these terms are to be multiplied by the factor
1/n. the latter arises due to the integration over the wall width which scales as
1/n. summarizing, the bps wall tension scales as n, in accordance with [2]. the
dominant contribution to the tension is due to the heavy x supereld. the s
supereld can at most contribute to the tension at the level of n 0. this is negligible
in the large n limit. therefore, in the leading order of the large n expansion the

17

wall is made of the x eld. this is in full accord with the intuitive expectations, of
course.

having established this, let us analyze whether the interactions of the x super-
eld with the s (or ) eld can cause the wall broadening. as was mentioned before,
the mass of these states is of order n 0. if the walls were able to emit these states,
then the tails of the wall would behave as exp(z). this would indicate that the
wall has a nite width, of order 1/, due to the cloud of nite mass states emitted
by the wall. however, as we will show below, the wall in our model cannot emit a
nite number of light states in the large n limit.

this assertion is related to the fact that the corresponding couplings are sup-
pressed as 1/n. indeed, let us consider the interaction vertex of the x supereld
with the  eld (it is helpful to deal with  rather than s). this vertex is dened
as

vx  

2

x 

v (x, x , , )(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)vac

.

(30)

here v stands for the potential of the model. using the superpotential (21) we
nd that the vertex is proportional to the o-diagonal element of the inverse kahler
metric

.

(31)

for a generic form of the kahler potential, the large n scaling of this expression is
not known. however, in ref. [5] it was shown that the wall solution of the theory
with the superpotential (16) exists if and only if

vx   g1

x (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)vac

1
n

.

g1

x (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)solution 
x (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)vac  1/n .

g1

since the wall interpolates between the pair of distinct vacua, this implies that

(32)

therefore, the coupling of the  supereld to the wall is suppressed by the factor
1/n. as a result, the light states cannot be emitted by the wall in the large n limit.
the broadening of the wall will not happen, and the wall width will scale as 1/n.

6.1.2 domain wall junctions

it has been found recently that in some models with the zn symmetry the domain
walls can form the so-called wall junctions which can be bps-saturated (preserve
1/4 of susy) [6, 7] (see also [33]). such a conguration is depicted in fig. 1 where
we see that n domain walls join at some localized region of space. the intersection
of these walls forms a tube.

18

given that the model one deals with has domain walls, it is natural to look for
the junction type solution as well. let as assume that the x and y coordinates
parametrize the plane of fig. 1. introduce a complex variable

2  x + iy .

(note the unconventional normalization.) in terms of this variable the corresponding
bps equations for the junction take the form [4, 6, 7]

 x () =

wzn
x

.

(33)

using the superpotential (22), (24) we obtain the bps equation for the junction,

  = 1  n .

(34)

here, as above, we dened a new variable  = x/n. a possible constant phase in
the right-hand side of the bps equation is absorbed in  .

there are two possible solutions of the junction type in the large n limit. we
will consider them in turn. first, observe that if || < 1, the right-hand side of this
equation equals to unity in the large n limit. thus, the solution of the equation is

 = ,

for

|| < 1 .

(35)

if, on the other hand, || = 1 then the solution of eq. (34) is just a constant phase,
(36)

 = exp(ik) ,

k = 1, ..., n,

for

|| = 1 .

finally, if || > 1, the right-hand side of (34) tends to innity in the large n limit.
therefore, the solution of this kind does not exist.
summarizing, the solution we just found looks as the one presented in fig. 1a.
there is a cylindrical core of a unit radius in the center of the solution where  = .
there are domain wall lines joining the cylinder from the exterior of the core. the
value of the eld  between these walls is a constant phase exp(il), l = 1, 2, . . . , n,
which takes dierent values for dierent sectors of fig. 1a. notice that the value
of the x eld in the center of the solution (35) is zero. if so, in accordance with
(23), the value of the gluino condensate in this region vanishes too. thus, the
(hypothetical) chirally symmetric kovner-shifman phase [30] is realized within this
solution inside the string at the geometric axis of the wall junction solution. we
should also point out that the solution given by (35) and (37) is dened up to terms
which provide appropriate matching at the boundary circle and at the boundaries
of the sectors. the width of the region where the matching between (35) and (36)
should be performed vanishes in the large n limit and, therefore, these terms cannot
be controlled in our approximation. strictly speaking, the very fact of matching
remains an assumption.

19

let us now turn to the second solution. it is straightforward to check that the

following expression is the solution of eq. (34):

 = exp  i2k

n ! in the k-th sector,

k = 1, 2, ...., n.

(37)

this conguration describes the domain walls intersecting at the origin in the (x, y)
plane (see fig. 1b). the intersection is just a straight line perpendicular to the
(x, y) plane. dierent sectors between dierent walls are parametrized by the value
of the phase of the solution (37). below, at the end of this section, we will argue
that the two solutions presented above have the same energy in the limit of innite
n.

before we turn to this discussion, however, let us calculate the tension of the
tube which is formed at the intersection of the walls. this tension is dened by
circulation of the axial current along the big circle (call it ) enclosing the tube [10]

tjunction = z

aldxl .

(38)

in the model at hand a = in 2(  )/2. along the circle  the axial
current is a total derivative, a = n 2, where  is the phase which changes along
the circle . as a result, the expression for the tube tension is

tjunction = 2n 2 .

(39)

thus, the tension scales as n 2 in the large n limit. this is consistent with our
previous estimate (1) and with the the expectation that there should be no bps
strings in sym theory. the tension of the latter would scale 9 as n.

let us now go back and show that the two junction solutions described above,
although seemingly dierent, are both indeed bps states in the large n limit. both
of these solutions preserve 1/4 of susy and satisfy the bps equations. the only
dierence between them might be the energy of a conguration. however, simple
counting based on (39) and the expression for the bps domain wall tension tdw [2],
shows that the energies of the two congurations enclosed by a circle of the radius r
are equal to tdwnr + tjunction. they dier from one another only in the subleading
order of the 1/n expansion. this may be interpreted as follows. suppose we start
with the conguration of fig. 1b and consider the circle of a unit radius which
encloses the center. as the number of walls tend to innity, the angular separation
between the walls inside the circle tends to zero. thus, the interior of this circle will
look pretty much as the core in fig. 1a. hence, we have the same energy density
in the region enclosed by the circle. on the other hand, the angular separations
between the walls cannot be set equal to zero outside of the circle, since these walls
stretch out to the spatial innity along the radial directions.

9in the d-brane construction the tension of a bps d-string would scale as 1/gs  n . since
qcd strings annihilate in groups of n , they cannot possibly be bps saturated objects. the
theorem that in no non-abelian theory bps strings can exist at weak coupling is established in
ref. [10].

20

6.2 domain walls in a model with multiple elds

in the previous subsection we found that the width of the bps wall is not aected
by interactions with light gluinoballs as long as these interactions are suppressed
as 1/n. however, the story might be more complicated if there are open strings
ending on the walls. in this case the wall is a sort of d-brane for a non-critical sym
string. if these strings do exist, their lowest excitations have nothing to do with the
conventional bound states, glueballs and gluinoballs. instead, they might appear as
a result of the presence of d-walls. if so, the d-wall will be able to interact with
states of the open strings; this interaction should not necessarily be suppressed by
powers of 1/n.

the existence of the open strings cannot be rigorously established in susy
gluodynamics at present. nevertheless, assuming that this phenomenon takes place,
it is worth nding a toy model in which these features could be discussed. here
we present a prototype eld-theoretic model which has certain properties described
above.

the model is specied by allowing f in eqs. (16), (22) to be a function of n + 1

variables,

f = f ( x1, x2, . . . , xn +1) .

(40)

after the s eld is removed, as described in the previous section, the spectrum of
the model consists of n + 1 states. one of these states is heavy, with mass of order
n. the rest have nite masses. there is a bps wall solution in the model. the
wall is made of the heavy eld. the light elds vanish on the solution. the width
of the solution is of order 1/n, just like in the previous section. what is dierent is
that the interaction vertices of the wall with the light states are not suppressed by
1/n. nevertheless, the light degrees of freedom are not excited on the wall; there is
no broadening.

6.2.1 the prototype superpotential

here we study a zn symmetric model which contains one heavy state and a number
of light states. the model is written in terms of n + 1 elds denoted by xk, k =
1, 2, ..., n + 1. the zn symmetric superpotential of the model is (below we set
 = 1)

w = x1 + eix2 + ei2x3 + . . . + ein xn +1  n ei(n +1)i

n +1

yk=1

xk
n

.

(41)

this superpotential replaces eq. (22) after the s eld is eliminated and f is allowed
to be a function of n + 1 variables. here   2/n, and  denotes the theta angle.
one could have easily absorbed the factors exp(ik) in eq. (41) in the denition
of the elds xk. we keep them for reasons which need not concern us here. the
model (41) can be viewed as a simplied version of the model discussed in sec. 3.

21

the corresponding lagrangian is invariant under the simultaneous discrete zn

transformations of the elds xk, k = 1, 2, . . . , n + 1

xk  xk exp(cid:16)il(cid:17),

l = 1, 2, . . . , n.

(42)

in addition, there is a symmetry which permutes dierent xs among themselves.
a simplest pattern of these transformations can be written as follows:

xj  xj+1 exp(i),

j = 1, 2, . . . , n , xn +1  x1 .

for simplicity let us chose the kahler potential in the form

k =

1 x1 + x 

2 x2 + . . . + x 

1

n (cid:16)x 

n +1xn +1(cid:17) .

(43)

(44)

the reason why we introduce the overall factor 1/n will become clear shortly (es-
sentially, it is needed in order to make the kahler potential scale as n 2 on the
solution).

let us rst study the vacuum structure in this model. the vacua of the theory

are determined by the equations

x j = "ei(j1) 
w

1
xj

nei(n +1)i

n +1

yk=1

xk

n # = 0 ,

this system of equations implies that

j = 1, 2, ..., n + 1.

(45)

x1 = eix2 = ei2x3 = . . . = ein xn +1 = n ei(n +1)i

n +1

yk=1

xk
n

.

(46)

one nds as a solution

hxki = nexp i(k  1) 

i

n! ,

k = 1, 2, . . . , n + 1.

(47)

all other solutions of eq. (46) are related to the latter by the symmetry transfor-
mations. there are n dierent vacua in the theory described by the superpotential
(41), in full accordance with the (spontaneously broken) zn .

let us comment on the role of the theta angle. when the  parameter changes

the vacuum values of dierent elds transform into one another,

   + 2 ,

1  x vac
x vac

2  x vac

3  . . . x vac

n  x vac

1

, x vac

n +1  x vac

2

.

(48)

thus, the 2 shift of the theta parameter leads to a relabeling of the vacuum states,
precisely as it should be in pure sym theory (with massless gluinos and a nonzero

22

gluino condensate). after the role of the theta term is elucidated, we will set  = 0
for simplicity.

next, we turn to the task of nding the bps domain walls for the superpo-
tential (41). the bps equations for the minimal wall, interpolating between the
neighboring vacua m and m + 1 are

zx 

j = ei w

x j = ei"ei(j1) 

1
xj

n

n +1

yk=1

xk

n # ,

j = 1, 2, ....

(49)

1
n

where

and the following boundary conditions are implied

 = argw ,

xj()  hxjim , xj()  hxjim+1 .

in eq. (49) and below it is assumed for simplicity that n is even.

it is easy to see that the ansatz which goes through the system of equations (49)

is

x  x1 = x2ei = x3ei2 = . . . = xn +1ein .

(50)

on this ansatz one nds (introducing a new variable   x/n) that the system
reduces to a single equation,

(in the large n limit the phase  = /2 up to subleading terms).

z = i(cid:16)1  n(cid:17) ,

(51)

this latter equation is identical to (25) and can be solved in the large n limit,
as in eq. (26). therefore, expressions (50) and (26) dene the bps domain walls
of the model (41). the width of the wall is of order 1/n, in accordance with the
discussion in the previous sections.

it is interesting to understand what physical excitations make the wall. to
answer this question we must determine the mass eigenstates of the model at hand.
the elds xk in the superpotential (41) are not diagonal. indeed, the corresponding
n + 1 by n + 1 mass matrix of fermions has the form

mkj = n

2w

xkxj(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)vac

= (

0 if k = j ,

ei(kj) if k 6= j

(52)

where the mass matrix is evaluated at the vacuum where hx1/ni = 1; in all other
vacua the results are essentially the same. note that each entry in this matrix is
o(1). nevertheless, upon diagonalization we nd one eigenstate  call it y  with
mass n

y =

1

n + 1 (cid:16)x1 + eix2 + ei2x3 + . . . + ein xn +1(cid:17) .

(53)

23

other n states yl, l = 1, 2, . . . , n can be expressed in terms of xs in a simple

way, they have the same form as the diagonal generators of su(n), e.g.

y1 =

1

2 (cid:16)x1  eix2(cid:17) ,

y2 =

1

6 (cid:16)x1 + eix2  2ei2x3(cid:17) ,

(54)

and so on. they all have mass 1, i.e. are light.

6.2.2 why the broadening of the wall does not take place

in this subsection we argue that although the wall interacts with the light states
with unsuppressed couplings, nevertheless the broadening of the wall width does not
take place.

it is important to note that all light states yl have the vanishing vevs in the
vacua of the theory. moreover, these elds are identically zero on the domain wall
solution dened by eqs. (50) and (26). the only eld which actually makes the
bps wall is the heavy state y. moreover, the superpotential, being expressed in
terms of y and yl, contains no terms linear in yl.
let us now briey discuss interactions of the heavy eld y with the light elds
yl. the expression for the interaction potential is rather cumbersome, so we merely
summarize below its basic features. in the superpotential there are vertices with
n  1 heavy elds and two light elds, n  2 heavy and three light, and so on. in
the large n limit the vertices have the structure

  yn!n 1 yln

yl
n

.

the kinetic term is

k =

y 

l yl
 .

1

n 
y y +

n

xl,=1

rescaling the elds to cast the kinetic term in the canonic form, one nds that, say,
the heavy-light-light vertex is not suppressed by powers of 1/n. the production
rate is proportional to the square of the amplitude multiplied by the inverse mass
of the decaying state. since the decaying state has the mass of order n, this rate is
going to be suppressed as 1/n

 


n

.

likewise, one can nd that the rates for the decays of the heavy state into arbitrary
number of light states are suppressed by the corresponding powers of 1/n. corre-
spondingly, the wall energy is completely saturated by the contribution of the heavy
eld y, the wall width l  1/n, and there is no broadening.

24

7 discussion and conclusions

the vacuum structure of susy gluodynamics is rich and complicated. essential
ingredients in exploring this structure are the bps domain walls and junctions.
the theory is in the strong coupling regime. therefore, quantitative studies of
the fundamental model are not feasible.
instead, one is able to abstract certain
qualitative features from exact results based on supersymmetry and from d-brane
constructions.
it is also possible to model essential properties of the vacuum in
terms of eective lagrangians. these model lagrangians allow one to explore the
bps objects and to study the expected most salient features of the theory.

in particular, we argued that the minimal bps wall in susy gluodynamics has
width (n)1 and is made of the eld which is not present among conventional
mesons of the model. the mass of the relevant state scales as n.

the width of the bps wall scales as 1/n despite the fact that the order parameter
 interacts with the nite mass mesons. this property allows one to naturally
interpret the tension of the bps wall junction. which scales as n 2. the 1/n
scaling law for the width implies the existence of a hadronic state with mass  n
distinguished by its role in making the wall. we suggested speculative arguments
hinting that such hadrons can persist in non-supersymmetric ym theory in the large
n limit. if so, there emerges a challenging task to understand the nature of this
special glueball.

acknowledgments

the authors are grateful to gia dvali, sasha gorsky, dan kabat, zurab kaku-
shadze, andrei losev and arkady vainshtein for useful discussions. a part of this
work was done while the authors were visiting the aspen center for physics, within
the framework of the program phenomenology of superparticles and superbranes.
we are grateful to the aspen center for physics for the hospitality. the work
of g.g. was supported by the grant nsf phy-94-23002. the work of m.s. was
supported by doe under the grant number de-fg02-94er408.

references

[1] n. seiberg, exact results on the space of vacua of four-dimensional susy
gauge theories, phys. rev. d49, 6857 (1994) [hep-th/9402044]; k. intriliga-
tor and n. seiberg, phases of n=1 supersymmetric gauge theories in four-
dimensions, nucl. phys. b431, 551 (1994) [hep-th/9408155].

[2] g. dvali, m. shifman, dynamical compactication as a mechanism of spon-
taneous symmetry breaking, nucl. phys. b504, 127 (1997) [hep-th/9611213];
domain walls in strongly coupled theories, phys. lett. b396, 64 (1997)
[hep-th/9612128]; erratum b407, 452 (1997).

25

[3] a. kovner, m. shifman and a. smilga, domain walls in supersymmetric yang-

mills theories, phys. rev. d56, 7978 (1997) [hep-th/9706089].

[4] b. chibisov and m. shifman, bps-saturated walls in supersymmetric theo-
ries, phys. rev. d56, 7990 (1997) [hep-th/9706141]; erratum d58 (1998)
109901.

[5] g. dvali, g. gabadadze, z. kakushadze, bps domain walls in large n

supersymmetric qcd, hep-th/9901032; nucl. phys. b (to be published).

[6] g.w. gibbons, p.k. townsend, a bogomolnyi equation for intersecting do-

main walls, hep-th/9905196.

[7] s.m. carroll, s. hellerman, m. trodden, domain wall junctions are 1/4-bps

states, hep-th/9905217.

[8] e. witten, branes and the dynamics of qcd, nucl. phys. b507, 658 (1997)

[hep-th/9706109].

[9] g. dvali and z. kakushadze, large n domain walls as d-branes for n = 1

qcd string, nucl. phys. b537, 297 (1999) [hep-th/9807140].

[10] a. gorsky and m. shifman, more on the tensorial central charges in n
= 1 supersymmetric gauge theories (bps wall junctions and strings), hep-
th/9909015, submitted to prd.

[11] possible existence of soliton-like bound states in some of the models considered
by seiberg [1] and in connection with the thin walls was also advocated by
a. vainshtein, unpublished.

[12] i. aeck, m. dine and n. seiberg, dynamical supersymmetry breaking in
supersymmetric qcd, nucl. phys. b241, 493 (1984); dynamical supersym-
metry breaking in four-dimensions and its phenomenological implications,
nucl. phys. b256, 557 (1985).

[13] a.v. smilga, bps domain walls in supersymmetric qcd: higher unitary
groups, phys. rev. d58, 065005 (1998) [hep-th/9711032]; a.v. smilga, bps
and non-bps domain walls in supersymmetric qcd, in proc. third work-
shop on continuous advances in qcd, minneapolis, mn, april 1998, ed. a.v.
smilga (world scientic, singapore, 1998), p. 536 [hep-th/9807203].

[14] t.h.r. skyrme, a nonlinear field theory proc. roy. soc. lond. a260, 127

(1961);
g.s. adkins, ch. r. nappi, e. witten, static properties of nucleons in the
skyrme model, nucl. phys. b228, 552 (1983).

[15] e. witten, baryons in the 1/n expansion, nucl. phys. b160, 57 (1979).

26

[16] s. elitzur, a. giveon and d. kutasov, branes and n = 1 duality in string

theory, phys. lett. b400, 269 (1997) [hep-th/9702014].

[17] a. hanany and e. witten, type iib superstrings, bps monopoles, and three-
dimensional gauge dynamics, nucl. phys. b492, 152 (1997) [hep-th/9611230].

[18] a. strominger, open p-branes, phys. lett. b383, 44 (1996) [hep-
th/9512059]; p.k. townsend, d-branes from m-branes, phys. lett. b373,
68 (1996) [hep-th/9512062].

[19] m. du, supermembranes, hep-th/9611203.

[20] k. becker, m. becker and a. strominger, five-branes, membranes and non-

perturbative string theory, nucl. phys. b456, 130 (1995) [hep-th/9507158].

[21] a. hanany, m.j. strassler and a. zaaroni, connement and strings in

mqcd, nucl. phys. b513, 87 (1998) [hep-th/9707244].

[22] g. gabadadze, the discrete z2nc symmetry and eective superpotential in

susy gluodynamics, nucl. phys. b544, 650 (1999) [hep-th/9808005].

[23] e. witten, theta dependence in the large n limit of four-dimensional gauge

theories, phys. rev. lett. 81, 2862 (1998) [hep-th/9807109].

[24] m. shifman, domain walls and decay rate of the excited vacua in the large n

yang-mills theory, phys. rev. d59, 021501 (1999) [hep-th/9809184].

[25] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field theories and su-

pergravity, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 231 (1998) [hep-th/9711200].

[26] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from

non-critical string theory, phys. lett. b428, 105 (1998) [hep-th/9802109].

[27] e. witten, anti-de sitter space and holography, adv. theor. math. phys.

2, 253 (1998) [hep-th/9802150].

[28] e. witten, anti-de sitter space, thermal phase transitions, and connement
in gauge theories, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 505 (1998) [hep-th/9803131].

[29] g. veneziano, s. yankielowicz, an eective lagrangian for the pure n = 1

supersymmetric yang-mills theory, phys. lett. 113b, 231 (1982).

[30] a. kovner and m. shifman, chirally symmetric phase of supersymmetric glu-

odynamics, phys. rev. d56, 2396 (1997) [hep-th/9702174].

[31] i.i. kogan, a. kovner and m. shifman, more on supersymmetric domain
walls, n counting and glued potentials, phys. rev. d57, 5195 (1998) [hep-
th/9712046].

27

[32] a. smilga and a. veselov, complex bogomolnyi-prasad-sommereld domain
walls and phase transition in mass in supersymmetric qcd, phys. rev. lett.
79, 4529 (1997) [hep-th/9706217]; domain walls zoo in supersymmetric qcd,
nucl. phys. b515, 163 (1998) [hep-th/9710123]; a.v. smilga and a.i. veselov,
bps and non-bps domain walls in supersymmetric qcd with su(3) gauge
group, phys. lett. b428, 303 (1998) [hep-th/9801142];
b. de carlos and j.m. moreno, domain walls in supersymmetric qcd: from
weak to strong coupling, phys. rev. lett. 83, 2120 (1999) [hep-th/9905165].

[33] s.v. troitsky and m.b. voloshin, on intersection of domain walls in a super-

symmetric model, phys. lett. b449, 17 (1999) [hep-th/9812116].

28

