large extra dimensions and noncommutative geometry

in string theory

farhad ardalan 1

school of physics, ipm

p.o. box 19395-5531, tehran-iran

and

department of physics, sharif university

p.o. box 11365-9161, tehran-iran

abstract

the consequences of noncommutativity of space coordinates of string theory in

the proposed large extra dimension solution to the hierarchy problem are explored;

in particular the large dimension stabilization and the graviton reabsorption in the

brane are considered.

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
7

 

 
 

1
v
4
6
0
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1ardalan@theory.ipm.ac.ir

1

in ordinary quantum mechanics, space coordinates of a point or separate points com-

mute and can therefore be simultaneously measured. however, it has long been suspected

that in the realm where quantum eects of gravity become signicant, space coordinates

may not commute; and it has been considered ever since the inception of quantum me-

chanics.

it is only recently that a thorough mathematical theory of noncommutative geometry

has been developed [1], accommodating the simple notion of noncommuting coordinates,

the application of which to various aspects has been extensive [2]; the most signicant

application being to quantum gravity through string eld theory [3], and branes in string

theory [4]. the discovery of the noncommutative geometry of the branes in string the-

ory has spurred a urry of research activity in noncommutativity in string theory (see

reference 4 for a detailed review).

the appearance of noncommutativity in the presence of branes in string theory is

closely tied to the non vanishing expectation value of the ns-ns axionic two form eld b

with components along. when the eld b has non vanishing components on the d-brane,

the coordinates of the open strings attached to them and the coordinates along the d-

branes fail to commute. in certain limits of the theory where gravity is decoupled, this

noncommutativity results in appearance of a nontrivial gauge theory whose properties

have been under extensive study.

in a separate development, a novel solution to the problem of hierarchies between the
planck scale of 1019gev and the electroweak scale of about 1 tev, has been recently pro-

posed via the existence of submillimeter extra space dimensions beyond the three physical

space dimension of our universe [5]. in this scenario the extra dimensions acquire sub-

millimeter lengths and have dramatic consequences in both classical gravity experiments

and in future collider experiments. studies on the eects of these extra dimensions on

astrophysical and cosmological observables, in addition to the present data on classical

gravity and collider experiments, have yielded bounds on the scale and the number of

extra dimensions.

an outstanding problem in the proposed large extra dimension solution of the hier-

2

archy problem is the dynamical stabilization of the extra dimensions, for which certain

possibilities have been proposed. another problem that arises in the models of extra

dimension is the question of the graviton and other bulk elds reabsorption on the three

brane forming our world.in this letter consequences of the noncommutativity of space

coordinates of the branes on the scenario of large extra dimension is noted and its bearing

on the above two problems are discussed.

to begin with, following reference [4], note that noncommutativity in d-branes appear

as soon as a non zero constant kalb-ramond b eld is turned on: the world sheet action

of the open strings in the presence of the b eld

s =

1

4 z

(gijax iax j  2bijabux ibx j) + z

aix i

(1)

with  the string world sheet and gij, the metric of the target space, and a the gauge eld

at the end of the open string, leads to the mixed boundary condition along the d-brane:

the action (1) is invariant under two independent gauge transformations;

gijx j + 2bijtx j = 0

and

ai = i,

ai = i

b = d

(2)

(3)

(4)

quantizing the string with this boundary condition is in consistent with the usual

canonical commutation relations of the open string [6]. a consistent dirac quantization

forces some coordinates of the open strings to be noncommutative whose location de-

pend on the xing of the gauge invariance (4).in the particular gauge of da=0, the end

3

points of the open strings, i.e.

the coordinates of the brane along the brane, become

noncommutative;

where

[xi, xj] =

ij = 2(

in the simplest case of two dimensions

ij

i
2

1

g + 2b

)ij
anti

12 =

(2b)2

detg + (2b)2

1
b

(5)

(6)

(7)

where b = b12. we will soon explore the consequences of this noncommutativity of

the two space coordinates x1 and x2 along the brane in the context of the large extra

dimension proposal.

in the string theoretical version of the large extra dimension proposal our three di-

mensional space is a sub manifold of a brane on which, naturally, the gauge elds reside

and the other elds of the standard model of particle physics live. there are graviton

and other elds which propagate in the full nine dimensional bulk of the space of string

theory (or the ten dimensional space of m-theory). of these bulk elds the kalb-ramond

b eld plays an important role in our discussions. according to the analysis of ref. [5] the

gravitational strength in the four dimensional world is considerably reduced compared to

that of the bulk, provided the size r of the extra compact dimensions is suciently larger

than the string scale, i.e.,

m 2

pl = m 2

 (mr)n

(8)

here m is the string mass scale and mpl is the ordinary four dimensional planck

mass; n is the number of compact dimensions. correspondingly the coupling constant of
various interactions are reduced by the volume eect, (mr)n, compared to the bulk.

4

to explore the eect of the above mentioned noncommutativity (7) on the large extra

dimension proposal, let us consider the case of a 5-brane wrapped on a two torus with

coordinates x1 and x2. in order to conform with the large extra dimension scenario, the

coordinate x1 and x2 should be of the weak (string) scale so that the gauge elds and
other standard model elds are initially conned to the narrow 3-brane with the usual m 1



thickness [7]. the remaining three dimensional sub manifold of the 5-brane constitutes

our world. some or all of the other dimensions of the space are then compactied at

the large scale.this is a simple situation for which the phenomena of space coordinate

noncommutativity shows up, if we allow the b eld to have a non vanishing expectation

value along the x1 and x2 directions.

as a result of noncommutativity of x1 and x2, eq. (5), these coordinates can not be

simultaneously set to a certain value, e.g. zero, and the 3-brane of our world develops a

thickness along the extra dimension x1 and x2. as long as this thickness , is com-
parable to the string scale (weak scale) m 1
under certain conditions the size of the thickness  can be much larger than m 1

 , no new phenomenon is expected. however,

and



it will have drastic consequences on the phenomenological implications of the large extra

dimension scenario.

in analogy to the phase space noncommutativity of ordinary quantum mechanics,

where [x, p] = ih, the size of the thickness  will be proportional to 12. and from eq.

(7), it is easily seen that  can have as large a value as

max  max 

b
detg

(9)

in the usual large extra dimension scenario, b is simply the bulk decay constant of axion

and must be of the order m[5] and therefore

max 



m 1
detg

;

(10)

then for small volumes, detg, of the x1, x2 space, a large thickness develops, even though

we started from weak scale sizes for x1 and x2.

5

when the b eld has non zero component both along the 3-brane and connecting the

3-brane and the other directions of the 5-brane, there will be large corners of the moduli

space for which 12 and consequently , will be large.

the most immediate result of a large  will be an enhancement of the cross section for

reabsorption of the bulk elds such as gravitons, by the 3-brane. in the original discussion

of the cosmological consequences of the large extra dimension theory [5], there is a bound

on the reheating temperature t, due to over closure of the universe because of graviton

emission into the bulk. the bulk gravitons are partially reabsorbed by the three brane

and decay into two photons. the observed present decay photon ux then puts a bound

on t which falls far short of the temperature for the critical mass and can not account

for the dark matter. the solution envisaged in ref[5] is to allow for another, preferably

of a larger dimension brane on which gravitons may decay, which in turn will reduce the

branching ratio for the graviton decay on the 3-brane.

now when the noncommutativity of the coordinates x1 and x2 force the 3-brane to

be thick with a large volume, the gravitons will have a much shorter lifetime and the

reheating temperature will accordingly be lowered and the possibility of accounting for

dark matter will further rescind.

the noncommutativity of the coordinates orthogonal to the 3-brane of our world will

probably be most important for the stabilization of these coordinates. the point is that

during the cosmological evolution of the dimensions, there will be a minimum size, due

to the noncommutativity of the coordinates, in which the eective potential for the extra

dimensions will have a minimum. there are certain models for the stabilization of the

dimensions which are relevant in this context. one model [8], tailored for this purpose in

ve spacetime dimensions, achieves stabilization of the one extra dimension through use

of a bulk scalar eld (x, y). in this model the scalar bulk eld is added with a certain

potential of the generic form

v () = z qdetg(2

 2)2

(11)

6

and allowed to develop a non vanishing vacuum expectation value which depends on the

extra dimension. the integration over the extra dimension will result in an eective

potential for the parameters of v and g, which include the size of the extra dimension.

this procedure can be generalized for the case of more than one extra dimension, where

now the two parameters of scale in the two extra dimensions do not commute. the

minimum of the eective potential is then expected to be at a scale of .

in whatever manner the eective potential for the size of the extra dimensions is

generated, the noncommutativity of these coordinates presents a natural reason for the

existence of a minimum size of the order of  for the extra dimension. for example

in the asymmetric ination model of ref[9], where a potential v () is assumed for the

inaton eld , which is in turn identied with the extra dimension size the radion, again

the noncommutativity of the coordinates sets a lower bound on . moreover the moduli

problem which appear in this model, i.e. the large energy of the radion eld in the bulk,

is automatically less severe as the radion decay to the brane elds is enhanced due to the

increased thickness of the branes.

we hope to come back to a detailed study of these issues later.

acknowledgement

the author would like to thank h. arfaei and y. farzan for discussions.

7

references

[1] a. connes, noncommutative geometry, academic press (1994).

[2] j. c. varilly, an introduction to noncommutative geometry, physics/9709045.

[3] e. witten, noncommutative geometry and string field theory, nucl. phys. b268

(1986) 253.

[4] n. seiberg and e. witten, string theory and noncommutative geometry, hep-

th/9908142 and references there in;

[5] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopolous, and g. dvali, phys. lett. b429, 263 (1998); phys

rev d59, 086004 (1999). i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopolous, and g.

dvali, phys. lett b436, 257 (1998).

[6] f. ardalan, h. arfaei, and m.m. sheikh-jabbari, jhep 02, 016 (1999); and dirac

quantization of open strings and noncommutativity in branes, hep-th/9906161.

[7] a. hashimoto and i.r. klebanov, phys. lett. b381, 437 (1996); s.s. gubser, a.

hashimoto, i.r. klebanov and j.m. maldacena, nucl. phys. b472, 231 (1996), i.r.

klebanov and l. thorlacius, phys. lett b371, 51(1996); c. bochas, phys. lett. b374,

37 (1996)

[8] w. d. goldberger and m.b. wise hep-ph/9907447.

[9] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopolous, n. kaloper, and j. march-russell, hep-

ph/9903224.

8

