9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
7
1

 

 
 

1
v
1
3
1
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the century of the incomplete revolution:

searching for general relativistic quantum eld theory

contribution to the special issue 2000 of the journal of mathematical physics

physics department, university of pittsburgh, pittsburgh, pa 15260, usa;

centre de physique theorique, case 907, luminy, f-13288 marseille, france.

carlo rovelli

rovelli@pitt.edu

(february 1, 2008)

in fundamental physics, this has been the century of quantum mechanics and general relativity.
it has also been the century of the long search for a conceptual framework capable of embracing the
astonishing features of the world that have been revealed by these two rst pieces of a conceptual
revolution. i discuss the general requirements on the mathematics and some specic developments
towards the construction of such a framework. examples of covariant constructions of (simple)
generally relativistic quantum eld theories have been obtained as topological quantum eld theories,
in nonperturbative zero-dimensional string theory and its higher dimensional generalizations, and
as spin foam models. a canonical construction of a general relativistic quantum eld theory is
provided by loop quantum gravity. remarkably, all these diverse approaches have turn out to be
related, suggesting an intriguing general picture of general relativistic quantum physics.

i. new mathematics for fundamental physics

in fundamental physics, the rst part of the twentieth century has been characterized by two important steps towards
a major conceptual revolution: quantum mechanics and general relativity. each of these two theories has profoundly
modied some key part of our understanding of the physical world. quantum mechanics has changed what we mean
by matter and by causality and general relativity has changed what we mean by where and when. the last
part of the century has then been characterized by the search for a new synthesis: a unitary and comprehensive
conceptual framework, capable of replacing the newtonian framework and embracing the astonishing features of the
world that have been revealed by quantum mechanics and by general relativity. lacking a better expression, we can
loosely denote a theoretical framework capable of doing so as a background independent theory, or, more accurately,
general relativistic quantum eld theory.

the mathematics needed to construct such a theory must depart from the one employed in general relativity 
dierentiable manifolds and riemannian geometry to describe classical spacetime, as well as from the one employed
in conventional quantum eld theory algebras of local eld operators, fock spaces, gaussian measures . . .  to
describe quantum elds. indeed, the rst is incapable of accounting for the quantum features of spacetime; the second
is incapable of dealing with the absence of a xed background spatiotemporal structure. the new mathematics should
be capable to describe the quantum aspects of the geometry of spacetime. for instance, it should be able to describe
physical phenomena such as the quantum superposition of two distinct spacetime geometries, and it should provide
us with a physical understanding of quantum spacetime at the planck scale and of the foamy structure we strongly
suspect it to have.

here, i wish to emphasize that what we have learned in this century on the physical world with quantum mechanics
and general relativity represents a rich body of knowledge which strongly constraints the form of the general theory
we are searching. if we disregard one or the other of these constraints for too long, we just delay the confrontation with
the hard problems. for example, string theory has developed to a large extent disregarding the main physical lesson
of general relativity: as a result, string theorist are facing today the problem of searching a genuinely background
independent formulation, thus realizing that after so many years of research the structure of the fundamental theory
is still unknown.

in the rst part of this essay (section ii), i give a general discussion of the main physical lessons we have
learned from general relativity and from quantum eld theory, and on the consequent constraints on the general

1

form of the theory we are searching. in particular, i discuss the physical meaning and the theoretical implications of
dieomorphism invariance, and i stress the fact that common concepts such as poincare invariance, or the hamiltonian,
are weak eld limit concepts that loose their physical signicance when the gravitational eld is strong. they are
therefore unlikely to play any role in the fundamental theory.

in the second part of this essay (section iii), i illustrate some of the ideas and the lines of research aimed at
developing a general relativistic quantum eld theory. a well developed attempt to a rigorous construction of a
general relativistic quantum eld theory is loop quantum gravity, a hamiltonian quantization of general relativity.
loop quantum gravity has obtained remarkable physical results on the planck scale quantum structure of space. of
particular interest is the derivation of the discrete spectrum of the physical area a generic surface, and the physical
volume of a generic spatial region [1]. this result represents a set of detailed and in principle falsiable quantitative
physical predictions, it provides a physical interpretation for the spin network states, the basis states of the theory
[2], and gives us an intuitive picture of quantum spacetime.

on the side of covariant formalisms, several examples of generally covariant quantum eld theories have been
constructed. some of these are very simple theories with a nite number of degrees of freedom, such as the topological
quantum eld theories [3]. of particular relevance here are combinatorial state sum constructions of topological
quantum eld theories in three [4] and four [57] dimensions. nonperturbative string theories in zero-dimensions,
or 2d quantum gravity matrix models [8] represent another simple example in low dimension. matrix models have
been generalized to three and four dimensions, by boulatov [9] and by ooguri [6] in the form of 3d and 4d topological
quantum eld theories. there are several tentative formulations of quantum gr itself as a model of this kind [1114],
some of which are based on the fact that gr can be seen as a constrained form of bf theory, a topological eld
theory. all these theories can be represented as spin foam models: feynman sums over 2-complexes (branched
surfaces) carrying spins [10]. thus, spin foam models seem to represent a generic covariant formalism for general
relativistic quantum eld theory.

remarkably, canonical and covariant approaches are related. a spacetime manifestly covariant formulation of loop
quantum gravity can be obtained by expanding the operator that evolves the quantum states in the coordinate time,
`a la feynman. this yields precisely a spin foam model. the spin foam represents in this case the history of the
evolution of a spin network. thus, a surprising number of very dierent approaches converge towards a somewhat
unitary description of a general relativistic quantum eld theory. in this formulation, a spin foam provides an intuitive
picture of the foamy features of the quantum spacetime geometry.

here, i present only a brief view of some intriguing developments and their connections. for a more comprehensive
overview of current approaches to quantum gravity, see [15]. my main aim is to show that there is a eld of converging
ideas on the problem of constructing general relativistic quantum eld theory. hopefully, these idea will lead us to
a well dened nontrivial theory whose classical limit is general relativity; and thus to the conclusion of the beautiful
conceptual revolution opened at the beginning of the century by quantum mechanics and general relativity.

ii. why a general relativistic quantum field theory

a. the lesson of general relativity: dieomorphism invariance

general relativity (gr) is the present theory of the gravitational interaction.

it is a highly successful theory,
which in recent years has obtained spectacular empirical support binary pulsars period decay due to gravitational
radiation, discovery of black holes in the sky, . . . , has pervaded several branches of physics astrophysics, cosmology,
. . . , and has even found technological application in the global positioning system, a development unthinkable not
long ago.

however, gr is much more than just the theory of a specic physical force. indeed, gr is a theory of space and
time.
it has modied in depth our understanding of what space and time are, radically changing the newtonian
picture. this modication of the basic physical picture of the world does not refer to the gravitational interaction
alone. rather, it aects any physical theory. indeed, gr has taught us that the action of all physical systems must
be generally covariant, not just the action of the gravitational eld. thus, gr is a theory with a universal reach,
whose implications involve the redenition of our description of the whole of fundamental physics.

more in detail, gr has modied the physical meaning of the spacetime coordinates x that enter our basic descrip-
tion of the world (as argument of the elds, or position of fundamental physical objects such as particles, strings,

2

branes . . . ). in newtonian and special relativistic physics, the coordinates x describe the spacetime localization of
the events. events are thought to happen in spacetime. intuitively, spacetime can be thought as a stage over which
physics happens. concretely, the localization of an event is determined with respect to a physical reference system,
namely a set of physical objects chosen as spatiotemporal reference. for instance, the value in ~x = 0 and t = 0 of the
electric eld ~e(~x, t) represents a physical quantity that can be measured in a certain spacetime location determined
by a physical reference system.

if we take gr into account, this picture does not hold anymore, and the meaning of the coordinates x is altered.
in fact, in a general relativistic theory physical quantities that have a coordinate dependence are not gauge-invariant.
only quantities that do not depend on the coordinates may correspond to concretely physically observable quantities.
localization with respect to a background spacetime, or with respect to a xed external reference system, has no
meaning. what has physical meaning is only the relative localization of the dynamical objects of the theory (the
gravitational eld among them) with respect to one another. the physical picture of the world provided by gr is
not that of physical objects and elds over a spatiotemporal stage. rather, it is a more subtle picture of interacting
entities (elds and particles) for which spatiotemporal coincidences only, and not spacetime localization, have physical
signicance. once again, this modication of the meaning of the coordinates does not refer to the gravitational force
alone: it refers to our entire description of the world at the fundamental level.

at the classical (non quantum) level, this novel view of space and time is expressed by the use of physical theories
which are still dened over a spacetime dierential manifold m, but which are invariant under (active) dieomor-
phisms  : m  m of the spacetime manifold m into itself. the maps  form a group, denoted dif fm. more in
detail, one rst denes the elds  of the theory as if they were located over spacetime. that is, as functions over
the manifold  : m  f, where f is some eld-value space. similarly, the dynamics of a particle is described by the
worldline x : r  m of the particle in m. then, however, one chooses a dieomorphism invariant action functional

s[, xn] = s[(), (xn)],

   dif fm,

(1)

where  represents all the elds and xn, n = 1 . . . n represents n particless worldlines.
in (1), dif fm acts
geometrically on the space of the elds and of the particle trajectories. (it acts on the dynamical variables of the
theory only, not on xed nondynamical structures.). for instance, if  is a scalar eld, () =   , and, for the
particle worldline, (xn) =   xn.

one of the main results of twentieth centurys fundamental physics is that at the fundamental level the physical

world is described by theories with property (1).

property (1) implies that spacetime localization is relational, for the following reason. if (, xn) is a solution of
the equations of motion, then so is ((), (xn)). but  might be the identity for all coordinate times t before a
given t0 and dier from the identity for some t > t0. the value of a eld at a given point in m, or the position
of a particle in m, change under the active dieomorphism . if they were observable, determinism would be lost,
because equal initial data could evolve in physically distinguishable ways respecting the equations of motion. therefore
classical determinism forces us to interpret the invariance under dif fm as a gauge invariance: we must assume that
dieomorphic congurations are physically indistinguishable. that is

(, xn)  ((), (xn)),

(2)

where  means physically indistinguishable. a (classical) physical gauge invariant state of the system s is not described
by a eld conguration (or by the location of the particles), but rather by the equivalence class of eld congurations
(and particle locations), related by dieomorphisms.

the quantities that have physical meaning, namely that can be predicted by the theory once the state is known,
or whose measurement gives information on the state of the system, are di-invariant quantities, that is, functions q
of the dynamical variables  and x that satisfy

q[, xn] = q[(), (xn)],

   dif fm.

(3)

these quantities are the observables of a general relativistic theory. they do not have a dependence on the
coordinates x, and they are not functions on m. indeed, anything which depends on the coordinates x or is a
functions on m is gauge-noninvariant, and therefore does not represent a physical quantity. examples of di-invariant
quantities satisfying (3) are the earth-venus distance during the last solar eclipses, the number of pulses of a pulsar
in a binary system that reach the earth during one revolution of the system (that is, between two doppler maxima),

3

the energy deposited on a gravitational antenna by a gravitational wave pulse and, in fact, any signicative physical
quantity measured in general relativistic experimental or observational physics. for a more detailed discussion on
observability in gr, see [1618].

i will say that an observable quantity in a eld theory is weakly local if it is localized on the manifold, that is,
if it depends on the coordinates. i will say that it is weakly nonlocal is it doesnt. the adjective weak is to
distinguish this notion of locality from others employed in physics, such us spacelike commutativity of the quantum
elds or absence of nonlocal interactions. observables in a general relativistic theory are weakly nonlocal. on the
other hand, general relativistic observables are typically local in a weaker, relational, sense: for instance, the value
of the ricci scalar in the spacetime point in which two particles worldlines intersect is local in the sense that it is
localized in terms of physical degrees of freedom, the particles. i will say that observables of this type are relationally
local. typical gr observables are thus relationally local and weakly nonlocal.

in a general relativistic context, the spacetime manifold m, whose points are labeled by the coordinates x, is
thus nothing more than an auxiliary mathematical device for describing spatiotemporal relations between dynamical
objects. these relations are given by spatiotemporal coincidence, not by localization with respect to spacetime, or with
respect to external reference system objects. a displacement, or an arbitrary smooth deformation of all dynamical
objects over the manifold m is a change of mathematical description, not a change of physical state. coordinate
dependent quantities have no operational meaning. only quantities that do not depend on the coordinates have
physical meaning. localization over m has no physical meaning. only localization of the dynamical objects with
respect to one other has physical meaning. this is a deep change in the way physics treats localization. as we shall
see below, the eects of this change on quantum eld theory are considerable.

i conclude this section by briey discussing a few important theoretical notions whose meaning has to be slightly
generalized in order to make sense in a general relativistic context. in particular, i will mention the phase space, the
observable algebra and time.

the phase space  is commonly dened as the space of the initial data at some initial time, up to gauge invariance,
if any. in general, however,  admits a more covariant denition, as the space of the solutions of the equations of
motion, up to gauge. this denition makes sense in the general relativistic context. let c be the space of the solutions
of the equations of motion of a di invariant theory. dif fm acts on c. the phase space of the theory is

 =

c

dif fm

.

(4)

 carries a natural simplectic structure, determined by the action. concretely, this simplectic structure can be
computed using the conventional hamiltonian framework.1 however, it can also be directly computed in a covariant
fashion.

the physical observables of the theory, such as the examples mentioned above, satisfy eq.(3), or eq.(5), and are
thus real functions on . an observable, indeed, has a well dened value on every physical state s.2 in general, the
space of the smooth3 functions on a phase space , equipped with the poisson brackets determined by s simplectic
structure, is a noncommutative algebra acl, the classical observables poisson algebra. a physical state determines
(and can be identied with) a positive functional on the observable algebra

1in the hamiltonian framework, a solution of the equations of motion is coordinatized by its value on a (physically ctitious)
initial value adm hypersurface, and the quotient (4) is obtained by factoring away the gauge transformations generated by
the dirac, or adm constraints c . in this formalism, (3) becomes

{q, c } = 0.

(5)

an observable is a quantity having vanishing poisson brackets with the adm constraints.
2actually, observables of physical interest are often dened on portions of  only, that is, only for certain classes of physical
states.
3in general,  fails to be a manifold, due in particular to the dierent dimensionality of the orbits of dif fm in c, and care
must be accordingly taken in dening smoothness. from the physical point of view, what matters are the not points of ,
but open sets in , because physical measurements have errors and the state is never exactly known. thus, in principle we
can disregard the singular points of  without changing physical predictions. in practice these singular points spaces with
symmetries are often the only ones in which we are able to compute something!

4

s(q) = q(s),

s  , q  acl.

(6)

that is, a state can be viewed as an ensemble of values that the observables can take. we can thus take the algebra
of the observables acl and its positive functionals as the fundamental elements that dene the theory.

in a non general relativistic theory, the dynamics is given by assigning the hamiltonian or the action of of the
poincare group, on . in a general relativistic theory there is, in general, no hamiltonian dened on . coordinate
time evolution is a gauge, and is washed away by (3). the algebra of the dieomorphism invariant observables acl
codes the full dynamical content of the theory. of course, acl is highly non-trivial. evolution in clock time is described
by the di-invariant (and thus coordinate-time independent) correlations between a physical variable q and a clock
variable t. for each real t, q(t) is a di invariant function on  (see [16,19]).

on the other hand, the physical owing of time is not described by the theory. in my opinion, such a ow is
thermodynamical in origin and is state dependent; this thermal time can be identied as the state dependent ow
dened by the (generic) statistical state s over the observables algebra

dq
dt

= {q, log s}.

(7)

in words, it is not the hamiltonian h that denes a thermal gibbs state s = exp{h}, but rather the other way
around: the statistical state s in which the system happens to be determines a hamiltonian h   log s, and
therefore a time ow. this point of view allows one to develop a statistical mechanics of the gravitational degrees of
freedom, a problem which is still open. the idea is discussed and developed in [20,21].

b. the lesson of quantum mechanics and quantum eld theory: weakly local operator algebras

i begin this section with some general considerations on quantum mechanics (qm). this century has replaced
newtonian mechanics with qm as the fundamental mechanical theory. qm is a curious theory, which we probably
havent fully understood yet. the meaning of quantum mechanics is completely clear as far as the theory is applied to
describe a quantum systems s interacting with a classical or macroscopic systems o, the measuring apparatus,
or observing system. on the other hand, the physical meaning of quantum mechanics as a general mechanical
theory of all dynamical systems is viewed by many as controversial.

i myself understand quantum mechanics as a theory that describes the interaction between any two physical
systems. given two systems, s and o, the way s aects o in the course of an interaction is described by the
quantum theory of s, where o is formally regarded as the classical measuring device, whatever its physical properties.
this implies that the properties that s manifests in interacting with o are not necessarily the same it manifests in
interacting with another physical system, say o. the last, in fact, may be aected by the quantum properties of o
and in particular by the o  s quantum correlations. these do not aect the way s interacts with o alone and are
not taken into account in the quantum theory of s alone. it follows that all (contingent) properties of a system are
relative to another system. there are no absolute properties, or an absolute state, of a system. a statement such as
the z component of the spin of the electron s is up should be interpreted as the z component of the spin of the
electron s, with respect to the physical system o, is up i have elaborated relational this point of view on quantum
mechanics in [22], to which i refer for more details and related references.

it has been suggested by some that this issue the interpretation of quantum mechanics must be solved together
with the problem of combing qm and gr. i do not think that this is the case. in fact, qm is uncontroversial as long
as a macroscopic classical physical system o, which could be used as measuring apparatus or observing system, is
available. and a system of this sort is certainly available (say, the earth). gr forbids us from using external physical
reference systems, but the external reference system that serves to localize objects should not be confused with the
apparatus that performs a quantum measurement. a measuring apparatus can perform a quantum measurement of
a dieomorphism invariant quantity.

on the other hand, it seems to me that there could be some deep connection between the relational aspect of the
world revealed by gr (localization is relative to other dynamical objects) and the relational aspects that, i think,
characterize qm (states and outcome of measurements are relative to the observing, or interacting, object). after
all, an observing object is somewhere in spacetime and, as we know from special relativity, any interaction requires
spatiotemporal coincidence. the other way around, spatiotemporal coincidence can only be revealed by means of a

5

physical, and thus quantum, interaction. therefore the weaving itself of spacetime seems to be woven with a thread of
quantum interactions. however, i think we are still too far from a theory capable of describing the world so intimately.
i think that it is more productive, today, to remain grounded on what we know well about the world, that is gr
and qm, and simply search for a general relativistic quantum theory. let me thus close this parentheses of general
considerations, and get back to what we have learned from qm.

the main lesson of quantum mechanics is that the states of a physical system have a (projective) complex linear
structure, such that, given any set of states si, in which the measurement of a quantity q yields the results qi, there

exist also states s = pi isi , with pi |i|2 = 1, in which the quantity q can take any value qi, each with probability
|i|2. the linear space h of the states has a hilbert structure and, for every observable quantity q, there is an
orthonormal basis sn in which q is determined and has value qn. thus, for any q a self-adjoint operator q on h is
dened by qsn = qnsn. since distinct observables in general do not share eigenbases, the operators do not commute.
in general, the set of the observables that characterize a system forms a noncommutative operator algebra a, the
quantum observable algebra, and h provides a representation of a. the algebra a is related to the algebra acl of the
classical theory that describes the h  0 limit. in particular, a is a linear representation of (possibly a subalgebra
of) acl, or of a deformation (in h) of the same. thus poisson brackets are remnants of quantum noncommutativity.

this is the general form of a quantum mechanical system. in the course of the century, however, it has become
increasingly clear that nature can be described in terms of elds at the fundamental level. all the forces we know,
as well as the special relativistic quantum behavior of the elementary particles are well described by eld theories.
the present picture of nature, which is extraordinary empirically successful, is thus a theory of elds. the observable
quantities of a non general relativistic eld theory are weakly local: they are values of elds and local functions of
these. they depend on the value of the elds at a point (or fourier transforms of the same), or in an open region of
spacetime   m. a non general relativistic quantum theory of elds is a representation of an algebra a of spacetime
dependent observables, or a weakly local operator algebra. the set of the observables with support on a region  form
a subalgebra a and

   = a  a ,

 ,   m, a, a  a,

(8)

as subalgebras. in particular, a, with suitable properties, may be an algebra of the quantum eld operators [23]. we
denote a theory having this structure a weakly local quantum eld theory.

the quantum eld theories that have proven so enormously successful in particle physics are weakly local quantum
eld theories. examples of observable in these theories are whightman functions, scattering amplitudes, or the energy
in a spatial region. these quantities are dened on the spacetime manifold. physically, they describe a system which
is located somewhere in spacetime, and which is studied by means of an external reference system that determines
where and when measurements are performed. the spacetime, or momentum, dependence of the quantum
elds represents the spatiotemporal location of the eld excitation. more precisely, the spacetime dependence of the
observables represents the spatiotemporal location of the apparata that reveal these eld excitations.

string theory is a weakly local eld theory of this type as well. the physical interpretation of the scalar elds
x (,  ) dened on the two-dimensional string world sheet is the location of the string on the spacetime manifold,
the target space. thus, in order to interpret the theory, we must assume that physical reference systems exist in the
target space. the theory describes the motion of the string with respect to these objects. the target space equipped
with its xed metric is a pre-general relativistic absolute spacetime.4

in conclusion, a quantum theory is dened by an operator algebra a. in a non general relativistic quantum eld
theory, a is a weakly local operator algebra. observables and states have a well dened spacetime dependence, which
represents the spatiotemporal localization of the eld excitations and of the measurement apparata.

4clearly, the fact that the quantities x (,  ) are quantum operators does not mean that spacetime is quantized, anymore
than the fact that the position of a conventional particle in minkowski space x ( ) is an operator does.

6

c. general relativistic quantum eld theory

we can now compare the two previous sections. as discussed in ii a, if we take relativistic gravity and gr into
account, we have to weaken the notion of localization. the observable quantities of a general relativistic theory are
weakly nonlocal. therefore they cannot form a weakly local operator algebra of the kind (8). thus, the mathematical
structure of quantum eld theory recalled in the previous section is incompatible with the general relativistic notion
of localization described in section ii a.

a general relativistic quantum theory is a quantum eld theory in which the observable algebra a and the states
have no remnant of localization in spacetime. such a structure is very dierent from that of non general relativistic
quantum eld theory. a quantum state, in particular, will not represent a eld excitation somewhere in space.
localization has to be dened internally, with respect to the quantum states themselves.

the theory should then reduce to a conventional weakly local quantum eld theory in the limit in which we
disregard the quantum and dynamical properties of the gravitational eld. in this limit, relational localization with
respect to the gravitational eld is reinterpreted as absolute localization, dened with respect to a xed nondynamical
spacetime. in simpler words, if we do not consider the gravitational eld as a dynamical entity, then we can use it as
the background stage over which, and with respect to which, the other elds and the particles are localized, and
move.

is conventional qm suciently general to deal with dieomorphism invariance and with relational locality? the
answer is subtle, and depends on what one precisely means by conventional qm. in the schrodinger picture, the
states (t) depend on time, and time evolution is governed by the schrodinger equation. this structure is not general
enough to deal with general relativistic theories, in which there is no external time-parameter evolution.
indeed,
an external clock is precisely a minimal form of external reference system. however, qm can be formulated in the
heisenberg picture as well. in the heisenberg picture, a quantum state  has no temporal connotations. a heisenberg
state is often viewed as the value of the schrodinger state at some xed moment of time, but a more useful view of a
heisenberg state is to see it as representing the entire history of the system (at least, until the next measurement).
thus, a heisenberg state is the quantum analog of the classical state s dened in section ii a as a solutions of the
equations of motion up to gauge, without any reference to time. in the heisenberg picture of a non-general relativistic
theory, observables have a time dependence, governed by a hamiltonian h

d q
dt

= ih[ q, h].

(9)

in a general relativistic theory there is no hamiltonian. observables, however, must be di-invariant, namely satisfy
the quantum equivalent of equation (3). in the hamiltonian framework, this means that the observable must satisfy
the quantum version of (5), that is

[ q, c ] = 0,

(10)

where c  are the quantum constraints. equation (10) is the general relativistic generalization of equation (9).5
thus, qm admits a formulation which is suciently general to deal with general relativistic systems. this is a
heisenberg formulation, in which the heisenberg equation of motion (9) is replaced by the constraint equation (10).
clock time evolution is described in this context by appropriate dieomorphism invariant operators that express the
correlation between a physical variable and the clock time [19]. these are denoted evolving constant of the motion.
an alternative explicitly covariant generalization of qm that can deal with general relativistic systems is hartles
generalized qm [24]. see also [25].

as mentioned at the end of section ii a, in the classical theory the physical ow of time is presumably of
thermodynamical origin. remarkably, there is an intriguing quantum eld theoretical analog of (7), given by a key
structural property of von neumann algebras, the tomita-takesaki theorem [26]. as shown in [21], the state dependent

5any hamiltonian theory admits a formulation in this more general framework. for instance, the mechanics of a free particle in
one dimension can be formulated over the four dimensional phase space (x, px , t, pt ) with the single constraint c = pt + p 2
2m ,
and no hamiltonian. it is easy to see in this case that (10) reduces precisely to (9).

7

thermal time ow can be identied with the one-parameter group of automorphisms of the observable algebra given
by the tomita ow of a generic state. a state independent characterization of the time ow is then provided by the
co-cycle radon-nikodym theorem [27], which denes a canonical one-parameter group of outer automorphisms of the
algebra.

the problem of merging gr and qm, and concluding a century long scientic revolution is the problem of con-
structing a nontrivial weakly nonlocal quantum eld theory, in which locality is only relationally dened. to dene
such a theory, we need a hilbert space of states h and an operator algebra of observables a on h that do not carry
spatiotemporal dependence, but, instead, represent dieomorphism invariant physical states and observables. in the
rest of this essay, i briey illustrate several concrete attempts to construct theories of this type.

iii. towards general relativistic quantum field theory

two main avenues towards the construction of a rigorous four dimensional general relativistic quantum eld theory
are being explored: the canonical and the covariant one. i discuss the canonical approach in section iii b and some
covariant approaches in section iii c, below. i then discuss the convergence of the two approaches. before going into
this, however, in section iii a i briey recall the old explorations of the canonical and covariant approaches developed
during the the sixties and the seventies. these explorations were very formal: badly ill-dened mathematical
symbols appear in the equations, and any attempt to a nontrivial calculation yields uncontrolled innities. in spite of
this, the explorations of the sixties and seventies have played an important role in opening the way towards general
relativistic quantum eld theory, because they suggested the general structure the theory should have, and built the
physical intuition on general relativistic quantum physics. in a sense, many of the later developments can be seen as
eorts to transform these early constructions into rigorous mathematics.

a. old ideas and intuitive constructions

the canonical framework has been introduced by brice dewitt and john wheeler [28]. it is synthesized in their

celebrated equations, which, in the absence of matter, read

h [q] = (cid:20)(qacqbd  1

2 qabqcd)





qab

qcd

 det q r[q](cid:21) [q] = 0;

[q] = [(q)],

  dif f .

(11)

(12)

here q is the 3d metric of a spatial hypersurface , a, b . . . = 1, 2, 3 are tangent space indices, r is the ricci scalar, and
the quantum state of the gravitational eld is represented by the wave functional [q]. equation (12) requires [q]
to be invariant under dieomorphisms of , while the rst, the actual wheeler-dewitt equation, a system of innite
(because h is a function on 3-space) coupled functional dierential equations, is obtained as the dirac quantization
of the constraint that generates coordinate time translations in classical hamiltonian general relativity. the two
equations (11,12) can be seen as an implementation of 4d di-invariance.

the interpretation of |[q]|2 as a probability density for a measurement of the spatial geometry to yield the result
q is unfortunately common in the literature, but is wrong, because only 4d di invariant quantities are observable. to
extract physical information from the wheeler dewitt theory, one needs a 4d di invariant observable q[q, p] written
in terms of q and its conjugate momentum p, and a corresponding quantum operator q = q[q, 
q ], commuting with
the wheeler dewitt operator h. then the expectation value of q in a state  that solves (11,12) is given by h| q|i,
where h | i is a scalar product on the space of the solutions of (11) determined by the requirement that the operators
corresponding to real observables be self-adjoint.

formal solutions of (11) can be obtained by using a covariant formalism based on hawkings euclidean sum over

riemannian geometries [29]

z = z [dg] es[g] .

8

(13)

g is a riemannian metric of a 4d compact manifold m and s[g] is the euclidean einstein-hilbert action. the restriction
of the above integration to the 4-metrics on a 4d manifold m bounded by a compact 3d manifold  with induced
metric q, gives the celebrated hartle-hawkings solution of (11) [30]:

[q] = zg=q

[dg] es[g].

(14)

one can can consider a 4d cylinder m = [0, 1] and integrate over the 4-metrics on m that induce the two 3-metrics
q, q on the two components of its boundary. the quantity

p(q, q) = zg=q q

[dg] es[g]

(15)

is formally a projector on the solutions of (11,12). it can also be seen as a propagator, from the initial to the nal
. it is a propagator, however, that acts as the identity on physical states: not surprisingly, since evolution over the
spacetime manifold m, or coordinate time evolution, is actually pure gauge.

as already mentioned, both the canonical theory (11) and the covariant theory (13) are ill dened and little can be

computed with them. but a number of well dened constructions have been inspired by these theories.

b. canonical approach: loop quantum gravity

i feel that there will always be something missing from other methods
which we can only get by working from a hamiltonian (or maybe from
some generalization of the concept of hamiltonian)

p.a.m. dirac

loop quantum gravity is a well developed attempt to dene a general relativistic quantum eld theory using
canonical methods. it is a canonical quantization of general relativity, with its conventional matter couplings. the
theory is based on the idea of using loop variables for describing the gravitational eld. loop variables have long been
suspected to play a key role in gauge theories and gravity [31]. the discovery of the loop representation is that the
use of these variables turns out to greatly simplify the treatment of di invariance and of the dynamics in quantum
gravity. in turn, the theory suggests that one-dimensional excitations (more precisely, excitations dual to surfaces in
3d) are natural di invariant quantum excitations of the gravitational eld.

i sketch here the basics of the formalism, focusing on its main structure and leaving out many important details.
for a general overview of loop quantum gravity and complete references, see [32]. for a pedagogical introduction, see
[33]. let a = {a} be the space of the smooth su (2) connections on a xed compact 3d manifold . the space a
can be taken as the conguration space for gr; see for instance [3436]. the momentum conjugate to a is an su(2)
valued 2-form e, which is physically interpreted as the densitized triad 6, where (detq)qab = t r[eaeb]. continuous
functionals (a) form a topological vector space l. let u [a, ] be the holonomy of the connection a along the curve
. let a graph  = {1, . . . , n} be a nite collection of n piecewise smooth curves, or links, i, i = 1, . . . , n in ,
that meet, if at all, only at their endpoints. given a graph  and a complex, haar-integrable, function f on [su (2)]n,
consider the functional

,f (a) := f (u [a, 1], . . . , u [a, n]) .

(16)

these functionals are dense in l. obviously, a functional based on a graph  can always be rewritten as one based on
a larger graph  that contains  as a subgraph: it suce to take f independent from the holonomies of the links in
 but not in . therefore, any two cylindrical functions can be viewed as being dened on the same graph. taking
this into account, a scalar product is dened for any two such functionals by

6i identify a vector density ea and the corresponding 2-form e = eaabcdxbdxc.

9

h,f | ,gi := z[su(2)]n

du1 . . . dun f (u1, . . . , un) g(u1, . . . , un) .

(17)

du1 . . . dun is the haar measure on [su (2)]n. the scalar product (17) is invariant under the natural transformation
of (a) under su (2) gauge transformations and dieomorphisms. the extended hilbert space hext of the quantum
theory is obtained by completion. there exist a number of mathematical developments connected with the construction
given above. they involve projective families and projective limits, generalized connections, representation theory of
c -algebras, measure theoretical techniques, and others. see for instance [37,38].

an algebra of well dened self-adjoint eld operators is dened in hext. the trace of the holonomy of a around a

loop ,

t [] = tr u [a, ]

(18)

is a multiplicative self-adjoint operator. by replacing the conjugate momentum e (a 2-form, we recall) with a
functional derivative and integrating it over a 2d surface c in  we obtain a self-adjoint lie algebra valued operator

e(c) = zc

dadbabc



ac(x(~))

.

(19)

t () and e(c) are the elementary operators of the theory, in the same sense in which the creation and annihilation
operators a(k) and a(k) are the elementary operators in conventional quantum eld theory. unlikely a(k) and a(k),
the operators t () and e(c) do not require a background metric to be dened.

the integral a(c) over the surface c of the su(2) norm of e

a(c) = zc

|e|

(20)

is the standard geometrical classical expression for the area of c [39]. the corresponding quantum operator can be
constructed on hext. since a(c) involves the square of e, to dene it we actually need to regularize the classical
expression and to study the limit of the regularized operator as the regulator is removed. remarkably, the limit is
nite and well dened [1]. the resulting operator is self adjoint and has discrete spectrum. the main sequence of the
spectrum, restoring physical units, is [1]

a = 8hg xi=1,npji(ji + 1) ,

(21)

where the (ji) are an arbitrary n-tuplet of half integers. this result is the source of the loop quantum gravity physical
prediction, rst suggested in [40] and in [41], that the area is quantized, namely that a planck scale sensitivity
measurement of an area can only yield discrete outputs from (21).

an orthonormal basis that diagonalizes the area operator is given by the spin network states [2,42]. given a graph
, embedded in the 3-manifold , the assignment a non-trivial irreducible representation of su (2), labeled by its spin
ji, to each one of its links i is called a coloring of the links. consider then a node n of the graph, with k adjacent
links 1, . . . , k, colored as j1, . . . , jk. fix an orthonormal basis in the tensor product hn = i=1,k h (ji) of the hilbert
spaces of the su (2) representations j1, . . . , jk. the choice of an element nn of this basis is called a coloring of the
node n. a (non-gauge invariant) spin network s = (, ji, nn) is a graph embedded in space in which links and nodes
are colored. see figure 1. the spin network state s(a) is dened by

s(a) = olinks i

rji(u [a, i])  onodes n

nn .

(22)

rj(u ) is the representation matrix of the group element u in the spin-j irreducible representation of su (2), seen
here as an element in h (j)  h (j), and 
indicates the scalar product in h = links i (h (j)  h (j)). by varying the
graph and the colors we obtain a family of states, which can be easily normalized. as a straightforward consequence
of the peterweyl theorem, these states form an orthonormal basis in hext.

10

n
2

s =

j

1 = 1/2

j

2 = 1

j 3 = 1/2

n1

fig. 1. a simple spin network with two trivalent nodes.

if a surface c cuts the links 1 . . . n of a spin network s, then the spin network state s is an eigenstate of the
area operator with eigenvalue (21) where the jis are the spin associated to the links i. see figure 2. therefore a
spin network state can be thought as quantum excitation of the metric in which each link carries a quantum of area,
proportional to the square root of the casimir of the representation that colors the link. a similar result holds for
the volume [1] (see details in [43]): the discrete quanta of volume are localized on the nodes of the spin network, and
depends on the colors of the node.7. thus, spin network states can be seen as elementary quantum excitations of the
gravitational eld, carrying quanta of volume (chunks of space) at their nodes, and quanta of area on the links that
separate the nodes, or, more precisely, on the surfaces separating the quanta of volume, and which are dual to the
links.

n
1

p
2

p
3

c

p
1

fig. 2. a spin network s intersecting the surface c.

n2

so far, i have illustrated the kinematics of the theory. the next step is to implement the constraints, namely to
dene the analog of equations (11,12). in addition, we have to impose the local su (2) gauge invariance which is
peculiar to the connection formulation of gr. su (2) local gauge transformations act on a spin network state simply
by the su (2) action on the spaces hn. by restricting the colors of the nodes to basis elements nn in the spin
zero irreducible component of hn, we easily obtain the su (2) invariant subspace h0 of hext. such nn are called
intertwiners, since they dene invariant mappings between su (2) representations.

h0 carries a unitary representation u (dif f ) of dif f. there are no invariant proper states, but using standard

generalized states techniques, we can nevertheless dene

hdif f 

h0

dif f

(23)

as the di invariant subspace of s  in a gelfand triple s   h0  s. it is natural to take s as the space of the nite

7the fact that the volume operator vanishes outside the nodes can be intuitively understood as follows: the result of the
action of the triad operator, which is a functional derivative on the holonomy is proportional to the tangent of the loop. in
the volume element, abctr[eaebec], we need at least three distinct tangents at a point in order to have a nonvanishing triple
product. thus, we need a node.

11

linear combinations of spin network states. the spin network basis in h0 yields a simple description of hdif f and
a denition of the hilbert structure on it. let an s-knot, or abstract spin network, s be an equivalence class under
dif f () of (embedded) spin networks s.8 a basis in hdif f is given by the states hs| in s  dened by

hs|si = (cid:26) 0

1

if s 6 s
if s  s .

(24)

where we have used a dirac bra-ket notation for the elements of s 
0 and s. furthermore, one can prove (see [38] and
references therein) that observables on h0 which are self-adjoint (and thus correspond to real classical quantities) and
di invariant (and thus are well dened on hdif f ) are self-adjoint under the scalar product

hs|si = (cid:26) 0

c(s)

if
if

s 6= s
s = s .

(25)

where c(s) is the number of discrete symmetries of the abstract s-knot. this is therefore the appropriate scalar
product we need on physical grounds, picked up by the requirement that real classical quantities become self-adjoint
operators.

the states |si are (3d) dieomorphism invariant quantum states of the gravitational eld. they are labeled by
s-knots: abstract, non-embedded, knotted, colored, graphs s. as we have seen above, each link of the graph can be
seen as carrying a quantum of area, and each node quanta of volume. an s-knot represents an elementary quantum
excitation of space: its nodes represent chunks of space with quantized volume, separated by elementary surfaces,
dual to the links, with quantized area. the key point is that an s-knots does not live on a manifold. it is not located
somewhere. it is not a quantum excitations in spacetime. rather, it is a quantum excitations of spacetime. the
quantized space does not reside somewhere:
it itself denes the where. this is the picture of quantum space
that emerges from loop quantum gravity. it is profoundly dierent from the structure of the states of a weakly local
quantum eld theory.

the last step in the denition of the theory is the construction of the quantum hamiltonian constraint, namely the
rigorous analog of the wheeler dewitt equation (11). this is obtained by promoting the classical gr hamiltonian
constraint, which in the connection formalism can be written [46] as

h[n ] = z n tr[f  {a, v }]

(26)

into a quantum operator. here n is a scalar smearing function; f is the curvature of a; { , } are poisson brackets;
and v is the volume of . to promote h[n ] to an operator, we need rst to regularize it. we replace the classical
expression (26) by a regularized,  dependent one, h[n ], written in terms of quantities that we know how to promote
to quantum operators. in particular, f is replaced by the holonomy of an -size loop. the classical quantities are then
replaced by the corresponding quantum operators, leading to the hamiltonian operator h[n ]. finally, we study the
limit   0: h[n ]  h[n ]. this can be done in detail [46], with surprising results.

first, the action of the operator vanishes on the holonomy u [a, ] anytime the smearing function n is zero on the
end points of  [47]. in other words, h acts only at the nodes of the spin networks. this can be seen as a consequence
of the presence in (26) of the volume. indeed, as described above, the volume operator vanishes outside the nodes.

second, the result of the action of the hamiltonian operator on a spin network state turns out to be given by

h[n ] |si = xnodes n of s

n (xn) an dn |si .

(27)

xn is the point in which the node n is located. the action of the operator dn on the state |si is given in fig. 8: the
operator acts by creating an extra link which joins two points n1 and n2 lying on distinct links adjacent to the node

8in fact, by slightly enlarging dif f we can eliminates a moduli space structure in the equivalence classes of the nodes with
intersections [44], and obtain a separable hilbert space hdif f . on this, see also [45]. (the unconstrained space state hext is
non-separable.)

12

n [48]. (a sum over all couples of adjacent links is understood. the extra triangular loop that the new link forms
is essentially the -size loop whose holonomy gives the regularization of the curvature f in (26). the coecients an
can be explicitly computed [49].

s

n

^
d

n

1

n

n
2

fig. 3. the action of the hamiltonian constraint on a trivalent node.

now, the key point of this construction is that h[n ] is well dened on hdif f . more precisely, the limit in which
the regulator is removed makes sense and is nite on the dieomorphisms invariant states, and only on those states.
it is here that one sees the deep interplay between general covariance and quantum eld theory. what happens is
that the size of the triangle in figure 3, or, equivalently, the precise position of the two new nodes, depends on the
regulator . however, since the action of the operator on a state hs| in hdif f is dened by duality, the relevant limit
is

h h[n ]s|si  lim
0

hs| h[n ]si.

(28)

but when acted upon by the di invariant state hs|, the precise position of the link in | h[n ]si is irrelevant, because
dierent positions are related by a dieomorphism, for  suciently small. therefore the limit (28) turns out to
be trivial (constant) [50]. in a precise sense, potential ultraviolet divergences are washed away by dieomorphism
invariance.

this concludes the description of the theory. the theory has been applied, for instance, in black hole physics,
leading to a nite computation of the bekenstein-hawking entropy of a schwarzschild black hole [51]. several aspects
of the theory are still poorly understood (low energy limit, general observables). furthermore, the general lines of the
construction of the hamiltonian constraint are understood, but a number of variants are possible, reecting rather
wide quantization ambiguities, and it is not clear which variant, if any at all, yields the physically correct theory,
with the right low energy limit. still, loop quantum gravity provides a construction of a well dened and nontrivial
general relativistic quantum eld theory.

c. covariant approaches

1. topological quantum eld theories and the turaev viro model

well dened, although very simple, examples of a covariant formulation of general relativistic quantum eld theory
are provided by topological quantum eld theories (tqft). topological eld theories are theories in which the number
of gauges matches the number of elds, so that all local degrees of freedom are washed away by gauge invariance. if
the space topology is non-trivial, a nite number of global degrees of freedom may remain gauge invariant, leaving a
non-trivial dynamical theory.

a prejudice hard to die wants any dieomorphism invariant eld theory to be topological, in the sense of having a
nite number of global degrees of freedom, unless dieomorphism invariance is broken. this is wrong, and, as far as we
know from gr, the world is described precisely by a dieomorphism invariant eld theory in which dieomorphism
invariance is not broken9, but the number of degrees of freedom is innite. these degrees of freedom are local
in the relational sense: they are localized with respect to each other.
indeed, we can distinguish three kinds of

9of course, we may gauge x it.

13

theories. first, there are non-di-invariant theories like qed. thy have weakly local degrees of freedom weaves
interpreted as localized in spacetime (with respect to a reference system). second, there are theories like gr. these
are dieomorphism invariant, have an innite number of degrees of freedom gravitational waves. these degrees
of freedom are relationally local and weakly nonlocal (hence the long historical confusion, now completely over, on
whether gravitational waves are real or not). finally, there are topological theories, which are dieomorphism
invariant, and, in addition, have only a nite number of global degrees of freedom.

gr, on the other hand, is topological in three spacetime dimensions (there are no gravitational waves in 3d).
quantum gr in 3d has been intensively studied [5254]. a state sum formulation of a tqft that yields euclidean 3d
gr in an appropriate limit is provided by the celebrated turaev-viro model [4]. the turaev-viro model can be dened
over an arbitrary triangulation  of the spacetime 3-manifold. an assignment of an irreducible representation je of
the quantum group su (2)q to each 1-simplex (edges) e of the triangulation is called a coloring c of the triangulation.
we chose q a root of unity so that that the number of irreducible representations is nite. the partition function of
the model is dened as a sum over all colorings of  by

zt v = xc ye

dim(je) yt

{6j}t(c).

(29)

dim(je) is the (quantum) dimension of the representation je. the second product is over the tetrahedra t of the
triangulation. {6j}t(c) is the q-analog of the wigner 6-j symbol of the six representations assigned to the edges that
bound the tetrahedron t. the wigner 6-j symbol of su (2) can be computed as the value, for a = 0 of the spin
network state (22) where the spin network is given by the colored one skeleton of t. the analogue calculation for a
quantum group can be done using the temperley-lieb recoupling theory techniques developed in [55]. the sum (29)
turns out to be independent from the triangulation. all triangulations are connected by a small set of elementary
moves, and (29) does not change if we perform an elementary move on the triangulation. the invariance of (29)
under these moves follows from the properties of the the wigner 6-j symbols. in turn, these reect the fact that the
irreducible representations form an associative tensor category [56].

the turaev-viro model can be dened over a triangulated 3-manifold with boundary. we associate a hilbert space
h to each component  of the boundary of the 3-manifold m. this is done as follows. first, associate to  a
hilbert space l, spanned by an orthonormal basis of states |si, where s is a coloring of the triangulation of .
then, consider a 3-manifold bounded by   . dene a linear map between l and l with matrix elements

p, (s, s) = hs|p |si = xc,c=ss yt

{6j}t(c).

(30)

the sum is over the coloring of the internal edges only. if = and m is the cylinder   [0, 1], (30) denes a
projector

p(s, s) = p,(s, s)

(31)

on l. h is the kernel of this projector, and is triangulation independent.

in general, the map (30), restricted as a map from h to h is independent from the triangulation. in fact, this
construction denes a functor from the category m whose objects are 2-manifolds and morphism are 3-manifolds with
boundaries, into the category h of hilbert spaces. from this point of view, the projection

p : l  h

(32)

dened by (31) is the standard technique to get a functor from a semifunctor. atiyah has provided a compelling
general denition of tqft as a functor from m to h [3]. atiyahs general scheme captures the structure we expect
from a general relativistic quantum eld theory, and, in particular, from a quantum theory of gravity. notice that
the projection (32) provides precisely the analog of the the wheeler dewitt equation. in particular, it represents a
realization of hawkings projection (15) on the solutions of (11), which is also dened on a cylinder. the point is that
evolution along the cylinder [0, 1] is the evolution in coordinate time generated by the hamiltonian constraint. this
evolution, i recall, is a non-physical gauge transformation in the classical theory. the analogy between quantum gravity
and tqft goes much further than this formal similarity structure: as we shall see in section iii c 4, the solution of
the loop quantum gravity version of the wheeler-dewitt equation, can be computed by a formula surprising similar
to (30).

14

on the other hand, the axioms of a tqft in atiyahs formulation require the spaces h to be nite dimensional.
it is this feature that reects the topological nature of the theories, and is not compatible with quantum gravity,
where we expect the theory to have an innite number of degrees of freedom and an innite dimensional state space.
the rest of the formal structure of atiyahs denition of tqft, on the other hand, reects only the dieomorphism
invariance of the theory, and it is thus likely to underlie a full quantum theory of gravity as well.

now, remarkably, in the turaev-viro model the states in l have a natural representation as spin network states.
this is the rst of a number of structural similarities between tqft and loop quantum gravity. to see this, consider
the dual  of the triangulation . going to the dual triangulation will be a crucial technique below [57].  is a
cellular complex whose 1-cells correspond to the triangles in  and whose 2-cells correspond to the edges in . the
coloring of  induces a coloring of the 2-cells of . consider now a connected component  of the boundary. the
dual of the triangulation of , or, equivalently, the boundary of , is a trivalent graph. a state, namely a coloring
of  determines a coloring of the links of this graph. this is precisely a (trivalent) spin network. a link carrying the
trivial representation is viewed as a non existing link. recall that l is spanned by the coloring of the triangulation
of the boundary: it follows that l admits a basis of spin network states.

in the q = 1 case the model diverge because there is an innite number of representations. the divergent sum is
the ponzano-regge model, a formal quantization of 3d gr constructed in the late sixties [58]), which has inspired
most of the later developments. the q = 1 model can be also seen as a quantization of a 3d topological eld theory,
bf theory [59]. the elds of bf theory are a su (2) connection a, and a su(2)-algebra valued 1-form b. the action
is

s[a, b] = z tr[b  f ].

(33)

a discretization and path integral quantization of this theory yields (29). because of the topological aspect of the
theory, the discretization turns out not to change the theory itself; that is, no degrees of freedom are lost in the
discretization, or, equivalently, the continuum limit of the discretization is trivial. a canonical quantization [52]
yields the same quantum theory, and, remarkably, one nds that the spin network states are precisely represented by
spin network functionals of the connection [60,61].

2. four dimensions: the turaev-ooguri-crane-yetter model

let us now move to four dimensions. the generalization of the turaev-viro model to four dimensions was found
by turaev, ooguri and crane and yetter [57,62]. the key idea is to color 2-simplices (faces) f of the triangulation
with irreducible representations jf and to color 3-simplices (tetrahedra) t with intertwiners nt. one then denes

zcy = xc yf

dim(jf ) ys

{15j}s(c)

(34)

where the second product is now over the 4-simplices s of the triangulation, and the wigner 6-j symbol is replaced
by the 15-j symbol. the wigner 15-j symbol can be computed as follows. in the dual triangulation, the 2 and 3
simplices that bound s correspond to 2-cells and 1-cells. the intersection of these with a ball surrounding s (which
in the dual triangulation is a point) is again a spin network. the 15-j symbol is the a = 0 value of the corresponding
spin network state. the turaev-ooguri-crane-yetter (tocy) model is the quantization of 4d bf theory. in 4d bf
theory the actions is as in (33), but b is now a two form.

in section iii c 1, i have shown that the states of the turaev-viro model can be described as spin networks: a basis
of states in the (unconstrained, that is, before the projection) state space l is given by the colored 1-skeletons of the
cellular complex dual to the boundary , and this is precisely a spin network. the same is true for the tocy model.
indeed, the boundary  is now three-dimensional; the colored triangulation of  carries spins over its triangles and
intertwiners over its tetrahedra. its dual carries spins over its edges and intertwiners over its nodes. these data dene
precisely a spin network. therefore spin networks label states in 3 as well as in 4 dimensions.

now, the euclidean gr action can be written as

s[a, e] = z tr[e  e  f ].

15

(35)

where a is an so(4) connection and e the (inverse) tetrad eld, which can be seen as a so(4) algebra valued 1-form.
comparing with (33), we see that gr can be considered as an so(4) bf theory plus a suitable constraint, imposing,
essentially, the two form b to be the exterior product of two 1-form elds e [63]. it was then natural to search for a
formulation of quantum euclidean gr as a (non topological) modication of a so(4) tocy state sum model. there
are several attempts to do that, leading to some tentative formulations of quantum euclidean gr as state sums of the
form (34). in particular, reisenberger [69] has proposed to directly implement the constraint on appropriate tensor
products of the hilbert spaces on which the irreducible representations are dened. the constraint has an appealing
geometrical interpretation as conditions for triangles dened by b (in 4d) to join into tetrahedra [64]. barrett and
crane [12] noticed that these conditions, in turn, admits a direct interpretation in terms of so(4) representation
theory: they are implemented within an so(4) crane-yetter state sum model simply by (appropriately) restricting
the sum to simple so(4) representations.10 a number of results support the idea that the these models model are
indeed related to quantum gr [65,66].

the key problem in these models is the following. in the topological theories, the introduction of a xed triangu-
lation is justied by the triangulation independence of the quantum theory. triangulation independence reects the
topological aspect of the theory and the absence of the local degrees of freedom: simply speaking, a nite number
of variables suce to capture all the physical degrees of freedom of the theory. in modifying bf theory to obtain
gr, one looses triangulation independence. this is to be expected, since gr has innite relationally local (although
weakly nonlocal) physical degrees of freedom.
in this context, a triangulation represents a genuine cut o of the
degrees of freedom. thus, the theory dened over a xed triangulation cannot be the physical theory one is searching.
to get the physical theory, we have either to sum over all triangulations, or to take a limit in which the trian-
gulation becomes ner and ner. these limits are poorly understood. some control over a sum over the sum over
triangulations, however, can be obtained from an alternative approach to these models, which i illustrate in the next
section.

3. nonperturbative string theory in 0 dimensions, eld theories over a group and summing over triangulations

an intriguing non perturbative and genuinely background independent formulation of 2d quantum gravity was
obtained sometime ago in the context of string theory in zero dimensions. this is the theory obtained by dropping
the scalar elds on the string world sheet that represent the location of the string in the target space, and retaining
just the 2d metric as a dynamical variable. the resulting theory can be expressed a sum over the geometries of a two
dimensional surface, as in (13). this sum can be concretely dened by triangulating the 2d surface with triangles with
sides of xed length, and summing over all topologically distinct triangulations. the number of triangles joining on a
vertex determines the local curvature of the manifold at the vertex. remarkably, the sum over such triangulations can
be reinterpreted as the feynman expansion of the partition function of a quantum theory of matrices with a simple
cubic potential [8]. indeed, the dual of a triangulation is a trivalent graph, and can be seen as one of the trivalent
feynman graphs of the cubic matrix theory.

a remarkable extension to 3d of the idea of these matrix models was obtained by boulatov in [9]. boulatov considers

a eld theory over three copies of su(2), with the action

s[] = z dg1dg2dg3 ((g1, g2, g3))2 +



4! z dg1 . . . dg6 (g1, g2, g3)(g3, g4, g5)(g2, g4, g6)(g1, g5, g6).

(36)

notice that if we represent the eld by a vertex and its three arguments with three edges attached to this vertex, then
the second term in the action has the structure of a tetrahedron. now, if we expand  in modes, harmonic analysis on
su (2) teaches us that the momenta of the eld , that is, its modes, are labeled by the irreducible representations
of the group. if we express (36) in terms of these modes and then compute the feynmans perturbative expansion in
 of the partition function

z = z [d] eis[] = x

n() zb[],

(37)

10irreducible representations of so(4) are labeled by two half integers (two spins) (j, j) where j + j is integer. a repre-
sentation is simple if j = j. thus, simple representations are labeled by just one spin j = j = j.

16

we obtain feynman graphs  (with n() vertices) formed by tetravalent vertices connected by propagators. each
propagator has three indices, carrying momenta, namely su (2) irreducible representations. these indices are paired
across the vertex, and summed over in such a way that they dene closed loops, or cycles, along the graph. if we
interpret these cycles as dening 2-cells, the feynman graph is a 2-complex with 2-cells colored by su (2) irreducibles.
most remarkably, if the 2-complex  is the dual 2-skeleton () of a triangulation , then the sum over momenta

zb[] = xc

a[, c]

(38)

is precisely the turaev-viro sum over colorings of , with q = 1. that is, the possible momenta on () match exactly
the possible colorings on , and each feynman amplitudes is equal to the corresponding turaev viro amplitude.

therefore, as formal series

a[(), c] = ye

dim(je)yt

{6j}t(c).

zt v [] = zb[()] .

(39)

(40)

the same trick works in four dimensions, as realized by ooguri [6]. the ooguri theory is a eld theory over 4 copies

of su(2). its action has the structure

s[] = z dg1 . . . dg4 2 +



5! z dg1 . . . dg10 5,

(41)

where the potential term has now the structure of a 4-simplex. the feynman expansion of this theory determines a
state sum for a triangulated 4d spacetime, which is precisely the q = 1 case of the tocy state sum (34). again, the
theory is, formally, triangulation independent.

now, the modication introduced into the so(4) tocy model in order to obtain gr from bf theory can be
implemented directly in the above model [67]. in fact, it is sucient to replace su (2) with so(4) in (41) and to
constrain  to be invariant under a xed so(3) subgroup h of so(4):

(g1, g2, g3, g4) = (h1g1, h2g2, h3g3, h4g4),

hi  h.

(42)

remarkably, this constraint implements precisely the restriction of the modes to the simple representations of so(4),
which, in turn, is the quantum implementation of the constraint that reduces gr to bf. given a triangulation 
with a dual 2-complex (), the value of the feynman graph  is precisely the barret-crane partition function
over the triangulation . but unlikely in the previous cases, which were topological, and therefore triangulation
independent, this time we gain something crucial: the full feynman expansion of the theory denes precisely a sum
over triangulations, restoring full general relativistic invariance.

the terms in the expansion can be interpreted as a quantized spacetime geometry. in fact, the interpretation of
the links and nodes of the spin network states as carriers of quanta of area and volume extends, as we shall see in the
next section, to the spacetime colored triangulations. thus these models provides a concrete denition of hawkings
sum over geometries. the quantum geometries can be generated as feynman graphs, as in the 2d quantum gravity
models. thus, in this context, we can view a triangulated spacetime as a term in a feynman expansion. alternatively,
we can interpret the eld  (more precisely, its fourier transform) as a quantum amplitude for the geometry of a
tetrahedron (see [64]). then the quantum eld theory can be seen as a multiparticle theory for many tetrahedra,
or elementary chunks of space, being created and destroyed in interactions. a spacetime is a feynman history of
creations and destructions of chunks of space.

4. spin foam models

all the models described above admit a common description as spin foam models. this is a surprising and remarkable
fact. let me sketch the general structure of a spin foam model. a spin foam model is a feynman-like sum over histories,

17

in which the histories are spin foams. a spin foam  is a colored 2d complex. a 2d complex is an (abstract) collection
of faces, which join at edges, which, in turn, join at vertices. two 2-complexes are considered distinct if they
are combinatorially distinct. a coloring c of a 2-complex is an assignment of spins to the faces and intertwiners to the
edges. a spin foam model is determined by choosing a vertex amplitude a (c), a function of the colorings of faces
and edges adjacent to the vertex. the spin foam model is then dened as the state sum

z = xspin

foams 

yvertices

v

av ,

or, possibly, including amplitudes of edges and faces as well:

z = xspin

foams 

yfaces

f 

af yedges

e

ae yvertices

v

av .

(43)

(44)

if  is a triangulation of a manifold m, and  the corresponding dual complex, then the 2-skeleton of  is a 2d
complex, which we indicate as (). the vertices of () correspond to the the n-simplices of ; the edges to the
n-1 simplices and the faces to the n-2 simplices. notice that in the 3d models described above, spins were carried by
the edges of , while in the 4d models spins were carried by the triangles of : in both cases, we obtain a spin foam
when using the dual description. (in the turaev-viro model, edges are trivalent and thus intertwiners are unique,
because there is a single normalized invariant tensor between three su (2) representations). furthermore, in all models
described above, the state sum does not depend on the full combinatorial data of the triangulation, but only on the
structure of its n, n-1, and n-2 simplices: that is to say, just on the data that are represented by the corresponding
spin foam. thus, for instance, we obtain the turaev-viro model by choosing av to be the wigner 6-j symbol on the
vertices that have the structure of the dual of a tetrahedron, and to vanish otherwise. we obtain the tocy model
by choosing av to be the wigner 15-j symbol on the vertices that have the structure of the dual of a 4-simplex, and
to vanish otherwise; and so on.

surprisingly, however, spin foams come from the canonical quarters. spin foams were rst introduced to describe
the dynamics of loop quantum gravity, under the name branched colored surfaces, [69]. as i illustrate below, indeed,
the covariant formulation of loop quantum gravity yields a partition function which is again a spin foam model.
the idea that quantum spacetime could be described in terms of a sum over surfaces had been proposed earlier, in
particular by baez [68], and then by reisenberger [69], and iwasaki [70], who realized the importance of 2-complexes.
the general notion and the term spin foam model were introduced by baez [10]. the possibility of dening a causal
structure over spin foams has also been explored [13]. see [10] and [71] for details and full references.

now, recall that in all the models described above, irrespectively of the dimension, a basis of (unconstrained) states
is labeled by spin networks. consider the state sum p(s, s) dened in (30,31) over the manifold   [0, 1]. as
discussed, this quantity denes an evolution in coordinate time, as well as the projector on the physical state space.
now, a moment of reection will convince the reader that in the spin foam formulation, p(s, s) has a remarkable
interpretation: it is a sum over histories  of evolutions of the spin network state s into the spin network state s.
that is to say, a spin foam can be seen as the spacetime world-sheet of a spin network. the faces of the spin foam
are the world-sheets swept by the links of the spin network and the edges of the spin foam are the worldlines swept
by the nodes of the spin network. vertices are where dynamics happen, precisely as in feynman diagrams. that is
to say, a spin foam vertex can be seen as a vertex in the sense of the feynman graphs of conventional quantum
eld theory. a spin foam with n vertices represents thus a transition amplitude across n-1 intermediate states, or an
n-order term is a perturbative expansion of the transition amplitude.

in the turaev-viro theory, for instance, the vertex is the dual of a tetrahedron. thus, it has four adjacent edges.
consider one of these edges as coming from the past, and three going into the future. then the vertex represents a
process in which a trivalent node of the spin network opens up in three trivalent nodes. see figure 4. a hamiltonian
that could generate such a vertex must thus have precisely the action described in figure 3, and the vertex amplitude
can be seen as a matrix element of this hamiltonian between the initial and nal state. but figure 3 represents the
action of the hamiltonian constraint of canonical quantum gravity, which was derived by starting from the adm
constraint and promoting it to an operator! this is a remarkable convergence.

18

fig. 4. the elementary vertex.

i now sketch the formal derivation of the spin foam formulation of loop quantum gravity from the canonical theory
[14]. once more, i give here only a very sketchy account of the derivation, and refer to the literature for all details.
the problem in canonical quantum gravity is to dene the physical hilbert space hphys, which is the space of the
solutions of the hamiltonian constraint, starting from the dieomorphism invariant hilbert space hdif f spanned by
the s-knot states. consider the projector operator

p = z [dn ] ei h[n ]

.

(45)

to be compared with the expression of diracs delta as the integral of an exponential. a dieomorphism invariant
notion of integration exists for this functional integral [14,72]. consider the matrix elements of p in the s-knots basis,
and expand the exponent. the expansion has the structure

hs|p |si  hs|si +z [dn ] (cid:16)hs| h[n ]|si + hs| h[n ] h[n ]|si + . . .(cid:17) .

(46)

using now the action (27) of h on spin network states, we can compute explicitly the action of the h[n ] operators.
the resulting integrals of the type r [dn ] (n (x1)    n (xn)) can be integrated explicitly, leaving a sum of terms, each
corresponding to a sequence of actions of the hamiltonian constraint over an s-knot. the amplitude of each term is
essentially the product of the an factors in (27), one for each action of h. each term can be seen as a history in which
the s-knot state |si evolves until it reaches |si. the resulting sum admits a graphical interpretation: the sequence
of actions of h on |si can be represented by the spacetime world-sheet swept by s moving in time and undergoing a
discrete transition at each action of h. this world-sheet is a precisely a spin foam. the faces of the complex are swept
out by the spin network links and the edges by the nodes. faces are colored just as the underlying link, and edges
as the underlying node. the transitions generated by h given in figure 3, is represented by the vertex illustrated in
figure 4. its amplitude is given by the corresponding matrix elements an of h, dened (27). for instance, a term
of order one is represented in figure 5. the 4d spacetime in which this evolution takes place corresponds to the
classical coordinate spacetime: a mathematical artifact.


f



i

s
f

v

s

i

fig. 5. a rst order diagram.

the result is that the expansion (46) of hs|p |si can be written as a sum over topologically inequivalent spin foams

19

, bounded by the initial and nal spin networks s and s. each surface  represents the history of the initial s-knot
state, and is weighted by the product of coecients av, associated to the vertices of . that is, we obtain a spin foam
model as in (43), where the vertex amplitude is determined by the matrix elements of the hamiltonian constraint.

the spin foam inherits from the spin networks a geometrical interpretation in terms of quanta of areas and volume,
and can be seen as an evolving quantum 3-geometry, that is as a quantum 4-geometry. in fact, a spin foam can be
seen as the formalization of weehlers intuition of the foamy structure of planck scale geometry [28]. in this picture,
the problem of specifying the correct hamiltonian constraint is translated into the problem of nding the right vertex
amplitude, 4d general covariance is manifest, and we have the usual advantages of the covariant formalism.
in
particular, 4d di-invariant quantum observables can be understood [24] in form more simple and intuitive than in
the canonical framework.

before concluding, it might be instructive to compare the spin foam formalism with the covariant formalism of a

bosonic string theory as an integral over surfaces

z = z [dstring] eia[string ] .

(47)

here string is the embedding of the string world-sheet in the target spacetime, and a[string] is the area of the
string world-sheet, which is induced by the xed background metric of the target spacetime. the spin foam partition
function (43) can be easily rewritten as

z = xspin

foams 

e

ip vertices

v

av

.

(48)

there is a similarity between (47) and (48). they are both sums over surface congurations, with amplitudes which
are exponentials of a local expression on the surface. there are however two crucial dierences. the rst is that
the surfaces in (48) branch o and carry spins, while the bosonic string world-sheets do not. the second, and most
important dierence is that the action of the string, namely the area a[string] depends on the target space metric,
and therefore depends on the precise location of string in the target space. the sum over surfaces in (47) is thus an
integral in which two slightly deformed locations of string in the target space count as dierent. on the contrary,
in (48) no manifold background structure enters the action (the exponent), and the weight does not depend on the
location of the spin foam in the manifold, but only on its di-invariant features. accordingly the sum over surfaces
is over di inequivalent classes only, and it is a sum and not an integral.

it has been suggested, on the other hand, that the background independent, general relativistic, formulation of
string theory, whose lack is the most serious open problem in that theory, could look like a spin foam model [74].
for instance, (47) could perhaps be obtained as an approximation of an expression of the form (48), when expanding
small uctuations f luctuation of  over a background background, representing the background geometry. the area
in (47) could then emerge as the result of local di invariant interactions between f luctuation and background. since
background can be interpreted as a 4-geometry and the area is the lowest dimension additive functional for a surface,
it is not unlikely that an expression like (47) could emerge from (48).

in conclusion, the picture of the theory as a sum over spin foams is thus common to both loop quantum gravity and
the covariant approaches: a common and compelling formalism for general relativistic quantum eld theory seems to
be emerging from dierent quarters. it is remarkably dierent from the formalism of non general relativistic quantum
eld theory. the spin foam formalism is explicitly di invariant and background independent. di invariance is strictly
related to the short scale discreteness of the theory, which is reected in the formalism by the purely combinatorial
nature of (48). in turn, this fundamental short scale discreteness seems to be capable of taking care of the conventional
quantum eld theory ultraviolet divergences.

iv. conclusion

hopefully, the picture that i have described and which is emerging from dierent quarters, some variant of this
picture, or maybe a dierent picture, will lead us to the denition of a consistent quantum general relativistic theory

20

with general relativity as its classical limit, and thus to a successful conclusion of the twentieth century revolution in
fundamental physics.

such a successful conclusion, in my opinion, is not to be searched in a omni-comprehensive lagrangian, or in a theory
of everything. rather, it is to be searched in a new conceptual framework for describing the physical world at the
fundamental level. a conceptual framework capable of replacing the extraordinary powerful newtonian framework,
but taking into account the deep modication of the basic notions of matter, causality, space and time that represent
a major legacy of this tormented century.

the great scientic revolution, the seventeenths century one, was opened by copernicus de revolutionibus and
successfully concluded by newtons principia. that is to say, it lasted a century and a half. the current revolution
has still a chance to be a bit shorter.

[1] c rovelli and l smolin, discreteness of area and volume in quantum gravity, nucl phys b442 (1995) 593, gr-

qc/9411005; erratum: nucl phys b456 (1995) 734.

[2] c rovelli and l smolin, spin networks and quantum gravity, phys rev d52 (1995) 5743, gr-qc/9505006.
[3] mf atiyah, topological quantum eld theories, publ math inst hautes etudes sci, paris 68 (1989) 175; the geometry
and physics of knots, accademia nazionale dei lincei, (cambridge university press, 1990). e witten, comm math phys
117 (1988) 353.

[4] vg turaev and oy viro, state sum invariants of 3-manifolds and quantum 6j symbols, topology 31 (1992) 865. vg

turaev, quantum invariants of knots and 3-manifolds (de gruyter, new york 1994).

[5] v turaev, quantum invariants of 3-manifolds and a glimpse of shadow topology in quantum groups, springer lecture
notes in mathematics 1510, pp 363-366 (springer-verlag, new york, 1992); quantum invariants of knots and 3-manifolds
(de gruyter, new york, 1994).

[6] h ooguri, topological lattice models in four dimensions, mod phys lett a7 (1992) 2799.
[7] l crane and d yetter, a categorical construction of 4-d topological quantum eld theories, in quantum topology, l

kaufmann and r baadhio eds (world scientic, singapore 1993), hep-the/9301062.

[8] f david, nucl phys b257 (1985) 45. j ambjorn, b durhuus, j frolich, nucl phys b257 (1985) 433. va kazakov, ik
kostov, aa migdal, phys lett 157 (1985) 295. dv boulatov, va kazakov, ik kostov, aa migdal, nucl phys b275 (1986)
641. m douglas, s shenker, nucl phys b335 (1990) 635. d gross, a migdal, phys rev lett 64 (1990) 635; e brezin, va
kazakov, phys lett b236 (1990) 144.

[9] dv boulatov, mod phys lett a7 (1992) 1629.

[10] j baez, spin foam models, class quant grav 15 (1998) 1827.
[11] m p reisenberger, a lattice worldsheet sum for 4-d euclidean general relativity, gr-qc/9711052.
[12] j w barrett and l crane, relativistic spin networks and quantum gravity, j math phys 39 (1998) 3296.
[13] f markopoulou, l smolin phys rev d58:084032 (1998). l smolin, hept-the/9001022, hep-the/9808192. r de pietri,
canonical loop quantum gravity and spin foam models, to appear in the proceedings of the xxiiith congress of the
italian society for general relativity and gravitational physics (sigrav), 1998, gr-qc/9903076. j w barrett and l crane,
a lorentzian signature model for quantum general relativity, gr-qc/9904025. j iwasaki, a surface theoretic model for
quantum gravity, gr-qc/9903122.

[14] c rovelli: quantum gravity as a sum over surfaces , nucl phys b (proc suppl) 57 (1997) 28. m reisenberger and
c rovelli,  sum over surfaces form of loop quantum gravity, phys rev d56 (1997) 3490, gr-qc/9612035. c rovelli,
the projector on physical states in loop quantum gravity, phys rev d59 (1999) 104015, gr-qc/9806121.

[15] c rovelli, strings, loops and others: a critical survey of the present approaches to quantum gravity, in gravitation and
relativity at the turn of the millennium. proceedings of the gr-15 conference, iucaa, pune, india december 1997 (inter
university center for astronomy and astrophysics pune 1998), gr-qc/9803024.

[16] c rovelli, what is observable in classical and quantum gravity? class quant grav 8 (1991) 297.
[17] c rovelli, halfway through the woods: contemporary research on space and time, in the cosmos of science, j
earman and j d norton eds (university of pittsburgh press and universitats-verlag konstanz, pittsburgh and konstanz
1997).

[18] c rovelli, quantum spacetime: what do we know?, in physics meets philosophy at the planck scale, c callender n

hugget eds (cambridge university press, in print) gr-qc/9903045.

[19] c rovelli, time in quantum gravity: an hypothesis, phys rev d43 (1991) 442; quantum mechanics without time: a

model, phys rev d42 (1990) 2638.

[20] c rovelli: statistical mechanics of gravity and thermodynamical origin of time, class and quantum grav 10 (1993)

1549; the statistical state of the universe, class and quantum grav 10 (1993) 1567.

21

[21] a connes and c rovelli: von neumann algebra automorphisms and time versus thermodynamics relation in general

covariant quantum theories, class and quantum grav 11 (1994) 2899.

[22] c rovelli: relational quantum mechanics, int j theor phys 35 (1996) 1637.
[23] r haag, d kastler an algebraic approach to quantum eld theory, j math phys 5 (1964) 848. r haag, local quantum

physics (springer verlag, berlin 1992).

[24] j b hartle, spacetime quantum mechanics and the quantum mechanics of spacetime in gravitation and quantizations,
proceedings of the 1992 les houches summer school, ed by b julia and j zinn-justin, les houches summer school
proceedings, vol lvii (north holland, amsterdam, 1995); gr-qc/9304006.

[25] c j isham, quantum logic and the histories approach to quantum theory, j math phys 35 (1994) 2157, gr-qc/9308006.
cj isham, j buttereld, some possible roles for topos theory in quantum theory and quantum gravity foundations
of physics, to appear, gr-qc/9910005.

[26] m tomita, v-th functional analysis symposium of the math soc of japan sendai (1967). m takesaki tomitas theory of

modular hilbert algebras and its applications, springer lecture notes 128 (springer-verlag, berlin).

[27] a connes, une classication des facteurs de type iii, ann sci ecole norm sup 6 (1973) 133.
[28] j wheeler, in battelle rencontres 1967, c dewitt and j a wheeler eds (benjamin, new york, 1968). b dewitt, phys

rev d160, 1113 (1967).

[29] sw hawking, the path-integral approach to quantum gravity, in general relativity: an einstein centenary survey,

sw hawking and w israel eds (cambridge university press, cambridge 1979).

[30] jb hartle, sw hawking, phys rev d28 (1983) 2960.
[31] s mandelstam, ann phys 19 (1962) 1. am polyakov, phys lett 82b (1979) 247; nucl phys b164 (1979) 171. ym makeenko,
aa migdal phys lett 88b (1979) 135. y nambu, phys lett 80b (1979) 372; f gliozzi, t regge, ma virasoro, phys lett
81b (1979) 178; m virasoro, phys lett 82b (1979) 436; a jevicki, b sakita, phys rev d22 (1980) 467; b sakita, collective
eld theory in field theory in elementary particles, b kursunoglu and a perlmutter eds (plenum publishing corporation,
1983). k wilson, phys rev d10 (1974) 247; j kogut, l suskind, phys rev d11 (1975) 395; l susskind coarse grained
quantum chromodynamics in les houches xxix weak and electromagnetic interactions at high energy, r balian and
c h llewellyn-smith eds (north holland, amsterdam).

[32] c rovelli, loop quantum gravity, in living reviews in relativity, electronic journal, http://www.livingreviews.org,

gr-qc/9710008.

[33] c rovelli, m gaul, to appear in the proceedings of the xxxv karpacz winter school on theoretical physics: from

cosmology to quantum gravity, polanica, poland, 1999. gr-qc/xxxxxxx.

[34] a ashtekar, lectures on non-perturbative canonical gravity (world scientic, singapore 1991).
[35] c rovelli, ashtekar formulation of general relativity and loop space nonperturbative quantum gravity: a report, class

quant grav 8 (1991) 1613.

[36] f barbero, real ashtekar variables for lorentzian signature space-times phys rev d51 (1995) 5507, gr-qc/9410014;

from euclidean to lorentzian general relativity: the real way, phys rev d54 (1996) 1492, gr-qc/9605066.

[37] a ashtekar, cj isham, representations of the holonomy algebra of gravity and non-abelian gauge theories, class and
quantum grav 9 (1992) 1069. a ashtekar, mathematical problems of non-perturbative quantum general relativity,
in: j zinn-justin and b julia (eds ), les houches summer school on gravitation and quantizations, les houches,
france, 1992 (north-holland, amsterdam 1995), gr-qc/9302024.

[38] j lewandowski, to appear on the proceedings of the xxxv karpacz winter school on theoretical physics: from

cosmology to quantum gravity, polanica, poland, february 212, 1999.

[39] c rovelli: area is the length of ashtekars triad eld, phys rev d47 (1993) 1703.
[40] c rovelli: a generally covariant quantum eld theory and a prediction on quantum measurements of geometry, nucl

phys b405 (1993) 797.

[41] l smolin, finite, dieomorphism invariant observables in quantum gravity phys rev d49 (1994) 4028.
[42] l smolin, the future of spin networks, gr-qc/9702030.
[43] r de pietri and c rovelli, geometry eigenvalues and scalar product from recoupling theory in loop quantum gravity,

phys rev d54 (1996) 2664, gr-qc/9602023.

[44] n grott and c rovelli: moduli spaces structure of knots with intersections, j math phys 37 (1996) 3014.
[45] j zapata, j math phys 38 (1997) 5663, gen rel grav 30 (1998) 1229.
[46] t thiemann, anomaly-free formulation of non-perturbative, four-dimensional lorentzian quantum gravity, phys lett

b380 (1996) 257; quantum spin dynamics (qsd), class quant grav 15 (1998) 839, gr-qc/9606089.

[47] c rovelli and l smolin, loop representation of quantum general relativity, nucl phys b331 (1990) 80.
[48] c rovelli, outline of a general covariant quantum eld theory and a quantum theory of gravity, j math phys 36 (1996)

6529.

[49] r borissov, r depietri, c rovelli: matrix elements of thiemann hamiltonian, classical and quantum gravity 14 (1997)

2793; gr-qc/97703090

[50] c rovelli and l smolin, the physical hamiltonian in nonperturbative quantum gravity, phys rev lett 72 (1994) 446,

gr-qc/9308002.

[51] c rovelli: black hole entropy from loop quantum gravity, phys rev lett 14 (1996) 3288; loop quantum gravity

22

and black hole physics, helvetica physica acta, 69 (1996) 582; gr-qc/9608032. k krasnov, geometrical entropy from
loop quantum gravity phys rev d55 (1997) 3505. a ashtekar, j baez, a corichi, k krasnov, quantum geometry and
black hole entropy, phys rev lett 80 (1998) 904-907.

[52] e witten (2+1) dimensional gravity as an exactly soluble system. nucl phys b311 (1988) 46.
[53] s carlip, quantum gravity in 2+1 dimensions (cambridge university press, cambridge, 1998).
[54] a ashtekar, v husain, j samuel, c rovelli, l smolin, 2+1 quantum gravity as a toy model for the 3+1 theory, class

and quantum grav 6 (1989) l185.

[55] l kauman, s lins, temperley-lieb recoupling theory and invariants of 3-manifolds, (princeton university press, prince-

ton 1994).

[56] l crane, d yetter, on algebraic structure implicit in topological quantum eld theory, kansas preprint, 1994. d yetter
state sum invariants of 3-manifolds associated to artinian tortile categories, topology and its applications 58 (1994),
47.

[57] f markopoulou dual formulation of spin network evolution, gr-qc/9704013.
[58] g ponzano and t regge, in spectroscopy and group theoretical methods in physics, f bloch ed (north-holland, amsterdam,

1968).

[59] g horowitz, exactly soluble dieomorphism invariant theories, comm math phys 125 (1989) 417. m blau and g thomp-
son, topological gauge theories of antisymmetric tensor elds, phys lett b228 (1989) 64. j baez, four dimensional bf
theory as a topological quantum eld theory, lett math phys 38 (1996) 129. a cattaneo, p cotta-ramusino, j frohlich
and m martellini topological bf theories in 3 and 4 dimensions, j math phys 36 (1995) 6137.

[60] c rovelli: basis of the ponzano-regge-turaev-viro-ooguri quantum gravity model is the loop representation basis,

phys rev d48 (1993) 2702.

[61] tj foxon, spin networks, turaev-viro theory and the loop representation, class quant grav 12 (1995) 951-964, gr-

qc/9408013.

[62] l crane, l kauman and d yetter, state sum invariants of 4-manifolds, j knot theory and ramications 6 (1997)

177, hep-th/9409167.

[63] r de pietri and l freidel, class quant grav 16 (1999) 2187, gr-qc/9804071. m reisenberger, class quant grav 16 (1999)

1357, gr-qc/9804061.

[64] a barbieri, nucl phys b518 (1998) 714. l freidel and k krasnov, class quantum grav 16 (1999) 351. j baez and j

barrett, the quantum tetrahedron in 3 and 4 dimensions, gr-qc/9903060.

[65] j w barrett and r williams, the asymptotic of an amplitude for the 4-simplex, gr-qc/9809032.
[66] l freidel and k krasnov, spin foam models and the classical action principle, adv theor math phys 2 (1998) 1221.
[67] r de pietri, l freidel, k krasnov, c rovelli, barrett-crane model from a boulatov-ooguri eld theory over a homogeneous

space, hep-the/9907154

[68] j baez, strings, loops, knots and gauge elds, in knots and quantum gravity, j baez ed (oxford university press,

oxford 1994).

[69] m reisenberger, worldsheet formulations of gauge theories and gravity, talk given at the 7th marcel grossmann meeting

stanford, july 1994, gr-qc/9412035.

[70] j iwasaki, a denition of the ponzano-regge quantum gravity model in terms of surfaces, journ math phys 36 (1995)

6288.

[71] j baez, an introduction to spin foam models of bf theory and quantum gravity, to appear in to appear in geometry
and quantum physics, h gausterer and h grosse eds, lecture notes in physics (springer-verlag, berlin), gr-qc/9905087.
[72] t thiemann, kinematical hilbert spaces for fermionic and higgs quantum field theories, class quantum grav 15

(1998) 1487, gr-qc/9705021.

[73] j c baez, spin foam models, class quant grav 15 (1998) 1827, gr-qc/9709052.
[74] l smolin, towards a background independent approach to m theory, hep-the/9808192; strings as perturbations of

evolving spin-networks, hep-the/9801022.

23

