clns 99/1639
hep-th/9910099

holography, a covariant c-function

and the geometry of the renormalization group

vatche sahakian1

laboratory of nuclear studies

cornell university

ithaca, ny 14853, usa

abstract

we propose a covariant geometrical expression for the c-function for theories which
admit dual gravitational descriptions. we state a c-theorem with respect to this quan-
tity and prove it. we apply the expression to a class of geometries, from domain
walls in gauged supergravities, to extremal and near extremal dp branes, and the ads
schwarzschild black hole. in all cases, we nd agreement with expectations.

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
2
1

 

 
 

1
v
9
9
0
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1vvs@mail.lns.cornell.edu

1 introduction

the holographic encoding of information in gravitational theories appears to be a manifes-
tation of a fundamental physical principle. the importance of this projection of information
was realized in the context of classical general relativity through entropy bounds and black
hole thermodynamics [1, 2, 3]. more recently, we have learned from string theory that this
phenomenon appears to have intriguing connections with scaling and renormalization group
ow in non-gravitational theories [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. a great deal remains to be unrav-
eled about this connection, but there are already indications that this line of thought may
hold the resolution of some of the paradoxical issues arising from black hole physics.

in this work, we investigate the connection between renormalization group ow and
holography by proposing a covariant, geometric measure for the eective central charge
for the so called boundary theory of maldacenas duality [12, 13, 14]. central charge,
or the c-function, is a measure of the degrees of freedom of a theory, the number of
independent species of excitations. for theories in two dimensions, zamolodchikov [15] was
able to prove a set of elegant statements describing the central role played by this quantity in
the renormalization group ow. the eective central charge was shown to be a function of the
couplings of the theory that is monotonically decreasing as one ows to lower energies; xed
points described by conformal eld theories correspond to the extrema of this function, and
the gradients over coupling space are related to the beta functions of the theory. attempts
to generalize some of these statements to higher dimensions have been met with very limited
success. in the context of maldacenas duality, we acquire geometrical tools to study this
question in regimes where a theory is strongly coupled.

the basic conceptual ingredient in our proposal is a remarkably simple, yet powerful
prescription proposed by bousso [16]. the observation is that holographic statements should
have a covariant nature. consequently, bousso proposes to use congruences of null geodesics
as probes for the sampling of holographically encoded information. we believe that this
principle is a general one. the proposal of maldacena in regimes where one focuses on bulk
dynamics in the non-stringy gravity sector must have a similar covariant nature.

in the next section, we motivate and construct a covariant expression for the central
charge for the boundary theory. we will guide ourselves by a set of intuitively driven prin-
ciples inspired by the bousso entropy bound. we will then prove a c-theorem; boussos
criterion for the convergence of the congruence, along with the null convergence criterion,
are identied as the necessary and sucient conditions 2. we will then proceed to apply
the prescription to certain classes of geometries: domain wall solutions in gauged super-

2this is for cases involving shearless ow; a more general statement can also be proved for the cases with

shear.

1

gravities, near horizon regions of extremal and near-extremal dp branes for p < 5, and the
anti-de sitter (ads) schwarzschild black hole in four dimensions. in the rst class, we nd
exact agreement with [10]. for the second class, the scaling of the c-function is found to
match onto the expected asymptotic behaviors given by the perturbative supersymmetric
yang-mills (sym), the matrix string, the m theory membrane and the m theory ve brane
theories. we also nd that our expression, applied to ow along radial congruences, is
insensitive to the presence of a thermodynamic horizon; as expected, the latter corresponds
to a thermodynamic state in the same dual theory. we end with a discussion assessing the
evidence presented.

2 a covariant c-function

consider a d dimensional spacetime with metric gab foliated by a choice of constant time
surfaces. let this vacuum solve einsteins equations with a negative cosmological constant.
focus on a spacelike d  2 dimensional surface m at some xed time. there are generally
four light-sheets projected out of this surface consisting of the spacetime points visited by
a congruence of null geodesics orthogonal to m [17]. as prescribed by bousso [16], we
pick a light-sheet along which the congruence converges. if na denotes the tangents to these
geodesics, we can construct a null vector eld ma on the light-sheet such that it is orthogonal
to m and satises mana = 1 [18]. then m admits the metric

the second fundamental form is dened by [17, 19]

hab = gab + n(amb) .

bab  bna = anb = bba .

(1)

(2)

the symmetry property follows from frobeniuss theorem and the fact that the vector eld
na is surface orthogonal. we dene the d  2 dimensional matrix

and its trace

ba

b = gacbcb = hacbcb ,

 = tr b .

the condition for the convergence of the geodesics is stated as [16]

  0 .

2

(3)

(4)

(5)

the geodesics are to be extended as long as this condition is satised; for spacetimes curved
by matter satisfying the null convergence condition3, these geodesics will typically end at
caustics (  ). we would like to think of a sense in which information on such a
light-sheet is holographically encoded on m. this is the nature of boussos entropy bound,
and it is also consistent with maldacenas conjecture4.
for simplicity, let us require that the spacetimes we consider admit a timelike killing
vector eld along which our choice of time ows. one may propose to time ow the whole
light-sheet forward and backward, generating a d dimensional region of spacetime which
becomes the bulk; and the boundary is the time ow of m. the c-function we will be
considering is to be accorded to the theory that is in some sense living on this boundary
and is dual to the bulk. we want to associate renormalization group ow to lower energy
scales with motion along the converging congruence of null geodesics. a more precise and
careful version of this statement will be postponed to future work. for now, we will use the
null geodesics described above as tools to probe covariantly the dual theory at lower energy
scales; the success of our proposal in the examples we will consider can be viewed as evidence
to this approach.

without claim to rigor, we next motivate the geometrical formula for the c-function.
the rst principle we accord to is that the local geometry transverse to the ow encodes
the information about the decrease of the eective central charge due to the coarse graining
of the boundary theory. this is partly motivated by the work of [20], where the energy
momentum tensor of the boundary theory for ads spacetimes was written in terms of local
quantities, essentially the extrinsic curvature of a foliation and its trace. from the same
line of thought, we expect the c-function to be proportional to g1
d , the inverse of the
d dimensional gravitational coupling. the next tool is dimensional analysis; we need a
local covariant object with dimensions lengthd2 to construct a dimensionless c-function;
motivated by the bousso construction, we allow ourself to use only covariant data from
the congruence.
intuitively, we also require invariance under boundary dieomorphisms;
the most natural way to assure this is through an integration over the boundary using the
proper measure constructed from hab. finally, we require that the formula gives the proper
scaling for the central charge in ads spaces, i.e. a constant proportional to ld2/gd [21],
where the cosmological constant scales as 1/l2. for ads spaces with metric in the poincare
3the null convergence condition is discussed in detail in [17]; it is the statement that the energy momentum
tensor satises the condition tabkakb  0 for all null ka. this follows from the strong or weak energy
conditions that are believed to be satised by all known forms of matter.
4the past/future history of the light-sheet is causally related to it; so that the spacelike notion of holog-

raphy we may naively accord to maldacenas duality is a subset of this covariant statement.

3

caustic
(ir physics)

d-1 dim.

time

m

figure 1: an illustration of the construction of holographic duals; the d  2 dimensional
surface m is shown, along with a caustic ending the congruence of null geodesics.

coordinates

ds2 =

l2

z2 (cid:16)dz2 + d~x2

d2  dt2(cid:17)

(6)

and a choice of constant z foliations at xed time for m, we have   z/l2 and h 

(l/z)d2. putting everything together, we are left with two simple candidates dierring only
if the ow of the congruence has shear (see denition below); we pick the one that appears
most natural in form:

c( ) 

.

(7)

the other option is to replace (det b) by d2. the integral is evaluated at some proper
time  along the geodesics;  is to be related to the energy scale of renormalization group
ow through the uv-ir relation. there are two problems with expression (7); dependence
on the scale parameter for the proper time; and it is divergent for many relevant geometries
with non-compact boundaries m. both problems can be regulated by proposing that the
local expression we have can yield only the fractional decrease in the central charge as a
result of renormalization. we then propose the cure:

c0

gdr h det b(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

c2
c1

=

gdr
gdr

h det b(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)1
h det b(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2

4

.

(8)

one xes the central charge at some proper time 1 from other data, and the formula predicts
the central charge at lower energy scales deep in the bulk at 2. the expression is manifestly
covariant, independent of the arbitrary scaling of the proper time, in principle convergent,
and invariant under boundary dieomorphisms. typically, one would expect to work in a
gravitational theory with negative cosmological constant so as to have an asymptotic ads
vacuum conguration corresponding to a uv xed point. c1 gets xed by the conformal
algebra in this region, and c2 predicts the central charge of the deformed conformal theory
at lower energy scales. the product of c1 with the numerator of the right hand side is
a numerical coecient times regulator factors canceling with the denominator of the right
hand side. for pure ads spaces, equation (8) gives one by construction.

in practical calculations, we will have symmetries that allow us to write a slightly sim-
plied formula. for the rest of this work, we assume that the ow under consideration is
shearless; the matrix b can be decomposed generally as [17]

b =



d  2

1 +  ,

(9)

where the symmetric matrix  is referred to as shear. for all cases under considerations, we
have  = 0, so that b is proportional to a d 2 dimensional identity matrix. we then write
(10)

c( ) =

c
0

c0

gdr h det b(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)



,

gdr h d2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

where c0 and c
0 are products of numerical coecients, and a factor regulating the size of m
in the cases where m is non-compact. as mentioned above, for shearless ow, we are unable
to discriminate between the two options that we were led to in the arguments above; i.e.
det b  d2. we are however intuitively driven to propose that the general form for the
central charge should be given by (8). we expect that the ow of the central charge should
be sensitive to the phenomenon of shear.

we will next prove a c-theorem for equation (10). a more general version with respect
to equation (8) can be proven as well (the convergence criterion gets slightly generalized
and we would require that the congruence is principal null with respect to the weyl tensor).
however, our understanding of the physical role of shear from the renormalization group
perspective is primitive; we defer the more general statement to future work where we hope
to explore explicitly examples with shear.

3 the c-theorem

theorem: consider a congruence of null geodesics emanating from a d  2 dimensional
surface m as dened above; then equation (10) is monotonically decreasing for increasing 

5

if the null convergence condition is satised, and if everywhere along the ow   0.

the proof is straightforward. dierentiating the log of equation (10), the derivative slices

through the integral (the congruence is orthogonal to m) and we get
d (cid:16)hd2(cid:17) ;

ln c = 

d
d

1

r hd2 z d

the monotonicity follows immediately from raychaudhuris equation

d
d

= 

1

d  2

2  rabnanb ,

h = nh = h  .

d
d

and from

we then have

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

d
d

ln c = 

(d  2)

r h ||d2 z h ||d3rabnanb  0 ,

where we have used   0. rabnanb  0 follows from the null convergence condition and
einsteins equations in the presence of a cosmological constant since nana = 0. the null
convergence condition follows from either the weak or strong energy conditions.

note that equation (14) vanishes for d = 2, i.e. when the boundary is described by
quantum mechanics. this is consistent with the fact that the renormalization group ow
prescription, in the spirit dened in eld theoretical settings, does not exist in this regime.
let us simplify the formulas further to make a few observations. often the metric for
spacetimes of interest depends on a single radial coordinate, and we choose the surface m
to be at constant value with respect to this coordinate. spacetime is therefore parameterized
by time, a radial coordinate, and d 2 spatial coordinates living on m. the integral in (10)
can then be evaluated, canceling the potential divergence in the numerator, so we write the
nite expressions

c( ) =

c0

gd h||d2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

rabnanb

,

,

(15)

(16)

d
d

ln c = (d  2)

||

where c0 is a nite numerical coecient.
implied is the statement that for larger values
of proper time, we penetrate deeper in the bulk and therefore ow to lower energies. this

6

statement will be made more precise in the next section. when ||  , putting an end to
the sampling of the bulk points, and assuming rabnanb is nite, equation (16) indicates that
we have reached an infrared xed point. depending on whether the combination h||d2 is

nite or innite, we have a nite or zero central charge. this implies that all renormalization
group ows to lower energies lead to ir xed points. this is certainly a desirable statement;
we have correlated caustics with ir xed points5. the other criterion for the theorem, the null
convergence condition, was also a condition advocated by the work of [10] for the statement
of monotonicity. our covariant approach indicates that this observation is a general one.

4 a covariant uv-ir relation

we need to prescribe a relation between the proper time and the energy cuto in the renor-
malization group ow. we have very little to guide ourselves with in this regard. the uv-ir
relation, as sketched in, for example, [22], is a rough scaling relationship; and it is still asso-
ciated with various paradoxes. a fundamental formulation of the relation between scale on
the boundary and bulk physics is yet unknown. in the spirit of our previous discussion, we
should try to write a covariant uv-ir relation. one can write trivially the statement of [22],
i.e. gttdt2  grrdr2, covariantly

1

( )  z 

u v

d  naat .

(17)

here t is the function foliating the equal time surfaces, u v is the proper time chosen in
the uv, and ( ) is the energy cuto associated with the proper time  . this approach
is particularly naive; and moreover it is not unique. one can readily write other covariant
expressions, particularly ones that make reference to the second fundamental form and ap-
pear to be more natural choices. given the correlation between ir xed points and caustics
we advocated earlier, it is desirable to state a uv-ir relation such that caustics naturally
correspond to the zero energy limit of the cuto. for the standard scenarios analyzed in the
literature in the context of (17), this is certainly the case. however, our understanding of
the underlying physics in this regard in a general context is limited; we will then adopt for
now equation (17) as a rough guide for the purpose of tracking the scaling relation between
energy scale and a coordinate in the bulk. a more fundamental geometrical understanding
of this issue and the coarse graining prescription is needed for a more rigorous map between
the renormalization group and geometry.

5 if rabnanb is to diverge, we expect stringy physics to set in to regulate the conclusion.

7

5 tests and examples

gauged supergravity:

we rst consider the class of geometries describing domain walls in gauged supergrav-
ities. these solutions interpolate between two asymptotic ads regions; they are believed
to correspond to the compactications of iib vacua on manifolds that get deformed from
the spherical geometry as one ows from the uv to the ir. a wide class of solutions were
summarized in [11], and the metrics have the generic form

ds2 = e2a(r)(cid:16)d~x2

(d2)  dt2(cid:17) + dr2 .

(18)

we pick the d  2 dimensional manifold m as a surface of constant r, and we measure
time/energy by the coordinate t. the congruence of ingoing null geodesics can easily be
found using the timelike killing vector eld t; one nds
na = e2at  ear ,

(19)

where  is an arbitrary parameter, chosen to be positive, that scales the proper time; this is
an arbitrariness characteristic of null geodesics. the christoel variables are found to be

where tt = 1 and ii = +1 for i  m. we construct the second fundamental form

r
ii = ae2aii

, i

ri = a ,

aea a

bbc = 





a
...
0
...

   0  
aea    0  
...
0
...

aea1

.





the data for the c-function becomes

yielding

b = aea1d2 , h = e(d2)a ,

c =

c0

gdad2 .

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

this is the expression that was proposed for the c-function in [10, 11] along with compelling
evidence in its favor. the form of (8) assures that the parameter c0 here is such that, in the
asymptotic ads uv region, the central charge is given by that of the uv xed point.

8

dp branes:

we next consider the near horizon geometries of dp branes. it will be more convenient

to rst study a class of metrics of the form

ds2 = e2a(z)(cid:16)f (z)1dz2 + d~x2

d2  f (z)dt2(cid:17) .

(24)

we will coordinate transform the dp brane geometries into this form later. we choose a
constant z and t surface for our manifold m. the congruence of null geodesics is given by
the vector eld
(25)

na = f 1e2at + e2az .

the christoel variables are

z

zz =

z

tt =

1

2  

f 
f

+ 2a! , z

ii = f a

,

f
2

(f  + 2f a)

, i

zi = a

, t

zt =

1

2   f 

f

the data for the c-function becomes

we then get the expression

b = ae2a , h = e(d2)a .

c =

c0

gde(d2)aad2 .

+ 2a!

(26)

(27)

(28)

the function f (z) disappeared from the expression for the c-function. the role of this func-
tion in the metric is to excite the geometry above extremality, i.e. to create a thermodynamic
horizon. correspondingly in the dual description, we excite a nite temperature vacuum in
the same theory. the c-function should not change when the vacuum reects a thermody-
namic state in the same theory with the same degrees of freedom. this insensitivity of our
expression to thermodynamic horizons is the second non-trivial piece of evidence in its favor.
we will come back to this issue later in the context of the ads schwarzschild black hole; for
now, let us proceed to dp branes.

a dp brane metric in the maldacena scaling regime is given by [23, 24]

7p

2

ds2

q!
str =   r

(cid:16)d~x2

(p)  f dt2(cid:17) +(cid:18)q
r(cid:19)

7p

2 (cid:16)f 1dr2 + r2d2

8p(cid:17) .

(29)

9

with the dilaton being

and

e = (cid:18)q
r(cid:19)

(7p)(3p)

4

,

q7p  gstr n , f = 1 (cid:18)r0

r (cid:19)7p

,

(30)

(31)

where (after taking the decoupling limit!) we have chosen units such that  = 1. energy
in the sym dual is measured with respect to the coordinate time t. given that we lack
numerical accuracy in the relation between energy scale and radial extent r at present (for
that matter, we also lack rigorous conceptual understanding in this context), we will now
start being careless with numerical coecients and aim at determining only the scaling of
the c-function with respect to the physical parameters of the sym theory. we apply the
coordinate transformation

r = z

2

p5

with p < 5 .

(32)

after rescaling the metric to the einstein frame, as well as absorbing certain constants in
the transverse coordinates

gein
 = e/2gstr


, (p  5)

p7

2

q

2

(~x, t)  (~x, t) ,

(33)

we get

ds2

ein = q

(p+1)(7p)

8

z

(p3)2

4(p5)   2

p  5!2  1

z2 (cid:16)f 1dz2  f dt2 + d~x2

2 (cid:19)2
p(cid:17) +(cid:18)p  5

d2

8p! .

(34)

note that we have eectively rescaled the sym energy. this metric is of the form (24)
except for the transverse 8  p sphere factor. even though it is straightforward to extend
our formalism to this extended space with the transverse sphere, it is easier to track the
scaling of the physical parameters by imagining that we have compactied the geometry on
this sphere, with the eect that the gravitational coupling in the lower d = p + 2 dimensions
scales as

g2

str

g(p+2) 

v ol(8p)

= g2

strzp8e(p8)a(z) ,

(35)

where a(z) refers to the corresponding function identied from matching (24) with (34). we
then have

.

(36)

1
z

a 

10

the c-function becomes

c = c0

z8pe8a
str ap = c
0g
g2

p3

2

str n

p+1

2 z

(p3)2

p5

,

(37)

where c0 and c
0 are numerical coecients. applying the uv-ir relation given by (17)
(necessarily at zero temperature; see comments clarifying the relevance of this statement in
the schwarzschild black hole section), we get [22]

(z) 

1

gstr nz

,

(38)

where we interpret  as the renormalization energy cuto scale. we have eliminated the
proper time in favor of the coordinate z using the trajectory of the geodesics. we have also
undone the rescaling of the time variable in (33), so that  is energy scale as measured in
the sym theory. putting things together, and dening the eective large n dimensionless
coupling as

2 = gstr , we arrive at an expression for the c-function for the p + 1 dimensional

g2
e()  gy

2np3 ,

(39)

where gy
sym theory

p3
5p

str n

p7

p5 

(p3)2

2 p3
5p
e

cdp()  g

(40)
the rst thing to note is that, when the energy scale is   y m such that the curvature
scale in the region of space where the integral of equation (10) is evaluated becomes of order
the string scale, we have g2

()n 2  csy m (ge) .

5p  g

e(y m )  1, and therefore, for all p,

cdp(y m )  n 2 ,

(41)

i.e. the gravitational description breaks down at the horowitz-polchinski correspondence
point [25] and the central charge scales as in the perturbative sym regime. this happens in
the uv for p < 3 and in the ir for p = 4. for p = 3, we note that the c-function is constant
and of order n 2 as expected for the conformal 3 + 1d n = 4 sym theory.
now let us analyze the dierent scenarios more closely: for p = 1, we get

cd1() 

n 2
ge() 

n 3/2
gy

 .

(42)

this result was obtained in [26] by dierent methods; the authors there could use the correla-
tion function with insertions of two energy-momentum tensors to read o the central charge.
this c-function, as noted by them, interpolates between the 1+1 dimensional sym and the

11

matrix string regimes; the latter arises in the ir at energy scales m s  gy /n 1/2, which
is again a horowitz-polchinski correspondence point in a dual geometry [27]; equation (42)
yields at this energy scale

as expected for the matrix string [28, 29].

cd1(m s)  n

next, consider p = 2; we have

cd2() 

n 2
e () 
g2/3

n 5/3
gy

2/3 1/3 .

(43)

(44)

moving from the 2 + 1 sym theory to the ir, at energy scales m 2  gy
in [27], the membrane theory is encountered. we nd the corresponding central charge is

2n 1/2, as shown

cd2(m 2)  n 3/2 .

(45)

this is indeed the proposed behavior for the membrane theory [30]. beyond this point, the
geometry becomes ads4, and it appears we have reached a xed point of ow6.

for p = 4, we ow from the sym in the ir to the (2, 0) theory on a circle sitting in the

uv. we have

as we ow to the uv, we will start probing the size of the eleventh dimension. this happens
at m 5  1/r11  gy

2. the central charge then becomes

cd4()  gy

2n 3 .

(46)

cd4(m 5)  n 3.

(47)

this is indeed the characteristic scaling for the central charge of the m5 branes [21]. the
geometry becomes beyond this scale ads7 s4, i.e. the near horizon geometry of m5 branes.
the reader may have noticed that p = 5 was a special case in our analysis. the coordinate
transformation applied for these examples breaks down in this setting.
in this case, one
probes the delicate ns5 brane geometry; a more careful analysis of the geodesic ow is in
order. the results are bound to have more of a predictive nature than of a test of our
proposal; we will postpone this task to the future.

equation (40) appears then to correctly reect the renormalization group ow in p + 1
dimensional sym theories for p < 5. furthermore, the expression is insensitive to excitations

6 one may expect naively that the energy scale m 2 must be 1/r11; however, the geometry of the lifted
d2 branes is given by that of smeared m 2 branes, whose near horizon geometry is not ads4; the energy
2n 1/2 was identied in [27] as the scale where the localized membrane theory sets in; it
scale m 2  gy
is this geometry which is ads4. correspondingly, we nd the characteristic n 3/2 scaling for membranes at
this scale of the ow.

12

of the vacuum above extremality to nite temperatures. we will say more on this issue in
the next section. one may argue that the matching onto the m2 and m5 brane central
charges is not terribly impressive since the geometries become ads at these energy scales,
and our expression is tuned to give the right answer for ads spaces. we note however that,
at the horowitz-polchinski correspondence points, this issue cannot be raised. we have
two powers of the dimensionless quantities ge and n to check against; if one gets xed
by the ads region, the other is free. note that in the case for d1 branes, the horowitz-
polchinski correspondence criteria bound both sides of the ow. and these matched the
proper asymptotics known from other reliable methods. turning around the argument,
this becomes a test of our hypothesis that the c-function is expressible in terms of local
geometrical quantities; a statement which is intuitively in tune with the prescription of the
renormalization group ow. when we reach a xed point, i.e. an ads region, it is irrelevant
how we got there; there may be dierent routes to owing to a xed points from dierent
neighbouring conformal eld theories. the outcome must be the same; the central charge is
xed by the end point, i.e. by the cosmological scale and gravitational coupling of the ads
region. this viewpoint, along with the non-trivial matchings with the perturbative sym
regimes for all p and the matrix string theory, constitutes compelling evidence in favor of a
local expression for the central charge.

ads schwarzschild:

we briey explore here the four dimensional ads schwarzschild black hole case to illus-

trate a previous point in a simpler setting. let us consider the metric [31]

ds2 = g(r)dt2 + f (r)dr2 + r2d2 + r2 sin2  d2 .

for the ads black hole, we have

g(r) = 1 

r0
r

+

r2
l2 = f (r)1 ,

where l is related to the cosmological constant. one then nds

c  f (r) g(r) .

(48)

(49)

(50)

the inverse relation between f and g characteristic of horizon excitations yields a constant
c-function. as in the near extremal dp brane cases, we nd here as well that our assessment
of the central charge in the theory does not get aected by a thermodynamic horizon. the
central charge for the ads schwarzschild black hole geometry is a constant equal to the value
set by the asymptotic ads region.

13

note that this example also demonstrates that the disappearance of the function f from
the central charge in the cases of near-extremal dp branes was not a result of focusing on
the space m transverse to the z  t plane; it is the relative relationship between f and g
that the central charge probes. one may get troubled from the fact that we used the zero
temperature uv-ir relation when we wrote the central charge as a function of the cuto
energy; i.e. we used the extremal metric. the complaint would be that the insensitivity of
the central charge, written as a function of energy scale, to the presence of the black horizon
was partly put by hand. the point is that the relation between energy scale in the boundary
theory and extent in the bulk should be an independent statement; a covariant formulation
of the uv-ir statement should be insensitive to the presence of a thermodynamic horizon
in the geometry independently from any other statement.
it would be unphysical if the
presence of a background thermal bath aected our assessment of the relation between the
location of an excitation in the bulk and its energy as measured in the boundary theory.
this would have been needed if the cancellation of the horizon factors in the central charge
expression was not to occur. this feature of our expression is then positive evidence in its
favor.

in what sense then does the presence of a black horizon special? it seems that we
are drawn to the conclusion that the central charge for the ads schwartzschild black hole
geometry is set by the asymptotic ads region; the black hole is simply a thermal state in
the conformal eld theory dual to the ads vacuum [32, 33]. the answer has to do with the
causal aspect of the horizon. consider a surface m sitting at the horizon. as bousso notes,
there are now three classes of null congruences which are candidates for sampling the bulk.
one set will sample the inside of the horizon, but the other two sets, the trapped geodesics,
will sample the surface area. these ones saturate the sampling criterion   0; i.e. they
satisfy  = 0. this indicates that the gravitational dynamics at the horizon in some sense
is a holographic dual to the gravitational dynamics whithin the horizon; both descriptions
being duals to a conformal eld theory. this viewpoint, in its current fetal state, presents
an intriguing marriage between our understanding of the special causal aspects of a black
horizon, its thermodynamic character, and renormalization group ow.

in principle, one can arrange matter congurations so as to curve spacetime as in (48)
with arbitrary f and g. asymptotically, we must recover ads space with the cosmological
constant set by our gravitational action. our analysis suggests that, if this setup is stable,
unlike the black hole scenario, it would correspond to perturbing the boundary theory away
from conformality, generating non-trivial renormalization group ow.

the generalization of this example to higher dimensions is straightforward; we expect no

change in the conclusions.

14

6 discussion

let us recap the proposal and critically assess the evidence we have presented in its favor.
we used a principle of covariant holography and a set of intuitively driven, yet non-rigorous,
arguments to dene holographic duals.
in this context, we proposed a c-function for the
boundary theory; it is a geometrical, local, covariant expression holographic in nature

.

(51)

c 

1

rm det b

the inverse central charge is simply written as the integral of the determinant of the second
characteristic form on m. the expression was explicitely tuned to yield a constant for ads
spaces. unfortunately , we do not have a more physical understanding of the form of (51).
if this proposal is indeed correct, it is a statement about understanding the holographic
encoding of information in the language of the renormalization group.

the evidences we presented in favor of (51) were as follows:

 we could prove a c-theorem: this essentially followed from raychaudhuris equation.
one of the two criteria for a monotonically decreasing c-function, the condition  < 0,
correlates with boussos criterion for sampling the bulk space for information; the
second criterion, the null convergence condition, was advocated independently in the
example of [10].

 for domain wall solutions, our result agrees with [10, 11]. this may be regarded as
merely a test for the possibility to formulate a c-function through the formalism of
congruences of null geodesics.

 for the dp brane geometries, our expression appears to interpolate correctly between
known asymptotics. this constitutes a non-trivial test for the principle that a covariant
and local expression for the c-function exists. as such however, any other covariant
local expression is a candidate as well.

 exciting a thermodynamic horizon in the bulk space does not change the central charge.
this constitutes a non-trivial test for the form we have proposed, beyond the test for
covariance.

the proposal (51) can be incomplete, with additional corrections needed as we move
further into the bulk [20]. the successes we demonstrated may have been accidents due to
certain symmetries in the cases considered. any covariant term, invariant under boundary
dieomorphisms, and vanishing in the maximally symmetric ads case is a priori allowed.

15

for example, terms involving arbitrary powers of det b and  such that the dimensions are
right are allowed. more interestingly, more general terms can be multiplied by powers of
the gravitational coupling to make them dimensionless; their origin would then probably be
stringy. one may in principle add terms constructed from pull-backs of the curvature tensors;
adding weyl tensor dependent terms would not aect our conclusions in the cases of extremal
dp branes and domain walls; it would however change the conclusion for near extremal dp
branes, which would be undesirable. it is possible that our approach may be a rst order
approximation to the underlying physics; perhaps probing the geometry by geodesics can
go so far; one may need to study the full quantum eld theory in a given background
geometry (or for that matter the full string theory) to decode renormalization group data
from gravitational physics. on the other hand, the principle of covariant holography accords
an attractive special physical role to null geodesics. we certainely expect corrections of
string theoretical origin as the geometrical description starts to break down. however, within
energy scales where the low energy gravity sector is a good approximation, a fundamental
quantity like the c-function may be expected to have a simple geometrical representation
such as (51). this is in the spirit of the frugal statement that relates entropy of a black hole
with the area of its horizon. we believe that we have presented enough evidence to make
the proposal worthy of further investigation.

one of the most attractive aspects of (51) is the fact that it is in practice easy to com-
putationally handle. it can readily be applied to a myriad of geometries, tested, as well as
used to understand the nature of certain ill-understood dual theories (such as ve branes).
there are also more stringent tests that the expression can be subjected to: in particular,
an understanding of the relation between the rst order callan-symanzik equations and the
second order einstein equations is of direct relevance to this proposal. work in this direction
is in progress.

we stated in the beginning of the rst section the condition that the gravitational vacuum
under consideration should solve einsteins equations in the presence of a negative cosmo-
logical constant. from the string theory side, we know that there exists an energy regime
that screens out regions of spacetime that are not candidates for holography. this typically
leads to focusing on the near horizon geometries of dp branes, which are conformal to ads
spaces. on the side of the boundary theory, xed points play a fundamental role in dening
renormalization group ows. these special points indeed correspond to ads spaces. it is in
this light that we are motivated to state that holography in general, and the formalism we
presented in particular, need to be tought of in the context of a gravitational theory with
a negative cosmological constant. this line of thought rules out extending these ideas to
at minkowski space. it would be interesting however to explore this approach in scenarios
where the spacetime does not admit a timelike killing vector eld.

an important issue that we have not been able to address properly is a covariant formu-

16

lation of the uv-ir correspondence. this issue is related to an understanding of the process
of coarse graining as seen by the gravity side. a possible picture for this was presented in [9].
on the other hand, it is tempting to believe that the gravitational vacuum that solves ein-
steins equations reects the state of the dual theory at all energy scales; locally, foliations
are snapshots of the theory at dierent energy scales. the metric and its rst derivative
on m (essentially the content of the congruence data) encode all the necessary information
about the theory at a given scale. from the diculty we are having to formulate a covariant
uv-ir correspondence, it appears that this line of thought may be only part of the whole
picture.

finally, certain simplifying assumptions were made in the text to arrive at leaner conclu-
sions and to focus on the relevant physics. the assumption of shearless ow however may
hold rich physics. even though it may appear straightforward to generalize the approach to
this case, there are subtleties which we do not understand in this context. flow with shear
is in particular a characteristic of boundary theories coupled to background gravity. our
understanding of the eect of this on the renormalization prescription is limited.

if a fundamental relation between renormalization group ow and geometry exists, it
should be possible to nd a geometrical interpretation for every object in the renormalization
group prescription. we hope to have stimulated further investigation in this direction.

i have enjoyed conversations with v. balasubramanian, e. flanagan,
acknowledgments:
h. tye, k. narayan, and s. teukolsky. i am grateful to k. narayan for a careful reading of
a draft. the comments about possible corrective terms to our proposal arose in discussions
with v. balasubramanian and h. tye. this work was supported by nsf grant phy-9513717.

references

[1] j. d. bekenstein, a universal upper bound on the entropy to energy ratio for

bounded systems, phys. rev. d23 (1981) 287.

[2] j. d. bekenstein, black holes and the second law, nuovo cim. lett. 4 (1972)

737740.

[3] s. w. hawking, particle creation by black holes, commun. math. phys. 43 (1975)

199.

[4] l. girardello, m. petrini, m. porrati, and a. zaaroni, novel local cft and exact

results on perturbations of n = 4 super yang-mills from ads dynamics, jhep 12
(1998) 022, hep-th/9810126.

17

[5] j. distler and f. zamora, non-supersymmetric conformal eld theories from stable

anti-de sitter spaces, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1999) 1405, hep-th/9810206.

[6] a. kehagias and k. sfetsos, on running couplings in gauge theories from type-iib

supergravity, phys. lett. b454 (1999) 270, hep-th/9902125.

[7] m. porrati and a. starinets, rg xed points in supergravity duals of 4-d eld theory

and asymptotically ads spaces, phys. lett. b454 (1999) 77, hep-th/9903085.

[8] l. girardello, m. petrini, m. porrati, and a. zaaroni, the supergravity dual of n =

1 super yang-mills theory, hep-th/9909047.

[9] v. balasubramanian and p. kraus, spacetime and the holographic renormalization

group, hep-th/9903190.

[10] d. z. freedman, s. s. gubser, k. pilch, and n. p. warner, renormalization group

ows from holography supersymmetry and a c-theorem, hep-th/9904017.

[11] k. skenderis and p. k. townsend, gravitational stability and renormalization-group

ow, hep-th/9909070.

[12] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal eld theories and supergravity,

hep-th/9711200.

[13] e. witten, anti-de sitter space and holography, hep-th/9802150.

[14] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov, and a. m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from

noncritical string theory, phys. lett. b428 (1998) 105, hep-th/9802109.

[15] a. b. zamolodchikov, irreversibility of the ux of the renormalization group in a 2-d

eld theory, jetp lett. 43 (1986) 730732.

[16] r. bousso, a covariant entropy conjecture, jhep 07 (1999) 004, hep-th/9905177.

[17] r.wald, general relativity. the university of chicago press, 1984.

[18] e. e. flanagan, d. marolf, and r. m. wald, proof of classical versions of the bousso

entropy bound and of the generalized second law, hep-th/9908070.

[19] g. s.hawking, the large scale structure of spacetime. cambridge monographs on

mathematical physics, 1973.

18

[20] v. balasubramanian and p. kraus, a stress tensor for anti-de sitter gravity,

hep-th/9902121.

[21] m. henningson and k. skenderis, the holographic weyl anomaly, jhep 07 (1998)

023, hep-th/9806087.

[22] a. w. peet and j. polchinski, uv / ir relations in ads dynamics, hep-th/9809022.

[23] g. t. horowitz and a. strominger, black strings and p-branes, nucl. phys. b360

(1991) 197209.

[24] n. itzhaki, j. m. maldacena, j. sonnenschein, and s. yankielowicz, supergravity and

the large n limit of theories with sixteen supercharges, phys. rev. d58 (1998)
046004, hep-th/9802042.

[25] g. t. horowitz and j. polchinski, a correspondence principle for black holes and

strings, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 61896197, hep-th/9612146.

[26] a. hashimoto and n. itzhaki, a comment on the zamolodchikov c-function and the

black string entropy, phys. lett. b454 (1999) 235, hep-th/9903067.

[27] e. martinec and v. sahakian, black holes and the super yang-mills phase diagram.

2, hep-th/9810224.

[28] l. motl, proposals on nonperturbative superstring interactions, hep-th/9701025.

[29] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, and h. verlinde, matrix string theory, nucl. phys. b500

(1997) 43, hep-th/9703030.

[30] s. s. gubser and i. r. klebanov, absorption by branes and schwinger terms in the

world volume theory, phys. lett. b413 (1997) 4148, hep-th/9708005.

[31] e. witten, anti-de sitter space, thermal phase transition, and connement in gauge

theories, hep-th/9803131.

[32] t. banks, m. douglas, g. horowitz, and e. martinec, ads dynamics from

conformal field theory, hep-th/9808016.

[33] v. balasubramanian, p. kraus, a. lawrence, and s. trivedi, holographic probes of

anti-de sitter spacetimes, hep-th/9808017.

19

