u-duality of born-infeld theory

spin-1999/28
october 1999

gysbert zwart
spinoza institute

leuvenlaan 4

3584 ce utrecht

and

institute for theoretical physics

university of utrecht

princetonplein 5
3584 cc utrecht
the netherlands

abstract

string theory compactied on a three-torus possesses an sl(5, z) u-duality group. we investigate
the realisation of this symmetry on the born-infeld theory on a three-brane, and discuss a u-duality
covariant formulation of the bps sector of the theory where the rank of the gauge group is treated
on an equal footing with the uxes.

1 introduction

the simplest compactications of string theories are those on tori. these preserve maximal supersym-
metry, and furthermore they enjoy a large discrete symmetry, called u-duality. this u-duality group can
be viewed as being generated by two distinct sets of symmetries (see e.g. [1] and references therein).

the rst is t-duality, a perturbative symmetry of string theory, i.e.

it holds order by order in the
string loop expansion. t-duality states that strings on circles of radius r are in fact equivalent to strings
on circles with inverse radii. in the identication, the roles of string momentum and winding states are
interchanged. the t-duality group of string theory on a d-dimensional torus is so(d, d, z).

the second contribution to the u-duality group follows from the observation that type iia strings
on a d-torus may alternatively be regarded as m-theory on a torus of one dimension higher. this
point of view makes obvious a geometric symmetry group sl(d + 1, z) of the torus. from the string
theory perspective, this is a non-perturbative symmetry: for instance, it interchanges non-perturbative
d0-branes with stringy momentum modes.

when these two groups are combined, they generate the u-duality groups, whose continuous versions
have been known to exist for a long time as the hidden symmetries of supergravity theories. for various
torus dimensions d, they are listed in table 1. in the following we will concentrate on the case d = 3,

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
5
2

 

 
 

1
v
3
9
1
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

sl(2, z)

sl(5, z)

so(5, 5, z)

u-duality group

d
1
2 sl(2, z)  sl(3, z)
3
4
5
6
7

e6(6)(z)
e7(7)(z)
e8(8)(z)

table 1: u-duality groups for string theory compactied on various tori

where the u-duality group is sl(5, z).

the states in the theory transform in multiplets of the u-duality group. in particular this is the case
for the 1/2 bps states. in type iib strings on a three-torus these states are d3-branes, three dierent
d1-branes (one for each cycle of the torus), three fundamental string winding modes and three momenta

1

around the torus. these ten objects transform as an antisymmetric tensor under sl(5). the 1/4 bps
states, in which we will be mainly interested, are realised as combinations of such 1/2 bps objects.

the symmetry under u-duality transformations also implies that the degeneracies of states related by
such a transformation should coincide. in the case of 1/4 bps states this degeneracy can be calculated in
perturbative string theory by considering a state with only momentum and winding quantum numbers.
the degeneracy of a state with momentum vector pi and winding numbers wi is given by d(p  w), with
d(n) dened by the chiral string partition function:

1  qn(cid:19)8
x d(n)qn = 256y(cid:18) 1 + qn

.

(1)

since any other 1/4 bps state can be mapped to such a state, all 1/4 bps degeneracies should be given
by a similar expression.

the purpose of this work (reported in [2, 3]) is to investigate the implications of the u-duality
symmetry of the string theory on the born-infeld gauge theory living on a three-brane wrapping a torus.
as we will see, the bps states of the strings have an interpretation in terms of uxes in the gauge theory
on the three-brane. we will study the bps sector of this born-infeld theory and, via bps quantisation
(following [4]) determine the associated degeneracies of the bps states in this gauge theory. these will
turn out to be in accord with the string results.

2 the born-infeld gauge theory on the three-brane

we will focus the discussion on the seven-dimensional case, corresponding to string theory compactied
on a three-torus, with u-duality group sl(5, z). on the type iib string theory side, bps states are built
from ten distinct objects: three-branes wrapping the three-torus, fundamental and d-strings winding
around three dierent one-cycles, and momentum modes in the three internal directions. the associated
quantum numbers transform in the ten-dimensional representation of sl(5).

in the gauge theory on a three-brane wrapping the torus, all these ten quantum numbers have an
interpretation as uxes. the relations are given in table 2. the number of d3-branes is of course related

string theory

d3-brane
d1-branes

fundamental strings

momenta

gauge theory

rank n

magnetic uxes bi
electric uxes ei
gauge momenta pi

table 2: translation of string theory quantum numbers into gauge uxes

to the rank n of the u (n ) gauge theory. the magnetic uxes, the zero modes of the magnetic eld
bi = 1
2 ijkfij , correspond to d-strings, whereas the s-dual electric uxes take the role of fundamental
strings. finally the momenta (i.e. the components of the integrated poynting vector e  b) simply
translate to the string theory momenta around the torus.

to bring out the u-duality properties, it is convenient to organise these gauge theory quantities in an

antisymmetric ve by ve tensor mij, as follows:

m =





0

p3
0

p2 e1 b1
p3
e2 b2
p1
p2 p1
e3 b3
0
e1 e2 e3
0
n
b1 b2 b3 n 0

.





(2)

the sl(5) acts on this matrix by conjugation. one can easily recognise the two subgroup sl(3) and
sl(2). the former is the geometric symmetry on the torus and acts as such on the three vectors. it sits
in the top lefthand block of the sl(5) matrices. the two by two lower righthand block realises the sl(2)

2

which is the electromagnetic duality. it mixes electric and magnetic components. both subgroups leave
the rank n untouched. we will discuss those transformations aecting the rank in the following.

the particular gauge theory on the d3-brane that we want to consider is the born-infeld gauge theory.

the abelian version of its action is given by

sbi =

1

gs z qdet(g + f ).

(3)

the inverse string coupling in front of the action is typical of d-branes. we omit possible non-trivial b-
eld background contributions. the generalisation to higher rank is thought to be given by a symmetrised
trace over the gauge group; this issue is not fully resolved yet however, for a discussion see e.g. [5]. we
will compute the hamiltonian and bps masses for the abelian case and assume the generalised result for
arbitrary n .

in order to calculate the hamiltonian we need to introduce the electric eld

ei =

l
ai

.

it now turns out that the square of the hamiltonian density h can be expressed in a simple way in terms
of the matrix mij dened in equation (2), as

h 2 =

(n 2 + b2) + eigij ej + pi(g1)ij pj

= 

tr m 2.

(4)

1
g2
s
1
2

in the rst line, we see the contribution from the d3 and d1-branes, with the characteristic coupling
constant dependence, and then the terms corresponding to winding and momentum. the second line
demonstrates that the hamiltonian takes a very simple form in terms of the sl(5) tensor m . (we can
absorb the coupling, as well as any non-trivial background elds, in a ve-dimensional metric).

this form suggests an sl(5) covariant description of the theory. however, the matrix m does not
have arbitrary components, there exist relations between them. remarkably we can write these relations
again in an sl(5) covariant form, as the constraint

k i =

1
8

ijklmmjkmlm = 0.

(5)

in components the ve-vector k i is given by

k = (n pi  (e  b)i, p  b, p  e).

the rst three components are precisely the denition of the poynting vector, while the last two compo-
nents are automatically zero whenever the rst three are.

we are therefore led to consider an arbitrary matrix m , provided it satises the ve-vector constraint
k = 1/2(m  m ) = 0. at this point a major problem is of course that, to make the connection to gauge
theory, while e, b and p may be position dependent, the rank n should of course be a constant. we
will turn to this in a moment.

finally, we are interested in the bps states of the theory. again the bps masses can be written in
a nice form using the matrix mij. the bps mass is a function of the ten charges, which are given by

the zero modes of m . we write these as mij = r mij. in terms of this matrix of uxes, the bps mass

formula takes the form

m 2

bp s = 

tr m2 + 2|k|.

(6)

1
2

here k is the zero mode equivalent of k, i.e. k = 1/2(m  m). note that while the space dependent k is
automatically zero, k is not. in fact k = 0 only for 1/2 bps states, while 1/4 bps states have non-zero
vector k. the bps equations can be expressed in a covariant fashion in terms of m and its zero-modes
m as well.

we will go on to quantise the space of bps states, in order to try to determine the quantum degen-
eracies of the bps states. we will rst review the method of bps quantisation introduced in [4] for the
u (n ) yang-mills theory; then we will apply this to the born-infeld case.

3

3 bps quantisation of yang-mills theory

in [4] hacquebord and verlinde discussed the question of sl(5) invariance of the bps spectrum in
the context of yang-mills theory on a torus. in the yang-mills theory we have the elds a, the vector
potential, and six (adjoint) scalar elds x i. the bps equations depend on the uxes of the conguration.
in the simple case where only the momentum in the one-direction, p1, and the rank n are non-zero, we
may gauge-x a0 and a1 to zero and then obtain the bps equations

(0  1)a2,3 = 0,

(0  1)x i = 0,

[ai, aj ] = [ai, x i ] = [x i , x j] = 0.

(7)

these equations were recognised in [4] as the left-moving sector of a matrix string theory. due to the
vanishing of the commutators, one can take all n by n matrices to be diagonal. at rst sight this seems
to imply that we have simply n distinct left-moving theories on a string. however, in the periodicity
conditions in the coordinate x1 one may include a permutation of the eigenvalues,

ai(x1 + 2) = sai(x1)s1,

and similarly for the x i , so that eectively one describes the long strings introduced in [6] as the
twisted sectors of a conformal eld theory on a symmetric product, with a total length n.

hacquebord and verlinde concentrated on the case where one has just one string of length n. in this
case, quantisation of the theory restricted to the bps congurations yields left-moving oscillators with a
fractional moding, in multiples of 1/n. then, to obtain a total momentum p1 one should consider states
with oscillator number np1, so that the degeneracy of such states is indeed given by d(np1), the result
from string theory.

for more general quantum numbers the degeneracies were argued to be the same in [4]. the total
bps degeneracies for the yang-mills u (n ) gauge theory therefore respect the u-duality group sl(5, z),
at least in the single long string sector.

the essential point in this result is that in the subsector of the theory respecting the bps conditions,
the congurations reduce to strings. the length of these strings equals the rank of the gauge theory. we
will now try to apply the same arguments to the born-infeld gauge theory. in the abelian case where the
theory is well understood, we will again see the reduction to a string theory. for the non-abelian version,
we will assume that similarly the equations reduce to those of a matrix string theory, so that eectively
we can also here use the abelian bps equations. we know that in the limit of large n , where the theory
is adequately described by the yang-mills theory, this should be the case, but for general n this remains
an assumption essential for our result.

4 bps quantisation of the born-infeld theory

for the supersymmetric born-infeld case we will now reexamine the situation. as explained above we
will use the bps equations found from the abelian born-infeld theory, and assume these to be valid for
the non-abelian case, with the only alteration that the length of the domain on which the elds live is
multiplied by the rank n.

just as in the yang-mills case let us start from the easy case, where only the quantum numbers
associated to the rank, n, and the momentum in the one-direction, p1, are non-zero. in this case the bps
equations are

e2 = b3, e3 = b2, e1 = b1 = p2 = p3 = 0.

(8)

if we insert the expressions for ei and bi in terms of the gauge eld ai we again nd the same equation
as in the case of the yang-mills theory,

(0  1)ai = 0,

and we are suppressing the six extra scalars x i. from the fact that the equations are precisely the
same we can of course conclude that here we have the same degeneracy as the one found in the previous
situation. however, in order to be able to generalise to arbitrary uxes, it is convenient to go through
the calculation in a little more detail.

4

in order to quantise the theory in a lightcone gauge, we identify the electric eld eld with left-moving

string coordinates,

enjoying the appropriate commutation relations

ei  xi,

[x(), x()] = i(  ).

from this relation to a string theory one can compute the degeneracy. however, let us step back and
try to make the analogy to the string theory before the xing to lightcone gauge. in order to do this
we propose to identify the lightcone coordinates x  with the rank, n , and the momentum, p1. for
the moment we therefore assume n to be a real, uctuating eld, whose zero mode is the rank n. this
implies imposing a commutation relation between the two quantities,

[n, p1] = i.

(9)

in this notation, if we write down the constraint k i = 0 (equation (5)), its only non-trivial component
k 1 takes the form

k 1 = x +x  

x ix i = 0

(10)

1
2

which we recognise as precisely the virasoro constraint! using the gauge symmetry generated by this
constraint we may now x n = x + to be a constant, n. this then determines p 1 = x  in terms of
the other elds as

np1 = (e  b)1.

in conclusion, by introducing an underlying pre-theory, in which the rank is allowed to be a uctuating
eld, we manage to make contact to a string theory before the xing of lightcone gauge. in this theory the
constraint k = 0 is interpreted as the virasoro constraint. the original gauge theory is then identied
with the lightcone gauge-xed version of this theory, where the rank is identied with the lightcone
momentum.

so far we have only introduced some additional structure, which by xing a gauge we again removed.
the usefulness of this additional structure becomes clear when we consider the generalisation to arbitrary
uxes. to solve the problem for general uxes, let us insert the expression in terms of the xs from the
previous discussion in the matrix mij:

m =





0

0

0
0

x 

0
0
0 x 
0 x 2 x 3
0

x 3 x 2 x +

0

0

0

x 2 x 3
x 2
x 3
x +

0

.





(11)

now, if mij satises the born-infeld bps equations, then, since these equations are covariant, an sl(5)
transformed m 
ij is a solution as well. if we therefore conjugate the matrix m above with an appropriate
sl(5, z) matrix, we obtain a new solution with arbitrary new zero-modes of the elds (uxes). the
entries of this new m  are all linear combinations of the x, so the new electric and magnetic elds, as
well as momenta and rank, are all functions of all the xs. in particular, since the new rank n  is not
anymore simply x +, it is no longer a constant. however, from the previous discussion we see that we
may remedy this simply by making a gauge transformation generated by the constraint k i, to x the
gauge so that again n  is a constant. eectively, by performing a u-duality transformation we have gone
out of the lightcone gauge, and one has to apply a compensating gauge transformation to reach a new
conguration with constant rank. since this is only a gauge transformation, it does not of course aect
the degeneracy, so that this is indeed automatically u-invariant.

5 conclusions

we have seen that born-infeld theory in 3 + 1 dimensions can be naturally written in terms of u-covariant
objects: the antisymmetric matrix mij, together with the ve-vector of constraints k i = 0. the spectrum
of bps masses, as well as the bps equations take a covariant form in terms of these quantities.

5

to study the degeneracies of the bps states, we generalised the bps quantisation applied to yang-
mills theory in [4]. in the bps sector, we saw that the theory reduced to a string theory, giving rise to
the stringy degeneracies d(n). furthermore, we proposed a theory underlying the actual gauge theory in
the bps sector, in which the rank is treated on an equal footing as the other elds. in this formulation
the constraint k was identied with the generator of conformal transformations. fixing this theory to
lightcone gauge yields the actual gauge theory with constant rank n .

references

[1] n. obers, b. pioline, hep-th/9809039.
[2] c. hofman, e. verlinde, g. zwart, jhep 10 (1998) 020, hep-th/9808128.
[3] g. zwart, jhep 06 (1999) 010, hep-th/9905068.
[4] f. hacquebord, h. verlinde, nucl.phys. b508 (1997) 609, hep-th/9707179.
[5] a. tseytlin, nucl.phys. b501 (1997) 41, hep-th/9701125.
[6] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, nucl.phys. b500 (1997) 43, hep-th/9703030.

6

