9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
1

 

 
 

1
v
6
6
2
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

cern-th-99-331
imperial/tp/99-0/8
november, 1999

type ii branes from brane-antibrane

in m-theory

laurent houart

theoretical physics group

blackett laboratory, imperial college

london sw7 2bz, uk
l.houart@ic.ac.uk

and

yolanda lozano

theory division, cern

1211 gen`eve 23, switzerland
yolanda.lozano@cern.ch

abstract

we discuss in a systematic way all the possible realisations of
branes of m and type ii theories as topological solitons of a brane-
antibrane system. the classication of all the possibilites, consistent
with the structure of the theory, is achieved by studying the wess-
zumino terms in the worldvolume eective actions of the branes of
m-theory and their reductions.

1

1 introduction

during the past couple of years, signicant progress has been made in our
understanding of m-theory beyond the bps congurations. these advances
have already permitted to test the web of dualities relating the dierent
phases of m-theory (the dierent superstring theories) on some of the non-
bps states of the spectrum, and a beautiful outlook on the interplays between
bps branes and non-bps branes has been given in some cases (see [1]-[4] for
reviews and references therein) along with an elegant mathematical formu-
lation [5, 6]. for example, a bps dp-brane of type ii theory may be viewed
as coming from a non-bps system given by a d(p+2), anti d(p+2) pair [7],
[8]. the instability of this non-bps conguration manifests itself in a com-
plex tachyonic mode of the open string stretched between the pair. when
the pair coincides, the tachyon rolls down to a true vacuum and condenses
leading to a stable vortex-like conguration, and the resulting object is a
bps dp-brane. recently, it has been argued [9] that a similar mechanism
could also produce fundamental strings. namely, a fundamental string in the
type ii theory could be described as a bound state of any pairs of stable dp,
anti-dp branes where the tachyon of a d(p-2)-brane stretched between them
condenses.
in [9], the author considers in some detail the case p = 4, i.e.
the condensation of a d2-brane stretched between a d4, anti-d4 pair. since
the tachyonic condensing charged object is in this case extended (a tachyonic
worldvolume string), there are no direct ways to describe quantitatively this
type of mechanism. nevertheless, the existence of this process can be de-
duced from the following three steps consideration [9]. one rst notices that
the usual process [8] of creation of a d2-brane in terms of the condensation
of a fundamental string should have a description in m-theory in terms of
creation of an m2-brane by condensation of a stretched m2 between a pair
of m5, anti-m5 branes. then one identies in the worldvolume eective ac-
tion of the brane anti-brane pair the wess-zumino term responsible for this
process. finally upon dimensional reduction one nds two wess-zumino
terms, one describing the usual realisation of the d2 as a soliton, the other
describing the fundamental string.

in this paper, we propose to extend in a systematic way this kind of
consideration. we study all the possible realisations of branes of m and type
ii theories as topological solitons of a brane-antibrane system by looking at
the wess-zumino terms of the worldvolume eective actions of the dierent
brane anti-brane pairs in m-theory.

the paper is organised as follows.

in section 2 we study the m5m5
system, reviewing the work of yi [9]. section 3 discusses the mkkmkk
system, and in section 4 we study the m9m9 case. section 5 considers all

2

brane-antibrane systems in m-theory in which m-waves are involved, in par-
ticular the m2m2 case. finally, section 6 analyses type iib branes from the
same kind of brane- antibrane systems. the last section contains a summary
and some discussions.

2 the m5m5 system

in this section we briey review the results of ref.[9]. we start with the
m5m5 system and analyse the process of annihilation of a pair of m5, anti-
m5 branes in terms of the tachyonic condensation of an m2-brane stretched
between this pair. in particular, one can identify the following coupling [10]
in the m5-brane, m5-brane worldvolume action:

zr5+1

c  da(2) ,

(2.1)

as the one describing the emergence of an m2-brane soliton when the stretched
tachyonic m2-brane condenses [9]. here c is the 3-form of eleven dimensional
supergravity and a(2) the worldvolume 2-form present in the action of the m5-
brane1. this 2-form is self-dual for a single m5-brane, however for an m5,
anti-m5 pair it is unrestricted [9], given that in the anti-m5 brane eective
action it is anti-self-dual and both contributions are combined to describe the
coinciding m5, anti-m5 pair2. the topologically non-trivial tachyonic con-
densation of an m2 is though [9] to be accompanied by a localised magnetic
ux da(2). integrating over the ux on a transverse r3 one nds:

zr2+1

c ,

(2.2)

which means that the condensation of the tachyonic mode of the m2 gives
rise to the annihilation of the m5 anti-m5 pair into an m2-brane, since this
is the way the m2-brane couples, minimally, to c.

the dimensional reduction of the stretched m2-brane between the two
m5-branes, along an m5-brane worldvolume direction, gives a fundamental
string stretched between a d4 and an anti-d4 branes, if the reduction takes
place along the m2-brane, or a d2-brane stretched between two d4, anti-d4
branes, if the reduction takes place along a direction transverse to the m2-
brane. these two processes are described by the worldvolume reduction of
(2.1)3:

1 hats on target space elds indicate that they are 11-dimensional. we use hats as well

for the worldvolume elds of branes in 11 dimensions.

2the complete wz term including the coupling of the complex tachyonic eld has been

constructed in [11] for d brane anti-d brane systems.

3we ignore all numerical prefactors.

3

zr5+1

c  da(2)  zr4+1

c (3)  db(1) + zr4+1

b(2)  da(2)

(2.3)

where:

a(2)
5 = b(1)
 ,

 = a(2)
a(2)
 ,

 = 0, 1, . . . , 4 ,

(2.4)

and c (3) denotes the rr 3-form and b(2) the ns-ns 2-form of the type iia
theory. the rst term describes a stretched fundamental string, coupled to
b(1), and the second a stretched d2-brane, coupled to a(2). considering the
rst term, integration over the localised magnetic ux db(1), which accompa-
nies the topologically non-trivial condensation of the tachyon of the string
[8], along a transverse r2 gives the coupling:

zr2+1

c (3)

(2.5)

which is the way the rr 3-form couples to the d2-brane. therefore, one re-
covers the fact [8] that the condensation of the stretched fundamental string,
coupled to b(1), gives a solitonic d2-brane. reversing the logic, the well-
established process of creation of a d2-brane legitimates by oxidation the
process of m2 creation described above.

on the other hand, a similar argument [9] on the second term of (2.3)
shows that the mechanism of tachyonic condensation of the stretched d2-
brane, coupled to a(2) , upon integration over the localised ux da(2) on a
transverse r3 (ux which should accompany this topologically non-trivial
process) gives:

zr1+1

b(2) ,

(2.6)

describing a solitonic fundamental string.

one can describe as well the process in which a d2-brane stretched be-
tween a ns5, anti-ns5 pair of branes condenses, giving rise to a d2-brane
soliton. the corresponding coupling is given by the reduction of (2.1) along
a direction perpendicular to the m5-branes worldvolume:

zr5+1

c (3)  da(2) .

(2.7)

here the integration over the localised ux da(2) on a transverse r3 gives the
minimal coupling of a d2-brane:

zr2+1

c (3) .

4

(2.8)

3 the mkkmkk system

following the same reasoning as in the previous section we now analyse the
dierent possible processes starting with the mkkmkk system by looking
at the relevant terms in the worldvolume eective action of the kaluza-klein
monopole.

the worldvolume eective action of the m-theory kaluza-klein monopole
was constructed in [12, 13]. the existence of the taub-nut direction in the
space transverse to the monopole is implemented at the level of the eective
action by introducing a killing isometry which is gauged in the worldvolume.
then the target space elds must couple in the worldvolume with covariant
derivatives of the embedding scalars, or through contraction with the killing
vector. the kaluza-klein monopole is charged with respect to an 8-form,
which is the electric-magnetic dual of the killing vector considered as a 1-
form. this eld is itself contracted with the killing vector, giving a 7-form
minimally coupled to the 7 dimensional worldvolume of the monopole.

the worldvolume eective action of the monopole contains the following

term [13]:

zr6+1

ik

c  db(1) ,

(3.1)

where c denotes the 6-form of eleven dimensional supergravity, k is the
 k 6 c 1...6, and b(1) is a 1-form worldvolume
killing vector, with (ik
eld which describes the coupling to an m2-brane wrapped on the taub-
nut direction. the same coupling appears in the eective action of the
mkkmkk pair, where now b(1) = b(1)
1,2 the corresponding
vector eld in the worldvolume of each monopole. after condensation of the
tachyonic mode of the m2-brane, the integration of the localised ux db(1)
on a transverse r2 gives

2 , with b(1)

c)1...5

1  b(1)

zr4+1

c

ik

(3.2)

i.e. an m5-brane soliton with one worldvolume direction wrapped around
the taub-nut direction. therefore we can describe a (wrapped) m5-brane
soliton, as the condensation of an m2-brane stretched between the kaluza-
klein anti kaluza-klein monopole pair.

we can now analyse the dierent possible processes in the type iia theory
to which this process gives rise. dimensionally reducing along the taub-
nut direction of the monopole we can describe a d4-brane through the
condensation of an open string stretched between a d6, anti-d6 pair [8].
this is described by the coupling:

5

zr6+1

c (5)  db(1)

(3.3)

which is straightforwardly obtained by reducing the coupling (3.1) describing
the creation of the solitonic (wrapped) m5-brane.

the reduction along a worldvolume direction of the monopole gives as
one of the possible congurations a solitonic ns5-brane, obtained after the
condensation of an open string stretched between a type iia pair of kaluza-
klein anti-kaluza-klein monopoles. the worldvolume reduction of (3.1)
gives:

zr5+1

ikc (5)  db(1) + zr5+1

ikb(6)  db(0)

(3.4)

where b(0) arises as the component of b(1) along the worldvolume direction
that is being reduced. these terms describe two processes: one in which a
(wrapped) d4-brane is created after condensation of a (wrapped) d2-brane
stretched between two type iia monopoles, described by the rst term, and
one in which a (wrapped) ns5-brane is created after the condensation of a
(wrapped) open string. this is, to our knowledge, the rst example in which
a ns5-brane has been described through a brane anti-brane pair annihilation.
there is another conguration giving rise to a solitonic ns5-brane, though
it occurs after the annihilation of a pair of so-called exotic branes, i.e. branes
not predicted by the analysis of the spacetime supersymmetry algebra. this
process is obtained after the reduction of the m2-brane stretched between the
kk, anti-kk pair along a direction transverse to the monopoles, but dier-
ent from the taub-nut direction. this reduction of the m-theory kaluza-
klein monopole gives rise to a kaluza-klein type of solution in ten dimen-
sions whose transverse space is not a four dimensional euclidean taub-nut
space, as for the conventional kaluza-klein monopole, but three dimensional.
therefore this solution is not asymptotically at but logarithmically diver-
gent. moreover it is not predicted by the analysis of the type iia spacetime
supersymmetry algebra (see [14] for a possible explanation of this fact). we
will however discuss briey this type of congurations because they give rise
to interesting descriptions of ns-ns branes in terms of brane anti-brane an-
nihilation. we will denote the brane obtained through this reduction of the
m-theory kk-monopole as a kk6-brane4. the coupling in the kk6-brane
worldvolume action reads:

4the type iia kaluza-klein monopole would then be denoted as a kk5-brane.

zr6+1

ikb(6)  db(1) .

(3.5)

6

this describes a (wrapped) ns5-brane after condensation of a (wrapped)
d2-brane stretched between a kk6, anti-kk6 pair of branes.

we now turn to the dual process in the mkkmkk system , i.e.
obtaining an m2-brane soliton after the condensation of an m5-brane. a
wrapped m5-brane is coupled in the worldvolume of a higher dimensional
brane through a 4-form eld, which in the 7 dimensional worldvolume of the
monopole is dual to the vector eld b(1) describing the coupling of a wrapped
m2-brane. given a dual pair of worldvolume elds only one can couple at
the same time in the worldvolume eective action, given that both of them
carry the same number of degrees of freedom. therefore we need to dualise
the vector eld b(1) in the kaluza-klein monopole eective action. first, one
adds a term

zr6+1

db(1)  db(4)

(3.6)

to the action, and then integrates b(1) from its equation of motion5. since
b(1) couples through its gauge invariant eld strength:

we can write (3.6) as

from where a term

f (2) = db(1) + (ik

c) ,

zr6+1

( f (2)  (ik

c))  db(4) ,

zr6+1

(ik

c)  db(4)

(3.7)

(3.8)

(3.9)

is already known to be coupled to the dual action without the need to elim-
inate explicitly f (2) from its equation of motion. this term describes an
m2-brane soliton. indeed, the condensation of the wrapped m5-brane, ac-
companied by a localised db(4)-ux over a transverse r5, gives a coupling:

zr1+1

c) ,

(ik

(3.10)

which is the way the eleven dimensional 3-form couples to a wrapped m2-
brane. therefore, this is the soliton that is produced after the condensation.
the creation of a fundamental string in the type iia theory is now de-
scribed as the reduction of the stretched m5-brane between the kaluza-klein
anti kaluza-klein pair over the taub-nut direction of the monopole. this

5this step is normally quite involved due to the complicated form of the born-infeld

part.

7

gives a d4-brane stretched between a d6, anti-d6 pair. the reduction of the
coupling (3.9) gives:

therefore, we nd:

zr6+1

b(2)  db(4) .

zr1+1

b(2)

(3.11)

(3.12)

after the integration of the 4-form, describing a solitonic fundamental string
[9].

three other possible brane anti-brane annihilation processes can be de-
duced in type iia from the m-theory kaluza-klein anti-kaluza-klein an-
nihilation that we have just discussed.
if we reduce this process along a
worldvolume direction of the kaluza-klein monopole we nd the following
couplings:

zr5+1

ikb(2)  db(4) + zr5+1

ikc (3)  db(3)

(3.13)

where:

b(4)
1...4 = b(4)

1...4 ,

b(4)
1...36 = b(3)

1...3 ,

 = 0, 1, . . . , 5 .

(3.14)

the rst term in (3.13) describes a fundamental string created after the
condensation of a ns5-brane stretched between a pair of type iia kaluza-
klein monopole anti-monopole. both the fundamental string and the ns5-
brane are wrapped on the taub-nut direction of the monopole. on the
other hand, the second term represents a wrapped d2-brane arising after the
condensation of a wrapped d4-brane stretched between the two monopoles.
the third case is obtained reducing (3.9) along a direction transverse to
the monopole but dierent from its taub-nut direction. we obtain the
following coupling in the seven dimensional worldvolume of a kk6-brane:

zr6+1

ikc (3)  db(4) .

(3.15)

this describes a d2-brane wrapped around the nut direction of the kk6-
brane, and it is obtained after the condensation of a (wrapped) ns5-brane
stretched between the brane anti-brane pair.

8

4 the m9m9 system

in this section we study the possible processes of creation of branes after
tachyonic condensation in the m9m9 system. we identify the coupling in
the m9-brane eective action responsible for this condensation and analyse
the related processes of creation of branes in type iia.

for this purpose it is important to recall that the m9-brane contains a
gauged direction in its worldvolume [15], such that the eld content is that
of the nine dimensional vector multiplet. reduction along this direction
gives the d8-brane eective action, whereas the reduction along a dierent
worldvolume direction gives the kk8-brane, another so-called exotic brane
of the type iia theory, in the sense that it is not predicted by the analysis of
the type iia spacetime supersymmetry algebra. this brane contains as well
a gauged direction in its worldvolume, inherited from that of the m9-brane,
and has been studied in connection with the 7-brane of the type iib theory
in [14], where its worldvolume eective action has been derived. the wess-
zumino term of the m9-brane eective action has not yet been constructed
in the literature. however, from the eective action of the kk8-brane we
can deduce the presence of the following term in the m9-brane worldvolume
eective action:

zr8+1

ik

n (8)  db(1) .

(4.1)

let us stress that the m9-brane is eectively an 8-brane, given that it has
one of its worldvolume directions gauged. therefore the integration takes
place over a nine dimensional space-time. the contraction of the 8-form
potential n (8) with the (worldvolume) killing direction, denoted by k, is the
eld to which the m-theory kaluza-klein monopole couples minimally6. b(1)
is a 1-form worldvolume eld describing a wrapped m2-brane ending on the
m9-brane [16]. the reduction of this term along a worldvolume direction
dierent from the gauged direction gives the terms:

zr7+1

ikn (8)  db(0) + zr7+1

ikn (7)  db(1)

(4.2)

present in the eective action of the kk8-brane (expression (4.6) of reference
[14]), and where:

b(1)
 = b(1)
 ,

b(1)
8 = b(0) ,  = 0, 1, . . . , 7 ,

(4.3)

6as we mentioned in the previous section here n (8) is the electric-magnetic dual of the

killing vector considered as a 1-form.

9

n (8) gives rise to the two elds ikn (8), ikn (7).

ikn (8) is the eld
and ik
that couples minimally to the kk6-brane that we considered in the previous
section, whereas the ordinary type iia kaluza-klein monopole is charged
with respect to ikn (7).

the coupling (4.1) in the m9-brane worldvolume eective action describes
the process in which a kaluza-klein monopole is created after the conden-
sation of a, wrapped, m2-brane stretched between an m9, anti-m9 pair of
branes. as in the previous sections the pair is described by choosing b(1)
as the dierence of vector elds in each brane. indeed, integration over the
localised magnetic b(1)-ux, associated to the wrapped m2-brane, on a trans-
verse r2 gives:

zr6+1

n (8)

ik

(4.4)

i.e. the eld minimally coupled to the kaluza-klein monopole.

reducing (4.1) along the isometric worldvolume direction denoted by k we
can describe the process in which a d6-brane is created after the condensation
of an open string stretched between a pair of d8, anti-d8 branes [8]. the
resulting coupling in the worldvolume eective action of the d8 brane is given
by:

zr8+1

c (7)  db(1)

(4.5)

where c (7) is the rr 7-form potential of the type iia theory and is obtained
through the reduction:

n (8) = c (7) + . . .

ik

(4.6)

(see [13] for the details of this reduction). therefore the condensation of a
fundamental string, accompanied by a localised db(1) ux over a transverse
r2, gives a d6-brane soliton:

zr6+1

c (7) .

(4.7)

instead, we can reduce (4.1) along a worldvolume direction of the m9-
brane, in which case we obtain a pair of kk8, anti-kk8 branes with the
following couplings:

zr7+1

ikn (7)  db(1) + zr7+1

ikn (8)  db(0) ,

(4.8)

derived already in (4.2). the rst coupling describes a type iia kaluza-klein
monopole, obtained after the condensation of a d2-brane. the taub-nut

10

direction of the monopole coincides with the gauged worldvolume direction
of the kk8 branes, and the stretched d2-brane is also wrapped around this
direction. the second coupling describes a kk6-brane, obtained after the
condensation of a (wrapped) open string stretched between the two kk8,
anti-kk8 branes. again the killing direction of the kk6 and kk8-branes
coincide. a last reduction on (4.1) can be performed along the transverse
direction. such a reduction on the m9 gives rise to the ns9a-brane predicted
by the type iia spacetime supersymmetry algebra [17]. we have thus the
possibility of obtaining a kk6 after the condensation of a (wrapped) d2
stretched between a ns9a, anti-ns9a pair.

as in the previous section, the process in which a wrapped m2-brane
is created through the condensation of a kaluza-klein monopole stretched
between the pair of m9, anti-m9 branes is described by the coupling dual to
(4.1). the kaluza-klein monopole must be coupled to the (9 dimensional)
worldvolume of the m9-brane through a 6-form worldvolume eld b(6), which
must be the worldvolume dual of the vector eld b(1).
in the dualisation
process we nd:

zr8+1

db(1)  db(6) = zr8+1

( f (2)  (ik

c))  db(6) ,

from where we already identify a coupling:

zr8+1

c  db(6)

ik

(4.9)

(4.10)

in the dual eective action. integration over a localised magnetic b(6)-ux,
associated to the kaluza-klein monopole, on a transverse r7 gives:

zr1+1

c

ik

describing a wrapped m2-brane soliton.

the reduction of (4.10) along the k-direction gives:

zr8+1

b(2)  db(6).

(4.11)

(4.12)

here b(6) is associated to a d6-brane, and the integration of its localised
magnetic ux on a transverse r7 gives:
zr1+1

b(2) ,

(4.13)

describing a fundamental string soliton [9].

11

as before, we can also analyse the process obtained by reducing (4.10)

along a worldvolume direction. we obtain:

zr7+1

ikc (3)  db(5) + zr7+1

ikb(2)  db(6) ,

(4.14)

where b(5) arises from the reduction of b(6) along the worldvolume direction.
the rst term describes a (wrapped) d2-brane, occuring after the conden-
sation of a kk5 monopole whose killing direction coincides with the killing
direction of the kk8, anti-kk8 branes obtained after the reduction. the
second term describes a (wrapped) fundamental string, realised in this case
after the condensation of a kk6-brane stretched between the pair of kk8,
anti-kk8 branes. finally, reducing (4.10) along the transverse direction leads
to a process where a (wrapped) d2-brane is produced after the condensation
of a kk6-brane stretched between a pair of ns9a, anti-ns9a branes.

5 brane-antibrane systems in m-theory in-

volving m-waves

in this section we analyse, among other processes, the brane-antibrane system
in m-theory giving rise to the process in which a fundamental string stretched
between a d2, anti-d2 pair condenses and a solitonic d0-brane is produced.
this process is described in m-theory by a wrapped m2-brane stretched
between a pair m2, anti-m2. when the tachyonic mode of the wrapped
m2-brane condenses an m-wave soliton is produced. in order to identify the
wess-zumino coupling in the worldvolume eective action of the m2, anti-
m2 pair of branes that is responsible for this process let us rst analyse its
dual conguration, i.e. that in which an m-wave is stretched between the
brane anti-brane pair and a wrapped m2-brane is created after its tachyonic
mode condenses.

the so-called m-wave is a pp-wave in m-theory carrying momentum along
a given direction, which we will denote by y. an m-wave ending on another
m-brane is described in the worldvolume eective action of the latter by its
coupling to the embedding scalar y. therefore in order to have a non-trivial
condensation of the tachyonic mode of the m-wave this direction must be
topologically non-trivial. indeed, the coupling in the worldvolume eective
action of the m2, anti-m2 pair of branes that is responsible for the conden-
sation of the tachyonic mode of the m-wave is given by:

zr2+1

c  dy ,

ih

12

(5.1)

where h denotes a killing vector in the y-direction. integration over a lo-
calised magnetic dy-ux gives a coupling:

zr1+1

c) ,

(ih

(5.2)

describing an m2-brane wrapped on the y-direction. the dual process is now
described by dualising this coupling. for this we need to recall that the eld
strength associated to the y-eld, which appears in the worldvolume eective
action of the m-theory pp-wave [18], is f (1) = dy + h2hdx, where  runs
over all directions but the y direction. therefore, we nd a coupling:

zr2+1

h2hdx  db(1) ,

(5.3)

b(1) being the worldvolume dual of the scalar y.
localised b(1)-ux we end up with the coupling:

integrating now over a

zr

h2hdx

(5.4)

which is the eld minimally coupled to the m-wave moving in the h direc-
tion. therefore condensation of the wrapped m2-brane coupled to b(1) in
the worldvolume of the pair produces an m-wave moving in the direction on
which the stretched m2-brane is wrapped.

we can now analyse which are the type iia brane anti-brane annihilation
processes to which these two systems give rise. it is particularly interesting
to consider the reduction along the y-direction. the coupling (5.1) gives rise
to:

zr2+1

b(2)  dy .

(5.5)

therefore it describes a fundamental string, through the condensation of a
d0-brane stretched between the d2, anti-d2 pair of branes obtained after
the reduction. on the other hand, the coupling (5.3) gives:

zr2+1

c (1)  db(1)

(5.6)

which in turn describes a solitonic d0-brane after condensation of a funda-
mental string. therefore we can conclude that the m2, anti-m2 systems that
we have discussed are the origin in m-theory of both the d0-brane creation
studied by sen [8] and the creation of a fundamental string in a d2, anti-d2
system after d0-brane condensation [9].

reduction along a direction dierent from y gives rise to two interesting
processes which, as we will see, generalise to all branes in type ii theories.

13

from worldvolume reduction we obtain a process in which a wrapped funda-
mental string stretched7 between a pair f1, anti-f1 gives rise to a pp-wave
moving in the direction on which the stretched string is wrapped. of course
we also nd the dual to this process, i.e. a solitonic wrapped fundamental
string emerging after the condensation of a pp-wave in the same brane con-
guration. similarly, after doing a direct dimensional reduction we obtain
the same type of congurations but for d2-branes. a wrapped d2-brane is
created after a pp-wave condenses in a d2, anti-d2 pair, and a pp-wave can
also be created if instead a wrapped d2-brane condenses.

an m-wave, being coupled in the worldvolume of an m-brane through the
worldvolume scalar labelling the direction in which it propagates, can end
on any of the branes of m-theory. therefore we can analyse the same two
processes that we have studied in the m2m2 case on m5, mkk or m9 brane
anti-brane systems. we are not going to repeat in detail the corresponding
analysis of the wess-zumino terms responsible for these processes, since the
reasoning goes straightforwardly as for the m2 system. let us just mention
that, together with the process in which any wrapped type iia p-brane8
stretched between a p-brane anti p-brane pair gives rise to a pp-wave soliton,
and its dual (wrapped p-brane creation through condensation of a pp-wave),
we nd the following processes:

(ns5, ns5; d4  d0)

(ns5, ns5; d0  d4)

(kk6, kk6; kk5  d0)

(kk6, kk6; d0  kk5)

(ns9, ns9; kk8  d0)

(ns9, ns9; d0  kk8)

where we use a simplied notation to indicate that the condensation of a
brane (third column) stretched between the brane-antibrane pair given by
the rst and second columns gives rise to a certain brane soliton, specied
by the fourth column. most of these processes involve exotic branes, but it is
particularly interesting to see that a d0-brane can be realised as a solitonic
conguration in an ns5, anti-ns5 annihilation process. this represents a
novel way of realising this brane soliton other than through, the more con-
ventional, d1, anti-d1 annihilation process [8].

7 the string is in fact not really properly stretched between the pair being wrapped in

the ydirection.

8also ns-ns ones, like the fundamental string that we have just considered.

14

6 type iib branes from brane-antibrane sys-

tems

in the previous sections we have derived all the type iia branes that can pos-
sibly occur as solitons after the condensation of a tachyonic brane stretched
between a pair brane-antibrane. this derivation was performed by direct
reduction from m-theory, where the wess-zumino term in the worldvolume
eective action of the brane-antibrane pair responsible for the process was
identied. it is now straightforward to derive the t-dual couplings responsi-
ble for brane creation in a brane-antibrane system in the type iib theory.

together with the realisation of dp-branes as bound states of d(p+2),
anti d(p+2) branes [8] we nd the corresponding dual processes, in which
a bps fundamental string is described as a bound state of d(p+2), anti
d(p+2) branes after the condensation of a tachyonic dp-brane stretched
between them. t-duality allows to identify explicitly the couplings in the
d(p+2)-brane eective action that are responsible for these processes:

zrp+3

c (p+1)  db(1)

(6.1)

describes dp-brane creation after condensation of an f1, described by b(1),
and:

zrp+3

b(2)  db(p)

(6.2)

describes f1 creation after condensation of the p-brane described by b(p),
worldvolume dual of b(1).

type iib branes are organised as singlets or doublets under the type
iib sl(2,z) duality group. therefore we expect to nd a spectrum of brane
solitons in brane-antibrane systems that respects this symmetry. the d5
brane forms an sl(2,z) doublet with the ns5 brane of the type iib the-
ory. therefore s-duality predicts the occurrence of a d3-brane soliton as a
bound state in a ns5, anti-ns5 pair when the condensation of a d1-brane
stretched between the two takes place. this process is indeed obtained after
t-dualising two type iia congurations. namely, that in which a d2 brane
stretched between a pair of ns5, anti-ns5 branes condensed to give a bps
d2-brane, and that in which the same kind of brane was stretched between
a pair of kk5 monopoles and condensed to give rise to a d4-brane soliton.
of course the process in which a d1-brane is created after the condensation
of a d3-brane stretched between the two ns5, anti-ns5 branes is also pre-
dicted by t-duality from certain type iia congurations. for these and the
following congurations we omit the explicit wess-zumino couplings, since

15

they can be straightforwardly derived from those in type iia found in the
previous sections. the situation with the d9-brane is similar to that with
the d5-brane, in the sense that it forms a doublet with an ns9-brane in the
type iib theory. we have indeed obtained after t-duality the congurations
describing a 7-brane as a bound state ns9, anti-ns9 after a stretched d1-
brane condenses, and its dual, namely a d1-brane realised as a bound state
ns9, anti-ns9 through the condensation of a tachyonic 7-brane.

for the type iib mkkmkk system we nd that a pair of type iib kk,

kk monopoles can annihilate giving rise to the following solitonic branes:

(kk5, kk5; d3  d3)

(kk5, kk5; d1  d5)

(kk5, kk5; f1  ns5)

(kk5, kk5; d5  d1)

(kk5, kk5; ns5  f1)

where we use the same simplied notation as in the previous section. we see
from these congurations that the creation of both a brane and its s-dual is
possible through annihilation of a pair of monopoles, which agrees with the
fact that this brane is selfdual under s-duality, so all pairs of s-dual processes
should be allowed.

concerning 7-branes some remarks are in order. t-duality of the type
iia kk6 and kk8-branes predicts a 7-brane in the type iib theory which
is connected by s-duality with the d7-brane, for what we will denote it as
an ns7-brane. this is the 7-brane that appears for instance in the processes
involving ns9, anti-ns9 annihilation. the existence of these two dierent
eective actions describing 7-branes in the type iib theory, where the anal-
ysis of the spacetime supersymmetry algebra predicts a single 7-brane, was
discussed in [14], where it was argued that the two worldvolume eective
actions are indeed necessary in order to describe a single nonperturbative
7-brane in the weak and strong coupling regimes. consistently with this
picture, we nd after t-duality one conguration in which an ns5-brane is
created when a d1-brane stretched between a pair of ns7, anti-ns7 branes
condenses, and the corresponding dual process, i.e. that in which a solitonic
d1-brane emerges after condensation of an ns5-brane. these processes are
s-dual to the more standard d5, f1 creation [8] [9] through d7, anti-d7
annihilation.

finally, t-duality on the type iia congurations involving pp-waves pre-
dicts the analogous kind of congurations in the type iib theory. namely,

16

solitonic wrapped p-branes after p-brane anti p-brane annihilation through
condensation of a pp-wave, and solitonic pp-waves after condensation of a
wrapped p-brane in the same system.

7 discussion

in this paper, extending preceeding considerations [9], we have classied the
branes of the m and type ii theories which can be realised in a consistent way
with respect to the structure of the theory as bound states of systems brane-
antibrane, after condensation of the tachyon mode of open branes stretched
between the pair. we have achieved this classication by studying the wess-
zumino terms in the worldvolume eective actions of the branes of m-theory
and their reductions.

we have shown that it is possible to give an eleven dimensional description
to the creation of a fundamental string from the annihilation of a pair of dp,
anti-dp branes with p=2,6,8. as for the case p=4 [9], the fundamental
string is created by the condensation of a d(p-2)-brane stretched between
the pair dp, anti-dp. we have identied the term in the wess-zumino
action of the pair brane-antibrane in m-theory responsible for this creation.
this term is obtained generically by nding the worldvolume dual of the
coupling describing a stretched m2-brane between the brane anti-brane pair,
which in turn describes an extended worldvolume soliton coming from the
condensation of the m2-brane. the case p=4 is especially simple in this sense.
its description in m-theory is in terms of an m2-brane stretched between
a pair of m5, anti-m5 branes, giving rise to a solitonic m2-brane. this
process is self-dual, in the sense that the dual coupling in the six dimensional
worldvolume of the m5-brane describes again a solitonic m2-brane, whereas
this is not the case for the m-theory origin of the p=2,6,8 cases. therefore,
in these cases the reduction to the type iia theory gives many dierent
realisations of bps objects as bound states of brane anti-brane pairs, which
by t-duality give in turn rise to many congurations in the type iib theory.
as an interesting realisation we have found that the ns5-brane can originate
from certain brane anti-brane annihilations, both in the type iia and type
iib theories.

we can conclude in general that the bps branes that can be realised
as solitons in a given p-brane anti p-brane conguration are determined by
the possible branes that can end on the p-brane, and whose tachyonic mode
condenses giving rise to the soliton conguration. these branes are easily
predicted by looking at the p-brane worldvolume eective action and iden-
tifying the dierent worldvolume q-forms that couple in it. for instance the

17

type iib kaluza-klein monopole anti-monopole pair gives rise to so many
dierent solitonic congurations because there are two scalars and one 2-form
coupled in the worldvolume eective action of the monopole [19], allowing
for wrapped f1, d1 and d3-branes ending on it, together with the branes
described by their worldvolume duals, i.e. d5 and ns5 branes.

finally, it is worth emphasizing that a lot of progress remains to be done
in order to reach a quantitative understanding of the dynamics of the possible
processes discussed in this paper. one can furthermore hope that there exists
a mathematical connection with some generalisation of k-theory [5, 6] where
these processes could t in.

acknowledgements

l. h. would like to acknowledge the support of the european commission
tmr programme grant erbfmbict-98-2872.

references

[1] a. sen, non-bps states and branes in string theory, hep-th/9904207.

[2] a. lerda and r. russo, stable non-bps states in string theory: a

pedagogical review, hep-th/9905006.

[3] j. h. schwarz, tasi lectures on non-bps d-brane systems,

hep-th/9908144.

[4] o. bergman

and m. gaberdiel, nonbps dirichlet branes,

hep-th/9908126.

[5] e. witten, d-branes and k-theory, j. high energy phys. 9812 (1998)

019, hep-th/9810188;
p. horava, type iia d-branes, k-theory, and matrix theory, adv.
theor. math. phys. 2 (1999) 1373, hep-th/9812135.

[6] o. bergman, e. gimon and p. horava, brane transfer operations and
t-duality of non-bps states, j. high energy phys. 9904 (1999) 010,
hep-th/9902160.

[7] a. sen, tachyon condensation on the brane-antibrane system, j. high

energy phys. 9808 (1998) 012, hep-th/9805170.

18

[8] a. sen,

so(32) spinors of type

i and other solitons on
brane -antibrane pair, j. high energy phys. 9809 (1998) 023,
hep-th/9808141.

[9] p. yi, membranes from five-branes and fundamental strings from dp

branes, nucl. phys. b550 (1999) 214, hep-th/9901159.

[10] c. callan, j. harvey and a. strominger, worldbrane actions for string

solitons, nucl. phys. b367 (1991) 60.

[11] c. kennedy and a. wilkins, ramond-ramond couplings on brane-

antibrane systems, hep-th/9905195.

[12] e. bergshoe, b. janssen and t. ortn, kaluza-klein monopoles and
gauged sigma-models, phys. lett. b410 (1997) 132, hep-th/9706117.

[13] e. bergshoe, e. eyras and y. lozano, the massive kaluza-klein

monopole, phys. lett. b430 (1998) 77, hep-th/9802199.

[14] e. eyras and y. lozano, exotic branes and nonperturbative seven

branes, hep-th/9908094.

[15] e. bergshoe

and

j.p.

van

der

schaar, on m9-branes,

class. quant. grav. 16 (1999) 23, hep-th/9806069.

[16] e. eyras and y. lozano, brane actions and string dualities,

hep-th/9812225.

[17] c.m. hull,

gravitational duality,

branes

and charges,

nucl. phys. b509 (1998) 216, hep-th/9705162.

[18] e. bergshoe and p.k. townsend, super d-branes, nucl. phys. b490

(1997) 145, hep-th/9611173.

[19] e. eyras, b. janssen and y. lozano, 5-branes, kk-monopoles and t-

duality, nucl. phys. b531 (1998) 275, hep-th/9806169.

19

