preprint typeset in jhep style. - hyper version

hep-th/9910164
ru-99-24
hep-uk-0009

a nonsupersymmetric matrix orbifold

tom banks

department of physics and astronomy
rutgers university, piscataway, nj 08855-0849
e-mail: banks@physics.rutgers.edu

lubos motl

department of physics and astronomy
rutgers university, piscataway, nj 08855-0849
e-mail: motl@physics.rutgers.edu

abstract: we construct the matrix description for a twisted version of the iia string
theory on s1 with fermions antiperiodic around a spatial circle. the result is a 2+1-di-
mensional u(n)  u(n) nonsupersymmetric yang-mills theory with fermionic matter
transforming in the (n, n). the the two u(n)s are exchanged if one goes around a
twisted circle of the worldvolume. relations with type 0 theories are explored and we
nd type 0 matrix string limits of our gauge theory. we argue however that most of
these results are falsied by the absence of susy nonrenormalization theorems and that
the models do not in fact have a sensible lorentz invariant space time interpretation.

keywords: m-theory, string duality, superstring vacua.

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
0
2

 

 
 

1
v
4
6
1
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

contents

1. the conformal eld theory description

2. the matrix model

2.1 the u(n)  u(n) formalism
2.2 actions for the local and nonlocal formulations

3. alternative derivation and connection with type 0 theories

4. the matrix string limits

4.1 rohm compactied type iia strings
4.2 dependence on the uxes
4.3 type 0 matrix strings
4.4 breakdown of the cluster property

5. conclusions

1

4
6
7

9

10
10
12
14
15

18

1. the conformal eld theory description

matrix theory [1] has been used to describe m-theory with 32 supercharges in 8,9,10
and 11 dimensions as well as various projections of this theory.
in this paper we
would like to study a nonsupersymmetric matrix model in order to obtain a better
understanding of susy breaking in string theory. the problems of the model that we
study show that susy breaking leads to rather disastrous consequences. however, we
point out in the conclusions that the restriction to the light cone frame prevents us
from abstracting completely clearcut lessons from this exercise.

before proceeding, we note that after this paper was completed (but before we had
become convinced that the results were worth publishing) another paper on matrix
models of nonsupersymmetric string theories appeared [18]. we do not understand the
connection between the model presented there and the one we study. another recent
paper on nonsupersymmetric compactications, with considerations related to ours is
[19]. our results do not agree with the suggestion of these authors that nonsupersym-
metric compactications lead to poincare invariant physics.

1

let us start with the description of the conformal eld theory that describes the
model we are interested in. we start with the type iia theory. compactication
on a circle of radius r can be described as modding out the original theory by a
symmetry isomorphic to z, consisting of the displacements by 2kr, k  z, in the
chosen direction. we can write those displacement as exp(2ikrp). a gso-like
projection by this operator now guarantees that the total momentum of a string is a
multiple of 1/r. we also have to add twisted sectors where the trip around the closed
string is physically equivalent to any element of the group that we divided by. those
sectors are wound strings, x( + 2) = x() + 2rw, where w  z is the winding
number.

such a compactication preserves all 32 supercharges. we will study a more com-
plicated model which breaks the supersymmetry completely. the symmetry isomorphic
to z will be generated by (the direction of the circle is denoted by the index 2)

g = exp(2irp2)(1)f

(1.1)
where (1)f counts the spacetime statistics (or spin; in the green-schwarz formalism
it is also equivalent to the worldsheet spin). because of this extra factor of (1)f
the physics becomes very dierent. the fermionic elds of the spacetime eective
eld theory become antiperiodic with the period 2r2 while bosons are still periodic.
such a boundary condition of course breaks supersymmetry completely because it is
impossible to dene the (sign of the) supercharge everywhere. those antiperiodic
boundary conditions for the fermions are the same as those used in nite temperature
calculations, with euclidean time replaced by a spatial circle. this compactication,
introduced in [7] is motivated by scherk-schwarz compactications of supergravity [6].
the physical spectrum is obtained by requiring g |i = |i and in the twisted sectors
corresponding to gw, w  z, a trip around the closed string is equivalent the shift by
2wr2 times (1)wf . because (1)wf for odd w anticommutes with fermions in the
green-schwarz formalism, the fermions  must be antiperiodic in the sectors with odd
winding number. similarly, the gso projection g |i = |i now does not imply that
p2 must be a multiple of 1/r2. looking at (1.1) we see that there are two possibilities.
either (1)f is equal to +1 and p2 = n/r2 or (1)f = 1 and p2 = (n + 1/2)/r2.
we have sectors with p2r2 both integer or half-integer, but for integer p2r2 we project
out all the fermions and for half-integer p2r2 we project out all the bosonic states.

thus we have four kinds of sectors; odd or even w can be combined with integer
or half-integer p2r2. for even w the boundary conditions are as in the untwisted
theory but for odd values of w we must impose antiperiodic boundary conditions for
the green-schwarz fermions .

2

since the sectors with even values of w are well-known (we just keep only bosons
or only fermions according to p2), we note only that in the sectors with odd values of
w the ground state has 8 (1/24 1/48) = 1/2 excitations both in the left-moving
and right-moving sector (the same as the ground state of a ns-ns sector in the rns
formalism). in other words, the ground state is a nondegenerate bosonic tachyon. we
must also take into the account the condition l0 = l0, more precisely (nl = nr = 0
for the ground state of even w and nl = nr = 1/2 for odd w and we dene n = p2r2)
(1.2)

nl = nr + nw.

furthermore for integer n we must project all the fermions out of the spectrum.
for even w (which means also even nw) this leaves us with the bosonic states of the
untwisted iia theory. for odd w (which implies integer nw) the fermionic modes are
half-integers and we see that due to (1.2) the number of left-moving and right-moving
fermionic excitations must be equal mod 2. therefore the level matching condition
(1.2) automatically projects out all the fermionic states.

similarly for half-integer n we must get rid of all the bosonic states. if w is even,
nw is integer and odd and apart from (1.2) we must also independently impose the
condition (1)f = 1 and we get just the fermionic part of the spectrum of the type
iia string theory. however for w odd (which implies that nw is half-integer and the
fermions are antiperiodic), we see a mismatch 1/2 modulo 1 between nl and nr in
(1.2), so the bosons are projected out automatically as a result of the level-matching
condition (1.2).

in both cases we saw that the (1)f projection was automatic in sectors with odd
values of w.
it is a general property of orbifolds that in the twisted sectors where
a trip around the closed string is equivalent to the symmetry g, the gso projection
g |i = |i is a direct consequence of the level-matching condition.

what about the tachyons? for even values of w we have a part of the spectrum of
type iia strings, so there is no tachyon. however for odd values of w, we can nd a
tachyon. recall that

m2 =

4

 nl + (cid:18) n

r2 

2

wr2

 (cid:19)

=

4

 nr + (cid:18) n

r2

+

2

wr2

 (cid:19)

.

(1.3)

for n = 0, w = 1, we see that the ground level nl = nr = 1/2 is really
tachyonic for r2
2/ < 2. for suciently small radius r2 there is a bosonic tachyon in
the spectrum. if r2 is really small, also states with w = 3, 5, . . . (but always n = 0)
may become tachyons.

3

however for n = 1/2 (fermionic sector) and w = 1 we see from (1.2) that the lowest
possible state has nr = 1/2 and nl = 0 (one 1/2 left-moving excitation) which
means that m2 expressed in (1.3) is never negative. this means that the tachyons can
appear only in the bosonic spectrum (as scalars).

there are many interesting relations of such a nonsupersymmetric theory with
other theories of this kind. for example, by a wick rotation we can turn the twisted
spatial circle into a time circle. the antiperiodic boundary conditions for the fermionic
eld then describe a path integral at nite temperature. the appearance of the tachyon
in the spectrum for r2 < 2 is related to the hagedorn phase transition. the innite
temperature, or zero r2 limit of our model gives the type 0 theories.

the type 0 theories (0a and 0b) are modications of the type ii theories con-
taining bosonic states only in diagonal sectors ns-ns and r-r; we have also only
one gso projection counting the number of left-moving minus right-moving fermionic
excitations. the type ii theories can be obtained as an z2 orbifold (making separate
projections on left-moving fermions) of the type 0 theories in the r-ns formalism;
the dierence between type iia and type iib theories is a sign of the projection in
the r-r sector; type iia is in a sense type iib with a discrete torsion. equivalently,
we can also obtain type 0 theories by orbifolding type ii theories but in the green-
schwarz formalism: type 0a and 0b theories can be described in the green-schwarz
formalism by the same degrees of freedom as the corresponding type ii theories, but
we must include both pp and aa sector and perform the corresponding (diagonal)
gso-projection.

2. the matrix model

in a rst naive attempt to construct a model describing the type 0a theory, we would
probably make a local orbifold (orbifolding in matrix theory was described in [9]) of
the original matrix theory, corresponding to the z2 orbifold of the worldsheet theory
in the green-schwarz formalism. we would represent the operator (1)f by a gauge
transformation e.g. 31 and the bosonic matrices would then be restricted to the block
diagonal form, reducing the original group u(2n) into u(n)  u(n) with fermions in
the o-diagonal blocks i.e. transforming as (n, n). however the coordinates x of the
two blocks would suer from an instability forcing the eigenvalues of the two blocks to
escape from each other: the negative ground-state energy of the o-diagonal fermions
is not cancelled by a contribution of bosons and therefore the energy is unbounded from
below even for nite n.

4

bergman and gaberdiel however pointed out [13] that it is more appropriate to
think about type 0a string theory as a type iia theory orbifolded by a z2 group
generated by the usual (1)f times the displacement by half of the circumference
of the corresponding m-theoretical circle. of course, this displacement could not be
seen perturbatively. we are clearly led to the scherk-schwarz compactication of m-
theory. we will thus attempt to construct a more sophisticated matrix model. we will
nd a model which naively incorporates all of the duality conjectures of bergman and
gaberdiel and has type 0a,b and rohm compactied type iia,b matrix string limits.
in the end, we will nd that many of our naive arguments are false, due to the absence
of susy nonrenormalization theorems, and that the model we construct does not have
a lorentz invariant large n limit. we argue that this implies that scherk-schwarz
compactied m-theory does not have a lorentz invariant vacuum.

let us start with a review of untwisted m-theory compactied on a circle. the
algorithm [9] to mod out the bfss model by a group of physical symmetries h is to
enlarge the gauge group u(n) and identify elements of h with some elements g of the
gauge group. it means that the matrices y = x, ,  are constrained to satisfy

h(y ) = ghy g1
h ,

gh  u(n),

h  h.

(2.1)

we wrote gy g1 because y transform in the adjoint representation and the physical
action of the symmetries on y is denoted h(y ). to obtain the o(n) matrix model
describing a single horava-witten domain wall, we can set gh = 1 and just postulate y
to be symmetric with respect to the symmetry (consisting of the reection of x 1, 1,
multiplying spinors  by 1 and transposing all the matrices). therefore x 1 and half s
become antisymmetric hermitean matrices in the adjoint of o(n) while the other xs
and s become symmetric real matrices. the naive matrix description of the heterotic
strings on tori together with the sectors and gso-like projections on the heterotic
matrix strings was obtained in [11].

compactication of x 2 on a circle with radius r2 can be done in a similar way.
we just postulate the set of possible values of the u(n) indices to be {1, 2, . . . n} 
(0, 2)circle and represent the physical symmetry exp(2ir2 p) by the gauge transfor-
mation 1 exp(i2). note that the matrices now have two discrete and two continuous
indices. postulating (2.1) tells us that the matrices must commute with any function
of :

x 2

mn(2, 

(2.2)

2) = x 2

2)  i(2  
2)
and similarly for the other matrices x i and  (without the (2 
2) term). now if we
understand the summation over the sigma index as integration and ignore the factor
(0) in the trace, the bfss hamiltonian becomes precisely the hamiltonian of sym
theory with 2 being an extra coordinate.

mn(2)(2  

5

matrices of the form (2.2) can be also expressed in the terms of the fourier
2 are

modes as done rst by taylor [3]. the extra fourier mode indices replacing 2, 
denoted m, n and (2.2) becomes

(x 2

m +1,n +1)mn = (x 2

m,n )mn + 2r2m,n mn

(2.3)

and similarly for the other matrices without the last term.

we will study a compactication of m-theory on a twisted t 2 so we will use two
worldvolume coordinates 1, 2 to represent those two circles. what about the (1)f
twist which modies the compactication of x 2? shifting both ends of the open strings
m, n  m + 1, n + 1 as in (2.3) must be accompanied by (1)f which commutes with
bosons but anticommutes with spacetime fermions. in the green-schwarz formalism it
also anticommutes with the s. so the structure of the bosonic matrices is unchanged
and the condition for s will be twisted:

in the continuous basis this is translated to

(m +1,n +1)mn = (m,n )mn.

mn(2, 

2) = mn(2)(2  

2 + ).

(2.4)

(2.5)

this can be described by saying that  has nonzero matrix elements between opposite
points of the 2 circle. we will often use this nonlocal interpretation of the resulting
theory even though the theory can be formulated as a conventional nonsupersymmetric
gauge theory with fermionic matter, as we will show in a moment.

2.1 the u(n)  u(n) formalism
in order to get rid of the nonlocality, we must note that if we identify the opposite
points with 2 and 2 + , so that 2 lives on a circle of radius , everything becomes
local. by halving the circle, we double the set of bosonic elds. the two u(n) groups
at points 2 and 2 +  are completely independent, so that the gauge group becomes
u(n)  u(n). we should also note that if we change 2 by , the two factors u(n)
exchange; this is an important boundary condition.

the bosonic elds thus transform in the adjoint representation of u(n)  u(n).
what about the fermions ? we saw that the two matrix indices 2 and 
2 dier by
. one of them is thus associated with the gauge group u(n) at point , the other
with the u(n) at point  +  which is the other u(n) factor in the u(n)  u(n)
formulation. in other words, s transform as (n, n) under the u(n)  u(n). this
is a complex representation of (complex) dimension n 2 and the complex conjugate s

6

transform as ( n, n). in the old language,  and  diered by  in 2 or in other words,
they corresponded to the opposite orientations of the arrow between 2 and 2 + .
the number of real components is 2n 2 (times the dimension of the spinor 16), the
same as the dimension of the adjoint representation. this should not surprise us since
for r2   we expect that our nonsupersymmetric model mimics the physics of the
supersymmetric model.

we could also check that the commutation relations derived from the nonlocal
orbifold formulation agree with the canonical commutation relations of the u(n) 
u(n) nonsupersymmetric gauge theory with the matter in (n, n). these theories are
very similar to the quiver theories of moore and douglas [10], but with a peculiar
boundary condition that exchanges the two u(n) groups as we go around the twisted
circle.

2.2 actions for the local and nonlocal formulations

we will be considering both descriptions. in one of them, the yang-mills theory has
gauge group u(n) and is dened on a time coordinate multiplied by a two-torus with
circumferences 1/r1, 1/r2 (instead of 2 employed in the previous section) where
r1, r2 are the radii of the spacetime circles in planck units1 and the fermions are
nonlocal degrees of freedom (arrows) pointing from the point (1, 2) to the point
(1, 2 + 1/2r2). we will call this picture nonlocal.

we will also sometimes use a local picture where the coordinate 2 is wrapped
twice and its circumference is only 1/2r2.
in the local picture, the gauge group is
u(n)  u(n) and these two factors exchange when we go around the 2 circle so that
the eective period is still equal to 1/r2:

a

ij(0, 1, 2 + 1/2r2) = a1

ij

(0, 1, 2).

(2.6)

here  = 0, 1 is an index distinguishing the two factors in u(n)u(n). we suppresed
the worldvolume vector index  = 0, 1, 2. indices i, j run from 1 to n; here i spans n
and j belongs to n. similar boundary conditions are imposed on the scalars x which
also transform in the adjoint of u(n)  u(n). both satisfy the usual hermiticity
conditions. fermions  (whose spacetime transformation rules are the same as in the
supersymmetric theory) transform in (n, n). writing them as ij, the index i belongs
to n of the rst u(n) and the index j belongs to n of the second u(n).
in the
same way, in ()ij = (ji) the rst index i belongs to n of the second u(n) and the
second index j belongs to n of the rst u(n) so that tr  = 
ijji is invariant. the

1to simplify the presentation, we choose the convention for the numerical constants in various

dimensionful quantities to agree with these statements.

7

boundary condition for s reads

ij(0, 1, 2 + 1/2r2) = ()ij(0, 1, 2).

(2.7)

of course,  matrices are complex, they do not obey a hermiticity condition. the
lagrangian is (i = 1, . . . , 7)

l = x=0,1

tr (cid:20)

1
4

f 
()f(), 

1
2

dx i

()dx i

() +

1
4

[x i

(), x j

()]2(cid:21)

(2.8)

+tr hiix i

(=1)i

(=0) + iix i

(=1) +  + ia

(=0) + ia

the trace always runs over n  n matrices. we have put the dimensionful quantity
gy m equal to one. the action is simply

a = z d0 z 1/r1

0

d1 z 1/(2r2)

0

d2l(0, 1, 2).

(2.9)

for the purposes of the calculations of feynman diagrams it is also useful to write the
action in the nonlocal (nl) formulation of the theory. in this formulation, the period of
2 is doubled and equal to 1/r2. the elds can be identied as follows (the dependences
on 0, 1 and indices , i are suppressed):

x()(2) = xnl(2 + /(2r2)), a()(2) = anl(2 + /(2r2)),  = 0, 1,

(2.10)

(2) = nl(2),

(2) = 

nl(2) = nl(2 + 1/(2r2)),

0  2 

1
2r2

.

(2.11)

all the equalities are n  n matrix equalities. in this nonlocal language the action
can be written as

a = z d0z 1/r1

0

d1z 1/r2

0

d2lnl(0, 1, 2)

where (the subscript nl of all elds is suppressed)

lnl = tr (cid:20)

1
4

f f 

1
2

dx idx i +

1
4

[x i, x j]2(cid:21)

+tr h + i(ix i(2) + a(2))i

+tr (cid:20)i(cid:18)ix i(2 +

1
2r2

) + a(2 +

1
2r2

)(cid:19) (cid:21)

we denoted the 2 dependence in which one of the fermionic terms is nonlocal.

(2.12)

(2.13)

8

3. alternative derivation and connection with type 0 theories

it has long been known [4, 5] that the type 0a,b string theories in ten dimensions
can be viewed as innite temperature limits of type iib,a theories. rotating the
euclidean time to a spacelike direction, this means that the zero radius limits of rohm
compactications are the type 0 theories. it is less well known (but, we believe, known
to many experts) that the nite radius rohm compactications are compactications
of the type 0 theories on dual circles with a certain orbifold projection. indeed, both
type 0 theories have two types of ramond-ramond elds which are related by a discrete
symmetry. this doubled number is a consequence of having one gso-projection only
(the diagonal one). more precisely, the operator r = (1)fr which counts the right-
moving fermionic excitations has eigenvalues (+1) for half of the rr-elds and (1)
for the other half. therefore (1)fr is a generator of a z2 symmetry that exchanges
the rr-elds in a basis rotated by 45 degrees, i.e. rr+1 + rr1 with rr+1  rr1
where rr1 denotes the elds with (1)fr = 1.

twisted compactication of type 0a or 0b with monodromy r i.e. the orbifold
of type 0 string theory on a circle of circumference 2l by the symmetry r exp(ilp)
gives a string model t-dual to the rohm compactied type iib or type iia string,
respectively. we will refer to the twisted circle as the scherk-schwarz circle when
describing it from the type ii point of view and as the r circle from the type 0 point
of view.

this t-duality is not hard to understand at the level of the string spectrum. be-
cause of the gso projection, scherk-schwarz compactied type ii theory contains
bosonic states of integer momenta and fermionic states of half-integer momenta (in
appropriate units). the dual type 0 string theory initially had bosonic excitations
only (in ns-ns and r-r sectors). but because of the extra orbifold by r exp(ilp),
we obtain also fermions in ns-r and r-ns twisted sectors with a half-integer winding.
this agrees with the assumption of t-duality. apart from t-duality between type
iia/iib on a scherk-schwarz circle and type 0b/0a on an r circle which we just
mentioned, we should be aware of the t-duality between type 0a and type 0b string
theory on a usual circle.

now consider the dlcq of m-theory compactied on a scherk-schwarz circle.
using the logic of [2], this is a zero coupling limit of type iia string theory compactied
on a scherk-schwarz circle of planck size, in the presence of n d0-branes. using the
t-duality adumbrated in the previous paragraphs, this is weakly coupled type 0b
string theory on an r circle in the presence of n d-strings of the rst kind; since the
r monodromy exchanges two types of d-strings, there must be an equal number of
d-strings of the other type. in other words, the d-strings are compactied on a circle

9

dual to the m-theory scherk-schwarz circle, with r twisted boundary conditions.

now we can use the description of d-branes in type 0 theories discovered by
bergman and gaberdiel [13]. as we have said, there are two types of d-strings in
type 0b theory, each of which has a bosonic 1 + 1 dimensional gauge theory on its
world volume: open strings stretched between two like d-strings contain bosonic states
only. these two types are related (exchanged) by the r symmetry. in the presence of
closely spaced d-strings of both types, there are additional fermionic degrees of freedom
which transform in the (n, m )[( n , m)] of the u(n)  u(m) gauge group: open
strings stretched between two unlike d-strings contain fermions only. these fermions
are spacetime spinors. in the corresponding seiberg limit, all the closed string states
(including tachyons) are decoupled and in the corresponding dkps energy scale only
the massless open string states survive.

the result is a 1 + 1 dimensional u(n)  u(n) gauge theory with fermions in the
bifundamental and a boundary condition that exchanges the two u(n) groups as we
go around the circle, a result of the r monodromy. this is the same gauge theory we
arrived at by the orbifolding procedure of the previous section.

it is now easy to compactify an extra dimension on an ordinary circle and obtain
the 2 + 1 dimensional gauge theory of the previous section as the matrix description of
rohm compactication. the double t-duality in seibergs derivation can be done in
two possible orders, giving always the same result. in the next section, we will see that
at least formally we can rederive the various string theories as matrix string limits of
the gauge theory. in particular, this will provide a derivation of the bergman-gaberdiel
duality relation between scherk-schwarz compactication of m-theory, and type 0a
strings.

4. the matrix string limits

4.1 rohm compactied type iia strings

in the limit where the spacetime radius r2 goes to innity, the radius of the worldvolume
torus 1/r2 goes to zero so that we also have 1/r1  1/r2. therefore the elds become
eectively independent of 2 up to a gauge transformation. furthermore, because of
the boundary conditions exchanging the two u(n)s, the expectation values of scalars
in both u(n)s must be equal to each other (up to a gauge transformation). this
can be also seen in the nonlocal formulation: in the limit r2   the elds must be
constant (up to a gauge transformation) on the long circle of circumference 1/r2.

thus in this limit we can classify all the elds according to how they transform
under the 2 independent gauge symmetry u(n). in the nonlocal language this u(n)

10

is just a global (but 1 dependent) symmetry. in the u(n)  u(n) language this
is the diagonal symmetry u(n).
in both cases, we nd that not only bosons but
also fermions (transforming originally in (n, n)) transform in the adjoint (the same as
n  n) of this u(n). there is only one set of elds: the 2 independence causes the
bosons in both u(n)s to be equal and the complex matrices  to be hermitean.
in the matrix string limit we expect to get a matrix description of the scherk-
schwarz compactication of type iia strings on a long circle. the appearance of the
matrix strings (at a naive level) can be explained as usual: most things work much like
in the supersymmetric matrix string theory [15, 16, 17].

in the nonlocal formulation, u(n) gauge group is broken completely down to a
semidirect product of u(1)n and the weyl group, sn , of u(n). therefore the classical
congurations around which we expand are diagonalizable n  n matrices where the
basis in which they can be diagonalized can undergo a permutation p  sn for 1 
1 + 1/r1:

xi(1) = u(1)diag (x1

i , x2

i , . . . xn

i )u 1,

u(1 + 1/r1) = u(1)p.

(4.1)

this is the mechanism of matrix strings [15, 16, 17]. every permutation p can be
decomposed into a product of cycles and each cycle of length k then eectively describe
a long string with the longitudinal momentum equal to p+ = k/r. for instance, a
single cyclic permutation of k entries (written as a k  k matrix p) describes a single
string:

p =





 1  . . . 
  1 . . . 
...
. . . 1
1   . . . 

...

...

.





(4.2)

the denition (4.1) of xi creates eectively a string of length k (relatively to the
circumference 1/r1). we can write the eigenvalues as

i (1) = xlong
xm

i

(1 + (m  1)/r1),

m = 1, 2, . . . k

(4.3)

where xlong
periodicity of the matrix (4.1) with p dened in (4.2).

has period k/r1. assuming the k/r1 periodicity of xlong

i

i

we can show 1/r1

the matrix origin of the level-matching conditions was rst explained in [17]: the
residual symmetry zk rotating the long string is a gauge symmetry and because the
states must be invariant under the gauge transformations, we nd out that l0 l0 must
be a multiple of k (the length of the string) because the generator of zk can be written
as exp(i(l0  l0)/k). in the large n limit such states are very heavy unless l0 = l0
and we reproduce the usual level-matching conditions. in this limit the discrete group
zk approximates the continuous group quite well.

11

4.2 dependence on the uxes

in the conformal eld theory of the rohm compactication, sectors with odd or even
winding numbers should have antiperiodic or periodic spinors , respectively. we want
to nd the analog of this statement in the matrix formulation.

let us put w units of the magnetic ux in the nonlocal representation of our theory.

the corresponding potential can be taken to be

a=1 = 2r1r22

w
n

, a=2 = 0

(4.4)

recall that the periods of 1, 2 are 1/r1, 1/r2. in the local u(n)u(n) formulation,
the elds in the region 0  2  1/2r2 from (4.4) dene the block of the rst u(n) and
the region 1/2r2  2  1/r2 denes the second u(n). note that for 2  2 + 1/r2,
tr a=1 changes by 2r1w which agrees with the circumference of x 1.

now if we substitute the background (4.4) into (2.8) we see that the contributions of
the form a from the last two terms give us a contribution coming from the dierence
2  2 + 1/2r2 which is equal to

i tr [1]

wr1

n

.

(4.5)

such a term without derivatives would make the dynamics nonstandard. however it is
easy to get rid of it by a simple redenition (we suppress 0, 2 dependence)

(1)  (1) exp(i1r1w/n).

(4.6)

note that under 1  1 + n/r1 which corresponds to a loop around a matrix string
of length n,  changes by a factor of (1)w. this conrms our expectations:
in the
sectors with an odd magnetic ux (=winding number) the fermions  are antiperiodic.
we might also wonder about the electric ux (=compact momentum p2) in the
direction of 2. as we have explained in the beginning, this ux should be allowed
to take 1/2 of the original quantum so that the sectors with half-integer electric ux
contain just fermions and the usual sectors with integer electric ux contain bosons only,
the other being projected out by the gso conditions in both cases. this behaviour
should be guaranteed by denition: the operator exp(2r2 p2)(1)f is identied with
a gauge transformation (namely exp(2r22)  1n n ).

however it might seem a little strange that the together with the  excitations one
must also change the electric ux; it might be useful to see the origin of the sectors of
various electric ux microscopically. we propose the following way to think about
this issue. the  excitations in a compact space carry charge  with respect to groups

12

u(1) at the opposite points of 2. the total charge vanishes therefore we do not have an
obstruction to excite . however the charge does not vanish locally, therefore we should
accompany the excitation by an electric ux tube running between 2 and 2 +1/2r2 in
a chosen direction (it is useful to think about it as a branch-cut) and the total electric
ux induced by this excitation equals one half of the quantum in the supersymmetric
(untwisted) theory.

as a consequence of these observations, we see that our model contains the string
eld theory hilbert space of the rohm compactication in the large n limit. at a very
formal level, the dynamics of the model in an appropriate limit of small radii and large
yang-mills coupling, appears to reduce to that of free rohm strings. however, this is
not necessarily a correct conclusion. the analysis of the moduli space lagrangian is
done at the classical level, but the apparent free string limit corresponds to a strongly
coupled ym theory.
in [16] it was emphasized that the derivation of matrix string
theory depends crucially on the nonrenormalization theorem for the moduli space la-
grangian. we do not have such a theorem here and cannot truly derive the free rohm
string theory from out model. this is only the rst of many diculties.

a further important point is that the u(1) gauge theory (or u(1)  u(1) in the
local formalism) leads to a free theory which is identical to the conformal eld theory
in the matrix string limit 1/r1  1/r2. in particular we can see that the ground state
in the sectors with an odd magnetic ux has negative light cone energy, and would
have to be interpreted as a tachyon in a relativistic theory. even if we assumed the
clustering property to be correct (in the next section we show that this property is
likely to be broken at the two-loop level), this tachyon would lead to inconsistency in
the large n limit: it would be energetically favoured for a conguration in the u(n)
theory to emit the n = 1 tachyonic string  and compensate the magnetic ux by the
opposite value of the ux in the remaining u(n  1) theory. the energy of tachyon
is of order n 0 which is negative and n times bigger than the scale of energies we
would hope to study in the large n limit (only states with energies of order 1/n admit
a relativistic interpretation in the large n limit).

to make this more clear: in order to establish the existence of a relativistic large n
limit we would have to nd states with dispersion relation p
in the model, as well
as multiparticle states corresponding to separated particles which scatter in a man-
ner consistent with relativity. the observation of the previous paragraph shows that
such states would generally be unstable to emission of tachyons carrying the smallest
unit of longitudinal momentum2. the only way to prevent this disaster is to lift the

2+m2

n

2note that in susy matrix theory the excitations along directions where the gauge group is
completely broken down to u (1) factors have higher energy than the states with large longitudinal

13

moduli space. however, once we imagine that the moduli space is lifted it is unlikely
that multiparticle states of any kind exist and the model loses all possible spacetime
interpretation. we will investigate the cluster property of our model below. however,
we rst want to investigate the type 0 string limits of our model. as above, we will
work in a purely classical manner and ignore the fact that the moduli space is lifted by
quantum corrections.

4.3 type 0 matrix strings

the rohm compactied iia string is the formal limit of our 2 + 1 dimensional gauge
theory when the untwisted circle of the yang mills torus is much larger than the
scale dened by the gauge coupling, while the twisted circle is of order this scale or
smaller. we will now consider three other limits. the relation between the yang-mills
parameters and the m-theory parameters is

g2
y m = r/l1 l2

i = l3

planck/r li .

(4.7)

(4.8)

where 1,2 is the untwisted (twisted) ym radius, l1,2 are the corresponding m-theory
radii, and r is the lightlike compactication length. in the type 0 string limit, we
want to take l2  0, with 2 xed (it is the string length squared divided by r) and
l1 of order the string length). the latter restriction means that g2
y m 1 is xed. the
limit is thus a 1 + 1 dimensional gauge theory on a xed length twisted circle, with
gauge coupling going to innity.

restricting ourselves to classical considerations, we are led to the classical moduli
space of this gauge theory. the bosonic sector of the moduli space consists of two sets
of independent n  n diagonalizable matrices. however, in order to obtain congura-
tions which obey the twisted boundary conditions and have energy of order 1/n, one
must consider only topological sectors in which the matrices in the two gauge groups
are identical. note however, that since the bosonic variables are in the adjoint represen-
tation, they are not aected by gauge transformations which are in the u(1) subgroup.
this additional freedom becomes important when we consider the fermionic variables.
the boundary conditions on these allow one other kind of conguration with energy of
order 1/n: considering the fermions as n  n matrices, we can allow congurations in
which the diagonal matrix elements come back to minus themselves (corresponding to
the gauge transformation (1,1) in u(n)  u(n)) after a cycle with length of order
n. the resulting low energy degrees of freedom are fermion elds on the long string

momentum.

14

with either periodic or antiperiodic boundary conditions. the gauge elds are vector
like so in terms of left and right moving elds we get only the pp and aa combinations
of boundary conditions. the o(8) chirality of the fermions is correlated to the world
sheet chirality as in iia matrix string theory. one also obtains a gso projection on
these fermionic degrees of freedom by imposing the gauge projection corresponding
to the (1,1) transformation. the resulting model is thus seen to be the type 0a
string theory, written in light cone green-schwarz variables. remembering that the
1 + 1 twisted gauge theory was the matrix description of scherk-schwarz compactica-
tion of m-theory, we recognize that we have derived the conjecture of bergmann and
gaberdiel.

to obtain the 0b matrix string limit and the t-duality (on an untwisted circle)
between the two type 0 theories, we simply follow the results of one of the present
authors and seiberg [16] and rst take the strongly coupled yang mills limit by going
to the classical moduli space and performing a 2+1 dimensional duality transformation.
this corresponds to both directions of the yang mills torus being much larger than the
yang mills scale. we then do a dimensional reduction to a 1 + 1 dimensional theory
to describe the 0b and iib string limits.
in the former, the twisted circle is taken
much larger than the untwisted one, while their relative sizes are reversed in the latter
limit. after the duality transformation and dimensional reduction the manipulations
are identical to those reported above.

a serious gap in the argument is the absence of 2 + 1 superconformal invariance.
in [16] this was the crucial fact that enabled one to show that the interacting type iib
theory was lorentz invariant. here that argument fails. we view this as an indication
that the spacetime picture derived from free type 0 string theory is misleading. we
will discuss this further below. indeed, in the next subsection we show that the cluster
property which is at the heart of the derivation of spacetime from matrix theory fails
to hold in our model.

4.4 breakdown of the cluster property

the easiest way to derive the feynman rules is to use the nonlocal formulation (2.13). it
looks similar to a local lagrangian except that the gauge eld in the last term (i.e. the
whole third line) is taken from 2 + 1/2r2. in the feynman diagrams the propagators
have (worldvolume) momenta in the lattice corresponding to the compactication, i.e.
p1, p2 are multiples of 2r1 or 2r2 respectively. the last term in (2.13) gives us a
vertex with two fermions and one gauge boson and the corresponding feynman vertex
contains a factor (1)p 2/2r2.
in order to determine the cluster properties of our theory, we must calculate the
eective action along the at directions in the classical moduli space of the gauge theory.

15

we will concentrate on a single direction in which (in the nonlocal formulation) the
gauge group is broken to u(n1) u(n2). that is, we calculate two body forces, rather
than general k body interactions. there is a subtlety in this calculation which has to
do with our lack of knowledge of the spectrum of this nonsupersymmetric theory.

in general, one may question the validity of the born-oppenheimer approximation
for the at directions because the individual nonabelian gauge groups appear to give
rise to infrared divergences in perturbation theory.
in the susy version of matrix
theory this problem is resolved by the (folk) theorem that the general u(n) theory
(compactied on a torus) has threshold bound states. these correspond to wave func-
tions normalizable along the at directions and should cut o the infrared divergences.
in our susy violating model, we do not know the relevant theorems.

the most conservative way to interpret our calculation is to take n1 = n2 = 1
in the u(2) version of the model. if one nds an attractive two body force then it is
reasonable to imagine that in fact the general u(n) theory has a normalizable ground
state, thus justifying the born-oppenheimer approximation in the general case.

so let us proceed to calculate the potential in the u(2) case, and let r be the eld
which represents the separation between two excitations of the u(1) model. from
the point of view of 2 + 1 dimensional eld theory, r is a scalar eld, with mass
dimension 1/2. it is related to the distance measured in m-theory by powers of the
eleven dimensional planck scale. at large r, the charged elds of the u(2) model are
very heavy. to integrate them out we must understand the uv physics of the model.
the formulation in terms of a u(2)  u(2) theory with peculiar boundary conditions
shows us that the uv divergences are of the same degree as those of the susy model,
though some of the susy cancellations do not occur, as we will see below. ultraviolet
physics is thus dominated by the xed point at vanishing yang-mills coupling and we
can compute the large r expansion of the eective action by perturbation theory.

  

p

p

p

fig.1: one-loop diagrams.

16

 

v 
2

v1

v1

p

p

v 
2

fig.2: non-vanishing two-loop contributions to the
2  ((p)  1)v2.

eective potential. here v 

the one loop contribution, f ig.1, to the eective potential vanishes because it is
identical to that in the susy model. the only dierence between the models in the
nonlocal formulation is the peculiar vertex described above. the leading contribution
comes from two loops and is of order g2
y m (the squared coupling has dimensions of
mass).
it comes only from the diagrams containing fermion lines shown in f ig.2.
these diagrams should be evaluated in the nonlocal model and then their value in the
susy model should be subtracted. the rest of the two loop diagrams in the model are
the same as the susy case and they cancel (for time independent r) against the susy
values of the diagrams shown. taking r very large in the diagrams is, by dimensional
analysis, equivalent to taking the volume large, and the potential is extensive in the
volume in the large volume limit. the massive particles in the loops have masses of
order gy m r and this quantity is kept xed in the loop expansion.

in the susy theory, these are the two terms in the commutator.

our lagrangian has two gauge boson fermion vertices v1 + (p)v2. p is the mo-
mentum.
in our
lagrangian, the rst is identical to that in the susy theory while the second diers
from it by the sign (p), which is negative for odd values of the loop momentum around
the twisted circle. schematically then, the nonvanishing two loop contribution has the
form

this can be rewritten as

h(v1 + (p)v2)2i  h(v1 + v2)2i

2h((p)  1)v1v2i

(4.9)

(4.10)

the resulting loop integral is quadratically ultraviolet divergent. the leading di-
vergence is independent of r, but there are subleading terms of order g2
y m  |gy m r|
and g2
y m ln()(gy mr)2. corrections higher order in the yang-mills coupling, as well
as those coming from nite volume of the yang-mills torus, are subleading both in r
and . thus, the leading order contribution to the potential is either conning, or
gives a disastrous runaway to large r. which of these is the correct behavior is deter-
mined by our choice of subtractions. it would seem absurd to choose the renormalized
coecient of r2 to be negative, and obtain a hamiltonian unbounded from below. if

17

that is the case, then a conning potential prevents excitations from separating from
each other in the would-be transverse spacetime. in other words, the theory does not
have a spacetime interpretation at all, let alone a relativistically invariant one.

we also see that the fear expressed in the previous chapter that all excitations will
decay into tachyons of minimal longitudinal momentum was ill founded.
instead it
would appear that the entire system will form a single clump in transverse space. the
u(1) part of the theory decouples, so we can give this clump transverse momentum
and obtain an energy spectrum

p  

rp2
n

+ 

(4.11)

where  is the ground state energy of our nonlocal su(n) yang-mills theory.

if  were to turn out positive and of order 1/n, this dispersion relation would
look like that of a massive relativistic particle. we might be tempted to say that the
system looked like a single black hole propagating in an asymptotically at spacetime.
the stability of the black hole would be explained if its mass were within the planck
regime. this interpretation does not appear to be consistent, for semiclassical analysis
of such a system indicates that it has excitations corresponding to asymptotic gravitons
propagating in the black hole background. our result about the lifting of the moduli
space precludes the existence of such excitations.

since the vacuum energy is divergent, the positivity of  is a matter of choice.
however, large n analysis suggests that it scales like a positive power of n, so we have
another reason that the black hole interpretation does not seem viable.

5. conclusions

what are we to make of all these disasters? we believe that our work is solid evidence
for the absence of a lorentz invariant vacuum of m-theory based on the rohm com-
pactication. the rohm strings are certainly degrees of freedom of our matrix model,
even if we cannot derive the (apparently meaningless because of the tachyon and un-
bounded eective potential) string perturbation expansion from it (as a consequence
of the absence of a nonrenormalization theorem).

however, naive physical intuition based on the string perturbation series, suggest
that if there is a stable solution corresponding to the rohm model, it is not lorentz
invariant. while we cannot trust the perturbative calculations in detail, they at least
imply that the vacuum energy of the system is negative at its (hypothetical) stable
minimum. (we remind the reader that even at large radius, before the tachyon appears,
the potential calculated by rohm is negative and the system wants to ow to smaller

18

radius). perhaps there is a nonsupersymmetric anti-desitter solution of m-theory to
which the rohm model ows. there are many problems with such an interpretation,
since it involves changing asymptotic boundary conditions in a generally covariant
theory. normally one would imagine that m-theory with two dierent sets of asymptotic
boundary conditions breaks up into two dierent quantum mechanical systems which
simply do not talk to each other. the nite energy states with one set of boundary
conditions simply have no overlap with the nite energy states of another (the denition
of energy is completely dierent).

as an aside we note that an extremely interesting question arises for systems (un-
like the rohm compactication) which have a metastable minkowski vacuum. in the
semiclassical approximation [8] one can sometimes nd instantons which represent tun-
neling of a minkowski vacuum into a bubble of anti-desitter space. does this idea
make any sense in a fully quantum mechanical theory, particularly if one believes in the
holographic principle? coleman and de luccia argue that the system inside the ads
bubble is unstable to recollapse and interpret this as a disaster of cosmic proportions:
minkowski space lls up with bubbles, expanding at the speed of light, the interior of
each of which becomes singular in nite proper time. it is hard to imagine how such a
scenario could be described in a holographic framework3.

at any rate, it is clear that the fate of the rohm compactication depends crucially
in this sense one might argue that our
on a change in vacuum expectation values.
attempt to study it in light cone frame was doomed from the start. it is a notorious
defect of the light cone approach that nding the correct vacuum is extremely dicult.
it involves understanding and cancelling the large n divergences of the limiting dlcq,
by changing parameters in the light cone hamiltonian. if the correct vacuum is a nite
distance away in eld space from the naive vacuum from which one constructs the
original dlcq hamiltonian, this may simply mean that the true hamiltonian has
little resemblance to the one from which one starts. if our physical arguments above
are a good guide, the problem may be even more severe. the correct vacuum may not
even have a light cone frame hamiltonian formulation.

we confess to having jumped in to the technical details of our construction before
thinking through the physical arguments above. nonetheless, we feel that our failure is
a useful reminder that gravitational physics is very dierent from quantum eld theory,
and an indication of the extreme delicacy of susy breaking in m-theory.

3this should not be taken simply as an indication that a holographic description of asymptotically
at spacetimes is somehow sick. the coleman de luccia instanton also exists in an asymptotically
ads framework, with two negative energy vacua. if the higher energy state has very small vacuum
energy the semiclassical analysis is practically unchanged. so, if the coleman deluccia phenomenon
really exists in m-theory we should be able to nd a framework for studying it within ads/cft.

19

acknowledgments

this work was supported in part by the doe under grant number de-fg02-96er40559.

references

[1] t. banks, w. fischler, s.h. shenker, l. susskind, m theory as a matrix model: a conjec-

ture, phys. rev. d 55 (1997) 5112 [hep-th/9610043].

[2] n. seiberg, why is the matrix model correct?, phys. rev. lett. 79 (1997) 3577-3580

[hep-th/9710009].

[3] w. taylor, d-brane eld theory on compact spaces, phys. lett. b 394 (1997) 283-287

[hep-th/9611042].

[4] n. seiberg, e. witten, spin structures in string theory, nucl. phys. b 276 (1986) 272.

[5] l.j. dixon, j.a. harvey, string theories in ten-dimensions without space-time supersym-

metry, nucl. phys. b 274 (1986) 93-105.

[6] j. scherk, j.h. schwarz, spontaneous breaking of supersymmetry through dimensional re-

duction, phys. lett. b 82 (1979) 60.

[7] r. rohm, spontaneous supersymmetry breaking in supersymmetric string theories, nucl.

phys. b 237 (1984) 553.

[8] s. coleman, f. de luccia, gravitational eects on and of vacuum decay, phys. rev. d

21 (1980) 3305.

[9] l. motl, quaternions and matrix theory on spaces with boundaries, hep-th/9612198.

[10] m. douglas, g. moore, d-branes, quivers and ale instantons, hep-th/9603167.

[11] t. banks, l. motl, heterotic strings from matrices, j. high energy phys. 12 (1997) 004

[hep-th/9703218].

[12] e. witten, string theory dynamics in various dimensions, nucl. phys. b 443 (1995) 85

[hep-th/9503124].

[13] o. bergman, m.r. gaberdiel, dualities of type 0 strings, j. high energy phys. 07 (1999)

022 [hep-th/9906055.]

[14] y. imamura, branes in type 0/type ii duality, hep-th/9906090.

[15] l. motl, proposals on nonperturbative superstring interactions, hep-th/9701025.

20

[16] t. banks, n. seiberg, strings from matrices, nucl. phys. b 497 (1997) 41-55

[hep-th/9802187].

[17] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, matrix string theory, nucl. phys. b 500 (1997)

43-61 [hep-th/9703030].

[18] j.p. penalba, a matrix model for type 0 strings, j. high energy phys. 9908 (1999) 005

[hep-th/9907083].

[19] r. blumenhagen, c. kounnas, d. lust, continuous gauge and supersymmetry breaking

for open strings on d-branes, hep-th/9910094.

21

