9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
9
2

 

 
 

1
v
2
4
2
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

minimal string driven cosmology

and its predictions

m.p.infante(1),(2), n.sanchez(1)

(1) observatoire de paris-demirm. 61, avenue de lobservatoire, 75014 paris, france

(2) dpto. fsica teorica, univ. de zaragoza. pza.san francisco, 50009 zaragoza, spain

abstract

we present a minimal model for the universe evolution fully extracted
from eective string theory. by linking this model with a minimal but well
stablished observational information, we prove that it gives realistic predic-
tions on early and current energy density and its results are compatible with
general relativity. interestingly enough, the predicted current energy den-
sity is found  = 1 and in anycase with lower limit   4
9 . on the other
hand, the energy density at the exit of inationary stage gives also |inf = 1.
this result shows an agreement with general relativity (spatially at metric
gives critical energy density) within an unequivalent non-einstenian context
(string low energy eective equations). the order of magnitude of the energy
density-dilaton coupled term at the beginning of radiation dominated stage
agrees with gut scale. without solving the known problems about higher
order corrections and graceful exit of ination, we nd this model closer to the
observational universe properties than the current available string cosmology
scenarii. at a more fundamental level, this model is by its construction close
to the standard cosmological evolution, and it is driven selfconsistently by the
evolution of the string equation of state itself. the inationary string driven
stage is able to reach an enough amount of ination, describing a big bang
like evolution for the metric.

pacs numbers: 98.80.cq; 11.25.-w; 04.80.cc; 98.80.-k
report numbers: hep-th/9910242; dftuz/99/15.

e-mail: infante@mesunb.obspm.fr
e-mail: norma.sanchez@obspm.fr

1

1 introduction

the very early stages of the universe must be described with physics beyond
our current models. around the planck time, energy and sizes involved would re-
quire a quantum gravity treatment in order to account accurately for the physics at
such scale. string theory appears as the most promising candidate for solving the
rst stages evolution. until now, one does not dispose of a complete string theory,
valid at the very beginning of the universe neither the possibility of extracting so
many phenomenological consequences from it. otherwise, eective and selfconsis-
tent string theories have been developed in the cosmological context in the last years
([1]-[5]). these approaches can be considered valid at the early stages inmediately
after the planck epoch and should be linked with the current stages, whose physics
laws must be expected as the very low energy limits of the more complete laws in
the early universe. matters raise in this process. the brans-dicke frame, emerg-
ing naturally in the low energy eective string theories, includes both the general
relativity as well as the low energy eective string action as dierent particular
cases. the former one takes place when the brans-dicke parameter bd =  while
the last one requires bd = 1 ([6]). because of being extracted from dierent
gravity theories, the eective string equations are not equivalent to the einstein
equations. since current observational data show agreement with general relativ-
ity predictions, whatever another fundamental theory must recover it among their
lowest energy limits, or at least must give results compatible with those extracted
in einstein frameworks. the great diculties to incorporate string theory in a re-
alistic cosmological framework are not so much expected at this level, but in the
description of an early universe evolution (string phase and ination) compatible
with the observational evolution information.

the scope of this paper is to present a minimal model for the universe evolution
completely extracted from selfconsistent string cosmology ([2]). in the following, we
recall the selfconsistent eective treatments in string theory and the cosmological
backgrounds arising from them. with these backgrounds, we construct a minimal
model which can be linked with minimal observational universe information. we
analyse the properties of this model and confront it with general relativity results.
although its simplicity, interesting conclusions are found about its capabilities as a
predictive cosmological description. the predicted current energy density is found
compatible with current observational results, since we have   1 and in anycase
  4
9. the energy density-dilaton coupled term at the beginnning of radiation
dominated stage is found compatible with the order of magnitude typical of gut
scales e  1090erg cm3. on the other hand, by dening the corresponding critical
energy density, the energy density around the exit of ination gives |inf = 1. this
result agrees with the general relativity statement for which k = 0   = 1, but it
is extracted in a non-einstenian context (the low energy string eective equations).
no use of observational information neither further evolution universe properties

2

are needed in order to nd this agreement, only the inationary evolution law for
the scale factor, dilaton and density energy.

our string driven model is dierent from previously discussed scenarii in string
cosmology ([3]). until now, no complete description of the scale factor evolution
from inmediately post-planckian age until current time had been extracted in string
cosmology. the described inationary stage, as here presented and interpretated,
is also a new feature among the solutions given by eective string theory. the
string driven model does not add new problems to the yet still open questions,
but it provides a description closer and more naturally related to the observational
universe properties. the three stages of evolution, ination, radiation dominated
and matter dominated are completely driven by the evolution of the string equation
of state itself. the results extracted are fully predictive without free parameters.

this paper is organized as follows: in sections 2 and 3 we construct the minimal
string driven model. in section 4 we discuss its main features: enough ination, the
evolution of the hubble factor and the energy density predictions. we also discuss
its main properties, dierences and similarities with other string cosmology scenarii.
in section 5 we present our conclusions.

2 minimal string driven model

the string driven cosmological background is a minimal model of the universe
evolution totally extracted from eective string theory. we nd the cosmological
backgrounds from selfconsistent solutions of the eective string equations. physical
meaning of the model is preserved by linking it with a minimal but well stablished
information about the evolution of the observational universe. two ways allowing
extraction of cosmological backgrounds from string theory have been used. the
rst one is the low energy eective string equations plus the string action matter.
solutions of these equations are an inationary inverse power evolution for the scale
factor, as well as a radiation dominated behaviour. on the other hand, selfconsistent
einstein equations plus string matter, with a classical gas of strings as sources, give
us again a radiation dominated behaviour and a matter dominated description. from
both procedures, we obtain the evolution laws for an inationary stage, a radiation
dominated stage and a matter dominated stage. these behaviours are asymptotic
regimes not including strictly the transitions among stages. by modelizing the
transitions in an enoughly continuous way, we construct a step-by-step minimal
model of evolution.
in this whole and next sections, unless opposite indication,
the metric is dened in lenght units. thus, the (0,0) component is always time
coordinate t multiplied by constant c, t = ct . derivatives are taken with respect
to this coordinate t.

3

2.1 the low energy eective string equations

we work with the low energy eective string action (that means, to the lowest
order in expansion of powers of ), which in the brans-dicke or string frame can
be written as ([1],[2],[3]):

s = 

c3

16gd z dd+1xq| g |e r +  

h 2
12

+ v! + sm

(1)

where sm is the corresponding action for the matter sources, h = db is the an-
tisymmetric tensor eld strength and v is a constant vanishing for some critical
dimension. the dilaton eld  depends explicitly only upon time coordinate and
its potential will be considered vanishing. d is the total spacetime dimension. we
consider a spatially at background and we write the metric in synchronous frame
(g00 = 1, g0i = 0 = g0a) as:

g = diag(1, a2(t) ij)

(2)

here ,  = 0 . . . (d  1) and i, j = 1 . . . (d  1). the string matter is included as a
classical source which stress energy tensor in the perfect uid approximation takes
the form:

t

 = diag((t), p (t)i

j)

(3)

where  and p are the energy density and pressure for the matter sources respec-
tively.

the low energy eective string equations are obtained by extremizing the vari-
ation of the eective action s (1) with respect to the metric g, the dilaton eld 
and the antisymmetric eld h and taking into account the metric (2) and matter
sources (3). we will consider that the antisymmetric tensor h as well as the
potential b vanish. by dening h = a
a and the shifted expressions for the dilaton

 =   lnq| g |, matter energy density  = ad and pressure p = p ad, we obtain

the low energy eective equations l.e.e. ([2],[3]):
 2 + dh 2 = 0
16gd

2

2




 dh 2 =

2( h  h ) =


 e


p e

c4
16gd

c4

(4)

the shifted expressions have the property to be invariants under the transfor-
mations related to the scale factor duality simmetry (a  a1) and time reection
(t  t). following this, if (a, ) is a solution of the eective equations, the dual
expression (a, ) obtained as:

ai = ai

1

,

 =   2 ln ai

(5)

is also a solution of the same system of equations.

4

2.1.1 string driven inationary stage solution

the inationary stage appears as a new selfconsistent solution of the low energy
eective equations (4) sustained by a gas of stretched or unstable string sources as
developed in [2] and also in [3]. this kind of string behaviour is characterized by a
negative pressure and positive energy density, both growing in absolute value with
the scale factor ([2],[4],[8],[9]). strings in curved backgrounds satisfy the perfect uid
equation of state p = (  1) where  is dierent for each one of the generic three
dierent string behaviours in curved spacetimes ([2]). for the unstable (stretched)
string behaviour, it holds u = d2
d1 ([4]). thus, the equation of state for these string
sources in the metric (2) is given by ([2]):

p = 

1
d



(6)

we nd the following selfconsistent solution for the set of eective equations

(4) with the matter sources eq.(6):

a(t) = ai(ti  t)q

0 < t < tb < ti

q =

2

d + 1

(7)

(t) = i + 2d ln a(t)
(t) = i(a(t))(1d)

p (t) = 

1
d

(t) = 

i
d

(a(t))(1d)

notice that here t is the cosmic time coordinate, running on positive values such
that the parameter ti is greater than the end of the string driven inationary regime
at time tb, d is the number of expanding spatial dimensions; i , i are integration
constants and ai, ti parameters to be xed by the further evolution of scale factor.

although the time dependence obeys a power function, this string driven so-
lution is an inationary inverse power law proper to string cosmology. this solu-
tion describes an inationary stage with accelerated expansion of scale factor since
h > 0 and can be considered superinationary, since a(t) increases with
h > 0,
time. however, notice the negative power of time and the decreasing character of
the interval (ti  t). notice also that the string energy density (t) and the pressure
p (t) have a decreasing behaviour when the scale factor grows.

2.1.2 string driven radiation dominated stage solution

this stage is obtained by following the same procedure above described, but
by considering now a gas of strings with dual to unstable behaviour. dual strings

5

propagate in curved spacetimes obeying a typical radiation type equation of state
([2],[3]).

1
d

p =



(8)

this string behaviour and the dilaton frozen at constant value ( = constant)
gives us the scale factor for the radiation dominated stage:

a(t) = aii tr

(t) = ii
(t) = ii(a(t))(1+d)

r =

2

d + 1

p (t) =

1
d

(t) =

ii
d

(a(t))(1+d)

(9)

here ii, ii are integration constants, and aii a parameter to be xed by the
evolution of the scale factor.

2.2 selfsustained string universes in general relativity

as shown in ref.[2], [4] and [5], string solutions in curved spacetimes are self-
consistent solutions of general relativity equations, in particular in a spatially at,
homogeneus and isotropic background:

ds2 = dt2  a(t)2dx2

where the einstein equations take the form:

d(d  1)h 2 = 

,

(d  1) h + p +  = 0

1
2

(10)

(11)

as before, the matter source is described by a gas of non interacting classical strings
(neglecting splitting and coalescing interactions). this gas obeys an equation of state
including the three dierent possible behaviours of strings in curved spacetimes:
unstable, dual to unstable and stable. let be u, d and s the densities for strings
with unstable, dual to unstable and stable behaviours respectively. taking into
account the properties of each behaviour ([2]), the density energy and the pressure
of the string gas are described by:

 =

1

(a(t))d  u a(t) +

d
a(t)

+ s!

,

p =

1
d

1

(a(t))d   d

a(t)

 u a(t)!

(12)

equations (12) are qualitatively correct for every t and become exact in the
asymptotic cases, leading to obtain the radiation dominated behaviour of the scale

6

factor, as well as the matter dominated behaviour. in the limit a(t)  0 and t  0,
the dual to unstable behaviour dominates in the equations (12) and gives us:

(t)  d (a(t))(d+1)

,

p (t) 

1
d

d (a(t))(d+1)

(13)

this behaviour is characterized by positive string density energy and pressure,
both growing when the scale factor approaches to 0. dual to unstable strings behave
in similar way to massless particles, i.e.
radiation. solving selfconsistently the
einstein equations (11) with sources following eqs.(13), the scale factor solution
takes the form:

a(t)    2d

d(d  1)!

2

d+1

1

d+1  d + 1
2 !

(t  tii)r

, r =

2

d + 1

(14)

this describes the evolution of a friedmann-robertson-walker radiation dominated
universe, the time parameter tii will be xed by further evolution of the scale factor.
on the other hand, studying the opposite limit a(t)  , t   and taking into
account the behaviour of the unstable density u which vanishes for a(t)   [2],
the stable behaviour becomes dominant and the equation of state reduces to:

  s (a(t))d

,

p = 0

(15)

the stable behaviour gives a constant value for the string energy, that is, the energy
density evolves as the inverse volume decreasing with growing scale factor, while the
pressure vanishes. thus, stable strings behave as cold matter. again, from solving
eqs.(11) with eqs.(15), the solution of a matter dominated stage emerges:

a(t)   

d

(d  1)

1
d

s

2!

(t  tiii)m , m =

2
d

(16)

we construct in the next sections a model with an inationary stage described by
the string driven solution (see eq.(7)), followed by a radiation dominated stage (see
eq.(9)) and a matter dominated stage (see eq.(16)). we will consider the dilaton
eld remain practically constant and vanishing from the exit of ination until the
current time, as suggested in the string driven radiation dominated solution. it
must be noticed that the same solution for the radiation dominated stage emerges
from the treatment with dilaton eld and without it (general relativity plus string
equation of state), allowing us to describe qualitatively the evolution of the universe
by means of these scale factor asymptotic behaviours.

3 scale factor transitions

taking the simplest option, we consider the real scale factor evolution mini-

7

mally described as:

ai(t) = ai(ti  t)q
aii(t) = aii tr
aiii(t) = aiii tm

t  (ti, tr)

t  (tr, tm)

t  (tm, t0)

(1)

with transitions at least not excessively long at the beginning of radiation dominated
stage tr and of matter dominated stage tm. we also dene a beginning of ination at
ti, and t0 is the current time. it would be reasonable do not have instantaneous and
continuous transitions at tr and tm for the stages extracted in the above section, since
the detail of such transitions is not provided by the eective treatments here used.
one can suspects the existence of very brief intermediate stages at least at the end
of the inationary stage (t  (tb, tr)), as we will discuss in the next section, and also
at the end of radiation dominated stage (t  tm). the dynamics of these transitions
is unknown and not easy to modelize, it introduces in anycase free parameters ([7]).
in order to construct an evolution model for the scale factor, it is compatible with
the current level of knowledge of the theory to suppose the transitions very brief.
we will merge our lack of knowledge on the real transitions by means of descriptive
temporal variables ([7]) in function of which the modelized transitions at t1 and t2
are instantaneous and continuous. we link this descriptive scale factor with the
minimal information about the evolution of the observational universe; we consider
the standard values for cosmological times: the radiation-matter transition held
about tm  1012 s, the beginning of radiation stage at tr  1032 s and the current
1  1017 s (the exact numerical value of t0 turns out
age of the universe t0  h0
not crucial here). we impose also to our description satisfy the same scale factor
expansion (or scale factor ratii) reached in each one of the three stages considered
in the real model (1). it is also convenient to x the temporal variable of the third
(and current) stage t with our physical time (multiplied by c). explicit computations
can be found in [7] and led nally to the following scale factor in cosmic time-type
variables:

q

ai(t) = ai( ti  t)
aii(t) = aii(t  tii)r
aiii(t) = aiii(t)m

ti < t < t1
t1 < t < t2

t2 < t < t0

(2)

with continuous transitions at t1 and t2 both the scale factor and rst derivatives
with respect to the variables t, t and t. the parameters ti, ai, tii, aiii can be
written in function of aii and transition times using the matching conditions. in
terms of standard observational values, the transitions t1, t2 and the beginning of
the inationary stage description ti are expressed as:

t1 =

r
m

tr +(cid:18)1 

ti = (cid:18) r

m



q
m

r

,

m(cid:19) tm
ti  tr(cid:19) tr +(cid:18)1 

tr  ti

t2 = tm
m(cid:19) tm

r

(3)

8

the parameters of the scale factor (2) can be written also in terms of the observa-
tional values tr, tm and the global scale factor aii:

+

ti = tr(cid:18) r
ai = aii(cid:18) q
m(cid:19)

m

q

m(cid:19) + tm(cid:18)1 
(cid:18) r
m(cid:19)

r+q

tr

q

r

,

r

m(cid:19)

,

r

tii = (cid:18)1 
m(cid:19) tm
aiii = aii(cid:18) r
m(cid:19)

r

tm

(4)

rm

the time variable t of inationary stage and t of radiation stage are not a
priori exactly equal to the physical time coordinate at rest frame (multiplied by
c), but transformations (dilatation plus translation) of it. the low energy eective
action equations from where the scale factor, dilaton and energy density have been
extracted, allow these transformations. with this treatment of the cosmological
scale factor, we will attain computations free of by hand added parameters and
with full predictability as can be seen in the next sections.

the last point is to make an approach for the dilaton eld. this is considered
practically constant from the beginning of the radiation dominated stage until the
current time. the dilaton eld increases during the inationary string driven stage.
its value can be supposed coincident with the value at exit ination time in a sudden
but not continuous transition, since its temporal derivatives can not match this
asymptotic behaviour. ii = (tr)  1. remember the expression for the dilaton
in ination dominated stage,

ii = i + 2d ln a(tr)

(5)

the scale factor can be written also in terms of the conformal time variable
a(t) dened for each stage. detailed computation can be found elsewhere ([7],

d = dt
[10]) and are not needed here.

4 properties of the string driven model

4.1 enough ination

the loose ends in standard frw cosmology are the atness problem or why
the current spatial curvature k is so little and the corresponding  so close to
1; the horizon problem and causality related considerations and the large scale
homogeneity of universe and related perturbation considerations. the inationary
paradigm with an exponential expansion period answers these questions provided
the inationary expansion reaches an enough number of e-folders, usually considered

9

among 80  100. any other cosmological theory predicting an inationary stage
should have to answer these questions. as the minimum requirement in this sense,
a compatibility with enough amount of ination must be required. we discuss now
if enough ination could be provided by the string driven inationary stage.
in
the comoving coordinates, enough ination can be simply produced if the additive
parameter ti is found suciently near and above the ination-radiation dominated
transition time tr.
in this way, by increasing the time, the scale factor inates
by approaching a pole type singularity. but the singularity is not reached neither
passed throw, because the exit of ination stage happens before.

notice also that both the scale factor and dilaton increase with time, as well
as the spacetime curvature since it is proportional to h. as a consequence, the
dynamics of the stage could lead to break the conditions giving rise to the low en-
ergy eective regime. let be tb the instant when this breaking in the low energy
eective regime happens and, as consequence, the string driven inationary evolu-
tion ends. what kind of evolution follows is an open question, a more complete
treatment would be neccesary in order to describe the scale factor in a higher order
regime, where string eects would play a strong role. by consistency with the time
scales, it is reasonable to suppose a very short interval between the end of the string
driven ination and the beginning of the standard radiation dominated cosmology.
one can suspects the existence of a very brief intermediate stage at the end of the
inationary stage at nearly constant curvature (t  (tb, tr)). due to its briefness
and supposed bounded curvature controlled by higher-order string corrections, not
so great expansion would appear in the stage not governed by the l.e.e..

let us impose the string driven inationary stage to reach an arbitrary number

f of e-folds between the beginning at ti and the comeback to l.e.e. at tr:

ai(tr)
ai(ti)

 ef

(1)

this condition gives us the relation:

1 +

tr  ti
ti  tr

f
q

 e

by dening the parameter  related with the value ti through ti = tr(1 + ) and
 relating the ination duration and its exit, the enough ination condition eq.(1)
translates as:

1 +

f
q

 e




that, in good approximation, gives us    e

f

q .

the dilaton eld increases during the inationary stage, however its eect in
breaking the l.e.e. regime is not given by the exit ination conditions but by the

10

beginning ination ones. we have modelized a time ti being the beginning of an
inationary stage close to planck time tp  1043s. in this inationary stage, from
eqs.(7) the dilaton eld is (t) = i + 2d ln a(t). therefore, the dilaton increases
during the inationary stage between ti and tr a ratio:

(tr)
(ti)

=

i + 2d ln a(tr)
i + 2d ln a(ti)

thus, if an enough amount of ination tooks place, for instance a(tr) = ef a(ti), the
ratio in the dilaton eld is given by the expression:

(tr)
(ti)

= 1 +

f

2d

log10 e

(i + 2d ln a(ti))

(2)

where we notice the lineal dependence with the number of e-folds f and the inverse
dependence of scale factor at the beginning of ination stage a(ti).

no need to place this singularity on the big bang (around t  0) is found from
the eective equations. still more: the beginning ti of the string driven inationary
stage is practically irrelevant. the usual inationary paradigm considers between 60-
100 e-folds enough to solve the problem of large scale homogeneity. this quantity is
true for standard (exponential de sitter) ination, but we can consider it enoughly
restrictive.
in anycase, we realize that string driven ination can, in principle,
provide whatever amount of ination, since a nite value of f gives a nite relation
among ti and tr too. one would expect the value of ti given from theory and
predicting the right amount of ination. in our limited minimal string driven model,
we prove the compatibility of our inationary description with the usual standard
ination values.

in the gure[1] we show the scale factor evolution for a de sitter stage(ds),
an usual power law inationary stage (p l) and the string driven inationary stage
(sd).

we consider now the duration of ination. in the descriptive coordinate t, it

= t1  ti. from eqs.(3) is seen:

means t(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)inf

where t|inf = tr  ti and remember q and m are positive values and ti > tr.
coherently, we obtain a positive value for the duration of ination in descriptive
variables. notice that as long as ti  tr, this duration experiments a greater
dilatation. in fact, if we have in general ti = tr(1 + ), then:

=

q
m

tr

ti  tr

t|inf

t(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)inf

t(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)inf

=

q
m

1


t|inf

11

log a(t )

a(tr)

sd

pl

ds

t [seg]

1032

1035

1034

1033

figure 1: comparison among dierent inationary evolution laws

representation of the ination amount reached by a de sitter (ds), an usual power law
(p l) and a string driven (sd) inationary stages. the three scale factors have been
normalized at tr. for enough ination (ti  tr), the (sd) behaviour becomes very much
sharper.

since enough ination requires  << 1, the duration in descriptive variables increases
so much in order to reproduce the expansive behaviour of the scale factor. for
instance, for an expansion of order  ef , the last expression becames:

=

q
m

e

f

q t|inf

t(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)inf

such enormous dilatation in the descriptive variables is reached by means of
transformation of the transition times. from eqs.(3) we see that t1  tm and always
t1 > 0, meanwhile ti can decrease to large negative values, enlarging in this way
the duration of the stage in the descriptive variables. by using ti = tr(1 + ) and
tr  ti = tr, the condition ti < 0 holds when:






1

q (cid:18)r + (m  r)

tm

tr (cid:19)

(3)

with the standard transition times given in sections above, the r.h.s. of eq.(3)
is  1043.
in the l.h.s. we nd   1 and   0. for beginning of ination
around the planck time (ti  tp ) and enough ination (f  80), we have 
  1087
and equation (3) is satised. this feature is needed in order to attain the required
amount of ination in the descriptive variables, because it requires a great dilatation
 1087 t|inf . the temporal descriptive coordinate
t runs on both positive and negative values, but the proper cosmic time runs always
on positive values.

of the ination duration t(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)inf

12

the matter dominated stage description presents the same duration that the
real one since it runs on proper cosmic time. the duration of the radiation dominated
stage in descriptive variables suers a slight contraction with respect to duration in
proper time t|rad = r
m t|rad. for our model in three spatial dimensions, this
value is r

m = 1

3

4.2 evolution of the hubble factor

the hubble factor in the model constructed with the string driven inationary

stage has the following behaviours in each stage:

h(t)|inf = cq(ti  t)1
h(t)|rad = cr(t  tii)1
h(t)|mat = cm(t)1

(4)

in the gure [2] we can observe the evolution of hubble factor in the minimal
string driven cosmological model. notice the growth of h(t) around the exit of
ination. since the hubble factor is proportional to spacetime curvature, the region
around tr is a highly curved regime, where the l.e.e. regime should transitorily
break down. notice also the nearly constant curvature at the beginning of the
ination stage

4.3 energy density predictions

as can be easily seen, from eq.(4) we have:

2



 2 + dh 2 = 0

,

2



 dh 2 =

16gd

c4


 e

both equations give:

  dh 2 =

8gd

c4


 e

by substituting the shifted expressions for the dilaton  =   lnq| g | and matter

energy density  = ad, the above equation yields:

  d(cid:16) h + h 2(cid:17) =

8gd

c4

 e

(5)

eq.(5) can be considered as the generalization of the einstein equation in the frame-
work of low energy eective string action. this equation will allow us extract some
predictions on the energy density evolution in our minimal model.

13

h = c a

a [seg1]

hinf (tr)

h(ti)

h(tm)
h(t0)

tr

t [seg]

tm t0

figure 2: representation of hubble factor in string driven cosmology

representation of the hubble factor evolution in the minimal string driven cosmological
model. during the inationary stage, the hubble factor remains almost constant until the
neighbourhood of the transition to radiation dominated stage. just before it, the hubble
factor has an explosive but bounded growth. during the radiation dominated and matter
dominated stages, the hubble factor decreases with a nearly constant slope.

4.3.1 energy density at the exit of ination

by introducing the string driven solution for a(t), (t), (t) (eqs.(7)) in eq.(5),

we obtain a relation for the integration constants i and i:

i ei =

c4

8gd

2d(d  1)
(d + 1)2 ai

(1+d)

(6)

now, is easy to nd the relation between i, ei and the values of the energy density
1 and dilaton eld 1 at the end of ination stage. we can compute these values
either with the real scale factor ai(t) or with the description ai(t). by dening
1 = (ai(tr)) = ( ai( t1)) and 1 = (ai(tr)) = ( ai( t1)) and making use of eqs.(7),
we can write:

1e1 = i ei ai

1+d(ti  tr)q(1+d)

(7)

now, with the information about the evolution of the scale factor and the
descriptions in each stage, it is possible to relate this expression with observational
cosmological parameters. in fact, we must understand eq.(7) as one obtained in the
description of inationary stage:

ti  tr  ti  t1 =

q
m

tr

14

for the string driven solution, the exponents have the values q = 2

d+1,
d. with these expressions we obtain the density-dilaton coupling at the end

d+1, r = 2

m = 2
of ination:

1e1 =

c4

2(d  1)

8gd

d

2

tr

(8)

(9)

with tr = ctr where tr  1032s, this expression gives the numerical value:

1e1 = 7.1 1090erg cm3

it must be noticed that the same result can be achieved from the radiation
dominated stage, due to the continuity of the scale factor, of the density energy
and the dilaton eld at the transition time tr.

it must be noticed also an interesting property of this energy density-dilaton
coupled term. we can extend the general relativity treatment and dene |inf
as this coupled quantity in critical energy density units, where the critical energy
8g h(t)2. we compute the
density c(t) for our spatially at metric is c(t) = 3c2
corresponding c at the moment of the exit of ination:

c| t1 =

3c2
8g

h( t1) =

3c4
8g

m 2tr

2

with this, it is easily seen:

|inf =

1e1
c| t1

=

2
3

d  1

d

1
m 2

(10)

(11)

where m is given by eq.(16). it gives for our model in the three dimensional case
|inf = 1.

here we have used the descriptive variables in order to link the scale factor
transitions with observational transition times. but the conclusion |inf = 1 is
independent from this choice.
in fact, we have computed it again in the proper
cosmic time of the inationary stage and taking the corresponding values at the
beginning of the radiation dominated stage tr. from eq.(7) and h(t) = q(ti  t)1,
we have:

|inf =

 1  dq!

1

3q   2

q

(12)

q is given by the string driven solution eq.(7) and with it, we recover |inf = 1.
in fact, the same result could be achieved also by evaluating |inf exactly at the
end of string driven inationary stage, whatever this time may be. that means,
we have a prediction non-dependent of whenever the exit of ination happens.

in the proper cosmic time coordinates, (ti  tr) is a very little value. but
independently from this, the coupled term energy density-dilaton at the exit of

15

ination gives the value one in the corresponding critical energy density units. the
value of the critical energy density is computed following the einstein equations
for spatially at metrics, but solely the low energy eective string equations give
the expression for the coupled term eq.(5) and the string driven solution itself. in
this last point, no use of further evolution, linking with observational results neither
standard cosmology have been made. this enable us to arm that in the l.e.e.
treatment, the relation between spatial curvature and energy density holds as in
general relativity, at least for the spatially at case (k = 0   = 1). this
result means to recover a general relativity prescription within a non-einstenian
framework.

4.3.2 predicted current values of energy density and omega.

thus, we can obtain the corresponding current value of 0e0 in units of critical

energy density or contribution to .

to proceed, we remember that the evolution of the density energy in the mat-
ter dominated stage follows   a(t)3  t2 then, at the beginning of matter
dominated stage we would have

2

m = (cid:18)tm
t0 (cid:19)

0

on the other hand, in the radiation dominated stage, the density behaviour is:
  a(t)4  t2 which gives for the energy density

that is,

2

1 = (cid:18) tr
tm(cid:19)

m

2

0 = (cid:18)tr
t0(cid:19)

1

considering that the dilaton eld has been remained almost constant since the end
of ination 0  r, we have

 =

0e0

c

= (cid:18) tr

t0(cid:19)e1

1
c

(13)

where the current critical energy density is expressed in terms of current hubble
factor h0 = h(t0) as:

c =

3c2
8g

2

h0

from eq.(13) and with eqs.(8) and (14), we obtain:

2

t0
h0

2

 =

2(d  1)

3d

16

(14)

(15)

as like as h0  t0

1, we have nally

 =

2(d  1)

3d

(16)

in our three-dimensional expanding universe, it gives  = 4
9.

in the last, we have taken t0  h0

1 following the usual computation.

in

general relativity framework, it holds:

if the deceleration parameter q0 = a(t0) a(t0)
parameter is found:

2. for our model, the deceleration

(17)

t0 =

1

h0

2
3
a(t0)2 > 1

q0 =

1  m

m

that for standard matter dominated behaviour gives exactly q0 = 1
2. for this and
as well as observations give q0  1, we compute the value of  in this framework.
from eq.(15) and eq.(17) we obtain:

 =

2
3

d  1

d (cid:18)2

3(cid:19)2

which in the three dimensional case gives exactly:

 = 1

we have obtained that a metric spatially at k = 0 leds to a critical energy density
 = 1. this result is so known in general relativity, but here it has been extracted
in a no general relativity framework, since low energy eective equations are not a
priori equivalent to general relativity equations. looking from the point of view of
the brans-dicke metric-dilaton coupling, general relativity is obtained as the limit
of the brans-dicke parameter   , while the low energy eective string action
(see eq.(1)) is obtained for  = 1.

notice that  = 1 is obtained as a result of applying coherently general rela-
tivity statements in the matter dominated stage, but the initial eq.(8) comes for the
inationary stage, described in the low energy eective string framework. thus, a
result from this string treatment is compatible with, and leads to similar predictions
that, standard cosmology.

since in anycase t0  h0

1, eq.(8) can be seen as giving a lower limit for :

 

2
3

(d  1)

d

(18)

this is the prediction for the current energy density from string driven cosmology
and this is not in disagreement with the current observational limits for .

17

4.4 discussion of the model

4.4.1 string driven cosmology is selfconsistent

matter dominated stages are not an usual result in string cosmology back-
grounds. the standard time of matter dominated beginning tm  1012s is supposed
too late in order to account for string eects. but this is coherent with the fact that
matter dominated stage is described selfconsistently by eective string treatments.

the general relativity equations plus string sources supposes one of the weak-
est regimes for describing string-metric coupling. in this treatment, metric evolves
following classical general relativity equations and the string eect is accounted
uniquely by considering them as the classical matter source ([2]). backreaction
happens since the equation of state for string behaviours have been obtained by
studying their propagation in curved backgrounds. the result is selfconsistent be-
cause einstein equations returns the correct curved background when aymptotic
behaviours have been taken. thus, it is a good point that the current stage ap-
pears selfconsistently as the asymptotic limit for large scale factor. similarly, the
radiation dominated stage is obtained from both eective treatments considered.
this is coherent with having such stage previous to the current stage (where string
eects must be not visible) and successive to a stage extracted under considerations
of stronger string eects.

the intermediate behaviour between radiation and matter dominated stages is
not known. because this and current knowledge, this eective treatment is not able
to describe suitably the radiation dominated-matter dominated transition. as it
is said elesewhere [7], a sudden but continuous and smooth transition among both
stages is not possible without an intermediate behaviour. other comment must
be dedicated to the ination-radiation dominated transition. in the string driven
model, this transition requires a brief temporaly exit of low energy eective regime
for comeback within it at the beginning of radiation dominated. this could be un-
derstood as the conditions neccesary to modify the leading behaviour from unstable
strings to dual strings. further knowledge about the evolution of strings in curved
backgrounds is necessary. it has been reported that multistring solutions (strings
propagating in packets) are present in curved backgrounds and show dierent and
evolving behaviours ([13]-[15]). research in this sense could aid to overcome the
transition here considered, asymptotically rounded by low energy eective treat-
ments.

18

4.4.2 string driven ination realizes a big-bang

during the inationary stage, the scale factor suers a great expansion, enough
for solving the cosmological puzzles. the almost amount of expansion is reached
around the exit time. in fact, the beginning of this stage is characterized for a very,
very slow evolution for the scale factor and dilaton. this evolution increases speed
in approaching the exit ination, since it is approaching also the pole singularity in
scale factor. from a phenomenological point of view, the inationary scale factor
describes a very little and very calm universe emerging from the planck scale. the
evolution of this universe is very slow at the beginning, but the string coupling with
the metric and the string equation of state drive this evolution, leading to a each time
more increasing and fast dynamics. in approaching the exit of ination, the scale
factor and the spacetime curvature increase. the metric explodes around the exit
of ination. the last part of this explosion is the transition to radiation dominated
stage in a process that breaks transitorily the eective treatment of strings. this
transition is supposed brief, the transition to standard cosmology happens at the
beginning of radiation dominated stage.

at priori, this model seems privilege an unknown parameter ti, playing the
role usually assigned to singularity at t = 0 in string cosmology. but this is not
unnatural, since in order to reach an enough amount of ination, this parameter is
found to be very close to the standard radiation dominated beginning tr and so, to
the beginning of standard cosmology. on the other hand, this value appears related
to the gut scale, which is consistent with the freezing of the dilaton evolution and
change in the equation of state in our eective string treatment.

in this way, the universe starts from a classical, weak coupling and small cur-
vature regime. driven by the strings, it evolves towards a quantum regime at strong
coupling and curvature.

the argument above mentioned, where a brief transition exits and comebacks
among stages in a low energy eective treatment, is not an exceptional feature in
string cosmology. pre-big bang models [3] deal with two branches described in
low energy eective treatments. both branches are string duality related, but the
former one runs on negative time values. the intermediate region of high curvature
is supposed containing the singularity at t = 0 and consequently, the big bang. our
string driven cosmology presents also this intermediate point of high curvature,
but it is found around the ination-radiation dominated transition, near but not
on planck scale. in our model, negative proper times are never considered and the
instant t = 0 remains before of the described inationary stage (is not coherent
include it in the eective description, since before planck time a fully stringy regime
is expected whose eects can not be considered merely with the eective equations).
there are not predicted singularities, neither at t = 0 nor t = ti, at the level of the

19

minimal model here studied.

another great dierence with the pre-big bang scenario is the predicted
dynamics of universe. the pre-big bang scenario includes a dilaton driven phase
running on negative times. not such feature is found in our universe description.
although the curvature does not obey a monotonic regime, time runs always on
positive values and the scale factor always expands in our string driven cosmology.

the pre-big bang scenario assumes around t  0 a string phase with high
almost constant curvature. our minimal string driven cosmology does not assume
such a phase, but a state of high curvature is approached (and reached) at the end
of ination stage. the low energy eective regime (l.e.e.) breaks down around
the ination exit, both due to increasing curvature (the scale factor approaches the
pole singularity) and to the increasing dilaton. the exit of ination and beginning
of radiation dominated stage must be described with a more complete treatment for
high curvature regimes.

from eq.(2), the growth reached by the dilaton eld during the inationary stage
would not be so large, at least while the low energy eective treatment holds. the
exact amount depends mainly on the initial inationary conditions, the parameter
i being constrained by the eective equations (4).
in anycase, when the scale
factor approaches its singularity and the e-folds number f increases very quickly
with time, the same is not true for the dilaton ratio. comparatively, the dilaton
ratio increases in a much slower way (tr )
a(ti)  ef . as a
consequence, corrections due to the high curvature regime are needed much earlier
than the corresponding to dilaton growth.

(ti)  f than the scale factor a(tr )

5 conclusions

we have considered a minimal model for the evolution of the scale factor to-
tally extracted from string cosmology. the earliest stages (an inationary power
type expansion and a radiation dominated stage) are obtained from the low energy
eective equations, while the radiation dominated stage and matter dominated stage
are selfconsistent solutions of the einstein equations with a gas of strings as matter
sources. such solutions suggest the low energy eective action is asymptotically
valid at earliest stages, around and immediately after planck time tp  1043s,
when the spacetime and string dynamics would be strongly coupled. the radiation
dominated stage is extracted from both treatments, coherently with being it an in-
termediate stage among the two regimes: ination and matter dominated stage. on
the other hand, since the stable string behaviour describes cold matter behaviour,
current matter dominated stage can be extracted also in the string matter treat-

20

ment. notice that in string theory, the equation of state of the string matter is
derived from the string dynamics itself and not given at hand from outside as in
pure general relativity.

no detail on the transitions dynamics can be extracted in this framework,
too naive for accounting such eects. the ination-radiation dominated transi-
tion implies a transitory breaking of the low energy eective regime. the radiation
dominated-matter dominated stage can not be modelized in sudden, continuous and
smooth way. further study is required on the evolution of the equation of state for
the gas of strings. the three string behaviours in curved backgrounds are present in
this gas and each cosmological stage is selfconsistently driven by them. in this way,
the transition between ination and radiation dominated stage is related with the
evolution from unstable to dual string behaviour, while the radiation dominated-
matter dominated transition could be driven by passing from the dual to stable
behaviour.

phenomenological information extracted from this string driven model is com-
patible with observational universe information. an amount of ination, usually
considered as enough for solving the cosmological puzzles, can be obtained in the
inationary stage. energy ranges at exit of ination are found coherents with gut
scales. the inationary stage gives a value for the energy density-dilaton coupled
term equivalent to the corresponding critical energy density, computed as in gen-
eral relativity. that means, we have |inf = 1, whenever the end of inationary
stage be computed. also, the contribution to current energy density is computed
  4
9, and taking account the validity of general relativity in the current matter
dominated stage, we nd this contribution be exactly  = 1.

our main conclusion is to have proved that string cosmology, althought being
eective, is able to produce a suitable minimal model for universe evolution.
it
is possible to place each eective context in a time-energy scale range. energy
ranges are found and general relativity conclusions are obtained too in a string
theory context coherently. we have extracted the general relativity statement
about spatial curvature and energy density, at least for the spatially at case (k =
0   = 1) in a totally non-einstenian framework, like the low energy eective
string action giving rise to the inationary string driven stage.

in their validity range, no need of extra stages is found. only the interval around
the transitions and the very beginning epoch, probably the planck epoch, will require
more accurate treatments that hitohere considered. since the behaviours above ex-
tracted are asymptotic results, it is not possible to give the detail of the transitions
among the dierent stages. the connection among asymptotic low energy eective
regimes through a very brief stage (requiring a more complete description of string
dynamics) enables us to suppose this stage containing the evolution in the equation
of state from unstable strings domain to dual strings one. from the point of view of

21

the scale factor evolution, this brief transition could be modelized as nearly instan-
taneous, provided curvature and scale factor expansion have attainted nearly their
maximun values. similar comment can be made in the radiation dominated-matter
dominated transition. it must be driven by the subsequent evolution of the gas of
strings from dual to unstable domain to string stable behaviour domain. again, a
brief intermediate stage could take place among both asymptotic behaviours. but
this is an open question in the framework of string cosmology both for ination-
radiation dominated as well as radiation dominated-matter dominated transition.

acknowledgments

m.p.i. wants to thank marina ramon medrano and hector j. de vega for very

helpful discussions.

references

[1] a.a.tseytlin in string gravity and physics at the planck energy scale, pro-
ceedings of the erice chalonge school 1992, ed. by n.sanchez (world scien-
tic, singapore 1993).

[2] h.j.de vega and n.sanchez, phys.rev.d 50 (1994) 7202.

[3] m.gasperini and g.veneziano, astropart.phys. 1 (1993) 317.

[4] string theory in curved spacetimes, ed. by n.sanchez (world scientic, sin-

gapore, 1998).

[5] string gravity and physics at the planck scale, proceedings of the erice
chalonge school, sept. 1995, ed. by n.sanchez and a.zichichi, nato asi
476 c, kluwer ac. publ. 1995.

[6] m.gasperini and m.giovannini, phys.rev.d 47 (1993) 1519.

[7] m.p.infante and n.sanchez, linking a minimal theoretical model of scale
factor evolution with observational universe information (in preparation).

[8] m.gasperini, n.sanchez and g.veneziano, int. jour. mod. phys. a 6 (1991)

3853.

[9] m.gasperini, n.sanchez and g.veneziano, nuc.phys.b 364 (1991) 365.

[10] m.p.infante and n.sanchez, the primordial gravitational wave background

in string cosmology (accepted for publication in phys.rev.d).

[11] m.gasperini and g.veneziano, mod.phys.lett. a 8 (1993) 3701.

22

[12] n.kaloper, a.linde and r.bousso, phys.rev.d 59 (1999) 4350.

[13] f.combes, h.j.de vega, a.v.mikhailov and n.sanchez, phys.rev.d 50

(1994) 2754.

[14] h.j.de vega, a.larsen and n.sanchez, nucl.phys.b 427 (1994) 643.

[15] h.j.de vega, a.larsen and n.sanchez, phys.rev.d 51 (1995) 6917.

[16] g.veneziano, phys.lett.b 265 (1991) 287.

[17] h.j.de vega and n.sanchez, phys.lett.b 197 (1987) 320.

[18] n.sanchez and g.veneziano, nuc.phys.b 333 (1990) 253.

[19] m.gasperini, phys.rev.d 56 (1997) 4815.

23

