9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
5
1

 

 
 

2
v
0
7
1
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

topics in d-geometry

michael r. douglas

department of physics and astronomy
rutgers university
piscataway, nj 088550849; usa
and
i.h.e.s., le bois-marie, bures-sur-yvette, 91440 france

abstract. we discuss the general theory of d-branes on calabi-yaus, recent results
from the theory of boundary states, and new results on the spectrum of branes on the
quintic cy. (contribution to the proceedings of strings 99 in potsdam, germany.)

1. introduction

the present contribution consists of three parts. the rst is a general summary of the
theory of d-branes on calabi-yau; the second summarizes the works [5, 9] which connect
the boundary state approach with large volume results; the third summarizes new results
on lines of marginal stability on the quintic found in june 1999. the transparencies for
this talk (which emphasize dierent parts of the material) are also available at [1].

for background material on d-geometry, see [11]. this term refers to the study
of how the conventional geometry which describes branes in supergravity is generalized
in the context of d-branes. as a point of departure we could consider any of the
geometrical pictures which branes give us for the various terms in an eective action.
perhaps the simplest example is the following: the moduli space of a 0-brane at a point
in a cy3 is the cy3 itself; the moduli space metric is just the ricci-at metric on the
cy3.

examples of the unconventional geometry we have in mind include the following:

(i) stringy and quantum corrections will generally modify conventional geometric
predictions. in particular, we can ask how a d-brane world volume action is aected
bystringy (ls) corrections. an example is to nd the moduli space metric for the
d0-brane at a point; this provides a canonical non-ricci at metric for each point
in cy moduli space. qualitative eects visible at nite ls include t-duality and
mirror symmetry; we will discuss the latter below.

(ii) perturbative string compactication can be dened non-geometrically, by specifying
an appropriate internal cft. some examples (such as gepner models) turn out to
have geometric interpretations, and this denition provides a concrete way to work
in the highly stringy regime. others such as asymmetric orbifolds do not have

topics in d-geometry

2

known geometric interpretations; studying d-branes on these spaces will probably
lead either to nding such interpretations or showing why they do not exist.

(iii) d-brane world-volume theories include open strings stretching between pairs of
branes, which in many cases provide alternate gauge theory origins for what are
gravitational eects in the large distance limit. orbifold resolution by quiver
theories are an example in which non-trivial topology is reproduced as a classical
gauge theory moduli space. the short distance gravitational interactions between
d-branes are replaced by quantum gauge theory dynamics.
in special cases (in
the large n limit or for quantities protected by supersymmetry) this is believed
to reproduce supergravity, but more generally provides another way of dening its
stringy generalization.

(iv) noncommutative gauge theory arises on d-brane world-volumes in appropriate
limits of string theory, such as compactication on a small torus with xed
background b eld, or in minkowski space with large b eld. it seems quite likely
that similar theories are relevant in curved backgrounds; nding concrete examples
is an important problem for future work.

this is by no means a complete list but perhaps includes the most interesting points
discovered so far. as each of them would form a topic in its own right, for the rest of
the review we will focus on the following meta-question: to what extent do these eects
lead to qualitative changes in the brane physics  and thus cannot be ignored? the
way to study this question is to frame the alternative (null) hypothesis: the qualitative
properties of brane theories (especially, the low energy eective action, dimension of
the moduli space, types of singularities and so on) are the same as predicted by naive
geometric considerations  and test it in examples. we will refer to this as the geometric
hypothesis and make it more precise below.

2. d-branes on calabi-yaus

in at

space (minkowski or

is known about d-branes

quite a lot
toroidal
compactications) and in k3 compactications, where type ii-heterotic duality and the
large supersymmetry already suce to give a good picture. the geometric hypothesis
appears to be essentially true in these cases  the brane spectrum and moduli spaces
can be described as the spectrum and moduli spaces of semistable coherent sheaves
(a generalization of vector bundle which allows singularities corresponding to pointlike
instantons) [25].

d-branes on calabi-yau threefolds are not so well understood and look quite
interesting for a number of reasons. physically, supersymmetry preserving branes
will have n = 1, d = 4 gauge theories on the world-volume which may be directly
relevant for phenomenology. they generalize the strong coupling limit of heterotic
string compactication but in some ways appear simpler than the (0, 2) sigma models
which appear there. many questions can be addressed using the highly developed theory
of n = 2 supersymmetry and mirror symmetry.

topics in d-geometry

3

an important dierence with the cases of higher supersymmetry is that the
spectrum of branes can depend on the particular vacuum (point in moduli space) under
discussion. for example, in pure su(2) gauge theory, we know that the strong coupling
spectrum is quite dierent from the semiclassical spectrum; the purely electric w
bosons are not present. given n = 2 supersymmetry this dependence of spectrum
on moduli is highly constrained: as is well known, the bps spectrum can change only
on lines of marginal stability dened by the condition im z(q1)/z(q2) = 0. thus the
problem of nding the spectrum of wrapped branes on cy and deciding whether it
too changes at string scales is non-trivial but accessible, as we will discuss in the next
sections.

supersymmetric (1/2 bps) branes on a cy3 are divided into a and b branes
depending on the boundary condition on the u(1) currents in the (2, 2) superconformal
algebra (which determines which part of the world-sheet supersymmetry they preserve)
[32]: either ql = +qr or ql = qr is a consistent choice. the notation comes from
topological eld theory  an a brane is one whose open strings naturally couple to a-
twisted topological theory and the kahler moduli, while a b brane couples to complex
structure moduli. mirror symmetry will exchange the two  the spectrum and world-
sheet theories of a branes on a cy m is isomorphic to that of the b branes on its
mirror w.

if we consider branes dened by dirichlet and neumann boundary conditions in
the non-linear sigma model with cy3 target, the b branes are 2p-branes wrapped on
holomorphic cycles and carrying holomorphic vector bundles (this is the case with direct
analogy to the heterotic string), while the a branes are 3-branes wrapped on what are
called special lagrangian submanifolds (or sl-submanifolds; more below) [2]. at rst
this notation may seem backwards given the discussion in the previous paragraph, since
the 2p-cycles and the masses of b branes are controlled by kahler moduli (and thus
are calculable in the a-twisted topological closed string theory), while the 3-cycles and
masses of a branes are controlled by complex structure moduli. nevertheless it is correct
 in going from the open to closed string channel the boundary conditions on the u(1)
current change sign, interchanging a and b twistings.

this switch has important consequences, especially if we combine it with the
known properties of cy sigma models. specically, the b twisted models receive no
quantum corrections, while a twisted models receive world-sheet instanton corrections.
physically, this means that the n = 2 prepotential in compactied iib theory, which
depends only on complex structure moduli, is classically exact. this means that whereas
b brane masses receive world-sheet instanton corrections, the large volume results for
central charges and masses of a branes are already exact (this fact and mirror symmetry
can then be used to determine b masses).

this means that lines of marginal stability for a branes are the same as in the large
volume limit, and this fact strongly suggests that the spectrum of a branes is determined
entirely by classical geometric considerations. since we have not argued that the world-
volume theory itself does not receive stringy corrections (indeed we expect it to), this

topics in d-geometry

4

might seem to be an unjustied leap of faith at this point. nevertheless there is a good
argument for it, which we now summarize.

the classical geometric prediction is that each a brane is a 3-brane wrapped on a
sl-submanifold. now a sl-submanifold  of a cy n-fold is a lagrangian submanifold
with respect to the kahler form: | = 0, satisfying an additional constraint involving
the holomorphic n-form: there exists a constant  such that

im ei| = 0.

(2.1)

the constant  determines which of the original n = 2 supersymmetries remains
unbroken; two branes of dierent  together break all supersymmetry.

while lagrangian submanifolds are oppy, specied locally by an arbitrary
function (in canonical coordinates, pi = f /xi), the special lagrangian condition
determines this function up to a nite dimensional moduli space, which for a smooth
cy has been shown to be smooth and of real dimension b1 = dim h 1(, r) [30]. a
d-brane conguration is specied by  and a at u(1) gauge connection, leading to
a moduli space of complex dimension b1, which before taking stringy corrections into
account is a torus bration.

i.e.

interesting examples of sl-submanifolds of r6 are known, but not too many are
known for cys. the only general construction known is as the xed point of an
im zi = 0 in a cicy. even necessary or sucient conditions for
involution,
candidate cycles to support sl-submanifolds are not known. the subject is still rather
new however and interest has picked up dramatically as a consequence of the proposal of
strominger, yau and zaslow that the mirror w to a cy m is just the moduli space of
the d3-brane on m mirror to the d0 on w, which will be some (appropriately chosen)
t 3.
[39] a number of papers have shown the existence of t 3 brations on particular
cys which can in principle be deformed to special lagrangian brations. [22]

the question of how deformations of the cy itself aect the spectrum of sl-
[26] the part of this story relevant

submanifolds has recently been studied by joyce.
for complex structure deformations (also summarized in [27]) is as follows.

the natural geometric description of transitions between 3-brane congurations in
six dimensions is for two intersecting 3-branes to intercommute, producing a single
3-brane, or the reverse.
in the large volume limit, this process can be studied in
the neighborhood of the intersection point, and the relevant question is: out of all
congurations  in r6 which asymptote to two planes 1 and 2 at xed angles ,
is the minimal volume surface the union of the two planes, or something else, and if so
what?

this question was answered some years ago by use of calibrated geometry [24]
let 1 be the rst plane and 2 the
and the result is known as the angle theorem:
orientation reversal of the second plane; out of so(2n) rotations turning 1 into 2
take the eigenvalues eii and let  = p i. if the minimal such  is greater than or equal

to , the volume cannot be reduced; while if  <  it can.

the surface of lower volume can be approximately described by use of an exact

topics in d-geometry

5

sl-submanifold solution in r6 with the prescribed asymptotics, which exists in the case
 = . one can try use this solution to lower the volume by orienting it to cross both
of 1 and 2 near the intersection point; if it does so, the nite region between the
intersections is guaranteed to have lower volume than the original planes. this will be
possible exactly when  < .

the angle theorem tells us which of two congurations is stable in terms of a local
geometric condition (the same as the string theory condition for the intersection point
to have an associated tachyon [3]), but the geometric picture furthermore implies that
this can be tested just knowing the central charges for the two branes. this is because
the relative angle is known given the phase of pullback of  (locally dz1  dz2  dz3) to
each brane, and  must have constant phase on each brane. thus decays take place just
when z(q1) and z(q2) are colinear  this is exactly the standard marginal stability
condition. these considerations tell us a little more  namely, which state (the single
brane, or two branes) is stable on which side of the marginal stability line.

this geometrical picture of a brane decay and stability ts with the constraints
following from the exact stringy prepotential and thus, despite the fact that other
consequences of this geometrical picture may well be false for substringy branes, it
is consistent to imagine that the spectrum is the geometric one. this is in contrast to
the b description of the spectrum which must be modied by the stringy corrections
to the prepotential. this is the rst example of what we will call below the modied
geometric hypothesis.

all of this tells us quite a bit about the dependence of the spectrum of 3-branes
on the cy moduli, but does not substitute for the need to have some results on the
spectrum in at least some part of moduli space. since so little is known about 3-branes
at present we instead take this from the large volume limit of the b brane spectrum as
many mathematical results towards classifying holomorphic cycles and vector bundles
are known.

the most basic of these is the following. given a holomorphic vector bundle,
the donaldson-uhlenbeck-yau theorem gives necessary and sucient conditions for the
existence of a yang-mills connection preserving supersymmetry: it must be semistable.
this is a somewhat complicated condition involving all holomorphic subbundles, but a
simpler necessary condition is known which depends on the chern character of the
bundle (which corresponds to d-brane charge as q62k  chk(f ), the 2k form in
tr ef/2) and the kahler class:

z (q6q2 +

1
2

q2

4)    0.

(2.2)

on manifolds with b1,1 > 1 this describes an explicit dependence of the spectrum on the
kahler class, as has been discussed by sharpe. [37]

since the prepotential determining the central charges of b branes receives world-
sheet instanton corrections, it is fairly certain that this mathematical stability condition
is modied in the stringy regime. this is quite interesting as it would mean that the
condition for a bundle to be usable in superstring compactication is not always the

topics in d-geometry

6

geometrical condition which has been implicitly assumed in the past.

given a specic supersymmetric brane, we can try to derive its world-volume
eective action and general considerations suggest that the simplest quantities to start
with are the holomorphic ones: the superpotential and gauge kinetic term. the latter
corresponds to the dilaton and in cy compactications with zero ns eld strength this
only becomes non-trivial at string loop level (this is one of the invariants dened in
[4]). however a superpotential can appear at tree level and indeed for multiple parallel
branes we expect a generalization of the tr z 1[z 2, z 3] superpotential of 3-branes in at
space. there are also known examples of superpotentials for single branes (see [5] for a
discussion).

a plausible counterpart of the nonrenormalization theorem for the n = 2
prepotential is the following: the superpotential, being essentially a topological quantity
in open string theory, depends only on the moduli of the appropriate twisted theory. [5]
specically, an a brane superpotential depends only on kahler moduli, while a b brane
superpotential depends only on complex structure moduli, and furthermore is equal to
the large volume result.

this comes close to showing that a b brane moduli space is the same as in the
large volume limit, but not quite  the potential can also contain d terms. these would
naturally depend on the kahler moduli, as in the example of quiver theories. a natural
generalization of the preceding conjecture is that these could be determined in the large
volume limit from the a brane point of view.

as explained in [27], the d terms are related to the stability question. a world-
volume description of the decay process of joyce starts with the two intersecting 3-branes
and u(1)  u(1) gauge theory; the intersection comes with a chiral multiplet charged
under both u(1)s, and the dependence on complex structure moduli comes through
an fi term for the relative u(1). as one goes through the transition one goes from a
supersymmetry breaking ground state with unbroken u(1)  u(1) to a supersymmetry
preserving ground state with broken relative u(1). 

an analogous statement was already known on the b side.

[37] equality in
(2.2) denes a boundary within the kahler cone on which stability degenerates to
semistability. this means that the connection on the brane becomes reducible, and
an enhanced gauge symmetry appears, a phenomenon which in n = 1 theory can only
arise from d terms as above. we see that this qualitative picture survives the stringy
corrections, but the precise location of the boundary is dierent, in a way determined
by the a picture geometry.

the upshot of the discussion is that mirror symmetry leads to a natural conjecture
for a modied or mirror geometric hypothesis  some brane questions are geometric

 as in [6] this conguration can be shown by a probe analysis to be equivalent to a single 3-brane
produced by intercommutation.
[17] a dierence with the case of 2-branes considered there is that
the resulting 3-brane is not actually special lagrangian. this is possible because near the transition
it has a large extrinsic curvature and this is evidence that the detailed form of the special lagrangian
condition gets  corrections.

topics in d-geometry

7

in the a picture, and others are geometric in the b picture. as is well known the
prepotential in the complex structure sector is determined geometrically; this determines
a brane central charges and stability and strongly motivates the claim that the spectrum
of branes can be understood geometrically in the a picture. we can add to this the
claim that the superpotential in the b twisted model is classical; this means that brane
moduli spaces are largely determined by the geometry of the b picture. finally, it may
be possible to determine the d terms in the a picture and complete the story.

so far as i know, these conjectures are consistent with the evidence, but require
much more testing. the most interesting tests are in the stringy regime, as we discuss
next.

3. boundary states and branes

exactly solvable cfts were a fruitful source of
insight into compactication of
closed string theory and are now beginning to teach us about branes in these
compactications. the fundamental notion is that of boundary state, a cft
description of a boundary condition as a linear functional on the closed string hilbert
space. reparameterization invariance and supersymmetry can be easily implemented
by imposing operator constraints. one must then impose the condition that all annulus
partition functions (associated with pairs of boundary states) have an open string hilbert
space interpretation (the multiplicities are integers); this condition was proposed by
cardy and can be solved for rational cfts. d-brane ground states correspond to such
boundary states (not much is known about the non-rational case; possibly additional
unknown constraints must be satised).

the simplest and most studied models are orbifolds and orientifolds. in this case the
general boundary state approach can be shown to reduce to the world-sheet prescription
proposed in [12]  one introduces image d-branes on the cover and quotients by a
simultaneous space-time and gauge action. the case of strings and branes near a
single orbifold or orientifold singularity is particularly easy and one obtains quiver gauge
theories as world-volume theories. for c3/ these have been much studied and among
the noteworthy results are the following:

(i) the resolution of these singularities is described in quiver gauge theory by fi terms
coupling to kahler moduli. [13, 35] if multiple resolutions with dierent topology
are mathematically possible, they all appear to be accessible physically. [20]

(ii) the resulting metrics are not ricci at. [14, 35] although some caveats were made

in that work, it can be shown that this statement is true at string tree level. [17]

(iii) the quiver theory depends on the choice of representation of ; the basic case is
the regular representation, while non-regular representations correspond to branes
wrapped around exceptional cycles (or fractional branes). [8]

(iv) if we take d3-branes to get a 3+1 theory, the regular representation is distinguished

by having zero beta function in the large n limit.[29]

topics in d-geometry

8

(v) these theories have supergravity duals corresponding to the quotients ads5 

s 5/.[28]

recently diaconescu and gomis have studied the case of c3/z3 in detail.[9] besides
checking the equivalence between the boundary state approach and the proposal of [12],
they determined the mapping between fractional branes and wrapped branes in the
large volume limit, using techniques we will describe below. additional summary of this
example can be found in [1].

we now turn to gepner models and the work [5]. gepner models provide cft
models which are equivalent to cy compactication at special points in moduli space of
enhanced discrete symmetry. the study of boundary states in these models was initiated
by recknagel and schomerus [34]; they classied the subset of boundary states which
can be obtained by separate boundary conditions in the individual n = 2 minimal
model factors, for which cardys techniques apply. (see also [23], as well as [19] which
uses the landau-ginsburg approach.)

let us briey summarize the spectrum of branes one obtains and the main result
used in the analysis of [5]  the intersection form between two branes. cardys
analysis (for diagonal modular invariant) produces boundary conditions in one-to-
one correspondance with closed string primary elds; the spectrum of open strings
with two such boundary conditions a and b is generated by primary elds in one-to-
one correspondance with those on the right hand side of the (verlinde) fusion rules
ab  n c

abc.

the ak n = 2 minimal model can be obtained as a deformation of the su(2)k
wzw model, and its primary elds l
m are labelled similarly, by two integers 0  l  k
(the su(2) representation label) and 0  m < 2k + 4 (the charge under the u(1) of
n = 2) up to a z2 identication (l, m) = (k  l, m + k + 2). the fusion rules are the
product of u(1) fusion rules (i.e. zk+2 charge conservation) with su(2)k fusion rules.

before implementing the gso projection, the gepner model boundary conditions
are labelled by a set of such integers, and are all a boundary states (since they
correspond to left-right symmetric elds). the gso projection then restricts the closed
string spectrum to (odd) integer total u(1) charge p m, while twisted states with
ml 6= mr are added. the restriction has the eect of reducing the number of distinct
a boundary states, while the twisted sectors provide new candidate b boundary states.
the nal result for the (3)5 model is that all boundary states are labelled by a set
of ve li  {0, 1}; the a boundary states are also labelled by ve mi satisfying one
relation and form representations of z4
5  s5 discrete symmetry, while the b boundary
states have a single m label and represent a z5 discrete symmetry. these are the known
discrete symmetries of the cft at the gepner point; it is known to be equivalent to
5 symmetry, at a special point in

i = 0 in p4 with manifest z4

the fermat quintic p5

i=1 z 5

kahler moduli space with quantum z5 symmetry.

the modied geometric hypothesis of section 2 would imply that these a branes
are exactly the sl-submanifolds of the fermat quintic and we can test this idea for the

topics in d-geometry

9

known sl-submanifolds. these are obtained by taking a real section im e2imi/5zi = 0:
topologically these are rp3s, which fall into the same representation of z4
5  s5 as two
sets of boundary states: those with all li = 0 and those with all li = 1. how can we
tell which (if either) is their counterpart?

a strong check of any proposed identication is that the geometric intersection
number of a pair of 3-branes must agree with the quantity tr ab(1)f in this sector of
the open string theory.
[15] this can be seen by considering electric-magnetic charge
quantization in the resulting d = 4 theory. this computation is a special case of those
in [34] and it turns out the li = 1 states match this intersection form, while the li = 0
states do not (they presumably correspond to some other sl-submanifolds). so far this
is in agreement with both the original and the modied geometric hypothesis.

however, one also nds that the li = 1 brane world-volumes have a massless
chiral multiplet, and this disagrees with the geometric prediction of [30]. as discussed
in [5] it is likely that this is lifted by a superpotential, but even so this contradicts
the strongest form of the geometric hypothesis, in which both this massless eld and
the superpotential would have matched. it does not contradict the modied geometric
hypothesis, which allows the a brane superpotential to depend on the kahler form,
and furthermore shows that massive elds in the large volume limit can come down to
become (linearized) moduli. such eects and even jumping of the dimension of moduli
space are known to be possible in the b picture; perhaps this superpotential would be
manifest in a mirror description.

turning to the b branes, we have more intuition for which of these exist in the
large volume limit: namely the condition (2.2) must be satised (if q6 6= 0; there is an
analogous statement if q6 = 0 but q4 6= 0). although bundles on the quintic are by
no means classied, various considerations suggest that generic charge vectors for which
the discriminant (the left hand side of (2.2)) is suciently large will be associated to
stable bundles.

thus it is interesting to express the charges of the b boundary states in large volume
terms, and compare. a precise form of this comparison is to choose a path in kahler
moduli space from the gepner point to the large volume limit, and use the at sp(2r, z)
connection provided by special geometry to transport the charge lattices between the
two regimes.

the kahler moduli space and prepotential for the quintic is of course well known
from the famous work of candelas et. al. [7] which computed the periods of the three-
form on the mirror. to review the structure of this moduli space: it is a riemann sphere
with three singularities, a large volume limit at z  , the gepner point with a z5
quotient singularity at z = 0, and nally a conifold singularity at z = 1 at which
a three-cycle of the mirror degenerates (has zero period). it turns out [7, 21] that on
the original quintic this is precisely the central charge of the pure (trivial gauge eld)
six-brane. the periods i(z) can be obtained as solutions of picard-fuchs odes or
more explicitly as series expansions around each singularity, with radius of convergence
determined by the locations of the others.

topics in d-geometry

10

two concrete results are now needed from this analysis. first, the mirror map gives
us an appropriate basis for the large volume limit  central charges of the individual
2p-branes. second, given that the central charge of a brane with charge vector qi is
z = qii(z), the transition functions of the at connection on the charge lattice are
simply the linear transformations between dierent bases i(z) adapted to dierent
regions of moduli space (these are connection formulas for generalized hypergeometric
functions). this tells us what the 2p-brane central charges will be at the gepner point.
in principle these could already be compared with a precise computation of the
central charges of our boundary states, but such a comparison will run into tricky
problems of normalization. the best way to study the charges of d-branes  as was
done in the very rst example [33]  is to instead compute the interaction between two
d-branes in the open string channel, as this is canonically normalized (it is a partition
function). indeed the simplest quantity of this type is the intersection form tr ab(1)f
discussed above and thus the simplest way to proceed is to express the known large
volume intersection form in terms of a natural basis at the gepner point (one which
represents the quantum z5 symmetry in a simple way) and compare this intersection
form with the intersection forms of the boundary states.

it turns out that the resulting boundary state charges are simple when expressed
using the basis rst postulated by candelas  the zero-brane period and its z5 images.
the states of minimal charge are the ve li = 0 states; one of these turns out to be the
pure six-brane h6b|  ( 1 0 0 0 ), and to get the others we just need to know the
z5 monodromy in the large volume basis, which is given in [7]. in the conventions of [5]
it is

4 1 8
3
1
5
0 1
1
1
0
0

5
3
1
1






(3.1)

g  ( q6 q4 q2 q0 )  ( q6 q4 q2 q0 )


and thus the others are h6b|gm . the charges for states with l = p li > 0 can be
derived from these by using the fusion rules: essentially, they are hq6|(1 + g)lgm .

one surprise of the result is that the d0-brane is not present (as a rational boundary
state; this is not to say that it does not exist at the gepner point). it appears that this
is also consistent with the geometric hypothesis in the following sense: any location we
might pick for the d0 would break some of z4
5, but all of the rational b boundary states
are singlets under z4

5, so we should not nd the d0 in this analysis.k

looking at the charges of all of the boundary states, they appear to be consistent
with the original geometric hypothesis, at least in the weak sense that they are all
consistent with (2.2). not too much more is known about vector bundles on the quintic
so it is hard to be more precise.
 note that these are conventions in which the charge vectors include the factor p a, which are not

the conventions of (2.2). the latter are also given in [5]; they are the ones in which the large volume
monodromy is simple but charges are not necessarily integral.
k it appears that other gepner models can contain the d0 as a boundary state.[10]

topics in d-geometry

11

on the other hand, the monodromy (3.1) in general can take solutions of (2.2) into
non-solutions, making it highly implausible that it is a symmetry of the entire brane
spectrum. this is reminiscent of related phenomena in the study of n = 2 gauge theory,
and we turn to this analogy.

4. marginal stability on the quintic

as we saw in the previous section, the d0-brane is not a rational boundary state for the
gepner quintic. this leads one to wonder whether it exists in the stringy regime at all,
and more generally how much the spectrum of branes varies as we move around.

in generic n = 2, d = 4 theories, the spectrum of bps states depends on the
moduli, but it varies in a highly constrained way. a state of charge q will generically
be stable under variations of the moduli, but there exist can lines of marginal stability
(or jumping lines), on which the state can decay to bps states of charge q1 and q2,
if the condition

|z(q)| = |z(q1)| + |z(q2)|

(4.1)

is satised. here z(q) = q  (z) is the central charge in terms of a vector of periods
(z) at a point z in moduli space; for the a branes these are the periods of the three-form

 = r  (normalized to r    = 1).

the most familiar examples are supersymmetric gauge theories, which have been
studied in great detail. for example, pure su(2) n = 2 gauge theory (the original
seiberg-witten solution) has a line of marginal stability which goes through the massless
monopole and dyon points and separates the strong and weak coupling limits. the
strong coupling bps spectrum consists only of the monopole and dyon, the two
states responsible for the singularities. this phenomenon was necessary as otherwise
monodromies around the massless monopole point would produce states with arbitrarily
large electric charge, which are not present in the known semiclassical spectrum.

besides the known semiclassical spectrum, a number of constraints follow from
the solution for the prepotential and justify this result. the primary constraint is the
physical correspondance between singularities and massless states [38]: if z(q) vanishes
at some z, either there is a corresponding singularity which we can think of as coming
from integrating out this state at nearby points, or else the state must not exist at z. if
it exists at some z, there must be a line of marginal stability separating z and z. this
is quite strong as it turns out that the ratio of the two periods ad/a assumes all possible
real values (in all the asymptotically free su(2) theories in fact) and thus every charge
can be constrained. one sees this most easily by combining the result (easily veried
numerically) that im ad/a changes sign between weak and strong coupling regimes with
the sl(2, z) transformation properties of ad/a (which force the line im ad/a = 0 to
connect the massless monopole and dyon points).

our earlier observation that the z5 monodromy obtained by encircling the gepner
point in the quintic does not t well with the known constraints on the large volume

topics in d-geometry

12

spectrum is our rst suggestion that similar phenomena will obtain here. there is also a
qualitative similarity to the change of sign of im ad/a. let the conifold point be zc = 1:
here the six-brane becomes massless, 6  z  zc. although the other periods are not
analytic here, they are still continuous:   (z  zc) log(z  zc) + regular. thus just as
in gauge theory, im 6/0 changes sign as we go through this point.

this starts to suggest that the gauge theory picture with its drastic change in
the spectrum might also be possible here. unfortunately few of the other elements of
the story there have been developed for the quintic (or indeed any cy) moduli space.
in particular, the appropriate analogs of sl(2, z) and the fundamental region are not
known, making it dicult to get a good global picture of the moduli space.

the boundary state results show us that the answer will not be as simple as that
for gauge theory  the spectrum will not collapse simply to the states which can become
massless. we should also not assume that all of the boundary states exist at large
volume.

to study this one can simply follow all of the central charges for boundary states
out from the gepner point to the large volume limit, to see what happens. one expects
more marginal stability lines in the neighborhood of the conifold point, so to minimize
the possibilities for decay we choose the trajectory z real and negative opposite to it in
moduli space. we then numerically integrated the picard-fuchs equations (and checked
the results against the series expansions of [7]) to get the periods and thus the bps
masses.

using these to compute the masses of bps branes with the charges of all rational
boundary states produces a surprise: one of them has its period go through zero! in
other words, there exists a bps state at the gepner point whose mass appears to go to
zero at a non-singular point x in moduli space. (readers who want proof that this is not
an error of numerics or conventions will nd a semi-qualitative proof in the appendix.)
this in itself is not inconsistent as long as there exists a line of marginal stability
separating the point x from the gepner point. at this point we run into one of the main
diculties in studying these questions for cy: there are an innite number of candidate
marginal stability lines, and we need more knowledge about the bps spectrum to decide
which are real (i.e. the decay takes place, which requires the states of charge q1 and
q2 to actually exist on the line). this is closely related to the fact that at a generic
point in moduli space, there exist charges q such that |z(q)| <  for any positive , no
matter how small. consider the gepner point: there the periods are the fth roots of
unity, so the set of z(q) is a z5 symmetric lattice embedded in the complex plane.

although we have not as yet found the true marginal stability lines, we can at least
try to postulate a pair of charges q1 and q2 into which the problematic state can decay
and whose masses do not cross zero on the way to large volume. this is not hard to
do, and thus the existence of such a marginal stability line seems perfectly plausible 
there seems no reason to doubt the consistency of the theory.

thus we have proof of the existence of at least one marginal stability line; given
that we have two points at which z(q) vanishes for simple charges q it is quite likely

topics in d-geometry

13

that many other true marginal stability lines pass through these points.

an even stronger consideration of this type is to follow large volume branes to the
gepner point: it is easy to nd charge vectors satisfying (2.2) whose period goes through
zero on this axis. if it is true that these generally correspond to stable bundles, we have
many more examples.

all this starts to be signicant evidence for the claim that the bps spectrum is

rather dierent in the stringy regime.

4.1. a note on attractor points

a question related to marginal stability but somewhat simpler has arisen in the study
of bps black holes in cy compactication. it has been shown [18] that the entropy of
such black holes is governed by the attractor mechanism. given a black hole of large
charge q, the consistency condition for a covariantly constant spinor is a rst order
equation which is just gradient ow on the moduli space to a minimum of the quantity
s(z) = |q  (z)|; the entropy is the minimal value smin(q).

for some q, it is possible that smin(q) = 0. in the previously known examples
(such as the state which goes massless at the conifold point), the state existed at the
minimizing point in moduli space and produced a singularity in the moduli space metric,
modifying the discussion. what we have found here is a q for which the discussion above
leads to a contradiction (as noted in [31])  the attractor equation breaks down (has
no sensible solution) before reaching the horizon, so this is not a failure of supergravity.
indeed, this could be interpreted as an argument that such black holes cannot exist, and
an observation consistent with this idea is that (at least in some cases) the condition
smin(q) = 0 reduces to the negation of (2.2) in the large volume limit on the quintic,

however, we have found a particle with (small) charge q and smin(q) = 0 at the
gepner point, so we have a paradox. we can take n of these particles and put them
into a small region of space, using only total energy nm + . for n suciently large,
one would certainly expect that they form a black hole nq, for which the previous
argument applies.

what is going on ? the resolution will almost certainly use the fact that  as a
single brane  the object in question was unstable at the minimizing point. one scenario
is that the nal stable object is a bound state of two black holes of charges nq1 and
nq2 with a hard core repulsive potential.
[16] this would evade the previously cited
argument, which assumed a spherically symmetric conguration.

it seems likely that more surprises along this line await us.

5. conclusions and further directions

d-branes have played a central role in the study of superstring and m theory duality.
quite a lot has been understood about compactications with enhanced supersymmetry,
but eventually we will need to deal with the physical cases of n = 0 (and hopefully

topics in d-geometry

14

n = 1!) supersymmetry in four dimensions.

a large class of n = 1 supersymmetric string compactications can be obtained by
using d-branes on calabi-yaus. many of these are related to known constructions (f
theory or the strong coupling limit of heterotic strings) but what i have tried to show
here is that we can make further progress by using special properties of the weak type
ii string coupling limit, namely the close relation between d-brane theories which ll
dierent parts of minkowski space (e.g. d3 and d0-branes), and the powerful tools of
mirror symmetry and exactly solvable cft.

a reasonable goal for the current work is to settle the geometric hypothesis
and modied geometric hypothesis as described here  namely, to show that the
superpotential and d terms depend only on complex and kahler data for b branes
(the reverse for a branes) and answer the following questions:

(i) are all a branes 3-branes wrapped on sl-submanifolds, even for a stringy cy ?
are all marginal stability lines and decays described by the local intercommutation
of 3-branes ?

(ii) if so, do the mirror symmetry predictions for the spectrum of b branes agree
with geometric predictions at large volume? what does the semistability condition
translate into in the a picture ?

(iii) is the spectrum of b branes on stringy cys very dierent from the large volume
spectrum (as the results here suggest) ? if so, is it nite or perhaps characterized
by simple inequalities analogous to (2.2) ?

(iv) is knowledge of the large volume spectrum and the exact prepotential enough to
determine the spectrum throughout moduli space (using consistency arguments of
the sort which worked for supersymmetric gauge theory) ?

(v) can we make a complete statement about the potential and moduli space on these
branes (presumably combining b picture information to get the superpotential and
a picture to get the d terms) ?

(vi) can we extend this picture to nite string coupling, perhaps by making contact

with the heterotic string limits of the same models ?

a longer term goal will be to understand terms in the eective action which are

not so strongly constrained by supersymmetry, such as the d0-metric on a cy.

perhaps interesting non-supersymmetric models can be obtained by considering

non-bps space-lling brane congurations, along the lines of [36, 27].

acknowledgments

i would like to thank t. banks, i. brunner, d.-e. diaconescu, b. r. greene, m.
kontsevich, s. kachru, a. lawrence, j. maldacena, g. moore, c. romelsburger, c.
vafa and e. witten for collaboration and helpful discussions.
this research is supported in part by doe grant de-fg05-90er40559.

topics in d-geometry

appendix

15

we give a semi-qualitative argument for the vanishing period, using the results for the
periods of the mirror to the quintic in [7]. they are functions of a complex modulus
 which covers the riemann sphere with three punctures.    is the large volume
limit, with t = b + iv =  5
2i log(5).  = 1 is the conifold point, and  = 0 is the
gepner point.    with  = e2i/5 is the z5 quantum symmetry of the gepner
point  it leads to the same bulk theory but acts as an sp(4, z) monodromy on the
brane spectrum.

candelas et al. use a basis k() where 0 is the 0-brane period in the large
volume limit and the others are its images under the z5. of the gepner point. these
are multi-valued on the  plane and thus it is necessary to take care with the domains
of denition.

there are three lines along which the periods have simple reality properties. we
dene the line a to be  = x real with x > 1, the line b as  = x real satisfying
0  x < 1, and the line c as  = e2i/10x with x real and positive.

from the explicit series expansions for the periods it is easy to check the following

qualitative properties:

(i) near the gepner point, j()  2+jc with c = (1/5)/(4/5)4 a positive

real constant.

(ii) in the large volume limit, j()  sj3

6 t3 where sj3 = 0, 5, 15, 15, 5 for j =

0, 1, 2, 3, 4.

(iii) along b we have (j(x)) = 1j(x) and along c we have (j(1/2x)) =
j(1/2x) (this must be checked using both large and small volume expansions).

from [5], one can check that the period

x = 1  4

(5.1)

is the central charge of a b boundary state l1 = 1, li = 0 for i > 1.

we now argue that x will have a zero along the axis c. from (iii) we see that
x is purely imaginary along this axis, so if the imaginary part changes sign between
the gepner and large volume limits it must have a zero. this can be checked explicitly
given the limiting behaviors we quoted.

5

6t3  5

a way to see that this was inevitable is to consider the behavior of the six-
brane period 6 = 1  0 on the loop abc in moduli space. at large volume,
6  iv 3 so it comes in from negative imaginary innity towards
6 1/2
zero. along a and b 6 is purely imaginary and as we know it crosses zero at  = 1
(the conifold point) and comes out the other side, to reach its value at the gepner point
6() 0 c(2  3) = c2i sin 
5 . as we come back along the axis c, we know
that the six-brane does not become massless anywhere, so 6 must move o into the
complex plane to avoid the origin, nally joining the same asymptotics 6  5/6iv 3
we had at large positive .

topics in d-geometry

16

this behavior implies that 6 must cross the real axis at some point, and since 0

is real all along c, 1 must become real at this point.

references

[1] http://www.aei-potsdam.mpg.de/cgi-bin/viewit.cgi

and http://www.physics.upenn.edu/particle meeting/talk titles.html.

[2] k. becker, m. becker and a. strominger, nucl. phys. b456, 130 (1995) hep-th/9507158.
[3] m. berkooz, m.r. douglas and r.g. leigh, nucl. phys. b480, 265 (1996), hep-th/9606139.
[4] m. bershadsky, s. cecotti, h. ooguri and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b405, 279 (1993).
[5] i. brunner, m. r. douglas, a. lawrence and c. romelsberger, hep-th/9906200.
[6] c. callan and j. maldacena, nucl. phys. b513 (1998) 198-212; hep-th/9708147.
[7] p. candelas, x.c. de la ossa, p.s. green and l. parkes, nucl. phys. b359, 21 (1991).
[8] d.-e. diaconescu, m. r. douglas and j. gomis, jhep 9802 (1998) 013; hep-th/9712230.
[9] d.-e. diaconescu and j. gomis, hep-th/9906242.
[10] d.-e. diaconescu and c. romelsburger, to appear.
[11] m. r. douglas, hep-th/9901146.
[12] m. r. douglas and g. moore, hep-th/9603167;
e. gimon and j. polchinski, hep-th/9601038.

[13] m. r. douglas, b. r. greene and d. r. morrison,

nucl. phys. b506 (1997) 84-106; hep-th/9704151.

[14] m. r. douglas and b. r. greene, adv.theor.math.phys. 1 (1998) 184; hep-th/9707214.
[15] m. r. douglas and b. fiol, hep-th/9903031.
[16] m. r. douglas and j. maldacena, work in progress.
[17] m. r. douglas, to appear.
[18] s. ferrara, r. kallosh and a. strominger, phys. rev. d52 (1995) 5412-5416, hep-th/9508072.
[19] s. govindarajan, t. jayaraman and t. sarkar, hep-th/9907131.
[20] b.r. greene, nucl. phys. b525 (1998) 284-296; hep-th/9711124;

t. muto, nucl. phys. b521 (1998) 183-201; hep-th/9711090.

[21] b.r. greene and y. kanter, nucl. phys. b497, 127 (1997) hep-th/9612181.
[22] m. gross, alg-geom/9710006, math.ag/9809072;

math.ag/9909015; w.-d. ruan, math.dg/9904012 and math.dg/9909126.

[23] m. gutperle and y. satoh, hep-th/9808080 and hep-th/9902120.
[24] f. reese harvey, spinors and calibrations, academic press, 1990.
[25] j.a. harvey and g. moore, comm. math. phys. 197 489, (1998) hep-th/9609017.
[26] d. joyce, hep-th/9907013.
[27] s. kachru and j. mcgreevy, hep-th/9908135.
[28] s. kachru and e. silverstein, phys.rev.lett. 80 (1998) 4855-4858; hep-th/9802183.
[29] a. lawrence, n. nekrasov and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 199-209; hep-th/9803015.
[30] r. c. mclean, ph. d. thesis, duke 1990; n. hitchin, dg-ga/9711002.
[31] g. moore, hep-th/9807087.
[32] h. ooguri, y. oz and z. yin, nucl. phys. b477 (1996) 407; hep-th/9606112.
[33] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724-4727; hep-th/9510017.
[34] a. recknagel and v. schomerus, nucl. phys. b531, 185 (1998), hep-th/9712186.
[35] a. v. sardo inrri, alg-geom/9610004.
[36] a. sen, hep-th/9904207.
[37] e. sharpe, adv.theor.math.phys. 2 (1999) 1441-1462, hep-th/9810064.
[38] a. strominger, nucl. phys. b451 (1995) 96-108; hep-th/9504090.
[39] a. strominger, s.-t. yau and e. zaslow, nucl. phys. b479 (1996) 243; hep-th/9606040.
[40] c. vafa, hep-th/9804131.

