quantisation and gauge invariance

jan govaerts1

institut de physique nucleaire

universite catholique de louvain

2, chemin du cyclotron

b-1348 louvain-la-neuve, belgium

abstract

recent developments concerning canonical quantisation and gauge invariant quantum mechan-
ical systems and quantum eld theories are briey discussed. on the one hand, it is shown
how dieomorphic covariant representations of the heisenberg algebra over curved manifolds of
non trivial topology involve topology classes of at u(1) bundles. on the other hand, through
some examples, the recently proposed physical projector approach to the quantisation of general
gauge invariant systems is shown to avoid the necessity of any gauge xinghence also avoiding
the possibility of gribov problems which usually ensue any gauge xing procedure, and is also
capable to provide the adequate description of the physical content of gauge invariant systems.

1st international workshop on contemporary problems in mathematical physics,

institut de mathematiques et sciences physiques (imsp), universite nationale du benin,

to appear in the proceedings of the

cotonou, republique du benin

october 31st - november 5th, 1999

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
5
2

 

 
 

1
v
1
9
1
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

october 1999

1e-mail: govaerts@fynu.ucl.ac.be

1

introduction

two of the most fundamental tenets of modern physics at the turn of this century are, on the one
hand, the general concepts of quantum physics, and on the other hand, the general idea of local or
gauge symmetries as the governing principle for all interactions and their properties as well as for
their ultimate unication.

nevertheless, the combination of these two general conceptual frameworks is not straightfor-
ward, and is in fact beset by a series of dicult issues. for example, a manifest realisation of a local
symmetry requires the introduction of gauge variant degrees of freedom which cannot be associated
to physical, i.e. gauge invariant observables. maintaining such degrees of freedom explicit through
the quantisation procedure requires tools which in eect cancel the contributions of these non physi-
cal congurations to physical observables. on the other hand, reducing these gauge variant degrees
of freedom before quantisation often runs counter to a manifest realisation of other symmetries,
such as global spacetime symmetries as for example poincare invariance, while more importantly
still, such a reduction implies a gauge invariant conguration space description whose topology and
geometry is typically very intricate and dicult to circumvent in general terms, thereby leading to
the possibility of gribov problems[1]. at the quantum level, the diculty is then exacerbated still
further by the fact that quantisation techniques for manifolds of non trivial topology and geometry
are much more involved to develop than for the ordinary and most familiar case of a at euclidean
space.

in this contribution, we wish to discuss two recent developments concerned with such is-
sues. on the one hand, the general classication of representations of the heisenberg algebra over
conguration space manifolds of arbitrary topology and geometry has recently been considered[2],
leading to the possibility of inequivalent representations associated to all topologically distinct at
u(1) bundles which may be dened for a base manifold whose rst homotopy group is non trivial.
on the other hand, a new approach to the quantisation of constrained systems, which in-
clude gauge invariant ones, has recently been suggested[3]. this approach is formulated solely
within diracs quantisation of such systems[1], does not require any extension (such as in brst
quantisation[1]) nor any reduction (such as in faddeevs reduced phase space quantisation[1]) of
the initial formulation of the system, and uses in an essential way the physical projection operator
onto gauge invariant quantum states only. since the latter operator is dened through integration
over the manifold of the group of gauge transformations, it lends itself to general group theoretical
methods for the evaluation of its matrix elements, which are also the generating functions for the
wave functions of gauge invariant states. some of the advantages of this new approach to quanti-
sation have already been illustrated in some simple examples, showing[4] among other important
points, that this method being free of the necessity of any gauge xing procedure is also necessarily
free of any gribov of any type[1], a situation which is not achieved with any of the other quanti-
sation methods. until now, the physical projector approach to gauge invariant systems has been
applied to some simple quantum mechanical systems[5, 6] as well as to pure u(1) chern-simons
theory in 2+1 dimensions[7], one of the simplest examples of a topological quantum eld theory[8].
it would indeed be most worthwhile to explore the potential of this new approach to the quanti-
sation of gauge invariant systems in situations much closer to actual theories for the fundamental
interactions, either eld theories for gravity[9] or the strong and electroweak interactions, as well
as any of the systems motivated by studies within string and m-theory[10].

this contribution is organised as follows. in the next section, the discussion of conguration
space representations of the heisenberg algebra over a manifold of arbitrary topology and geometry
is recalled. in sect.3, diracs general hamiltonian formulation of gauge invariant systems is briey
described, at least in the simplest cases of such systems, concluding with the construction of the
physical projector. sect.4 then considers the application of the physical projector to some simple

1

quantum mechanical gauge invariant systems, showing how the physical spectrum as well as the
wave functions of physical states follow straighforwardly, while also circumventing any possibility
of a gribov problem.
in sect.5, the physical projector is brought to bear on the quantisation
of the pure u(1) chern-simons theory in 2+1 dimensions, leading to a physical spectrum totally
independent of the geometry of the 2+1 dimensional space but depending solely on its topology,
and in complete agreement with results achieved in the literature through standard quantisation
methods[11]. finally, some further remarks are presented in the conclusions. by its nature, the
presentation of this contribution can only be sketchy; futher details are to be found in the original
references[2, 5, 6, 7].

2 representations of the heisenberg algebra

the representation theory of the heisenberg algebra associated to the real line, and by extension to
any at euclidean space parametrised by cartesian coordinates, is most familiar to anyone having
studied quantum theory. denoting q (,  = 1, 2, . . . , n) the cartesian coordinates and p their
canonical conjugate momenta, this algebra is dened by the following commutation relations at the
operator level,

,

[q, p] = ih

as well as the self-adjoint properties (q) = q and p
 = p. in particular, up to unitary trans-
formations, there exists essentially a single such representation, corresponding to the usual plane
wave representation of that algebra (von neumanns theorem). however, when the conguration
space coordinate system q is curvilinear, or when the conguration space possesses a non trivial
geometry or even topology, usual canonical quantisation procedures for the associated symplectic
poisson bracket structure through the correspondence principleleading to the above commutation
relations dened locally over phase spaceseem to have remained an open issue. however, in the
same way as may be developed for an euclidean space[1], the representation theory of the above
heisenberg algebra in the general case may straightforwardly be considered[2].

(1)

indeed, only two basic assumptions are required. on the one hand, that the representation
space possesses as a basis all eigenstates |q > of the position operators q associated to a local
coordinate system set-up on the conguration space m , namely q|q >= q|q >. on the other
hand, that this representation space is equipped with an hermitian positive denite inner product
for which the operators q and p are indeed self-adjoint.

from only these two assumptions, it then follows[2] that the general conguration space
representation of the heisenberg algebra is such that the momentum operator matrix elements are
given by

< q|p|q >= ih

g1/4(q)



q (cid:18)

1

g1/4(q)

(n)(q  q)(cid:19) +

a(q)(n)(q  q) ,

1

pg(q)

while the vanishing commutation relations [p, p] = 0 imply the further restriction

a(q) 

a(q)
q 

a(q)
q = 0 , ,  = 1, 2, . . . , n .

(2)

(3)

(4)

in these relations, the positive denite function g(q) species the normalisation of the position
eigenstates |q > through

< q|q >=

(n)(q  q)

,

while the variables a(q) corresponds to a local vector eld of vanishing eld strength a(q)
dened over the conguration space.

1

pg(q)

2

in particular for any quantum states | > and | >, their conguration space wave function
representations (q) < q| > and (q) < q| > are such that their inner product is given by

< | >= zm

dnq qg(q) (q)(q)

,

while the position and momentum operators are realised through the dierential operators,

< q|q| >= q(q) , < q|p| >= ih

g1/4(q) (cid:20) 

q +

i
h

a(q)(cid:21) g1/4(q)(q) .

(5)

(6)

the two quantities g(q) and a(q) thus parametrise all possible representations of the heisen-
berg algebra over m . however, not all these representations are necessarily unitarily inequi-
valent.
indeed, even though g(q) parametrises the normalisation of the basis states |q > and
a(q) the conguration space matrix elements of the momentum operators p, we have not yet
accounted for the freedom in a possible q-dependent phase redenition of the basis states, namely
|q >(2)= ei(q)/h|q >. in fact, such a local phase redenition is tantamount to a local u(1) gauge
transformation of the vector eld a(q) which is dened through the above parametrisation of the
p matrix elements, from which one nds a(2)

 (q) = a(q) + (q)/q.

hence in conclusion, the variables a(q) of vanishing eld strength determine a at u(1)
bundle over the conguration space manifold m , while unitarily inequivalent representations of the
heisenberg algebra over m are thus classied in terms of the gauge equivalence classes of at u(1)
bundles over m . the latter classes are characterized through the u(1) holonomies around non
contractible cycles in m , namely a mapping of the rst homotopy group (or fundamental group) of
m into the set of gauge equivalence classes of at u(1) connections over m , characterized through
their holonomies. in particular for a manifold of trivial homotopy group, namely a simply connected
one as is the case for the n dimensional euclidean space, there is thus a single representation of the
heisenberg algebra, up to local u(1) unitary phase transformations in conguration space. this
conclusion of course corresponds to von neumanns theorem for the real line, while choosing then
the trivial gauge conguration a(q) = 0 in the associated trivial homology class provides the usual
plane wave representation of that algebra.

this conclusion still leaves open the interpretation of the normalisation factor g(q). from (5),

it is clear that through the combination dnqpg(q) this function determines an integration measure
over m . in particular, when this integration measure is chosen to be dieomorphic invariant under
coordinate reparametrizations in m , the associated conguration space wave function representa-
tion (q) =< q| > is itself dieomorphic covariant, with the position and momentum operators
represented as in (6). when m is equipped with a metric structure g(q), the canonical choice for
g(q) = detg(q) indeed determines such a dieomorphic invariant integration measure, thereby
leading nally to dieomorphic covariant representations of the heisenberg algebra over manifolds
of arbitrary topology and geometry. an immediate example is that of curvilinear coordinates in a
at euclidean space, but more involved cases may of course be considered in a likewise manner.

finally, the condition of self-adjoint momentum operators p requires that the associated

wave function representation of states be such that

dnq

zm



q (cid:20)qg(q) |(q)|2(cid:21) = 0 ,  = 1, 2, , n ,

(7)

thereby implying restrictions on states when m has boundaries.

given such a conguration space representation of the heisenberg algebra, it is also possible
to determine the wave functions for momentum eigenstates. however, because of the possibility of
non trivial u(1) holonomies in the general case, a network of paths p (q0  q) connecting any point

3

q on m to a given point q0 through a given path, has to be set-up on m in a continuous fashion as
a function of q. having done so, one introduces the path-ordered u(1) holonomies

[p (q0  q)] = p e

 i

hrp (q0q)

dqa(q)

,

so that momentum eigenstate conguration space wave functions are given by[2]

< q|p >=

ei(q0,p)
(2h)n/2

[p (q0  q)]
g1/4(q)h1/4(p)

i
h (qq0)p

e

,

(8)

(9)

where (q0, p) is an arbitrary phase factor, while the function h(p) determines the normalisation
of the momentum eigenstates according to

< p|p >=

(n)(p  p)

.

(10)

1

ph(p)

clearly, in the case of the trivial representation with a(q) = 0, one recovers the usual plane wave
representation of the heisenberg algebra, extended to include the normalisation factors g(q) and
h(p) possibly dierent from unity in order to ensure proper dieomorphic covariant properties in
the case of non cartesian coordinates over m .

given these dierent expressions, it then also becomes possible to set-up a phase space
path integral representation of matrix elements of quantum operators, say in conguration space.
the ensuing expressions are identical to the usual ones in discretized form, the sole dierence
appearing through the normalisation and the path dependency of the external states (see the
original reference[2] for further details).

once such a general discussion of representations of the heisenberg algebra over conguration
spaces of arbitrary topology and geometry has been displayed, it is a simple matter to apply it
to any given system whose dynamics is determined through some action principle. based on the
latter, the canonical hamiltonian formulation of the system may be developed, which through
canonical quantisation then leads to a certain quantum representation of the quantised system. in
the case of a conguration space of non trivial rst homotopy group, the choice of representation
parametrised in terms of non trivial u(1) holonomies of the at bundle around the non contractible
cycles in m is a matter of physics, in the same way that for example the spin representation of
a quantised system invariant under space rotations is a matter of physics. it is also at the level
of the hamiltonian that a possible metric structure over m may appear and thus determine the
adequate reparametrisation covariant representation of the heisenberg algebra to be used. finally,
in correspondence with the given classical hamiltonian, a two parameter class of hermitian (and
possibly self-adjoint) quantum hamiltonian operators may be introduced[2], which all reduce to the
classical one in the limit h  0. again, further developments are left for the interested reader to
nd in the original reference. the main point this contribution wished to emphasize is the general
classication of conguration space representations of the heisenberg algebra over a manifold of
arbitrary topology and geometry in terms of topology and gauge equivalence classes of at u(1)
bundles over that manifold.

3 gauge invariant systems and the physical projector

the analysis of the hamiltonian formulation of constrained systems goes back to dirac[1] and is
very general. here, only the simplest possible situation will be outlined explicitely, corresponding
essentially to systems with gauge symmetries of the yang-mills type. moreover, we shall also assume
that all degrees of freedom are grassmann even variables which thus commute at the classical level.

4

as is well known, when a system possesses continuous (global) symmetries, by noethers the-
orem there exist conserved quantities generating these symmetries, whose poisson brackets among
one another also determine the lie algebra of the symmetry group, while their poisson brackets
with the hamiltonian of the system close among themselves. more explicitely, if h(q, p) denotes
the latter hamiltonian while a(q, p) stand for the symmetry generators, one has

{a(q, p), b(q, p)} = cab

cc(q, p) , {h(q, p), a(q, p)} = ca

bb(q, p)

.

(11)

here, cab
however, these coecients may be phase space dependent quantities[1]).

b are specic coecients assumed to be constants in our discussion (more generally

c and ca

in the case of local or gauge symmetries, these properties of the conserved quantities are of
course preserved, but in addition, the physical requirement of gauge invariance implies further that
these conserved quantities must vanish identically, a(q, p) = 0, for gauge invariant congurations.
moreover, the dynamics of the system in phase space is then governed by the action principle
(assuming (q, p) to dene canonically conjugate degrees of freedom[1])

s[q, p; a] = z tf

ti

dt [ qp  h(q, p)  aa(q, p)]

,

(12)

where a(t) are arbitrary lagrange multipliers for the gauge generator constraints a = 0, which
also parametrise the gauge freedom generated by a under time evolution. in particular, innites-
imal gauge transformations then correspond to the variations

q = {q, aa} , p = {p, aa} , a = a + cbcbc

a  bcb

a ,

(13)

where a(t) are arbitrary innitesimal functions.

within diracs quantisation of such systems[1], the usual rules of canonical quantisation are
simply applied to all the phase space degrees of freedom (q, p), leading a priori to representation
algebras of the heisenberg type as discussed in the previous section. the restrictions of the gauge
invariance are then imposed through the operator constraints

while time evolution is generated by the time ordered operator

a| >= 0 ,

s(tf , ti) = t e

ti

hr tf

 i

dt[ h+a(t) a]

.

(14)

(15)

clearly, such an operator propagates both gauge invariant as well as gauge variant states, and
thus cannot correspond to the physical propagator of the system to which only physical, i.e. gauge
invariant states would contribute. usually, in order to achieve that aim, one considers some gauge
xing procedure through which only gauge invariant congurations are maintained in the actual
time dependent dynamics. this gauge xing may be eected before quantisation, namely through
the so-called faddeev reduced phase space approach[1]. or else, the gauge xing is eected through
the so-called brst quantisation of the gauge invariant system[1], in which case the original phase
space is extended to include degrees of freedomnamely ghostsof grassmann parity opposite
to that of the original degrees of freedom, in order to compensate for the contributions of the
gauge variant congurations and of the degrees of freedom conjugate to the lagrange multipliers
a which are also introduced in order to render the as dynamical as well. however, whatever the
approach to gauge xing being implemented, even though the ensuing description is by construction
indeed always gauge invariant, it may generally suer gribov problems[1], namely it may include
some gauge invariant congurations more than once, or not at all as the case may be, clearly

5

an unacceptable situation if one is to properly include once and only once all physically distinct
congurations possibly accessible to the system.

nevertheless, gribov problems are a consequence of gauge xing, so that if the latter may
be circumvented, gribov problems would simply not be an issue anymore. the recently proposed
physical projector approach to the quantisation of constrained systems[3] indeed provides such a
framework which avoids the apparent necessity of gauge xing, while at the same ensuring a proper
inclusion of all physically distinct congurations and thus avoiding gribov problems altogether[4].
in fact, the physical projector approach is simply set within diracs formulation briey described
above, and uses the projector onto the gauge invariant components of any quantum state of the
quantised system. the projector itself is obtained by integrating over the group of gauge transfor-
mations the transformations of states generated by the gauge generators a,

e = z du (a)e i

h a a

.

(16)

here, a are coordinates over the group manifold, while du (a) is the group invariant integration
measure normalised such that e indeed obeys the properties of a projection operator,

e 2 = e

,

e  = e

.

(17)

in the case of a compact gauge group, this denition of e is sucient. when the gauge group is non
compact, thereby leading to a spectrum of the gauge generators a which is not purely discrete,
further considerations need to be applied[3].

given the physical projector e, the denition of the physical evolution operator propagating

gauge invariant states only is clearly,

sphys(tf , ti) = e s(tf , ti)e = e i

h (tf ti) h e = e e i

h e he e

,

(18)

making it explicit that indeed only gauge invariant states contribute to this operator both as
external states as well as intermediate ones.
in particular, in the case of a compact lie group
of gauge transformations, as implicitely assumed in this discussion having taken the structure
c to be constants, it is clear that the evaluation of matrix elements of such a physical
coecients cab
operator, and of the physical projector itself, immediately implies group theory techniques for the
calculation of various group invariants.

in the remainder of this contribution, dierent examples of the application of the physical

projector quantisation of gauge invariant systems are briey described.

4 some quantum mechanical gauge invariant systems

one of the simplest examples of quantum mechanical systems possessing a local gauge invariance is
that of a so(2)=u(1) local gauge invariance in a plane dening two degrees of freedom. however,
this situation being far too simple by itself, the invariance under time dependent so(2) rotations
may be coupled to translations in a direction perpendicular to the plane of rotations, thereby
leading nally to a system with three degrees of freedom of cartesian coordinates (x(t), y(t), z(t)),
whose dynamics is governed by the lagrange function[12],

l =

1

2 h( x + gy)2 + ( y  gx)2 + ( z  )2i  v (qx2 + y2)

.

(19)

here, (t) is a gauge degree of freedom, g is a gauge coupling constant, while the potential

v (px2 + y2) is a rotation invariant quantity which for later purposes is taken to be a spherically

symmetric harmonic potential v = 2(x2 + y2)/2.

6

since gauge transformations in this system correspond to time dependent so(2) rotations in
(x(t), y(t)) coupled to time dependent translations in z(t), it should be clear that the generator of
this local abelian gauge symmetry is given by

 = pz + gp

,

(20)

where pz is the momentum conjugate to the coordinate z while p is that conjugate to the angular
variable  associated to polar coordinates (r, ) in the (x, y) plane. similarly, the gauge invariant
hamiltonian of the system simply reads,

h =

1
2

p2
r +

1
2r2 p2

 +

1
2

p2
z +

1
2

2r2

,

(21)

which clearly has a vanishing poisson bracket with the gauge generator , since the variables (r, pr),
(, p) and (z, pz) each form a pair of canonically conjugate phase space degrees of freedom.

canonical quantisation of the system is straighforward enough[12, 6], and is best developed
in the helicity basis[5] related to the so(2) symmetry in the (x, y) plane. given the creation
and annihilation operators a()
x,y associated to the cartesian coordinates (x, y) in the usual way, the
helicity creation and annihilation operators are dened by

a =

1
2

[ax  iay]

,

a
 =

1

2ha

yi
x  ia

.

(22)

one then nds

h =

1
2

p2

z + hha

+a+ + a

ai

,

 = pz + hgha

+a+  a

ai

.

(23)

these expressions make obvious what the physical spectrum of the system is, and how to construct
the associated quantum excitations of the fock vacuum. in particular, working in the conguration
space representation of the heisenberg algebra associated to the polar coordinates (r, , z), it is then
straightforward to determine the wave functions of all gauge invariant states[6]. for example, the
physical energy spectrum is thus given by

en =

1
2

p2 + h(n+ + n + 1)

, with p = hg(n+  n)

,

(24)

n being of course the integer excitation numbers of the modes of left- or right-handed so(2)
helicity.

for the present system, the spectrum of the gauge generator  being continuous (because of
the pz contribution), the denition of the physical projector requires rst to consider the projector
e onto those states whose  eigenvalue lies within the interval [, +],  > 0 being a positive
number taken to be as small as may be required. the operator e0 projecting onto those states such
that  = 0 is then obtained as[3, 6, 7]

e0 = lim

0

h

 e = z +



i

h  

d e

.

(25)

conguration space matrix elements of the physical propagator of the system, sphys(tf , ti) =

ei(tf ti) h/he0, are then readily determined. an explicit calculation[6] nds,
i cos t
f +r2
2h sin t (r2



< rf , f , zf| sphys(tf , ti)|ri, i, zi >=

2ih sin t e

= ei 

2 ||ei(f i)e i

2 htg22

 p+

j||(cid:0) rf ri
h sin t(cid:1)

7

i )
,

(26)

where t = tf  ti and f,i = f,i  gzf,i. in fact, given this nal expression, it is possible[6] to
show that each single physical state of the system contributes to these matrix elements once and
only once as an intermediate state, thereby establishing that the physical projector approach is
indeed necessarily free of any gribov problem. moreover, it is also possible from this expression
of the physical propagator to extract the wave functions for each of the physical states, the above
matrix elements playing somehow the role of generating functions for these wave functions.

other similar examples of gauge invariant quantum mechanical systems may be considered.
for instance, rather than introducing the z(t) degree of freedom associated to the coupling of
the time dependent local so(2) gauge transformations with time dependent translations in the
z direction, one may consider a whole collection of n similar (xi(t), yi(t)) so(2) invariant pairs
of degrees of freedom (i = 1, 2, , n ), which are all rotated by the same time dependent angle
irrespective of the value of the index i. so(2) gauge invariance then requires that the total so(2)
angular momentum of such systems be vanishing, thereby leading to a compact group of gauge
transformations. here again when introducing an identical so(2) invariant harmonic potential for
all these degrees of freedom, the quantisation of such systems is straightforward, while the physical
projector approach readily leads to the determination of the physical spectrum and of the wave
functions of its physical states, whether in conguration space or any other choice of basis for
quantum states, such as coherent states[5].

such considerations have been worked out in all details for the so(2) case, and to some
extent for the so(3) case[4]. generalisations to all lie algebras are possible[4], and would be
worth exploring. in particular, it would be extremely interesting to combine techniques of coherent
states with those of combinatorics in group theory, which is possible now through the use of the
physical projector.
indeed, as the above construction of the latter operator should have made
clear, matrix elements of the physical projector are given by integrals over the group manifold of
the exponentiated generators, hence leading to specic combinations of character invariants in the
group. unravelling the connection between these characters and the quantities to be integrated
over the group manifold may provide new combinatorial identities for the representation theory
of compact lie algebras. exceptional lie algebras may be particularly fascinating cases in that
respect, beginning with the case of g2.

5 u(1) chern-simons theory and the physical projector

given the space available, let us now turn to an example of a quantum eld theory, rather than
a quantum mechanical system, whose gauge freedom is so large that gauge invariance projects
down a nite number of physical congurations only from the initially innite number of degrees of
freedom. such theories are dubbed topological quantum eld theories, since their sets of physical
states only depend on the topology of the underlying manifold on which they are constructed[8].
as a matter of fact, the physical projector approach is also apt to handle the intricacies of such
systems[7], as briey described in this section.

among the simplest of such topological quantum eld theories are the u(1) chern-simons

theories in 2+1 dimensions, whose action principle reads

s = nkzm

dx0dx1dx2a a

.

(27)

here nk is a normalisation factor taking quantised values at the quantum level[8] (hence the
notation), while a(x) (,  = 0, 1, 2) is a u(1) gauge connection dened over the 2+1 dimensional
base manifold m . that this system is topological in character is obvious from two facts, the rst
is that the above action is dened irrespective of a metric structure on m ; only a dierentiable

8

structure is required. the second fact is that the equations of motion of the system reduce to

f = a   a = 0 .

(28)

hence, the dynamics of the system is that of at u(1) bundles over m , whose characterization is
provided entirely through the u(1) holonomies of the gauge eld a(x) in m , which indeed is
purely a topological issue determined by the topology of m .

for the purpose of canonical quantisation, let us restrict to topologies of the form m = ir,
where  is an arbitrary compact riemann surface, later on to be taken to be a torus t (note that
the 2+1 dimensional split does not refer to a metric signature, but to such a topology split in the
dieomorphic structure of m ). in such a case, the holonomies of a reduce to the holonomy classes
around the cycles dening a basis of the rst homology group of . these holonomies only involve
the zero mode contributions of the gauge eld, so that the entire physical content of the system is
restricted to lie entirely within its zero mode sector. hence in order to present results, let us only
concentrate on that sector, even though the whole canonical quantisation procedure may be applied
to all degrees of freedom, while local u(1) gauge transformations homotopic to the trivial one (i.e.
small gauge transformations) may be used[7] to gauge away any non zero mode conguration for
the eld a(x).

specically, let us consider the case of the torus t , having only two homology cycles. the
coordinate system associated to these cycles enables a mode decomposition[7] of the eld a(x).
under large gauge transformations characterized by the two integer holonomies k1 and k2 associated
to these two cycles, the zero modes a1 and a2 transform according to

a

1 = a1 + 2k1

, a

2 = a2 + 2k2

.

(29)

on the other hand, these two degrees of freedom dene in fact the phase space of the system, with
in particular the commutation relations

[ a1, a2] = i

h
2nk

.

(30)

hence this system is distinguished by having a phase space which itself is a compact 2-torus
of volume (2)2, quite a unique feature not directly amenable to usual quantisation techniques.
moreover, the above commutation relation shows that the number of physical states must also
be given by (2)2/(2h/(2nk)) = 4nk/h, a rst indication that the factor nk indeed needs to
be quantised at the quantum level (nk > 0 is assumed; when nk is negative, the roles of the
coordinates x1 and x2 are interchanged).

a coherent state quantisation of the system requires some further structure to be introduced
beyond the mere topological and dieomorphic ones, namely a complex structure parametrised by
a complex parameter  = 1 + i2 such that 2 > 0. the associated annihilation and creation
operators are then dened by

 = s nk

h2 hi a1 + i a2i ,  = s nk

h2 hi a1  i a2i .

(31)

having restricted our considerations to the zero mode sector alone, the construction of the physical
projector relates to large gauge transformations acting on the zero modes only. from the gauge

transformations in (29), this projector is found[7] to be given by e = p+

k1,k2=

u (k1, k2) with

u (k1, k2) = c(k1, k2)exp( 2i

h s hnk

2 h( k1  k2) + ( k1  k2)i) .

(32)

9

here, c(k1, k2) is a cocyle factor such that the group composition law is obeyed for the above
operator representation of large gauge transformations. the latter requirement implies that[7]

c(k1, k2) = eikk1k2

, with nk =

h
4

k ,

(33)

where k is an arbitrary strictly positive integer, hence also to be equal to the number of physical
states.

within the coherent state representation of the system, it is now possible to determine its
physical spectrum content as well as the coherent state wave functions for these gauge invariant
states, from the simple application of the physical projector onto the space of quantum states.
an explicit analysis[7] nds that the number of physical states is indeed equal to the integer k
which quantises the normalisation factor nk, while the obtained wave functions agree completely
with results established previously in the literature[11] (see the original references[7, 11] for explicit
expressions). by construction, these physical states |r > (r = 0, 1, , k  1) are gauge invari-
ant under large gauge transformations. however, to which extent a dependency on the complex
structure  of the torus t arises also needs to be assessed. the explicit analysis[11, 7] of this
issue nds that this further requirement of modular invariance in the parameter  implies that the
integer k must also be even, while the whole set of physical states then provides a single irreducible
representation of the modular group of the riemann surface . this is thus how the topological
invariance of the original classical theory is characterized at the quantum level. the dependency
on the complex structure through modular classes is a consequence of a conformal anomaly of the
quantised system[8].

6 conclusions

as mentioned in the introduction, the purpose of this contribution is to highlight some recent results
concerned with the issues raised by the canonical quantisation of systems whose conguration space
is not euclidean and at or is parametrized by curvilinear coordinates, and of systems possessing
local gauge invariances. a general classication of representations of the heisenberg algebra in the
rst case was briey described, which implies the appearance of topology classes of at u(1) bundles
over conguration space, together with a dieomophic covariant wave function representation of
quantum states. with respect to gauge invariant systems, a new approach[3] to their quantisation
has been discussed, and shown through explicit examples to lead to a perfectly adequate framework
avoiding any gauge xing and thereby also the possibility of gribov problems. other advantages
of the physical projector approach have not been emphasized however, such as for example the fact
that it is also apt to address the issues raised by the quantisation of compact phase spaces with
isometries, as illustrated through the u(1) chern-simons theory example.

the next stage of explorations based on the physical projector is now to be initiated, aiming
towards a deeper insight into the non perturbative dynamics of theories ever closer to those of the
actual material universe and its quantum excitations, whether within the realm of quantum eld
theories or other inceptions instigated by the recent developments in string and m-theory.

acknowledgements

prof. j.r. klauder is gratefully acknowledged for many useful discussions over the years, and for his
constant interest in this work. prof. m.n. hounkonnou is thanked for his insistence in getting this
contribution into the written form, and more importantly for the initiative and the organization
of this workshop, which hopefully should be the rst in a long series of such meetings of ever
increasing purposefulness and interest.

10

references

[1] for a detailed discussion and references to the literature, see for example,

j. govaerts, hamiltonian quantisation and constrained dynamics (leuven university press,
leuven, 1991).

[2] j. govaerts and v.m. villanueva, topology classes of flat u(1) bundles and dieomorphic
covariant representations of the heisenberg algebra, preprint quant-ph/9908014 (august
1999).

[3] j.r. klauder, ann.phys. 254, 419 (1997);

j.r. klauder, nucl. phys. b547, 397 (1999).

[4] j. govaerts, j. phys. a30, 603 (1997).

[5] j. govaerts and j.r. klauder, ann. phys. 274, 251 (1999).

[6] v.m. villanueva, j. govaerts and j.-l. lucio-martinez, quantisation without gauge fix-
ing: avoiding gribov ambiguities through the physical projector , preprint hep-th/9909033
(september 1999).

[7] j. govaerts and b. deschepper, the physical projector and topological quantum field the-
ories: u(1) chern-simons theory in 2+1 dimensions, preprint hep-th/9909221 (september
1999).

[8] e. witten, comm. math. phys. 117, 353 (1988);
e. witten, comm. math. phys. 121, 351 (1989).

[9] j.r. klauder, non canonical quantization of gravity. i. foundations of ane quantum

gravity, preprint gr-qc/9906013 (june 1999).

[10] for a recent discussion, see for example,

j.h. schwarz, tasi lectures on non bps d-brane systems, preprint hep-th/9908144 (au-
gust 1999).

[11] m. bos and v.p. nair, phys. lett. b223, 61 (1989);

m. bos and v.p. nair, int. j. mod. phys. a5, 959 (1990);
j.m.f. labastida and a.v. ramallo, phys. lett. b227, 92 (1989);
s. elitzur, g. moore, a. schwimmer and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b326, 108 (1989);
h. murayama, z. phys. c48, 79 (1990).

[12] r. friedberg, t.d. lee, y. pang and h.c. ren, ann. phys. 246, 381 (1996).

11

