cernth/99-327
hep-th/nnnmmyy

non-perturbative n = 1 strings from geometric
singularities

p. mayr
th division, cern, 1211 geneva 23, switzerland

abstract. the study of curved d-brane geometries in type ii strings implies a
general relation between local singularities w of calabiyau manifolds and gravity
free supersymmetric qfts. the minimal supersymmetric case is described by f-
theory compactications on w and can be used as a starting point to dene minimal
supersymmetric heterotic string compactications on compact calabiyau manifolds
with holomorphic, stable gauge backgrounds. the geometric construction generalizes
to non-perturbative vacua with ve-branes and provides a framework to study non-
perturbative dynamics of the heterotic theory.

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
7
2

 

 
 

1
v
6
1
2
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

to appear in the proceedings of the strings 99 conference, potsdam (germany),
19--25 july 1999

cernth/99-327

non-perturbative n = 1 strings from geometric singularities

2

1. introduction

much of the work in string theory in the last years has been devoted to dualities between
seemingly dierent physical theories. a remarkable aspect of these dualities is that they
involve often a geometrization of physics, that is there is a correspondence of physical
quantities with data of a geometric object. in extreme cases, one arrives at a duality
between a physical theory and a geometric theory, with the physical data such as the
moduli space, symmetries, spectrum and even correlation functions being in one-to
one correspondence with the quantities of a geometric theory.
in particular, if the
coupling constants of the physical theory are mapped to geometric parameters, the
duality provides an extremely powerful tool to study quantum eects in the physical
theory.

generally, the most useful formulation of the geometric theory is in terms of complex
geometries w , with the complex deformations of w being equivalent to the moduli space
mphys of scalar vevs ai of the physics theory. the geometry w can be dened as the
zero locus of a holomorphic polynomial in some ambient space y

w : pw (xi, u) = 0,

(1)

where xi are holomorphic coordinates on y and u parametrize the complex structure
of w . the idea is that there is a map u  ai which maps the complex structure
moduli space of w to mphys. the prototype for the relation between a complex
geometry w and a physical system is the case of n = 2 su(2) super-yang-mills
theory in four-dimensions, whose one-dimensional moduli space on the coulomb branch
has been shown to be equivalent to the complex deformations of a torus [1]. however
it was realized shortly later [2, 3] that this relation is only a special example of a very
general connection between complex geometries of calabiyau 3-fold singularities and
n = 2 supersymmetric gravity free quantum eld theories in four dimensions. the link
between geometry and physics is provided by d-brane geometries in type iib strings
in the following way. if the type iib string is compactied on a calabiyau 3-fold x
with small 3-cycles ci, there are extra light states from d3-branes wrapped on the ci.
in the limit of vanishing volume these states give rise to massless charged particles in
uncompactied space-time [5], with their quantum numbers and interactions determined
by the geometry of the cycle ci embedded in x. since the type ii string coupling is in
the hypermultiplet sector, which does not couple neutrally to the vector multiplets, the
exact eective two derivative action of the vector multiplets on the coulomb branch is
given by the tree level type iib physics, which in turn is determined by the classical
complex geometry. in the limit of very small 3-cycles, which means we consider singular
geometries, one can decouple gravity and most of the fundamental string spectrum
and obtains an equivalence between the complex deformations of calabiyau 3-fold
singularities and the coulomb branch of general gravity free n = 2 qfts in four
dimensions. apart from the exact non-perturbative eective action, there are other

 for a review and more references, see [4].

non-perturbative n = 1 strings from geometric singularities

3

important non-perturbative data of the eld theory, such as the stable bps spectrum
[3] and s-duality symmetries [6], that are determined in the exact tree level type iib
theory and thus, the geometry of the singularity.

this relation between geometric calabiyau 3-fold singularities and gravity free
qfts can be extended [7] to theories with n = 1 supersymmetries by replacing the
type ii string theory with f-theory [9]. in this case we obtain eld theories that are
embedded in minimal supersymmetric string theories in d < 8 dimensions, in particular
n = 1 supersymmetric string theories in four dimensions.

an especially interesting class of

the latter consists of heterotic string
compactications on calabiyau 3-folds z, which are the most promising perturbative
string theories from the phenomenological point of view. however an aspect of these
so-called (0, 2) vacua that has turned out to be dicult to study, is the specication
of a suitable gauge background, which takes the form of a holomorphic stable vector
bundle (or sheaf) on z. it turns out [7] that these bundles appear as the moduli space
of a certain class of eld theories that are dual to calabiyau 4-fold singularities
in the previous sense and can be constructed and studied using the geometric duality,
very much as in the case of n = 2 supersymmetric qfts. again we obtain non-
perturbative information from the geometric perspective and in particular the geometric
construction generalizes to non-perturbative vacua of the heterotic string, including
those with background 5-branes [10] and non-perturbative gauge symmetries.

2. singularities for n = 1 supersymmetric theories

we have mentioned already that the crucial link between the geometric singularities
and the physical system associated to it is provided by the curved geometry of d-branes
of type ii strings wrapped on vanishing cycles. however, to reduce supersymmetry,
we need to compactify f-theory on the singularity, rather than type ii strings.
in
general, f-theory has a very dierent way to generate massless states, in particular
from open strings stretching between background d7 branes. however note that in
the duality between f-theory compactied on a calabiyau n-fold wn times a torus
t 2 and type iia on wn, the radii of t 2 are mapped to geometric moduli of the type
iia theory on wn. we can therefore describe the minimal supersymmetric theory from
f-theory on wn in terms of a type iia compactication on the f-theory-limit of wn,
dened as the patch in the geometric moduli of type iia on wn that corresponds to the
decompactication of the t 2 factor in the dual f-theory compactication. as a matter
of fact this allows to adopt many of the methods developed in the n = 2 context to the
minimal supersymmetric case. in particular one can establish in this way the following
geometric duality:

similarly as in the n = 2 context, one needs only type iia (and f-theory) physics
to establish the above equivalence. a necessary assumption that is needed is that zn is
elliptically bered. the equivalence holds for any structure group h of the bundle.

 see ref. [8] for an introduction to the subject.

non-perturbative n = 1 strings from geometric singularities

4

calabiyau geometry wn+1

n = 1 field theory (zn, v )

local singularities wn+1
in n + 1-fold brations of

compactication of n = 1, 10d sym

on ell. bered calabiyau zn;

elliptically bered ale spaces

holomorphic stable vector bundle v on zn

note that the moduli space of the n = 1 eld theory appearing on the right hand
side of the above table is precisely the same as that of the gauge background of a
heterotic compactication on zn in the point particle limit, under the condition that
the structure h ts in the perturbative heterotic gauge symmetry ghet
0 , e.g. e8  e8.
since one arrives at the above equivalence using only type iia/f-theory physics, one
can derive type iia/heterotic and f-theory/heterotic duality in the point particle limit.
note that the equivalence is true for any h; for h  ghet
it becomes equivalent to a
duality with the heterotic string in the point particle limit.

0

since the eld theory involved in the geometric duality is so closely related to a
string theory compactication, about which we do not have a good control, it makes
sense to consider the reverse process of decoupling gravity and nd global embeddings of
the singularities wn+1 into compact calabiyau manifolds wn+1 to describe dual pairs
of the full f-theory/heterotic and iia/heterotic dualities away from the point particle
limit. interestingly one nds that global embeddings exist precisely if h  ghet
0 . while
it is expected from the physics point of view that we recover the known consistent
string theories in this way, the result is non-trivial from the geometric point of view.
the global embeddings dene dual pairs of string duality (as opposed to the relation
between singularity and eld theory), namely a compact calabiyau n + 1-fold wn+1
on which f-theory is compactied and a compact calabiyau zn together with a family
of holomorphic stable vector bundles v on it that describe the dual heterotic data.
moreover one obtains a precise map of the moduli spaces of the two theories in the
point particle limit. we can then use the duality wn+1  (z, v ) away from this limit
to study non-perturbative properties of the minimal supersymmetric heterotic string
vacua.

3. vector bundles and type ii strings

at rst sight it is not obvious that f-theory compactied on the geometric singularities
wn+1 describes holomorphic stable vector bundles on compact calabiyau manifolds
zn of one complex dimension less. the relation between the geometric singularity and
vector bundles can be traced back to a symmetry of type iia on k3t 2 [6] that is
closely related to mirror symmetry on k3. consider a type iia string compactied on
a k3 surface. this gives an n = 2 supersymmetric theory in six dimensions. from
dimensional reduction we obtain twenty n = 2 vector multiplets which contain as their
bosonic degrees of freedom each one vector and four real scalars. the latter transform
as a 4 under an so(4)r r-symmetry and parametrize the 58 metric moduli of k3 plus
22 values of the b-elds on h2(k3).

non-perturbative n = 1 strings from geometric singularities

5

in a a given algebraic realization m2 of k3, the 80 moduli of k3 split in complexied
kahler and complex structure modulik. the so(4)r rotations acting on the scalars in
4 do not preserve this split in general. in particular there is an so(4)r rotation that
exchanges kahler and complex structure moduli spaces mkm and mcs, respectively.
such a transformation is usually known as mirror symmetry of k3 manifolds, which
says that a type iia string compactied on m2 describes the same physics as a type
iia string compactication on a dierent k3 manifold w2, with the kahler and
complex structure moduli exchanged. the new algebraic k3 surface w2 is called the
mirror manifold of m2. we have the following identications under mirror symmetry:

m2  w2,

(2)

mcs(m2)  mkm(w2), mkm (m2)  mcs(w2).

there is an intriguing generalization of this symmetry upon compactication on a further
t 2 to four dimensions. in this case we obtain an n = 4 supersymmetric string theory.
the n = 4 vector multiplet now contains 6 scalars which transform in a 6 of an so(6)r
symmetry. the two extra scalars are the internal components ai of the six-dimensional
gauge elds on the t 2, call it e, and thus parametrize the stringy moduli space of
wilson lines on the elliptic curve, mstring
(h). here h denotes the structure group of
the wilson line background. again the so(6)r rotations provide identications within
the type iia moduli space miia(k3  t 2):

e

mkm (m2)  mcs(w2)  mstring

e

(h).

(3)

in particular there is now an element of so(6)r, corresponding to the last arrow, which
provides a relation between the moduli space of stringy wilson lines on e with the
kahler moduli space of an algebraic k3 manifold.

let us illustrate the symmetry (3) of the type iia compactication on k3 t 2 in
the dual heterotic picture where it is very natural; however we stress that we do not need
the heterotic dual to derive the symmetry. fig. 1 shows the type iia compactication
and the corresponding dual heterotic string compactied on t 2
the

1  t 2

2  t 2
3 .

type iia

heterotic 

g singularity

m km

k3

m cs

mt 2

3

(g)

mt 2

1

(h )1

mt 2

2

(h )2

mt 2

3

(g)

x

x

8d

6d

4d

so(4)r
mirror symmetry

so(6)r
"new"

figure 1. the symmetry (3) from a heterotic point of view.

factorization of t 6 on the heterotic side is related to i) the elliptic bration and ii) the

k subscripts, as in m2, denote the complex dimension of a geometry.
 since the k3 surface is unique, mirror symmetry acts as a discrete identication in the moduli space
of k3 surfaces.

non-perturbative n = 1 strings from geometric singularities

6

factorization of the gauge background on k3 t 2 in the type iia theory. under these
circumstances, the kahler moduli of k3 can be identied with moduli space mt 2
(h1)
of h1 wilson lines on the rst t 2
1 and similarly complex structure moduli with wilson
lines in the second factor mt 2
(h2). the non-abelian gauge symmetry in six dimensions
is g which on the type iia side arises from the g singularity and on the heterotic side
is the commutant of h1  h2 in ghet
0 . upon further compactication to four dimensions
on a torus t 2

3 , we obtain another factor mt 2

(g) on both sides.

2

1

3

the heterotic theory has an obvious symmetry under permutation of the three t 2
factors. the exchange of the rst two tori amounts to mirror symmetry in the type
iia theory. on the other hand an exchange that involves the third torus gives a new
symmetry of the moduli space of the type iia compactication that identies wilson
lines with structure group g on t 2 with either kahler or complex deformations of a g
singularity of k3. this is the new relation described in (3).

finally we can decouple most of the fundamental string states and gravity in the
limit of a singular geometry of the k3, or in terms of physics, in the eld theory limit.
the elliptically bered 2-fold singularities m2 that describe the local patch in m2 (and
similarly a local geometry w2 for the complex geometry side) obtained in this limit
describe eld theory wilson lines on a torus e:
mkm (m2) = mcs(w2) = m f t

(4)

e (h).

note that this relation will be more general as the one obtained in the global k3 context.
in the latter, r = rank h is bounded from above by the dimension of h2(k3), whereas
in (4) we can actually consider local singularities of ale spaces of arbitrary rank.

the above eld theory limit is compatible with taking the f-theory limit of the type
iia theory. the f-theory compactication on w2 gives then the deliberate geometric
dual we are looking for.

4. holomorphic stable bundles on calabiyau n-folds

in the previous section we have seen how holomorphic (semi-)stable bundles on a calabi
yau 1-fold, or simply wilson lines on t 2, are related to f-theory compactied on a 2
complex dimensional calabiyau singularity w2. to obtain holomorphic stable bundles
on calabiyau n-folds, we consider holomorphic brations of w2 over some n1 complex
dimensional base bn1. the total space wn+1, which is required to satisfy the calabi
yau condition in order to be a valid type iia and f-theory background, is an n + 1
dimensional non-compact singularity with an elliptic bration inherited from that of
w2.

the dual heterotic picture is the following [11]: the data of h wilson lines on
t 2 are bered over the same base bn1,
in virtue of the adiabatic principle [12].
the t 2 bration over bn1 results in a compact calabiyau n-fold zn on which the
heterotic string is compactied and the gauge background on t 2 extends to a family of
holomorphic stable bundles on zn.

non-perturbative n = 1 strings from geometric singularities

7

let us now sketch the general form of the dual singularities wn+1 which have a nice
geometric and group theoretical interpretation. let (y, x, z; v) denote a special set of
coordinates on the elliptically bered ale space w2; in particular v is a coordinate on
the base p1 of the elliptic bration of w2. moreover the xi are coordinates on the base
bn1 of the w2 bration of wn+1. the singularity wn+1 is dened as the vanishing of
the polynomial p:

p = p0 + p+ = p0(y, x, z|xi) + x

vipi

+(y, x, z|xi) = 0.

(5)

i

we have divided the polynomial p in a v independent part p0 and a v dependent piece
p+. they describe the geometry zn and the gauge bundle v on zn, respectively. in
fact p0 is the dening equation for the elliptically bered, compact calabiyau zn in
weierstrass form. the polynomial p+ that describes the bundle has a very nice group
theoretical structure. if we consider the extended dynkin diagram of the structure group
h of v , then each node of index si contributes precisely one monomial psi
+ to p+. e.g.,
for su(n) we have n nodes of index one and the equation for p+ becomes (for n even)

p+ = v1  (zn an (xi) + xzn 2 an 2(xi) + . . . + xn/2a0(xi)).

(6)

since in this case v appears only linearly in p, it can be integrated out as far as variation
of the complex structure is concerned. this yields the two separate conditions p0 = 0
and p1
+=0. the rst equation denes zn. the n roots of the second equation determine
n points on the elliptic ber e of zn, with their position on e varying with the values
of the base variables xi. we thus recover the spectral cover construction of su(n)
bundles on elliptic brations described in [11, 13].

more generally, we obtain a similar geometric representation of

families of
holomorphic stable bundles on zn for any h. the actual construction of the geometries
wn+1 can be phrased best in the framework of toric geometry. this approach has the
advantage of being very general, in particular in treating general calabiyau manifolds
zn with non-smooth elliptic brations, as well as studying singularities in both, the
geometric and gauge data. moreover one can dene a toric map that identies the dual
objects

f : wn+1  (zn, v ),

(7)

with important physical data of the heterotic side, such as the geometry of the manifold
zn, the family of bundles on it, non-perturbative 5-branes or gauge symmetries and the
stability of the bundle having a very simple and systematic representation in terms of
the toric geometry of the singularity wn+1 on the left side [7, 14]. this allows for a
simple construction of deliberate families of stable bundles v with arbitrary structure
group h on any toric calabiyau in terms of the singularity wn+1.

0

moreover, if h  ghet

one can easily determine the possible global embeddings of
the local singularity wn+1  wn+1, where wn+1 is now the global calabiyau n+1-fold
which gives the dual string theory when used as an f-theory compactication. the map
wn+1  (zn, v ) can then be used to study non-perturbative properties of the minimal
supersymmetric heterotic string theory on zn, as is illustrated in the next section.

non-perturbative n = 1 strings from geometric singularities

8

5. some results on (non-perturbative) n = 1 heterotic strings

let us nally sketch some results on (non-perturbative) heterotic physics which have
been obtained in [7, 14] using the above method.

stability of the bundle v

we complained already that it is very hard to nd explicit solutions to the stability
equations for v and in the sequel we claimed that we can construct a large class of
such stable bundles seemingly without eort using the geometric singularities wn+1.
obviously, there has to be quite a good reason for this simplication in the geometric
construction. indeed there is one important property of the geometric singularities wn+1
that we did not interpret so far in the heterotic duals: the calabiyau condition that
ensures that the type iia, or f-theory, compactied on wn+1 is consistent. indeed one
can show [14] that the calabiyau property of wn+1 translates to a stability condition
on the background v on zn, expressed in terms of a bound on the rst chern class
 = c1(n ) of a line bundle n that is an important characteristic data of the vector
bundle v on z [11]. one nds that

(g) c1(l)   ( 12c1(l) ),

(8)

where g is the singularity type of the ber geometry w2 and (g) is a certain
characteristic number dened in [14]. explicit expressions for n and the bounds on
 for toric bases, such as p2 and fn and blow ups thereof, can be found in [7]+.

the answer to why it was so easy to get stable solutions from the geometric
construction is thus that we have replaced the complicated condition for stability in
the heterotic string, about which we have poor control, with the simple calabiyau
condition on the dual type iia/f-theory side, which is much easier to deal with.

standard embedding

a simple solution to solve the background equations for v is to set the gauge
connection equal to the spin connection of the manifold, v = t z. this is the so-called
standard embedding. though this conguration is not too appealing for phenomenology
- in four dimensions, the heterotic gauge group is e6  e8 and the matter spectrum is
tied to the euler number of z - it has been studied extensively in the past because it was
one of the few known solutions. the structure group of v is su(n) for a calabiyau
n-fold.

the global geometry wn+1 corresponding to the f-theory dual can be determined
in the following way. from the fact that the bundle in the second factor is trivial it
follows that the line bundle n is trivial in the second e8 factor. the weierstrass form
for wn+1 and zn takes the following form:
pzn = y2 + x3 + xz4f + z6g,

+ a bound on  derived in [15] is dierent from those in [7] and [14].

non-perturbative n = 1 strings from geometric singularities

pwn = y2 + x3 + x(zzw)4f + (zzw)6g + z6z5w7 + z6z7w5.

9

(9)

here (z, w) denote the variables parametrizing the base p1 of the elliptically bered k3
ber w2 of the bration f : wn+1  bn1 and  = 4f 3 + 27g2 is the discriminant of
the elliptic bration of zn. this generalizes the six-dimensional result obtained in [16]
to four and lower dimensions.

non-perturbative gauge symmetries

in the f-theory picture, gauge symmetries correspond to singularities in the elliptic
bration. those located over the base bn1 have a perturbative interpretation in the
heterotic dual, whereas non-perturbative ones are located over curves in bn1 [17]. using
the map wn+1  (zn, v ) we can describe the heterotic compactication that leads to
the same dynamics non-perturbatively. in the six-dimensional case we nd:

() consider the e8  e8 string compactied on an elliptically bered k3 with a
singularity of type g at a point s = 0 and a special gauge background v . if the
restriction of the spectral cover of v|e to the ber e at s = 0 is suciently trivial,
the heterotic string acquires a non-perturbative gauge symmetry gnp  g.

the triviality condition can be made precise by specifying the behavior of v near s = 0
[7]. similar results hold for four-dimensional compactications.

we point out that the above triviality condition on the spectral cover does not imply
that the eld strength of v , which measures the behavior of v near the singularity, is
trivial.
in fact it has been shown recently in [18] that if f = 0 on the singularity,
the conformal eld theory of the heterotic string is well behaved and there is no non-
perturbative gauge symmetry.

non-perturbative dualities

the map f : wn+1  (zn, v ) can be ambiguous in the sense that there are two (or
even more) ways to associate a pair (zn, v ) to wn+1. if the two maps are compatible
with the same elliptic bration, we obtain a non-perturbative duality of two heterotic
string theories

(zn, v )  (z 

n, v ).

(10)

the conditions under which this duality exists, can be formulated in simple properties
of the toric polyhedron 
wn+1 associated to the calabiyau wn+1 in its construction as
a toric hypersurface [7]. the generic form of the duality is the following:

() let the heterotic string be compactied on a calabiyau three-fold with g
singularity and with a certain gauge background with structure group h such that
the toric data 
full the above mentioned condition. then there exists a
non-perturbatively equivalent compactication on a calabiyau manifold with g
singularity and with a specic gauge background with structure group h .

wn+1

 for g 6= su (n ) we use the generalization of the spectral cover in terms of the sections of a certain
weighted projective bundle over bn1 [11].

non-perturbative n = 1 strings from geometric singularities

10

here h (h ) is the commutant of g (g) in e8  e8. note that the duality exchanges
the groups of the geometric singularity and the gauge bundle: the singularity in the
dual manifold is the commutant of the structure group and vice versa. let us give an
extreme example of such an duality: the heterotic string with a trivial gauge bundle
on a smooth k3 has a perturbative e8  e8 gauge symmetry and in addition n
t = 24
non-perturbative tensor multiplets from the 24 ve-branes required to satisfy anomaly
cancellation in six dimensions. the dual theory is a heterotic theory with e8  e8 gauge
bundle on a k3 with e8  e8 singularity. the perturbative gauge symmetry is trivial,
while non-perturbative dynamics associated to the singularity produce both, the e8 e8
gauge symmetry as well as 24 extra tensor multiplets.

this duality reminds very much of a known duality in the linear sigma model
formulation of heterotic strings, namely a symmetry under the exchange of the data
dening the manifold and the data dening the bundle [19]. however note that in our
case this duality is in general non-perturbative.

mirror symmetry of f-theory

consider a six-dimensional f-theory compactication on w3 and the associated
if the mirror manifold m3 of w3 is also
heterotic dual (z2, v ) as dened above.
elliptically bered, there is also a heterotic theory (z 
2, v ) associated to it and one
can ask the question of how the two theories are related. the answer is that after
compactication on a three-torus to three dimensions, the two become equivalent in
virtue of mirror symmetry of type ii strings [20].

a proposal for the relation between (z2, v ) and (z 

2, v ) has been made in [21]
based on a comparison of hodge numbers and gauge symmetries in some cases. using
the toric map wn+1  (zn, v ) one can determine the two theories; in fact one nds a
subtle realization of higgs and coulomb branches in toric geometry as expected from
the action of three-dimensional mirror symmetry [7]. the general relation is of a similar
form as in () above: a heterotic theory with a g bundle compactied on a k3 manifold
with h singularity gets mapped to a heterotic theory with a bundle with structure group
h compactied on a manifold with g singularity. note that we have an explicit map of
the moduli spaces of the two theories. it would be interesting to formulate the associated
three-dimensional dual pairs associated to this relation, as in [22].

6. outlook

the geometric construction of minimal supersymmetric heterotic string vacua in four
dimensions and their f-theory duals opens an interesting way to study phenomenolog-
ically relevant string compactications. the identications between wn+1 and (zn, v )
may serve as a starting point to study more rened non-perturbative relations between

non-perturbative n = 1 strings from geometric singularities

11

the dual f- and heterotic string theory. in particular we would like to formulate both
perturbative and non-perturbative quantities of the heterotic string, e.g. gauge and
yukawa couplings as well as superpotential of the (0, 2) vacua, in terms of geometric
quantities on wn+1. a concrete example are the correlation functions determined by
holomorphic prepotentials, considered in [23]. also for the superpotential, a geomet-
rical approach exists and has been studied in [25, 23, 26, 27, 28].
in the ideal (and
supposedly too optimistic) case, we can hope to obtain exact results for at least some
of the holomorphic physical quantities in the n = 1 theory from geometric information
on wn+1, similarly as it happened to work in the case of n = 2 supersymmetry.

acknowledgements
i would like to thank per berglund for the collaboration on this work and the organizers
of strings 99 for the opportunity to present it and for their hospitality.

[1] n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl. phys. b426 (1994) 19, erratum: ibid 430 (1994) 396;
[2] s. kachru, a. klemm, w. lerche, p. mayr and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b459 (1996) 537.
[3] a. klemm, w. lerche, p. mayr, c. vafa, n. warner, nucl. phys. b477 (1996) 746.
[4] p. mayr, fortsch. phys. 47 (1999) 39.
[5] a. strominger, nucl. phys. b451 (1995) 96.
[6] s. katz, p. mayr and c. vafa, adv. theor. math. phys. 1 (1998) 53.
[7] p. berglund and p. mayr, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 1307.
[8] p. mayr, n = 1 heterotic vacua from mirror symmetry, hep-th/9904115;
d-branes and f-theory, proceedings of the trieste spring school 1999.

[9] c. vafa, nucl. phys. b469 (1996) 403.

[10] m.j. du, r. minasian and e. witten, nucl. phys. b465 (1996) 413.
[11] r. friedman, j.w. morgan and e. witten, comm. math. phys. 187 (1997) 679.
[12] c. vafa and e. witten, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 46 (1996) 225.
[13] m. bershadsky, a. johansen, t. pantev and v. sadov, nucl. phys. b505 (1997) 165.
[14] p. berglund and p. mayr, stability of vector bundles from f theory, hep-th/9904114.
[15] g. rajesh, j. high energy phys. 12 (1998) 18.
[16] p.s. aspinwall and r.y. donagi, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 1041.
[17] d. morrison and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b473 (1996) 74; nucl. phys. b476 (1996) 437.
[18] e. witten, heterotic string conformal eld theory and a-d-e singularities, hep-th/9909229.
[19] j. distler and s. kachru, nucl. phys. b442 (1995) 64.
[20] k. intriligator and n. seiberg, phys. lett. b387 (1996) 513.
[21] e. perevalov and g. rajesh, phys. rev. lett. 79 (1997) 2931.
[22] k. hori, h. ooguri and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b504 (1997) 147.
[23] p. mayr, nucl. phys. b494 (1997) 489.
[24] w. lerche and s. stieberger, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 1105.
[25] s. kachru and e. silverstein, nucl. phys. b482 (1996) 92.
[26] s. katz and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b497 (1997) 196.
[27] c. vafa, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 497.
[28] d.-e. diaconescu and s. gukov, nucl. phys. b535 (1998) 171.

 see also [24] for an interesting study of correlation functions in the eight-dimensional duality.

