9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
6

 

 
 

1
v
4
4
0
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

gravity and instantons

school of physics, university of new south wales, sydney, 2052, australia,

email: kmy@newt.phys.unsw.edu.au

m. yu. kuchiev

conventional non-abelian so(4) gauge theory is able to describe gravity provided
the gauge eld possesses a specic polarized vacuum state in which the instantons
have a preferred orientation. their orientation plays the role of the order parameter
for the polarized phase of the gauge eld. the interaction of a weak and smooth
gauge eld with the polarized vacuum is described by an eective long-range action
which is identical to the hilbert action of general relativity. in the classical limit
this action results in the einstein equations of general relativity. gravitons appear
as the mode describing propagation of the gauge eld which strongly interacts with
the oriented instantons. the newton gravitational constant describes the density
of the considered phase of the gauge eld. the radius of the instantons under
consideration is comparable with the planck radius.

1 instantons in an external eld

this work reviews the idea proposed in 1,2 which suggests a new explanation
for the origin of gravitational forces. in the proposed scenario gravity arises
as a particular eect in the conventional yang-mills gauge theory 3 formu-
lated in at space-time. all geometrical objects necessary for the gravitational
phenomenon can originate from the gauge degrees of freedom if a particular
nontrivial vacuum state, which we will call the vacuum with polarized instan-
tons develops in the so(4) gauge theory.

consider euclidean formulation of the so(4) gauge theory. the gauge
algebra for so(4) gauge group consists of two su(2) gauge subalgebras, so(4) =
su(2)+su(2). the instantons and antiinstantons can belong to any one of these
two available su(2) gauge subalgebras. it is convenient to choose the generators
for one su(2) gauge subalgebra to be (1/2)aij and the generators for the
other one to be (1/2)aij. to distinguish between these two subalgebras we
will refer to them as su(2) and su(2). symbols aij , aij are the usual t
hooft symbols, a = 1, 2, 3, i, j = 1,    , 4. in this notation the gauge potential
and the strength of the gauge eld are

aij

 = 

f ij

 = 

1
2
1
2

(aa

aij + aa

 aij ),

(f a

 aij + f a

 aij ),

(1)

(2)

where aa

 belong to su(2). the yang-

 and f a

 belong to su(2) and aa

, f a

1

 (x)f ij

mills action reads s = 1/(4g2)r f ij

 (x) d4x. the latin indexes i, j =
1,    , 4 label the isotopic indexes, while the greek indexes ,  = 1,    , 4 label
the indexes in euclidean coordinate space. remember that we consider the
usual gauge eld theory in at space-time. for the chosen normalization of
generators the relation between the gauge potential and the eld strength reads
f ij

 akj

  aik

 = aij

  aij

 + aik

 akj
 .

consider interaction of an instanton with an external gauge eld which has
trivial topological structure and is weak and smooth. thus formulated problem
was rst considered by callan, dashen and gross 8 where it was shown that the
interaction of an instanton with the external eld is described by an eective
action

s =

222

g2

adabf b

 (x0).

(3)

here  and x0 are the radius and position of the instanton. the matrix dab 
so(3) describes the orientation of the instanton in the su(2) gauge subalgebra
where the instanton belongs. f b
 (x) is the gauge eld in the subalgebra where
the instanton belongs. this eld has to be taken in the singular gauge 9. the
interaction of an antiinstanton with an external eld is described similarly.
the only distinction is that it produces the corresponding term with the t
hooft symbol a instead of a which stands in (3).

let us now generalize the problem. suppose that there is a number of
instantons and antiinstantons which belong to either su(2) or su(2) gauge
algebras. assuming that the dilute gas approximation is valid we nd that the
contribution to the action reads

s = 

2

g2 xk

a bijt ab

k 2

kf ij

 (xk).

(4)

here k runs over all instantons and antiinstantons which have radiuses and
coordinates k and xk. to simplify notation the t hooft symbols are enumer-
ated as 6-vectors a = (a, b), a = 1,    , 6; a, b = 1, 2, 3. to describe an
orientation of every (anti)instanton it is convenient to introduce a 6  6 matrix
t ab

, a, b = 1,    , 6

k

t ab

dk ck (cid:19)
k  tk = (cid:18) ck dk

(5)

as a set of four 33 matrixes ck, ck, dk, dk. for any given k-th (anti)instanton
only one of these four matrixes is essential while the other three are equal to
zero. this nonzero matrix belongs to so(3) and describes the orientation
of the k-th topological object in the gauge algebra where it belongs. for
example, if the k-th object is an antiinstanton in the su(2) gauge subalgebra,

2

then we assume that ck  so(3) describes its orientation in the su(2) while
ck, dk, dk = 0.

let us consider the behavior of the ensemble of instantons in the vacuum
state assuming that there exists a weak and smooth topologically trivial gauge
eld f ij
 (x). one can derive the eective action which describes interaction of
the vacuum with this eld averaging (4) over short-range quantum uctuations
in the vacuum. the result can be presented as the eective action

s = z a aijmab(x)f ij

 (x) d4x.

where the matrix mab(x) is

mab(x) = 2h

1
g2 2t abn(, t, x) i.

(6)

(7)

the brackets h i here describe averaging over quantum uctuations whose wave-
length is shorter than a typical distance describing variation of the external
eld. these uctuations in the dilute gas approximation for instantons should
include averaging over positions, radiuses and orientations of instantons. in
(7) n(, t, x) is the concentration of (anti)instantons which have the radius
 and the orientation described by the matrix t  t ab. in the usual vac-
uum states the concentration of instantons does not depend on the orientation,
n(, t, x)  n(, x). in that case an averaging over orientations gives the triv-
ial result mab(x)  0, as mentioned by vainshtein et al. 10 the main goal of
this paper is to investigate what happens if the concentration n(, t, x) does
depend on the orientation t = t ab providing the nonzero value for the matrix
mab(x).

it is shown below that interesting physical consequences arise if one as-

sumes that the matrix mab(x) satises the following condition

mab(x) =

1
4

f m ab(x),

(8)

where f is a positive constant and m ab(x)  so(3, 3), which means that
m m t = , where the matrix ab is dened as

 = (cid:18) 1

0 1(cid:19) .

0

(9)

condition (8) is the main assumption about properties of the vacuum state
of the so(4) gauge theory. now we can clarify the meaning of the term
polarization of instantons which was introduced above intuitively. we say

3

that there is the polarization of instantons with the so(3, 3) symmetry, if (8)
is valid. one can interpret (8) as the statement that there exists the new
nontrivial phase of the so(4) gauge theory. the matrix m (x) plays the role
of the order parameter for this phase. the (anti)instantons which contribute
to the nontrivial value of the matrix t ab in (7) can be looked at as a specic
condensate. the constant f characterizes the density of this condensate.

notice that existence of a state with polarized instantons does not come
into contradiction with general principle of gauge invariance which in the con-
text considered is known as the elitzur theorem, 5 see also the book of polyakov
6 and recent lectures of hamer , 7 because the orientation of an instanton is a
gauge invariant parameter.

it is instructive to re-write (6) in another form. notice that there exists
a relation between matrixes belonging to so(3, 3) and matrixes belonging to
sl(4) groups which is well known, see a book of gilmore 11. it can be presented
as a statement that for any m ab  so+(3, 3), a, b = 1,    , 6 there exists
some matrix h i  sl(4), i,  = 1,    , 4 satisfying

h ih j  h i h j =

1
2

a bijm ab.

(10)

identifying m ab(x) = m ab one nds from (10) h i = h i(x)  sl(4)
which can be considered as another representation for the order parameter.
substituting h i(x) dened by (10) into (8) one can rewrite the action (6) in
the following useful form

s = f z h i(x)h j (x)f ij

 (x) d4x.

(11)

up to now our consideration was restricted by orthogonal coordinates. it is
instructive however to present the action (11) in arbitrary coordinates. under
the coordinate transformation the matrix h i(x) is transformed as h i(x) 
hi(x) = (x/x)h i(x), where the transformed matrix is called hi(x).
using it one can present the action (11) in arbitrary coordinates x in the
following form

s = f z hi(x)hj (x)f ij

 (x) det h(x) d4x.

(12)

(x) is understood as the matrix inverse to hi(x),
we use notation in which hi
i.e. hi
(x)hj(x) = ij. the determinant in (12) is dened as a determinant of
this inverse matrix, det h = det[hi
]. thus the factor det h(x) in (12) simply
accounts for the variation of the phase volume under the coordinate transfor-
mation.

4

2 the riemann geometry and the einstein equations

excitations above the polarized vacuum should possess interesting properties
because variation of the gauge eld results in the contribution to the action
(12) which is linear in the eld. this is in contrast to the standard quadratic
behavior of the conventional yang-mills action. let us examine the properties
of excitations in the classical approximation.

we will assume that the elds considered vary on the macroscopic dis-
tances, say  1cm, and their magnitude can be roughly estimated as |f ij
 | 
1/cm2. we will see below that the constant f which was dened in (7),(8)
is large, f  1/r2
p, where rp is the planck radius. this shows that for weak
elds the integrand in the yang-mills action is suppressed compared to the
yang-mills action by a drastic factor |f ij
 |/f  (rp/1cm)2 = 1064. therefore
our priority is to take into account the action (12) which describes interaction
of the weak eld with polarized instantons, neglecting the yang-mills action.
let us consider the action (12) as a functional which depends on the weak
eld vector potential and the matrix hi(x) which describes orientations of
instantons, s = s({aij
 (x)}, {hi(x)}). classical equations for this func-
tional read

(s)
aij
 (x)
(s)
hi(x)

= 0,

= 0.

(13)

(14)

in order to present classical equations in a convenient form let us dene three
quantities, g (x), 

 (x), and r

 (x):

g(x) = hi
(x)hi

 (x) = hi(x)hj
 (x) = hi(x)hj
r

 (x),
(x)aij
(x)f ij

 (x) + hi(x) hi
 (x).

(x),

(15)

(16)

(17)

after simple calculations the rst classical equation (13) may be presented in
the form 
(x) = 1/2g (x) [g (x) + g (x)   g(x)], in which the
matrix g(x) is dened as g(x) = hi(x)hi (x). clearly the found relation
is identical to the usual expression for the christoel symbol in terms of the
riemann metric for some riemann geometry, see for denitions landau and
lifshitz. 12 moreover, it is easy to verify that the quantity r
 (x) can be pre-
sented in terms of g(x) as well r
.
one recognizes in this relation the usual connection between the riemann ten-

 (x) = 

  

 + 

 

  

 

5

sor and the riemann metric. we see that equation (13) shows that the intro-
duced in (15) quantity g(x) can be considered as a metric for some riemann
geometry with the christoel symbol 
 (x).
consider now the second classical equation (14). it is easy to verify that

(x) and the riemann tensor r

it can be presented in the following form

r 

1
2

gr = 0,

(18)

in which r (x) and r(x) are the ricci tensor and the curvature of the rie-
mann geometry. the found equation (18) is identical to the einstein equations
of general relativity in the absence of matter.

moreover, the eective action (12) may also be presented in geometrical
terms. to see this consider the action when (13) is valid.
it is clear from
(15),(17) that the integrand of the action (12) proves be proportional to the
integrand of the usual hilbert action of general relativity 12. one can consider
the action (12) and the hilbert action as same quantity if the newton grav-
itational constant k is identied with the constant f which characterize the
density of the polarized condensate of instantons k = 1/(16f ). this relation
shows that f = 2/r2
p. remember that the constant f introduced in (7),(8) de-
pends on the typical radiuses and separations of the polarized instantons. we
see that these radiuses and separations should be comparable with the planck
radius.

3 discussion of results

we come to the interesting result. the rst classical equation of motion for the
gauge eld (13) shows that particular combinations of the gauge eld variables
(15),(16),(17) are identical to the riemann metric, the christoel symbol, and
the riemann tensor for some riemann space. the second classical equation
(14) proves be identical to the einstein equations for this riemann metric.
validity of the einstein equations guarantees that long-range excitations are
massless spin-2 excitations. the found eective action turns out to be identical
to the hilbert action of general relativity. these facts altogether permit one to
identify the found excitations with gravitons. this indicates that gravity arises
in the framework of the gauge theory. it is very important that the dynamics
of general relativity, its action and equations of motion, originate directly from
the dynamics of the gauge eld. all these results follow from assumption (8)
which has been interpreted above as the so(3, 3) polarization of instantons.

in order to justify the considered scenario one needs to nd gauge models
in which polarization of instantons takes place. the necessary model should

6

satisfy several demanding conditions. one of them is a necessity that the
polarization of (anti)instantons remains non-trivial even in the simplest case
when gravitational eld is absent. in this case the polarization of instantons
simplies to be a constant so(3)  so(3) matrix. to meet this requirement
the least one needs is a su (2) gauge theory model in which instantons are
polarized, while antiinstantons remain non-polarized. a candidate for such a
model has been proposed in . 2

acknowledgments

this work is supported by the australian research council. the hospitality of
the stu of the special research center for the subatomic structure of matter
at the university of adelaide, where part of this work has been carried out, is
acknowledged.

references

1. m.yu.kuchiev, europhys.lett. 28, 539 (1994); classical and quantum

gravity 15, july issue (1998).

2. m. yu. kuchiev, europhys.lett. 30, 255 (1995);

phys.rev. d53, 6946 (1996).

3. c. n. yang, r. mills, phys. rev. d 96, 191 (1954).
4. a. a. belavin, a. m. polyakov, a. s. schwartz, and yu.s.tyupkin,

phys. lett. 59b, 85 (1975).

5. s. elitzur, phys. rev. d 12, 3978 (1975).
6. a. m. polyakov, gauge fields and strings (harwood academic publish-

ers, chur, london, paris, new-york, melbourne, 1987).

7. c. hamer, in statistical mechanics and field theory, proceedings of the
seventh physics summer school eds. v. v. bazhanov and c. j. burden
(the australian national university, 1994), pp. 253-278.

8. c. callan, k. dashen, and d. gross, phys. rev. d 17, 2717 (1978);

phys. rev. d 19, 1826 (1979).

9. g. t hooft, phys. rev. d 14, 3432 (1976).
10. a. i. vainshtein, v. i. zakharov, v. a. novikov, and m. a. shifman,

usp. fiz. nauk 136, 553 (1982).

11. r. gilmore, lie groups, lie algebras, and some of their applications,

(john willey & sons, new-york, london, sydney, toronto, 1974).

12. l. d. landau, e. m. lifshitz, the classical theory of fields (pergamon

press, oxford and new york, 1971).

7

