hep-th/9910245

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
9
2

 

 
 

1
v
5
4
2
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

connectedness of the boundary

in the ads/cft correspondence

edward witten

department of physics, california institute of technology, pasadena, ca 91106

cit-usc center for theoretical physics

and

institute for advanced study, olden lane, princeton, nj 08540

and

s.-t. yau

department of mathematics, harvard university, cambridge mass. 02138

let m be a complete einstein manifold of negative curvature, and assume that (as in the

ads/cft correspondence) it has a penrose compactication with a conformal boundary

n of positive scalar curvature. we show that under these conditions, hn(m ; z) = 0 and
in particular n must be connected. these results resolve some puzzles concerning the

ads/cft correspondence.

october, 1999

1. introduction

suppose that m is a complete einstein manifold of negative curvature and dimension

n + 1 and that the conformal boundary of m , in the sense of penrose [1], is an n-manifold

n . this means that m is the interior of an n + 1-dimensional manifold-with-boundary m ,

whose boundary is n , and that the metric g of m can be written near the boundary as

g =

(1.1)

1

t2(cid:0)dt2 + gij(x, t)dxidxj(cid:1) ,

where t is a smooth function with a rst order zero on m , and positive on m , and
gij(x, t)dxidxj is an t-dependent family of metrics on m . thus, t  0 on m and t = 0 on
n . in this situation, g0 = g(x, 0) is a metric on n . if t is replaced by a dierent function
with a rst order zero on m , say t = et, then g0 undergoes a conformal transformation
g0  g0 = e2g0, so n actually has a natural conformal structure but not a natural metric.
if, in the conformal class of metrics on n , there is a representative with positive (or zero,

or negative) scalar curvature, then we say that n has positive (or zero, or negative) scalar

curvature.

there is a correspondence between conformal eld theory on n and quantum gravity,

or string theory, on m [2-4]. to be more precise, the correspondence asserts (see [4],

section 3) that to do conformal eld theory on n with a given conformal structure g0 on
n , one must sum over contributions of all possible n + 1-dimensional einstein manifolds

m with conformal boundary n and induced conformal structure g0. actually, the full
correspondence involves a number of additional details that we will omit in the present

paper. for example, one usually must consider not n + 1-dimensional einstein manifolds

m , but manifolds of dimension n + k + 1 obeying appropriate supergravity equations and
asymptotic at innity to x = m y , where y is a xed compact k-manifold characteristic
of the conformal eld theory that one chooses to consider. (examples are given in [2].)

our results could possibly be extended to theorems about the possible xs (showing for

example that under suitable hypotheses the ideal boundary of x is connected), but for
simplicity we will consider only the case that x = m  y , and analyze the possible m s.

topological conditions

presented with this correspondence, one wonders how one can characterize the m s

that exist for given n . are there general topological conditions on m ? for some choices

of n , can one nd all of the m s? in this paper, we will prove the following general

1

restriction: if n has positive scalar curvature (and is nonempty), then hn(m ; z) = 0. we

explain below the physical interpretation of this restriction.

the role of positive scalar curvature is suggested by the most canonical example of
a complete, negatively curved einstein manifold, namely hyperbolic space hn+1, or  as

it is known in the supergravity literature  anti de sitter space adsn+1.
in this case,
the conformal boundary n is a sphere sn, with the standard conformal structure which

has as a representative the standard round metric. this metric certainly has positive

scalar curvature. because of the basic role played by this example, the correspondence

between quantum gravity in n + 1 dimensions and conformal eld theory in n dimensions

is sometimes called the ads/cft correspondence.

in general, conformal eld theory can make sense on a manifold of negative scalar cur-

vature, but the specic conformal eld theories that arise in the ads/cft correspondence,

at least in the examples studied so far, are well-behaved only when the scalar curvature of

n is non-negative. in the important case that n is a four-manifold, this can be seen di-

rectly: in this case, the conformal eld theories are four-dimensional gauge theories which

contain scalar elds whose potential is unstable if the scalar curvature of n is negative.

more generally, one sees by considering the action of a suitable brane in m [5,6] that if

n has negative scalar curvature, the theory is unstable. the argument, whose details we

recall in section 2, is made by considering a brane in m whose worldvolume is a codimen-
sion one hypersurface   m . one considers the brane action l() (which we will dene
in section 2) and shows that it is unbounded below if n has negative scalar curvature. if

n has positive scalar curvature, the theory is stable, and if n has zero scalar curvature,

it may be stable or unstable depending on further details.

two puzzles concerning the ads/cft correspondence

we therefore limit ourselves to the case that n has positive scalar curvature. consider

the following two puzzles concerning the ads/cft correspondence:

(1) can it happen that n is not connected but is a union of disjoint components

ni, i = 1, . . . , s, each of positive scalar curvature? if so, the ads/cft correspondence

does not make much sense. for conformal eld theory on a union of disjoint manifolds
n = ini is just the product of the theories on the dierent nis. there is no evident
way to couple them, and hence no candidate for how to interpret the contribution of an
m whose boundary is ini.

2

(2) for given n of positive scalar curvature, can m contain wormholes? a wormhole
is obtained by cutting out two balls from a manifold m0 and then gluing together their
boundaries to make a new manifold m . if m can have such wormholes, then to understand

the conformal eld theory on n , we will have to come to grips with the strange behavior

of quantum gravity in the presence of wormholes [7,8].

we will resolve both of these problems by showing that they simply do not arise for
n of positive scalar curvature. this follows from our result that for such n , hn(m ; z) =
0.
indeed, in (1), if the number of boundary components is greater than one, then a

hypersurface that is near one of the boundary components (dened by an equation such as

t = , where t is the coordinate used in (1.1) and t = 0 denes the boundary in question) is
a nonzero element of hn(m ; z). hence vanishing of hn(m ; z) implies that n is connected.
likewise, in (2), a spacetime m with wormholes would have nonzero hn(m ; z), since the
boundary of either of the balls removed from m0 is a nonzero element of hn(m ; z). hence
vanishing of hn(m ; z) implies that there are no wormholes.

results of this type denitely depend on n having positive scalar curvature. for

example, let q be any compact negatively curved einstein manifold of dimension n, with
metric gijdxidxj. then a complete einstein metric of negative curvature on m = q  r
is given by the simple formula

ds2 = dt2 + cosh2 t gijdxidxj.

(1.2)
the conformal boundary of m consists of two copies of q, at t = . this shows that
if the conformal boundary of m has negative scalar curvature, then hn(m ; z) can be
nonzero. note that in this example, each component of n has negative scalar curvature.
in fact, our proof shows that hn(m ; z) = 0 if any component of n has positive scalar
curvature.

an interesting corollary of the fact that, under the stated hypotheses, n must be
connected is that the natural map from 1(n ) to 1(m ) is surjective. (for example, m
must be simply connected if n is simply connected.) otherwise, by taking a suitable cover
of m , one could make an example with disconnected n of positive scalar curvature.

structure of the argument

the proof that hn(m ; z) = 0 for a boundary of positive scalar curvature will be made
by showing, by a local calculation, that the brane action l() cannot have a minimum,

and also by showing, using nonlinear analysis, that there is a minimum in each nonzero
homology class if the boundary has a component of positive scalar curvature. combining
these results, it follows that hn(m ; z) = 0 if the boundary has such a component. the
local computation is presented in section 2 and the global one in section 3.

3

2. local calculation

let m be an n + 1-dimensional einstein manifold of negative curvature and nonempty
conformal boundary, for some n  2. let  be a compact hypersurface in m . we denote
its area or volume as a. since m has a nonempty boundary, the volume form  of m is

exact, say  = d for an n-form . the brane action (for a bps brane) is dened by

l() = a  nz

.

note that if  is the boundary of a domain , we have

l() = a  nv

where

v =z



(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

(2.4)

(2.5)

(2.6)

is the volume enclosed by .  is not unique, but changing  will add to l a term that

is a constant in each homology class, and this does not aect the variational problem that

we will consider below. (in the physical application,  is an n-form eld of the appropriate

supergravity theory, and any choice of  makes sense.)

the importance of positive curvature for the boundary is that it is necessary in order

to ensure that l() is bounded below. this follows from a computation performed in

[5] and in greater generality in [6]. as in the introduction, we write the metric near the

boundary as

ds2 =

we consider  to be homotopic to the boundary and to be dened by an equation t = t(xi).

1

t2(cid:0)dt2 + gij(x, t)dxidxj(cid:1) .

for n > 2
for n = 2.

the brane action then becomes for small t or equivalently large 

we write

l =(

2e

t =(cid:26) 22/(n2)
2n3(n2)2r dnxg(cid:16)|d|2 + n2
2r d2xg(cid:0)|d|2 + r + o(e2)(cid:1)

1

1

4(n1) 2r + o(2(n4)/(n2))(cid:17) for n > 2;

for n = 2.

here we have identied  with the boundary at t = 0, and we regard gij(x, 0) as a metric
gij on ; r is the scalar curvature of this metric. 1 the brane action is conformally

1 in deducing (2.6), one uses the einstein equations to determine the behavior of gij(x, t) near

t = 0. for details, see [6], eqns. (3.6)-(3.8).

4

invariant; indeed, under t  et (where  is a function on the boundary, that is, on ),
we have gij  e2gij and in view of (2.5)

 (cid:26) exp((n  2)/2) for n > 2

  

for n = 2.

(2.7)

for l to be bounded below, it must be bounded below in the region of large , where

the corrections in (2.6) can be dropped. whether this is so depends, for n > 2, on the

spectrum of the conformally invariant operator

 =  +

n  2
4(n  1)

r,

(2.8)

where  is the laplacian. if  is positive denite, l is bounded below at least in the
region of large ; if it has a negative eigenvalue, then l is unbounded below; and if the
smallest eigenvalue of  is zero, then one must consider the correction terms in (2.6) to
determine if l is bounded below in the large  region. the lowest eigenvalue of  is
positive, negative, or zero depending on whether, in the conformal class of the metric gij
on , there is a representative of positive, negative, or zero scalar curvature.

thus we learn that, for n > 2, stability requires that  have nonnegative scalar

curvature. for n = 2, the same conclusion can be reached by rst replacing g with a
conformally equivalent metric e2g with constant r, and then noting that for constant 
and   +, l is bounded below if r  0 and unbounded below if r < 0.

properties of a minimum of l

so far we have merely summarized the considerations in [5,6]. now, assuming that

the boundary of m has positive scalar curvature, we want to try to get a restriction on

the topology of m . the computation performed above suggests that (for a boundary of

positive scalar curvature) l is bounded below. if so, we may expect that l will have an

absolute minimum for each nonzero choice of the homology class of  in hn(m ; z). (the
reason that one suspects a minimum for each homology class, not each homotopy class, is

that in varying a hypersurface  to minimize l,  may develop a singularity. in passing

through such a singularity, the homology class of  does not change, but the homotopy

class may.) the existence of such a minimum will be proved in section 3. we will now

show, however, by a local computation that l cannot have a minimum. combining these

results, it will follow that hn(m ; z) = 0, which is the result that was promised in the
introduction.

5

we assume that the einstein manifold m obeys

rij = ngij .

(2.9)

(the choice of constant on the right hand side is correlated with the choice of constant

n multiplying the second term in the brane action (2.2). we denote indices of m by

i, j, k = 1, . . . , n + 1 and indices of the hypersurface  by i, j, k = 1, . . . , n.)

we now want to study a hypothetical extremum  of l. we suppose that  is an

embedded submanifold. in a neighborhood of , we can pick one coordinate, r, to be the
distance from , and pick the other coordinates xi so that the metric near  is

ds2 = dr2 +bgij(x, r)dxidxj.
we let gij =bgij(x, 0) be the metric on , and we write
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r=0
bgij(x, r)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r=0
2bgij(x, r)

gij =

gij =

r2

r

.

(thus, the second fundamental form of  is g/2, and the mean curvature is tr g1 g/2.)

we can describe a uctuation in the position of  by specifying r as a function of x.

to determine the conditions for  to be a local minimum of l, we need to evaluate l up

(2.10)

(2.11)

(2.12)

(2.13)

(2.14)

2 r2g + . . ., we calculate to this order

to second order in r. writingbg = g + r g + 1
a =z dnxqdet(bgij + irjr) =z dnxpdet g(cid:18)1 +

+

r2
4

tr g1g 

r2
4

r
2

tr g1 g +

r2
8

tr(g1 gg1 g) +

(tr g1 g)2

1

2|dr|2(cid:19) .

also, to this order

so

nv = const + nz dnxg(cid:18)r +

r2
4

tr g1 g(cid:19) .

l = a  nv = const +z dnxg(cid:18) r

r2
8

tr g1 g  rn +
(tr g1 g)2 
2
4 (cid:0)tr g1g  tr(g1 gg1 g)(cid:1) +
r2

+

nr2
4

tr g1 g

1

2|dr|2(cid:19) .

6

the condition for l to be stationary at r = 0 is

tr g1 g = 2n.

for r = 0 to be a local minimum requires

tr g1g  tr(g1 gg1 g).

if n is a real symmetric n  n matrix, then
tr n 2 

1
n

(tr n )2,

(2.15)

(2.16)

(2.17)

with equality only if and only if n is a multiple of the identity. applying this to n = g1 g,
for which tr n = 2n, we learn that

tr (g1 gg1 g)  4n,

(2.18)

with equality precisely if g = 2g.

now we look at the einstein equations. if  are the (r-dependent) christoel symbols

of  in the metric gij(x, r)dxidxj, then the nonzero christoel symbols b of m in the

metric (2.10) are

jk = i
jk
1
2
gis gjs.

jk = 
1
rj =
2

gjk

bi
br
bi

let rij and r be the ricci tensor and scalar of , and brij, br the analogous objects of

m . the relevant part is

1
2

tr g1g +

1
4

tr g1 gg1 g

brrr = 

now we use the einstein equations at r = 0; the equation brrr = ngrr = n gives

tr (g1 gg1 g) = n.

1
2

tr (g1g) 

1
4

using also the inequality (2.16) that followed from stability, we get

4n  tr (g1 gg1 g).

7

(2.19)

(2.20)

(2.21)

(2.22)

comparing to (2.18), we learn that all the inequalities must be equalities, forcing g = 2g,
r = 0, and tr g1g = 4n.

so the possibility that the action l has a stable nondegenerate minimum is excluded.

note that the analysis has been purely local and makes no assumption about the global

structure of m .

as for the case of a degenerate minimum where the order r2 term vanishes, a further

analysis that we will explain momentarily shows that this can happen only in an example

of the following type. if the metric gij on  is ricci-at, then the metric

ds2 = dr2 + e2rgijdxidxj

(2.23)

on r   obeys the n + 1-dimensional einstein equations with cosmological constant. for
any constant c, the submanifold c of r   dened by r = c is a stationary point of
l. the action l(c) is independent of c, so this is a degenerate critical point. conformal
innity consists of a copy of  at r = , with zero scalar curvature. thus this type
of example is impossible if we assume that the boundary has positive scalar curvature.
(in this type of example, there is also a sort of cusp at r = , so there is no penrose
compactication even with nonpositive curvature on the boundary.)

we conclude by giving the proof that a degenerate minimum of l must be of the form

just described. let l(c) = l(c). we have from (2.14)

where

dl
dc

= zc

dnxgf

f = n 

1
2

tr g1 g.

(2.24)

(2.25)

since we assume that l is locally minimized at c = 0, we have dl/dc  0 for small positive
c, and hence

on the other hand,

d
dr

f =

1
2

using (2.21), this becomes

z dnxgf  0.
tr(g1 gg1 g) 

1
2

tr g1g.

df
dr

= n +

1
4

tr(g1 gg1 g).

8

(2.26)

(2.27)

(2.28)

using (2.17), with n = g1 g, this implies an inequality

df
dr  

1
n

f (2n  f ).

(2.29)

same sign as f  since f (r) =r r

we have f (0) = 0, since 0 is a critical point of l(). for small positive r, f has the
0 dt f (t). (2.29) implies that if f (r) is negative for small
positive r, then df/dr is positive. this is a contradiction, so f  0 for small positive r.
comparing to (2.26), we learn that f is identically zero for all suciently small positive

r. it follows from (2.24) that l(c) is independent of c for small positive c. as we deduced
from (2.22), at any value of c for which dl/dc = d2l/dc2 = 0, we have dgij/dc = 2gij.
hence

gij(x, c) = e2cgij(x, 0)

(2.30)

for suciently small positive c. by real analyticity (or the einstein equations) this is true

for all c, and the einstein equations (2.9) also imply that gij(x, 0) is a ricci-at metric

on . thus, we have shown that a degenerate minimum of the functional l() has the

special form given in (2.23) and in particular cannot exist if the boundary has positive

scalar curvature.

in the above, we can replace the einstein equation rij = ngij by an inequality
rij  ngij , since this would only improve the crucial inequality (2.21). physically, this
corresponds to having additional matter elds excited in an asymptotically ads spacetime.

we summarize our results as follows:

theorem 2.1 the functional l() = a  nr  for an embedded hypersurface  in an

n+1-dimensional einstein manifold m of ricci curvature greater than or equal to n does
not have any local minimum. any critical point of this functional is either unstable or is

neutrally stable and of the form given in (2.23). the neutrally stable case is only possible
if the ricci curvature is precisely n.

3. existence

in this section, we will prove existence theorems for a hypersurface , in a given

homology class, that minimizes the functional l() = area()  nr . here  is a

hypersurface in a complete n + 1-dimensional manifold m of ricci curvature n that has
a conformal boundary as described in the introduction and the last section.

9

if instead m were compact, and we have an upper bound on the area of  and a

lower bound on l(), then existence of a minimizing hypersurface  in a given homology

class in m follows from very general grounds. in fact, any sequence of hypersurfaces of

bounded area in a compact manifold has a convergent subsequence. for compact m , if we

assume that  is an embedded hypersurface, then both the upper bound on the area in a

minimum of l() and the lower bound on l() follow from the fact that the potentially

negative term nr  in the denition of l() is bounded below by minus the volume of

m . so if we make m compact by cutting o the ends, then  exists.

the  obtained this way, as the limit of a sequence of embedded hypersurfaces i
chosen to minimize limi l(i), might a priori have very bad singularities. however,
rather deep results in geometric measure theory [9-12] show that such a limiting  has
singularities only in codimension  7. (these results are obtained for area-minimizing
hypersurfaces. the possible singular behavior at interior points of m of a hypersurface

minimizing l = a  nr  is the same as for area-minimizing hypersurfaces, since the

second term is less important near a singularity.) existence of a minimizing hypersurface

 that is smooth except in high codimension is good enough for our purposes, because the

arguments of section 2, though formulated for smooth , can be extended to the case that
 has a singularity of high codimension. 2

to apply this existence result for  to the case that m is noncompact and has a

penrose compactication, we rst introduce a cuto in the volume of m as follows. we

recall that near each conformal boundary component mi of m , the metric of  looks like

1

t2(cid:0)dt2 + gij(x, t)dxidxj(cid:1) ,

with the boundary being at t = 0. we cut o the ends by restricting to t  i, with
i a small positive function on mi. with m made compact in this way, existence of 

follows by the argument above. the main technical step in the present section is to prove,

under certain conditions, that if the i are suciently small, then the minimizer  (or at

least one of its components) does not intersect the boundary of m . once this is known, a

comparison with theorem 2.1 will give our restrictions on the topology of m .

2 curiously, in supersymmetric examples of the ads/cft corresponce (and in fact, in all
known examples) the dimension of m is at most seven and hence the dimension of  is at most

six. so in the known applications,  is always smooth.

10

we turn now to the proofs. we begin with some preparations. the following is a

well-known fact:

lemma 1. let d be the geodesic distance function from a point x0 in a manifold m whose
sectional curvature has an upper bound given by k > 0. at points where kd < /2 and d
is smooth, the second derivative (the hessian) of d, in directions orthogonal to the tangent

vector of the shortest geodesic joined to x0, is not less than

kd
tankd

.

1
d

(3.1)

proof. let (s, t) : (a, a)  [0, l]  m be a family of geodesics so that

(s, 0) = x0

for all s,

and at s = 0, d

ds (s, l) is perpendicular to d

dt (0, l). we also suppose that (s, l) is a
geodesic. we shall parametrize (0, t) by arc length so that t = length (0, t). then
j(t) = d

dt for all t. direct calculation shows that

is perpendicular to d

ds (s, t)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)s=0

d2

ds2 length (s, t)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)s=0

2

d
dt

0 "(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
j(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
=z l
0 (cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)
ds2 length ()(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)s=0 z l

x  y. then we see that
d2

assuming kl  

2 , the right hand side is minimized by setting

2

 kz l

0 kjk2.

dj

dt(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

hence

let  = d2. then the second derivative of  is not less than

j(t) =

sin(kt)
sin(kl)

j(1).

d2

ds2 length ()(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)s=0 

k

tan(kl)

.

2kd
tan(kd)

11

z l

0

rijklj ij k dj
dt

dl

dt # dt.

(3.2)

assume the sectional curvature rijklx ix ky jy l to be less than kkxk2ky k2 when

(3.3)

(3.4)

(3.5)

(3.6)

if the derivatives are taken along directions orthogonal to the shortest geodesic joint to

x0. it is not less than 2 if the direction is tangential to the shortest geodesic joint to x0.

hence the second derivative is always not less than

f () = 2 min  kd

tan(kd)

, 1! .

(3.7)

let  be a hypersurface with mean curvature bounded above by c.3 then restricting

 to , we nd

  nf ()  2c.

(3.8)

this follows because the second derivatives on  dier from the ones on  by the

second fundamental form after being renormalized by the gradient of , whose norm is less
than 2d = 2. (the rst derivative of the geodesic distance is not greater than one.)

let us now assume that distance from x   to m is greater than r. integrating

the above inequality on   {  r}, we obtain

2r area [  { = r}] z (nf ()  2c).

(3.9)

(here we have used the fact that, since the normal derivative of d is at most 1, the normal
derivative of  is not greater than 2r when  = r.)

let f (r) = volume [  {  r}]. then

df
dr 

1
2r

area [  { = r}]

zr(cid:18) nf (t)  2ct
tr(cid:18) nf (t)  2ct

 inf

(cid:19)
(cid:19) f (r).

4r

4r

in particular,

(log f (r))  (log h(r))

where

h(r) = rn/2 exp(z r

0 (cid:18)inf

st(cid:18) nf (s)  2cs

4t

(cid:19) 

n

2t(cid:19)) .

3 in the notation of section 2, the mean curvature is tr g1 g/2.

12

(3.10)

(3.11)

(3.12)

when r  0, h(r)  rn/2 and f (r)  crn/2. hence

(cid:19) 

n

2t(cid:19)) .

(3.13)

4r

f (r)  crn/2 exp(z r

0 (cid:18) inf

tr(cid:18) nf (t)  2ct

lemma 2. let  be a hypersurface with a mean curvature bounded above by c in a
manifold m whose sectional curvature is bounded above by a constant k. let x0   be a
point so that the distance from x0 to m is greater than r. then if r < 
and if the
2k
geodesic distance (of m ) from x0 is smooth within bx0 (r) the ball of radius r, then the

area of bx0 (r)   is not less thanecrn whereec depends only on dim m , kr and cr.

the assumption that the geodesic function from x0 is smooth will be true if r is small
enough. this can be seen as follows. the only reason that the geodesic distance may not

be smooth at x is that there may be two distinct geodesics with shortest distance joining

x to x0. by minimizing the distance of such geodesics, one can nd a point x so that
the distinct geodesics at x have exactly opposite directions and hence there is a smooth

geodesic loop at x0.

let us now assume that for some constant  > 0, the map 1(bx0 (r))  1(bx0(r))
, the exponential map from the tangent space at x0 is non-singular

is trivial. since r < 
2k
everywhere in a ball of radius r.

the geodesic loop at x0 bounds a disk within bx0(r) and hence can all be lifted up
to the tangent space. this is not possible as the lifting of any geodesic at x0 must be a
straight line and cannot be a closed loop.

the condition for smoothness of geodesic distance is therefore satised if we can nd

 > 0 so that 1(bx0(r))  1(bx0 (r)) is trivial for all 0 < r < 
2k
x0 with distance greater than r from m . this condition is clear for manifolds with
compactication of the type described in section 1.

and for all

from now on, we shall choose r so that all the above assumptions are satised.
suppose {x1, x2, . . . , xm} are points on  so that the balls bxi( r

2 ) are mutually disjoint
and   ibxi(r). we also assume distances from xi to m is greater than r
2 . then
area () pi area (bxi( r
2 )  ) is bounded from below
by a positive constant depending only on r, c and k, we conclude that m is dominated
by area (). this number m can be considered as a quantity that measures the outer

2 )  ). since each area (bxi( r

diameter of .

let us now assume that m is a compact manifold with boundary components

m1, . . . , mk. we assume k > 1. we consider domains  with boundary components

13

given by m2, . . . , mk and an embedded hypersurface  which is (compactly) homologous

to m1. then

l() = area ()  nz
= area () +xi



nzmi

  n vol ().

(3.14)

if 0 minimizes l(),

area (0)  n vol (0)  area (m1)  n vol (m ).

(3.15)

assume that 0 can be written as 1 +    + k. then either one of i is in the
interior of m or all of them intersect m. in case all of them intersect m , we argue as

follows. we consider rst the case that all of the i intersect one of the mj with j > 1.

from the above inequality (3.15), we know

xi

area (i)  area (m1).

(3.16)

by lemma 2, the diameter of each i

is dominated by area (i) and hence by

a area (m1) where a depends only on the upper bound of the sectional curvature of

m and the lower bound of the injectivity radius of m . (the mean curvature of each i is

n, according to (2.15).)

if  is the complement (in m ) of the neighborhood of j>1(mj) with radius of
a area (m1), then (as we are assuming that each i intersects one of the mj with j > 1)
  (m\0) and (3.15) shows

xi1

area (i)  area (m1)  n vol ().

(3.17)

in particular, area (m1) + nvol (m\)  n vol (m ).

we have then proved the following lemma:

lemma 3. on a compact manifold m with boundary m1, m2, . . . , mk, let 1 +
   + i be a sum of embedded cycles that minimizes the functional l() = area () 
n vol (, m2, . . . , mk), on the homology class of m1. then one of the is does not
intersect m2      mk if

n vol m > area (m1) + n vol bd(m2      mk)

(3.18)

14

where d = a area (m1), bd is the ball of radius d around m2      mk and a de-
pends only on the upper bound of the sectional curvature of m and the lower bound of its

injectivity radius.

in the case that m is obtained from a manifold with a penrose compactication by
cutting o the ends by t  i for i  2, the inequality in lemma 3 is obeyed if the i
are suciently small.

we still need a condition to ensure that a component of  does not meet m1. when
m1 is a conformal boundary at innity, the computation at the beginning of section 2
suggests that  will not be near m1 if m1 has positive scalar curvature; we want to
make this more precise. in the present discussion, we have cut o the ends of m and m1
is an ordinary boundary; positive scalar curvature at conformal innity implies that (when

m1 is suciently close to innity) the mean curvature of m1 is greater than n.

thus in general the assumption we want is that m1 has mean curvature greater than
n. there is a foliation in a neighborhood of m1 so that the leaves are given by level sets of
the distance function to m1. the mean curvature of the nearby level sets is still greater
than n. the (outer) normal of these level sets denes a vector eld v in a neghborhood of

m1 whose divergence is given by the mean curvature of the level sets. hence

div v > n.

(3.19)

now if i intersects m1, we can replace i by intersecting it with the level sets and

obtain a new surface fi. by applying the divergence theorem (as norm(v) = 1) to the
domain  bounded by the dierence of i andfi, we get
areafi  area i z

(3.20)

div v

< area i  n vol ().

from this inequality, it is clear that l(fi) < l(i). hence i cannot be part of the

minimum of the functional l. in conclusion, if m1 has mean curvature strictly greater
than n, it does not intersect any of the i, and hence under the hypotheses of lemma 3,
there must be a component i which does not intersect any boundary components mj.
we can deduce the following:

lemma 4. let m be a compact manifold with boundary components m1, . . . , mk.
assume that m1 has mean curvature greater than n. let bd(m2, . . . , mk) be a neigh-
borhood of m2      mk with radius d = a area (m1), where a depends only on the

15

upper bound of sectional curvature of m and the lower bound of the injectivity radius of

m . assume that

n vol [m \ bd(m2, . . . , mk)] > area(m1).

(3.21)

then when we minimize the functional l() = area ()  nr  among embedded

surfaces homologous to  which bound a domain with m2      mk, there must be a
component of  which does not touch m1      mk. the singular set of  is a closed
set with at least codimension seven hausdor dimension.

this last statement follows from regularity theorems of geometric measure theory.

the fact that the singular set has large hausdor codimension allows us to use arguments

of section two. what one needs is to introduce in the computations in section 2 a cut o

function  which is zero on the singular set and one outside an -neighborhood of the set.
the contribution of  is 1
 . but the singular set has small measure and the integral of
||2 tends to zero when   0.

if the number of mj is greater than one, so that m1 is not homologous to zero, then
a minimum of l() exists in the homology class of m1 (as explained at the beginning of
this section) and lemma 4 gives a condition in which the minimum has a component that

does not intersect the boundary of . but the existence of such a component contradicts
theorem 2.1 if the ricci curvature of m is not less than n. so we conclude:
theorem 3.1 let m n+1 be a compact manifold with ricci curvature not less than n.
let m1 be one of the boundary components of m so that rm1  rm > 1
2 n(n + 1) along
m1. assume that

nvol[m \ bd(m2, . . . , mk)] > area(m1),

(3.22)

where d depends only on the upper bound of the sectional curvature of m and the lower

bound of the injectivity radius. [bd(m2, . . . , mk) is the neighborhood of radius d around
the components of m \ m1.] then m has only one boundary component.

the above inequality on the volume is true if the boundary components mi, i 
2, are far away from m1.
if m is obtained by cutting o the ends in a penrose
compactication, we can obey this inequality by moving the mi, i  2, close enough to
innity.

in the statement of theorem 3.1, the condition rm1  rm > 1

2 n(n + 1) ensures that

the mean curvature of the boundary is greater than n.

hence we have:

16

theorem 3.2. let m n+1 be a complete manifold without boundary with ricci curvature
not less than n and with a penrose compactication such that at least one component
of the conformal boundary of m n+1 has positive scalar curvature. then the conformal
boundary of m n+1 is connected. more generally, let m n+1 be any complete manifold with
curvature bounded from above and with ricci curvature not less than n. suppose m is
compact and rm  rm > 1
2 n(n + 1) along m . if the injectivity radius of m is bounded
from below by a positive constant, then m is compact, with connected boundary m .

proof. if m is not compact, we can exhaust m by subdomains whose boundary is m and
m2, . . . , mk. we can make (m \ bd(m2, . . . , mk)) to be arbitrarily large because m
is complete and noncompact and we can put an arbitrarily large number of balls bxi(r)
in m \ bd(m2, . . . , mk) as long as the subdomain is large. hence, we can obey the
inequality in lemma 4.
theorem 3.3 let m be as in theorem 3.2. then the natural map 1(m )  1(m ) is
surjective.
proof. otherwise a non-trivial element of 1(m )\1(m ) exists. we can form a cov-

ering manifold fm of m making use of this element. this fm would have disconnected

theorem 3.4 let m be as in theorem 3.2. then hn(m ; z) is zero.
proof. let 0 be a xed embedded cycle representing an element in hn(m ; z). then we
can study the functional l() among embedded hypersurfaces  homologous to 0. in
this case,   0 is the boundary of a domain with components counted with multiplicity
plus or minus one (according to the orientations). we can then apply stokess theorem on

components.

each subdomain to conclude that(cid:12)(cid:12)r (cid:12)(cid:12) is bounded by vol m andr0 ||. the rest of the

proof is the same as before.

we thank a. strominger for discussions. research of e.w. has been supported in

part by nsf grant phy-95-13835 and the caltech discovery fund. research of s.-t.

yau supported in part by nsf grant dms-9803347 and doe grant fg02-88er25065.

17

references

[1] r. penrose and w. rindler, spinors and spacetime, vol. 2, chapter 9 (cambridge

university press, cambridge, 1986).

[2] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field theories and super-

gravity, hep-th/9711200.

[3] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov, and a. m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from

non-critical string theory, hep-th/9802109.

[4] e. witten, anti de sitter space and holography, hep-th/9802150.
[5] j. maldacena, j. michelson, and a. strominger, anti de sitter fragmentation, jhep

9902:011,1999, hep-th/9804085.

[6] n. seiberg and e. witten, the d1/d5 system and singular cft, jhep

9904:017,1999, hep-th/9903224.

[7] s. coleman, why there is nothing rather than something: a theory of the

cosmological constant, nucl. phys. b310 (1988) 643.

[8] t. banks, prolegomena to a theory of bifurcating universes: a nonlocal solu-
tion to the cosmological constant problem, or little lambda goes back to the
future, nucl. phys. b309 (1988) 493.

[9] e. gonzalez, u. massari, and i. tamanimi, on the regularity of boundaries of sets
minimizing perimeter with a volume constraint, indiana u. math. j. 32 (1983)
25.

[10] m. gruter, boundary regularity for solutions of a partitioning problem, arch. rat.

mech. anal. 97 (1987) 261.

[11] l. simon, lectures on geometric measure theory, proc. center for math. anal.,

australian nat. univ. 3 (1983).

[12] p. sternberg and k. zumbrun, on the connectivity of boundaries of sets mini-
mizing perimeter subject to a volume constraint, comm. anal. geom. 7 (1999)
199.

18

