9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
8
1

 

 
 

1
v
5
4
1
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

ill-(th)-99-05
hep-th/9910145

quantization of superstrings in
ramond-ramond backgrounds

david berenstein

and

robert g. leigh

department of physics

university of illinois at urbana-champaign

urbana, il 61801

february 20, 2014

abstract

we present a perturbative study of ramond-ramond backgrounds
in the nsr formalism. we show how to perform -model compu-
tations and discuss in detail the structure of the brst charge and
picture changing operators. contact terms play a vital role in the
analysis. we also give evidence for a two loop non-renormalization
theorem for the background beta functions.

email:berenste@hepux0.hep.uiuc.edu
email:rgleigh@uiuc.edu

1

1 introduction

the quantization of superstrings in ramond-ramond (rr) backgrounds is
an important theoretical problem, as it has direct signicance to the large n
behaviour of strongly coupled gauge theories [1]. for a review see [2]. several
attacks at this problem have been made in the literature. the green-schwarz
formalism for the interesting case of ads5  s5 has been studied in the
classical theory by a number of authors,[3, 4] and aspects of the quantization
of this action as an expansion around at spacetime has been considered in
ref. [5]. light cone gauge has been considered further in ref. [6]. the rr
background with ads3  s3 geometry has been considered in ref. [7, 8] and
from a green-schwarz perspective in refs. [9, 10].

either way one looks at the quantization problem, there are technical
questions which need to be answered in order to have a string quantization.
in a green-schwarz formulation of the superstring, we only know how to
perform a quantization in the lightcone gauge. for a general background,
one can not expect to have a well-dened notion of lightcone. moreover, if
there is a choice of lightcone, it is not clear that in a curved background one
can decouple the lightcone degrees of freedom from the rest of the worldsheet
cft.

if one attempts to work in a covariant formulation of the superstring, one
must confront technical questions about the worldsheet cft. in particular
we are used to dealing with ns backgrounds, which respect worldsheet super-
symmetry. the brst structure and the picture changing operations follow
directly from worldsheet supersymmetry, so one can calculate the constraints
on physical states without diculty. as we discuss below, an rr background
breaks worldsheet supersymmetry. moreover, the usual picture-changing op-
erator is dened in terms of the worldsheet supersymmetry generator; in rr
backgrounds, one must nd an alternate way to remove the ambiguities of
picture. it is important to stress here that although we are used to thinking
of the superstring in at spacetime as a simple theory, it is not a free theory.
rather, it is usually described via a free eld realization; the price we pay for
that is the complications of screening and picture. it is then not surprising
that we must carefully consider the modications to these structures in rr
backgrounds.

it is the purpose of this paper to attack these problems and suggest an
answer as to how the brst structure and the picture changing operations
are modied by the rr background within conformal perturbation theory.

1

in an earlier paper,[11] we began a perturbative analysis of superstring
theory in ramond-ramond backgrounds using the familiar ramond-neveu-
schwarz (rns) formalism. we consider (type iib) string theory on an
arbitrary smooth target space with non-zero ramond-ramond eldstrength
background. for simplicity, we assume the dilaton is constant,1 and all other
moduli are set to zero. we also assume that the background is such that
the  expansion and the string loop expansion is well-behaved. the closed
string -model was derived explicitly through a process of summing over
open string worldsheets in a d-brane[12] background. the -model action is
deduced by requiring conformal invariance order by order in the expansion
in 1/r, the distance from the branes, an application of the fischler-susskind
mechanism.[13] this -model has the form

s = z d2zd2 g(x)dx dx +z d2z p1/2 p1/2h(x)e/2se /2 s (1)
in this expression, the elds  and  are those found in the bosonization of
the  superghost system of the at spacetime theory, and ,  are space-
time chiral spinor indices. further notational details may be found in the
appendix. the formal dimension zero operators p1/2 and p1/2 are thought
of as the (anti-)holomorphic square root of the picture-changing operator.
these remove the ambiguity of ghost-picture, so that to each order in per-
turbation theory the rr-background vertex does not aect the pictures of
external states. for the low order calculations presented in ref.
[11], the
lack of knowledge of the detailed form of p1/2 was not important, as for
any (non-zero) s-matrix element, these operators always appear in pairs. in
the present paper, we confront this issue more directly and discuss how to
consistently deal with these operators, order by order in perturbation theory.
an important aspect of these backgrounds is that the cft in no sense
splits holomorphically. aspects of this were pointed out in [11], such as
the realization of spacetime symmetry currents and their algebras. regard-
less, we will show in this paper that conformal invariance may be consistently
maintained, and a holomorphic stress tensor constructed order by order. fur-
thermore, the brst operator may be constructed; the resulting restrictions
on physical states are consistent with spacetime supersymmetry.

much of the discussions presented in this paper involve a careful analysis
of contact terms. indeed, the -model action should be supplemented with a

1the signicance of this statement in the context of the -model will be pointed out

later. the spacetime signicance is obvious.

2

consistent choice of contact terms in order to dene the theory. (in fact, as we
will discuss, the presentation of the nsns part of the action as an integral
over superspace corresponds to a choice of contact terms, valid at lowest
order.) the guiding principles for choosing contact terms will be worldsheet
conformal invariance and spacetime supersymmetry [14].

in the presence of the rr background, we expect operator mixing between
operators of ns and r type. thus it is a possibility that the brst charge
and picture-changing operator itself contains rr contributions. in the latter
case, such eects would seriously complicate the perturbative expansion.

one of the principal results of this paper is that the corrections to the
picture-changing operator are of a very simple form at low ordersit is simply
covariantized with respect to the background metric. in particular, there ap-
pears to be no rr contribution at tree level, and the ghost-picture structure
of this theory is then very much as it is in at spacetime. we will comment
more fully on this subject in later sections.

in general, because of the conformal invariance of the background, we
expect that there exists a nilpotent brst current which gets contributions
from both ns and r sectors. the results of this paper are consistent with
the assumption that only the ns part of jbrst contributes to p+1 at tree
level. in particular, the -dependence of qbrst is severely restricted.

jbrst = g(x)x  + ghosts + . . . = e gmatter + . . .

(2)

where the pure ghost pieces are independent of the background.

since the -model is interacting, all statements are perturbative in ; to
verify these equations we use an expansion around a well known background
(we choose at backgrounds for our example), which is devoid of the rr
eld strength and which satises the string equations of motion.

the paper is organized as follows.

in the next section, we discuss the
issue of (the absence of) worldsheet supersymmetry in rr backgrounds. in
section 3, we discuss the importance of contact terms in string perturbation
theory. in section 4, we present the details of one-loop -model computa-
tions. in section 5, we discuss the form of the brst charge. after a short
review of brst symmetry within the standard superstring, we show explic-
itly that the rr background does not modify the picture-changing operator
at tree level, thus validating the one-loop computations performed in section
4. we argue however that at one loop there are non-trivial contact terms
which imply that the brst charge is modied by the rr background. this

3

follows from the brst invariance of the background. we nd a description
in which the the brst charge and the stress tensor are modied holomorphi-
cally. using this description, we are able to show that the resulting brst
constraints on spacetime boson and fermion states are precisely equivalent to
the respective equations of motion. finally, in section 6, we consider briey
higher loops in -model perturbation theory. we give worldsheet evidence
that two and three loop contributions to the -functions vanish. this re-
sult is of course consistent with expectations from spacetime arguments. we
conclude the paper with additional comments.

2 worldsheet supersymmetry

in eq. (1), we have written the nsns term in terms of worldsheet super-
space for brevity. it is important to consider here the signicance, if any, of
worldsheet supersymmetry. to this end, recall the sum over spin structures
of the at spacetime superstring.

z

z = x

(3)

superconformal symmetry acts simply within each spin structure z, but not
of course in any sense on the whole. note that the superconformal transfor-
mations have branch cuts at the positions of rr insertions (equivalently, the
ope is non-local).

in summing over worldsheets in a d-brane background, we are eectively
summing over insertions of tadpoles produced by the d-brane. as is well-
known,[15] there are tadpoles for both nsns elds as well as rr elds.
thus summation over worldsheets exponentiates these elds into the -model
action (1). note however the eect of the sum over spin structuresbecause
of the insertions of arbitrary numbers of rr operators, it is no longer the
case that the partition function can (necessarily2) be represented in the form
(3). this fact is consistent with the absence of worldsheet supersymmetry in
the -model. the superconformal symmetry of the at spacetime -model
is broken to conformal symmetry by the rr background. there are several
puzzles associated with this fact that we would like to consider here. first,
the at spacetime theory has a superghost conformal eld theory, and one
may ask the signicance of this when worldsheet supersymmetry is broken.

2there may exist special cases where this indeed does occur.

4

in the present formulation, this ghost sector becomes irrevocably tied up with
the matter cft. a related issue is the appearance of picture. recall rst the
source of picture in the at spacetime theory. the  system is bosonized
in terms of elds , , , and the eld  has a zero mode on the sphere. one
must then include a factor of  in the string path integral; brst invariance
is guaranteed if the operator p+1 = {qbrst , } is independent of . we
will argue in what follows that these properties persist in ramond-ramond
backgrounds: although the detailed forms of qbrst and p+1 are modied,
there is still a  zero mode, and hence the picture structure is maintained.

3 contact terms

contact terms in string theory are required for various reasons. as green
and seiberg [14] pointed out, contact terms arise in the ope of vertex op-
erators. contact terms are required in order to cancel contributions to s-
matrix elements due to unphysical states, and therefore they serve to ensure
the analyticity of the s-matrix and worldsheet supersymmetry.
in some
other cases contact terms are required to preserve spacetime supersymmetry.
alternatively,[16] contact terms may be thought of in terms of our inability
to enforce the superconformal gauge globally when operators collide.

contact terms also arise [17] when one studies the moduli space of a
family of conformal eld theories. in this case they represent the connection
coecients of the metric in moduli space. as the connection depends on a
choice of coordinates, contact terms are not uniquely determined at a given
point in moduli space.

regardless, it is clear that to properly dene the theory, we have to give,
in addition to the eld content and -model action, a prescription for con-
tact terms. in the backgrounds considered in this paper, this is non-trivial,
since worldsheet supersymmetry is not present in the sense discussed above.
instead, the appropriate prescription is to enforce spacetime symmetries.

as an example, let us consider deforming a string theory compactied

on a torus by the (1, 1) operator ijr d2z x i x j, which corresponds to a

graviton at zero momentum. the propagator x i(z)x j(0)  ij ln |z  z|2
implies that there results a quadratic divergence proportional to ijij(2)(0).
this may be cancelled by extending the vertex operator to an integrated

5

supereld

v = ijz d2z(cid:16)x i x j + i j + i j + f if j(cid:17) .

(4)

the additional terms are contact terms and they vanish on-shell, f i = 0 =
i. however, in a given correlation function, they potentially contribute
when the insertion collides with other operators. it is at these points thet
one cannot use the equations of motion, and the terms which are zero on-shell
produce a contact term contribution to amplitudes.

for general deformations i(x) produced by (1, 1) operators on the world-

sheet we expect the following structure for the ope

i(x, z)j(x, z) =

1

k k(x, z)

|z  z|2 oij

ij(x)
|z  z|4 +
|z  z|2 (2)(z  z) + cij(2)(z  z)
+(2)(z  z) ij
k k(x, z) + higher order

bij

+

(5)

(6)

(7)

the higher order terms correspond to  corrections to the ope. the power
singularities will contribute a quadratic divergence on the worldsheet (pro-
portional to ij) and a one loop -function of k, whereas the -function
contact terms serve to cancel the quadratic divergences by making them into
total worldsheet derivatives.
if one keeps the calculation to one loop or-
der the contact terms also serve to modify propagators to give the correct
background eld renormalization. the contact term ope corresponds to

bij

i(x, z)j(x, z)|ct =

|z  z|2 (z  z) + cij2(z  z) + (2)(z  z) ij

k k(x, z)
(8)
and bij, cij are related to ij, so that when they are combined they form a
total derivative on the worldsheet. this is how the tachyon decouples from
the cft.

one has to keep in mind that the coecient ij

k depends on the back-
ground, and gets corrected order by order; so when one does a set of calcu-
lations to a given order, one has to give a prescription for these corrections.
this is the coecient which is interpreted as the connection on the moduli
space of cft [17].

6

in the superspace formulation, cancellation of quadratic divergences is
automatic, and thus it is easier to enforce conformal invariance on the world-
sheet.
indeed, these are the contact terms which are required to cancel
contributions to the s-matrix elements by unphysical particles, and they al-
ways show up as total derivatives on the worldsheet. one can, on the other
hand, integrate out the auxiliary elds, and one gets explicit contact terms
in the lagrangian. in the non-linear -model, these contact terms serve to
cancel the quadratic divergences on the worldsheet, and they also serve to
restore the worldsheet supersymmetry, which is non-linearly realized. in the
absence of worldsheet supersymmetry, this is the only way to proceed, so at
each order in the perturbation one has to calculate the appropriate contact
terms.

in this paper we wish to understand rr backgrounds, so one has two
types of problems to address. first, one still needs contact terms to cancel
the divergences on the worldsheet eld theory, but these are more complicated
due to the fact that the rr backgrounds break worldsheet supersymmetry,
and thus the superspace formulation is ill-dened. one could hope that the
contact terms introduced by the rr background are all zero, and that one
could use the superspace formulation for the ns operators and thus obtain a
result which is free of quadratic divergences. indeed, as we will see later, this
is precisely what happens in the  expansion, but only to one loop order.

secondly, contact terms for theories with rr backgrounds are subtle
because of picture. given a prescription for contact terms in a xed picture,
there could arise additional contact terms from picture-changing operators.
this would imply then that contact terms are picture dependent. fixing the
rr operators to be in picture zero (by introducing the square root of the
picture-changing operator) should remove this ambiguity

4 one-loop -model calculations

let us now demonstrate some features of -model perturbation theory. we do
this for several reasons, mainly to demonstrate that the technique is straight-
forward and systematic. we begin with one-loop computations, and comment
on higher order calculations later in the paper. as mentioned previously, we
assume for simplicity throughout that the dilaton is constant, and the ns

7

b eld is unexcited. the nsns part of the action is

in sn s =

1

2 z d2x (cid:26)gij()x ix j + igij() i(d/)j +

1
6

rijk( ik)( j)(cid:27)

(9)
a choice of contact terms must be made at lowest order. as we have dis-
cussed, it is consistent (at least at leading orders) to dene these as if the
nsns part of the theory possessed (o-shell) worldsheet supersymmetry.

in sn s =

1

4i z d2x d2 gij(x) dxidxj

(10)

as is well-known, this choice cancels all quadratic divergences at one loop.
alternate (on-shell) contact term prescriptions also exist, but we nd the
present formulation most convenient computationally.

the rr part of the -model is written

where s are spin elds

irr = z d2z s sh(x)

s = p1/2se/2

(11)

(12)

to dene s, we introduce an auxiliary orthonormal frame e
a, such that
aa. the a fermions are conventionally normalized and may be
 = e
bosonized in the standard fashion. the spin elds s are then dened in the
usual way, mutual locality restricting them to one chirality. these are spinors
of the spacetime manifold, and the monodromies introduced by s on the
worldsheet fermions are also carried by the superghost system. p1/2 and its
right moving counterpart will be dened implicitly by their square, which is
also formally p+1 = {qbrst , }. the ghost system is the standard one,[18]
with  = e,  = e, where ,  are fermions of conformal dimensions
one and zero respectively. the point here is simply that in the local frame,
the ghost and picture-changing structure is identical to the at spacetime
quantities. we will argue that in fact the picture -changing operator receives
no further corrections in -model perturbation theory, at least to low orders.

relevant opes may be written

s(z) s(0) 

(c 1  x)

z

(as)

(z  z)1/2

a(z) s(z) 

8

(13)

(14)

: ab : (z) s(z) 

([b, a]s)

z  z

(15)

for the calculations which follow, we will employ a normal coordinate ex-
pansion (see ref. [22] for details).

let us consider the graviton -function. at one loop, there are two con-

tributions linear in curvature.3

figure 1: the one-loop graph from the ns-ns sector and the rr sector,
respectively. wavy lines denote s propagators.

from the nsns graph, we obtain

1

2 z d2z

2i

rik1k2jx i x jek1
a (x)ek2
b (x)ha(z)b(z)i
1
()z d2z rijx i x j
4

=

(16)

(17)

where a are canonically normalized bosonic uctuations, with ha(z)b(z)i =
ab(z  z).

from the rr graph we nd

d2z
|z  z|2 x i x jea

1

2! z d2zd2z s sh(z)  s sh(z)
j(x)tr(cid:16)hac 1(bc 1h)t(cid:17)

i (x)eb

(18)

(19)

=

1

2! z d2zz

to evaluate this further, let us specialize to the case of a single p-form eld
strength

h =

h1...p (c1...p)

(20)

1
p!

3two powers of the eld strength h count consistently as a single power of curvature.

9

we need then evaluate

tr (1...pap...1b) h1...ph1...p

= 32 p! h 2

ab 

1
2p

abh 2!

thus, we may write the -function at this order as

ij = rij 

1

2(p  1)!  h 2

ij 

1
2p

gijh 2!

(21)

(22)

(23)

note that this is the correct equation of motion for constant dilaton (for
which r = 0; in the case of adsp  sp, this is achieved by cancellation
between the two factors.)

we have computed the -function to the operator of order 2; there are of
course also -functions for terms of higher order. these however may be in-
terpreted geometrically as the normal coordinate expansion of the curvature
tensors appearing in the above -function. there are tree-level corrections
to the picture-changing operator itself, which come only from the nsns
background (we discuss this fact more fully later in the paper). the modi-
cation simply involves a covariantization x   g(x)x . this
is simply related to the normalization of the eld propagators; the spin eld
itself however is given directly in an orthonormal frame (see appendix), and
so does not undergo such renormalizations in the nsns background.

let us make a few comments concerning the contraction of the two rr
operators. at lowest order, there are no contact terms, and the divergence is
as given. in particular, the operators p1/2 and p1/2 are harmless; there are
two of each, and at this order, they simply combine to p+1 p+1. at higher
orders, there is a possible contact term between p1/2 and p1/2 (as there
would be between p+1 and p+1), and this needs to be taken into account
consistently. we will return to this discussion in the next section.

5 brst

let us turn our attention now to the structure of brst in theories with rr
backgrounds. in order to emphasize the various features, we begin with a
short review of standard material for the ordinary superstring. this discus-
sion will also serve to set notation. for a more complete discussion we refer
the reader to [19, 20].

10

traditional string compactications are described in terms of a world-
sheet supersymmetric -model coupled to worldsheet supergravity. the full
theory is superconformally invariant. for simplicity of the discussion we will
assume that the dilaton is constant (in this case the theory is also classically
superconformally invariant).

locally on the worldsheet one can choose the superconformal gauge and
in this gauge one has eliminated the local worldsheet gravity degrees of free-
dom. the supergravity ghost system in this gauge is conformally invariant,
and is described by a free eld theory which is decoupled from the matter
superconformal eld theory.

the metric and gravitino enter in the action as lagrange multipliers, and
their equations of motion imply that the (super) stress tensor of the system
vanishes. classically one has tz z = 0 (because the theory is conformally
invariant). the holomorphic and anti-holomorphic pieces of the matter stress
tensor do not vanish as operators, and they can only be made to vanish on
states. because there is a conformal anomaly for the matter system, the
stress tensor can not be made to vanish identically, independent of the ghost
system. solving the constraints is done via the brst quantization of the
string theory.

the string theory is well posed (the target space -model is a solution
of string theory) if the total central charge of the conformal eld theory of
the combined matter and superghost system vanishes. the ghost system
is described by two conjugate superelds b =  + b and c = c + , of
dimensions 3/2 and 1. in this case, one has an (anti)holomorphic brst
operator q which squares to zero, and is described by the supereld

q = i dzd(ctgm +

1
2

ctgg)

(24)

where tgm = gm + tm is the super-stress tensor of the matter system and
tg = gg + tg is the stress tensor of the decoupled ghost system 4.

because the ghost system is free, one has two separately conserved ghost
numbers (one for the b, c system, and another for the ,  system), and the
brst operator splits into pieces of dierent fermionic ghost charge, namely

q = q0 + q1 + q2

(25)

4notice that for conformal eld theories with more than one worldsheet supersymmetry
we actually have a choice as to which supersymmetry we use to dene gm. all of these
choices should be unitarily equivalent.

11

where

q0 = i c(tm + t +
q1 = i (gm)
q2 = i 1

b2

2

1
2

tbc)

(26)

(27)

(28)

1 = {q0, q2} and q2

q2 = 0 gives independent equations for each ghost number, so we get q2
0 = 0,
q2
2 = 0. the rst of these equations is the nilpotency
of the standard conformal brst charge, which says that the superconformal
eld theory is conformally invariant.

physical states are associated with the cohomology of q. to each state
one associates a vertex operator oi which is superconformally invariant,
qoi = 0. this solves the constraints produced by the equations of mo-
tion of the worldsheet supergraviton. the constraints put the physical state
on-shell in the spacetime theory.

the operators are given with xed ghost charges. for the b, c system,
unintegrated vertex operators are built as oi = ccv1,1, where the v (i)
1,1 is
a vertex operator of conformal dimension (1, 1) that is independent of b, c
(but which might depend on , ). the integrated operators are obtained

by removing the cc and replacing it by r d2z. qoi = 0 implies that q0oi =

0, so the operator is also conformally invariant. correlation functions are
constructed by integrating the vertex operators oi over a riemann surface
with xed complex structure; and then integrating over the moduli space
of complex structures (these are the non-local degrees of freedom that the
superconformal gauge does not remove globally). because of the worldsheet
fermions one also needs to pick a spin structure on the riemann surface.

the dierent parts of the brst charge play dierent roles. indeed, ver-
tex operators are conformally invariant if q0v = 0. the extra pieces of the
brst operator give additional constraints on the system. it is particularly
important to notice that q0 acts as a second order dierential operator in
spacetime, so it is an appropriate tool to give equations of motion to space-
time bosons.

for spacetime fermions, q0 gives a laplace equation, with double the
appropriate number of degrees of freedom. the extra pieces of the brst
operator give an additional constraint, namely the dirac equation.

notice that one can interpret this fact in a slightly dierent way. first,

12

ignoring the superconformal invariance, one could just have required con-
formal invariance and say that supersymmetry was accidental. this is how
one builds the bosonic string in the absence of supersymmetry after all.
in the special case where the theory is supersymmetric, there is an extra
operator q1 which squares to zero in the q0 brst cohomology classes,
(q1)2 = q0q2 = 0. thus, in the cohomology of the q0 brst operator,
q1 acts as the d operator of an exact sequence (graded by the ghost charge),
so one can use it to give further restrictions on cohomology (the idea behind
spectral sequences). from a spacetime point of view, we are getting a rst
order dierential operator acting on states.

5.1 brst for rr backgrounds

in the calculations presented so far, the picture-changing operator for rr
backgrounds was dened without any reference to a brst structure on the
worldsheet, indeed we used the standard picture-changing operator. the
purpose of this section is to give a (somewhat heuristic) description of brst
that justies our comments; this should serve as a basis for a full formal
perturbation expansion to all orders.

it is instructive to analyze how the brst charge gets modied as we
change the background in which the string propagates. we have a family of
conformal eld theories (parametrized by the perturbation parameters), and
the brst operator is a section of an operator bundle over the moduli space
of conformal eld theories.

let us begin with a supersymmetric -model parametrized by a metric

on target space g()

 (x); the stress tensor is given by

t =

1
2

 (x)x x  + fermions
g()

(29)

with a similar expression for the supersymmetry generator. as we change g,
the stress tensor changes appropriately, at tree level.

as the brst charge is intimately tied to the stress tensor, we expect

that it is modied just as the stress tensor is. indeed

qbrst =  ctgm

(30)

we want to justify this answer directly from the perturbative approach to
the family of conformal eld theories. indeed, the tangent space in the moduli

13

space is generated locally by the massless (1, 1) vertex operators, which are
brst invariant, so it does not seem necessary to modify the brst operator
locally on the moduli space.

however, there is a caveat in the argument, which stems from the fact
that the perturbations are done by integrated vertex operators. when one
is checking the invariance of the background one needs to make sure to take
into account the contact terms between the integrated vertex operator and
the brst contour. these contact terms need to be cancelled, as they would
spoil the brst invariance of the background, and they provide the necessary
corrections to the brst charge.

the fact that to rst order one can ignore contact terms is justied by
how one parametrizes moduli space. indeed, the contact terms act as the
connection on the operator bundle on the moduli space of conformal eld
theories [17]. one can choose a local parameterization of the moduli space
in which the connection vanishes, which is also the reason why contact terms
are not fully determined when one considers string amplitudes. in spacetime
this choice is characterized by the dierent gauge choices in the supergravity
low energy eective eld theory.

the brst operator, being essential to the quantization of the string,
should be a canonical object in this moduli space of backgrounds. one can
construct the brst operator by following a path from our starting point
(at space in our case) to another scft in the same moduli space. the
brst operator of the perturbed theory is constructed by parallel transport
along the path. as there might be monodromies in the bundle over moduli
space, the best one can hope for is that given two dierent paths between the
same points in moduli space, the two brst operators give string theories
which are unitarily equivalent. it is in this sense that the brst operator
associated to a point in moduli space is canonical.

for rr backgrounds, we will take the approach that the brst operator
is dened by parallel transport of the brst operator in the ns conformal
eld theories on the path that connects it to the point we are studying.

from this construction, and the fact that the physical states can always
be taken to be independent of the  zero modes coming from the  ghost
system, we learn that these zero modes survive even in the presence of the
rr perturbation of the cft. the brst operator thus obtained will give us
a picture-changing operator p+1 = {qbrst , }.

now, we will argue that there is no contact term that makes the picture-
changing operator depend on the rr eld strength at tree level on the world-

14

sheet, as we have assumed in section 4. to analyze this question we will
concentrate on the -dependent part of the brst operator, q1. since we
are considering a perturbation expansion, we indicate the expansion order in
the brst current by an upper index; the lower index continues to refer to
the ghost charge. thus, if we write the background vertex corresponding to
the full deformation as



vb =

iv(i)

xi=1

(31)

where  is the formal perturbation expansion parameter (in normal coordi-
nates the expansion parameter is the coordinate itself), we also write

iq(i)
j

qj = xi

(32)

i

for the brst charge. q(0)
are the pieces of the unperturbed brst charge.
for our purposes, we will only analyze the rst order corrections to q, namely
q(1)
1 which are the corrections coming from the rr vertex operator.
q(2)
is determined by the contact term between a ns operator and the q0
0
brst current (a standard computation).

0 and q(1)

contact terms usually arise because a left moving eld and a right moving

eld are located at the same point, e.g.

x (z) x (z)  (2)(z  z)

(33)

in a free eld theory. it is easy to see that these type of terms are precisely the
ones that make modications to the brst operator in the ns backgrounds.
so let us consider the left moving brst operator (just the piece with ghost
charge 1), and the insertion of a rr background vertex. we want to analyze
a possible contact term between q(0)

1  gm and the vertex.

now, we would like to be able to directly calculate this eect with vrr in
the (0, 0)-picture (i.e., with the factors of p1/2 present). however, one must
be careful, because there could be contact terms with the p1/2s. indeed, we
would like to motivate that there is denitely such a contact term present.
to do so, we will consider the rr background insertion in various pictures,
and show that the resulting contact terms are picture-dependent.5 this
ambiguity is removed if we agree to take the background insertions always in

5here we specically mean that results are dierent if we move picture-changing oper-

ators to be coincident with the background insertion.

15

picture (0, 0). in a later section, we will work out the contact terms in that
picture, using as a guiding principle, worldsheet conformal invariance.

as a rst step, which justies the treatment at one-loop that we gave in
section 4, we argue that this ambiguity is not present at tree-level  it is a
one-loop eect.

if one uses a (1/2, 1/2)-picture operator, there seems to be no apparent
contact term, because the left and right moving fermion eld theories are
decoupled. on the other hand, suppose we consider a picture (1/2, 1/2)
vertex operator, h()


i  x  se/2. here, we have dened

i   s e+/2,

i   s e+ /2

(34)

there is a contact term coming from the x  in gm and the x  in the
vertex. also, the  of q(0)
1 has an ope with the spin elds. the resulting
contact term counts as a 1-loop eect, so we learn that the tree level cor-
rection to the picture-changing operator vanishes. thus, we have justied
our claims regarding the eects of picture-changing in the one-loop computa-
tions of section 4. in particular, since the rr correction to picture changing
vanishes at tree level, the picture-changing operator acts, in one-loop com-
putations, as if there were a supersymmetric -model. indeed, the one loop
result is globally well-dened.

if one works out the details in picture (1/2, 1/2), one nds that the the
contact term is equivalent to a one-loop correction to the brst operator
takes the form6

q(1)

1   i  i h  

(35)

which is seen to have ghost charge (1/2, 1/2). the fact that the contact terms
are picture dependent, shows that there are ambiguities in the denition of
the contact terms. note that the operator i   s e+/2 is of conformal
dimension (0, 0). however, since the cft is not unitary, it is not the case
that i  is trivial.
indeed it has non-trivial opes with itself and other
operators.

note that q(1)

1   h  i  i  is not holomorphic. this is certainly a
problematic feature. however, we remind the reader that this explicit form
was derived starting with a picture (1/2, 1/2) background insertion. its
presence is meant to merely indicate the necessity of having a contact term.
the fact that it is non-holomorphic, we believe, may be traced to the fact

6here, h

   h()

()


.

16

that the superstring is not really a free eld theory (rather, it only appears
so if one ignores picture). in the next section, we will give a holomorphic
prescription for the contact term (for picture (0, 0) backgrounds) which has
the right structure.

that this switch to a holomorphic form is necessary is clearly indicated
by looking at the contact term related to q(1)
0 , i.e., the term proportional
to c. again, it is picture-dependent and if we choose the rr background in
(1/2, 1/2) picture, we nd

 i dz c h()

 sx  i



(36)

this correction may be interpreted as a correction to tzz, and so must be
holomorphic by conformal invariance. again, we will nd the proper resolu-
tion in the next section.

5.2 background brst invariance

when the background is taken in (0, 0) picture, the correction to the brst
operator may be determined unambiguously. we can determine this by re-
quiring that the one-loop -functions are recovered explicitly through brst
invariance of the background.
in particular, a tree-level correction to the
brst operator, proportional to the rr eldstrength, is required.

as a warmup, let us recall how this works in a purely gravitational nsns
background. the bosonic term in the -model is at second order proportional
to

rx x x  x 

(37)

and the correction to the worldsheet stress tensor results from exchanging
x   x . note that the resulting operator is holomorphic on-shell at
this order in r.

the brst current applied to the correction to the background gives

q(0) z d2z v(1)  z d2z c  rx  x  + total derivative

(38)

requiring that this vanishes is completely equivalent to the vanishing of the
graviton -function.

now, we would like to analyze this with the rr background. in order to
see an eect, we need to expand to second order in the background. to this

17

order then, we want to test

q(0)
0

(cid:18)z d2z v(2) +

1
2

(z d2z v(1))2(cid:19)  q(1)

0

 v(1) = 0

(39)

each vertex is meant to be inside the contour of q. the factors of v(1) are
rr background insertions, while v(2) is the nsns quantity given in (37).
q(1)
0 v(1)|c.t is the contact term between the original brst operator
and the rr background.

0 = q(0)
we work to one-loop. the term involving (r v(1))2 may be dropped be-

cause its contribution either vanishes on-shell (from q(0)
 v(1) = 0) or is
0
of higher loop order (a contact contribution from v(1)v(1)   is already of
one-loop order).

the result of q(0)
0

 v(2) is as calculated above for the nsns background,

and results in a contribution to the graviton -function  rx  x .

next, we need to calculate q(1)
0

 v(1). previously, we considered v(1) in

picture (1/2, 1/2) and found the result

 e/2sx  i



(40)

0  i dz c h()
q(1)
we would now like to nd a suitable q(1)
that eq. (39) is satised. this will uniquely x q(1)

0 when v(1) is in picture (0, 0), such
0 , including its coecient.
(40) is problematic if we use it literally,
including appropriately chosen picture-changing operators to bring the full
result to (0, 0) picture. indeed there is a non-holomorphic singularity present

let us demonstrate that eq.

i dz

1

|z  z|2 c hhx x ()()

to avoid this, we choose a contact term, i.e., a new version of q(1)
0

0  i dz c hs
q(1)

if we require the ope

then we obtain

(z) s(z) 

1

z  z

x ()

q(1)
0

 v(1)  (hh)x  x 

18

(41)

(42)

(43)

(44)

the tensor form is precisely right such that eq.
graviton -function, (23).

(38) reduces to the full

next, note that the above form for q(1)
0

could be deduced via a contact

term calculation if we have also have

t (z)  s(z)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)c.t.
t (z)  s(z)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)c.t.

 (2)(z  z)(z)

 0

(45)

(46)

furthermore, note that we may equivalently write a correction to the stress
tensor from the rr background of the form

t (1)  hs

(47)

the stress tensor is thus properly holomorphic, and has holomorphic opes
with other operators.

5.3 brst and physical states

in our previous paper, we demonstrated mixing between ns and r operators
in the presence of rr backgrounds. we can no show, with our prescription
for q(1)
0 , that those results can be consistently reproduced via brst methods.
indeed, this is an important check of our methods.

as an example, consider the massless case. physical vertex operators in

unintegrated form are

on s = p+1 p+1cc feikx e e 

and

orr = p1/2 p1/2cc geikx e/2s e /2 s

(48)

(49)

consider a state which, at zeroth order, is a rr state. we know that this
mixes with an nsns state, and so the condition, at rst order, for the full
state orr + on sn s to be physical is

q(0)

0 on sn s + q(1)

0 orr = 0

(50)

to check this, we need only q(1)
opes, we nd

0 , which we have given above. performing the

ccce e (cid:16)k2f + hg()()(cid:17)

(51)

19

this is precisely of the correct form; its vanishing determines the appropriate
mixing (see ref. [11] or [21]).

next, if we want to demonstrate the mixing for a physical state of the

form on sn s + orr, we need a prescription for q(1)
1 :

q(1)

1 on sn s + q(0)

1 orr = 0

(52)

recall that previously we had q(1)
a holomorphic expression. to do so, introduce a new eld   with ope

1  h  i  i . we wish to replace this by

  x  

then, the choice

1

z  z () 



s

q(1)

1  ap1/2e3/2sx () 

 h   

(53)

(54)

is holomorphic and of the appropriate dimension and picture. a is a normal-
ization constant. eq. (52) gives

p1/2 p1/2cci (cid:16)k/g + ak/hf(cid:17) 

e /2 seikx

(55)

one can think of the extra term as arising from the variation of the covariant
derivative of the background; there is a choice of the normalization constant
a which makes this consistent with spacetime supergravity. this equation
can be solved to nd the required mixing for the physical state.

5.4 comments

in the previous sections on brst, we have noted that in order to obtain
consistent results, we must modify the brst charge. in order for this to
retain a holomorphic structure, we are forced to introduce new elds, with
somewhat exotic opes. let us review the structure of these elds. we
have elds  and   of dimension (1, 0). (fields of dimension (0, 1) would
also be required for the antiholomorphic part of the brst charge.) these
elds intertwine the matter cfts via

(z) s(z) 

 (z) x (z) 

x (z)()

s(z)() 


1

z  z

1

z  z

20

(56)

(57)

note that such a structure, mixing holomorphic and anti-holomorphic quan-
tities, is allowed here because the cft is not unitary. the alternative would
be to discard brst entirely. although this system has a simple structure,
we caution that it is by no means clear that it is complete. we have not for
example checked that the operator algebra closes.

let us also comment further on the structure of the ghost cfts. since
we have enforced conformal invariance (tz z = 0), a conformal gauge choice
is possible, at least locally. thus the conformal ghost cft is unmodied.
the superconformal ghosts are another matter. we have seen that although
some of the structure, such as picture, is retained in the full theory, although
the ghost and matter cfts are mixed. since worldsheet supersymmetry
is lost in the rr background, one should simply think of the presence of
, ,  as a parameterization of the cft which is convenient close to a trivial
background.

perhaps one puzzling aspect of the brst analysis is the lack of world-
sheet supersymmetry. when supersymmetry is present, it provides a canon-
ical square root for the spacetime laplacian, related to q1, which squares
to zero in q0 cohomology. the existence of such an operator allows for the
appropriate constraints on spacetime elds. worldsheet supersymmetry is
not a necessary condition however, and it is possible to nd an appropriate
nilpotent operator which leads to constraints consistent with spacetime su-
persymmetry. note that we have a theory with constraints, which are not
derived from any apparent gauge principle. it is possible of course that such
a gauge principle exists.

6 two loops and higher order

in section 4, we have obtained one-loop -functions in a normal coordinate
expansion. in the last section, we have seen that the picture-changing oper-
ator receives corrections from the nsns background only at tree level it
is covariantized with respect to the full background metric. this means that
there are no subtleties for one-loop -functions, and they are dened globally
as a power series in the normal coordinate expansion. the inclusion of the
rr background led to no quadratic divergences, and there appeared to be
no need for contact terms of the rr insertions. the brst analysis however
led to the conclusion that contact terms may appear at higher orders, and
we were able to accommodate such terms eectively.

21

in fact, contact terms for rr insertions are required by spacetime super-
symmetry at higher loop order. if there were no such contact terms, then
each pair of rr insertions corresponds to an extra loop in the  expansion,
and one obtains a logarithmic divergent factor for each pairas a result they
do not contribute to the graviton -function. thus, in the absence of rr
contact terms, the only contribution to the graviton -function would be of
order h2. on the other hand, it is expected that at four loops in the  expan-
sion, the graviton -function receives a correction of order r4. a spacetime
supersymmetric completion would include terms with at least four factors of
the rr eldstrength h.

contact terms for the rr insertions can reduce the divergence of terms
of higher order in h to a single logarithm, thus giving a contribution to the
-function. thus, such contact terms are required by spacetime supersym-
metry.

however, we do need to show that at low loop orders, there are never-
theless no contributions to the -functions, which is a generalization of the
results of [22]. let us now discuss the case of two loops. consider the presence
of three rr background insertionsthis would potentially give a contribution
to the rr -function. if we bring two of the insertions together, we obtain
a logarithmic divergence proportional to rx  x  (here we have, con-
sistently, used the one-loop equations of motion). to this, we should add
r(  +  ) the resulting operator could have a contact term with
the third rr insertion. a short calculation reveals that this is proportional
to

(2)(z  z)rh()

 s s

(58)

since r is symmetric, this expression simplies, and the -function is pro-
portional to rh. however, since we have restricted the backgrounds to
constant dilaton, r = 0. thus, there is no two-loop contribution to the rr
-function from three rr insertions. one should also take into account a
possible contribution from loop corrections to the picture-changing operator.
however, one can again argue that this is proportional to r and thus vanishes
for this special class of backgrounds,

another possible source for the rr -function would be a single rr
insertion plus terms of up to order x 4 in nsns elds. however, again we
nd that all such contributions are proportional to the ricci scalar, and so
vanish.

we can also discuss the two-loop graviton -function. from our previous

22

discussion, we know that the contribution of four rr insertions would lead
to a (log )2 singularity in the absence of rr contact terms. however, such
contact terms are of one-loop origin; a pair of such contact terms then counts
as two-loops, and there is no room left, at two loop order, for a further
logarithmic divergence. we conclude that a two-loop contribution of order
h4 to the graviton -function vanishes.

thus, all two-loop contributions to the -functions vanish. these re-
sults imply that there is a choice of contact terms which is compatible with
spacetime supersymmetry to this order.
indeed for products of homoge-
neous spaces (like ads5  s5) it is easy to see that the possible contact terms
between the ns and rr eld vanish at one loop, again because they are
proportional to rg, and therefore there is no -function to two loops at
all for the rr elds.

notice that in principle one can set the contact terms to zero up to two
loops for the rr elds, and then there is no contribution from the rr eld
to the three loop  function, which is then consistent with supergravity. if
one introduces contact terms at three loops, they would contribute to a four
loop  function for the graviton and the rr elds. in spacetimes where one
is supposed to have spacetime supersymmetry, we have to worry that we can
dene the spacetime supersymmetry current on the worldsheet consistently
order by order in the perturbation expansion. indeed, contact terms should
contribute to show that the worldsheet symmetry current associated to su-
persymmetry is conserved. this makes it hard to believe that the procedure
of setting all these contact terms to zero will work up to that high an order.
we do not wish however, to explicitly carry out the four loop computations.

7 conclusions and comments

in this paper we have further explored -model perturbation theory includ-
ing ramond-ramond backgrounds. the expansion appears to be consistent
to all orders in , with contact terms being determined by spacetime su-
persymmetry. worldsheet supersymmetry is broken by these backgrounds;
however, at least at low orders in perturbation theory, it is possible to mimic
the appropriate contact terms by taking the nsns part of the -model o-
shell in a supersymmetric form. this stems from the fact that the contact
terms between the rr operators dont contribute at lowest orders for the
special class of backgrounds where the dilaton is constant.

23

certain aspects of the theory remain quite simple. one has a notion of

brst symmetry and the brst current is of the form

jbrst = jconf + j1 + j2

(59)

where jconf is the contribution from the conformal eld theory stress tensor,
and it annihilates physical states. the stress tensor includes contributions
from the rr background. the remaining piece, j1, as usual, implements
the dirac equation on physical fermionic states, and it is also conformally
invariant. we have constructed the leading corrections to j and j1 coming
from the rr background. in principle one should expect corrections to all
orders in the  expansion to each of these quantities. as well, since there
is no symmetry restricting the form of q, there may be additional terms of
other ghost charges present. we suspect that q in fact does truncate, as
given, although we have not identied the mechanism.

we have not checked that (q1)2 = 0 in the brst cohomology of q0,
which would make the set of constraints consistent. we have found that the
conditions on massless vertex operators seem to be compatible with super-
gravity results. this is an explicit check on the consistency of the perturba-
tion expansion.

calculations become complicated at higher orders because we dont have
worldsheet supersymmetry as a guiding principle. contact terms must be
introduced order by order in the perturbation expansion, and one would like
a systematic approach in which to do calculations, that is a prescription for
the contact terms to all orders. the guiding principle we have available is
compatibility of the  expansion with spacetime supersymmetry; however,
spacetime supersymmetry is corrected to all orders in  as well, so in prac-
tice it may be dicult to implement. our -model approach has given us
plausibility arguments that there are no two loop corrections to the  func-
tion of the background in the  expansion. given such a prescription, if one
shows that one has compatibility with spacetime supersymmetry, one should
be able to give a worldsheet proof of the non-renormalization theorems which
have heretofore been based on spacetime supersymmetry arguments[23, 24].
the techniques in this paper if developed further should make it possible
to understand the spectrum of massive string states in rr backgrounds.
particularly, one should be able to compute the perturbative spectrum of
the string in the ads5  s5 geometry in the innite n limit, as an expansion
in the inverse of the thooft coupling, and it should depend only on dening
the full ope of the elds appearing in the brst current.

24

one should also be able to include the dilaton and the ns b-eld for the
most general supergravity background. the results should also generalize
without diculty to any situation where we might have a good knowledge of
the cft, as in the case of orbifolds.

going to nite n is more dicult, as it involves calculating the one loop
partition function of the string in these backgrounds. perturbation theory
in  is probably not sucient for this calculation, as one may need to go
to all orders to understand issues such as modular invariance, or a stringy
exclusion principle[25].

acknowledgments: we would like to thank the aspen center for physics
and the institute for theoretical physics at ucsb, where some of this work
was performed. we are indebted to robert dijkgraaf, jacques distler, david
kutasov, finn larsen and joe polchinski for discussions of our results. rgl
is supported by an outstanding junior investigator award of the united
states department of energy, grant de-fg02-91er40677. further partial
support was provided by nsf grant # phy94-07194.

a appendix: conventions

the elds in the superstring are described by the spacetime coordinates
x , their superpartners , the bosonic ghosts b, c and the fermionic ghosts
, . one has , b, c, ,  for the antiholomorphic elds. one also includes
the auxiliary eld f  to close supersymmetry o shell. the  system is
bosonized by  = e,  = e with ,  fermions of conformal dimension
1 and 0 respectively.

the opes of these elds that are used in calculations around at space

are given as follows

x (z)x (z) =  log |z  z|2

(z)(z) = 

1

z  z

f (z)f (z) =   log |z  z|2

se/2(z)se/2(z) 

(z)s(z) 

25

1

 e

z  z 
(z  z)1/2 

1

s 



(a.1)

(a.2)

(a.3)

(a.4)

(a.5)

(z)s (z) 

1

(z  z)1/2  

 s

with similar opes for the right moving elds.

divergent quantities are dened through

hx(z)x(z)i = log  = z

d2p

(2)2|p|2

it is easy to show also that

d2z

|z  z|2 = log 

z

(a.6)

(a.7)

(a.8)

for curved spaces, fermions are bosonized by pairing in an orthonormal

frame

(a.9)
and it is a that is bosonized in a standard fashion. with this bosonization
it is possible to dene spin elds in the curved manifold (with respect to the
given orthonormal frame). the ope of these spin elds is

 = e

aa

se/2(z)se/2(z) 


a
z  z ae

the picture changing operator is dened by

p+1 = qbrst 

(a.10)

(a.11)

in at backgrounds, the relevant piece of the picture changing operator

for integrated vertex operators is given by

p+1  ex  = egm

(a.12)

we also formally dene p1/2 to be the holomorphic square root of the picture
changing operator

(a.13)
the relevant piece of the picture-changing operator in a curved geometry will
be

1/2 = p+1

p2

(a.14)
where a is the normalized tangent vector. this result which is independent
of the rr background to rst order in the  loop expansion.

p+1  eaa  ex g(x),

occasionally, we also use the shorthand notation

s = p1/2e/2s

(a.15)

with a similar expression for the right moving elds s.

26

references

[1] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal eld theories and
supergravity, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200.

[2] o. aharony, s. s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri, and y. oz, large

n eld theories, string theory and gravity, hep-th/9905111.

[3] r. r. metsaev and a. a. tseytlin, type iib superstring action in

ads5  s5 background, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 109, hep-th/9805028.

[4] r. kallosh and j. rahmfeld, the gs string action on ads5  s5,

phys. lett. b443 (1998) 143, hep-th/9808038.

[5] a. rajaraman and m. rozali, on the quantization of the gs string

on ads5  s5, hep-th/9902046.

[6] r. r. metsaev, light cone form of eld dynamics in anti-de sitter

space- time and ads/cft correspondence, hep-th/9906217.

[7] n. berkovits, c. vafa, and e. witten, conformal eld theory of ads

background with ramond-ramond ux, jhep 03 (1999) 018,
hep-th/9902098.

[8] n. berkovits, quantization of the type ii superstring in a curved six-

dimensional background, hep-th/9908041.

[9] i. pesando, the gs type iib superstring action on ads3  s3  t 4,

jhep 02 (1999) 007, hep-th/9809145.

[10] j. rahmfeld and a. rajaraman, the gs string action on ads3  s3

with ramond-ramond charge, phys. rev. d60 (1999) 064014,
hep-th/9809164.

[11] d. berenstein and r. g. leigh, superstring perturbation theory and

ramond-ramond backgrounds, hep-th/9904104.

[12] j. dai, r. g. leigh, and j. polchinski, new connections between

string theories, mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 20732083.

[13] w. fischler and l. susskind, dilaton tadpoles, string condensates

and scale invariance, phys. lett. b171 (1986) 383.

27

[14] m. b. green and n. seiberg, contact interactions in superstring

theory, nucl. phys. b299 (1988) 559.

[15] j. polchinski, dirichlet branes and ramond-ramond charges, phys.

rev. lett. 75 (1995) 47244727, hep-th/9510017.

[16] j. distler and m. d. doyle, world sheet supersymmetry without
contact terms, phys. lett. b287 (1992) 7381, hep-th/9203058.

[17] d. kutasov, geometry on the space of conformal field theories and

contact terms, phys. lett. b220 (1989) 153.

[18] d. friedan, e. martinec, and s. shenker, conformal invariance,
supersymmetry and string theory, nucl. phys. b271 (1986) 93.

[19] m. b. green, j. h. schwarz, and e. witten, superstring theory.

cambridge monographs on mathematical physics, 1987.

[20] j. g. polchinski, string theory. cambridge monographs on

mathematical physics, 1998.

[21] h. j. kim, l. j. romans, and p. van nieuwenhuizen, the mass

spectrum of chiral n=2 d = 10 supergravity on s5, phys. rev. d32
(1985) 389.

[22] l. alvarez-gaume, d. z. freedman, and s. mukhi, the background

eld method and the ultraviolet structure of the supersymmetric
nonlinear sigma model, ann. phys. 134 (1981) 85.

[23] m. b. green and s. sethi, supersymmetry constraints on type iib

supergravity, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 046006, hep-th/9808061.

[24] r. kallosh and a. rajaraman, vacua of m theory and string theory,

phys. rev. d58 (1998) 125003, hep-th/9805041.

[25] j. maldacena and a. strominger, ads3 black holes and a stringy

exclusion principle, jhep 12 (1998) 005, hep-th/9804085.

28

