1

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
8
2

 

 
 

1
v
2
3
2
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

making the gravitational path integral more lorentzian

or

life beyond liouville gravity

r. lolla, j. ambjrnb, k.n. anagnostopoulosc

amax-planck-institut fur gravitationsphysik, am muhlenberg 1, d-14476 golm, germany

bthe niels bohr institute, blegdamsvej 17, dk-2100 copenhagen , denmark

cdepartment of physics, university of crete, p.o. box 2208, gr-710 03 heraklion, crete, greece

in two space-time dimensions, there is a theory of lorentzian quantum gravity which can be dened by a rigor-
ous, non-perturbative path integral and is inequivalent to the well-known theory of (euclidean) quantum liouville
gravity. it has a number of appealing features: i) its quantum geometry is non-fractal, ii) it remains consistent
when coupled to matter, even beyond the c=1 barrier, iii) it is closer to canonical quantization approaches than
previous path-integral formulations, and iv) its construction generalizes to higher dimensions.

1. motivation

the ultimate aim of the work described below
is to learn more about four-dimensional quan-
tum gravity by relating non-perturbative canon-
ical and covariant approaches, which so far have
not been successful separately.

by covariant we do not mean semi-classical
gravitational path integrals, but genuine sums
over all metrics, which usually involve a dis-
cretization of space-time. a prototype of this
ansatz is quantum regge calculus. with the help
of numerical simulations, one tries to nd a non-
trivial xed point and an associated continuum
theory of quantum gravity. a great deal of nu-
merical expertise has been gathered in the ap-
proach of dynamical triangulations, a recent vari-
ant of the regge method. unfortunately, all in-
vestigations so far have concentrated on path in-
tegrals for unphysical space-time metrics of eu-
clidean signature. unlike for some xed back-
ground metrics, there is no prescription of how
to wick-rotate a general euclidean metric to
lorentzian signature.

on the other hand, a lot of progress has been
made in the last ten years in an analytic formula-
tion of canonical quantum gravity based on a re-
formulation in terms of gauge-theoretic variables,

called loop quantum gravity. although a pri-
ori based in the continuum, the quantum theory
has a number of discrete features reminiscent of a
generally covariant version of a lattice gauge eld
theory. however, in this approach some basic
obstacles remain in dening a satisfactory quan-
tum hamiltonian evolution, and ecient numer-
ical methods have not yet been developed.

it is tempting to try to combine the positive
aspects of both approaches, but one soon real-
izes that in order to relate the two, a number of
technical and conceptual diculties have to be
overcome. to narrow this gap, we want to de-
ne a lorentzian path integral where individual
regularized space-time geometries in the sum are
required to be causal, reected in a local light-
cone structure and the absence of closed time-
like curves.
it should be appreciated that it is
relatively easy to write down feynman sums of
amplitudes

xcausal geometries {i}

eiseinstein(i),

(1)

but that it is very hard to construct concrete
models with a suitable regularization, such that
the sum can be performed and leads to a non-
trivial continuum theory.

2

2. an ideal testing ground: d=2

the diculties associated with dening the
sum (1) can be overcome, at least in dimension
d = 2. there exists already a rigorous discretized
path integral for euclidean geometries, obtained
by the method of dynamical triangulations, where
the path-integral sum is performed over all pos-
sible triangulations t (i.e.
gluings of equilat-
eral triangles). the 2d gravity action for xed
space-time topology reduces to the cosmological-
constant term

s = z d2xp| det g|,

(2)

for both euclidean and lorentzian metrics g.
after the discretization, this term becomes pro-
portional to n (t ), with n (t ) counting the
number of triangles contained in t . the eu-
clidean state sum is given by

z eu() = xn

en z eu(n ) = xn

en xt (n )

1. (3)

with the help of ingenious combinatorial meth-
ods the counting of all triangulations t (n ) of vol-
ume n in the sum on the right can be done ex-
plicitly. moreover, there is good evidence that the
method is dieomorphism-invariant, since it re-
produces the results of continuum liouville grav-
ity in the continuum limit.

how can this framework be adapted to the
lorentzian situation? we have substituted the
fundamental equilateral building blocks (with
squared edge lengths a2 = 1) by triangles with two
time-like edges with a2 = 1 and one space-like
edge with a2 = 1 [1]. to obtain allowed histories,
these must be glued causally: consecutive spatial
slices (consisting entirely of space-like edges) of
variable length l are connected by sets of time-
like edges. for simplicity, these slices are com-
pactied to circles s1. a typical triangulated 2d
lorentzian geometry of t time-steps (t pointing
up) is depicted in fig.1. note that the local ge-
ometric degrees of freedom (apart from the edge
lengths) are encoded in the variable coordination
numbers of edges meeting at vertices, giving a
direct measure of curvature.
it turns out that
also in this discrete lorentzian model, the com-
binatorics can be solved explicitly and yields the

figure 1. a typical triangulated 2d lorentzian
space-time (of topology [0, 1]  s1).

lorentzian analogue z lor() of (3). the partition
function exhibits critical behaviour as   crit,
where a continuum limit can be taken. after
appropriate renormalization, one obtains a new
quantum gravity theory inequivalent to liouville
gravity. it is rather surprising that there is a sec-
ond universality class of models describing uc-
tuating two-geometries!

the central dynamical quantity of the theory
is the continuum propagator g(l1, l2; t ).
it
describes the transition from an initial spatial ge-
ometry of length l1 to a nal one of length l2 in
proper time t and takes the form [1]

g(l1, l2; t ) = e coth(it )i(l1+l2)
i1(cid:16) 2il1l2
sinh(it )(cid:17),

il1l2
sinh(it )



(4)

where i1 denotes the modied bessel function.

in order to illustrate our claim that the
lorentzian quantum gravity theory diers from
liouville gravity, let us look at the behaviour of
a simple observable. a good example is the so-
called hausdor dimension dh , which contains in-
formation about the bulk properties of the quan-
tum geometry in the ground state of the theory.
it is measured by looking at the volume v  rdh
of geodesic balls (discs in dimension 2) of radius
r. liouville gravity has a fractal hausdor dimen-

sion dh = 4. this may be surprising at rst, but
has to do with the fact that the dominant contri-
butions to the path integral are highly branched
geometries, with many baby universes. by con-
trast, in the lorentzian theory we have dh = 2,
which is the canonical dimension expected from
nave semi-classical considerations. the dier-
ence arises because there are no baby universes in
lorentzian gravity. at a point where a baby uni-
verse branches o, the lorentzian metric struc-
ture must inevitably go bad, thereby violating
causality. this also implies that in lorentzian
gravity the topology of the spatial slices cannot
change. note that this is exactly the situation
described by canonical approaches to gravity.

3. coupling matter to lorentzian gravity

the discussion of the previous section suggests
that the geometry of lorentzian quantum grav-
ity is better behaved than its euclidean coun-
terpart. this is also illustrated by fig.1 (taken
from a monte carlo simulation of pure lorentzian
gravity). in spite of strong uctuations hli of
the length of spatial slices, the geometry is still
eectively two-dimensional. the geometry of the
lorentzian model therefore lies somewhere in be-
tween the wildly uctuating and fractal quantum
geometry of the liouville model and that of a
xed classical two-dimensional space-time.

it is an interesting question how matter will be-
have under coupling to the lorentzian model. to
investigate this issue, we have considered a model
of ising spins with nearest-neighbour interaction.
coupling this to euclidean dynamical triangula-
tions yields an exactly soluble model of euclidean
gravity plus matter. its matter behaviour is gov-
erned by the critical exponents
 = 1,
characterizing the singularity structure of the spe-
cic heat, the spontaneous magnetization, and
the magnetic susceptibility as functions of the
bare ising coupling constant i . this should be
contrasted with the onsager values of these expo-
nents found on xed, at lattices, which are given
by

 = 0.5,

 = 2,

(5)

 = 0,

 = 0.125,

 = 1.75.

(6)

the partition function for lorentzian gravity

3

coupled to ising spins i = 1 is the sum
z(, i ) = xn

en xt (n )

zt (n ) (i ),

(7)

where the partition function zt (i ) of the ising
model on the lorentzian triangulation t is

zt (i ) = x
{i}

e

i /2phiji

ij .

(8)

we have investigated this model by means of a
high-t (that is, small inverse temperature i )
expansion and by monte carlo simulations [2].
an exact solution has not yet been constructed.
note that eq. (7) describes the euclidean sector
of lorentzian gravity plus matter, i.e. with real
weights and therefore euclidean values for the
coupling constants. this is the form suitable for
numerical simulations. what we have found is
that both methods agree with good precision in
their estimates of the critical matter exponents,
which turn out to be the onsager exponents. the
hausdor dimension of the geometry is unaltered,
dh = 2, and the typical monte-carlo-generated
geometries look qualitatively similar to the ones
in pure gravity. there are eects of the gravity-
matter coupling at the discretized level, for exam-
ple, on the distribution of coordination numbers,
but we have not investigated whether this is re-
ected in a change of universal properties of the
geometry that would survive in the continuum
limit.

4. coupling more matter

the previous picture is changed drastically
when several ising models instead of one are cou-
pled to lorentzian gravity. for the case of n ising
models, the partition function (7) is replaced by

z(, i ) = xn

en xt (n )

z n

t (n ) (i ).

(9)

at the critical point, this model describes a con-
formal eld theory with central charge c = n/2
coupled to gravity. our motivation for coupling
more matter is the fact that euclidean 2d grav-
ity becomes inconsistent for n > 2, that is, be-
yond the so-called c = 1 barrier.
in the pres-
ence of ising spins it is energetically favourable

4

to have short boundaries between regions of op-
posite spins. in a theory of uctuating geometry
the eect of the spins is to try and squeeze o
parts of the space-time manifold.
in euclidean
gravity, where the geometry is very branched to
start with, this mechanism seems to be so eec-
tive that for n > 2 the theory seizes to make
sense.

in order to get a clear picture of what goes
on well beyond the c = 1 barrier in lorentzian
gravity, we have investigated its properties at
n = 8 by numerical simulations [3]. one observes
a very strong interaction of gravity and matter,
to the extent that the geometry is now in a dif-
ferent phase from before: time and space direc-
tions acquire an anomalous relative scaling and
the hausdor dimension is changed to dh = 3!
this is illustrated by fig.2. the eect of the
matter on the geometry is reected in the pres-
ence of the long, stalk-like part of the space-time,
which is eectively one-dimensional. all interest-
ing physics (that survives the limit as n  )
happens in the extended bulk phase. however, in
spite of these drastic changes in the geometrical
properties, we have found that the critical matter
exponents retain their onsager values!

5. conclusions

there are a number of lessons to be learned
from this two-dimensional model of quantum
gravity. the choice of lorentzian over euclidean,
which in our case consisted in the imposition of
a causality condition on individual path-integral
histories, made a big dierence.
in two dimen-
sions, it led us to the discovery of a new univer-
sality class of quantum gravity models, besides
that of liouville gravity. in lorentzian gravity,
the quantum geometry is much smoother, and
better behaved in the sense that one can cross
the infamous c = 1 barrier without any problems.
conversely, the coupled model with eight ising
models illustrated that the matter behaviour is
rather robust: the geometry can undergo drastic
changes without the critical matter behaviour be-
ing aected. from this we also learn that onsager
exponents by no means imply that the underlying
space-time is at.

figure 2. lorentzian gravity coupled to 8 ising
models (n=18816, t=168).

the dierence between the euclidean and
lorentzian theories can be traced entirely to the
presence of branchings or baby universes [1,3].
since this is a purely kinematical eect which has
to do with an a priori restriction on the sum-over-
geometries, it will be present in higher dimensions
as well. to date, the problem with dynamically
triangulated path integrals for euclidean geome-
tries in d > 2 has been the dominance of highly
degenerate geometries, including a proliferation
of baby universes. our hope is that also in these
cases a causality requirement will lead to an eec-
tive smoothing out of the quantum geometry.
an investigation of the case d = 3 is under way.

references

1. j. ambjrn, r. loll, nucl. phys. b536 (1998)

407-434 [hep-th/9805108].

2. j. ambjrn, k. anagnostopoulos, r. loll,

phys. rev. d, to appear [hep-th/9904012].

3. j. ambjrn, k. anagnostopoulos, r. loll,
phys. rev. d, to appear [hep-lat/9909129]
and preprint aei-1999-20 [hep-lat/9908054].

