preprint typeset in jhep style. - hyper version

nsf-itp-99-125
hep-th/9910211

wilson loops as matrix strings

nadav drukker

institute for theoretical physics, university of california,
santa barbara, ca 93106

and

department of physics, princeton university,
princeton, nj 08544

drukker@itp.ucsb.edu

abstract: in the framework of matrix theory we show that wilson loops can
serve as interpolating elds to dene string scattering amplitudes as gauge theory
observables.

9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
1

 

 
 

2
v
1
1
2
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

contents

1.

introduction

2. string vertex operators

3. discussion

1

2

4

1. introduction

matrix theory [1] is a proposed formulation of m-theory in the light cone gauge, or
for nite n the discrete light cone quantization of m theory [2]. when one of the
target space directions is compactied it turns into a non perturbative formulation of
light cone type iia string theory [3, 4, 5]. in the uv this theory is two dimensional
supersymmetric u(n) gauge theory, the dimensional reduction of ten dimensional
sym.

the theory lives on a cylinder parameterized by ,  where  has period 2.
there are two gauge elds a, eight scalars x i (i = 2, . . . 9) and their superpartners
. the action is

s = z d d tr"

1
4g2

y m

f 2

 +

+

g2
y m
4

[x i, x j]2

1

2 (cid:16)dx i(cid:17)2

+i d + igy m i[x i, ]i .

(1.1)

this action is a non-abelian generalization of the light cone green-schwarz string
action. in the infra-red gy m  , the potential energy [x i, x j]2 is minimized by
commuting matrices, so the action reduces to a collection of free strings. the only
subtlety is that the holonomy around the cylinder does not have to be trivial. when
this happens, instead of n short strings one gets fewer long strings. in the large
n limit, those long strings become the usual light cone strings.

it was shown [5] that the least irrelevant operator with all the necessary symme-
try that can be added to this theory corresponds to a joining/splitting interaction of
the strings.

in [6] those interactions were further studied. it was shown that the singular
points in light cone string diagrams are smoothed by a non-commutative region.
at high energy the string scattering amplitude is dominated by the gross-mende

1

surfaces [7]. for those surfaces the interaction point is replaced by an instanton
solution of the self-dual ym equations.

in this approach one solves the (self-dual) ym equations for given boundary
conditions. the solutions are instantonic congurations carrying a charge in the
permutation group sn relating the incoming arrangement of the string bits to the
outgoing one. for gauge invariance it is necessary to sum over all permutations
of the n components of the incoming and outgoing strings. part of this sum, say
over the the arrangement of the incoming strings is trivial, but a large part of the
sum is non trivial. there will be many distinct congurations (as many as  n!)
which correspond to the same physical process. each of them is related to a dierent
instanton.

to calculate the scattering amplitude in this way will require a sum over a very
large number of dierent processes. it is possible that the sum is dominated by a
small number of saddle points, but we dont know that. otherwise, this seems like a
very dicult problem, perhaps the sum does not converge.

in this paper we try a dierent approach. instead of solving the classical equa-
tions of motion, whose solutions are not gauge invariant, we nd gauge invariant
operators which are the non-abelian generalization of string vertex operators. using
those operators, which are certain wilson loops, we can dene a string scattering
amplitude as a gauge theory observable. these correlators can be regarded as the
non-perturbative string scattering amplitude, and are well dened objects in the
gauge theory. unfortunately, we dont know how to evaluate them, except by reduc-
ing back to a calculation like [6].

2. string vertex operators

we will be studying the wilson loop operator

w (pi, p) =

1
p

tr p exp iic  a1 +

pi
p

x i! d! .

(2.1)

the curve c wraps the world sheet p times along a straight line in the  direction.
pi are arbitrary parameters that couple to the scalars in the loop (they could be
functions of ).

have a gauge eld a() for which exp(ir 2

to see what happens to the loop in the ir we should evaluate it for the elds
that remain in that limit. the congurations that survive are the long strings, they
0 a() d1) = u is in the weyl group
of u(n) (a permutation matrix). at every point all the x i commute, and when
parallel transported, also at dierent points. it is possible to make a large gauge
transformation that will set a to zero and will make all the x is diagonal, but not
single valued. one has to be careful when doing that, though, since the operator (2.1)

2

is invariant only under small gauge transformations and not under large ones. instead
one is left with u p in the trace

w (pi, p) 

1
p

tr"exp iz 2p

0

pi
p

x i() d! u p# ,

(2.2)

where x i is x i after it was diagonalized, and its dened for  beyond 2 through
the twisted boundary conditions.

if u includes a cycle of length p, then in that block u p is the unit matrix ip

and x i are (after reordering)

x i() =





xi()

0

  

0
...
0

xi(2 + )

  

  
. . .
   xi(2(p  1) + )

0
...
...

.





(2.3)

its clear that r 2p

x i() in that block is proportional to the identity matrix, so
the trace of the exponent is just p times the exponent. therefore on this block the
wilson loop reduces to

0

w (pi, p)  exp iz 2p

0

pi
p

xi() d! .

(2.4)

this is precisely the form of the vertex operator for the light-cone string [8]! if pi
are constants, this is the vertex operator for the graviton.

there is a subtle point when u contains a cycle of length n which divides p.
clearly when u contains no such cycles, the wilson loop vanishes as expected. but
as dened above, it will not give zero for congurations with cycles of length that
divides p.

to eliminate that problem one could recursively dene a modied wilson loop
operator with the extra terms subtracted. alternatively one could approximate p
by a prime number, which should be possible for large enough matrices. that only
leaves the case of cycles of length 1.

instead, we think that this eect should be regarded as a real artifact of the
nite n theory. this is consistent with the observation [6] that the matrix string
graviton seems to include both a long string and many short strings. it also ts well
with whats known on the nature of the wave function for bound states of n short
strings [9]. there too, for non prime n one gets contributions from all the divisors
of n.

we just showed that the wilson-loop (2.1) turns into the corresponding string
vertex operator in the infra-red. since the ym action reduces to the string action
the correlation function

hw1    wni,

(2.5)

3

with some of the operators inserted at negative innite time, and some at positive
innite time is the string scattering amplitude in matrix theory. this is the non-
perturbative denition for the scattering amplitude of strings with corresponding
momenta.

one should note that the wilson loops w are not the wave function of the ma-
trix string. in particular they have large support on non-commuting congurations.
likewise, those operators are not the only operators one could use. adding to w
any function whose support does not include the long strings congurations will
not alter this result. any such modication would work perfectly well as a vertex
operator, the dierence corresponds to more massive modes that will not modify the
calculation when the incoming and outgoing states are suciently far apart.

3. discussion

we showed that the wilson loop operators (2.1) can serve as interpolating elds for
strings. using them we dened the matrix string scattering amplitude as a gauge
invariant observable (2.5). one would like to nd a way to evaluate those correlators.
this turns out to be a dicult problem, those wilson loops are not simple
operators.
if one tries to use perturbation theory, it is natural to expand about
classical solutionsthe long strings congurations. this reduces the problem back
to the calculation of [6]. one has to sum over many ingoing and outgoing classical
solutions, and calculate the instantonic processes that take one to the other.

we have not found any other way to calculate these correlators.
apart from strings, matrix theory contains other objects [10]. it is easy to write
down operators which have the appropriate charges. for example, the wilson loop

w = tr pic

d f01 exp iic  a1 +

pi
p

x i! d! ,

can be used as a vertex operator for a 0-brane.

likewise

w = tr pic

d[x i, x j] exp iic  a1 +

pi
p

x i! d! ,

is a wilson-loop for a 2-brane in the i, j plane.

(3.1)

(3.2)

acknowledgments

i wish to thank david gross for a lot of help. this work was supported in part by
the nsf under grant no. phy94-07194.

4

references

[1] t. banks, w. fischler, s.h. shenker and l. susskind, m theory as a matrix model:

a conjecture, phys. rev. d55, 5112 (1997) hep-th/9610043.

[2] l. susskind, another conjecture about m(atrix) theory, hep-th/9704080.

[3] l. motl, proposals on nonperturbative superstring interactions, hep-th/9701025.

[4] t. banks and n. seiberg, strings from matrices, nucl. phys. b497, 41 (1997) hep-

th/9702187.

[5] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde and h. verlinde, matrix string theory, nucl. phys. b500,

43 (1997) hep-th/9703030.

[6] s.b. giddings, f. hacquebord and h. verlinde, high-energy scattering and d pair

creation in matrix string theory, nucl. phys. b537, 260 (1999) hep-th/9804121.

[7] d.j. gross and p.f. mende, the high-energy behavior of string scattering ampli-

tudes, phys. lett. 197b, 129 (1987);
d.j. gross and p.f. mende, string theory beyond the planck scale, nucl. phys.
b303, 407 (1988).

[8] s. mandelstam, the interacting string picture and functional integration, lectures
given at workshop on unied string theories, santa barbara, ca, jul 29 - aug 16,
1985.

[9] m.b. green and m. gutperle, d-particle bound states and the d-instanton mea-

sure, jhep 01, 005 (1998) hep-th/9711107.

[10] t. banks, n. seiberg and s. shenker, branes from matrices, nucl. phys. b490, 91

(1997) hep-th/9612157.

5

