9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
6
2

 

 
 

1
v
7
0
2
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

on the heterotic/f-theory
duality in eight dimensions

w. lerche
cern, geneva, switzerland

abstract we review quantitative tests on the duality between the heterotic string
on t 2 and f -theory on k3. on the heterotic side, certain threshold
corrections to the eective action can be exactly computed at one-loop
order, and the issue is to reproduce these from geometric quantities
pertaining to the k3 surface. in doing so we learn about certain non-
perturbative interactions of 7-branes.

1.

introduction

one of the most basic dualities in string theory is the one between the
heterotic string, compactied on the two-torus t 2, and f -theory on k3
[1]; indeed other dualities can be derived from this duality in d = 8. in
fact, the higher the uncompactied space-time dimension is, the simpler
the structure of non-perturbative eects becomes, and related to that,
the less complicated the structure of the moduli space is. as we will
see, in d = 8 the structure is simple enough for exactly computing cer-
tain non-perturbative quantities, but still complicated enough to obtain
functionally non-trivial results.

the point is that certain pieces of the eective action can be computed
exactly at one-loop order in the heterotic formulation. this is the reason
why this model provides an ideal framework for studying non-trivial
brane interactions; in the past, it has been very successfully applied to
study brane interactions in type i and matrix strings (see eg., [2, 3, 4]).
our aim, on the other hand, is to show how these coupling functions
can be reproduced in f -theory, ie., from k3 geometry. this has also a
direct interpretation in terms of certain type iib d-brane interactions,
which gives another motivation for studying this subject.

usually, when studying interactions between d-branes, one considers
idealized situations where one focuses one a single pair of (possibly stacks

1

2

of) branes. in addition, these branes are usually mutually local, i.e.,
they can be simultaneously described at weak coupling, and so treated
with methods of conformal eld theory.

however, for making quantitative tests of string dualities involving
highly non-trivial functions, the full global structure of d-brane interac-
tions becomes important as well  that is, the inuence of all the other
branes that are usually considered as far away. some of the branes are
necessarily non-local with respect to each other, which precludes any
conformal eld theoretic treatment of the full theory.

therefore, in order to exactly determine the functional dependence
of the relevant interactions, new non-perturbative methods are called
for. guided by the exact results that can be obtained in the heterotic
formulation, we will show how these interactions can be described in
geometrical terms. this approach has been presented in refs. [5, 6, 7],
and this is what we will partially review from section 3.4 onwards.

however, before we will come to that, we will rst review some simple
facts about the structure of the coupling functions under consideration.
subsequently we will present a brief introduction to the relevant aspects
of f -theory.

2.

bps saturated, exact heterotic
amplitudes at one-loop order

one certainly cannot expect to compute any given piece of the ef-
fective lagrangian exactly. it is in general just very special couplings,
namely typically those which are anomaly-related and to which only
bps-states contribute, that are amenable to an exact treatment. in the
present situation with 16 supercharges in eight dimensions, the canoni-
cal bps-saturated amplitudes [8, 9] involve four external gauge bosons
(and/or gravitons that we will not consider here).

supersymmetry relates parity even (i f n) and parity odd ( 

2 f 
f  ..f ) sectors, and one can conveniently combine the theta-angle and
the coupling constant  into one complex coupling, e. in particular,
when compactifying the heterotic string on t 2, the eective threshold
couplings e (t, u )  i(t, u ) + 1
2 (t, u ) become highly non-trivial
functions depending on the usual torus kahler and complex structure
moduli, t and u .

as mentioned before, in the heterotic string picture these couplings
are exact at one-loop order; this is simply because there are no in-
stantons that could possibly contribute (apart from the world-sheet
instantons whose eects are captured in the one-loop computation).
the couplings are in fact directly related [8] to the heterotic elliptic

on the heterotic/f-theory duality

3

genus [10], which is given by the ramond partition function in the
presence of a non-vanishing background gauge eld strength, roughly:

given by modular integrals of the form:

ba(f, q)  trr(1)j0 ql0ef . more precisely, the couplings are typically
re[e(t, u )] f  ...f  z d2

z(2,2)(t, u, q) ba(f, q)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) 8form

where z(2,2) is the partition function of the two-torus t 2:

, (1.1)

2

z2,2(t, u, q) = xpl,pr

1

2|pl|2

1

2|pr|2

q

q

,

12t2u2

(m1 + m2 u + n1 t + n2 t u ), pr =

(m1 + m2 u +
with pl =
n1t + n2t u) (we switched o the wilson lines here). the evaluation of
modular integrals of type (1.1) is quite an art that has been discussed
at length in [11, 3, 5, 6], but wont be touched upon here. essentially,
each of such integrals results in a certain holomorphically factorized,
borcherds product type of automorphic function:

12t2u2

e (t, u ) = ln[] ,

where

 = (qt )a(qu )b y(k,l)>0(cid:16)1  qt

kqu

l(cid:17)c(kl)

,

(1.2)

for some a, b. here, qt = e2it , qu = e2iu , the product runs over
k > 0, l  zz  k = 0, l > 0 in the chamber t2  imt > u2  imu ,
and c(n) are the expansion coecients of a certain nearly holomorphic
and (quasi-)modular form, c(q)  p c(n)qn. the precise form of this
counting function c(q) depends on the specic gauge couplings that
are considered.
specically, if we switch o all the wilson lines so that we have e8e8

non-abelian gauge symmetry, we have [3, 6]:

e8e 

8

(t, u ) = 48 ln[] , with a = 2 , b = 0 and counting function
(1.3)

(q)

1

c(q) =

1
12

24he2e4  e6i2
24he2

e4

e8e8(t, u ) = 24 ln[] , with a = 8 , b = 12 and counting function
4i(q) ,

2 e4  2e2e6 + e2

c(q) =

1
12

where en(q) are the usual eisenstein series of the corresponding modu-
lar weight. moreover, for those couplings for which the eld strengths
f = {ft , fu} are superpartners of the torus moduli, an extra structure

4

[5, 7] emerges: namely these couplings satisfy non-trivial integrability
conditions and so can be obtained as fourth derivatives of the following
holomorphic prepotential:1

g(t, u )  x(k,l)>0

c(kl)li5(qt

kqu

l) ,

(1.4)

with counting function given by c(q) = e2
is dened by lia(z) =pp>0
pa (a  1).

zp

an physically interesting feature of these couplings in the t, u sub-
sector is that they have logarithmic singularities, consider for example:

4

24 (q). above, the polylogarithm

(t t u u )

e

(t, u )  (t )2 (u )2 g(t, u )

=

1
2i

ln[j(t )  j(u )] +

(1.5)

1
2i

ln[0(t, u )],

where 0(t, u ) is some cusp form that stays nite over the whole of
the moduli space. similar to the analogous situation in four dimensions
[12, 13], the modular invariant j-functions encode the gauge symmetry
enhancements pertaining to the compactication torus t 2: su (2) for
t = u , su (2)  su (2) at t = u = i and su (3) at t = u =  
e2i/3, and in particular reect the charge multiplicities of the states
becoming light near the singularities. specically, near the su (2) locus
the coupling behaves like:

(t t u u )

e

(t, u )  ln[a] ,

a  1 (t  u ) ,

and similar for the other gauge groups. this is the expected behavior of
the one-loop eld theory eective action, with cuto scale given by .
the issue is to reproduce the threshold coupling functions e (t, u )
in the dual f -theory compactication on k3 (we will actually consider
one-dimensional slices of the moduli space with constant u ). for this, we
will rst briey review some of the relevant basic features on f -theory
that we will need.

3.

3.1

review of f -theory

elliptic fibrations

f -theory compactications [1] are by denition compactications of
the type iib string with non-zero, and in general non-constant string

1the very existence of a holomorphic prepotential hints at the existence of a yet unknown
superspace formulation of the theory, in which the prepotential would gure as the eective
lagrangian.

on the heterotic/f-theory duality

5

coupling  they are thus intrinsically non-perturbative. f -theory may
also seen as a construction to geometrize (and thereby making manifest)
certain features pertaining to the s-duality of the type iib string.

to explain this in somewhat more detail, let us rst recapitulate the
most important massless bosonic elds of the type iib string. from the
nsns sector, we have the graviton g , the antisymmetric 2-form eld
b as well as the dilaton ; the latter, when exponentiated, serves as
the coupling constant of the theory. moreover, from the rr sector we
have the p-form tensor elds c (p) with p = 0, 2, 4. it is also convenient
to include the magnetic duals of these elds, b(6), c (6) and c (8) (c (4)
has self-dual eld strength). it is useful to combine the dilaton with the
axion into one complex eld:

iib  c (0) + ie .

(1.6)

the s-duality then acts via projective sl(2, zz) transformations in the
canonical manner: iib  aiib +b
ciib +d with a, b, c, d  zz and ad  bc =
1. furthermore, it acts via simple matrix multiplication on the other
elds if these are grouped into doublets(cid:16) b(2)
c(4)(cid:17) (while c (4) stays

c(2)(cid:17),(cid:16) b(6)

invariant).

the simplest f -theory compactications are the highest dimensional
ones, and simplest of all is the compactication of the type iib string
on the 2-sphere, ip1.2 however, as the rst chern class does not vanish:
c1(ip1) = 2, this by itself cannot be a good, supersymmetry preserving
background. the remedy is to add extra 7-branes to the theory, which
sit at arbitrary points zi on the ip1, and otherwise ll the 7+1 non-
compact space-time dimensions. if this is done in the right way, c1(ip1)
is cancelled, thereby providing a consistent background.



ip

z

 

(cid:10)

(cid:28)

(z )

i ib

7-brane

figure 1.1 encircling the location of a 7-brane in the z-plane leads to a jump
of the perceived type iib string coupling, iib  iib + 1.

to explain how this works, consider rst a single d7-brane located at
an arbitrary given point z0 on the ip1. a d7-brane carries by denition

2six and in particular for dimensional compactications are much more complicated than the
eight dimensional one discussed here, and any discussion of them would be beyond the scope
of this lecture.

6

one unit of d7-brane charge, since it is a unit source of c (8). this means
that is it magnetically charged with respect to the dual eld c (0), which
enters in the complexied type iib coupling in (1.6). as a consequence,
encircling the plane location z0 will induce a non-trivial monodromy,
that is, a jump on the coupling  see fig. 1.1. but this then implies
that in the neighborhood of the d7-brane, we must have a non-constant
string coupling of the form: iib(z) = 1
2i ln[z z0]; we thus indeed have
a truly non-perturbative situation.
in view of the sl(2, zz) action on the string coupling (1.6), it is natural
to interpret it as a modular parameter of a two-torus, t 2, and this is what
then gives a geometrical meaning to the s-duality group [1]. since, as we
have seen, this modular parameter iib = iib(z) is not constant over
the ip1 compactication manifold, the shape of the t 2 will accordingly
vary along ip1. the relevant geometrical object will therefore not be the
direct product manifold t 2  ip1, but rather a bration of t 2 over ip1 
see fig. 1.2.

singular fibers

)

generic
smooth fiber



(cid:10)

ip

(cid:10)

(cid:10)

(cid:10)

(cid:10)

total space
= k3

)

24  7-branes  extending
      over 7+1 dimensions

fibration of an elliptic curve over ip1, which in total makes a
figure 1.2
k3 surface. at 24 points the bers and therefore the string coupling become
singular, and this is where the 7-branes are located.

the logarithmic behavior of iib(z) in the vicinity of a 7-brane means
that the t 2 ber is singular at the brane location.
it is known from
mathematics that each of such singular bers contributes 1/12 to the
rst chern class. therefore we need to put 24 of them in order to have
a consistent type iib background with c1 = 0. the mathematical data:
t 2 bered over ip1 with 24 singular bers is now exactly what char-
acterizes the k3 surface;3 indeed it is the only complex two-dimensional
manifold with vanishing rst chern class (apart from t 4).

3more precisely, an elliptically bered k3; we assume here singularities of the simplest
canonical type. see ref. [14] for a physicists review of the k3 manifold.

on the heterotic/f-theory duality

7

the k3 manifold that arises in this context is so far just a formal con-
struct, introduced to encode of the behavior of the string coupling in the
presence of 7-branes in an elegant and useful way. one may speculate
about a possible more concrete physical signicance, such as a compact-
ication manifold of a yet unknown 12 dimensional f -theory [1]. the
existence of such a theory is still unclear, but not really important for
our purposes; all we need the k3 for is to use its intriguing geometric
properties for computing physical quantities (the quartic gauge thresh-
old couplings, ultimately).

in order to do explicit computations, we rst of all need a concrete
representation of the k3 surface. since the families of k3s in question
are elliptically bered, the natural starting point is the two-torus t 2. it
can be represented in the well-known weierstra form:

wt 2 = y2 + x3 + xf + g = 0 ,

which in turn is invariantly characterized by the j-function:

j =

4(24f )3
4f 3 + 27g2 .

(1.7)

(1.8)

an elliptically bered k3 surface can be made out of (1.7) by letting
f  f8(z) and g  g12(z) become polynomials in the ip1 coordinate z, of
the indicated orders. the locations zi of the 7-branes, which correspond
to the locations of the singular bers where j(iib(zi))  , are then
precisely where the discriminant

(z)  4f8

3(z) + 27g12

2(z)

(1.9)

=:

vanishes.

24yi=1

(z  zi)

3.2

monodromies and locality

note that the polynomials f8(z) and g12(z) in (1.7) together have
exactly 18 independent free parameters. it is indeed a mathematical fact
that the moduli space of elliptic k3 manifolds is 18 complex-dimensional
and furthermore locally given by

m =

so(18, 2)

so(18)  so(2)

.

(1.10)

this just happens to be the same as the moduli space of the heterotic
string on t 2 (which includes the torus moduli t, u besides the 16 wil-
son lines) ! this coincidence of moduli spaces was one of the primary

8

motivations [1] for postulating the duality between f -theory on k3 (or
type iib on ip1 with 24 7-branes) and the heterotic string on t 2.

however, (1.9) tells us that there are indeed 24 plane locations, and
because we have only 18 independent parameters, the locations of the
7-branes cannot be all independent, but must be to some degree cor-
related. moreover, the heterotic compactication has 16+2=18 u (1)
factors (besides the graviphotons), while we have on the f -theory side
24 7-branes, each of which carries locally a u (1) factor. therefore the
degrees of freedom of the 24 branes must somehow be restricted globally,
though locally all the branes look the same.

the point is that there are in fact many types of 7-branes, labelled by
their electric and magnetic charges (p, q).4 a d7-brane is by denition a
brane on which a fundamental type iib string can end, and by convention
carries (p, q) charge of (0, 1). conversely, a 7-brane on which a d1 string
can end has (p, q) = (1, 0), and the generic (p, q) brane is a 7-brane on
which a (p, q) string [15] can end.

the sl(2, zz) s-duality group acts on the charge labels t(p, q) in the
obvious manner, and all the sl(2, zz) orbits of a given brane have lo-
cally identical properties. indeed the monodromy induced by encircling
a (p, q) brane is simply the corresponding sl(2, zz) conjugate of the mon-

odromy m(0,1) = (cid:16) 1 1

0 1(cid:17) of a single d7-brane, and takes the following

form:

m(p,q) = (cid:18) 1 + pq
p2

q2

1  pq(cid:19)  sl(2, zz).

(1.11)

(1.12)

global consistency then requires that the total monodromy on the ip1
base must be trivial:

24yi=1m(pi,qi) = 1 ,

which obviously forbids all 24 branes to simultaneously be of type (0, 1).
a given pair of 7-branes is said to be mutually local if their mon-

odromies commute, which is when

p1q2  p2q1 = k  zz

(1.13)

vanishes. then they can be simultaneously treated at weak coupling,
using methods of ordinary conformal eld theory. if on the other hand
the intersection number k 6= 0, then the branes are mutually non-
local or dyonic, and cannot simultaneously be described at weak

4mathematically, this label refers to the homology class of the vanishing 1-cycle  that
characterizes the singular elliptic ber t 2. that is,  = p+q, where ,  form a symplectic
basis of h1(t 2, zz).

on the heterotic/f-theory duality

9

coupling. in particular, the naive addition of the u (1) gauge groups that
locally live on each brane, is then ill-dened. since the global consistency
condition (1.12) turns out to admit only a maximum of 18 mutually
commuting monodromies, it is thus clear that we cannot expect to see
more than 18 independent u (1) factors in the full theory, even though
each of the 24 branes carries one of such factors locally. therefore there
is generically no weak coupling, or cft description description that
would be valid for the complete system of 24 branes.

3.3

gauge symmetries and kodaira
singularities

we have mentioned in the preceding section that the moduli space m
(1.10) of elliptic k3s is the same as of the heterotic string compactied
on t 2; at generic points in m the gauge symmetry is simply u (1)18.
however, there is much more structure in the theory, in particular at
specic sub-loci of m, extra non-abelian gauge symmetries can appear.
this is familiar for the heterotic string, where for example we can switch
o the wilson lines and thereby restore the e8  e8 gauge symmetry of
the ten dimensional theory. in fact there can appear any combination
of simply laced gauge groups (those which are classied by the labels
an, dn and e6,7,8), as long as the total rank does not exceed 18.

an immediate question is therefore how such gauge symmetries ap-
pear in the f -theory language. for the an  su (n+1) type of groups,
the answer is well-known and simple: if we place n d7-planes near each
other, then the open strings that are stretched in all possible ways be-
tween them describe massive charged gauge bosons of u (n)/u (1)n  see
fig. 1.3 a). if the branes collide, these n(n  1) strings will have zero
masses and so lead to a gauge enhancement, u (1)n  u (n).

(cid:10)

(cid:10)

(cid:10)

(cid:10)

(cid:8)(cid:8)

(cid:8)

(cid:8)

(;

) + c:c:

(cid:22)

e



h



(cid:10)

(cid:10)

(cid:10)

(cid:10)

a)

b)

c)

figure 1.3
enlargement of non-abelian gauge symmetries: a) u (n) is gener-
ated by open strings stretched between n d7-branes of type (0, 1); b) if we add
a pair of (1, 1) and (1, 1) branes, then the extra indirect trajectories extend
u (n) to so(2n); c) e8 is generated by colliding e6 and h2 kodaira 7-planes.

for the other gauge groups the story is not that simple, however.
to understand it, let us rephrase what we just said in terms of k3
geometry. here each d7-brane corresponds to a singular elliptic ber

10

with type (0, 1) vanishing 1-cycle, located over the same point in the z-
plane. accordingly, the gauge enhancement corresponds in this language
to the collision of singular bers. in particular, when all singular bers
are on top of each other, then the resulting singular ber will have a
worse singularity than we had before (see fig. 1.4).

actually, upon collision not only the elliptic ber, but also total space,
which is the k3 surface, becomes singular or more singular. to see this,
note that the open string stretched between any d7-branes is nothing
but a projection of a 2-cycle in the k3 - see again fig. 1.4. this 2-cycle
can be visualized by dragging the (0, 1) cycle in the ber along the path
of the open string (in other words, the 2-cycle is a bration of s1 over
a line segment).
if the d7-branes collide, then the 2-cycle obviously
shrinks to zero size, and this is precisely what makes the k3 singular.

a

 

a

 

a

 

a



non-zero
2-cycle in k3





(cid:10)

ip

ip

(cid:10)

(cid:10)

string= projection
of 2-cycle

 k3 is non-singular

 k3 has a2 singularity

figure 1.4 one the left we show three singular bers of type a0. the open
string trajectories are projections of 2-cycles of non-zero volume in the k3.
on the right we have collided the singular bers to form a singularity of type
a2, which is associated with the simultaneous vanishing of several intersecting
2-cycles in the k3.

there is a mathematical classication [16] of what possible singulari-
ties an elliptic k3 surface can have.5 these are essentially given by the
well-known ade singularities, however the condition of being elliptic
brations gives some little extra structure. the possible elliptic ko-
daira singularities are listed in table 1; remember, though, that for a
compact k3 surface the total rank that can be achieved is restricted to
be less or equal to 18. the precise manner how the open string trajec-
tories build up the various charged gauge bosons can in general be quite
complicated, and this is an interesting subject that has been studied

5we mean here singularities that can be reached by going a nite distance in moduli space;
there can be other kinds of singularities like decompactication limits.

on the heterotic/f-theory duality

11

in detail in various papers [17]; however it is beyond the scope of this
review.

type gauge symmetry 7  brane content monodromy
an
dn+4
e6
e7
e8
h0
h1
h2

u (n + 1)
so(2n + 8)
e6
e7
e8
u (1)
u (2)
u (3)

an+1
an+4bc
a5bc 2
a6bc 2
a7bc 2
ac
a2c
(ac)2

t n+1
s2t n
(st )2
s
st
(st )1
s1
(st )2

table 1: kodaira classication of elliptic singularities (n  0). phys-
ically, these correspond to 7-planes which support the respective ade
gauge symmetries on their world-volumina; many of them cannot be
described in term of weak coupling physics. we also indicated their
(non-unique) decomposition in terms of 7-brane building blocks, where
a denotes a 7-brane of type (0, 1), b of type (1,1) and c of type
(1, 1). moreover we show their sl(2, zz) monodromies in terms of the
usual generators s and t .

physically, associated to each of these singularities is something what
we may call a kodaira 7-plane, which may be thought of as superposi-
tion or bound state of ordinary 7-branes. we call these object planes
rather than branes to emphasize that their physical properties are in
general quite dierent from their ordinary brane building blocks. for
example, as will be important later on, some of these planes have -
nite order monodromies, which implies that no logarithmic branch cuts
emanate from them. this in turn means that these planes have no net
zz-valued d-brane charge, and one may view their nite zzn monodromy
as a torsion generalization of ordinary d-brane charge. those planes
may also be regarded as non-perturbative zzn generalizations of orien-
tifold planes (which are associated with zz2).

an important physical point is furthermore that for the kodaira sin-
gularities other than an, the vanishing 1-cycles of the colliding singular
bers are not all of type (0, 1). this means that all other 7-planes apart
from those of type an, involve 7-brane building blocks of dierent (p, q)
types. in fact one can build all the possible 7-planes out of just three
kinds of building blocks [17], which are indicated in table 1 as well.

these building blocks are non-local with respect to each other, and
according to our previous considerations, this implies that the 7-planes
are generically strongly coupled and cannot be described by ordinary

12

cft methods; it is likely that there isnt any lagrangian description
of their world-volumina theories. the exceptions include of course the
planes of type an, and to some extent also dn+4; the latter can be
described on a sub-locus of the moduli space where one puts the (1, 1)
and (1,1) branes on top of each other; the resulting object behaves like
an orientifold plane, which can indeed be dealt with in terms of standard
cft [18].

3.4

constant coupling slices of
the moduli space

for our purpose of computing eective interactions induced by the
7-branes, the mutual non-localities of the 24 (p, q) branes are very in-
convenient. however, what we can do to simplify matters is to restrict to
slices of the moduli space where the 24 branes combine into composites
that have commuting net monodromies.

particularly simple are the sub-cases where the monodromies not only
commute, but are also of nite order. these correspond to theories
where the 7-brane charge is cancelled locally, such that the type iib
string coupling iib is constant over the ip1 base. remembering from
(1.8) that the coupling is determined by

j(iib(z)) =

4(24f8(z))3

4f8(z)3 + 27g12(z)2

!

 const.,

(1.14)

we see that requiring z-independence yields three (partially overlapping)
possibilities for splitting up the 24 branes [18, 19]:

i) g12 = 0  j = 1728  iib = i: group into eight h1-planes (after
xing three points due to sl(2,c) invariance, this gives ve independent
moduli)
ii) f8 = 0  j = 0  iib =   e2i/3: group into into twelve
h0-planes (nine independent moduli)
3  iib =arbitrary constant: group into
iii) f8 = h4
four d4-planes (one independent modulus; this branch intersects branches
ii) and iii)).

2, g12 =const.h4

upon further specialization, one can have some or all of the hn branes
combine into planes with larger gauge symmetries; the possibilities are
summarized in table 2.

on the heterotic/f-theory duality

13

kodaira type  h0 h1 h2
composition h0 h1 h0
torsion charge zz6 zz4 zz3


iib



i

d4
3,h1
2 h0
zz2
any

e6
2 h0
zz3


e7
4 h1
zz4
i

e8
3 h0
zz6


5

table 2: list of 7-planes with nite order monodromies in the z-plane,
which do not carry net (zz-valued) d-brane charge. they may be viewed
as non-perturbative zzn generalizations of orientifold planes. we also list
their composition in terms of basic hk building blocks, as well as the
associated constant type iib string coupling, iib.

what we will do, in order to further simplify the problem, is to con-
sider just one-dimensional slices of these moduli spaces, obtained by
grouping the hk planes into four planes in total. as we will see, the cor-
responding geometries will be then pretty easy to deal with. explicitly,
we will consider from now on the singular k3 surfaces dened by the
equations w (x, y, z; ) = 0, where:

(e8
(e7
(e6
(d4

2h0
2h1
2h2
2d4

2) : w = y2 + x3 + z5(z  1)(z  )
2) : w = y2 + x3 + xz3(z  1)(z  )
2) : w = y2 + x3 + z4(z  1)2(z  )2
2) : w = y2 + x3 + z3(z  1)3(z  )3 .

(1.15)

the rst one yields e8e8 gauge symmetry, and thus will correspond to
the heterotic model with switched-o wilson lines of section 2. the other
cases correspond to similar models with certain wilson lines switched
on; we include them here because we can uniformly treat all these models
in the same way.

e

(cid:0) plane

h

(cid:0) plane

h

(cid:0) plane

e

(cid:0) plane

(cid:0)k

k

k

(cid:0)k

z =  

z = 

z = (cid:21)((cid:28) )

z = 

g gauge fields

(cid:10)

(cid:8)

(cid:10)

(cid:8)

(cid:0)

!

(cid:0)

!

!

!

figure 1.5
7-plane conguration of the rst three models in (1.15), which de-
scribes k3 surfaces with elliptic (e8k  hk)2 singularities. we have indicated
the monodromies given by  = e2i/n , and also exhibited multiplets of (mutu-
ally non-local) open strings that run between the hk planes. for ( )  1 the
hk planes merge into a single plane, the strings between them then giving rise
to massless charged gauge elds that enhance the non-abelian gauge group.

each of the surfaces in (1.15) has two pairs of singular bers of the
indicated types over the zplane. as convention we have chosen to

14

put 7planes of types e8,e7,e6,d4 at z = 0,, and planes of types
h0,h1,h2,d4 at z = 1, , respectively (see fig. 1.5). note that the
kodaira singularity types of these two sets are dual to each other,
in that the monodromies of the e8k planes and of the hk planes are
inverses of each other; they belong to zzn , n = 2, 3, 4, 6, respectively.
in the one-dimensional sub-moduli spaces, two interesting things can
happen. first, a (e8k) and a hkplane can collide, to yield an  e8
singularity of the local form y2 + x3 + z6 = 0. as we will see, this corre-
sponds to the decompactication limit on the heterotic side. secondly,
two hkplanes can collide to produce a 7plane associated with some
extra non-abelian gauge symmetry g, and precisely which one can be
inferred from table 2.
in other words, the generic non-abelian gauge
symmetry is (e8k  ak)2, which can be enhanced to (e8k)2  g, for
g = a2, d4, e6, respectively (for colliding d4 planes there is no further
gauge enhancement, as this also corresponds to the decompactication
limit).

4.

4.1

geometric determination of the
threshold couplings

chern-simons couplings on
kodaira 7-planes

the issue is to compute the functions e (1.1) via 7-brane interac-
tions. eective interactions in 8d space-time are generated by super-
imposing world-volume actions, and also by integrating out exchanges
between the 7branes. while in general very complicated, the interac-
tions are in the present context reasonably tractable because of their spe-
cial anomaly related, parity-odd structure. they arise from the chern-
simons terms on the world-volumina of the 7-branes, via the exchange
of rr antisymmetric tensor elds c (p).

for a single d-brane with (p, q) = (0, 1), the relevant tree level cou-

plings look [20] (for trivial normal bundle):

d7 = c  e2if q ba(r)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) 8form
l(cs)
k=0c (2k) is the formal sum over all rr forms, and ba(r) is

where c  4
the dirac genus. the couplings for general (p, q) branes can be obtained
by applying sl(2, zz) transformations on the elds in (1.16).

,

(1.16)

however, due to the generic mutual non-locality of the 24 (p, q) 7-
branes that we simultaneously have in the theory, it is a priori not clear
how to add up these terms and how to determine what eective inter-
actions they induce. but as discussed above, we can simply restrict

on the heterotic/f-theory duality

15

to sub-moduli spaces where the 24 branes combine into 7-planes that
are all mutually local, ie., have commuting monodromies. then all the
contributions can simply be added up.

in order to do so, we will rst need to know what the relevant couplings
on the world-volumina on the various kinds of 7-planes are, in analogy
to the couplings on a single d7-brane (1.16). because of the mutual
locality, the anomalous couplings can in fact be very easily determined.
specically, recall that a d4-plane can be viewed as being composed out
of four d7-branes plus one orientifold plane, which are all mutually local.
since a direct cft computation gives l(cs)
[21, 22, 23], where bl(r) is the hirzebruch genus, we thus have:
= c (cid:20)tr(e2if ) q ba(r)  4qbl(r)(cid:21)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) 8form
l(cs)
d4
= c (4)(cid:16) 1

o7 = 4c qbl(r)|8form

(1.17)

2 r2  2trf 2(cid:17)
3 trf 4  1

+c (0)(cid:16) 2

12 trf 2trr2 + 1

192 (trr2)2 + 1

48 trr4(cid:17)

summing over all four world-volumina indeed exactly reproduces the
(eight dimensional remainder of the) green-schwarz term of the het-
2)+c (2)x8(fso(32), r).
erotic string, l(gs) = c (6) 2(r2trfso(32)
the same logic must be valid for the h0 and h1-planes and their
composites. even though these planes are associated with strong cou-
pling and may not have a well-dened lagrangian description of their
world-volume theories, the wz coupling terms are topological and in-
dependent of the coupling, and must make sense at least for anomaly
cancelling reasons. therefore, we can conclude for the basic building
blocks:

l(cs)
h0

=

1

3l(cs)
d4

,

l(cs)
h1

=

1

2l(cs)
d4

,

(1.18)

where the gauge eld traces follow implicitly from the decomposition
so(8)  u (1) or u (2), respectively.
4.2

geometric interactions on zzn
curves

what we are interested in are the non-trivial interactions between
the planes, which should ultimately reproduce the coupling functions
e(t, u = const) of section 2. the primary perturbative contributions
will arise from massless c (p) tensor eld exchange between individual
planes. the eective interaction will thus depend on the distances be-
tween the various 7-planes in the z-plane.

16

more specically, the closed string exchange that contributes to the
maximal number of wedge products of eld strengths is in the odd rr
sector, and is proportional to the greens function  of a scalar eld on
the z-plane:

m1...mp(z1), c (8p)

dc (p)
where, as z1  z2:

n1...n8p(z2)err  m1...mpn1...n8p(z1, z2) ,
(z1, z2) = ln(z1  z2) + nite .

(1.19)

(1.20)

however, in order to obtain functionally exact results, we need to know
the full greens functions that probe the global structure of the z-plane,
and not just their leading singular behavior. this is in general a com-
plicated problem, but in our setup, where we consider only planes with
nite order monodromies, there is a natural geometric answer [5, 6].

z

figure 1.6
lift of the zplane to a covering riemann surface. shown is here
the situation with two e6 and two h2 planes, which correspond to zz3 twist
elds and anti-twist elds, respectively, located at the branch points of a genus
two curve 2. we also show an open string trajectory that contributes to the
2 (transforming as (3, 3) under su (3)su (3) e6)
coupling trfsu (3)
and which corresponds to a 1/3period on 2.

2trfsu (3)

by denition, monodromies of nite order means that the geometry
of the singular k3s can be described by a nite covering of the z-plane
and so eectively reduces to the one of riemann surfaces. the four 7-
planes then correspond to the branch points of these curves (cf. fig. 1.6).
more specically, for the four models in (1.15) one nds the following
zzn -symmetric curves

n1 :

(1.21)
of genus g = n  1, where n = 6, 4, 3, 2, respectively. the requisite
greens functions should therefore simply be given by appropriate scalar
greens functions on these covering spaces [24].

xn = z1(z  1)(z  )

on the heterotic/f-theory duality

17

the canonical greens function of a scalar eld on a riemann surface

is known to be given by the logarithm of the prime form

z1

z1

~w] ,

z1



prime
form

~w|]

~w](im)1[imz z2

[r z2
p(z1)p(z2)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) [imz z2
(z1, z2) = ln(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(1.22)
where p(z)  q 
([~z|])  wi(z) is a some 1/2-dierential whose
purpose is to cancel spurious zeros of the numerator theta-function
(where  denotes an arbitrary odd characteristic).
indeed, the only
singularity of the prime form is at coincident points, ie., (z1  z2) 
]+ nite terms. by construction, the nite terms implement
ln[
the requisite global properties of the greens functions.

z2z1

dz1dz2

zi

due to the high degree of symmetry of our zzn curves n1, much
of the information in (1.22) is in fact redundant for our examples. by
explicit computation one can show that the prime form greens function,
when evaluated between any two of the branch points, can always be
written in the following generic form:

n 1

prime
form

(z1, z2) = ln [1(1  )2 ()3] ,

(1.23)

where z1,2  {0, 1, ,}, z1 6= z2 and the numerical coecients i de-
pend on the particular choice of z1 and z2.
however, it turns out [6] that these canonical greens functions on
n1 to not capture the full story. they capture only the exchange of
c elds, but miss certain additional instanton contributions. namely,
loops of (p, q) strings in the z-plane will be closed in general only on
the covering surface n1, so that such strings eectively wrap the
riemann surfaces. wrapping entire world-sheets of such strings will
thus in general generate extra instanton contributions

these extra contributions can be viewed as modications of the canon-
ical greens functions (1.23) into eective greens functions. indeed,
a greens function is in general ambiguous up to the addition of a nite
piece, and it is this ambiguous piece to which we can formally attribute
those extra non-singular, non-perturbative corrections. denoting the
extra piece by , we can thus write the threshold coupling functions
generically as follows:

e () = n 1

prime
form

() + ()

(1.24)

we will describe further below how to exactly compute the extra contri-
butions ().

for the time being, note that the above picture applies most directly
to couplings that mix the gauge eld strengths of two dierent 7-planes,

18

2. how-
which means that they have the form hc (4), c (4)i trfg
ever, as one can check on the heterotic side, there are moduli-dependent
corrections also to other eight-form terms in the eective action, eg., to
2)2, which pertain to a single gauge group factor living on a single
(trfg
brane.

2 trfg

(cid:6)



z

(cid:10)

(cid:8)

(cid:8)

(cid:10)

e



h



h

e





interactions probing the zz3 torsion piece of d-brane charge. a
figure 1.7
2)2, transforming as a
string junction is shown that contributes to (trfsu (3)
singlet under su (3)su (3)  e6. we also show how it lifts to a cycle on the
covering curve. the junction gives rise to a logarithmic singularity when the
planes collide, even though it does not seem to couple locally to the right h2
plane.

in the usually considered situation with cft description, where one
focuses on pairs of d- or orientifold-branes [21, 22, 23], such terms arise
from integrating out c (0)c (8) exchange between the two branes, each
equipped with couplings like l(cs) = q7c (8) + . . . + c (0) y8(f ), where
y8(f ) is some 8-form polynomial. this obviously induces a location-
dependent correction to the quartic gauge eld coupling of the form
q7hc (0), c (8)itry8(fg).
however, in the present context, the 7-brane charge is cancelled lo-
cally on every plane so that q7  0; indeed there is no c (8) term in
(1.17). this means that naive c (0)c (8) exchange cannot contribute to
these couplings. but how do these (possibly singular) moduli-dependent
corrections, which we explicitly see on the heterotic side, then arise ?
more specically, how can a given brane that carries the eld strength
fg feel the presence of the other brane, while no string ends on that
other brane ?

the point is that despite our 7-planes do not have net zz-valued 7-
brane charge (no logarithmic monodromy), there is still a remnant left,
which is reected by the nite order zzn monodromies. it is this tor-
sion piece of the d-brane charge that must be responsible for the req-

on the heterotic/f-theory duality

19

uisite long-range interactions [25]. this can be seen by analyzing the
interactions in terms of string junctions [17]. similar to what is familiar
from orientifold planes, what one nds are string trajectories that loop
around other planes, rather than coupling to them via the local chern-
simons terms in (1.17); this is exemplied in fig. 1.7 for the e6 model.
it thus seems natural to view these interactions as analogous to those of
alice strings [26], which do have long-range interactions but no locally
dened charge density.

at any rate, what we learn by studying these couplings is that there
can be non-trivial interactions between 7-branes that should be attributed
the global properties of the multi-valued z-plane (which is best repre-
sented by the curves n1), rather than solely to local wz couplings.
5.

solution via the mirror map

5.1

flat coordinates and moduli
spaces

the singular k3 surfaces in (1.15) all depend on one geometric mod-
ulus, . on the other hand, the heterotic models we consider depend
on two moduli t, u (besides the wilson lines that we keep frozen and
so neglect). in order to compare the geometrical interactions, which de-
pend on the parameter  in (1.23), with the heterotic one-loop results,
we therefore rst of all need to know what the map between these
moduli is.

the point is that the heterotic moduli are the canonical moduli of a
conformal eld theory. from general reasoning [27, 28] we know that the
moduli space has a at structure and that the canonical cft moduli
are the corresponding at coordinates. therefore, we need to determine
what the at coordinate  is that is associated with the geometric mod-
ulus . a general way of constructing the at coordinate is to write
 () in terms of the ratio of certain period integrals (which are them-
selves solutions of certain linear dierential equations, as we will discuss
below).

specically, the relevant periods pertaining to the singular k3 sur-
faces w (x, y, z; ) = 0 in (1.15) are obtained by integrating the unique
holomorphic two-form (2,0)
k3 ,

i = zi

(2,0)

k3 zi

dxdz

yw (x, y, z; )

(1.25)

over a suitable integral basis of 2-cycles i. we have seen before that
these singular k3s are closely related to riemann surfaces n1, and
indeed by redening variables: x = vz2(11/n )(z  1)2/n (z  )2/n ,

20

the period integrals (1.25) factorize intor

z11/n (z1)1/n (z)1/n .
the integral over v being a constant normalization that we neglect, the
k3 period integrals thus turn into period integrals (now over 1-cycles)
pertaining to the zzn curves (1.21):

dvv3+1r

dz

i = z

z11/n (z  1)1/n (z  )1/n zi

dz

(1,0)
n 1

(1.26)

these integrals are of canonical hypergeometric type and so given by
linear combinations of

0() = z 
1() = z 1

0

0

(1,0)
n 1

(1,0)
n 1

n ) 2f1( 1

= (1)2/n  csc( 
= 1/n (1)2/n  csc( 

n , 1

n , 1; )

(1.27)

n ) 2f1( 1

n , 1

n , 1; 1

 ) .

the at coordinate is then given, as usual, by the ratio of the periods:

 () =

1()
0()

= s(0, 0, 1 2

n ; ) .

(1.28)

cusp c

if

(cid:28)  ! (cid:21)((cid:28) )

(cid:26)

conifold b

(cid:10)

(cid:8)

(cid:10)

(cid:8)

e

(cid:0) plane

e

(cid:0) plane

h

(cid:0) plane

h

(cid:0) plane





 

 

z =  

z = 

z = 

z = (cid:21)((cid:28) )

 a

 c

 b

cusp a

figure 1.8 on the left we see a picture of the moduli space of the heterotic
compactication with e8  e8 gauge symmetry, given by a fundamental region
if = if  (s  if)  ih+. the hauptmodul ( ) maps this region to the
7-plane geometry shown in the right part of the gure. the cusps and orbifold
point correspond to the various ways the mobile h0 plane can hit the three
other planes.

in (1.28), s(a, b, c) denotes a triangle function that maps the complex
plane into a fundamental region if  ih+, while its entries a, b, c indicate
the angles of if. we depict a typical such fundamental region in fig. 1.8.
the two zeros mean that there are generically two cusps (corresponding

on the heterotic/f-theory duality

21

to the decompactication limits   0,), and in addition there is one
orbifold point associated with gauge enhancement,   1 (however, for
n = 2 there are three cusps, which reects that any two colliding d4
singularities correspond to decompactication).
by the theory of triangle functions, the inverse maps given by the
hauptmoduls ( ), can then be concisely written in terms of standard
modular functions. these, together with the modular subgroups under
which  is invariant, are listed in table 3.

n mod. subgroup hauptmodul ( = t )
6 p (2)
4 0(2)
3 0(3)
2 0(4)

(pj( ) +p1  j( ))2 
64 ( ( )
 1
27 ( ( )
 1
16 ( ( )
 1

(2 ) )24
(3 ) )12
(4 ) )8

iib = u

i



undet.

table 3: modular subgroups of which ( ) is a modular function for the
k3 families in (1.15), and the values of the constant string coupling iib.
they agree with the duality groups of the corresponding dual heterotic
string compactications. (the modular subgroup p (2)  sl(2, zz) has
been discussed in ref. [29]).

if we now identify

t = 
u = iib  const.

(1.29)

(where the constant type iib coupling iib is as listed in table 3), then
the above modular subgroups indeed exactly match the modular sub-
groups that arise on the heterotic side by switching on the corresponding
wilson lines.6

moreover we can use the map (t ) to compare the leading singulari-
ties in the geometric greens function (1.24) with the heterotic one-loop
results. note that (1.23) carries the leading logarithmic behavior of the
full greens function when two of the hn planes collide for   1. in
particular, for the e8 model we get:

e (t ) 1 ln[(t )]  ln[j(t )] ,

(1.30)

which captures precisely the singularity of the coupling (t t u u )
(t, )
in (1.5) (where we need to set j(u )  j()  0). one can check

e

6the functional map between t, u (with u not being frozen) and the z-plane geometry has
been determined for the e8  e8 model in refs. [30, 5].

22

that similarly for the other models, there is perfect agreement with the
singularities in the perturbative results on the heterotic side. this yields
a rst quantitative, though still supercial test of the duality.

5.2

string geodesics and bps masses

remember that the elliptic k3 manifold that appears in f -theory is
primarily an elegant tool to encode the relevant open string geometry
of non-perturbative type iib compactications, and as such should have
no particular physical signicance in itself (unless the ctitious twelve
dimensional f theory turns out to exist). therefore, we should be able to
give the geometrical quantities that we have discussed above a physical
meaning that makes sense more directly in the type iib compactication
on ip1.

indeed the periods and at coordinates have a direct interpretation
in terms of open strings. recall [15] that the tension of a (p, q) string
(in the canonical metric) is

tp,q =

1

imiib |p + qiib| ,

(1.31)

so that the mass of a string stretched along a line c is rc
imiib|(iib)|2q24

tp,qds. the
line element has been determined in [31, 18] and is given by ds2 =
i=1(z  zi)1/12dz|2. for the geometries we consider
(with four 7-planes and constant type iib coupling iib), the mass of
a string stretched between any two planes (at branch points z1 and z2)
then simplies to:

z1/n1(z  1)1/n (z  )1/ndz|2

mp,q

2 =z z2
z1 | (p + qiib(z))2(iib(z))
}
|
= |p + qiib|2|2(iib)|2z z2
z1 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(1,0)
n 1(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

{z

const.

2

,

which coincides up to a numerical prefactor with the period integral
(1.26) (strictly speaking, period integrals are over closed homology cy-
cles, while here the open strings are stretched along half-cycles. the
dierence is just in the normalization).
in fact only ratios of periods
have an invariant meaning, whence we have to divide (1.31) by the fun-
damental period 0. to see that this provides the correct normalization,
consider in the e8e8 model the mass of open strings stretched between
the two h0 planes. it is proportional to

mp,q

2  |p + qiib|2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

r 
r 

1 (1,0)
5
0 (1,0)
5

2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

on the heterotic/f-theory duality

23

2

.

(1.32)

= |p + q|2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

  

  (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

with the identication (1.29): iib  ,  = t , this exactly repro-
duces the known heterotic mass formula for the su (3)/u (1)2 gauge
bosons that become massless as the planes collide (as   1 or t  ).
the open strings that correspond to these gauge bosons are sketched in
figs. 1.5 and 1.6; they have (p, q) charges given by (1, 0), (0, 1) and
(1,1), respectively, for which (1.32) implies that they all have the
same mass.
one can check that the bps masses of stretched strings match also in
the other examples those of the corresponding winding and momentum
states in the heterotic string compactications on t 2; a detailed analysis
has been presented in ref. [32].

5.3

mirror map acting between
open and closed string sectors

note that in the previous section, we tacitly used a dierent language
as before: namely we used the concept of stretched open strings, while
previously we had discussed c-eld exchange between 7-planes, which
is primarily a closed string concept. indeed the mass of stretched open
strings is best parametrized by the at coordinate t , on the other hand
closed string interactions between 7-planes depend on their physical lo-
cations in the z-plane, and thus are more naturally parametrized by the
geometrical modulus (t ).

z



z



figure 1.9 dual interpretations of the same string diagram, obtained by
time-slicing the world-sheet in two orthogonal ways: either in terms of tree
level closed string exchange between the planes,
leading to a contribution
< c, c > ln[z1 z2]. or as one-loop diagram involving stretched open strings,
4 ln[mi]. the functional relationship between these expressions

is essentially governed by the mirror map,   ( ).

leading top qi

that a given physical string process can have dierent interpretations
in terms of open or closed strings is of course a well-known, basic fact of
string perturbation theory  see fig. 1.9. to see this better in the present

24

context, let us recapitulate the origin of the logarithmic singularity that
arises in the eective action when two h0 planes collide in the e8  e8
model. it can be seen to arise in following two dual ways:
i) it either arises as leading one-loop eect involving open strings stretched
between the planes:

e  xstates

i

qi

4 ln[mi] ,

(1.33)

which gives, using (1.32):

e  3 ln" t  
t  #.

(1.34)

the numerical factor arises due to the 3 sets of charged su (3)/u (1)2
gauge bosons which have the same mass.
ii) alternatively, the singularity arises as discussed before from mass-
less closed string c-eld exchange between the planes, namely as small-
distance singularity of a greens function:
e  hc (4)c (4)i  ln[z1  z2]  ln[1  (t )]  ln[j(t )]. (1.35)
the j-function then expands near the singularity as

t  !3
j(t  ) = const.   t  

+ . . . ,

(1.36)

where the power indeed reproduces the same prefactor as in (1.34). thus
the j-function (which pertains to the geometry of the z-plane) knows
about the open string states of the theory, and eectively sums up many
contributions in a duality invariant way.

the insight that we can abstract from this is that the map  
 between at and geometric coordinates of the moduli space can be
physically interpreted in terms of a map between the natural open and
closed string moduli. from the view point of k3 period integrals, the
map    can also be viewed as mirror map [33] on k3.7 however,
in the f -theory setup the whole of k3 is not really physical, and we
should not consider closed two-cycles but rather their projection on the
z-plane, which gives open string geodesics. in this sense, the role of the
k3 mirror map in the physical type iib compactication on ip1 is then
played by a map between open and closed string sectors.

7while for higher dimensional calabi-yau d-folds the mirror map acts between dierent
manifolds and their moduli spaces, torus and k3 are self-mirror and accordingly the mirror
map acts within the same moduli space [34].

on the heterotic/f-theory duality

25

5.4

picard fuchs equations, and
their symmetric square

we have seen in the preceding sections that a lot can be learned by
simply focussing on the leading singularities in the moduli space of the
eective theory. however, for the sake of performing really non-trivial
quantitative tests of the heterotic/f-theory duality, we should try harder
in order to reproduce the exact functional form of the couplings e (t )
from k3 geometry. the hope is, of course, to learn something new about
how to do exact non-perturbative computations in d-brane physics.

more specically, the issue is to eventually determine the extra con-
tributions () to the geometric greens functions in (1.24). having
a priori no good clue from rst principles how to do this, the results
of the previous section, together with experience with four dimensional
compactications with n = 2 supersymmetry [35, 36, 37], suggest that
somehow mirror symmetry should be a useful tool. it was indeed shown
in refs. [6, 7] how mirror symmetry can be formally used to do such
computations, although a satisfying physical insight why it works has
not yet been achieved. we will therefore only briey sketch the ndings
of these works, and refer the interested reader to them for more details.
the starting point is the observation that threshold couplings of sim-
ilar structure appear also in four dimensional, n = 2 supersymmetric
compactications of type ii strings on calabi-yau threefolds. more pre-
2 (in
cisely, these coupling functions multiply operators of the form trfg
contrast to quartic operators in d = 8), and can be written in the form

(4d)
e  ln [1(1  )2 ()3] + () ,

(1.37)

which looks similar to (1.24). by analyzing [6, 7] the known results of
mirror symmetry computations [36, 37] in d = 4, it is found that the
extra term () in (1.37) appears also in the dilaton at coordinate.
that is, it is nothing but the remainder of the dilaton in the large dilaton
limit: s =  ln[y] + , where y  es + ... is a geometric coordinate of
the underlying cy threefold moduli space.
the dilaton s is a period associated with the cy threefold, and like all
period integrals, it satises a system of linear dierential equations. the
idea [6, 7] is thus to rst isolate a dierential equation that is satised
by () in d = 4, and then to see how to generalize it such as to obtain
a dierential equation for () in d = 8. furthermore, this dierential
equation may then be translated back into geometry, and this then would
hopefully give us a clue about what the relevant quantum geometry is
that underlies those quartic gauge couplings in eight dimensions.

26

the starting point is, once again, the families of singular k3 surfaces
in (1.15). as we have seen above, associated with them are the period
integrals (1.25), which evaluate to the hypergeometric functions given
in (1.27). generally, period integrals satisfy the picard-fuchs linear
dierential equations [38], and for our examples (1.15) these read: ln 
i(z) = 0, where

ln (z) = z

2  z (z + 1

2n )(z + 1

2  1

2n ) .

(1.38)

here we have made for convenience a change of variables: z  4/(1
)2; moreover, z  z 
z .
the four-dimensional theories are obtained by compactifying the type
ii strings on cy threefolds of special type, namely they are brations
[36, 39] of the k3 surfaces (1.15) over ip1. the size of the ip1 yields then
an additional modulus, whose associated at coordinate is precisely the
dilaton s (in the dual, heterotic language; from the type ii point of view,
it is simply another geometric modulus). the k3-bered threefolds are
then associated with enlarged pf systems of the form:

ln (z, y) = z(z  2y)  z (z + 1
2  2y (2y + 1)y .
l2(y) = y

2n )(z + 1

2  1
2n )

(1.39)

since we are interested in the perturbative, one-loop contributions on
the heterotic side (which capture the full story in d = 8, in contrast
to d = 4), we need to consider only the weak coupling limit, which
corresponds to the limit of large base space: y  es  0. though
we might now be tempted to drop all the y  yy terms in the pf
system, we better note that the y term in ln (z, y) can a non-vanishing
contribution, namely in particular when it hits the logarithmic piece of
the dilaton period, s =  ln[y] + . as a result one nds that the piece
 that we want to compute satises in the limit y  0 the following
inhomogenous dierential equation:

ln  ( 0)(z) = 0(z) .

(1.40)

we now apply the inverse of this strategy to our eight dimensional
problem. since we know from the perturbative heterotic calculation of
section 2 what the exact answer for  must be (e.g., (1.3)), we can work
backwards and see what inhomogenous dierential equation the extra
contribution () obeys. what we nd after some tedious computations
is that it satises:

l2
n  ( 0

2)(z) = 0

2(z) ,

(1.41)

whose homogenous operator

on the heterotic/f-theory duality

27

l2
n (z) = z

3  z (z + 1  1

n )(z + 1

2 )(z + 1

n ) ,

(1.42)

is the symmetric square [40, 41] of the k3 picard-fuchs operator
(1.38). this means that its solution space is given by the symmetric
square of the solution space of ln (z), i.e.,
2, 01, 1

2) = 0.

(1.43)

l2
n  (0

even though the inhomogenous pf equation (1.41) concisely captures
the extra corrections in the eight-dimensional threshold terms, the con-
siderations leading to this equation have been rather formal and it would
be clearly desirable to get a better understanding of what it mathemat-
ically and physically means.

note that in the four dimensional situation, the pf operator ln (z),
which gures as homogenous piece in (1.40), is by construction associ-
ated with the k3 ber of the threefold. by analogy, the homogenous
piece of equation (1.41) should then tell us something about the geom-
etry that is relevant in the eight dimensional situation. observing that
the solution space (1.43) is given by products of the k3 periods, it is
clear what the natural geometrical object is:
it must be the symmet-
ric square sym2(k3) = (k3  k3)/zz2. being a hyperkahler manifold
[42], its periods (not subject to world-sheet instanton corrections) indeed
enjoy the factorization property exhibited by (1.43).

 

!

k 

k 

k 

(cid:2)

=zz





ip

d=4



ip

d=8

figure 1.10
formal similarity of the four and eight-dimensional string com-
pactications: the underlying quantum geometry that underlies the quadratic
or quartic gauge couplings appears to be given by three- or ve-folds, which are
brations of k3 or its symmetric square, respectively. the perturbative com-
putations on the heterotic side are supposdly reproduced by the mirror maps
on these manifolds in the limit where the base ip1s are large.

the occurrence of such symmetric products is familiar in d-brane
physics. the geometrical structure that is relevant to us is however
not just the symmetric square of k3, but rather a bration of it, in

28

the limit of large base space  this is precisely what the content of the
inhomogenous pf equation (1.41) is. it is however not at all obvious to
us why this particular structure of a hyperkahler-bered ve-fold would
underlie the non-perturbative quantum geometry of the quartic gauge
couplings in eight dimensions.8

the situation is, in this respect, somewhat similar to n = 2 sym
theory in four dimensions, where the riemann surfaces underlying the
eective lagrangian were found in [43], and at the time the geometry
appeared to be merely a convenient mathematical tool for encoding ap-
propriate physical data.
it was only quite some time later when the
geometry was given a deep physical interpretation.9 in the same spirit,
one may speculate that the ve-folds that seem to emerge here may
ultimately have an interpretation in terms of a yet unknown dual for-
mulation of the theory, or, perhaps more likely, in terms of sigma-models
describing the relevant 7-brane interactions that lead to the requisite f 4
terms in the eective action.

6.

conclusion

summarizing, we have seen that the postulated duality between the
heterotic string compactied on t 2 and f -theory on k3 (which is de-
ned to be type iib strings on ip1 with 24 (p, q) 7-branes) passes nu-
merous tests. in particular, highly non-trivial quartic gauge threshold
coupling functions, which are one-loop exact on the heterotic side, can
be reproduced from geometrical data pertaining to k3 surfaces. still,
a better physical understanding of the issues discussed in the previous
paragraphs would be highly desirable.

acknowledgments

i thank stephan stieberger and nick warner for the collaboration on this subject,

and moreover the organizers of the school for a very pleasant stay.

8the same structure is found also when considering models with more moduli; in particular,
the prepotential g(t, u ) in (1.4) can be re-derived in an analogous fashion from symmetric
squares [7].
9for example, as part of world-volumina of type iia [44] or m -theory [45] vebranes.

references

[1] c. vafa, evidence for f-theory, nucl. phys. b469 403 (1996),

hep-th/9602022.

[2] c. bachas, c. fabre, e. kiritsis, n.a. obers and p. vanhove,
heterotic/type-i duality and d-brane instantons, nucl. phys. b509
33 (1998), hep-th/9707126.

[3] e. kiritsis and n.a. obers, heterotic type i duality in d < 10-
dimensions, threshold corrections and d-instantons, jhep10 004
(1997), hep-th/9709058.

[4] c. bachas, heterotic versus type i, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 68 348

(1998), hep-th/9710102;
m. bianchi, e. gava, f. morales and k.s. narain, d-strings in un-
conventional type i vacuum congurations, nucl. phys. b547 96
(1999), hep-th/9811013;
e. gava, a. hammou, j.f. morales and k.s. narain, on the pertur-
bative corrections around d-string instantons, jhep03 023 (1999),
hep-th/9902202;
k. foerger and s. stieberger, higher derivative couplings and
heterotic-type i duality in eight dimensions, hep-th/9901020;
m. gutperle, a note on heterotic/type i duality and d0 brane quan-
tum mechanics, jhep05 007 (1999), hep-th/9903010;
e. gava, k.s. narain and m.h. sarmadi, instantons in n = 2 sp(n)
superconformal gauge theories and the ads/cft correspondence,
hep-th/9908125.

[5] w. lerche and s. stieberger, prepotential, mirror map and f-theory
on k3, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 1105 (1998), hep-th/9804176.

[6] w. lerche, s. stieberger and n.p. warner, quartic gauge couplings

from k3 geometry, hep-th/9811228.

29

30

[7] w. lerche, s. stieberger and n.p. warner, prepotentials from sym-

metric products, hep-th/9901162.

[8] w. lerche, elliptic index and superstring eective actions, nucl.

phys. b308 (1988) 102.

[9] c. bachas and e. kiritsis, f 4 terms in n = 4 string vacua, nucl.

phys. proc. suppl. 55b 194 (1997), hep-th/9611205.

[10] a. schellekens and n. warner, anomalies, characters and strings,

nucl. phys. b287 (1987) 317;
e. witten, elliptic genera and quantum eld theory, comm. math.
phys. 109 (1987) 525;
w. lerche, b.e.w. nilsson, a.n. schellekens and n.p. warner,
nucl. phys. 299 (1988) 91.

[11] j.a. harvey and g. moore, algebras, bps states, and strings, nucl.

phys. b463 315 (1996), hep-th/9510182.

[12] g. lopes cardoso, d. lust and t. mohaupt, threshold corrections
and symmetry enhancement in string compactications, nucl. phys.
b450 115 (1995), hep-th/9412209.

[13] b. de wit, v. kaplunovsky, j. louis and d. lust, perturbative
couplings of vector multiplets in n=2 heterotic string vacua, nucl.
phys. b451 53 (1995), hep-th/9504006;
i. antoniadis, s. ferrara, e. gava, k.s. narain and t.r. taylor,
perturbative prepotential and monodromies in n=2 heterotic su-
perstring, nucl. phys. b447 35 (1995), hep-th/9504034.

[14] p.s. aspinwall, k3 surfaces and string duality, hep-th/9611137.

[15] j.h. schwarz, an sl(2,z) multiplet of type iib superstrings, phys.

lett. b360 13 (1995), hep-th/9508143.

[16] k. kodaira, ann. math. 77 (1963) 563; ann. math. 78 (1963) 1.

[17] see eg.:

a. johansen, a comment on bps states in f-theory in 8 dimen-
sions, phys. lett. b395 36 (1997), hep-th/9608186;
m.r. gaberdiel and b. zwiebach, exceptional groups from open
strings, nucl. phys. b518 151 (1998), hep-th/9709013.
m.r. gaberdiel, t. hauer and b. zwiebach, open string-
string junction transitions, nucl. phys. b525 117 (1998),
hep-th/9801205;
o. dewolfe and b. zwiebach, string junctions for arbitrary

references

31

lie algebra representations, nucl. phys. b541 509 (1999),
hep-th/9804210.

[18] a. sen, f-theory and orientifolds, nucl. phys. b475 562 (1996),

hep-th/9605150.

[19] k. dasgupta and s. mukhi, f-theory at constant coupling, phys.

lett. b385 125 (1996), hep-th/9606044.

[20] m. green, j.a. harvey and g. moore, i-brane inow and anoma-
lous couplings on d-branes, class. quant. grav. 14 47 (1997),
hep-th/9605033.

[21] k. dasgupta, d.p. jatkar and s. mukhi, gravitational cou-
plings and z(2) orientifolds, nucl. phys. b523 465 (1998),
hep-th/9707224.

[22] j.f. morales, c.a. scrucca and m. serone, anomalous cou-
plings for d-branes and o-planes, nucl. phys. b552 291 (1999),
hep-th/9812071.

[23] b. craps and f. roose, anomalous d-brane and orientifold cou-
plings from the boundary state, phys. lett. b445 150 (1998),
hep-th/9808074;
b.j. stefanski, gravitational couplings of d-branes and o-planes,
nucl. phys. b548 275 (1999), hep-th/9812088.

[24] l. dixon, d. friedan, e. martinec and s. shenker, the conformal

eld theory of orbifolds, nucl. phys. b282 (1987) 13;
m. bershadsky and a. radul, conformal eld theories with addi-
tional z(n) symmetry, sov. j. nucl. phys. 47 (1988) 363-369;
f. ferrari and j. sobczyk, bosonic field propagators on algebraic
curves, hep-th/9909173.

[25] w. lerche and s. stieberger, on the anomalous and global interac-

tions of kodaira 7-planes, hep-th/9903232.

[26] a. s. schwarz, field theories with no local conservation of the elec-

tric charge, nucl. phys. b208 (1982) 141.

[27] r. dijkgraaf, h. verlinde and e. verlinde, topological strings in

d < 1, nucl. phys. b352 59 (1991).

[28] s. cecotti and c. vafa, topological-antitopological fusion, nucl.

phys. b367 359 (1991).

32

[29] r. rankin, modular forms and functions, cambridge university

press.

[30] g. lopes cardoso, g. curio, d. lust and t. mohaupt, on the
duality between the heterotic string and f-theory in 8 dimensions,
phys. lett. b389 479 (1996), hep-th/9609111.

[31] b.r. greene, a. shapere, c. vafa and s. yau, stringy cosmic
strings and noncompact calabi-yau manifolds, nucl. phys. b337
1 (1990).

[32] m.c. barrozo, map of heterotic and type iib moduli in 8 dimen-

sions, hep-th/9909178.

[33] see e.g., essays and mirror manifolds, (s. yau, ed.), international
press 1992; mirror symmetry ii, (b. greene et al, eds.), interna-
tional press 1997.

[34] p.s. aspinwall and d.r. morrison, string theory on k3 surfaces,

hep-th/9404151.

[35] s. kachru and c. vafa, exact results for n=2 compactications of

heterotic strings, nucl. phys. b450 69 (1995), hep-th/9505105.

[36] a. klemm, w. lerche and p. mayr, k3 fibrations and het-
erotic type ii string duality, phys. lett. b357 313 (1995),
hep-th/9506112.

[37] s. kachru, a. klemm, w. lerche, p. mayr and c. vafa, nonper-
turbative results on the point particle limit of n=2 heterotic string
compactications, nucl. phys. b459 537 (1996), hep-th/9508155.

[38] s. hosono, a. klemm, s. theisen and s.t. yau, mirror symmetry,
mirror map and applications to calabi-yau hypersurfaces, com-
mun. math. phys. 167 301 (1995), hep-th/9308122.

[39] p.s. aspinwall and j. louis, on the ubiquity of k3 fibrations in

string duality, phys. lett. b369 233 (1996), hep-th/9510234.

[40] b.h. lian and s. yau, arithmetic properties of mirror map
and quantum coupling, commun. math. phys. 176 163 (1996),
hep-th/9411234, mirror maps, modular relations and hyperge-
ometric series i, hep-th/9507151, mirror maps, modular rela-
tions and hypergeometric series. ii, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 46
248 (1996), hep-th/9507153.

references

33

[41] m. lee, picard-fuchs equations for elliptic modular varieties, appl.

math. letters 4, no.5 (1991) 91-95;
c. doran, picard-fuchs uniformization: modularity of the mirror
map and mirror-moonshine, math.ag/9812162.

[42] see e.g., d. huybrechts, compact hyperkahler manifolds: basic re-

sults, alg-geom/9705025;
r. dijkgraaf,
hep-th/9810210.

instanton strings and hyperkahler geometry,

[43] n. seiberg and e. witten, electric - magnetic duality, monopole
condensation, and connement in n=2 supersymmetric yang-mills
theory, nucl. phys. b426 19 (1994), hep-th/9407087.

[44] a. klemm, w. lerche, p. mayr, c. vafa and n. warner, self-dual
strings and n=2 supersymmetric field theory, nucl. phys. b477
746 (1996), hep-th/9604034.

[45] e. witten, solutions of four-dimensional eld theories via m-theory,

nucl. phys. b500 3 (1997), hep-th/9703166.

