9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
8
2

 

 
 

1
v
7
2
2
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

polynomial gauge invariants of a bosonic string

physics department, tomsk state university, tomsk 634050 lenin ave 36

vasiliy dolgushev1

russia

abstract

an open bosonic string is considered with the aim to construct a general gauge invariant, being
a polynomial of fubini-veneziano (fv) elds. the fv elds are transformed as 1-forms on s 1 ,
that allows to formulate the problem in geometric terms. we introduce a most general anzats for
these invariants and explicitly resolve the invariance conditions in the framework of the anzats. the
invariants are interpreted as integrals of n-form over a gauge invariant domains in an n-dimensional
torus, where the invariance of these domains is considered with respect to the action of the diagonal
of the group (dif f s 1)n.

we also discuss a possibility to get a complete set of gauge invariants which allow an actual
dependence on the string zero modes. we nd that the complete set cant be restricted by polynomial
invariants only.

the classical polynomial invariants, being directly dened in the string fock space, turn out to
break the structure of the respective brst cohomology even in the critical dimension. we discuss
a possibility to restore the brst invariance of the corresponding operator algebra by a non-trivial
quantum deformation of the original invariants.

introduction

the aim of the work is to nd a complete set of gauge invariants of a bosonic string.

a classical gauge invariant is understood as a parametrization independent object that is a physical
observable. and a quantum gauge invariant is an operator which is well-dened in the respective brst-
cohomology. it is an operator which represents a physical observable.

a complete set of classical gauge invariants is dened as the set in terms of which an arbitrary physical
observable can be expressed. and a complete set of quantum gauge invariants is the set whose enveloping
algebra includes all invariant operators. it will be shown how to nd all classical invariants at least in
the class of polynomials. the question of the quantization of these invariants will be also discussed.

the bosonic string is a well studied model. it allows to apply various methods of quantization, its
spectrum can be obtained in dierent ways. however a structure of the reduced phase space of the model
is rather complicated and is not recognized well. it is the set of gauge invariants that can be applied for
investigating the structure.

it could be useful for constructing string interaction, for a string eld theory. there is also another
question less obvious and less well known, namely to understand how the phase space of the string
straties into phase spaces of the elementary particles constituting its spectrum. the information about
the invariants seems to be rather useful for elaborating the last question.

it is commonly known that the complete set of quantum gauge invariant can be represented by the
set of vertex operators [1]. however the vertex operators have no classical limit. and actually we are
looking for the another set of invariants which do have a certain classical limit.
for simplicity well restrict ourselves to the case of the open bosonic string.

classical gauge invariants

the complete set of the phase space variables of the open bosonic string consists of the fubini-veneziano(fv)
elds and the string zero mode

v  = v () :

1e-mail vald@phys.tsu.ru

[0 , 2]  r1 ,d1

v (0) = v (2)

q  r1 ,d1

(1)

1

they are subject to the rst class constraints

l() =

1
4

v ()v()

(2)

first of all let us pose the question whether there are polynomial gauge invariants which depend on
the fv elds only. the positive answer to the question can be found in the literature, namely an innite
set of such invariants was proposed in the works of pohlmeyer and rehren [2, 3, 4].

i 12...n
n

= z 2

0

v 1 (1)d1 z 1+2

1

d2v 2 (2)z 2

1

v 3 (3) . . .z n1

1

dnv n (n)

(3)

in the paper [4] it was proved that these polynomials (3) exhaust all gauge invariants which depend on
the fv elds only. if we do need to obtain a complete set of classical gauge invariants we should involve
an actual dependence on the string zero mode q .

the most general polynomial expression for a classical gauge invariant is as follows

i = x c12...n q1 q2 . . . qn +x cm1

112...n1

1
m1

q1 q2 . . . qn1 +. . .+x cm1m2...mn

12...n 1
m1

2
m2

. . . n
mn

(4)

where



n =

1

2 z 2

0

v ()eind

as we see all the terms in the expression (4) are of the same order in the phase space variables. one can
take the anzats in such a form simply because the gauge transformations are homogeneous in the phase
space variables:

v  = (()v ())

q = z 2

0

d()v ()

i = { l[] , i}

(5)

if one requires the polynomial (4) to be the gauge invariant the respective structure coecients are subject
to following conditions:

if

c12...n = 0 ,

c n1n2...nl

12...l1...nl = 0

n1 6= 0 , n2 6= 0 , . . . , nl 6= 0 ,
c n1n2...nl 0 ... 0
= 0 .

12...l(l+1...s1)...ns

(6)

one of the examples of such invariants which depends on the whole set of phase space variables is the
momentum tensor of the string:

m = q

0  q 

0 + xn6=0

i
n


n

n

(7)

using the relations (6) one proves that an abitrary polynomial gauge invariant can be expressed,
modulo constraints, in terms of the momentum tensor (7) and the polynomials (3). it turns out that the
proposed polynomial invariants form only a subalgebra of the algebra of physical observables. actually
they do not exhaust the complete set of string gauge invariants because there are physicaly dierent points
on the constraint surface of the string, that cannot be distinguished with the help of these polynomials.
the last means that the complete set of string gauge invariant must include observables which are not
polynomial in the phase space variables. unfortunately no one of such invariant is known yet.

2

quantization problem

let us discuss a quantization of the polynomial invariants. as we know the momentum tensor (7) of
the bosonic string can be quantized with out any problems. the same situation takes place with the
polynomials (3) while n < 4 . as to the invariants (3) with n being more or equaled 4 the situation
drastically changes. namely the invariants being directly dened in the fock space of the string do not
commute with the virasoro generators because of the quantum corrections. it means that the respective
operators are not dened in the space of the physical states. the given situation relates to the common
quantization problem of the systems with constraints. it would be rather strange if quantum corrections
did not destroy some key relations of a classical theory. in some cases it leads us to the true values of
the critical parameters, in other ones it means that it is not possible to construct a consistent quantum
theory. there is however the third case when we simply can say that some relations do not have a
consistent quantum interpretation, but the quantum theory does exist.

we think that the problem we face with can be solved. firstly lets note that the classical invariants
are dened ambiguously o the constraint surface. namely one can add to the previous polynomial an
expression, which vanishes on constraints. the terms, which vanish classically, may contribute to the
quantum commutator between the invariant and the brst charge.

where cn and pn are canonical ghosts and

 = xn

lncn +xn m

mpncmcnm ,

ln =

1

2 xk


k 

nk

(8)

(9)

are the virasoro generators.

and it is the arbitrariness that can be used for constructing genuine quantum brst invariants

polynomial in string operators and ghosts.

let us summarize the things to be done.

i)it is necessary to add to the naive invariant the most general expression which vanishes on constraints

i = i[v ]

[ i, ln ] = pm wnmlm

(10)

ii) to construct a quantum operator with ghosts using the bfv method

i = i + cmpnwnm + . . . ,

iii) to evaluate the commutator between the constructed operator and the brst charge

[ i, ] = pn[ i, ln ]cn +pn k l m[wklclpk , lncn] +pn m k l mwkl[clpk , pncmcnm] + . . .

where . . . means terms with higher structure functions.
while doing the last it is necessary to account only one-loop contributions because higher corrections
are simply vanishing. at last we can obtain the equation for the additional terms. these equation could
be solvable because the ghost terms give quantum corrections of the same order as those arisen in the
anomaly.

(11)

conclusion

thus we have the set of physical observables which exhaust all polynomial invariants. we have proved
that the set of the polynomial invariants is not complete. also we pose the question whether it is possible
to realize the brst cohomology of the string operator algebra in terms of the operators polynomial in
string modes and ghosts. these invariants unlike the vertex operators can clarify the connection between
the reduced phase space of the bosonic string and the brst cohomologies of the corresponding quantum
theory [5] .

3

references

[1] m.b. green, j.h. schwartz and e. witten, superstring theory, cambridge univ. press, cambridge

1987

[2] k. pohlmeyer and k.- h. rehren, comm. math. phys. 105, 593-627 (1986)
[3] k. pohlmeyer, comm. math. phys. 114, 351-362 (1988)
[4] k. pohlmeyer and k.- h. rehren, comm. math. phys. 114, 177-186 (1988)
[5] i. frenkel, h. garland and g. zuckerman, proc. natl. acad. sci. (usa) 83, 8442 (1986)

4

