damtp-1999-140

vacuum geometry

nathan f. lepora 

department of applied maths and theoretical physics,

cambridge university, england.

october 1999

abstract

we analyse symmetry breaking in general gauge theories paying particular

attention to the underlying geometry of the theory. in this context we nd

two natural metrics upon the vacuum manifold: a euclidean metric associated

with the scalar sector, and another generally inequivalent metric associated

with the gauge sector. physically, the interplay between these metrics gives

rise to many of the non-perturbative features of symmetry breaking.

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
7

 

 
 

1
v
1
6
0
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

e-mail: n.f.lepora@damtp.cam.ac.uk

1 introduction

non-abelian gauge theories are the modern setting for theories of particle interac-

tion. both the strong and electroweak interactions are described by such theories.

for electroweak interactions the full gauge symmetry is not apparant at low en-

ergies, with it assumed to be broken in some high energy phase transition. this

same concept of symmetry breaking may be taken further to unify the strong and

electroweak interactions.

central to the symmetry breaking scheme is the concept of a vacuum. the

symmetry is broken by the coupling between this vacuum and the original gauge

elds. this coupling induces mass for the gauge elds associated with the broken

symmetries, whilst the gauge elds associated with the residual symmetries do not

couple, remain massless and form the residual gauge theory.

however, gauge symmetry breaking has further implications. their structure

implies the existence of non-perturbative eects, which imply specic physical con-

sequences for the theory under consideration. examples of non-perturbative eects

include sphaleron processes, topological vortices, topological monopoles and dynam-

ically stable vortices. their spectrum and properties are very model dependant,

depending upon the particular pattern of symmetry breaking.

in this paper we are concerned with the specic geometric structure of the vac-

uum manifold and how it relates to the spectrum and properties of many non-

perturbative eects. our approach is to associate two natural homogenous metrics

on the vacuum manifold. one metric associated with the structure of the scalar sec-

tor, the other associated with the gauge sector. comparison of the relative geodesic

structures determines many of the non-perturbative features of the theory.

it transpires that the boundary conditions for many non-perturbative solutions

depends upon the comparative geodesic structure of the scalar and gauge met-

rics. embedded vortices correspond to mutually geodesic circles, whilst embedded

monopoles correspond to mutually geodesic two-spheres and sphalerons correspond

to mutually geodesic three spheres. furthermore, this approach also relates the

aharanov-bohm scattering of embedded vortices to the holonomy of geodesics with

respect to the gauge sector metric.

one should note that the material in this paper stems from a similar geometrical

1

analysis of the weinberg-salam model [1]. for illustration we perform the analysis

here in parallel to that.

the plan of this paper is as follows. we rstly review gauge symmetry breaking

using a notation compatible with the latter sections of this paper. we then discuss

the associated gauge and scalar metrics. finally we apply this discussion to the

determination of non-perturbative solutions and their properties in general gauge

theories.

2 gauge symmetry breaking

consider when a gauge symmetry g is broken to a residual symmetry h. a la-

grangian l describes the interaction of the gauge elds a with scalar elds .

these gauge elds a take values in the lie algebra g, whilst the scalar elds take

values in the vector space v . minimisation of this lagrangian yields a vacuum with

gauge invariance under only the subgroup h.

the gauge symmetry g has an action upon the scalar elds, described by the

representation d. correspondingly the lie algebra also has a derived action upon

the scalar elds, described by the derived representation d such that d(ex) = ed(x)

for all x  g.

the interaction of the scalar-gauge sector is then represented by the lagrangian

l = 

1
4

hf , fi + d d  v [],

with eld tensor

covariant derivative

f  = a  a + [a, a],

d =  + d(a),

(1)

(2)

(3)

and h, i the inner product on g.

there is some freedom in the choice of non-degenerate inner product h, i on g,

constrained to be invariant under the adjoint action ad(g). we parameterise the

possible inner products by splitting the lie algebra g into its commuting subalgebras

g = g1      gn and then dening the inner product h, i to consist of a linear

combination of the inner products on each gl. the parameters describing the linear

2

combination of inner products then specify the relevant length scales between the

commuting components of g. we shall show that these are related to the gauge

coupling constants.

explicitly the general ad(g)-invariant inner product on g is

hxl

xl,xl

yli = xl

sl{xl, yl}l, xl, yl  gl

(4)

with real, positive parameters {s1,    , sn} and

{xl, yl}l = p re[tr(xlyl)],

{xl, xl}l = 1,

exp(2xl) = 1,

gl simple
= u(1).

gl

(5a)

(5b)

taking an orthonormal basis {x 1

l ,    , x dim(gl)

l

} for gl with respect to {, }l, the

unit norm generators with respect to h, i are

k ql(s1,    sn)x i

l k= 1

(no sum).

with these generators the covariant derivative explicitly takes the form

d =  +xl

qlai

l x i
l ,

(6)

(7)

from which the scales {q1,    , qn} are interpreted as the corresponding gauge cou-

pling constants.

symmetry breaking is seen through minimisation of the lagrangian (1), one

solution of which is the vacuum

(x) = 0,

a = 0,

(8)

for some arbitrary 0 minimising v []. the other minima of eq. (1) collectively

give rise to the vacuum manifold of degenerate equivalent solutions

m = d(g)0,

(9)

a homogenous manifold contained in v .

around the vacuum in eq. (8) the residual eld theory has gauge symmetry h.

the eect of the interaction between this vacuum and the gauge elds is to give mass

to those gauge elds not associated with the generators of h. however the basis

3

{x i

l } does not generally correspond to a basis associated with mass eigenstates. to
nd this basis of mass eigenstates one must consider an orthogonal transformation

of the basis vectors {x i

l }.

we shall use a gauge equivalence argument to nd this basis of mass eigenstates.

firstly we split the gauge bosons into massless and massive families associated with

the decomposition

g = h  m.

this has the algebraic property

ad(h)h  h,

ad(h)m  m,

(10)

(11)

which physically represents that the massive gauge bosons are not equivalent to the

massless gauge bosons under h.

massless gauge bosons are generated by elements of h. these split into gauge

eigenstate families corresponding to the decomposition

h = h1      hm,

of h into commuting subalgebras. the space of zero mass eigenstates is then

ejy i

j bi
j ,

xj

(12)

(13)

j ,    , ejy dim(hj )

with {ejy 1
corresponding scale. the massless gauge elds are denoted by bi
j .

} forming an orthonormal basis for each hj and ej the

j

massive gauge bosons are generated by elements of m. this splits into mass-

degenerate families corresponding to the decomposition of

m = m1      ml,

(14)

into ad(h)g irreducible subspaces of m. physically the h-equivalent gauge bosons

are degenerate in mass, which split the spectrum of h-equivalent gauge boson gen-

erators into mass equivalent families. the space of massive eigenstates is then

gf z i

f w i
f ,

xf

(15)

with {gf z 1
and w i
f

f ,    , gf z dim(mf )
the corresponding massive gauge elds.

f

} forming an orthonormal basis for mf , with scale gf

4

taken together eqs. (13) and (15) specify the covariant derivative to be

d =  +xj

ejy i

j bi
j +xf

gf z i

f w i
f ,

(16)

explicitly composed of the residual and broken parts. again the scales {ej} and

{gf} are interpreted as the associated gauge coupling constants. they depend upon

the scales {qi}, with the explicit dependance determined by the orthogonal trans-

formation that relates the {xi} basis of g to the mass eigenstate basis above.

3 vacuum geometry

for both the scalar and gauge sectors we now explicitly calculate their associated

metrics. we also calculate the associated isometry and isotropy groups for each,

and from these groups specify the corresponding geodesic structures.

having obtained two inequivalent homogenous metrics on the vacuum manifold

we then compare their structure. we relate their isometry and isotropy groups, and

determine when curves are mutually geodesic with respect to both metrics.

3.1 gauge sector

the main structure associated with the gauge sector is the inner product h, i of

eq. (4). it species several important related features of the gauge sector. first of all

it denes the gauge kinetic term in eq. (1), introducing the gauge coupling constants

as the relative scales. secondly it stipulates the massive and massless gauge boson

generators to be the orthogonal subspaces m and h of eq. (10). finally it renders

the degenerate mass eigenstate families mi to be mutually orthogonal.

we shall use this inner-product to dene the gauge-sector metric. the denition

is achieved by associating the massive generators m with tangent spaces to the

vacuum manifold in a natural way. then the inner product h, i on m induces a

homogenous metric on the vacuum manifold. we nd the corresponding isometry

group of this metric to be the gauge group g and the isotropy group to be the

residual symmetry h.

explicitly, observe that the tangent space to m at 0 may be expressed

t0m = d(m)0.

(17)

5

more generally the corresponding tangent space at  = g0  m is, for any g  g,

tm = d(g)t0m = d(ad(g)m),

(18)

transitivity over m guarantees a natural isomorphism between any tangent space

and some ad(g)m.

using the isomorphism implied by eq. (18), the inner product h, i associates a

corresponding metric on m

h(x1, x2) = hx1, x2i, x1, x2  ad(g)m.

(19)

the precise form is parameterised by the scales {gf} of eq. (15).

this metric has the gauge symmetry group g of isometries

h(d(g)t1, d(g)t2)d(g) = h(t1, t2),

g  g.

(20)

more precisely, by eq. (18) the action of g  g upon h(, ) is

h(d(g)t1, d(g)t2)d(g) = had(g)x1, ad(g)x2i = hx1, x2i = h(t1, t2).

(21)

the above isometries represent the maximal group acting upon g that leaves h, i

invariant.

the isotropy group of this isometry group at the point 0 in m is the subgroup

h such that

which gives the isomorphism

d(h)0 = 0,

m =

g
h

.

(22)

(23)

thus we recover the familiar relation for the vacuum manifold, but now explicitly

associated with the gauge sector metrical structure.

given the above isotropy and isometry properties of the gauge metric we can

use the isomorphism (23) to calculate the corresponding geodesics upon m. this

geodesic structure follows from some results of dierential geometry. specically,

these results examine the geodesic structure on the coset space, but may be simply

carried back to the vacuum manifold to give the results that we require. the rel-

evant results are quoted here, although the full approach is described in detail by

kobayashi and nomizu [2, chapter x].

the gauge sector geodesic structure is simply

6

the geodesics on m with respect to the metric h(, ), passing through 0

x = {exp(xt)0 : t  r},

(24)

are:

with x  m.

3.2 scalar sector

the structure associated with the scalar sector is a vector space of scalar eld values

v equipped with a real euclidean inner product re[]. regarding the vacuum

manifold as embedded within the vector space of scalar eld values, a natural metric

may be induced on m by specifying its form on each tangent space to be that of

the euclidean inner product.

explicitly, regard the tangent space to m at   m, specied by eq. (18), as a

vector subspace of v

tm  v.

then a corresponding metric is induced from the real euclidean inner product

g(t1, t2) = re[t 

1 t2], t1, t2  tm.

(25)

(26)

this metric has a group i of isometries acting on v by the -representation

g((a)t1, (a)t2)(a) = g(t1, t2),

a  i.

(27)

consisting of those elements of gl(v ) that leave the metric invariant. since i 

gl(v ) the representation of i upon v is induced by

(i)  f (gl(v )),

(28)

with f the fundamental representation of gl(v ) upon v .

the isotropy group of i upon m at the point 0 is the subgroup j such that

this gives the isomorphism

(j)0 = 0,

m =

i
j

,

7

(29)

(30)

representing a second isomorphism with a coset space, and separate from the usual

one associated with the gauge sector in eq. (23).

the scalar coset space isomorphism found above in eq. (30) is explicitly related to

the scalar sector structure. in general the gauge group g is a subgroup of the isotropy

group i, with the representations coinciding so that d(g)  (i). symmetries not

contained in g are interpreted as global symmetries of the vacuum manifold not

apparent in the full gauge theory.

we now prove d(g)  (i). this follows from the gauge invariance of the

lagrangian (1), so that any g  g preserves the euclidean norm,

re[{d(g)t }d(g)t }] = re[t t ],

for all t in any tm. thus d(g)d(g) = 1, implying

g(d(g)t1, d(g)t2)a = re[{d(g)t1}d(g)t2]

= g(t1, t2).

(31)

(32a)

(32b)

proving our statement.

as for the gauge sector the importance of isomorphism (30) is the calculational

use of the isotropy and isometry properties to determine the associated geodesic

structure upon m. since our method is the same for both the scalar and gauge

sectors this allows direct comparison to be drawn between them.

associated with the isomorphism (30) is the decomposition

i = j  n ,

where n is associated with the tangent space to m at 0

t0m = (n )0,

(33)

(34)

with  the derived representation of . the relevant inner product, which denes

the decomposition (33), is dened by:

associated with the i-invariant metric g(, ) upon m is an inner product

upon n

{x, y } = g0(x0, y 0) = re[{x0}y 0];

(35)

extendable to a unique inner product on i such that {j , n } = 0.

8

geodesic structure then follows analogously to eq. (24):

the geodesics on m with respect to the scalar metric g(, ), passing

through 0 are:

for elements x  n .

x = {exp(xt)0 : t  r},

(36)

one should note that this geodesic structure does not in general coincide with

that of the gauge sector, although it may do for certain scales {qi}. the geodesic

structure on m with respect to g/h may be interpreted as homogenously squashed

with respect to that from i/j. more exactly we have shown that g is a subgroup

of the isometry group i, hence the associated gauge metric has correspondingly less

invariance.

for instance s3 admits a family of su(2)  u(1) invariant metrics that contin-

uously deforms to an su(2)  su(2) invariant metric; and s7 admits a family of

so(5)  su(2) invariant metrics that continuously deform to the so(8) invariant

metric.

3.3 scalar-gauge geometry

in summary, there are two inequivalent metrics on the electroweak vacuum manifold

associated with the scalar and gauge sectors. we shall now determine how the

structure of these metrics relate to each other. comparing the respective symmetry

groups determines those symmetries that are shared. these shared symmetries

dene submanifolds whose geodesics are mutually geodesic with respect to both

metrics.

the scalar and gauge metrics, g(, ) and h(, ), have the following isometry group

decompositions with respect to their isotropy groups

i = j  n ,

g = h  m,

where their group structures are related by

h  j,

9

(37a)

(37b)

(38a)

g  i,

m  i,

and the representations of g and i are coincident on the intersection

d(g)  (i).

also the tangent space to m at 0 is related to m and n by

t0m = d(m)0 = (n )0.

(38b)

(38c)

(39)

(40)

it is important to understand how the metrics g(, ) and h(, ) are related. it

transpires that this is through the decomposition of m into its ad(h)g irreducible

subspaces

m = m1      mk,

(41)

which denes a decomposition of the tangent space into its d(h) irreducible sub-

spaces t i

0m = d(mi)0

t0m = t 1

0m      t k

0m.

(42)

then at 0  m the metrics g(, ) and h(, ) are related by a bilinear transformation

of t0m taking the particular form

g(xi

xi0,xj

yj0) = xij

ijh(xi0, yj0),

where i =

g(xi0, xi0)
h(xi0, xi0)

,

(43a)

(43b)

and xi0  t i

0m.

result (43a) is established by noting that since both metrics are bilinear they

are related by an element a  gl(t0m)

g(t1, t2)0 = h(at1, at2)0, a  gl(t0m).

(44)

now observe d(h)  gl(t0m), is the maximal subgroup of gl(t0m) under

which both metrics are invariant. then d(h)a = ad(h) for all h  h. it follows

that the eigenspaces of a are the irreducible spaces of t0m under d(h), from

which one associates eqs. (41, 42) and establishes the result (43a, 43b). this may

be easily generalised to all   m by considering the action of g on eq. (43a).

10

the decomposition (42) also describes the geodesic structure of m with respect to

g(, ) and h(, ) in a rather nice way. applying eqs. (36) and (24), the submanifolds

m i = d(exp(mi))0,

t0m i = t i

0m

(45)

are the maximal totally geodesic submanifolds of m with respect to both metrics

g(, ) and h(, ). they naturally decompose m into totally geodesic component

parts.

one should note that the ad(h)g-irreducible subspaces of m also relate to

the mass eigenstates of the massive gauge bosons. it is interesting how the same

decomposition arises in two, at rst sight, apparently unrelated areas of the gauge

theory; however the association is that both are governed by the action of h within

the broken theory.

4 physical implications

in summary of the previous section: there are two homogenous metrics on the

vacuum manifold associated with the scalar and gauge sectors of the scalar-gauge

theory. these two sectors induce metrics upon the vacuum manifold associated with

the symmetries of their respective sector. generally the geodesics with respect to

these two metrics coincide on totally geodesic submanifolds. these totally geodesic

submanifolds are embedded in m such that at any point their collection of tangent

spaces do not intersect and collectively from the tangent space to m at that point.

given this structure we examine its relation to the spectrum of non-perturbative

solitonic-type solutions present for a general symmetry breaking. it transpires that

the embedded vortices correspond to the mutually geodesic paths, whilst monopoles

correspond to mutually geodesic two-spheres and sphalerons to mutually geodesics

three-spheres. this approach also interprets the scattering of embedded vortices

in terms of the holonomy of their respective geodesics. furthermore the dynami-

cal stability of a semi-local vortices, in their respective semi-local limit, is seen to

correspond to an extreme limit of the gauge metric.

11

4.1 embedded vortices

embedded vortices correspond to nielsen-olesen vortices embedded in a general

symmetry breaking [3]. as such their boundary conditions dene circular paths on

the vacuum manifold. thus it might be expected that their spectrum and properties

should correspond to the geometry of the vacuum manifold. this is what we nd.

their boundary conditions correspond to the paths that are mutually geodesic with

respect to both metrics.

formally, an embedded vortex is dened by the embedding

with the general ansatz

g  h





u(1)  1,

(r, ) = fno(r)ex0,

a(r, ) =

gno(r)

r

x ,

(46)

(47a)

(47b)

where x  g is the vortex generator. one may consider only x  m, since these

minimise the magnetic energy [4]. thus one considers only ansatze with boundary

conditions geodesic with respect to the gauge metric h(, ) .

the above vortex ansatz is a solution provided that [5]

(i) the scalar eld must be single-valued. hence the boundary conditions describe
a closed geodesic with e2x0 = 0.

(ii) the ansatz is a solution to the equations of motion; then elds in the vortex

do not induce currents perpendicular (in lie algebra space) to it [3]. this may be

equivalently phrased as [4]: x is a vortex generator if re[(x0)x 0] = 0 for all
x  such that hx , xi = 0.

condition (ii) can be conveniently restated in terms of the corresponding metrics:

x is a vortex generator if the associated tangent vector t = x0 satises
g(t, t ) = 0 for all t  such that h(t, t ) = 0.

referring to the discussion around eq. (42), we see that t must lie in one of the

d(h)-irreducible subspaces of t0m that relate the two metrics. namely x is an

12

element of any of the ad(h)g-irreducible subspaces of m in the decomposition

m = m1      mn.

(48)

it is interesting that the geodesics dened from the ad(h)-irreducible subspaces

mi are the only geodesics which are simultaneously geodesic with respect to both

metrics. from a mathematical point of view this is because these geodesics dene

submanifolds of the vacuum manifold with coincident scalar and gauge metrics (to

an overall factor). from a physical point of view, this may be interpreted as a

minimisation of both the scalar and gauge sectors of the action integral.

vortices within the same family mi have the same stability properties because of

their gauge equivalence. for topologically stable embedded vortices the associated

geodesic x(t) = d(exp(xt)0 has a conserved topological charge corresponding

to the element of 1(g/h) it represents. dynamically stable vortices are discussed

next.

4.2 dynamical stability

embedded vortices may become dynamically stable if there exists a limit of the

coupling constants {qi}  {qi} where the symmetry breaking takes the form [7]

gg  u(1)l  h, with h  u(1)l = 1.

(49)

in this limit there exists for small scalar potentials dynamically stable semi-local

vortices [6], and by continuity their stability persists for nearby values of the coupling

constants. here we show that this is related to an extreme limit of the gauge sector

metric. in this limit it becomes only well dened on a circle corresponding to the

boundary conditions of the semi-local vortex.

algebraically eq. (49) is related to the decomposition of m into its ad(h)g

irreducible subspaces [4]:

when ml represents a non-trivial projection of c, the centre of g, onto

m then that family may dene dynamically stable vortices.

such mls are one-dimensional, with their vortices invariant under h.

13

this qualitative dierence of the gauge theory when the coupling constants take

values {qi} is also apparent in the form of the gauge sector metric h(, ). when the

coupling constants take the value {qi}, the inner product h, i becomes ill dened;

being well dened only on the subalgebra u(1)l, where it takes the form

hx, y iql = 

1
q2
l

trxtry.

(50)

referring to the discussion around eqs. (19) and (45), we see that the metric is only

dened upon the one-dimensional submanifold ml = d(u(1)l)0  m, where it

takes the form

hql(t1, t2) = hx1, x2iql, ti = d(xi)  tml,

(51)

with a  u(1)l, relating  = d(a)0.

the metric h(, ) thus picks out a prefered submanifold ml  m over which it

is well dened. physically, this submanifold corresponds to those points that may

be reached by a gauge transformation from 0. other points within the vacuum

manifold may only be reached by a global transformation. it is precisely such sub-

manifolds that dene the boundary conditions for vortices that may be dynamically

stable.

4.3 combination electroweak vortices

recall that the two metrics are related by

g(xi

xi0,xj

yj0) = xij

ijh(xi0, yj0),

where i =

g(xi0, xi0)
h(xi0, xi0)

,

(52a)

(52b)

which is the reason for claiming the coincidence of the metrics on certain submani-

folds dened by the ad(h)g irreducible subspaces mi. in sec. (3.3) we then showed

that these mis contain the vortex generators, since to dene solutions the scalar

boundary conditions must be mutually geodesic with respect to both metrics.

the constants {i}, which dene the relative scales of the two metrics, are de-

pendant upon the gauge coupling constants {qi}. should coupling constants take

critical values such that i = j, the two metrics g(, ) and h(, ) become coincident

14

(to a factor) on a larger submanifold mij = d(exp(mi  mj)0, containing both

mi and mj. then one concludes that the vortex generators are members of a larger

family mi  mj, and one refers to these extra vortices as combination vortices 

interpreting them as two vortices in the original families combined together.

for critical coupling constants such that i = j one of two situations may occur,

depending upon the details of the geometry:

(i) the isometry group of the gauge sector metric h(, ) enlarges. then vortices in

the two families mi and mj becomes equivalent under global transformations of

these newly acquired symmetries.

(ii) the isometry group of the gauge sector metric h(, ) stays the same. the equiv-

alence of vortices remains the same as the non-critical case; however, the solution

set of embedded vortices increases to include the combination vortices.

these two situations relate to the symmetry properties of scattering two vor-

tices. for two dierent vortices heading towards each other the symmetry of the

scattering process causes them to travel along the line joining the centres both be-

fore and after they meet. however, when the vortices are the same, as happens in (i)

above, they may scatter at right angles to the original path, with the natural motion

passing through a toroidal charge two conguration. this charge two conguration

corresponds to a combination vortex.

although the combination vortex solutions are not solutions for non-critical cou-

pling constants, it may be possible that static deformed solutions persist. such

solutions would consist of perturbed solutions around the embedded vortex, with

the perturbations determined by substitution into the eld equations.

4.4 non-abelian aharanov-bohm scattering

associated with the magnetic ux of a vortex is the wilson line integral

u() = p exp z 

0

a  dl!  g,

(53)

at innite radius. then u() dictates the parallel transport of matter elds around

a vortex, with fermionic elds  transported to u(2)   around a vortex. by

diagonalisation one then associates components i with phase shifts i.

15

the wilson line integral is fundamental to understanding the interaction of a

vortex with charged matter elds [8]. non-trivial fermionic components i interact

with the vortex by an aharanov-bohm cross section

d
d

=

1

2k

sin2(i/2)
sin2(/2)

,

(54)

whilst trivial components e2k = 1 interact by an everett cross section [9].

substitution of eq. (47b) into eq. (53) gives the wilson line integral for an

embedded vortex, with generator x  m,

u() = exp(x)  g.

(55)

vortex boundary conditions restrict u(2)  h. also, by eq. (47a) the asymptotic

scalar eld satises () = d(u())0. for a given fermion representation this

species completely the scattering of a fermion component o an embedded vortex.

in [8] the wilson line integral is related to holonomy, referring to non-trivial

parallel transport around the vortex. in fact, we now show that this holonomy refers

to precisely the parallel transport with respect to the gauge sector metric around its

closed geodesics.

parallel transport with respect to the gauge sector metric h(, ) on m is related

to the symmetry groups g and h by [2]:

the parallel transport of tangent vector t  t0m along the geodesic

x(t) = d(exp(xt))0 to the point x(s) is

t  = d(exp(xs))t.

(56)

the holonomy is non-trivial when x(s) = x(0) and t  6= t .

hence geodesic parallel transport and the wilson line integral are related. for a

tangent vector t  t0m, its parallel transport to x() is

t  = d(u())t.

(57)

interpreting tangent vectors as components of the scalar eld we see that eq. (57)

also refers to a global transformation of g upon the scalar eld. the same global

transformation is relevant to the parallel transport of a fermion representation along

16

the geodesic. thus we see that the wilson line integral refers to parallel transport

along a geodesic with respect to the gauge sector metric h(, ). one should recall

also that the geodesics relevant to vortices are geodesic with respect to both metrics,

however it is only the gauge sector holonomy that is relevant to scattering.

4.5 embedded monopoles

embedded, or fundamental, monopole solutions are thooft-polyakov monopoles

embedded within the gauge theory. to avoid ambiguity between embedded su(2)

or embedded so(3) monopoles, the embedding is described in terms of the algebras

with the general ansatz

g  h





su(2)  u(1),

(r) = fmon(r)r,

a

a(r) =

gmon(r)

r


abxb,

(58)

(59)

(60)

(61a)

(61b)

where fmon(r) and gmon(r) are the usual monopole prole functions. notationally, we

treat  a vector within r  d(su(2))0 and use an orthonormal basis {x1, x2, x3}

for su(2), with x3  h. one may consider only x1, x2  m since these minimise

the magnetic energy. thus one considers only ansatze with boundary conditions

geodesic two-spheres with respect to the h(, ) metric.

by relating the above embedding to the spectrum of embedded vortices, one

arrives at the following result [4]:

embedded monopoles are dened by two generators x1, x2 such that

x1, x2  mi, with [x1, x2]  h.

(62)

hence the gauge equivalence classes of embedded monopoles are similar to those of

embedded vortices, but with extra constraints.

boundary conditions for the embedded monopole dene a two-dimensional spher-

ical submanifold d(su(2))0  m. analogous to embedded vortices these subman-

ifolds are simultaneously geodesic with respect to both metrics. however, in contrast

17

to vortices, there may be other geodesic two-spheres not associated with embedded

monopoles: for instance the sphaleron congurations, which we discuss next.

4.6 embedded sphalerons

analogously to embedded vortices and monopole one may embed sphalerons [10]

in a general symmetry breaking. to avoid ambiguity between su(2) and so(3)

sphalerons the embedding is discussed in terms of the algebras. for an su(2) em-

bedded sphalerons the embedding is

g  h





su(2)  1;

whilst for an su(2)  u(1) sphaleron the embedding is

g  h





su(2)  u(1)  u(1)diag.

(63)

(64)

(65)

(66)

(67)

(68)

the corresponding ansatze are simply the usual ones embedded in a larger theory.

by a similar analysis to that of monopoles one may conclude that an embedded

su(2) sphaleron corresponds to simultaneously geodesic three-spheres; whilst an

embedded su(2)u(1) sphaleron corresponds to a geodesic three-sphere submanifold

with respect to g(, ) and a squashed three-sphere submanifold with respect to h(, ).

contained within this embedded three-sphere is a two sphere that is simultaneously

geodesic with respect to both metrics, and has no topology associated with it.

physically, embedded sphalerons relate to the vacuum structure of the gauge

theory. inequivalent vacua of the quantum eld theory are labelled by the elements

of 3(g/h) and correspond to the chern-simons number of the vacua. sphalerons

represent the midpoint of a sequence of congurations passing from one vacuum to

another; they are thus physically relevant when they have an embedding associated

with a non-trivial element of 3(g/h).

18

5 discussion

in this nal section we briey discuss some extra points of note, and indicate some

possible extensions to the work of this paper.

(i) simplicity of electroweak theory

we showed that the maximal symmetry group of any metric upon the vacuum man-

ifold is the isometry group i, with the gauge group g  i. for electroweak theory

i = su(2)i su(2)k and g = su(2)i u(1)y . in fact this constitutes the smallest

dimensional example of such a structure [1].

(ii) energetics and curvature

the metrical structure determines an associated curvature of the vacuum manifold.

it seems natural that the energy of embedded vortices should correspond with the

sum of the relevant sectional curvatures associated with the scalar and gauge sectors

on the particular submanifold of m associated with the scalar boundary conditions

of the vortex. coecients of this sum would naturally be related to those of the

scalar potential, and the value of this sum to the stability of the vortex.

(iii) non-abelian zero modes

the zero modes of a conguration correspond to zero energy deformations of that

conguration. since the relevant congurations correspond to geodesic subman-

ifolds, the zero modes must preserve this property. thus zero modes should be

related to the metrical structure of the vacuum manifold.

(iv) mathematics of the scalar metric

often the scalar sector metric, associated with i/j, corresponds to a symmetric

space. consequently the scalar sector holonomy is trivial. it would be interesting to

determine exactly when a symmetric space is associated, and whether this is always

required to give a trivial holonomy to the scalar sector.

acknowledgements.

i acknowledge kings college, cambridge for a junior research fellowship and

thank conor houghton, tom kibble and paul san for interesting conversations

related to this work. this work was supported in part by the european commission

under the human capital and mobility program, contract no. chrx-ct94-0423.

19

references

[1] n.f. lepora and t.w.b. kibble, jhep 04 (1999) 027 hep-th/9904178.

[2] s. kobayashi and k. nomizu, foundations of dierential geometry, volume

ii (interscience publishers, 1969).

[3] m. barriola, t. vachaspati and m. bucher, phys. rev. d50 (1994) 2819 hep-

th/9306120.

[4] n.f. lepora and a. davis, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 125027 hep-ph/9507457.

n.f. lepora and a. davis, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 125028 hep-ph/9507466.

n.f. lepora and t.w.b. kibble, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 125019

hep-th/9904177.

[5] t. vachaspati and m. barriola, phys. rev. lett. 69 (1992) 1867.

[6] t. vachaspati and a. achucarro, phys. rev. d44 (1991) 3067.

m. hindmarsh, phys. rev. lett. 68 (1992) 1263.

[7] j. preskill, phys. rev. d46 (1992) 4218.

[8] m. g. alford and f. wilczek, phys. rev. lett. 62 (1989) 1071.

f. wilczek and y. wu, phys. rev. lett. 65 (1990) 13.

[9] a. e. everett phys. rev. d24 (1981) 858.

[10] n. manton, phys. rev. d28 (1983) 2019.

f. klinkhamer and n. manton, phys. rev. d30 (1984) 2212.

20

