on the renormalization of periodic potentials

i. nandori1, j. polonyi2,3 and k. sailer1

1 department for theoretical physics, kossuth lajos university, debrecen, hungary

2 institute for theoretical physics, louis pasteur university, strasbourg, france
3 department of atomic physics, lorand eotvos university, budapest, hungary

(february 16, 2014)

11.10.hi, 11.10.kk

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
1
2

 

 
 

1
v
7
6
1
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

i. introduction

the dynamics generated by a periodic potential represents a challenge in quantum eld theory where the usual
strategies to obtain the solution are based on the taylor expansion which violate the essential symmetry of the
problem, the periodicity. one expects two kinds of problems. a local one, the perturbation expansion for the small
uctuations around a minima of the potential should deal with innitely many vertices in order to preserve the
periodicity. a global problem appears in the construction of the eective potential as an instability, a conict between
the periodicity and the convexity which can be resolved in a trivial manner only, being the constant the only function
which is periodic and convex in the same time. another global problem, made rather puzzling by the atness of the
eective potential, is to nd an order parameter distinguishing the phase with periodicity from the one where the
periodicity is broken spontaneously.

the goal of this paper is to give a brief presentation of these issues in the case of a two dimensional scalar model.
the pertinent features of the sine-gordon model, the simplest realization of a periodicity, and the more detailed
goals of this paper are presented in section 2. section 3 contains a very brief introduction into the wegner-houghton
equation, applied for the periodic potential in section 4. the linearized renormalization group ow is given around
the two-dimensional gaussian xed point and the periodic operators of the potential are classied in section 5. the
nonlinear ow is discussed in section 6 by means of numerical integration of the renormalization group equation.
section 7 contains a few remarks about the signatures of the spontaneous breakdown of the fundamental group
symmetry. finally, section 8 is for the summary of our ndings.

ii. the sine-gordon, x-y and fermionic models

the simplest example for periodic potential is the two-dimensional sine-gordon model which is described by the

lagrangian

with

l =

1
2

()2 + v (),

v () = u cos .

(1)

(2)

the dynamics and the renormalization have been discussed by means of the straight perturbation expansion and the
equivalence of the sine-gordon, the thirring and the x-y planar models [1]- [9]. the duality between the sine-gordon
and the x-y model is useful since the latter has been investigated in great detail [10], [11]. the result is that the
sine-gordon model has a weak and a strong coupling phases, for 2 < 8 and 2 > 8, respectively. the normal
ordering is sucient to remove the uv divergences in the weak coupling phase. though the divergence structure of
the individual graphs is the same in either phase the partial resummation of the perturbation expansion produces new
uv divergences for 2 > 8 [1], [4], [5]. a further uv divergence was found at 2 = 4 [5]. the double expansion
in u and 2/8  1 [8] indicates no special singularities at 2 = 4 and shows that the adjustment of u and the
introduction of a wave function renormalization constant for the eld  in the strong coupling phase is sucient to
remove the uv divergences.

the vertices appearing in the perturbation expansion in (2) form a gas of vortices described by the x-y model. this
allows us to interpret the weak and the strong coupling phases as the molecular or the ionised phases, respectively
from the point of view of the vortex gas [7]. the x-y model with periodic external symmetry breaking potential

1

can be considered as the lattice regulated version of the compactied sine-gordon model. the model possesses a
topological current,

j(x) =


2

 (x)

(3)

which is conserved in the semi-classical expansion, when the path integral is saturated by eld congurations with
analytic space-time dependence. the ux dened by j is the vortex number, called the vorticity and the soliton
number in the same time. in this manner the world lines of the sine-gordon solitons end at the x-y model vortices,
making the soliton unstable and the topological current anomalous in the ionised phase where eld congurations with
singular space-time dependence survive the removal of the cuto [9]. this casts a serious doubt on the applicability
of the usual bosonization transformation in the high temperature, ionised phase. in fact, the non-conservation of
the topological current requires fermion number non-conserving terms in the fermionic representation, a fundamental
violation of the rules inferred from the weak coupling expansion.

we shall concentrate on the questions of the renormalization, the large amplitude instabilities and the spontaneous

symmetry breaking in this work.

renormalization: the challenge in view of the rich dynamics is whether some of these features can be recapitulated
by a simple, more eective version of the renormalization group method which is capable to follow the evolution of
a large number of operators [12]- [18]. we shall use the leading order gradient expansion in the wegner-houghton
equation [12] to study the renormalization group ow of a generalized model with an arbitrary periodic potential.
such a drastic truncation leaves some doubts due to the supposed role of the wavefunction renormalization constant
in the ionised phase. but the higher order contribution of the gradient expansion can only be treated consistently by
the use of the eective action instead of the bare one. we shall nd that the instability arising from the periodicity of
the eective potential makes the legendre transformation highly nontrivial and prevents us to use the eective action
in the infrared regime of the molecular phase.

instabilities: the issue of the global instability can best be understood by recalling the maxwell construction for
the eective potential of the 4 scalar model in the phase where the ground state breaks the symmetry (x)  (x).
the signature of the spontaneous symmetry breaking is the degeneracy of the energy density in the ground states,
the eective potential. there is a slight complication, the condition that the eective potential must be convex as
function of the eld expectation value  = h(x)i, v 
ef f ()  0 [19]. this feature introduces a linear maxwell cut in
the concave segments of the eective potential between the inexion points. but the eective potential has in general
discontinuous derivatives in this case which is not acceptable. in fact, by placing the system into a nite volume we
can perform the thermodynamical limit at the end of the computation since the spontaneous symmetry breaking is
tested by the external source. the eective potential obtained in this manner is analytic. thus, vef f () is globally
convex, i.e. the inequality

vef f () 

vef f (1)(2  ) + vef f (2)(  1)

2  1

(4)

holds for 1 <  < 2. the maxwell cut extends between the degenerate would be vacuum expectation values
vac. the degeneracy of the ground state is much larger than expected, any eld expectation value between vac
can be realized in a mixed phase and the actual choice of h(x)i depends on the dynamical process the system relaxes
towards its asymptotic state identied by the initial conditions [20]. within the mixed phase, vac <  < vac the
homogeneity of the ground state is recovered after taking into account the large amplitude inhomogeneous uctuations
[21].

the speciality of the symmetry breaking in the 4 model is that the symmetry transformation, (x)  (x)
connects nite number of eld congurations. it may happen that the symmetry transformation in question connects
eld congurations which dier in an innitely large amount. in this case the global constraint of the convexity of the
eective potential may lead to unusual situation. we shall consider a model with a periodic potential, v (+) = v (),
whose invariance under the transformation

(x)  (x) + 

(5)

makes the eective potential a periodic function in the eld variable. since the only periodic and globally convex
function is the constant there is no way to have nontrivial eective potential when the transformation (5) is a formal
symmetry of the action. notice that this statement holds for any dimensions. does this unexpected degeneracy
mean the impossibility of breaking this discrete symmetry spontaneously in contrary to the general belief based on
perturbation expansion?

such a general and profound conclusion arising from an elementary observation should raise doubt and requires a
more detailed understanding and interpretation, another goal we embark in this paper. we follow the renormalization

2

group ow of a scalar model with periodic potential in two dimensions and demonstrate that the atness predicted by
the simple observations above is indeed realized at the infrared end point. we shall argue that this result is consistent
with having two phases of the model, one where the symmetry in question is reected in the ground state and another
one where it is broken spontaneously. thereby, our model represents a more involved realization of the symmetry
breaking mechanism as the one with a polynomial potential.

symmetry: the suspected attening of the eective potential makes the naive order parameter to detect the realiza-

tion of the periodicity, r dx(x), useless. we suggest another nonlocal order parameter instead, the winding number,

to distinguish between the phases with manifest or spontaneously broken symmetry by means of the topological
defects.

the way the symmetry is implemented may seem unusual because the physical conguration space is actually mul-
tiply connected. in fact, the sine-gordon hamiltonian describes a family of coupled pendulums and the congurations
(x) and (x) +  are physically indistinguishable. we may use either the multiply connected description in terms
of the complex variable e2i(x)/  u (1) or the unconstrained (x)  r variable on the covering space for the
description of the system, and the transformation (5) belongs to the fundamental group 1(u (1)) = z.

the special diculty in detecting the spontaneous breakdown of the fundamental group symmetry is the degeneracy
of the vacuum energy density, the only resolution of the conict between the periodicity and the convexity of the
eective potential in either phase. the attening of the eective action in the region of the maxwell cut indicates the
weakness of the restoring force acting on the uctuations around the equilibrium position and raises the possibility
of the collapse of the topological stability of the solitons. this, in turn, suggests the winding number as an order
parameter to distinguish between the phases with the usual and the unusual realization of the fundamental group
symmetry. this circumstance reects a further similarity with gauge models at nite temperature [22].

finally we mention another special feature of the model under consideration which comes from the choice of the
dimension. the at eective potential suggests the presence of massless modes in the system which is excluded at the
lower critical dimension [23]. we shall see that the suciently fast convergence of the coupling constants to zero along
the renormalized trajectory suppresses the infrared divergences. note that the successive elimination of the modes
in the renormalization group method starts at the ultraviolet end and prevents the apparency of the ir divergences
before we reach the ir end point. in this manner we need no ir regulator in this method as long as the solution is
suciently rened to provide the infrared stabilisation mechanism supposed to be present in the exact solution of the
model.

iii. differential rg approach in momentum space

the renormalization group method followed in this paper provides a tool to investigate the scale dependence of
the blocked action sk. the dierential rg transformations are realised by integrating out the high-frequency fourier
components of the eld variable, in innitesimal steps in momentum space successively from the uv cut-o  to an
arbitrary moving cut-o k < . an innitesimal blocking step, corresponding to moving the cut-o k to k  k, can
be written as:

eskk[] =z d[]esk[+],

(6)

where the eld variables  and  contain fourier components with momenta in the sphere of radius k  k, and in
the spherical momentum shell of the thickness k, resp. in every innitesimal step, the path integration in eq.(6)
if the saddle point is at  = 0, one can nd an
is evaluated by the help of the saddle point approximation.
integro-dierential equation for the blocked action, called the wegner-houghton equation [12]. in the local potential
approximation one uses the leading order expression for the action in the gradient expansion,

and the wegner-houghton equation reduces to a dierential equation for the scale dependent potential vk() [16]

sk =z ddx(cid:20) 1

2

((x))2 + vk((x))(cid:21) ,

(7)

kkvk() = kd ln(cid:0)k2 + 2

vk()(cid:1) ,

(8)

with  = 1

2 d(2)d, and the solid angle d in dimension d.

notice that the argument of the logarithm in (8) must be nonnegative for the expansion made around a stable
vkcr () then the
saddle point.
wegner-houghton equation looses its validity for k < kcr and the saddle point becomes non-zero and the tree-level

if the argument becomes negative at a critical value kcr > 0, given by k2

cr = 2

3

blocking relation must be used. we simplify the saddle point structure of the blocking (6) by retaining the plane
waves only and we nd the evolution equation

vkk() = min

 (cid:20)k22 +

where  is the amplitude of the plane wave [21].

1

2z 1

1

duvk( + 2 cos(u))(cid:21) ,

(9)

iv. periodicity of the potential

let us assume now that the potential u() dened at the uv cut-o  is periodic, i.e. u() = u( + ). owing
to eq.(8), the periodicity of the potential is maintained and the period  is not changed under the innitesimal rg
transformation corresponding to the innitesimal change k of the scale k. it is easy to verify that the local potential
approximation preserves this symmetry as well,

when the potential vk() at the scale k is periodic with the period  then the r.h.s. of eq.(10), and consequently,
the potential vkk() at the scale k  k must be periodic with the same period , too.

kvkk() = kvk() +(cid:2)kd ln(cid:0)k2 + 2

vk()(cid:1)(cid:3) k.

(10)

it will be useful to write the periodic potential vk() as a fourier series,

vk() =



xn=0

un(k) cos (n) .

(11)

for the sake of simplicity we consider only potentials with z(2) symmetry, vk() = vk(). the whole scale
dependence occurs in the fourier amplitudes un(k), the coupling constants of the scale dependent potential. in the
case of a non-trivial saddle point eq.(9) can be rewritten as

vkk() = min

 "k22 +

un(k) cos(n)j0(2n)# ,



xn=1

(12)

where j0 stands for the bessel function and  = 2
 . let k() denote the position of the minimum of the bracket on
the r.h.s. of eq.(12). then k() is periodic k( + ) = k(), since one has to minimise the same expression of 
for  and  + . thus, the potential at scale k  k remains periodic with the same period length.

the retaining of the higher order contributions in the gradient expansion, among them the leading order being the
inclusion of a wavefunction renormalization constant zk((x)) into the kinetic energy of the action (7) changes the
situation. the action keeps its period length in the bare eld under any circumstance. but the period length in terms
k (0). such sub-
of the renormalized eld r,k(x) = z
leading contributions of the gradient expansion are neglected in the present work. we believe that their contribution
will not change our results qualitatively.

k (0)(x), where 0 minimizes the potential vk(), is z

1
2

1
2

it is easier to use the derivative of eq.(8) with respect to  rather than the original equation itself. for dimension

d the general form of the evolution equation reads as follows,

2kd2n2vn(k) = kkvn(k) 

1
2

k2

n

xp=1

anp(k)kkvp(k),

where n is the truncation in the fourier series, vn(k) = nun(k) and

anp(k) = (n  p)vnp(n  p)
+ (p  n)vpn(p  n)
 (n + p)vp+n(n  n + p),

(13)

(14)

with (n  n) = {1 if n  n, 0 if n < n}.

reaching the critical value kcr one has to change automatically from the system of equations (13) to eq.(12). in
every step k in the momentum space, the potential at the scale k  k is then found by minimising the expression on
the r.h.s. of eq.(12). after the minimisation, the potential vkk() is expanded in fourier-series to dene the new
fourier amplitudes at the scale k  k. one repeats this algorithm step by step till k = 0.

4

v. linearized solution

according to the power counting theories with polynomial interactions are super-renormalizable in dimension d = 2.
furthermore, the super-renormalizable interactions correspond to relevant operators in the uv scaling regime. how
can we have new uv divergences in the ionised phase when the set of the renormalizable operators is xed? the
source of the complication is that in the usual perturbative proof of the renormalizability each monomial vertex is
treated independently. this strategy is sucient for polynomial interactions but is not necessarily applicable for
periodic potentials where the symmetry is destroyed by any truncation of the taylor expansion.

the treatment of an innite series of operators instead of a single monomial may cause complications, an impression
of having renormalized a manifestly non-renormalizable model. in fact, we may nd an innite series of irrelevant
operators in a renormalizable model, showing the possibility of the removal of the cuto in the presence of nonrenor-
malizable operators. an obvious example is when a regulator, represented as an interaction vertex, yields irrelevant
operators. we nd this situation by introducing the nite dierence operator appearing in the lattice regularized
theories in the continuum. the nite dierence operator generates an innite power series of the gradient whose
monomials are nonrenormalizable. the basic question in the removal of the cuto is whether the series of the irrele-
vant operators is chosen in such a manner that the divergences can be removed by the ne tuning of a nite number
of parameters in the action. the innite series of irrelevant operator is usually required by some symmetry of the
theory, such as the periodicity in momentum space on the lattice [24], the global o(n ) symmetry of the nonlinear
sigma model [25] or gauge theories on the lattice [26]. the symmetry imposes such constraints on the radiative cor-
restions that the divergences can in fact removed within the given functional family of the action and the apparently
nonrenormalizable model becomes renormalizable.

one touches upon here a fundamental dierence between the ways renormalization group is used in statistical
mechanics and particle physics. in statistical mechanics the uv cuto is physical and we may not ignore the eects
taking place at that scale.
in particle physics we insist that the cuto is suciently far from the scale of the
phenomenon we are interested even in the eective theories. the gain coming from this constraining of the set of
observables is that universality arguments apply and it is enough to consider renormalizable models1. but we may
need irrelevant operators in statistical mechanics which lead to complicated nonrenormalizable models. the error
caused by the omission of the irrelevant pieces in the particle physical applications is negligible. we can turn this
insensitivity into a freedom: the suppression mechanism responsible of this simplication gives us the possibility to
include irrelevant pieces in the theories without specic ne tuning of their coupling constants in particle physics so
long as the uv divergences can be removed.

in the case of the periodic potential we have the opposite eect, a restriction on the renormalizability due to the
presence of innitely many vertices in the model. this is because the new uv divergences of the ionised phase arise
from the summation of innitely many, individually nite graphs [4], [5] , [8]. we show that this highly nontrivial
eect can be reproduced in a very simple manner in the framework of the functional form of the renormalization group
method. we shall use the fourier amplitudes un(k) as coupling constants and we linearize the d = 2 dimensional
renormalization group ow (13) around the xed point un = 0 by assuming |2
vk()|  k2. notice that the uv
gaussian xed point is well dened in any dimensions because modes with non-vanishing momentum are considered in
the blocking. the singularity building up at or below the lower critical dimension can be found in the ow generated by
such a blocking procedure as an instability and as an inconsistency of the massless ir xed point without inuencing
the uv scaling laws.

it is more natural to express the ow in terms of the dimensionless coupling constants, u(k) = kdu(k). the

solution of the linearized renormalization group equation satisfying the initial conditions un(k = ) = un is

un(k) = un(cid:18) k

(cid:19)( 2n22)

.

(15)

thus, the coupling constants un(k) are relevant, marginal, or irrelevant for 2 < 8/n2, 2 = 8/n2, or 2 > 8/n2,
respectively.

for 2 > 8 all dimensionless coupling constants are irrelevant and (15) is consistent and keeps the trivial saddle
point of the blocking stable. this result indicates the inaccessibility of the gaussian xed point in the uv limit, the
non-renormalizability of the model in the ionised phase. the infrared xed point is a trivial, noninteracting massless
theory.

1the universality might need certain generalization in case of several scaling regimes or instabilities [21], [27].

5

it is instructive to compare this result with the o(u3) prediction of the double expansion in u and 2/8  1
of the sine-gordon model which shows the possibility of absorbing the uv divergences into u and a wavefuntion
renormalization constant for the eld [8]. the doubt that the higher order contributions of the perturbation expansion
may render the theory non-renormalizable is resolved in ref. [8] by relying on the bosonization method. unfortunately
there are problems with the bosonization in the ionised phase which is not surprising since this mapping is based
either on the saddle point or the weak coupling expansion. the problem is the anomaly of the topological current
which requires the presence of fermionic operators with odd power in the fermion eld [9]. we believe that the theory
is non-renormalizable in this phase but the real proof requires further eorts.

the potential becomes at under rg transformation in the limit k  0 and the at eective potential suggests the
presence of a massless particle which is in contradiction with the dimensionality of the system [23]. the resolution of
this apparent contradiction is that according to (15) the non-gaussian vertices of the model tend to zero suciently
fast in the infrared limit to suppress the ir divergences of the perturbation expansion when each mode in the loop
integral is coupled to the eective coupling constants at the appropriate scale.

the critical point at 2 = 8 is a well know result for the sine-gordon model. furthermore it was known that the
higher harmonics, corresponding to the vortices with higher vorticity are irrelevant around the critical point [8]. what
is interesting in our solution is that one sees a change in the scaling laws for the higher harmonics at a nite distance
away from this critical point. in fact, the n-th harmonic is found to be relevant for 2  8/n2. the apparence
of a new relevant operator implies not only a new renormalization condition but the possibility of new ultraviolet
divergences. though we nd no evidence for the singularity at 2 = 4 [5], a series of new singularities is expected
at 2 = 8/n2, due to the vortices with higher vorticity.

vi. numerical solution

for 2 < 8 the rst few fourier-amplitudes are relevant, that is they increase for decreasing value of k and
consequently the linearisation ceases to be reliable. the solution can only be found numerically in this case. monitoring
the coupling constants numerically we compare the solution of eq.(13) with the result obtained from the analogous
relation for the polynomial potential [21],

vk() =x 1

n!

gnn.

(16)

the initial conditions for the polynomial potential were chosen g2 = 0.001, g4 = 0.01 and gn = 0, if n > 4. then
the saddle point remains trivial for any k and the singularity of the eq.(8) at k2
vk() is avoided. in
order to compare the periodic and the polynomial cases we choose the initial conditions for the fourier-amplitudes
un(k = ) for 2 = 0.12
c such, that after taylor-expansion the initial conditions for the polynomial case are recovered.
therefore, the initial conditions for various truncations n of the fourier-series are dierent. for the increasing values
of n the coupling constants gn(k) determined from the periodic potential by the taylor-expansion approach the
running coupling constants of the polynomial potential in the uv regime. this is understandable since the quantum
eld  does not feel the global properties of the potential, i.e. the periodicity due to its small uctuations in the uv
regime. just the opposite holds in the ir regime, where the eld uctuations become larger and they make the global
features of the potential manifest. therefore, it is expected that the solutions for the periodic and the polynomial
potentials become dierent in the ir regime.

cr() = 2

we integrated numerically eq.(13) starting from the uv cuto  = 1 down to the critical value k2

vkcr ()
by using the fourth-order runge-kutta method and k = 10pk with p = 3 or p = 4. there were no changes in
the numerical results by increasing p further. in fig.1 and fig.2 we show the scaling of the dimensionful coupling
constants g2 and g4 for dierent truncations n . increasing the value of n the dierences in the results obtained for
the periodic potential decrease.

cr() = 2

there are relevant coupling constants for 2 < 8 which become large enough to destabilize the trivial saddle point
of the blocking and we reach a non-vanishing critical value kcr where the saddle point becomes non-trivial and the
tree-level blocking eq.(9) must be used. by following the solution of this equation all dimensionful fourier-amplitudes
are found to approach zero as k  0. the typical behavior is depicted in fig.1 and fig.2.

there is a remarkable dierence in the behaviour of the theory with a periodic potential and that with the cor-
responding polynomial potential [29]. namely, that all the dimensionful coupling constants gn(k) obtained for the
periodic potential tend to zero in contrary to those of the polynomial potential which remain nite as k  0. in fig.3
we show this attening starting from the value kcr.

integrating numerically eq.(12) we have shown that under the successive innitesimal rg transformations the
periodic potential becomes a constant potential up to the accuracy 105. we compared our results with the analytic
formula for the saddle point amplitude k() obtained for the polynomial potential [21]:

6

k() =

1
2

(vac(k)  ||) .

(17)

for periodic potentials v ( + ) = v (), the amplitude k() should be periodic in the eld variable with the length
of period  for any scale k (see eq.(12)). thus, for periodic potentials, an expression similar to eq.(17) is valid in
the period   [/2, /2] and then the same pattern of the function k() is repeated in all other periods. in
the particular case investigated by us the sign of || is positive and the eld independent term is per
vac(kcr) = /2
and per
2 || with that obtained by numerical integration
of eq.(12), see fig.4. we have established that with the increasing number of fourier-modes taken into account the
computed curves get closer to the dashed line dened by per

vac(0) = 0. therefore we can compare the result per

k=0() = 1

k=0() = 1

2 ||.

vii. spontaneous symmetry breaking

we found two dierent phases of the model, 2 < 8 and 2 > 8, with dierent scaling laws. the eective
potential attens out in either case. how can we reconciliate this result with the usual perturbation expansion of the
sine-gordon model [1] where one expects small uctuations around one of the minima of the periodic potential for
2 < 8? what does happen with the symmetry    + 2? what is the corresponding order parameter?

to answer these questions we start by distinguishing the local potential of the eective theory vk() with a low
cuto k from the eective potential, vef f () = vk=0(). in theories with infrared stable dynamics the limit k  0
is safe and this dierence is negligible. but the infrared instability inducing the mixed phase and the maxwell cut
in the eective potential makes the limit k  0 more involved even for theories with massive particles only [21]. by
turning this complication into an advantage, we suggest to consider the infrared instabilities as the signature of the
spontaneous symmetry breaking.

let us consider the dynamics of the modes with momentum p < k 6= 0. the local potential vk() of the corre-
sponding eective theory is nontrivial and periodic and the perturbation expansion might be justied around one of
the minima for k > 0. the real question is the relative speed the dierent coupling constants approach 0 as k  0,
and whether the saddle point and the perturbation expansion remain consistent in this limit. as mentioned above,
we adopt the infrared instability, i.e. the stability of the trivial saddle point of the blocking as a signature of the
absence of the change of the symmetry pattern of the model.

the saddle point of the blocking remains trivial in the ionic phase and we expect no spontaneous symmetry
breaking there. the coupling constants decreases as k  0, the theory becomes trivial as it happens with other
non-renormalizable models. the innitesimal uctuations gradually ll up the valleys of the local potential and the

naive order parameter for the periodicity, r dx(x), decouples.

the large amplitude, tree level uctuations which lie beyond the realm of the perturbation expansion but are picked
up by the tree-level renormalization starts to ll up the valleys of the potential in the molecular phase already at
nite scale, k < kcr. we take this instability as the indication of spontaneous symmetry breaking. this seems to be
in agreement with the perturbative approach which is meaningful only when the potential has a non-trivial structure.
in order to identify the order parameter for the periodicity we elucidate the topological dierences between the
two phases. let us introduce periodic boundary conditions in the euclidean space-time and consider the following
quantities. one of them is the winding number,

q(x0) =z dx1j0(x0, x1),

(18)

the space integral of the topological current density at a given time, x0. we shall argue that this is the order parameter
for the fundamental group symmetry. one can construct another, independent topological invariant by exchanging
the time and the space axes. but this does not modify the discussion what follows. the other quantities are the
vorticities of the space-time regions before and after the time x0,

v =z(x0y0)>0

d2yj(y).

(19)

the ux of the topological current agrees with the vorticity of the enclosed vortices q = v = v+ [9].

in the molecular phase the distance between the vortex-anti vortex pairs is shrinking with the increasing uv
cuto and the quantum uctuations cannot change the value of q. this makes the path integration consistent
when constrained within a homotopy class, characterized by a xed value of q. in fact, the consistency of the path
integration is the requirement that the path integral as the function of the end point of the trajectories should satisfy
the (functional) schrodinger equation. the schrodinger equation can be derived for the pat integral by perforing

7

innitesimal variations on the trajectories at the nal time. thus the path integral is consistent if the functional
space over which it is evaluated is closed with respect to innitesimal deformation of the trajectories. since the
discontinuous eld congurations are suppressed in the path integral the quantization process is well dened in a
given homotopy class [22]. note that the consistent constraining the functional integration into a given homotopy
class removes the fundamental group symmetry. this is obvious in the semi-classical quantization of a soliton where
the dynamical stability of the whole construction comes from the spontaneous breakdown, the suppression of the
winding number changing processes. thus the condition for the stability of the solitons, the sucient smoothness of
the congurations dominating the path integral, is in the same time the signature of the breakdown of the fundamental
group symmetry.

there are vortex-anti vortex pairs with cuto independent separation in the ionised phase and q uctuates in an
uncontrollable manner. the path integration cannot be constrained into a given homotopy sector, the fundamental
group symmetry is realized but the semi-classical structure based on smoothness is destroyed, the solitons become
unstable. in the same time the bosonization relations are either lost or fundamentally modied because the soliton
(fermion number) non-conserving processes require the introduction of operators with odd powers of the fermion eld
in the action.

the susceptibility of the topological charge,

 = hq2i  hqi2

(20)

may serve as a disorder parameter to distinguish the dierent realizations of the periodicity. it is zero or small, i.e.
suppressed exponentially in the soliton mass m ,   et m where t is the time extent of the system, in the molecular
phase depending on what homotopy sectors are covered in the path integration, whether canonical or grand canonical
ensemble is chosen for the solitons. in the ionised phase it should receive a t independent contribution.

viii. summary

a simple two dimensional scalar model with periodic potential was investigated in this paper. the rst question
considered was the renormalization of the potential. the study of this problem requires the handling of innitely
many operators which was achieved by the wegner-houghton equation. we found a disordered phase where the model
is non-renormalizable and trivial. in another, ordered phase the relevant operators compatible with the symmetry
were identied.

the periodicity and the convexity impose triviality on the eective potential, a phenomenon veried in detail in
both phases. the coupling constants approach zero regularily in the disordered phase as the theory becomes trivial,
leading to the attening of the eective potential. instabilities were found in the ordered phase where the eective
potential is attened out by the maxwell construction only, indicating a nontrivial dynamics behind the trivial nal
result.

it was pointed out that the conguration space of the model is multiply connected and that the winding number
is suggested as a non-local order parameter distinguishing the explicit realization and the spontaneous breakdown of
the fundamental group, the shift of the eld variable by the period length of the potential. the relation between the
applicability of the semi-classical arguments and the spontaneous breakdown of the fundamental group symmetry is
shown in the context of our model.

we have started to extend this work to include the wavefunction renormalization constant for the eld, and to
investigate the phase structure in higher dimensions. the scalar model with periodic potential can be considered
as a non-linear o(2) model with a symmetry breaking term, and one expects similarities with non-abelian gauge
theories due to the compact nature of the dynamical variable. in fact, the molecular phase is asymptotically free and
the vacuum is lled up with vortices in its large distance structure. furthermore, the spontaneous breakdown of the
fundamental group symmetry is reminiscent of the breakdown of the center symmetry in nite temperature gauge
theories. thus, our results oer interesting lessons to be learned in constructing the quark connement mechanism.
we ignored the wavefunction renormalization constant in this work. in order to go beyond this approximation
and to take into account some higher order contributions in the gradient expansion one has to turn to the evolution
equations for the eective action, instead of the bare action [15], [17], [18]. but the problem is just that the eective
action, appearing in the renormalization group treatment, hides a large part of the dynamics due to the maxwell cut.
it is not clear to us how to improve the renormalization group method to make it applicable for models with compact
variables beyond the local potential approximation. this problem prevents us to apply the renormalization group
method in their present forms to gauge models with gauge xing which are based on compact gauge group.

8

acknowledgments

one of the authors (i.n.) thanks for j. alexandre, v. branchina, g.plunien for the useful discussions . this work
is supported by the nato grant pst.clg.975722, the daad-m ob project n o  27/1999, and the grants otka
t023844/97, t29927/98. one of the authors (k.s.) thanks the alexander von humboldt foundation for the follow-up
fellowship and w. greiner for his kind hospitality allowing to achieve a good progress in this work.

[1] s. coleman, phy. rev. d11 (1975) 3424.
[2] s. mandelstam, phys. rev. d11 (1975) 3026.
[3] s. t. chui, p. a. lee, phys. rev. lett. 35 (1975) 315.
[4] t. banks, d. horn, h. neuberger, nucl. phys. b108 (1976) 119.
[5] b. schroer, t. truong, phys. rev. d15 (1977) 1684.
[6] p. b. wiegmann, j. phys. c11 (1978) 1583.
[7] s. samuel, phys. rev. d18 (1978) 1916.
[8] d. amit, y. y. goldschmidt, g. grinstein, j. phys. a13 (1980) 585.
[9] k. huang, j. polonyi, int. j. mod. phys. a6 (1991) 409.

[10] j. m. kosterlitz, d. j. thouless, j. phys. c6 (1973) 118; j. m. kosterlitz, j. phys. c7 (1974) 1046.
[11] j. v. jose, l. p. kadano, s. kirkpatrick, d. r. nelson, phys. rev. b16 (1977) 1217.
[12] f.j.wegner, a.houghton, phys. rev. a8 (1973) 401;
[13] j. polchinski, nucl. phys. b231 (1984) 269.
[14] a.hasenfratz, p.hasenfratz, nucl. phys. b270 (1986) 687.
[15] c. wetterich, phys. lett. b301 (1993) 90; m. reuter, c. wetterich, nucl. phys. b391 (1993) 147.
[16] s.liao, j.polonyi, ann. phys. 222 (1993) 122.
[17] t. morris, int. j. mod. phys. a9 (1994) 2411.
[18] j. alexandre, j. polonyi, internal space renormalization group, submitted to phys. rev.
[19] r.j. rivers, path integral methods in quantum field theory, university press, cambridge, 1987
[20] d. boyanovsky, h.j. de vega, r. holman, j. salgado phys.rev. d59 (1999) 125009.
[21] j.alexandre, j.polonyi, phys. lett. b. 445 (1999) 351.
[22] j. polonyi, in quark gluon plasma, world scientic, 1990, r. hwa, edt; act. phys. hung. 2 (1995) 123.
[23] n. d. mermin, h. wagner, phys. rev. let. 17 (1966) 1133; s. coleman, comm. math. phys. 31 (1973) 259.
[24] t. reisz, com. math. phys. 117 (1988) 79.
[25] e. brezin, j. c. guillo, j. zinn-justin, phys. rev. d14 (1976) 2615.
[26] t. reisz, nucl. phys. b318 (1989) 417.
[27] j. alexandre, v. branchina, j. polonyi, phys. rev. d58 (1988) 16002.
[28] j. polonyi, nucl. phys. (proc. suppl.) b20 (1991) 32; connement and renormalization, hep-ph/9511243, in the pro-
ceedings of the international school of physics, enrico fermi, course cxxx, on selected topics in nonperturbative qcd,
soc. it. di fisica.

[29] j.m.carmona, j.polonyi, a.tarancon, wegner-houghton equation in low dimensions, submitted to nucl. phys.

9

0.0015

g2(k)

0.001

0.0005

0.0

-0.0005

0.0015

g2(k)

0.001

0.0005

0.0

-0.001

-0.0005

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

0.0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08

k

k

fig. 1. comparison of the scaling of the dimensionful coupling constant g2 obtained for the polynomial (dashed-line with
stars) and for the periodic potential for various values of the truncation n = 2, 3, 10, 20, 30 in the fourier series. the gures on
the left (right) show the scaling of the coupling above (below) kcr. below kcr we show the scaling of g2 for the cases n = 2, 3, 10.
the increasing order of the full-line curves corresponds to increasing n .

0.012

g4(k)

0.008

0.004

0.01

g4(k)

0.005

0.0

0.0

-0.005

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

0.0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08

k

k

fig. 2. the scaling of the dimensionful coupling constant g4 in the same cases as for g2 in fig.1. the gures on the left

(right) show the scaling of the coupling above (below) kcr.

10

0.0004

0.0002

vhfl

0

-0.0002

-0.0004

-2

-1

0
f

1

2

fig. 3. flattening of the periodic potential below kcr. the decreasing order of the curves corresponds to decreasing values

of the scale k with the step k = kcr/10.

1

0.8

rhfl

0.6

0.4

0.2

-1.5 -1 -0.5

0
f

0.5

1

1.5

2

fig. 4. comparison of the function k=0() obtained by numerical integration of eq.(12) with the analytic expression
per
k=0() = 1

2 || (dashed-line).

11

