9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
8

 

 
 

1
v
4
7
0
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

a proof of the ads-cft correspondence1

k.-h. rehren

institut fur theoretische physik

universitat gottingen

d-37073 gottingen (germany)

abstract

the ads-cft correspondence is established as a re-assignment of localization
to the observables which is consistent with locality and covariance.

1 introduction

the holographic principle, or ads-cft correspondence has been considered as
an amazing prediction on the basis of string theory, d-branes, and supergravity,
setting o an enormous research activity.
it states that the degrees of freedom
of a quantum eld theory in anti-desitter (ads) space-time of dimension d can be
completely identied with the degrees of freedom of a conformal quantum eld theory
in minkowski space-time of one dimension less. it was rst formulated for supergravity
in 5 (+ 5 compactied) dimensions and super yang-mills theory in 4 dimensions by
j. maldacena [6], and was then conjectured by e. witten to hold as a rather general
principle [9].

the holographic principle arises by a conuence of several ideas arising from string
theory and from gravity. it was discussed long ago by t hooft [8] that the degrees of
freedom of quantum elds above a black hole horizon are counted by the bekenstein
entropy of the horizon. in string theory, the horizons of certain extremal black hole
solutions to classical supergravity with ads geometry are considered as d3-branes.
these appear as the supporting space-time for a 1+3-dimensional superconformal
yang-mills theory, whose state space should contain that of the supergravity theory.

1talk given at quantum theory and symmetries, goslar (d), july 1999

the ads-cft correspondence, yet, is not a feature of string theory. although
string theory happened to play a prominent role in its discovery, the conjecture it-
self is a statement about ordinary qft, and its validity should be discussed in the
framework of ordinary qft.

it is well known that the ads-cft correspondence admits no simple identication
of the respective quantum elds on the two space-time manifolds involved. it has also
by now become a familiar conception with many of us that the quantum elds proper
are somewhat ambiguous entities in qft while the invariant entities are the local
algebras they generate [5]. if we agree to take this idea seriously, a precise formulation
of the conjectured correspondence is possible without any recourse to string theory
or to perturbative supergravity, and a rigorous proof is astonishingly simple [7].

the formulation of a qft should be such that it admits the unambiguous and
relativistically invariant computation of all the physical quantities (such as masses
and cross sections) which specify the theory.
it has been demonstrated that this
possibility is guaranteed if, in a representation of positive energy, only the localization
of each observable is known (see [1]). the covariant assignment of localizations to the
observables (or, what amounts to the same, the specication of all observables which
are localized in a given region) provides the physical interpretation and therefore
determines the theory. this formulation of a qft does not rely on any idea of
quantization of some classical physics.

the idea for the ads-cft correspondence is that the same observables can be
given dierent assignments of localizations (in dierent space-times) in a covariant
way, and are thus interpreted dierently as a qft in d dimensions or a conformal
qft in d  1 dimensions. we shall establish the conjecture by showing that any
covariant assignment of a localization in one space-time to the observables gives rise
to another such assignment in the other space-time, and vice versa. but we shall see
that it is not always adequate to think of localization in terms of smearing of elds.
so what is the role of string theory? it might turn out on the long run, that
string theory is just an ingenious device to produce nonperturbative qfts, and
might not at all exceed the realm of ordinary qft. this must not be a reason to be
disappointed but may be celebrated as a scheme which circumvents or soothens the
notorious diculties attached to lagrangean perturbation theory. if this is correct,
then it is no surprise if stringy pictures lead to statements about qft.

while locality has a central position in qft, the intuition prevails that string
theory is less local than ordinary qft, and hence is a new type of theory. but quite
to the contrary, string theory is even more local than is necessary in qft: namely,
if one accepts that (free) elds carrying dierent inner degrees of freedom commute
irrespective of their localization, then, treating transversal string excitations as inner
degrees of freedom, they may cause excited string elds to commute even at time-like
separation. this crude idea has been elaborated with some rigor for free strings [3]. i
personally take it as another hint that, as the dust settles, string theory might bring
us back to qft, hopefully at an advanced level of insight.

2 algebraic holography

we formulate the ads-cft conjecture as the assertion that the local qfts on ads
space-time ads1,d1 are in 1:1 correspondence with the conformally invariant local
qfts on compactied minkowski space-time cm1,d2. corresponding theories have
the same state space.

ads space-time is usually described as the hypersurface {x : x2

d = r2}
in an ambient minkowski space with two time directions (or rather, its quotient by
identication of antipodal points x, x). the embedded space has only one intrinsic
time direction and a global time orientation. a serious reason for unease is that it has
closed time-like curves. yet, the klein-gordon eld constructed in [4] is, for quantized
values of the mass, a perfectly sensible qft on ads space-time.

0  ~x2 + x2

qft on ads space-time has also been studied in [2]. no a priori conict with the
general framework of qft was found, except that causal inuences (signalled by non-
commutation of local observables) can propagate only along geodesics. this feature
(well known also from chiral observables in 2d conformal qfts) must presumably
be interpreted as the absence of proper interaction. thus, interacting qfts will, like
the klein-gordon eld of generic mass [4], live on a covering space.

one may also regard ads space-time ads1,d1 as a cosmological deformation
of minkowski space-time with the maximal number of isometric symmetries. the
symmetry group (ads group) is the lorentz group so(2, d1) of the ambient space,
the boosts in the second time direction acting as deformed translations.

the very same group, so(2, d1), is also the symmetry group of conformal qft in
d  1 dimensions, that is on compactied minkowski space-time cm1,d2. in fact, the
manifold cm1,d2 coincides with the conformal boundary of ads space-time (dened
by the conformal structure of ads1,d1 induced by the ads metric), and its conformal
structure coincides with the one inherited by restriction. the ads group preserves
the boundary and acts on it like the conformal group.

this observation is pivotal for the asserted 1:1 identication of qfts: the hilbert
space and the representation of the group so(2, d 1) are the same for both theo-
ries. what diers is the interpretation of the group: e.g., the hamiltonian of the
ads group (the rotation between the two ambient time directions) corresponds to a
periodic subgroup of the conformal group generated by time translations and time-
like special conformal transformations. space-like ads translations correspond to
dilatation subgroups of the conformal group.

the set of observables, considered as operators on the common hilbert space,
is also the same for corresponding theories. what diers is the assignment of a
localization to a given observable. the same operator is said to be localized in a
suitable region x  ads1,d1 as an observable of the ads theory, and it is said to be
localized in another region y  cm1,d2 as an observable of the conformal theory.

for this reinterpretation to work, it must be compatible with covariance and
locality, and this is the nontrivial issue. the group so(2, d1) must act geometrically

in both interpretations, and hence the sets of regions x and y above must be related
by a bijective correspondence which respects the action of the group. furthermore,
this bijection must map causal complements with respect to one geometry into causal
complements with respect to the other geometry since the geometric notion of causal
independence is coded algebraically by local commutativity.

these constraints already x the bijection between regions x in ads space-time
and regions y in conformal minkowski space-time of one dimension less. here it is:
the basic regions in ads1,d1 are wedge-like regions which arise as the connected
components of the intersection of ads space-time with the ambient space region
{x : x1 > |x0|}, and all so(2, d  1) transforms thereof. every such intersection
provides a pair of wedge regions which turn out to be causally complementary in the
sense that they cannot be connected by a causal geodesic.

the basic regions in cm1,d2 are nonempty intersections of a forward and a back-
ward light-cone, called double-cones. each wedge region in ads1,d1 intersects the
boundary in a double-cone in cm1,d2. this yields a bijection between wedge regions
in ads1,d1 and double-cone regions in cm1,d2 which respects the action of the group
so(2, d1) by construction, and causal complements by inspection.

sofar, the discussion is entirely geometric. the algebraic part is very simple:
we declare an operator which, as an observable of the boundary theory, is local-
ized in some double-cone, to be localized, as an observable of the ads theory, in
the associated wedge region, or vice versa. a minutes thought brings about that
this prescription yields a 1:1 correspondence between local qfts on ads space-time
ads1,d1 and local qfts on conformal minkowski space-time cm1,d2 [7]. the asso-
ciated theories have the same hilbert space and the same representation of the group
so(2, d1), while their respective physical interpretations are dierent.

one issue remains to be discussed, the positivity of the energy spectrum. as we
mentioned before, the two interpretations go along with dierent hamiltonians. by
a standard argument, it is well known that if one of these hamiltonians has positive
spectrum, then so does the other. yet, the spectra are very dierent! the ads
hamiltonian has discrete spectrum due to periodicity in time, while the boundary
hamiltonian has conformally invariant, hence continuous spectrum.

we shall discuss that the notion of sharp localization acquires a very dierent
meaning in corresponding theories. while sharp boundary localization obviously
corresponds to localization at space-like innity of ads space-time, sharp ads local-
ization turns out to have a very delicate meaning in terms of boundary localization.

3 examples

the proof sketched above is a structural proof for a structural statement.
it does
not tell us which particular ads theory is associated with which particular conformal
qft. this has to be discussed case by case, as will be exemplied below.

our proof also doesnt tell us which observables are localized in bounded regions
of ads space-time. the standard procedure is to say that an observable is localized
in an arbitrary ads region x, if it is localized in all wedge regions which contain
x. the according algebraic determination of localization in ads double-cone regions
yields the following general structural results [7].

in d  1 + 2, if there are double-cone localized ads observables, the boundary
theory must violate the additivity property that the observables localized in small
double-cones covering the space-like basis of a large double-cone generate the observ-
ables localized in the large double-cone. while this additivity should always hold for
theories generated by gauge-invariant wightman elds, its violation seems character-
istic for non-abelian gauge theories, as wilson loops cannot be expressed in terms
of point-like gauge invariant quantities. thus, ads theories which are described in
terms of proper local elds [4] and which consequently possess observables localized
in bounded regions, should correspond to gauge-type conformal boundary theories.

conversely, a boundary theory which is additive in the above sense must corre-
spond to a qft on ads space-time which does not possess local elds. to prevent
confuion: the latter still has as many wedge-localized observables as there are ob-
servables in the boundary theory, which however cannot be detached from innity.
impossibility of point-like localization does not mean that the theory is non-local,
since observables localized in causally complementary wedges do commute as they
should. topological eld theories (such as chern-simons with wilson lines attached
to the boundary as wedge-localized observables) come to ones mind [9].

the situation is much more favorable in d = 1 + 1. then cm1,d2 = s 1 and the
boundary theory is a chiral conformal qft. the penrose diagram of two-dimensional
ads space-time is the strip r  (0, ) with points (t, x)  (t + ,   x) identied.
this is in fact a mobius strip. light rays are 45 lines. a wedge region is a space-like
triangular region enclosed by a future and a past directed light ray emanating from
a point in the interior of the strip, and the associated boundary double-cone is the
interval cut out of the boundary s 1 by this wedge.

a double-cone in the mobius strip is the intersection of two wedges which cut out
of the boundary s 1 two intervals i1, i2 which overlap at both ends: i1  i2 = j1  j2.
an ads observable in d = 1 + 1 is thus localized in a double-cone if as a chiral
observable it is at the same time localized in both the large intervals i1, i2. this is
of course true for the chiral observables localized in j1 or j2, but in general there
will be more than these. the additional ads double-cone observables remain broadly
localized (if considered as boundary observables) even if the double-cone, and hence
the intervals j1, j2 are small. we shall see examples of such observables below. this
again does not mean any non-locality of ads double-cone observables, since they do
commute whenever two double-cones sit within causally complementary wedges. it
only means that their description in terms of boundary elds may be non-local.

we present an example in d = 1+1: a massless conserved vector current j on ads
space-time represented by the mobius strip. its equations of motion are solved in the

plane by j 0(t, x) = jr(tx)+jl(t+x) and j 1(t, x) = jr(tx)jl(t+x). restricting
this solution to the strip r  (0, ) and requiring it to respect the identication of
points (t, x)  (t + ,   x) amounts to put jl = jr  j with period 2. canonical
quantization is achieved by representing [j(u), j(u)] = i (u  u) on a fock space.

this is indeed a u(1) current, the simplest conformal qft on s 1. but its degrees

of freedom are redistributed (through the combinations j) over the mobius strip.

we now compute observables localized in an ads double-cone (giving rise to in-
tervals i1  i2 = j1  j2 as before) in the interior of the strip. typical boundary
observables localized in an interval i are of the form w (f ) = exp ij(f ) where f
is a periodic smearing function which is constant outside the interval i. adding a
constant c to f is immaterial since the charge operator r j(u)du is a multiple q of
unity in every irreducible representation, so w (f + c) = eicqw (f ). now, consider
a smearing function which has constant but dierent values on both gaps between
j1, j2. then w (f ) is localized as a boundary observable in both intervals i1, i2, but
it is neither localized in j1 nor in j2, nor is it generated by such observables. as
an ads observable, w (f ) is localized in a double-cone, and operators of this form
generate all observables in the double-cone. suitably regularized limits of w (f ) even
yield point-like local elds on the mobius strip (t, x) = exp i r t+x

tx j(u)du.

as the size of a double-cone well within the strip shrinks, the correlations of the
boundary observables within the intervals j1, j2 disappear, giving rise to two decou-
pled (chiral) current algebras, one for j1 and one for j2, among the ads observables
of the double-cone. the additional observables of the form w (f ) as discussed above
behave in this limit as vertex operators e(t + x)  e(t  x) carrying opposite
left and right chiral charge. thus, locally the qft on ads space-time looks like the
bosonic sector of the thirring (u(1) wzw) model.

references

[1] d. buchholz: current trends in axiomatic quantum eld theory, hep-th/9811233.

[2] d. buchholz, m. florig, s.j. summers: hawking-unruh temperature and einstein

causality in anti-de sitter space-time, hep-th/9905178.

[3] j. dimock: locality in free string eld theory, mp-arc 98-311.

[4] c. fronsdal: elementary particles in a curved space. ii, phys. rev. d 10 (1974) 589.

[5] r. haag: local quantum physics, springer 1992.

[6] j. maldacena: the large n limit of superconformal eld theories and supergravity,

adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231-252.

[7] k.-h. rehren: algebraic holography, hep-th/9905179, to appear in ann. h. poincare.

[8] g. t hooft: dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, in: salam-festschrift, a. ali

et al. eds., world scientic 1993, pp. 284-296.

[9] e. witten: anti de sitter space and holography, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998)

253-291.

