9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
1

 

 
 

1
v
9
5
2
0
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

equilibrium and non-equilibrium quantum field theory

petr jizba

summary

this dissertation is concerned with various aspects of equilibrium and nonequilibrium

quantum eld theory.

we rst focus in chapter 2 on infrared eects in nitetemperature quantum eld theory.
we propose a simple mathematical method (based on the largesttime equation and the
dysonschwinger equations) which allows systematic calculations of the change of density
in energy/particles in heatbath during a scattering/decay of external particles within the
heat bath. a careful analysis reveals that the resulting changes in the energy density are
nite even in the case of massless heatbath particles (no infrared catastrophe).

as a next point we reconsider in chapter 3 the usual method of pressure calculations.
we use the so called hydrostatic pressure (or pressure at a point) which is dened via the
energymomentum tensor. we go through all delicate points which one must deal with in
the context of quantum eld theory. namely the renormalisation of composite operators
and the vital role of renormalisation for a consistent quantum eld theoretical denition of
pressure are discussed. we nally apply the whole procedure to a toy model system; 4
theory with o(n) internal symmetry. in the case of the largen limit (also hartreefock
approximation) the pressure is an exactly solvable quantity. using the mellin transform
technique we then perform the largetemperature expansion of the pressure to all orders.

the hydrostatic pressure can be naturally extended to nonequilibrium systems. us-
ing the jaynesgibbs principle of maximal entropy and the (nonequilibrium) dyson
schwinger equations we derive generalised kubomartinschwinger equations and set up
a calculational scheme for pressure calculations away from thermal equilibrium. as an ex-
ample we explicitly evaluate in chapter 4 the pressure for our o(n) 4 theory in the
largen limit in the case of two translationally invariant nonequilibrium systems.

there follow ve appendices which collect together much of the background material
required in the main body of the thesis. the important part is the detailed analysis in
appendix a.1 of the dysonschwinger equations. the derivation there shows how the
dysonschwinger equations may be recast into a very useful functional form. in appen-
dices b and c we clarify some ner mathematical manipulations needed in chapter 3.
the fundamentals of the information or shannon entropy are presented in appendix d.
appendix e covers the elements of dimensional regularisation and special functions which
underlie much of the material presented in the earlier chapters.

equilibrium and non-equilibrium quantum

field theory

petr jizba

fitzwilliam college

a dissertation submitted for the degree of doctor of philosophy

university of cambridge

march, 1999

declaration of originality

this dissertation contains the results of research carried out in the department of applied

mathematics and theoretical physics, university of cambridge, between october, 1995

and march, 1999.

excluding introductory section the research described in this dissertation is original un-

less where explicit reference is made to the work of others. some of this work was carried

out in collaboration. i further state that no part of this dissertation or anything substan-

tially the same has been submitted for any qualication other than the degree of doctor

of philosophy at the university of cambridge. some of the research in this dissertation

has been, or is to be, published. the results in chapter 2 appeared in [j1]. the material

presented in chapter 3 has been accepted to phys. rev. d [j2]. chapter 4 results from a

collaboration with dr. e.s. tututi [jt1], [jt2], [jt3].

[j1]

p. jizba, phys. rev. d57: 3634, 1998.

[j2]

p. jizba, hep-th/9801197, phys. rev. d (in press).

[jt1] p. jizba and e.s. tututi, hep-th/9809110, in proceedings of the 5th int.

workshop on thermal field and their applications, regensburg, 1998.

[jt2] p. jizba and e.s. tututi, phys. rev. d60: 105013, 1999.

[jt3] e.s. tututi and p. jizba, damtp-1998-163, in proceedings of the viii

mexican school of the particles and fields, mexico city, 1998.

acknowledgement

i would like to express my respectful thanks to my research supervisor, prof. p.v. land-

sho, for his careful guidance throughout my whole ph.d., from the primitive inception

of the research to its writingup in this dissertation.

i wish to extend my gratitude to

dr. e.s. tututi and dr. m. blasone with whom i have enjoyed a relaxed and stimulating

collaboration and who, among others, shared the many upanddowns of my professional

and personal life.

my fundamental gratitude to my mother goes beyond the limit words can capture.

i

would like to dedicate this dissertation to her.

finally, it is a pleasure to thank to all my friends. particularly the encouragement and

support that i gained from marketa mazakova was invaluable. i also acknowledge the -

nancial assistance that i have received from the cambridge overseas trust, fitzwilliam

college and the board of graduate studies, university of cambridge.

to my mother

the scientist does not study nature because it is useful; he studies it
because he delights in it, and he delights in it because it is beautiful. if
nature were not beautiful, it would not be worth knowing, and if nature

were not worth knowing, life would not be worth living.

henri poincare

contents

1 introduction and overview

2 heatbath particle number spectrum

1

11

2.1 basic tools

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

2.1.1 mean statistical value

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

2.1.2 largesttime equation at t=0

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

2.1.3 thermal wicks theorem (the dysonschwinger equation)

. . . . . . 21

2.1.4 thermal largesttime equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

2.2 heatbath particle number spectrum:

general framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

2.3 modied cut diagrams

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

2.4 model process

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36

2.4.1 basic assumptions

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

2.4.2 calculations

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

2.5 conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50

3 pressure at thermal equilibrium

53

3.1

introduction

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53

i

3.2 renormalisation

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57

3.3 hydrostatic pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72

3.3.1 mass renormalisation

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72

3.3.2 coupling constant renormalisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77

3.3.3 the pressure

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80

3.4 hydrostatic pressure in d = 4 (hightemperature expansion)

. . . . . . . . 86

3.5 conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93

4 pressure in outofequilibrium media

96

4.1 basic formalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98

4.1.1 oequilibrium dysonschwinger equations

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99

4.1.2 the jaynesgibbs principle of maximal entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . 101

4.2 the o(n) 4 theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108

4.3 the largen limit

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110

4.4 outofequilibrium pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112

4.4.1 equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112

4.4.2 oequilibrium i . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115

4.4.3 oequilibrium ii

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125

4.5 conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127

5 summary and outlooks

a finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

130

135

a.1 functional formalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135

ii

a.2 graphical formalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142

a.3 comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148

b surface term in eq.(4.69)

c hightemperature expansion of the gap equation

d derivation of the shannon (information) entropy

e some mathematical formulae

153

155

157

169

e.1 integrals in d dimensions

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169

e.2 special functions and important relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171

iii

list of gures

fig.2.1 a one loop triangle diagram.

fig.2.2 an example of a cut diagram in the 3 theory which does
not contribute to the rhss of (2.12)(2.13). arrows
indicate the ow of energy.

p.15

p.19

fig.2.3 generic form of the cut diagram at the t = 0. shadow

p.19

is on the 2nd type vertex area.

fig.2.4 an example of nonvanishing cut diagrams at the t 6= 0.
the heatbath consists of two dierent particles. exter-
nal particles are not thermalized.

fig.2.5 the cut diagram from fig.2.3 c) demonstrates that the
cut can be dened in many ways but the number of
crossed lines is still the same.

fig.2.6 the numerator of (2.32) and (2.33) can be calculated
using the modied cut diagrams for htp tip1p2. as an
example we depict all the possible contributions to the
numerator derived from the cut diagram on fig.2.4 c).
the wavy lines and thin lines describe the heat-bath
particles. the crossed lines denote the substituted prop-
agators, in this case we wish to calculate the thinline
particle number spectrum.

fig.2.7 the modied cut diagrams involved in an ordere2 con-
tribution to the photon number spectrum. dashed lines:
photons. solid lines: ,  particles. bold lines:  par-
ticles.

fig.2.8 the diagram a) with a corresponding kinematics.

fig.2.9 the lowestorder cut diagram for htptip1p2.

p.25

p.25

p.35

p.38

p.38

p.41

iv

fig.2.10 the generating thermal diagrams involved in an order
e4 contribution to the electron number
spectrum.
dashed lines: photons. thin lines: ,  particles. bold
lines:  particles. halfbold lines: electrons.

p.46

fig.2.11 the nonvanishing modied cut diagrams

from

p.47

fig.2.10c).

fig.3.1

fig.3.2

fig.3.3

fig.3.4

fig.4.1

fig.4.2

fig.4.3

the graphical representation of d(pn|p).
counterterm renormalisation of the last two diagrams
in eq.(2.17). (cut legs indicate amputations.)

first few bubble diagrams in the expansion.

the keldyshschwinger time path.

a plot of hi vs. m at  = 100 mev.
a plot of the eq.(4.60): a) the general shape, b) a small
x behaviour.

a plot of pressure as a function of t ,  for mr =
100mev. the gray line corresponds to equilibrium pres-
sure, the black line corresponds to pressure (4.62).

fig.4.4

a plot showing the dierence of equilibrium and non-
equilibrium pressures for mr = 100mev.

fig.4.5

behaviour of the pressure (4.67) as a function of  and
t0 at mr = 100mev.

p.59

p.67

p.81

p.83

p.119

p.121

p.122

p.123

p.126

fig.a.1 diagrammatic equivalent of eq.(a.20). the cut sepa-

p.141

rates areas constructed out of f [] and g[].

v

notation

natural units  = c = kb = 1 will be used throughout this dissertation. the following
sub and superscripts will be used to label various quantities in the following text.

subscripts

s

h

c

f ix

in

hb

r

v

superscripts



t

l

d

either

, , 
i, j
, 

a, b, c, d

schrodinger picture
heisenberg picture
closedtime path (also the keldyschschwinger path)
gaugexing term
interaction component
heatbath component
renormalised object (operators, vertex functions, etc.)
volume

hermitian conjugation
complex conjugation (except for the t ordering)
4dimensional transverse components
4dimensional longitudinal components
symbol for a dimension

4dimensional spacetime index
3dimensional space index
closedtime path indices :,  = {+,} for non-
equilibrium, and ,  = {1, 2} for equilibrium
internal symmetry indices

i

some of the important elds and functionals which will be used are.

h =r d3xh(x)
l(x)

p

s

t
u(t; t)



c
, , 

hamiltonian
lagrange density
projection operator onto nal particle states
smatrix (s = i1 + it)
tmatrix
ket evolution operator
density matrix
general energymomentum tensor
canonical energymomentum tensor
general elds

various other notations that will be used are.

d

dc
df

 


fb
ff

d(n)
g(n)
g

i(. . .)
(. . .)

m

o(z)
p(t )
p(x, t )
p(t )
sf
s+
s
sg

full thermal propagator for scalar elds in the closed-
time formalism (i.e. 2  2 matrix)
connected thermal 2point greens function, i.e. connected part of df
free thermal propagator for scalar elds in the closed-
time formalism (i.e. 2  2 matrix)
full thermal npoint greens function
nonequilibrium npoint connected greens function
nonequilibrium propagator in the closedtime path
formalism (i.e. 2  2 matrix)
boseeinstein distribution
fermidirac distribution
information content
shannon (information) entropy
amount of information conveyed by a single message
bogoliubov matrix
massieu function =  (helmholtz) free energy
order z
thermodynamic pressure at the temperature t
hydrostatic pressure at the temperature t
hydrostatic pressure for translationally invariant media
feynman (causal) propagator for spin 1
positive energy part of sf
negative energy part of sf
von neumanngibbs entropy

2 particles; (t = 0)

ii

t
t 
w
z
z
z


(n)



(z)




(z)
(. . .)

f
+


a








h. . .i
h. . .i{pk}

time ordering symbol
the t  (or covariant) ordering
generating functional for g(n)
(grand) partition function
the jaynesgibbs partition function
wave function renormalisation
inverse temperature 1/t
generating functional for (n) (i.e. the eective action)
npoint vertex function (i.e. 1pi npoint greens function)

lefthanded variation

righthanded variation
positive (+), negative () frequency parts of diracs
function
feynman (causal) propagator for scalar elds; (t = 0)
positive energy part of f
negative energy part of f
chemical potential
expectation value of the heisenberg eld operator a

 = ha
in the presence of a cnumber source j (i.e. a
i)
proper selfenergy for the scalar theory; (t = 0)
proper selfenergy for the scalar theory at nite tem-
perature in the closed-time path formalism (i.e. 2  2
matrix)
selfenergy for the scalar theory at nite temperature
grand (canonical) potential.
in the case when the
canonical ensemble is in question,  is (helmholtz) free
energy
expectation value
thermal expectation value. particles with momenta
{pk} are unheated

 the minkowski metric used throughout is g = g = diag(1,1,1,1)

gg = 

 = tr(g) = 4, g = g = 2

 derivatives with respect to x or x are abbreviated as

  /x,   /x

iii

chapter 1

introduction and overview

the development of the theory of quantised elds at nite temperature and density (also

thermal quantum eld theory) over the past forty years or so has led to fundamental

changes in the understanding of a wide number of physical phenomena. among those one

may mention symmetry restoration during hightemperature phase transitions [13] which

has found signicant application in early universe cosmology, and we may also mention

applications in neutronstar [4] and supernova [5] astrophysics. however, perhaps one of

the most important applications of thermal quantum eld theory nowadays is to quantum

chromodynamics (qcd).

the reason for this interest may be traced to the mid70s when the notion of asymp-

totic freedom of qcd started to emerge. at zero temperature and chemical potential the

lowenergy and/or momentum transfer behaviour of qcd is characterised by connement

(i.e. strong interaction among qcd constituents). the internal scale that determines the

boundary between small and large energy in qcd is  qcd  0.2gev. as the en-
ergy and/or momentum transfer increases, qcd begins to be characterised by asymptotic

freedom, i.e., the coupling evolves as

1

chapter 1.

introduction and overview

2

qcd(q2, t = 0 = )

q2 0,

(q is the fourmomentum transfer, q2 > 0) and so quarks and gluons behave like weakly

interacting, massless particles1 in highenergy and/or large q2 processes. this behaviour

is usually tested experimentally by means of deep inelastic electronnucleon scattering.

if one starts to study qcd at nite temperature and/or nite baryon density one

automatically introduces new (intensive) variables, namely the temperature t and the quark

chemical potential . these bring an additional mass scale with which the coupling qcd

can run. it was collins and perry who rst showed in [4] that strong interactions become

weak not only at high energymomentum transfer, as in the deep inelastic scattering, but

also at very high baryon density. this reasoning was quickly extended to nite temperature

[3, 8] where it was shown that

qcd(q2 = 0, t, )  0,

provided that t  qcd and/or   qcd. thus at a suciently high temperature
and/or baryon number density qcd systems consist of free quarks and gluons, regardless of

the energymomentum transfer. this deconned phase of qcd is called the quarkgluon

plasma. as was just mentioned, the temperature and/or chemical potential must be greater

than the qcd fundamental mass scale qcd. in practice this means that the temperature
for creation of the quarkgluon plasma must be at least of the order  0.2gev  1012k
qcd  0.8(gev)3  1042 cm3.
and/or the baryon number density must be of order  3

1because quarks become massless, the deconned phase leads to chiralsymmetry restoration (under
normal circumstances the chiral avour group sul(n )  sur(n ), with n the number of quark avours,
is broken to a vectorlike subgroup suv (n )). the chiral phase transition is expected to be particularly
interesting at high temperatures and/or densities [6, 7].

chapter 1.

introduction and overview

3

such temperatures prevailed in the very early stage of the universe ( 106s  105s after
the bigbang) and such densities are expected to be present, for instance, in the core of

neutron stars [4].

apart from the cosmological and astrophysical implications, the quarkgluon plasma

naturally oers an important laboratory for the study of asymptotic freedom. this fact has

led to the construction of a relativistic heavy ion collider (rhic) at brookhaven national

laboratory, where it is expected that two onhead colliding beams of 197au will generate a

sucient centreofmass energy density which, when properly thermalized, will allow the

formation of a quarkgluon plasma. similar experiments are planned in the large hadron

collider (lhc) at cern with colliding pb beams.

so far we have only outlined possible applications of qft to systems which are in

thermodynamical equilibrium. however, during the last several years there has been a

steadily growing awareness that the usual equilibrium (or thermodynamical) approaches

in quantum eld theory fail to describe correctly such fundamental phenomena as realistic

phase transitions (both in condensed matter physics and in highenergy physics), quantum

electrodynamical (qed) plasma evolution (and the related problem of hot thermonuclear

fusion), heat transfer in stars, etc. presently, the most important applications of non

equilibrium qft, however, are in the physics of the early universe. the reason why it is

so important to go beyond conventional equilibrium approaches in describing the universe

is the extreme conditions present in the early period of its evolution [9].

it is now well

recognised that at the very early times the universe was very hot with energy densities
approaching the planck mass density  5.2  1093 g cm3, and it then cooled rapidly due
to the expansion. because of this fact, it is expected that the matter elds went through

a hierarchy of phase transitions before reaching the present status quo [10]. it is obvious

chapter 1.

introduction and overview

4

that if the matter elds involved in the phase transitions interacted at a rate much smaller

than the typical cooling (or relaxation) rate of the universe, the evolution would proceed in

an outofequilibrium manner. such nonequilibrium dynamics may, in turn, lead to many

crucial physical consequences. one such example is the baryon asymmetry [9, 11, 12]. if

one assumes that the relative abundance of baryonic matter over antibaryonic matter is not

created a priori via the initialtime conditions, then one must nd a physical mechanism

which could generate such an asymmetry. it was a.d. sakharov [13] who proposed more

than thirty years ago that, in order to explain a biased production of baryons over anti

baryons, one needs to take into account the nonequilibrium evolution of the universe since

baryons and antibaryons are produced in equal number in any equilibrium process. this

is one of the celebrated sakharov criteria [11, 13, 14] for baryogenesis.

another extremely interesting example of application of nonequilibrium qft in cos-

mology is the production of topological defects during phase transitions. interest in this

area stems from the belief that topological defects, such as cosmic strings, might provide

an explanation of structure formation and the cosmic microwave background radiation

anisotropies in the universe [15]. the domain structure of a ferromagnet is known to be-

come very dierent when the sample is cooled adiabatically through the curie temperature

compared to when it is cooled rapidly.

in analogy one may expect that the production

of topological defects and their evolution will depend strongly on the cooling rate of the

universe. the formation of defects and their dynamics can be beautifully mimicked in

quantum liquids [16, 17] such as helium 3he or 4he, in liquid nematic crystals [18] or in

superconductors [19]. recent experiments [16] with 3he have conrmed that the density of

vortex lines nucleated during the phase transition from a normal 3he liquid to its superuid

bphase depends considerably on the cooling rate.

chapter 1.

introduction and overview

5

in the framework of nonequilibrium applications of qft one should not forget the

currently very important application to relativistic heavyion collisions, which, as we have

mentioned, are expected to produce a sucient thermal environment for creation of a

quarkgluon plasma. the major indication that a nonequilibrium description seems to

be necessary comes from the expectation that the time scale at which the quarkgluon

plasma should exhibit itself will be too short for its macroscopic equilibration. the point

is that the energy density in the reaction zone, once the plasma begins to thermalise, will

create a pressure which will consequently lead to explosive expansion of the plasma. the

associated expansion time is estimated to be only 10 or 100 times longer than the time

scale of microscopic equilibration processes [20]. this introduces a basic uncertainty as

to whether an equilibrium treatment may be used safely. on the other hand, if a non

equilibrium description proves crucial, then one must face the question to what extent a

small, shortlived, fast expanding system of quarks and gluons can be called a quark

gluon plasma. one should honestly admit that there does not presently exist any generally

accepted model which would satisfactorily describe the quarkgluon plasma dynamics.

all the mentioned nonequilibrium processes are characterised by the rate at which a

system changes (e.g. expansion rate, dissipative rate, the rate at which particles are ex-

changed with an external environment) which is comparable to or greater than the rate

at which microscopic interactions (i.e. the equilibrating mechanism) are happening.

in

practice this means that the relaxation time scale (i.e. the mean time in which the sys-

tem relaxes to equilibrium) is much longer than the time scale at which observations are

performed, and consequently a system does not evolve adiabatically (i.e.

it does not go

through a sequence of states each of which is at thermal equilibrium). it is needless to say

that many of phenomena in nature are precisely of this character.

chapter 1.

introduction and overview

6

whereas for the description of matter in equilibrium one has at ones disposal a sys-

tematic and unied approach based upon the formalism of the gibbs (micro or grand)

canonical density matrices, no such simple way seems to exist in a nonequilibrium theory

because of the variety of phenomena and of the complexity of the evolution processes. this

is to be expected, as there is basically no limitation on the amount of questions that may

be asked about timedependent phenomena unless one clearly species which degrees of

freedom (or what degree of reduction) one will adopt for the description of the evolution

of a system. within such a reduced description, however, the dynamics has been shown to

be capable of prediction. in this framework there have steadily crystallised two major (and

mutually distinct) approaches [2123].

the rst one, which we mostly refer to in our thesis, is the, so called, maxent school

(or maximal entropy school) founded by e.t.jaynes et al. [2427]. the basic philosophy

behind this approach is rooted in the fact that the prediction of the future macroscopic

evolution of a system cannot be done with certainty on the basis of the initial macroscopic

data because of the existing correlations with the parameters or data that are discarded

in the given reduced description. the corresponding statistical inference about the system

is not deduced from the underlying microscopic dynamics but instead is rather based on

information theory. there the algorithm of entropy maximalisation leads to the density

matrix (or probability distribution) with the least informative content subject to the prior

knowledge which one has about the system. generally one may, at dierent times, adopt

dierent macroscopic parameters describing the system (i.e. at dierent times one may

choose a dierent level or reduction in the description). if this is the case, the maximalisa-

tion of entropy naturally leads to a more complex form of the density matrix. this branch

of the maxent school (and its various modications) is also known as the projection operator

chapter 1.

introduction and overview

7

technique [28].

the second school, the so called brussels school, is associated with i.prigogine, r.bales-

cu et al. [23, 29, 30]. the basic emphasis is here put on the microscopic dynamics (i.e.

hamilton, schrodinger or liouville equations), and all other nondynamical approaches,

such as those coming from information theory, are discarded: everything should be derived

from the dynamics alone. the ultimate aim is a dynamical separation into the parameters

to be retained on the desired level of description, and those to be discarded. this separation,

if it exists, should emerge the from dynamics as an asymptotic property valid for the large

(i.e. observational) time scales. it is well known since the time of boltzmann that the latter

may be achieved by introducing a certain hypothesis about the microscopic behaviour of the

system; e.g. boltzmanns stosszahlansatz (random collision hypothesis) [31], ehrenfests

coarse graining hypothesis [32], or bogoliubovs no initialtime correlations hypothesis [33].

this line of reasoning is basically inherited and progressed by the brussels school. it should

be noted that all the statistical inferences or hypotheses here have a strictly dynamical

nature (they are directly motivated by the underlying dynamics), but on the other hand

they are in a certain respect ad hoc, because only certain probabilistic features of the

microscopic dynamics are emphasised.

synopsis

we rst focus in chapter 2 on infrared eects in nitetemperature qft. we propose a

simple mathematical method (based on the largesttime equation and the dysonschwinger

equations) which allows systematic calculations of the change of energy density (or particle

density) in a heatbath during a decay (or scattering) of the external particle(s) within

the heat bath. the applied method naturally leads to an interpretation of the change of

chapter 1.

introduction and overview

8

density of energy (particles) in terms of three additive contributions: stimulated emission,

absorption and uctuations of the heatbath particles. this result is completely non

perturbative. a careful analysis reveals that the resulting change in the energy density is

nite even in the case of massless heatbath particles. this means that there is no infrared

catastrophe.

as the next point we reconsider in chapter 3 the problem of calculating pressure.

we use the socalled hydrostatic pressure (or pressure at a point) which is dened via

the energymomentum tensor. the obvious advantage is a possible extension into a non

equilibrium medium. we go through all the delicate points that must be dealt with in the

context of quantum eld theory. renormalisation of composite operators and in general

the vital role of renormalisation for a consistent quantum eldtheoretical denition of

pressure is discussed. we nally apply the whole procedure to a toymodel system: 4

theory with o(n) internal symmetry. in the case of the largen limit (also the hartree

fock approximation) the pressure is exactly solvable. using the mellin transform technique

we perform the largetemperature expansion of the pressure to all orders in t .

the hydrostatic pressure can be naturally extended to nonequilibrium systems. us-

ing the jaynesgibbs principle of maximal entropy and the (nonequilibrium) dyson

schwinger equations we derive in chapter 4 the generalised kubomartinschwinger equa-

tions and set up a calculational scheme for pressure calculations away from thermal equi-

librium. as an example we explicitly evaluate pressure for the o(n) 4 theory in the

largen limit in two cases of translationally invariant nonequilibrium systems.

there follow ve appendices which comprise much of the background material required

in the main body of the thesis. the important part is the detailed analysis in appendix a.1

of the dysonschwinger equations. the derivation there shows how the dysonschwinger

chapter 1.

introduction and overview

9

equations may be formulated in a very useful functional form. we also outline the connec-

tion with the more conventional approaches. in appendices b and c we clarify some ner

mathematical manipulations needed in chapter 3. the fundamentals of information or

shannon entropy are presented in appendix d. appendix e covers the elements of dimen-

sional regularisation and special functions which underlie much of the material presented

in the earlier chapters.

epilogue

a reader of this dissertation might be disappointed by the fact that he or she will not nd

a usual pedagogical introduction to the subject. the omission of such an introduction was

dictated mainly by two considerations. firstly, we have not felt very competent to provide

a good account of the fundamentals of both equilibrium and nonequilibrium quantum

eld theory. the subjects themselves are currently immensely vast and the number of

problems involved quickly approaches the thermodynamic limit. we therefore take a

more pragmatic point of view and proceed by sampling a few denite problems, which

we develop and analyse in great detail. secondly, and most importantly, we personally

hold the opinion that a dissertation should reect students ability to cope with a subject

and creatively apply it to practical problems rather than write an essay on mathematical

or physical foundations of the subject in question. any such attempts would lead (at

least in our case) to pure epigonism since we do not feel that we could add anything

substantially new to existing (and pedagogically excellent) textbooks and review articles;

see for example refs. [31,3442] for equilibrium quantum eld theory and statistical physics

and refs. [23, 30, 43, 44] for nonequilibrium quantum eld theory and statistical physics.

to end, we wish to make one more remark. we are perfectly aware that the presented

chapter 1.

introduction and overview

10

work is incomplete in many respects. our ignorance or lack of understanding of many

important topics is of course in part responsible for this weakness. in particular, we refer

here to discussions and applications of such crucial areas as the imaginarytime (euclidean

or matsubara) formalism, (nonequilibrium) thermoeld dynamics, hard thermal loops,

the theory of temperatureinduced phase transitions, linear response theory, stochastic

approaches to nonequilibrium dynamics, quantum transport equations, theory of transport

coecients and many more, which are denitely missing in this dissertation. although we

had originally planned to include some of the aforementioned issues (namely those which

directly concern or resonate with our present research), neither space nor time has allowed

us to full this wish.

chapter 2

heatbath particle number spectrum

in recent years much theoretical eort has been invested in the understanding relativistic

heavy ion collisions as these can create critical energy densities which are large enough to

produce the quarkgluon plasma (the deconned phase of quarks and gluons) [34, 36].

a natural tool for testing the quarkgluon plasma properties would be to look for

the particle number spectrum formed when a particle decays within the plasma itself.

as the plasma created during heavy ion collisions is, to a very good approximation, in

thermodynamical equilibrium [34] (somewhat like a microwave oven or a heat bath), one

can use the whole machinery of statistical physics and qft in order to predict the nal

plasma number spectrum. such calculations, derived from rst principles, were carried out

by landsho and taylor [45].

our aim is to nd a suciently easy mathematical formalism allowing us to perform

mentioned calculations to any order. because unstable particles treated in [45] can not

naturally appear in asymptotic states, we demonstrate our approach on a mathematically

more correct (but from practical point of view less relevant) process; namely on the scat-

tering of two particles inside of a heat bath. the method presented here however, might

be applied as well to a decay itself (provided that the corresponding decay rate is much

11

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

12

less than any of the characteristic energies of the process). in this chapter we formulate

the basic diagrammatic rules for the methodical perturbative calculus of plasma particle

number spectrum dhn()i/d and discuss it in the simple case of a heat bath comprised
of photons and electrons, which are for simplicity treated as scalar particles.

in section 2.1 we review the basic concepts and techniques needed from the theory of

the largest-time equation (both for t = 0 and t 6= 0) and the dysonschwinger equations.
rules for the cut diagrams at nitetemperature are derived and subsequently extended to

the case when unheated elds are present. it was already pointed out in [46] that the thermal

cut diagrams are virtually the kobessemeno diagrams [34] in the keldysh formalism [47].

this observation will allow us to identify type 1 vertices in the real time nitetemperature

diagrams with the uncircled vertices used in the (thermal) cut diagrams, and similarly type

2 vertices will be identied with the circled, cut diagram vertices. as we want to restrict our

attention to only some particular nal particle states, further restrictions on the possible

cut diagrams must be included. we shall study these restrictions in the last part of section

2.1.

as we shall show in section 2.2, the heatbath particle number spectrum can be conve-

niently expressed as a fraction. whilst it is possible to compute the denominator by means

of the thermal cut diagrams developed in section 2.1, the calculation of the numerator

requires more care. using the dysonschwinger equations, we shall see in section 2.3 that

it can be calculated through modied thermal cut diagrams. the modication consists of

the substitution in turn of each heat bath particle propagator by an altered one. we also

show that there must be only one modication per diagram. from this we conclude that

from each individual cut diagram we get n modied ones (n stands for the total number of

heatbath particle propagators in the diagram). furthermore, in the case when more types

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

13

of the heat bath particles are present, one might be only interested in the number spectrum

of some of these. the construction of the modied cut diagrams in such cases follow the

same procedure as in the previous situation. we nd that only the propagators aliated

to the desired elds must be altered.

in section 2.4 the presented approach is applied to a toy model in which a gluon plasma is

simulated by scalar photons, and we calculate the resulting changes in the number spectrum

of the plasma particles. section 2.4 ends with a qualitative discussion of the quarkgluon

plasma simulated by scalar photons and electrons.

for readers convenience, the chapter is accompanied with appendix a.1 where we

derive, directly from the thermal wicks theorem, the (thermal) dysonschwinger equations

as well as other useful functional identities valid at nite temperature.

2.1 basic tools

2.1.1 mean statistical value

the central idea of thermal qft is based on the fact that one can not take the expectation

value of an observable a with respect to some pure state as generally all states have non-

zero probability to be populated and consequently one must consider instead a mixture of

states generally described by the density matrix . the mean statistical value of a is then

hai = t r(a),

(2.1)

where the trace has to be taken over a complete set of physical states. for a statistical system

in thermodynamical equilibrium  is given by the gibbs (grand) canonical distribution

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

 =

e(hn )

t r(e(hn ))

=

ek

z

,

14

(2.2)

here z is the partition function, h is the hamiltonian, n is the conserved charge (e.g.

baryon or lepton number),  is the chemical potential, k = h  n, and  is the inverse
temperature:  = 1/t .

2.1.2 largesttime equation at t=0

an important property inherited from zerotemperature qft is the largesttime equation

(lte) [4850]. although the following sections will mainly hinge on the thermal lte,

it is instructive to start rst with the zerotemperature one. the lte at t = 0 is a

generally valid identity which holds for any individual diagram constructed with propagators

satisfying certain simple properties. for instance, for the scalar theory with a coupling

constant g one can dene the following rules:

1

1

2

2

x

x

x

x

1

2

1

2

y

y

y

y

~   

~   

~   

i

i

i

~   

-i



f
-

+


*
f

(x-y)

(x-y)

(x-y)

(x-y)

here if is the feynman propagator, i+ (i) is corresponding positive (negative) energy

part of if , the  means complex conjugation and index 1 (2) denotes type1 (type2)
vertex; type1 vertex has attached a factor ig whilst type2 bears a factor ig. using this
prescription, we can construct diagrams in conguration space. with each diagram then

can be associated a function f (x1, . . . xn) having all the 2nd type vertices underlined. for

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

15

example, for the triangle diagram in fig.2.1 we have

3x

x1

x2

figure 2.1: a one loop triangle diagram.

f (x1, x2, x3) = (ig)3 if (x1  x2) if (x1  x3) if (x2  x3)
f (x1, x2, x3) = (ig)2(ig) i+(x1  x2) i+(x1  x3) if (x2  x3)
f (x1, x2, x3) = (ig)2(ig) (i)f (x1  x2) i+(x1  x3) i+(x2  x3)
f (x1, x2, x3) = (ig)3 (i)f (x1  x2) (i)f (x1  x3) (i)f (x2  x3).
etc.

the lte then states that for a function f (x1, . . . , xn) corresponding to some diagram with

n vertices

f (. . . , xi, . . .) + f (. . . , xi, . . .) = 0,

(2.3)

provided that xi0 is the largest time and all other underlinings in f are the same. the proof

of eq.(2.3) is based on an observation that the propagator if (x) can be decomposed into

positive and negative energy parts, i.e.

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

16

if (x) = (x0)i+(x) + (x0)i(x),
i(x) = z d4k
(2)3 eikx(k0)(k2  m2).

incidentally, for xi0 being the largest time this directly implies

if (xj  xi) = i(xj  xi),
if (xi  xj) = i(xi  xj),

if (0) = if (0).

(2.4)

(2.5)

(2.6)

as f (. . . , xi, . . .) diers from f (. . . , xi, . . .) only in the propagators directly connected to

xi - which are equal (see eq.(2.6)) - and in the sign of the xi vertex, they must mutually

cancel.

summing up eq.(2.3) for all possible underlinings (excluding xi), we get the lte where

the special role of the largest time is not manifest any more, namely

f (x1, x2, . . . , xn) = 0.

(2.7)

xindex

the sumpindex means summing over all possible distributions of indices 1 and 2 (or equiva-

lently over all possible underlinings). the zerotemperature lte can be easily reformulated

for the tmatrices. let us remind that the feynman diagrams for the smatrix (s = i1+it)

can be obtained by multiplying the corresponding f (x1, . . . , xn) with the plane waves for

the incoming and outgoing particles, and subsequently integrate over x1 . . . xn. thus, in

xed volume quantisation a typical nvertex feynman diagram is given by

z

n

yi=1

dxiyj

eipjxmj

p2pjv yk

eiqkxmk

p2qkv

f (x1, . . . , xn).

(2.8)

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

17

here the momenta {pj} are attached to incoming particles at the vertices {xmj}, while mo-
menta {qk} are attached to outgoing particles at the vertices {xmk}. in order to distinguish
among various functions f (x1, . . . , xn) with the same variables x1, . . . , xn, we shall attach

a subscript ln to each function f . for instance, the function f14(x1, . . . , x4) corresponding

to the diagram

p1

p2

x1

x2

x3

x4

q1

q2

contributes to hq1q2|it|p1p2i by

z

4

yi=1

dxi

ei(p1+p2)x1

ei(q1+q2)x4

vp4p1p2

vp4q1q2

similarly, the function f24(x1, . . . , x4) corresponding to the diagram

(if (x1  x2))2(if (x2  x3))2(if (x3  x4))2,

p1

p2

x1

x2

x3

1q

q2

x4

contributes to hq1q2|it|p1p2i by

z

4

yi=1

dxi

etc.

ei(p1+p2)x1

ei(q1+q2)x4

vp4p1p2

vp4q1q2

if (x1  x2)if (x1  x3)(if (x2  x3))2

 if (x4  x3)if (x4  x2),

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

18

this can be summarised as

n

eipjxmj

eiqkxmk

h{qk}|it|{pj}i =xn z . . .z
consider now the case |{pj}i = |{qk}i (let us call it |ai). from the unitarity condition:
t  t = itt, we get

p2pj v yk

p2qkv

yi=1

dxixln yj

fln(x1, . . . , xn).

(2.9)

ha|t|ai  ha|t|ai = iha|tt|ai.

(2.10)

on the other hand, by construction f (x1, . . . , xn) = f (x1, . . . , xn), and thus (see (2.7))

f (x1, . . . , xn) + f (x1, . . . , xn) =  xindex

f (x1, . . . , xn).

(2.11)

the prime over index in (2.11) indicates that we sum neither over diagrams with all type

1 vertices nor diagrams with all type 2 vertices. using (2.9), and identifying |{qk}i with
|{pk}i (= |ai) we get

or (see (2.10))

ha|t|ai  ha|t|ai =  xindexha|t|ai,

ha|tt|ai = i xindexha|t|ai.

(2.12)

(2.13)

eq.(2.12) is the special case of the lte for the tmatrices. the nitetemperature exten-

sion of (2.13) will prove crucial in section 2.3.

owing to the (k0) in (x) (see eq.(2.5)), energy is forced to ow only towards type
2 vertices. from both the energymomentum conservation in each vertex and from the

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

19

energy ow on the external lines, a sizable class of the diagrams on the rhss of (2.12)-

(2.13) will be automatically zero. particularly regions of either 1st or 2nd type vertices

which are not connected to any external line violate the energy conservation and thus

do not contribute (no islands of vertices), see fig.2.2. consequently, the only surviving

diagrams are those whose any 1st type vertex area is connected to incoming particles and

any 2nd type vertex area is connected to outgoing ones. from historical reasons the border

between two regions with dierent type of vertices is called cut and corresponding diagrams

are called cut diagrams.

2

2

1

1

1

2

figure 2.2: an example of a cut diagram in the 3 theory which does not contribute to the
rhss of (2.12)(2.13). arrows indicate the ow of energy.

we have just proved a typical feature of t = 0 qft, namely any cut diagram is divided

by the cut into two areas only, see fig.2.3. eq.(2.12), rewritten in terms of the cuttings is

so called cutting equation (or cutkoskys cutting rules) [4850].

1

2

figure 2.3: generic form of the cut diagram at the t = 0. shadow is on the 2nd type vertex
area.

one point should be added. inserting the completeness relation pf |fihf| = 1 into the

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

20

lhs of (2.13), we get

xf

ha|t|fihf|t|ai = ixcuts

ha|t|ai.

(2.14)

it may be shown [46, 48] that all the intermediate particles in |fi correspond to cut lines.
this has a natural extension when ha|tt|ai  ha|tp t|ai with p being a projection
operator (p = p = p2) which eliminates some of the states |fi. it is easy to see that in
such case

xcuts
ha|tp t|ai = i

ha|t|ai,

(2.15)

where tilde over the pcuts indicates that one sums over the diagrams which do not have

the cut lines corresponding to particles removed by p.

there is no diculty in applying the previous results to spin 1

2 [48, 49]. the lte
follows as before: the diagram with only isf propagators (and ig per each vertex) plus
(isf ) propagator 1 (and ig per each vertex) equals to minus the
the diagram with only

sum of all diagrams with one up to n  1 the type 2 vertices (n being the total number of
vertices). for gauge elds more care is needed. using the ward identities one can show [48]

that type 1 and type 2 vertices in (2.12)(2.13) may be mutually connected only by physical

particle propagators (i.e. neither through the propagators corresponding to particles with

nonphysical polarisations or fadeevpopov ghosts and antighosts).

1the function i sf (x), similarly as (if )(x), interchanges the role s+ and s. unlike bosons, for

fermions i sf (x) is not equal to (isf )(x). despite that, eq.(2.12) still holds [48].

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

21

2.1.3 thermal wicks theorem (the dysonschwinger equation)

the key observation at nite temperature is that for systems of noninteracting particles

in thermodynamical equilibrium wicks theorem is still valid, i.e. one can decompose the

2npoint (free) thermal green function into a product of twopoint (free) thermal green

functions. this may be dened recursively by

ht ((x1) . . . (x2n))i =xj

j6=i

pht ((xi)(xj))i ht (yk6=i;j

(xk))i,

(2.16)

where p is the signature of the permutation of fermion operators (= 1 for boson operators)

and t is the standard time ordering symbol (for generalisation to the contourtimepath
ordering see appendix a.1). note that the choice of i in (2.16) is completely arbitrary.

the proof can be found for example in [34, 51, 52]. similarly as at t = 0, wicks theorem

can also be written for the (free) thermal wightman functions [51, 53], i.e.

h(x1) . . . (x2n)i =xj

j6=1

ph(x1)(xj)i hyk6=1;j

(xk)i.

(2.17)

a particularly advantageous form of this is the so called dysonschwinger equation (see

appendix a.1) which, at the t 6= 0, reads

hg[](x)f []i =z dzh(x)(z)i*g[]


 f []

(z)+ +z dzh(z)(x)i*g[] 


(z)

f []+ ,

(2.18)

where (x) is an interactionpicture eld and g[. . .] and f [. . .] are functionals of . the

arrowed variations



(z) are dened as formal operations satisfying two conditions, namely:

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

22




n(z)

(m(x)q(y)) =

m(x)
n(z)

q(y) + (1)pm(x)

q(y)
n(z)

,

(m(x)q(y))




n(z)

= (1)p m(x)

n(z)

q(y) + m(x)

q(y)
n(z)

,

or

with

m(x)
n(y)

= (x  y)mn.

(2.19)

(2.20)

(2.21)

the p is 0 for bosons and 1 for fermions; subscripts m, n suggest that several types of

elds can be generally present. note, for bosons

for more details see appendix a.1.


 = f
 f




 which we shall denote as f
 .

2.1.4 thermal largesttime equation

the lte (2.13) can be extended to the nitetemperature case, too. summing up in
(2.13) over all the eigenstates of k (= h  n) with the weight factor eki (i labels the
eigenstates), we get

htti = i xindexhti.

(2.22)

let us consider the rhs of (2.22) rst. the corresponding thermal lte and diagrammatic

rules (kobessemeno rules [34]) can be derived precisely the same way as at t = 0 using

the previous, largesttime argumentation [34,54]. it turns out that these rules have basically

identical form as those in the previous section, with an exception that now h0| . . .|0i  h. . .i.
note that labelling vertices by 1 and 2 we have naturally got a doubling of the number of

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

23

degrees of freedom. this is a typical feature of the realtime formalism in thermal qft

(here, in so called keldysh version [34]).

we should also emphasise that it may happen some elds are not thermalized. for

example, external particles entering a heat bath or particles describing nonphysical degrees

of freedom [55]. particularly, if some particles (with momenta {pj}) enter the heat bath,
the mean statistical value of an observable a is then

xi

eki
z hi;{pj}|a|i;{pj}i = z1t r({pj}  eka),

{pj} = |{pj}ih{pj}|,

which we shall denote as hai{pj}. from this easily follows the generalisation of (2.22)

htti{pk} = i xindexhti{pk}.

(2.23)

unlike t = 0, we nd that the cut diagrams have disconnected vertex areas and no kine-

matic reasonings used in the previous section can, in general, get rid of them. this is
because the thermal part of h(x)(y)i describes2 the absorption of on shell particle from
the heat bath or the emission of one into it. thus, at t 6= 0, there is no denite direction
of transfer of energy from type 1 vertex to type 2 one as energy ows in both directions.

some cut diagrams nevertheless vanish. it is simple to see that only those diagrams survive

in which the nonthermalized external particles enter a diagram via the 1st type vertices

and leave it via the 2nd type ones. we might deduce this from the denition of hti{pj},
indeed

2note that h(x)(y)i = h: (x)(y) :i + h0|(x)(y)|0i and h: (x)(y) :i = r d4k
m2)eik(xy), with fb(k0) = (e|k0|  1)1.

(2)3 fb(k0)(k2 

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

24

xindexhti{pj} = xindexxi

eki
z hi;{pj}|t|i;{pj}i.

(2.24)

note, we get the same set of thermal cut diagrams interchanging the summation pindex
withpi. it is useful to start then withpindexhi;{pj}|t|i;{pj}i. this is, as usual, described

by the (t = 0) cutting rules. in the last section we learned that the general structure of the

corresponding cut diagrams is depicted in fig.2.3, particularly the external particles enter

the cut diagram via type 1 vertices and leave it via type 2 ones. multiplying each diagram
(with the external particles in the state |i;{pj}i) with the prefactor eki
subsequently over i, we again retrieve the thermal cut diagrams, though now it becomes

and summing

z

evident that the particles {pj} enter such diagram only via type 1 vertices and move o
only through type 2 ones, since the summation of the (t = 0) cut diagrams from which

it was derived does not touch lines corresponding to unheated particles. note, the latter

analysis naturally explains why the unheated particles obey the (t = 0) lte diagrammatic

rules even in the thermal diagrams

another vanishing comes from kinematic reasons. namely threeleg vertices with all

the on shell particles (12 lines) can not conserve energymomentum and consequently

the whole cut diagram is zero. as an illustration let us consider all the nonvanishing,

topologically equivalent cut diagrams of given type involved in a threeloop contribution to

ipindexhtipq (see fig.2.4)3. let us stress one more point. in contrast with t = 0, at nite

temperature the cut itself neither is unique nor denes topologically equivalent areas, see

fig.2.5, only the number of crossed legs is, by denition, invariant. this ambiguity shows

that the concept of the cut is not very useful at nite temperature and in the following we

3let us emphasise that originally we had the 64 possible cut diagrams.

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

25

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

a)

1

2

1

2

e)

1

1

2

1

2

b)

1

1

2

2

2

f)

2

2

1

1

c)

1

2

2

2

1

1

2

2

g)

2

1

1

2

2

1

2

1

2

2

2

2

d)

h)

figure 2.4: an example of nonvanishing cut diagrams at the t 6= 0. the heatbath consists of
two dierent particles. external particles are not thermalized.

shall refrain from using it.

in section 2.3 it will prove useful to have an analogy of (2.23) for htp ti. here p

2

2

1

1

1

2

=

=

=

figure 2.5: the cut diagram from fig.2.3 c) demonstrates that the cut can be dened in many
ways but the number of crossed lines is still the same.

is the projection operator dened as

p =xj

|a; jiha; j| ,

(2.25)

where j denotes the physical states for the heatbath particles and a labels the physical
states for the outgoing, nonthermalized particles. let us deal with htp ti. using (2.15),
we acquire

htp ti = ixl

ekl

z

xindexhl|t|li .

interchanging the summations, we nally arrive at

(2.26)

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

26

htp ti = i

xindexhti,

(2.27)

where tilde over thepindex means that we are restricted to consider the cut diagrams, with
only (12)particle lines corresponding to the a and jparticles (i.e. h0|(x)(y)|0i and
h(x)(y)i, respectively). the extension of eq.(2.27) to the case where some external,
nonthermalized particles {pk} are present is obvious, and reads

htp ti{pk} = i

xindexhti{pk}.

(2.28)

finally, let us note that using the lte, one may extend the previous treatment to various

green functions. the lte for greens functions is then a useful starting point for dispersion

relations, see e.g. [34, 54].

2.2 heatbath particle number spectrum:

general framework

the cutting equation (2.28) can be fruitfully used for both the partition function z and

the heatbath particle number spectrum dhn()i/d calculations. to see that, let us
for simplicity assume that two particles (say 1, 2) scatter inside a heat bath. we are

interested in the heatbath number spectrum after two dierent particles (say 1, 2) appear

in the nal state. except for the condition that the external particles are dierent from the

heat bath ones, no additional assumption about their nature is needed at this stage.

the initial density matrix i (i.e. the density matrix describing the physical situation

before we introduce the particles 1(p1), 2(p2) into the oven) can be written as

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

27

i = z1

i xj

ekj|j; p1, p2ihj; p1, p2|,

(2.29)

where j denotes the set of occupation numbers for the heatbath particles. a long time

after the scattering the nal density matrix f reads

f = z1

f xj

ekj p s|j; p1, p2ihj; p1, p2|sp,

(2.30)

here p is the projection operator projecting out all the nonheatbath nal states except of

1(q1), 2(q2) ones. the smatrix in (2.30) is dened in a standard way: s = i1 + it. the

zf in (2.30) must be dierent from zi as otherwise f would not be normalised to unity.

in order that f satisfy the normalisation condition t r(f ) = 1, one nds

zf =xj

ekjhj; p1, p2|sp s|j; p1, p2i = hsp sip1p2 zi = htp tip1p2 zi.

(2.31)

the key point is that we have used in (2.31) the tmatrix because the initial state

|1(p1), 2(p2)i is, by denition, dierent from the nal one |(q1), 2(q2)i and consequently
p s can be replaced by ip t. this allows us to calculate zf using directly the diagrammatic

technique outlined in the preceding section.

from (2.1) and (2.30) one can directly read o that the number spectrum of the heat

bath particles is:

dhnl()if

d

= z d3k
= z d3k

(2)3 +(2  k2  m2

(2)3 +(2  k2  m2

l )xf
hf|al (k; )al(k; )f|fi
l )htpal (k; )al(k; )tip1p2

,

htp tip1p2

(2.32)

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

28

and consequently

hnlif =z d4k

(2)3 +(k2  m2

l )htpal (k)al(k)tip1p2

htp tip1p2

,

(2.33)

where we have used the completeness relation for the nal states |fi and [p; aa] = 0.
the subscript l denotes which type of heatbath particles we are interested in. in the

following the index will be mostly suppressed.

2.3 modied cut diagrams

to proceed further with (2.32) and (2.33), we expand the tmatrix in terms of timeordered

interactionpicture elds, i.e.

t[] =xn z dx1 . . .z dxnn(x1 . . . xn)t ((x1) . . . (xn)).

(2.34)

here  represents a heatbath eld in the interaction picture. other elds (i.e. , and

) are included4 in the n. an extension of (2.34) to the case where dierent heatbath
elds are present is natural. employing (2.34) in htp tip1p2, one can readily see that this
factorises out in each term of the expansion a pure thermal mean value h. . .i. the general
structure of each such thermal mean value is: hgm[]fn[]i, where fn[. . .] and gm[. . .] are
the operators with n chronological and m antichronological time ordered (heatbath)
elds, respectively. analogous factorisation is true in the expansion of htpaap tip1p2.
the only dierence is that the pure thermal mean value has the form hgm[]aafn[]i
4 when fermi elds are involved, we have, for the sake of compactness, included in the argument of 

the spacetime coordinate, the dirac index, and a discrete index which distinguishes  from .

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

29

instead5. in case when various heat-bath elds are present, m = m1 + m2 + . . . + mn, with

ml denoting the number of the heatbath elds of lth type.

applying the dysonschwinger equation to hgm[]aafn[]i twice and summing over

n and m, we get cheaply the following expression (c.f. also (a.11))

htpal altip1p2 =
= z dxdy{hl(x)alihall(y)i + (1)phl(x)alihal l(y)i} * t
+ z dxdy
+ z dxdy
+ hal alihtp tip1p2,

2 {hl(x)alihl(y)ali + (1)phl(x)alihl(y)ali}*
2 {hall(x)ihal l(y)i + (1)phal l(x)ihall(y)i}*tp



l(x)

p


 t

t


2

l(y)+p1p2
p t+p1p2
l(y)l(x)+p1p2


2t

l(y)l(x)

(2.35)

a similar decomposition for htp tip1p2 would not be very useful (cf.(a.19)); instead we de-
ne h(tp t)ip1p2 having the same expansion as htp tip1p2 except for the n(. . .)pm(. . .)
are replaced by n(. . .)pm(. . .) nl+ml

. in this formalism h(tp t)ip1p2 reads

2

l(y)+p1p2





p


 t

l(x)

ip1p2

h(tp t)
= z dxdyhl(x)l(y)i* t
2 ht (l(x)l(y))i*
+ z dxdy
2 ht (l(x)l(y))i*tp
+ z dxdy
= |q1, q2ihq1, q2| pj |jihj|. here p

 p


2

l(y)l(x))

t

p t+p1p2
l(y)l(x)+p1p2


2t

5remember that p = p





in the subspace of heatbath states.

,

(2.36)



=pj |jihj| behaves as an identity

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

30

with the t being the antichronological ordering symbol. comparing (2.36) with (a.20),
we can interpret the rhs of (2.36) as a sum over all possible distributions of one line

(corresponding to l) inside of each given (t 6= 0 !)
htp tip1p2. as (2.36) has precisely the same diagrammatical structure as

cut diagram constructed out of

htpaatip1p2  haai htp tip1p2

(cf.(2.35)), it shows that in order to compute6 the numerator of dhn ()i

d 
one can simply modify the usual htp tip1p2 cut diagrams by the following oneline

dhn ()ii

d

= dhn ()if

d

replacements (cf.(2.32)).

(i) for neutral scalar bosons:

h(x)(y)i  z d3k

(2)3 +(2  k2  m2){h(x)a(k; )iha(k; )(y)i

+ h(x)a(k; )iha(k; )(y)i}

= z d4k

(2)3 (k2  m2){fb()(fb() + 1)

 ((k0 + ) + +(k0  ))
+ +(k0  )(1 + fb())  (k0 + )fb()(cid:9) eik(xy),

(2.37)

where fb() is the boseeinstein distribution: fb() =

e||1. term (k0)fb() de-
scribes the absorption of a heatbath particle, so reduces the number spectrum, that is

1

why the negative sign appears in front of it. analogously,

6here dhn ()ii

d

(2)3 +(2  k2  m2)ha(, k)a(, k)i, (cf. (2.32)).

=r d3k

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

31

ht ((x)(y))i  z d3k

(2)3 +(2  k2  m2){ha(k; )(x)iha(k; )(y)i

+ ha(k; )(x)iha(k; )(y)i}

= z d4k

(2)3 (k2  m2)(1 + fb())fb()eik(xy)

 (+(k0  ) + (k0 + )).

similarly, for hni one needs the following replacements (cf.(2.33))

h(x)(y)i  z d4k

(2)3 (k2  m2){fb(k)(fb(k) + 1)

+ (k0)(1 + fb(k))  (k0)fb(k)} eik(xy),

ht ((x)(y))i  z d4k

(2)3 (k2  m2)(1 + fb(k))fb(k)eik(xy),

(2.38)

(2.39)

with the dispersion relation k = k2  m2.

(ii) for dirac fermions:

the dirac eld is comprised of two dierent types of excitations (mutually connected via

charge conjugation), so the corresponding number operator n() = nb() + nd() with

nb() = x=1,2z d3k

(2)3 +(2  k2  m2)b(k; )b(k; )

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

32

nd() = x=1,2z d3k

(2)3 +(2  k2  m2)d(k; )d(k; ).

thus, the oneline replacements needed for dhnb()i/d are

h(x)(y)i  x=1,2z d3k

(2)3 +(2  k2  m2){h(x)b(k; )ihb(k; )(y)i

 h(x)b(k; )ihb(k; )(y)i}

= z d4k

(2)3 +(k2  m2) (k0  ) (6 k + m)

 {(1  ff ())  ff ()(1  ff ())}eik(xy),

where ff () is the fermidirac distribution: ff () =

1

e(||)+1, and

(2.40)

ht ((x)(y))i  x=1,2z d3k

(2)3 +(2  k2  m2) {hb(k; )(x)ihb(k; )(y)i

 hb(k; )(x)ihb(k; )(y)i}

=  z d4k

(2)3 +(k2  m2) (k0  ) (6 k + m)

 ff ()(1  ff ())eik(xy).

correspondingly, for hnbi we need

h(x)(y)i  z d4k

(2)3 +(k2  m2) (6 k + m)

(2.41)

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

33

 {(1  ff ())  ff ()(1  ff ()}eik(xy)

ht ((x)(y))i   z d4k

(2)3 +(k2  m2) (6 k + m)ff ()(1  ff ())eik(xy).

(2.42)

for the dtype excitations the prescription is very similar, actually, in order to get dhnd()i

d

,

the following substitutions must be performed in (2.40)(2.42): (k0)  (k0), ff 
(1  ff ) and   .

(iii) for gauge elds in the axial temporal gauge (a0 = 0):

the temporal gauge is generally incorporated in the gauge xing sector of the lagrangian

and particularly

lf ix = 

1
2

(a0)2;   0.

(2.43)

the principal advantage of the axial gauges arises from the decoupling the fp ghosts in the

theory. this statement is of course trivial in qed as any linear gauge (both for covariant

and noncovariant case) brings this decoupling automatically [34]. particular advantage

of the temporal gauge comes from an elimination of nonphysical scalar photons from the

very beginning.

let us decompose a gauge eld ai, i = 1, 2, 3 into the transverse and longitudinal part,

i.e. ai = at

i + al

i with

at

i =(cid:18)ij 

ij

~2 (cid:19) aj and al

i =

ij
~2

aj,

(2.44)

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

34

and use the sum over gaugeparticle polarisations

()
i (k)()

j (k) = ij 

kikj
k2 ,

(2.45)

2

x=1

with ()(k) being polarisation vectors, then for dhn t ()i/d we get the following one
line replacements

i (x)at

hat

j (y)i 

2

x=1z d3k
+ hat

(2)3 +(2  k2  m2)hat
i (x)a(k; )iha(k; )at

j (y)i}

i (x)a(k; )iha(k; )at

j (y)i

~2 (cid:19) (eq.(2.37))

ij

= (cid:18)ij 
x=1z d3k
+ hat

2

ht (at

i (x)at

j (y))i 

(2)3 +(2  k2  m2){hat
i (x)a(k; )i
i (x)a(k; )ihat

i (x)a(k; )ihat

i (y)a(k; )i

= (cid:18)ij 

ij

~2 (cid:19) (eq.(2.38)).

the replacements needed for hn ti can be concisely expressed as

h. . .i (cid:18)ij 

ij

~2 (cid:19) (eq.(2.39))

as for the longitudinal (nonphysical) degrees of freedom, it is obvious that

i (x)al

hal

j (y)i; ht (al

i (x)al

j (y))i  0.

(2.46)

(2.47)

(2.48)

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

35

eqs.(2.37)(2.47) can be most easily derived in the nitevolume limit, e.g.

for a scalar

eld we reformulate (x) as

(x) =xr

ar2erv

eiert+ikr x +

ar2erv

eiertikr x,

rescaling the annihilation and creation operators by dening a(k) = 2ekv ak in such a
way that [ak; a

k ] = kk (so that hakaki = kk fb(k0)), while r d3k

the replacements (2.37)(2.47) are meant in the following sense: rstly one constructs
all the t 6= 0 diagrams for htp tip1p2, using the lte (2.28) and the rules mentioned
therein. in order to calculate the numerator of (2.32) or (2.33) we simply replace (using

(2)3  1

v pk.

corresponding prescriptions) one heatbath particle line in each cut diagram and this re-

placement must sum for all the possible heatbath particle lines in the diagram. if more

types of heatbath particles are present, we replace only those lines which correspond to

particles whose number spectrum we want to compute (see fig.2.6).

1

1

2

2

2

1

1

2

2

1

1

2

2

1

1

2

2

1

1

2

2

1

1

2

2

2

1

1

2

2

1

1

1

1

2

2

figure 2.6: the numerator of (2.32) and (2.33) can be calculated using the modied cut diagrams
for htp tip1p2. as an example we depict all the possible contributions to the numerator derived
from the cut diagram on fig.2.4 c). the wavy lines and thin lines describe the heatbath particles.
the crossed lines denote the substituted propagators, in this case we wish to calculate the thinline
particle number spectrum.

the terms in the replacements (2.37)(2.47) have a direct physical interpretation. the
f (k) and (1 + (1)pf (k)) can be viewed as the absorption and emission of the heat

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

36

bath particles respectively [45]. the term f (k)(1 + (1)pf (k)) describes the uctuations
of the heat bath particles. this is because for the noninteracting heatbath particles
h(nk  hnki)2i = f (k)(1 + (1)pf (k)). the substituted propagators can be therefore
schematically depicted as

x

x

x

1

2

2

~~

~~

~~

y

y

y

1

1

2

fluctuations

fluctuations + emissions + absorptions

fluctuations

collecting all the contributions from emissions, absorptions and uctuations separately, one

can schematically write

dhn()if

d

=

dhn()ii

d

+ f emission() + f absorption() + f f luc(),

(2.49)

where, for instance for neutral scalar bosons

f emission() = z1



p


 t

(y)+p1p2

.

f z d4k

(2)3 +(k2  m2)(k0  )(1 + fb())* t

(x)

using (2.38), it is easy to write down the analogous expressions for the f absorption and

f f luc. to the lowest perturbative order, the form (2.49) was obtained by landsho and

taylor [45].

2.4 model process

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

37

2.4.1 basic assumptions

to illustrate the modied cut diagram technique, we shall restrict ourselves to a toy model,

namely to a scattering of two neutral scalar particles  (pions) within a photon heat bath,

with a pair of scalar charged particles ,  (muon and antimuon) left as a nal product.

both initial and nal particles are supposed to be unheated. we further assume that the

heatbath photons a are scalars, i.e. the heatbath hamiltonian has form

h hb =

1
2

(a)2 

m2

2

a2.

in order to mimic scalar electrodynamic, we have chosen the interacting hamiltonian en-

tering in the tmatrix as

hin =


2

2 + (ea +

e2
2

a2).

2.4.2 calculations

we can now compute an ordere2 contribution to the dhn ()i

d

. the evaluation of the

dhn ()i

d

is straightforward. in fig.2.7 we list all the modied cut diagrams contributing

to an ordere2. note that diagrams b) and c) are topologically identical. similarly, diagrams

e), f), h), i) and j) should be taken with combinatorial factor 2 (corresponding diagrams

with a heat-bath particle line on the bottom solid line are not shown). of course, diagram

g) vanishes for kinematic reasons.

for instance, in order to calculate the contribution from diagram a) (see also fig.2.8)

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

38

1

1

2

a)

2

d)

2

1

g)

2

2

2

1

1

1

1

2

b)

e)

h)
2

j)

1

2

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

2

2

1

c)

1

2

f)
1

i)

1

1

1

2

2

2

figure 2.7: the modied cut diagrams involved in an ordere2 contribution to the photon number
spectrum. dashed lines: photons. solid lines: ,  particles. bold lines:  particles.

p1

2p

q1

q2

1
x1

y1
1

k

1
y2

q3

q4

2

x2

p1

2p

figure 2.8: the diagram a) with a corresponding kinematics.

we go back to eq.(2.9) and to prescriptions (2.37)(2.38), so we get

a) =

2e2
v 24p1p2 z d4x1d4x2d4y1d4y2 ei(p1+p2)x1 ei(p1+p2)x2 if (y1  x1) if (y2  x1)

 i(y1  x2) i(y2  x2) z d4k
 (+(k0  ) + (k0 + )) eik(y1y2)

(2)3 (k2  m2)(1 + fb())fb()

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

39

=

2e2t

v 4p1p2(2)5 fb()(1 + fb()) z d4k d4q3 d4q4 +(q2

1

1

 (k0  ) (cid:26)
 (k2  m2

2q3k + m2

2q4k + m2

) 4(p1  p2 + q1 + q2).



1

+

2q3k + m2


) +(q2

4  m2
)

3  m2
1

(cid:27)
2q4k + m2

(2.50)

we have dropped the i prescription in the propagators since adding/ subtracting an on

shell momenta q1;2 to/from an onshell momenta k we can not full the condition (k 
q1;2)2 = m2
. as it is usual, we have assumed that our interaction is enclosed in a time

and volume box (t and v respectively). analogously one can calculate contributions from

other diagrams in fig.2.7. let us emphasise that it is necessary to give sense to graphs

e), h), i) and j) as these suer with the pinch singularity; the muonparticle propagator
1;2  m2)1 has to be evaluated at its pole because of the presence of an onshell line
(p2
(12 line) with the same momenta. some regularisation is obviously necessary. using the

formal identity [34]

1

x  i

(x) = 





1
2

(x)  i((x))2,

(2.51)

we discover that the unwanted 2 mutually cancel between e) and h) diagrams (similarly

for i) and j) diagrams). an alternative (but lengthier) way of dealing with the latter pinch

singularity; i.e. switching o the interaction with a heat bath in the remote past and future,

is discussed in [56]. evaluating all the diagrams (note, we should attach to each digram the

factor 1

2! coming from a taylor expansion of the tmatrix), we are left with (c.f. eq.(2.49)):

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

40

f emission() +

f absorption()

=

) (k0  )

t2e2

ht p tip1p2 v 8p1p2(2)5 z d4k (k2  m2
z d4q1d4q2 +(q2
2  m2
)
 (cid:8)k1(1 + fb()) 4(q + q1 + q2 + k)
k2fb() 4(q + q1 + q2  k)(cid:9)

1  m2

) +(q2

(2.52)

and

f f luct() =

) (k0  )

) +(q2

1  m2

2  m2
)

t2e2fb()(1 + fb())

t2e2fb()(1 + fb())

ht p tip1p2 v 8p1p2(2)5z d4k (k2  m2
z d4q1d4q2 +(q2
(cid:8)4(q + q1 + q2 + k)k1 + 4(q + q1 + q2  k)k2
 24(q + q1 + q2)k3(cid:9)
ht p tip1p2 v 8p1p2(2)5 z d4k (k2  m2
z d4q1d4q2 4(q + q1 + q2)
(cid:26)(cid:18)1 
+(q1  q2)}
(cid:17)2

, k2 =(cid:16)

(cid:19) +(q2

2q1k  m2



2  m2
)

2q1k + m2

(cid:17)2

+

1

2q2km2

1

2q1km2





m2


, k3 =

+

1

1

) (k0  )

+

1

+(q2

1  m2
)

(2.53)

with k1 =(cid:16)

2q1k+m2


2q2k+m2

+

1

q = p1 + p2. the relevant (i.e. ordere0) term (see fig.2.9)

2

(2q1km2

)(2q2k+m2

) and

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

41

p1

2p

1
x1

q1

q2

2

x2

p1

2p

figure 2.9: the lowest-order cut diagram for htptip1p2.

for ht p tip1p2 reads

ht p tip1p2 =

=

2t

16 v p1p2(2)2 z d4q1d4q2 +(q2
64v p1p2|q|(2)qq2  4m2

2t

.

1  m2

) +(q2

2  m2

) 4(q + q1 + q2)

(2.54)

eqs.(2.52) and (2.53) are analogous to the result obtained in [45] for the decay. in order

to understand their structure, let us deal with the number spectrum7 for small s. to do

this, we change the integration variables

q1  q1 
q2  q2 

1
2
1
2

k

k.

these changes lead to

(2qik  m2

) +(q2

1  m2

) +(q2  m2

) 4(q + q1 + q2  k)

 2qik +(q2

1  m 2  x) +(q2

2  m 2  y ) 4(q + q1 + q2),

(2.55)

(2.56)

where m 2 = m2

  1

4m2

, x = q1k and y = q2k. in addition, transformations (2.55) have

unite jacobian. if one taylor expands (2.56) in terms of x and y then one gets successively

7so we implicitly assume that the photon mass m is suciently small.

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

42

higher contributions to (2.52)(2.53). expanding (2.52) to the rst order in x and y ,

and keeping only temperaturedependent pieces, we have

8v p1p2

ht p tip1p2

(f emission() + f absorption())

t


2e2

(2)5 fb() z d4q1d4q2 (k2  m2

) (k0  ) a,

(2.57)

with

a =


m 2

1 z d4q1d4q2 +(q2

1  m 2

1 ) +(q2

2  m 2

2 ) (4kx) 4(q  q1  q2)(cid:12)(cid:12) m1=m2=m .

here k = (cid:16) 1

(we have performed transformation q1  q2 in order to express
(2.57) solely in terms of x). as a is a lorentz scalar, it must depend on k only via product

2q1k + 1

2q2k(cid:17)2

(kq). one can thus evaluate a in the frame where q = (q0, 0) and then replace q0 by

(kq) (see also [45]). straightforward calculations show that

a =

|q|q q2

4  m 2 (cid:16) m

(2)(kq)3
(kq)2 + m2
|q|

4  mq2(cid:17)(cid:17)2 .
(cid:16)|q|3

(2.58)

recalling (2.54), we get

f emission() + f absorption()

q2fb()e2



2m 2pq2

ln



0  q2pq2  4m 2pq2  4m2
4  m 2(cid:17)
4  m 2(cid:17)

(q0 + |k||q|)2 + m2
(q0  |k||q|)2 + m2

m 2 (cid:16) q2
m 2 (cid:16) q2

q2

q2








 +

m2

(cid:16) q2

4  m 2(cid:17)
(cid:16) q2
q2 (q0  |k||q|)2 + m2

m 2

4  m 2(cid:17)

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum



m2

(cid:16) q2

4  m 2(cid:17)
(cid:16) q2
q2 (q0 + |k||q|)2 + m2

m 2

4  m 2(cid:17)
 and |q| = pq2

with |k| = p2  m2
m is negligibly small (i.e. if m  ), then




43

(2.59)

0  q2. eq.(2.59) takes a particularly simple form if

f emission() + f absorption()

2fb()e2

2



q2

m2

 pq2

0  q2 (q2  4m2
)

ln  q0 +pq2
q0 pq2

0  q2

0  q2! . (2.60)

similarly as in the previous case we can evaluate f f luct. performing transformation (2.55),

and expanding (2.53) to the rst order in x and y , we get

ht p tip1p2

8v p1p2

t

f f luct()



with

2e2

(2)5 fb()(1 + fb()) z d4q1d4q2 (k2  m2

) (k0  ) b,

(2.61)

1  m2

) +(q2

2  m2
)

m2

b = z d4q1d4q2 4(q  q1  q2) (cid:18) 
+ z d4q1d4q2 4(q  q1  q2) ((cid:18) 
q1k(cid:19)
 2(cid:18) qk
1  m 2

m1m2(cid:27) +(q2

2

(cid:19) +(q2
m(cid:19)2

1 ) +(q2

2  m 2

2 )(cid:12)(cid:12) m1=m2=m .

direct calculations lead to

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

44

b =

3
2

m 2

q2(q2  4m 2)

2 (kq)2


4  m 2(cid:17)(cid:17) 
(cid:16) m 2
(cid:16) q2

|q|pq2  4m 2 
|q|(q2  4m 2)

q2 (kq)2 + m2

2





3
2

.

after some analysis we nally get

( q2
4  m 2)(2m 2  q2) m2
q2 (kq)2 + m2

4  m 2(cid:17)(cid:17)2
(cid:16) q2




(cid:16) m 2

f f luct() 

fb()(1 + fb()) m e2



m
|q|

42 m 2 pq2
0  q2 pq2  4m2
 arctg
4  m 2 

(q0  |k||q|)



mq q2
2pq2  4m 2 "

(2m 2  q2) m

q0  |k||q|
q2 (q0  |k||q|)2 + m2

( q2



m 2

m 2

+

m 
arctg
|q|





m
|q|

(q0 + |k||q|)
mq q2

4  m 2 


q0 + |k||q|
q2 (q0 + |k||q|)2 + m2

( q2

4  m 2)

4  m 2)#)



fb()(1 + fb())|k| e2

2 (q2  4m2
)

.

(2.62)

expression (2.62) considerably simplies in the limit m  0. in the latter case

f f luct  

fb()(1 + fb())  e2

2(q2  4m2
)

,

(2.63)

so the leading behaviour for f f luct at small  and m   is dominated by 1. note that
separate contributions to the 0th order of a taylor expansion of f f luc behave as 2 but

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

45

they cancel between themselves leaving behind parts proportional at worst to 1. the

minus sign in (2.63) reects the fact that the uctuations tend to suppress an increase in

the particle number spectrum when  is small. on the other hand, from (2.60) we see that

the emissions and absorptions stimulate an increase in the particle number spectrum for

small .

a result similar to (2.60) and (2.63) has been derived by landsho and taylor [45]

for a decay using proper scalar electrodynamics, though in their case a contribution from

the emission and absorption dominated over uctuations for small . note that in our

model both contributions are of comparable size at   0. the former feature is inherently
if photons were vector
connected with the fact that our photons are scalar particles.

particles an additional photon momentum k would go with each threeline photonmuon

vertex and so one might expect that the contributions (2.60) and (2.63) would be soften at

small . we have checked explicitly that for zeromass photons in the axial temporal gauge
(i.e. a0 = 0) this is indeed the case, and it was found that f emission + f absorption  1
whilst f f luct  .

until now we have supposed that our heat bath contains only (scalar) photons in thermal

equilibrium. however, one could similarly treat a heat bath which is comprised of photons

and charged particles, let say electrons, mutually coexisting in thermal equilibrium. to be

more specic, let us assume that the heatbath photons a and electrons  are both scalars

so the heatbath hamiltonian takes form

h hb = h  + h e + ea +

e2
2

a2

h e =   m2
m2

h  =
2

(a)2 

1
2

e

a2,

and the tmatrix interacting hamiltonian hin reads

(2.64)

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

46

hin =


2

2 + (ea +

e2
2

a2) + (ea +

e2
2

a2).

it is usually argued [57,58] that the interacting pieces in h hb can be dropped provided that

ti   and tf  . since we assume that pions are prepared in the remote past and
muons are measured in the remote future, we shall accept in the following this omission.

we can now approach to calculate both the photon and electron number spectrum, i.e.

dhn ()i

d

and dhne()i

d

respectively. as for dhn ()i

d

, an ordere2 contribution is clearly

done only by diagrams in fig.2.7 as there are no relevant graphs with electron vertices

contributing to this order, so (2.59) and (2.62) still remain true. on the other hand, there

is no ordere2 contribution to dhne()i

d

. the lowest order in e (keeping 2 xed) is e4. this

brings richer diagrammatic structure then in the photon case. in fig.2.10 we list all the

generating thermal diagrams contributing to an ordere4.

a)

d)

b)

e)

c)

f)

figure 2.10: the generating thermal diagrams involved in an ordere4 contribution to the electron
number spectrum. dashed lines: photons. thin lines: ,  particles. bold lines:  particles.
halfbold lines: electrons.

it is easy to see that out of these 6 generating thermal diagrams we get 43 nonvanishing

and topologically inequivalent modied cut diagrams; for example from fig.2.10c) we have

only those diagrams which are depicted in fig.2.11.

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

47

1

1

2

2

1

1

1

2

1

2

2

2

1

1

1

2

1

2

2

2

figure 2.11: the nonvanishing modied cut diagrams from fig.4.4c).

note, the graphs of fig.2.11 must be multiplied by a factor of four as there are two

equivalent insertions of the modied electron line and two equivalent distributions of the

photonmuon vertex (so together with 1

2! from a taylor expansion of the tmatrix we get

the symmetry factor 2). analogously we get 10 inequivalent modied cut diagrams from

fig.2.10a); 7 from b); 8 from d); 6 from e) and 8 from f).) the actual electron number

spectrum calculations are thus rather involved. nevertheless, one might evaluate fairly

quickly f emission(e) + f absorption(e) as there are only three diagrams which contribute,

namely:

p1

p2

q1

1
q
3

qe

1
q6

q5
2

1
q7
2

q2

q4

1p

2

p2

p1

p2

q
3

qe

q1

2
2
q5

1
q6
1

q7

q4

q2

1

p1

2p

2

p1

p2

q2
q7

qe

1

q1

1

1
q6

q
3

2
q4
q5

2

2

p1

p2

let us remind that in the nale state we must have, apart from the heat-bath particles,

only two muons, and so the diagram

2

1

2

1

1

2

can not contribute to dhne()i

d

. subtracting a temperature independent part, we are left

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

48

with

with

f emission(e) + f absorption(e)

=

t2e4 fb(e)

htpt ip1p2 v p1p2(2)8z d4q7 d4qe +(q2
z d4q2 d4q3 +(q2
3  m2
k2 4(q + q2 + q3 + q7 + qe)(cid:9) ,

2  m2

) +(q2

e) (q2

e) (q0

7  m2

e  m2

e  e)
) (cid:8)k1 4(q + q2 + q3 + q7  qe)

(2.65)

1

1

1

(q2q + q2 + i)

(q3q + q2  i)

(2q7qe + 2m2

)2
e  m2

k1 =

k2 = k1(qe  qe).

if we are interested in the qualitative behaviour of (2.65) at small s, we need to perform

an integration over pe only. in order to keep our calculations as simple as possible, let us

assume that me = m = 0. eq.(2.65) can now be handled in a similar way as in the photon

heat bath case. we rst perform a transformation

q7  q7  qe,
qe  qe.

so (2.65) now reads

(2.65) =

t2e4 fb(e)

htptip1p2 v p1p2(2)8 z d4q2 d4q3 +(q2

(q2q + q2 + i)

(q3q + q2  i)

b,

1

1

2  m2

) +(q2

3  m2
)

(2.66)

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

49

where

b =z d4q7 d4qe

(2q7qe)2 (cid:8)+(q2

e ) (q0

7  e) 4(q + q2 + q3 + q7),

7 + x)  +(q2

7  x)(cid:9) (q2

with x = 2q7qe. as before we might expand b in terms of x. first surviving term reads

b  z d4q7 d4qe (cid:16)q2

7

= 0

e m2z d4q7 (q2

(q2

7)(cid:17) 4(q + q2 + q3 + q7)
7  m2) 4(q + q2 + q3 + q7)

2x

(2q7qe)2
1
|q7|

7  |q7|
q0

ln(cid:18) q0
7 + |q7|(cid:19)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)m=0

,

(2.67)

e , and consequently f emission(e) + f absorption(e)  1

so b  0
tion of the previous mathematical operations to f f luct(e) reveals that f f luct(e)  1
well. let us mention that the separate contributions present in f emission(e), f absorption(e)

e . straightforward applica-

e as

and f f luct(e) behave as 2

e but they mutually cancel leaving behind terms proportional

at worst to 1
e .

surprisingly enough, we have found that, for small , our heat bath (2.64) changes
due to scattering     in such a way that the rate of change in the electron number
spectrum has qualitatively similar behaviour (i.e. 1) as the rate of change in the photon

number spectrum. this is so provided one assumes that both electrons and photons are

massless particles. clearly, 2 behaviour would be disastrous as it would suggest that

the energy density dn/d of the heatbath particles behaves as 1 which would, if

integrated, produce an innite contribution to the total energy carried o by the heatbath

particles.

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

50

2.5 conclusions

in this chapter we have formulated a systematic method for studying the heatbath particle

number spectrum using modied cut diagrams. in particular, for the quarkgluon plasma

in thermodynamical equilibrium our approach should be useful as an eective alternative

to the landsho and taylor [45] approach. the method used in [45] (i.e. to start from

rst principles) suers from the lack of a systematic computational approach for higher

orders in coupling constants. one of the corner stones of our formalism is the largest

time equation (lte). we have shown how the zerotemperature lte can be extended to

nite temperature. during the course of this analysis, we have emphasised some important

aspects of the nitetemperature extension which are worth mentioning. firstly, many of

kinematic rules valid for zerotemperature diagrams can not be directly used in the nite

temperature ones. this is because the emission or absorption of heatbath particles make

it impossible to x some particular direction to a diagrammatic line.

it turns out that

one nds more diagrams then one used to have at zero temperature. the most important

reductions of the diagrams have been proved. the rather complicated structure of the

nitetemperature diagrams brings into play another complication: uncutable diagrams.

it is well known that at zero temperature one can always make only one cut in each cut

diagram (this can be viewed as a consequence of the unitarity condition). this is not

true however at nite temperature. we have found it as useful to start fully with the

lte analysis which is in terms of type 1 and type 2 vertices. this language allows us to

construct systematically all the cut diagrams. we have refrained from an explicit use of the

cuts in nitetemperature diagrams as those are ambiguous and therefore rather obscure

the analysis.

the second, rather technical, corner stone are the (functional) thermal dysonschwinger

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

51

equations. we have developed a formalism of the arrowed variations acting directly on eld

operators. this provides an elegant technique for dealing in a practical fashion with expec-

tation values (both thermal and vacuum) whenever functions or functionals of elds admit

the decomposition (a.1). the merit of the dysonschwinger equations is that they allow

us to rewrite an expectation value of some functional of eld in terms of expectation values

of less complicated functionals. some illustrations of this and further thermal functional

identities are derived in appendix a.1.

when we have studied the heatbath particle number spectrum, we applied the dyson

schwinger equations both to numerator and denominator of corresponding expression. the

results were almost the same. the simple modication of one propagator rendered both

equal. we could reect this on a diagrammatical level very easily as the denominator was

fully expressible in terms of thermal cut diagrams. our nal rule for the heatbath particle

spectrum is

dhn()i

d

= htp tim
htp tip1p2

p1p2

,

(2.68)

with t being the tmatrix, p being the projection operator onto nal states, p1, p2 being

the momenta of particles in the initial state,  being the inverse temperature and m being

abbreviation for the modied diagrams. modication of the cut diagrams consist of the

substitution in turn of each heatbath particle line by an altered one. this substitution

must be done in each cut diagram. replacement must be only one per modied diagram.

our approach is demonstrated on a simple model where two scalar particles (pions) scatter,

within a photon heat bath, into a pair of charged particles (muon and antimuon) and

we explicitly calculate the resulting changes in the number spectra of the photons and.

it is also discussed how the results will change if the photon heat bath is replaced with

chapter 2. heatbath particle number spectrum

52

photonelectron one.

chapter 3

pressure at thermal equilibrium

3.1 introduction

a signicant quantity of physical interest that one may want to calculate in eld theory

at nite temperature, either at equilibrium or out of equilibrium, is pressure. in thermal

quantum eld theory (both in the real and imaginarytime formalism) where one usually

deals with systems in thermal equilibrium there is an easy prescription for a pressure cal-

culation. the latter is based on the observation that for thermally equilibrated systems the

grand canonical partition function z is given as

z = e = t r(e(hini)),

(3.1)

where  is the grand canonical potential, h is the hamiltonian, ni are conserved charges,

i are corresponding chemical potentials, and  is the inverse temperature:  = 1/t . using

identity  

 = t 

t together with (3.1) one gets

t(cid:18) 

t(cid:19)i,v

=   e + ini,

(3.2)

with e and v being the averaged energy and volume of the system respectively. a com-

53

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

54

parison of (3.2) with a corresponding thermodynamic expression for the grand canonical

potential [36, 37, 59] requires that entropy s = (cid:0) 

t(cid:1)i,v , so that
d = sdt  pdv  nidi  p = (cid:18) 

v (cid:19)i,t

.

(3.3)

for large systems one can usually neglect surface eects so e and ni become extensive

quantities. eq.(3.2) then immediately implies that  is extensive quantity as well, so (3.3)

simplies to

p = 


v

=

lnz
v

.

(3.4)

the pressure dened by eq.(3.4) is the so called thermodynamic pressure.

since lnz can be systematically calculated summing up all connected closed diagrams

(i.e. bubble diagrams) [3, 36, 60], the pressure calculated via (3.4) enjoys a considerable

popularity [34, 36, 61, 62]. unfortunately, the latter procedure can not be extended to out

of equilibrium as there is, in general, no denition of the partition function z nor grand

canonical potential  away from an equilibrium.

yet another, alternative denition of the pressure not hinging on thermodynamics can

be provided; namely the hydrostatic pressure which is formulated through the energy

momentum tensor . the formal argument leading to the hydrostatic pressure in d
spacetime dimensions is based on the observation that h0j(x)i is the mean (or macro-
scopic) density of momenta pj at the point x. let p be the mean total (d1)momentum
of an innitesimal volume v (d1) centred at x, then the rate of change of jcomponent of

p reads

dpj(x)

dt

=zv (d1)

dd1x


x0h0j(x0, x)i = 

d1

xi=1 zv (d1)

dsi hiji.

(3.5)

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

55

in the second equality we have exploited the continuity equation for hji and successively
we have used gausss theorem1. the v (d1) corresponds to the surface of v (d1).

anticipating a system out of equilibrium, we must assume a nontrivial distribution

of the mean particle fourvelocity u (x) (hydrodynamic velocity). now, a pressure is by

denition a scalar quantity. this particularly means that it should not depend on the

hydrodynamic velocity. we must thus go to the local rest frame and evaluate pressure

there. however, in the local rest frame, unlike the equilibrium, the notion of a pressure

acting equally in all directions is lost. in order to retain the scalar character of pressure, one

customarily denes the pressure at a point (in the following denoted as p(x)) [64], which is

simply the averaged pressure 2 over all directions at a given point. in the local rest frame

eq.(3.5) describes jcomponent of the force exerted by the medium on the innitesimal

volume v (d1). (by denition, there is no contribution to dpj(x)/dt caused by the particle

convection through v (d1).) averaging the lhs of (3.5) over all directions of the normal

n(x), we get3

1

(sd2

1

)

d1

xj=1z dpj(x)

dt

nj d(n) =  1
(sd2

1

)

=

1

(d  1)

d1

xj,i=1zv (d1)
xi=1 zv (d1)

d1

ds hij(x)i z d(n) ninj
ds hi

i(x)i,

(3.6)

where d(n) is an element of solid angle about n and sd2

is the surface of (d  2)
sphere with unit radius (r d(n) = sd2
2 )) . on the other hand, from the
1the macroscopic conservation law for hi (i.e. the continuity equation) has to be postulated. for
some systems, however, the later can be directly derived from the corresponding microscopic conservation
law [63].

2 /( d1

= 2

d1

1

1

2to be precise, we should talk about averaging the normal components of stress [64].

3the angular average is standardly dened for scalars (say, a) as; r a d(n)/r d(n), and for vectors
(say, ai) as; pjr aj nj d(n)/r d(n). similarly we might write down the angular averages for tensors

of a higher rank.

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

56

denition of the pressure at a point x we might write

1

(cid:0)sd2

(cid:1)1

d1

xj=1z dpj(x)

dt

nj d(n) = p(x) zv (d1)

ds,

(3.7)

here the minus sign reects that the force responsible for a compression (conventionally

assigned as a positive pressure) has reversed orientation than the surface normals n (point-

ing outward). in order to keep track with the standard textbook denition of a sign of

a pressure [37, 64] we have used in (3.7) the normal n in a contravariant notation (note,
ni = ni). comparing (3.6) with (3.7) we can write for a suciently small volume v (d1)

p(x) = 

1

(d  1)

d1

xi=1

hi

i(x)i.

(3.8)

we should point out that in equilibrium the thermodynamic pressure is usually identied

with the hydrostatic one via the virial theorem [36,43]. in the remainder of this chapter we

shall deal with the hydrostatic pressure at equilibrium. we shall denote the foregoing as

p(t ), where t stands for temperature. we consider the nonequilibrium case in the next
chapter.

the plan of this chapter is as follows. in section 3.2 we review the necessary math-

ematical framework needed for the renormalisation of the energymomentum tensor.(for

an extensive review see also refs. [36, 65, 66].) the latter is discussed on the o(n) 4 the-

ory. as a byproduct we renormalise 2

a, ab and  operators. the corresponding qft

extension of (3.8) is obtained.

resumed form for the pressure in the largen limit, together with the discussion of both

coupling constant and mass renormalisation is worked out in section 3.3. the discussion is

substantially simplied by means of the dysonschwinger equations.

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

57

in section 3.4 we end up with the hightemperature expansion of the pressure. cal-

culations are performed for d = 4 (both for massive and massless elds) and the result is

expressed in terms of renormalised masses mr(0) and mr(t ). the former is done by means

of the mellin transform technique.

this chapter is furnished with two appendices. in appendix b we clarify some math-

ematical manipulations needed in section 3.3. for the completeness sake we compute in

appendix c the hightemperature expansion of the thermalmass shift m2(t ) which will

prove useful in section 3.4.

3.2 renormalisation

if we proceed with (3.8) to qft this leads to the notorious diculties connected with the

fact that  is a (local) composite operator. if only a free theory would be in question then
the normal ordering prescription would be sucient to render hi nite. in the general
case, when the interacting theory is of interest, one must work with the zimmerman normal

ordering prescription instead. let us demonstrate the latter on the o(n) 4 theory. (in

this section we keep n arbitrary.) such a theory is dened by the bare lagrange function

l =

1
2

n

xa=1(cid:0)(a)2  m2

02

a(cid:1) 

0

8n   n
xa=1

(a)2!2

,

(3.9)

we assume that m2

0 > 0. the corresponding canonical energymomentum tensor is given

by



c =xa

aa  gl .

(3.10)

the feynman rules for greens functions with the energymomentum insertion can be easily

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

58

explained in momentum space.

in the reasonings to follow we shall need the (thermal)

composite greens function4

d(xn|y) = ht  {r(x1) . . . r(xn)

c (y)}i .

(3.11)

here the subscript r denotes the renormalised elds in the heisenberg picture (the internal
indices are suppressed) and t  is so called t  product (or covariant t product) [53,6769].
the t  product is dened in such a way that it is simply the t product with all dierential
operators di pulled out of the t ordering symbol, i.e.

t {dx1

1(x1) . . .dxn

n(xn)} = d(i{})t {(x1) . . . (xn)} ,

(3.12)

where d(i{}) is just a useful shorthand notation for dx1
thermal greens functions, the t might be as well a contourordering symbol. it is the
mean value of the t  ordered elds rather than the t ones, which corresponds at t = 0 and
at equilibrium to the feynman path integral representation of greens functions [69, 70].

2 . . .dxn
n.

in the case of

1dx2

a typical contribution to 

c (y) can be written as

d1(y) d2(y) . . .dn(y) ,

(3.13)

so the typical term in (3.11) is

d(i{}) ht  {r(x1) . . . r(xn)(y1) . . . (yk)}i |yi=y .

performing the fourier transform in (3.11) we get

4by  we shall mean the eld in the heisenberg picture. the subscript h will be introduced in cases

when a possible ambiguity could occur.

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

59

(2)d! (2)d d(p 

k

xj=1

qj) d

(k)(q{}) d(pn|qk),

(3.14)

(k)(. . .) is a fourier transformed dierential operator corresponding to the quadratic

ddqi

d(pn|p) = xk={2,4} z   k
yi=1
where d
(k=2) and quartic (k=4) terms in 

c . denoting the new vertex corresponding to d

(k)(. . .)

as , we can graphically represent (3.11) through (3.14) as

p


p


d(pn|p) =

q1

2q

q1

2q

q3

q4

              

              

              

              

              

              

              

              

              

              


p1

              

              

              

              

              

              

              

              

              

              


np

np

p1

figure 3.1: the graphical representation of d (pn|p).

for the case at hand one can easily read o from (3.10) an explicit form of the bare composite

vertices, the foregoing are

p

a

p

q1

a

b


b

q2


d
c

 d

(2)(q{}) = 1

2 ab {2(q1  p)q

1  g((q1  p)q

1  m2

0)}

 d

(4)(q{}) = g 0

8n {2(abcd + acbd + adbc)  5abcdac}

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

60

(for the internal indices we do not adopt einsteins summation convention.) we have

tacitly assumed in fig.3.1 that the vacuum bubble diagrams present in the shaded blobs

are divided out. we have also implicitly assumed that summation over internal indices

is understood. note that in the case of thermal composite greens function, the new

vertices are clearly of type1 as the elds from which they are deduced have all a realtime

argument5 (type1 elds).

renormalisation of a(x)b(x)

now, if there would be no 
c

insertion in (3.11), the latter would be nite, and so it is

natural to dene the renormalised energymomentum tensor [

c ] (or zimmermann normal

ordering) in such a way that

d
r (xn|y) = ht  {r(x1) . . . r(xn) [

c ]}i,

is nite for any n > 0. to see what is involved, we illustrate the mechanism of the

composite operator renormalisation on a(x)b(x). we shall use the massindependent

renormalisation (or minimal subtraction scheme  (ms)) which is particularly suitable for

this purpose. in ms we can expand the bare parameters into the laurent series which has

a simple form [53, 66, 70], namely





ak(r; d)

(d  4)k!
0 = 4d r 1 +
xk=1
(d  4)k! .
r 1 +
xk=1

bk(r; d)

m2

0 = m2

(3.15)

(3.16)

here a0 and b0 are analytic in d = 4. the parameter  is the scale introduced by the

5for a brief introduction to the realtime formalism in thermal qft see for example [38].

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

61

renormalisation in order to keep r dimensionless. an important point is that both aks

and bks are mass, temperature and momentum independent.

it was zimmermann who rst realized that the forest formula known from the ordinary

greens function renormalisation [53, 65] can be also utilised for the composite greens

functions rendering them nite [65,71]. that is, we start with feynman diagrams expressed

in terms of physical (i.e. nite) coupling constants and masses. as we calculate diagrams

to a given order, we meet uv divergences which might be cancelled by adding counterterm

diagrams. the forest formula then prescribes how to systematically cancel all the uv loop

divergences by counterterms to all orders. however, in contrast to the coupling constant

renormalisation, the composite vertex need not to be renormalised multiplicatively. we

shall illustrate this fact in the sequel. let us also observe that in the lowest order (no loop)

the renormalised composite vertex equals to the bare one, and so to that order a = [a],

for any composite operator a.

now, from (3.15) and (3.16) follows that for any function f = f (mr, r) we have

f
m2
r

=

m2
0
m2
r

f
m2
0

=

m2
0
m2
r

f
m2
0

.

so particularly for

f = d(x1, . . . , xn) = ht {r(x1) . . . r(xn)}i,

one reads

m2
r



m2
r

d(x1, . . . , xn) = m2
0

d(x1, . . . , xn)



m2
0
n

=(cid:18)
=(cid:18)

i

2(cid:19)n z ddx
xa=1 z d r(x1) . . . r(xn) m2
2(cid:19) z ddx
xa=1
da(x1, . . . , xn|x; m2
0) .

n

i

02

a(x) exp(is[, t ])

(3.17)

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

62

here n 1 is the standard denominator of the path integral representation of greens func-
tion. we should apply the derivative also on n but this would produce disconnected graphs
with bubble diagrams. the former precisely cancel the very same disconnected graphs in

the rst term, so we are nally left with no bubble diagrams in (3.17). in the fourier space

(3.17) reads

m2
r



m2
r

d(p1, . . . , pn) =(cid:18)

i

2(cid:19) n
xa=1

da(p1, . . . , pn|0; m2
0) .

(3.18)

02
a

0 precisely compensates the

is by itself a renormalised composite operator. we see that m2

as the lhs is nite, there cannot be any pole terms on the rhs either, and so pa m2
singularity of pn

now, it is well known that any secondrank tensor (say mab) can be generally decom-

a=1 2
a.

posed into three irreducible tensors; an antisymmetric tensor, a symmetric traceless tensor

and an invariant tensor. let us set mab = ab, so the symmetric traceless tensor kab

reads

kab(x) = a(x)b(x)  ab/n

whilst the invariant tensor iab is

2

c(x) ,

n

xc=1

(3.19)

iab(x) = ab/n

2

c(x) .

n

xc=1

because the renormalised composite operators have to preserve a tensorial structure of the

bare ones, we immediately have that

kab = a1[kab] and iab = a2[iab] ,

(3.20)

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

63

where both a1 and a2 must have structure (1 +p(poles)). the foregoing guarantees that

to the lowest order kab = [kab] and iab = [iab]. as we saw in (3.18), m2

0iab is renormalised,

and so from (3.20) follows that m2

0iab = c [iab]. here c has dimension [m2] and is analytic

in d = 4. we can uniquely set c = m2

r because only this choice fulls the lowest order

condition iab = [iab] (c.f. eq.(3.16)). collecting our results together we might write

2

c = z2 "xc

2

c# = z2xc

xc

[2

c] ,

(3.21)

. in the second equality we have used an obvious linearity [65] of

with z2 = a2 = m2r
m2
0

[. . .]. from (3.19) and (3.21) follows that

a(x)b(x) = a1[a(x)b(x)] 

ab
n

(a1  z2)

so particularly for 2

a one reads

[2

c(x)] .

(3.22)

n

xc=1

2

a =

1
n

((n  1)a1 + z2) [2

a] 

1
n

(a1  z2)xc6=a

[2

c] .

(3.23)

from the discussion above it does not seem to be possible to obtain more information about

a1 without doing an explicit perturbative calculations, however, it is easy to demonstrate

that a1 6= z2. to show this, let us consider the simplest nontrivial case; i.e. n=2,
and calculate a1 to order r. for that we need to discuss the renormalisation of the n-

point composite greens function with, say, 2

1 insertion. to do that, it suces to discuss

the renormalisation of the corresponding 1pi npoint greens function. the perturbative

expansion for the composite vertex to order r can be easily generated via the dyson

schwinger equation [72] and it reads

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

64

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

         

         

         

         

         

         

j

. . .

i

=

renorm

        

        

        

        

        

        

i
j

. . .

+

         

         

         

         

         

         

j

. . .

i

+

         

         

         

         

         

         

j

. . .

i

+   .  .  .

(3.24)

where

1

1

1

2

1

2

= {
= {

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

1
1
4
2

1

1

1
1
3
12

1

2

1
1
4
2

1
1
3
12

1

1

1

2

1

{1
{1

1

2

2

2

1

here crosshatched blobs refer to (renormalised) 1pi (n+ 2)point greens function, circled

indices mark a type of the eld propagated on the indicated line, and uncircled numbers

refer to thermal indices (we explicitly indicate only relevant thermal indices). the coun-

terterms, symbolised by a heavy dot, are extracted from the boxed diagrams (elementary

zimmermann forests). in ms scheme one gets the following results:

1

1

1

2

1

2

= i r4d

4

=  1

4m2

r ddq
(2pi)d {d11(q)d11(q)  d12(q)d12(q)}|ms pole term
r(cid:18) (1 d

r (cid:19)|ms = r4d/2 (d  4) (4)2

r 4d md2

2 )

(4)

d
2

= r4d/6 (d  4) (4)2.

here d11 and d12 are the usual thermal propagators in the realtime formalism [34, 36, 38]

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

65

(see also section 3.3). from (4.24) we can directly read o that

[2

1] =(cid:18)1 

r4d

2 (d  4) (4)2 + o(2

r)(cid:19) 2

1 +(cid:18)

r4d

6 (d  4) (4)2 + o(2

r)(cid:19) 2

2 .

as the coecient before 2

2 is not zero, we conclude that a1 6= z2. it is not a great

challenge to repeat the previous calculations for the 12 insertion. the latter gives

a1 = 1 

r4d

3 (d  4) (4)2 + o(2

r) .

considered independently of the renormalisation of 2

eq.(3.23) exhibits the so called operator mixing [53]; the renormalisation of 2

a cannot be
c (c 6= a). the latter is a general fea-
ture of composite operator renormalisation. note, however, that ab (a 6= b) do not mix
by renormalisation, i.e. they renormalise multiplicatively. it can be shown that compos-

ite operators mix under renormalisation only with those composite operators which have

dimension less or equal [53, 65, 71].

unfortunately, if we apply the previous arguments to n = 0, the result is not nite;

another additional renormalisation must be performed. the fact that the expectation

values of [. . .] are generally uv divergent, in spite of being nite for the composite greens

functions6, can be nicely illustrated with the composite operator [2] in the n = 1 theory.

taking the diagrams for d(0|0) and applying successively the (unrenormalised) dyson
schwinger equation [72] we get

6also called the matrix elements of [. . .].

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

66

p = 0

             

             

             

             

             

             

             


=

+

1
2

             

             

             

             

             

             

             


+

1
36

             

             

             

             

             

             

             


(3.25)

eq.(3.25) might be rewritten as

+

d(0|0) = d(0|0)|0
2 z ddq1
36 z
yi=1

+

(2)d

6

r

1

1

ddq2
(2)d d(q1 + q2) damp(q2|0)|r d(q2)
ddqi
(2)d d(

qj) damp(q6|0)|2

r d(q6) ,

6

xj=1

(3.26)

where damp(qm|0)|k
and d(qm) is the full mpoint greens function. the crucial point is that we can write

r is the mpoint amputated composite greens function to order k
r ,

d(0|0) as a sum of terms, which, apart from the rst (free eld) diagram, are factorised to
the product of the composite greens function with n > 0 and the full greens function.

(the factorisation is represented in (2.17) by the dashed lines. )

now, utilising the counterterm renormalisation to the last two diagrams in (3.25) we

get situation depicted in fig.3.2. terms inside of the parentheses are nite, this is be-

cause both the composite greens functions (n  2 !) and the full greens functions are
nite after renormalisation. the counterterm diagrams, which appear on the rhs of the

parentheses, precisely cancel the uv divergences coming from the loop integrations over

momenta q1 . . . qi which must be nally performed. the heavy dots schematically indicates

the corresponding counterterms. in the spirit of the counterterm renormalisation we should

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

67

nally subtract the counterterm associated with the overall supercial divergence7 related

to the diagrams in question. but as we saw this is not necessary; individual counterterm

diagrams (zimmermann forests) mutually cancel their divergences leaving behind a nite

result.

(

1
2

            

            

            

            

            

            

            


+

1
36

             

             

             

             

             

             

             


renorm(

1
2

(=
+ (q1

1
36

q1

     

q2

renorm

q1

   

  

  
   


            

   

  

            

   

  

            

            

            

            

            


+

q2 (renorm
renorm( +

1
2

         

         

         

         

         

         

         


renorm

1
36

         

         

         

         

         

         


renorm

.

.

.

q6

q1

   

  

  
   


  
   


            

   

  

            

            

            

            

            


q6

renorm

q3q2

q4

q5

figure 3.2: counterterm renormalisation of the last two diagrams in eq.(3.25). (cut legs indicate
amputations.)

so the only uv divergence in eq.(3.25) which cannot be cured by existing counterterms

is that coming from the rst (i.e.

free eld or ring) diagram. the foregoing divergence

is evidently temperature independent (to see that, simply use an explicit form of the free

thermal propagator d11). hence, if we dene

7a simple power counting in the 4 theory reveals [53] that for a composite operator a with dimension

a the supercial degree of divergence  corresponding to an n-point diagram is  = a  n.

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

or, alternatively

h2irenorm = h[2]i  h0|[2]|0i,

h2irenorm = h[2]i  h[2]i|free elds ,

we get nite quantities, as desired. on the other hand, we should emphasise that

h2i  h0|2|0i = z2(cid:8)h[2]i  h0|[2]|0i(cid:9) 6= nite in d=4 .

68

(3.27)

(3.28)

(3.29)

an extension of the previous reasonings to any n > 1 is straightforward, only dierence is

that we must deal with operator mixing which makes (3.27) and (3.28) less trivial.

the important lesson which we have learnt here is that the naive double dotted normal

product (i.e. subtraction of the vacuum expectation value from a given operator) does not

generally give a nite result. the former is perfectly suited for the free theory (z2 = 1)

but in the interacting case we must resort to the prescription (3.27) or (3.28) instead.

renormalisation of the energymomentum tensor

in order to calculate the hydrostatic pressure, we need to nd such h
c i|renorm which apart
from being nite is also consistent with our derivation of the hydrostatic pressure performed

in the introductory section. in view of the previous treatment, we cannot, however, expect

that 

c will be renormalised multiplicatively. instead new terms with a dierent structure

itself will be generated during renormalisation. the latter must add up to 
c

in

than 
c
order to render d(xn|y) nite8.

8in fact it can be shown [36, 65] that the noether currents corresponding to a given internal symmetry
are renormalised, i.e j a = [j a], however, this is not the case for the noether currents corresponding to
external symmetries (like 
c

is).

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

69

now, the key ingredient exploited in eq.(3.5) is the conservation law (continuity equa-

tion). it is well known that one can modify 
c

in such a way that the new tensor 

preserves the convergence properties of 

c . such a modication (the pauli transformation)

reads

 = 

c + x 

x  = x  .

(3.30)

for scalar elds, (3.30) is the only transformation which neither changes the divergence

properties of 

c nor the generators of the poincare group constructed out of 
c

[36,53,63,

68]. because the renormalised (or improved) energy momentum tensor must be conserved

(otherwise theory would be anomalous), it has to mix with 

c under renormalisation only

via the pauli transformation, i.e.

[

c ] = 

c + x  .

(3.31)

in order to determine x , we should realize that its role is to cancel divergences present in



c . such a cancellation can be, however, performed only by means of composite operators

which are even in the number of elds (note that 
c

is even in elds and greens functions

with the odd number of elds vanish). recalling the condition that renormalisation can

mix only operators with dimension less or equal, we see that the dimension of x  must
be d  1, and that x  must be quadratic in elds. the only possible form which is
compatible with tensorial structure (3.30) is then

x  =

n

xa,b=1

cab(r; d) (cid:0)g  g(cid:1) ab .

(3.32)

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

70

from the fact that both 

c and [

c ] are o(n) invariant (see eq.(3.10)), x  must

be also o(n) invariant, so cab = abc. thus, nally we can write

[

c ] = 

c + c(r; d)

n

xa=1(cid:0)  g2(cid:1) 2

a ,

(3.33)

with c = c0 +p(poles), here c0 is analytic in d. structure of c(r; d) could be further

determined, similarly as in the n = 1 theory, employing a renormalisation group equation

[66]. we do not intend to do that as the detailed structure of c will show totally irrelevant

for the following discussion, however, it turns out to be important in non-equilibrium case.

now, similarly as before, [

c ] gives the nite composite greens functions if n > 0 but
c ]i is divergent (discussion for the n = 1 theory can be found in

the expectation value h[
brown [66]). the unrenormalised dysonschwinger equation for d(0|0) reads

p = 0

p = 0

            

            

            

            

            

            

            


+

           

           

           

           

           

           

           


=

+

+ (           

          

          

          

          



1
2

+

3

         

         

         

         

         


(

(            

           

           

           

           

           



1
36

+

4

1
1
6
8

           

           

           

           

           

           


(

.

(3.34)

the structure of the composite vertices in (3.34) is that described at the beginning of this

section. note that the amputated composite greens functions in individual parentheses

are of the same order in r. performing the counterterm renormalisation as in the case of

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

71

h[2]i, we factorise the graphs inside of parentheses into the product of the renormalised
2 (and 6) point composite greens function and the renormalised full 2 (and 6) point

greens function. the latter are nite. the uv divergences arisen during the integrations

over momenta connecting both composite and full greens functions are precisely cancelled

by the remaining counterterm diagrams. the only divergence comes from the freeeld

contribution, more precisely from the t = 0 ring diagram. dening

h

c i|renorm = h[

c ]i  h0|[

c ]|0i,

or

h

c i|renorm = h[

c ]i  h[

c ]i|free eld,

(3.35)

(3.36)

we get the nite expressions. note that the conservation law is manifest in both cases.

in equilibrium (and in t = 0) we can, due to spacetime translational invariance of h. . .i,
write

h[

c ]i = h

c i + hx i = h
c i .

(3.37)

using (3.35) or (3.36) we get either the thermal interaction pressure or the interaction

pressure, respectively. this can be explicitly written as

pth.int.(t ) = p(t )  p(0) = 

1

(d  1)

or

d1

xi=1 (cid:8)hi

c ii  h0|i

c i|0i(cid:9) ,

pint.(t ) = p(t )  pfree eld(t ) = 

1

(d  1)

d1

xi=1 (cid:8)hi

c ii  hi

c ii|free eld(cid:9) .

(3.38)

(3.39)

in order to keep connection with calculations done by drummond et al. in [61] we shall in

the sequel deal with the thermal interaction pressure only. if instead of an equilibrium, a

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

72

nonequilibrium medium would be in question, translational invariance of h. . .i might be
lost, in that case either prescription (3.35) or (3.36) is obligatory, and consequently c(r; d)

in (3.33) must be further specied.

3.3 hydrostatic pressure

in the previous section we have prepared ground for a hydrostatic pressure calculations in

the o(n) 4 theory. in this section we aim to apply the previous results to the massive

o(n) 4 theory in the largen limit. anticipating an out of equilibrium application,

we shall use the realtime formalism even if the imaginarytime one is more natural in

the equilibrium context. as we aim to evaluate the hydrostatic pressure in 4 dimensions,

we use here, similarly as in the previous section, the usual dimensional regularisation to

regulate the theory (i.e. here and throughout we keep d slightly away from the physical

value d = 4).

let us start rst with some essentials of our model system at nite temperature.

3.3.1 mass renormalisation

in the dyson multiplicative renormalisation the fact that the complete propagator has a

pole at the physical mass leads to the usual mass renormalisation prescription [53]:

m2

r) ,

r = m2

0 + (m2

(3.40)

where mr is renormalised mass and (m2

r) is the proper selfenergy evaluated at the mass

shell; p2 = m2

r. in fact, eq.(3.40) is nothing but the statement that 2point vertex function

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

73

(2)
r

evaluated at the massshell must vanish. the dysonschwinger equations correspond-

ing to the proper selfenergies read [7275]:

aa = 1

b=1

2pn

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     


b

a

a

b

+

a

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     


a

a

a

+

a

a

b

b

b=1

i

2pn

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     


a

     

     

     

     

     


      


b

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     


b

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     


a

(3.41)

ac|a6=c = 0 ;

~ o / n

where hatched blobs represent 2point connected greens functions whilst cross-hatched

blobs represent proper vertices (4)
r

(i.e. 1pi 4point greens functions). as aa are the

same for all a, we shall simplify notation and write  instead. in the sequel the following

convention is accepted:

b

d

c
         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         


.
.
. .

a

.

= (n) abcd...

r

note that the second term in (3.41) does not contribute in the largen limit. it is easy to see

that the third term does not contribute either. this is because each hatched blob behaves

at most as n 0 whilst (4) goes maximally9 as n1 . consequently, various contributions

9 in the 4 theory there is a simple relation between the number of loops (l), vertices (v ) and external
lines (e); 4v = 2i + e. together with the euler relation for connected graphs; l = i  v + 1 (here i is
the number of internal lines), we have l  v = 2e
2 . as each loop carries maximally a factor of n (this
is saturated only for tadpole loops) and each vertex carries a factor of n 1, the overall blob contribution
behaves at most as n lv = n

2e

.

2

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

74

from the rst graph in (3.41) contribute at most n 0, whereas in the second graph the

contributions contribute up to order n1. so the rst diagram dominates, provided we

retain only such 2point connected greens functions which are proportional to n 0 (as

mentioned in the footnote, these are comprised only of tadpole loops.). after neglecting

the setting sun graph, eg.(3.41) generates upon iterating the so called superdaisy diagrams

[61, 73, 76].

let us now dene (m2

r) = 0 m(m2

r). because the tadpole diagram in (3.2) can be

easily resumed we observe that

m(m2

r) =

ddq
(2)d

1

2z

i

q2  m2

0  (m2

r) + i

=

1

2z

ddq
(2)d

i
q2  m2

r + i

,

(3.42)

hence we see that  is externalmomentum independent. so if we had started with the

renormalisation prescription: i(2)

r (p2 = 0) = m2

r, we would arrived at (3.40) as well (this

is not the case for n = 1!).

at nite temperature the strategy is analogous. due to a doubling of degrees of freedom,

the full propagator is a 2  2 matrix. the latter satises, similarly as at t = 0, dysons
equation

d = df + df (i) d .

(3.43)

an important point is that there exists a real, nonsingular matrix m (bogoliubov matrix)

[34, 36, 38] having a property that

df = m(cid:18) if

0 if (cid:19) m .

0

(3.44)

here f is the standard feynman propagator and * denotes the complex conjugation.

consequently, the full matrix propagator may be written as

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

d = m 

p2m2

i
0t +i
0

0
i
0

t i ! m .

p2m2

75

(3.45)

similarly as in many body systems, the position of the (real) pole of d in p2 xes the

temperaturedependent eective mass mr(t ) [34, 41]. the latter is determined by the

equation

m2

r(t ) = m2

0 + re(cid:0)t (m2

r(t ))(cid:1) .

(3.46)

from the explicit form of m it is possible to show [34, 36] that re11 = ret . as before,

the structure of the proper selfenergy can be deduced from the corresponding dyson

schwinger equation. following the usual realtime formalism convention (type1 vertex

 i0, type2 vertex  i0 ), the former reads:

i11 =

1
2
  

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     


1

;

i22 =

1
2
  

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     


2

(3.47)

where

     


     


       
      


      


     


1

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     


1

1

1
    

    

    

    


1

1

=

+

1

1

+

1

2

2
    

    

    

    


       
      


1

1
    

    

    

    


1

    

1
    

    

    

    


1

.    .    . 

+

and similarly for d22. in (4.49) we have omitted diagrams which are of order o(1/n) or less.

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

76

note that the fact that no setting sun diagrams are present implies that the odiagonal

elements of  are zero. inspection of eq.(3.47) reveals that

11 =

0

2 z

ddq
(2)d

d11(q; t ) and 22 = 

0

2 z

ddq
(2)d

d22(q; t ) .

(3.48)

it directly follows from eq.(3.48) that both 11 and 22 are externalmomentum inde-

pendent and real10.

if we dene t (m2

r(t )) = 0 mt (m2

r(t )), then eq.(3.46) through

eq.(3.48) implies that

m2

r(t ) = m2

0 + 0 mt (m2

r(t )) .

(3.49)

a resumed version of d11 is easily obtainable from (3.45) [34, 36] and consequently (3.48)

yields

mt (m2

r(t )) =

1

2 z
= z

ddq

(2)d (cid:26)

ddq
(2)d

i
q2  m2
r(t ) + i
(q0)
im
eq0  1

1
q2  m2
r(t ) + i

.

+ (4) +(q2  m2

r(t ))

1

eq0  1(cid:27)

(3.50)

let us remark that (3.50) is manifestly independent of any particular realtime formalism

version. this is because the various realtime formalisms [34, 36] dier only in the o

diagonal elements of d.

in passing it may be mentioned that because 11(m2

r) is momentum independent, the

wave function renormalisation z = 1. (the kallenlehmann representation requires the

10reality of 11 can be perhaps most easily seen from the largesttime equation. the lte states that
11 + 22 + 12 + 21 = 0. because no setting sun graphs are present, 12 + 21 = 0, on the other hand
11 + 22 = 2iim11 (see (3.44)).

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

77

renormalised propagator to have a pole of residue i at p2 = m2
that z = (1  11(p2)|p2=m2
(2)
r = (2) and (4)

r = (4).

r )1 = 1.) trivial consequence of the foregoing fact is that

r. the former in turn implies

3.3.2 coupling constant renormalisation

let us choose the coupling constant to be dened at t = 0. this will have the advan-

tage that the high temperature expansion of the pressure (see section 3.4) will become

more transparent.

in addition, such a choice allows us to stay on a safe ground as the

renormalisation of the coupling constant at nite temperature is rather delicate [73].

by assumption the elds a have nonvanishing masses, so we can safely choose the

renormalisation prescription for r at s = 0 (s is the standard mandelstam variable). for

example, one may require that for the scattering aa  bb

(b 6= a) .
the formula (3.51) clearly agrees with the tree level value (4) aabb

(4) aabb(s = 0) = r/n,

(s = 0) = 0/n. let us
also mention that wards identities corresponding to the internal o(n) symmetry enforce

tree

(3.51)

(4) aaaa to obey the constraint11

(4) aaaa(p1; p2; p3; p4) = (4) bbaa(p1; p2; p3; p4) + (4) baba(p1; p2; p3; p4)

+ (4) baab(p1; p2; p3; p4) ,

(3.52)

11actually, wards identities read [42, 72] r ddx []

; w
is the generating functional of connected greens functions). performing successive variations with respect
to a(v), a(z), a(y) and b(w), taking the fourier transform, and setting the physical condition c = 0,
we get directly (3.52).

a(x) b(x) = r ddx []

b(x) a(x) (here a = w

ja

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

78

for any b 6= a. the structure of (4) is encoded in the dysonschwinger equation which
reads [53, 72]:

a
   

   

   

   
a
   


     

     

     

     

     


c

c

     

     

     

     

     


c=1

i

2pn

c

       

       

       

       

       

       

       


c

b

b

a
  
  

  

  
  


a

i

     

     

     

     

     


a

a

     

     

     

     

     


a

       

       

       

       

       

       

       


a

b

b

a

a

      

      

      

      

      

      


b

b

a

a

b

b

a

a

b

      

      

      

      

      

      


b

a

      

      

      

      

      

      


a

b

i

    

    

    

    


a

    

    

    

    


b

i

    

    

    

    


a

    

    

    

    


b

a

   

   


  

  


b

a

   

   


  

  


+

i=1pn
p3

c=1

a

c

a

c

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     


a

c

       

       

       

       

       

       


     

     

     

     

     


c

    

    

    

    


c

     

     

     

     

     


c

b

+

b

a

1
6

c=1

i

2pn

+

i

1

2pc;i

a

a

a

c

c

c

c

a

b

c

      

      

      

      

      

      


c

a

b

    

    

    

    


    

    

    

    


    

    

    

    


     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     


c

c

       

       

       

       

       

       


     

     

     

     

     


a

    

    

    

    


a

     

     

     

     

     


a

.

i

;      

~

 o

n/

(3.53)

the sum p3

i=1 schematically represents a summation over various scattering channels.

similarly as before, we can argue that the last three graphs contribute at most n2, whilst

the second (sh) graph may contribute up to order n1. so in the largen limit the last

three diagrams may be neglected, provided we keep in the 4point vertex function only

graphs proportional to n1. however, the former can be only fullled if we retain such a

sh graph where summation over internal index on the loop is allowed. remaining sh

graphs (describing t and u scattering channel interactions) are suppressed by the factor

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

79

n1 as the internal index on the loop is xed. in this way we are left with the relation

(4) aabb(s = 0)

0
n 

= 

0
n 

= 

i0

2n xc6=b z
0r(n  1)

2n 2

ddq
(2)d (4) bbcc(s)
z 1
ddq
(2)d

dxz

0

i
(q2  m2

r + i)

(q2  m2

i

r + i)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)s=0

,

((q  q)2  m2
i

r + x(1  x)s + i)2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)s=0

(3.54)

with q = p1 + p2 and s = q2, p1, p2 are the external momenta. to leading order in 1/n

we may equivalently write

r = 0 + 0r m(m2
r) ,

(3.55)

the prime means dierentiation with respect to m2
explicitly m(m2

r), we get from (3.55)

r; m(m2

r) is dened by (3.42). evaluating

0 =

r

1  r(2  d

2 ) (mr)d4/2 (4)

.

d
2

(3.56)

assuming that both 0  0 and r  0, we can infer from (3.56) that

0  r 

2(4)

d

2 (mr)4d

(2  d
2 )

,

(3.57)

so for d = 4 we inevitably get that r = 0. the latter indicates that the theory is

trivial [42, 61, 77], or, in other words, the o(n) 4 theory is a renormalised free theory in

the largen limit. this conclusion is also consistent with the observation that the theory

does not posses any nontrivial uv xed point in the largen limit [42, 77].

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

80

on the other hand, if we were assuming that 0 < 0, we would get a nontrivial

renormalised eld theory in d = 4 (actually, from (3.56) we see that 0  0 , provided that
r is xed and positive and d  4). however, as it was pointed out in refs. [42,61,77,78],
such a theory is intrinsically unstable as the groundstate energy is unbounded from below.

this is reected, for instance, in the existence of tachyons in the theory [61,77,78], therefore

the case with negative 0 is clearly inconsistent.

the straightforward remedy for this situation was suggested by bardeen and moshe [77].

they showed that the only meaningful (stable) o(n) 4 theory in the largen limit is that

with r, 0  0. this is provided that we view it as an eective eld theory at momenta
scale small compared to a xed uv cuto . the cuto itself is further determined by

(3.55) because in that case (assuming mr  )

0 =

r
1  r

322 ln( 2

m2
r

,

)

(3.58)

which implies that for r, 0  0 we have 2 < m2
corresponds to the landau ghost [79] (tachyon pole [61, 77]). for reasonably small r,  is

). the case 2 = m2

r exp( 322

r

r exp( 322

r

)

truly huge12 and so it does not represent any signicant restriction. the following discussion

will be conned to such an eective theory.

3.3.3 the pressure

the partition function z has a well known pathintegral representation at nite tempera-

ture, namely

12for example, if r = 1 and mr  100mev, we get  < 10141mev or equivalently  < 10131k (this is

far beyond the planck temperature - 1032k).

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

81

z[t ] = exp([t ]) =z d exp(is[; t ])

(3.59)

here =  is the so called massieu function [28, 36] and rc ddx = rc dx0rv dd1x

with the subscript c suggesting that the time runs along some contour in the complex

s[; t ] =zc

ddx l(x) .

plane. in the realtime formalism, which we adopt throughout, the most natural version is

the so called keldyshschwinger one [34, 36], which is represented by contour in fig.3.3



ti

re t

im t

c1

c2

tf

+

- i 

tf

- i 

ti



0

figure 3.3: the keldyshschwinger time path.

let us mention that the elds within the pathintegral (3.59) are further restricted by the

periodic boundary condition (kms condition) [34, 36, 38] which in our case reads:

a(ti  i, x) = a(ti, x) .

as explained in section 3.2, we can use for a pressure calculation the canonical energy

momentum tensor 

c . employing for 

c (x) its explicit form (3.10) together with (3.14),

one may write

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

82

h

c i =

n

2 z

ddq
(2)d (2qqg(q2m2

0)) d11(q; t ) +

0
8n

g*  n
xa=1

2

a(0)!2+ , (3.60)

where d11 is the dysonresumed thermal propagator [34, 36], i.e.

+ (2) (q2  m2

r(t ))

1

e|q0|  1

.

(3.61)

d11(q; t ) =

i
q2  m2
r(t ) + i

note that we have exploited in (3.60) the fact that the expectation value of 

(c.f. (3.59)) that the derivative of with respect to the bare coupling 0 (taken at xed

in order to calculate the expectation value of the quartic term in eq.(3.60), let us observe

independent. on the other hand, in (3.61) we have used the fact that m2

r is q independent.

c (x) is x

m0) gives

a(0)!2+ ,

2

[t ]

= 

i

8 n zc

ddx*  n
xa=1

(3.62)

which implies that

the key point now is that we can calculate[t ] in a nonperturbative form. (the latter
indeed, taking derivative of with respect to m2

is based on the fact that we know the dysonresumed propagator d11(q; t ) (see (3.61).)

a(0)!2+ = 

*  n
xa=1

0 (keeping 0 xed) we obtain

n8
v

(3.63)

0

2

.

[t ]

0

[t ]

m2
0

= 

in

2 zc

ddx(cid:10)2(0)(cid:11) = 

v n

2

z

ddq
(2)d

d11(q; t )

thus

83

(3.64)

(3.65)

0] has the standard loop

d m2

0 mt ( m2

= v n mt (m2

r(t )) ,

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

0] = v n z 

m2
0

[t ; 0; m2

r(t )) +[t ; 0;] .
let us note that[t ; 0;] is actually zero13 because[t ; 0; m2
figure 3.4: first few bubble diagrams in the expansion.

expansion [36, 72] depicted in fig.3.4.

+

1
48

1

1

1
48

1

+

1
16

+

1
16

+

1

+

2

1

2

1
8

1

1

it is worth mentioning that in the previous expansion one must always have at least one

type1 vertex [36]. the rhs of fig.3.4 clearly tends to zero for m0   as all the (free)
thermal propagators from which the individual diagrams are constructed tend to zero in this

limit. the former result can be also deduced from the cjt eective action formalism [76]

or from a heuristic argumentation based on a thermodynamic pressure [61]. note that in

the largen limit the fourth and fth diagrams in fig.3.4 must be omitted.

the expectation value (3.63) can be now explicitly written as

13to be precise, we should also include in fig.3.4 an (innite) circle diagram corresponding to the free
pressure [36, 73]. however the later is 0 independent (although m0 dependent) and so it is irrelevant for
the successive discussion (c.f. eq.(3.63)).

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

84

*  n
xa=1

2

a(0)!2+ = 8n 2 z 

m2
0

d m2

0 z

ddq
(2)d

(q0)
eq0  1

im  t ( m2
(q2  m2

0

r (t ))

r + i)2! .

(3.66)

in fact, the dierentiation of the proper selfenergy in (3.66) can be carried out easily.

using (3.49), we get

t
0

=

t
0

+ 0mt

t
0 

t
0

=

t

0(1  0mt )

.

from eq.(3.49) it directly follows that

dm2

r(t )

dm2
0

=

1

(1  0 mt )

,

which, together with the denition of mt , gives

*  n
xa=1

2

a(0)!2+ = 8n 2 z 
=  8n 2 z 
= 4n 2 m2

r(t )

m2

m2
r(t )
t (m2

r(t )) ,

d m2

im mt ( m2
r)

ddq
(2)d

(q0)
r z
(q2  m2
eq0  1
mt ( m2
r)
r mt ( m2
r)
 m2
r

d m2

r + i)2

(3.67)

where we have exploited in the last line the fact that m2
r  ) = 0. let us mention
that the crucial point in the previous manipulations was that mr is both real and momentum

t (m2

independent. collecting our results together, we can write for the hydrostatic pressure per

particle (cf. eq.(3.38))

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

85

p(t )  p(0) = 

= +



+

1

1

1

ddq

c ii  h0|i
c i|0i(cid:1)
(2)d1 (cid:18) 2q2
(d  1)(cid:19) (q0)
eq0  1
(2)d1 (cid:18) 2q2
(d  1)(cid:19) +(q2  m2
r(t ))  2(m2

(d  1)n (cid:0)hi
2 z
2 z
20(cid:0)2

r(0))(cid:1) .

t (m2

ddq

1

(q2  m2

r(t ))

r(0))

(3.68)

applying the green theorem to the last two integrals and eliminating the surface terms

(for details see appendix b) we nd

p(t )  p(0) =

=

ddq

1

1

1

+

r(0))

r(t ))

(q0)
eq0  1

2 z
2 z

20 (cid:0)2
nt (m2

r(t ))  2(m2

(q2  m2
(2)d1
ddq
(2)d1 (q0) (q2  m2
t (m2
r(0))(cid:1)
20(cid:0)2
r(t ) and n (m2
r);

r(t ))  n (m2

r(0)) +

t (m2

1

where we have introduced new functions nt (m2

r(t ))  2(m2

r(0))(cid:1) , (3.69)

nt (m2

r(t )) =
n (m2

1

ddq

2 z
(2)d1
t 0nt (m2

(q0)
eq0  1

r) = lim

r(t )) .

(q2  m2

r(t ))

(3.70)

eq.(3.69) can be rephrased into a form which exhibits an explicit independence of bar

quantities. using the trivial identity:

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

86

(3.71)

(3.72)

r(t ))  n (m2

r(0)) +

m2(t )

2

r(t )) + m(m2

(cid:0)mt (m2

r(0))(cid:1) ,

r(0). the result (3.72) has been previously obtained by authors

t (m2

1

20 (cid:0)2

=

=

2

1

r(t ))  2(mr(0))(cid:1)
20 (cid:0)t (m2

m2(t )

r(t ))  (m2
(cid:0)mt (m2

r(0))(cid:1)(cid:0)t (m2
r(0))(cid:1) .

r(t )) + m(m2

r(t )) + (m2

r(0))(cid:1)

we get

p(t )  p(0) = nt (m2
where m2(t ) = m2

r(t ) m2

[61] in the purely thermodynamic pressure framework.

3.4 hydrostatic pressure in d = 4 (hightemperature

expansion)

in order to obtain the hightemperature expansion of the pressure in d = 4, it is presumably

the easiest to go back to equation (3.68) and employ identity (3.71). let us split this

task into two parts. we rstly evaluate the integrals with potentially uv divergent parts

using the dimensional regularisation. the remaining integrals, with the boseeinstein

distribution insertion, are safe of uv singularities and can be computed by means of the

mellin transform technique.

inspecting (3.68) and (3.71), we observe that the only uv divergent contributions come

from the integrals:

+

1

(d  1)z

ddq

(2)d1 q2 (cid:0)+(q2  m2

r(t ))  +(q2  m2

r(0))(cid:1)

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

+

m2(t )

4

z

ddq

(2)d (cid:18)

i
q2  m2
r(t ) + i

+

i
q2  m2

r(0) + i(cid:19) ,

which, if integrated over, give

(3.73) = +

+

(d

2 + 1
2)
2 )(4)

2 )( d
(d  1)( d1
m2(t ) (1  d
2 )

4(4)

d
2

d

2 (cid:16)(m2
(cid:16)(m2

r(t ))

r(t ))

d

2  (m2

r(0))

d

2 1 + (m2

r(0))

d

2(cid:17)
2 1(cid:17) .

d

taking the limit d = 4  2  4 and using expansions

(n + ) =

n!   1
(1)n



+

1

k   + o()!

n

xk=1

ax+ = ax(cid:0)1 +  lna + o(2)(cid:1) ,

87

(3.73)

(3.74)

(3.75)

( is the eulermascheroni constant) we are nally left with

(3.73)|d4 = 

m2

r(0)m2
64 2

r(t )

ln(cid:18)m2

m2

r(t )

r(0)(cid:19) + m2(t ) (m2

r(t ) + m2

r(0))

1

128 2 .

(3.76)

the fact that we get nite result should not be surprising as entire analysis of section 3.2
was made to show that p(t )  p(0) dened via 

is nite in d = 4.

c

we may now concentrate on the remaining terms in (3.68), the latter read (we might,

and we shall, from now on work in d = 4)

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

88

1

3z

d4q
(2)3 q2

1

e|q0|  1

(q2  m2

r(t )) +

m2(t )

4

d4q
(2)3

z

1

e|q0|  1

(q2  m2

r(t )) . (3.77)

our following strategy is based on the observation that the previous integrals have generic

form:

i2(mr) = z

=

d4q
(2)3 q2
2 2 z 

m2+2

1

r

1

e|q0|  1
dx (x2  1)

(q2  m2
r),
1

1+2

2

exy  1

,

(3.78)

with  = 0, 1 and y = mr. unfortunately, the integral (3.78) can not be evaluated exactly,

however, its small y (i.e. hightemperature) behaviour can be successfully analysed by

means of the mellin transform technique [36,73]. before going further, let us briey outline

the basic steps needed for such a small y expansion.

the mellin transform f (s) is done by the prescription [36, 73, 8083]:

f (s) =z 

0

dx xs1 f (x) ,

(3.79)

with s being a complex number. one can easily check that the inverse mellin transform

reads

f (x) =

1

i(2)z i+a

i+a

ds xs f (s) ,

(3.80)

where the real constant a is chosen in such a way that f(s) is convergent in the neigh-
bourhood of a straight line (i + a, i + a). so particularly if f (x) = 1
( [80]; formula i.3.19) that

exy1 one can nd

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

f (s) = (s)(s)ys

(res > 1) ,

89

(3.81)

where  is the riemann zeta function ((s) =pn=1 ns). now we insert the mellin trans-
exy1 to (3.78) and interchange integrals (this is legitimate only if the

form of f (x) = 1

integrals are convergent before the interchange). as a result we have

z 

0

dx g(x)

1

exy  1

=z i+a

i+a

ds

i(2)

(s)(s)ysg(1  s) ,

(3.82)

with g(x) = (x 1) (x2  1)

1+2

2

. using the tabulated result ( [83]; formula 6.2.32) we nd

g(1  s) =

1
2

b(  1 + 1

2s; 3

2 + )

(res > 2 + 2) ,

(3.83)

with b( ; ) being the beta function. because the integrand on the rhs of (3.82) is analytic

for res > 2 + 2 and the lhs is nite, we must choose such a that the integration is

dened. the foregoing is achieved choosing a > 2 + 2. another useful expressions for

g(1  s) are ( [83]; formula i.2.34 or i.2.37)

g(1  s) = b( 3

= 2

2 + ;2  2 + s) 2f1[ 1
2 + b( 3

2 + ;2  2 + s) 2f1[ 1

1

2  ;2  2 + s; 1
2 + ; 1

2  ; 3

2   + s;1]
2   + s; 1
2] ,

where 2f1 is the (gauss) hypergeometric function [83]. using identity

(2x) =

22x1


(x)(x + 1

2) ,

we can write

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

90

(3.82) =

( 3

2 + )
4

z i+a

i+a

ds

i(2)

( 1

2 s)(s)(cid:0) 1

2y(cid:1)s

(  1 + 1

2 s) .

(3.84)

the integrand of (3.84) has simple poles in s = 2n (n = 1, 2, . . .), s = 1, s = 2n +
2 + 2 (n = 0, 1, . . . , ) and double pole in s = 0. an important point in the former pole

analysis was the fact that (s) has simple zeros in 2m (m > 0) and only one simple pole
in s = 1. the former together with identity

(cid:16)x
2(cid:17)  x

2 (x) = (cid:18)1  x

2 (cid:19) 

x1

2 (1  x) ,

shows that no double pole except for s = 0 is present in (3.84). now, we can close the

contour to the left as the value of the contour integral around the large arc is zero in the

limit of innite radius (c.f. [80] and [84]; formula 8.328.1). using successively the cauchy

theorem we obtain

4 (3.82)
( 3
2 + )

=

+





xn=0
xn=1

y2n22 2n+2+2(n + )! (1)n|b2n+2+2|

n! (2n + 2 + 2)! 24n44

y2n 2n (2n)! (1 + 2n) (1)n++1

n! (n + 1 + )! 24n1

+ y1  (1)+1 ( + 1)! 22+3

(2 + 2)!

+

( + 1)! (ln(cid:16) y
2 (1)+1

4(cid:17) +   1

2

1

k) ,

+1

xk=1

(3.85)

where bs are the bernoulli numbers. let us mention that for (2n + 1) only numerical

values are available.

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

91

inserting (3.85) back to (3.77), we get for p(t )  p(0)

p(t )  p(0) = (3.76) +

1
3

i2(mr(t )) +

m2(t )

4

i0(mr(t ))

=

t 4 2
90 

t 2

24 (cid:18)m2

r(t ) 

t mr(t )

4 

(cid:18)m2

r(t )
3 

m2(t )

4 (cid:19)

m2(t )

2 (cid:19) +
t 4 (cid:19) +  
m2(t )(cid:17) m2n+2

r

1

m4
r(0)
128 2

2(cid:19) 
(t ) 2n2 (2n)! (1 + 2n) (1)1+n

t 2n n! (n + 2)! 24n+4

.

+



m2

r(t ) m2
32 2

r(0)

(cid:18)ln(cid:18) mr(0)



xn=1(cid:16)m2

r(t )  (n+2)

2

(3.86)

i0(mr(t )). one

note that (3.76) cancelled against the same term in 1

3 i2(mr(t )) + m2(t )

4

can see that (3.86) rapidly converges for large t , so that only rst four terms dominate at

suciently high temperature. the aforementioned terms come from the poles nearby the

straight line (i + a, i + a) (the more dominant contribution the closer pole). it is a
typical feature of the mellin transform technique that integrals of type

z 

0

dx g(x)

1

exy  1

,

can be expressed as an expansion which rapidly converges for small y (hightemperature

expansion) or large y (lowtemperature expansion)14.

for a suciently large t we can use the hightemperature expansion of m2(t ) found

in appendix c. inserting (c.6) to (3.86) we obtain

14by the same token we get the lowtemperature expansion if the integral contour must be closed to the

right.

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

92

p(t )  p(0) =

t 4 2
90 

r(t )

t 2 m2
24

+

t 3 mr(t )

12

+

r

8 (cid:18) t 4
144 

t 3 mr(t )

24

+

t 2 m2

r(t )

162 (cid:19) + o(cid:18)m4

r(t ) ln(cid:18)mr(t )

t 4 (cid:19)(cid:19) .

(3.87)

up to a sign, the result (3.87) coincides with that found by amelinocamelia and pi [85] for
the eective potential15. actually, they used instead of the n   limit the hartreefock
approximation which is supposed to give the same vef f as the leading 1/n approximation

[79].

note that the discussion of the mass renormalisation in section 3.1 can be directly

extended to the case when mr(0) = 0 (this does not apply to our discussion of r!). latter

can be also seen from the fact that (3.86) is continuous in mr(0) = 0 (however not analytic).

the foregoing implies that the original massless scalar particles acquire the thermal mass

m2

r(t ) = m2(t ) . from (3.86) one then may immediately deduce the pressure for massless

elds a in terms of m(t ). the latter reads

p(t )  p(0) =

t 4 2
90 

t 2 (m(t ))2

48

+

t (m(t ))3

48 

+



xn=1

(m(t ))2n+4 2n2 (2n)! (1 + 2n) (1)n+1

t 2n (n  1)! (n + 2)! 24n+5

.

(3.88)

15let us remind [75, 76, 85] that from the denition of vef f the thermodynamic pressure is vef f . in
order to obtain (3.87) from vef f in [85], one must subtract the zero temperature value of vef f and restrict
oneself to vanishing eld expectation value and positive bare mass squared.

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

93

this result is identical to that found by drummond et al. in [61].

a noteworthy observation is that when the energy of a thermal motion is much higher

then the mass of particles in the rest, then the massive theory approaches the massless one.

this is justied in the rst (hightemperature dominant) term of (3.86) and (3.88). this

term is nothing but a half of the black body radiation pressure for photons [37,59] (photons

have two degrees of freedom connected with two transverse polarisations). one could

also obtain the temperature dominant contributions directly from the stefanboltzmann
law [36, 37, 59] for the density energy (i.e. h00i). the formal argument leading to this
statement is based on the noticing that at high energy (temperature) the theory at hand

is (classically) approximately conformally invariant, which in turn implies that the energy

momentum tensor is traceless [69]. taking into account the denition of the hydrostatic

pressure (3.8), we can with a little eort recover the leading hightemperature contributions

for the massive case.

3.5 conclusions

in the present chapter we have claried the status of the hydrostatic pressure in (equilib-

rium) thermal qft. the former is explained in terms of the thermal expectation value

of the weighted spacelike trace of the energymomentum tensor . in classical eld

theory there is a clear microscopic picture of the hydrostatic pressure which is further

enhanced by a mathematical connection (through the virial theorem) with the thermody-

namic pressure. in addition, it is the hydrostatic pressure which can be naturally extended

to a nonequilibrium medium. quantum theoretic treatment of the hydrostatic pressure

is however pretty delicate. in order to get a sensible, nite answer we must give up the

idea of total hydrostatic pressure. instead, thermal interaction pressure or/and interaction

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

94

pressure must be used (see (3.38) and (3.39)). we have established this result for a special

case when the theory in question is the scalar 4 theory with o(n) internal symmetry; but

it can be easily extended to more complex situations. moreover, due to a lucky interplay

between the conservation of  and the spacetime translational invariance of an equilib-

rium (and t = 0) expectation value we can use the simple canonical (i.e. unrenormalised)

energymomentum tensor. in the course of our treatment in section 3.2 we heavily relied on

the counterterm renormalisation, which seems to be the most natural when one discusses

renormalisation of composite greens functions. to be specic, we have resorted to the

minimal subtraction scheme which has proved useful in several technical points.

we have applied the prescriptions obtained for the qft hydrostatic pressure to 4

theory in thelarge n limit. the former has the undeniable advantage of being exactly

soluble. this is because of the fact that the largen limit eliminates nasty classes of

diagrams in the dysonschwinger expansion. the surviving class of diagrams (superdaisy

diagrams) can be exactly resumed, because the (thermal) proper selfenergy , as well as

the renormalised coupling constant r are momentum independent. we have also stressed

that the o(n) 4 theory in the largen limit is consistent only if we view it as an eective

eld theory. fortunately, the upper bound on the uv cuto is truly huge, and it does

not represent any signicant restriction. for the model at hand the resumed form of the

pressure with mr(0) = 0 was rstly derived (in the purely thermodynamic pressure context)

by drummond et al. in [61]. we have checked, using the prescription (3.38) for the thermal

interaction pressure, that their results are in agreement with ours. the former is a nice

vindication of the validity of the virial theorem even in the qft context.

the expression for the pressure obtained was in a suitable form which allowed us to take

advantage of the mellin transform technique. we were then able to write down the high

chapter 3. pressure at thermal equilibrium

95

temperature expansion for the pressure in d = 4 (both for massive and massless elds) in

terms of renormalised masses mr(t ) and mr(0). we have explicitly checked that all uv

divergences present in the individual thermal diagrams miraculously cancel in accordance

with our analysis of the composite operators in section 3.2.

chapter 4

pressure in outofequilibrium media

in recent years signicant progress has been made in understanding the behaviour of qft

systems away from thermal equilibrium. motivation for the study of such systems comes

both from the early universe as well as from the quarkgluon plasma (deconned phase

quarks and gluons). nonequilibrium eects are expected to be relevant in the relativistic

heavyion collisions planed at rhic and lhc in the near future [8689].

one of the signicant physical variables, in the context of nonequilibrium qft, is

pressure. pressure, as an easily measurable parameter1, is expected to play an important

role in a detection of phase transitions. this is usually ascribed to the fact that the pressure

should exhibit a discontinuity in its derivative(s) when the local phase transition occurs.

the aforementioned has found its vindication in solid state physics and uid mechanics,

and may play a crucial role, for instance, in various baryogenesis scenarios.

it is well known that for systems in thermal equilibrium, the pressure may be calcu-

lated via the partition function [34, 36, 62]. however, this procedure cannot be extended to

oequilibrium systems where is no such thing as the grandcanonical potential. in this

1in this connection we may mention the piezo resistive silicon pressure sensors used, for instance, in

superuid helium [90, 91] or neutron (xray) diraction technique used in solid state physics [92, 93].

96

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

97

chapter we consider an alternative denition of pressure, based on the energymomentum

tensor. this, so called, hydrostatic pressure is dened as the spacelike trace of the energy

momentum tensor (see chapter 3), and in equilibrium, it is identied with the thermody-

namical pressure via the virial theorem [36]. there are several problems with the validity

of this identication on the quantum level, indeed gauge theories suer from a conformal

(trace) anomaly and require special care [36]. however, we will avoid such diculties by

focusing on a scalar theory which is free of the mentioned complications [36,94]. the major

advantage of dening pressure through the energymomentum tensor stems from the fact

that one may eortlessly extend the hydrostatic pressure to nonequilibrium systems (for

discussion see chapter 3).

the aim of this chapter is to provide a systematic prescription for the calculation of the

hydrostatic pressure in nonequilibrium media. this requires three concepts; the jaynes

gibbs principle of maximal entropy, the dysonschwinger equations and the hydrostatic

pressure.

in order to keep our discussion as simple as possible we illustrate the whole

procedure on a toy model system, namely the o(n) 4 theory. the latter has advantage

of being exactly solvable in the largen limit, provided that we deal with a translationally

invariant medium. as a result the hydrostatic pressure may be expressed in a closed form.

in order to provide meaningful results also for readers not entirely familiar with the

oequilibrium dysonschwinger equations and the jaynesgibbs principle of maximal en-

tropy, we briey summarise in section 4.1 the basic essentials. (detailed discussion of the

equilibrium case may be found in appendices a.1a.3 or in refs. [25,95,96].) as a byprod-

uct we construct the generalised kubomartinschwinger (kms) conditions. section 4.2 is

devoted to the study of the (canonical) energy momentum tensor in the o(n) 4 theory.

if both the density matrix and the full hamiltonian are invariant under o(n) symmetry one

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

98

obtains wards identities in a similar manner as in equilibrium. we show how these drasti-

cally simplify the expression for the pressure. in section 4.3 we concentrate our analysis on

the largen limit. in this setting we derive a very simple expression for the pressure - pres-

sure depends only on twopoint green functions. section 4.4 then forms the vital part of

this paper. owing to the fact that the innite hierarchy of the dysonschwinger equations

is closed (basically by chance) we obtain simple equations for twopoint green functions -

kadanobaym equations. these are solved exactly for three illustrative density matrices

. we choose deliberately translationally invariant s. the reason is twofold. firstly, for a

nontranslationally invariant medium one must use the improved energy momentum tensor

instead of the canonical one [94]. this is rather involved and it will be subject of our future

work. secondly, the kadanobaym equations turn out to be hyperbolic equations whose

fundamental solution is well known. as a result we may evaluate, for the density matrices

at hand, the hydrostatic pressure explicitly. the chapter ends with a discussion.

4.1 basic formalism

the key object of our interest is the energymomentum tensor (x). a typical contribu-

tion to (x) can be written as

d1(x) d2(x) . . .dn(x) .

here  is a eld in the heisenberg picture and di stands for a corresponding dierential
operator. since di(x) and dj (x) generally do not commute for i 6= j, one must
prescribe the ordering in . our strategy is based on the observation that one can

conveniently dene such ordering via the nonlocal operator

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

99

lim

xixt {d1(x1)  dn(xn)} =

lim

xixd(i{})t {(x1)   (xn)} ,

(4.1)

where d(i{}) is just a useful shorthand notation for d1d2 . . .dn, and t  is dened
in section 3.2. it is clear that both t  and t coincide if all the arguments xi are dierent,
so (t  t )(. . .) is an operator with a support at the contact points. the t  ordering is in
general a very useful tool whenever one deals with composite operators. in the sequel we

shall repeatedly use this fact.

4.1.1 oequilibrium dysonschwinger equations

let us now briey outline the derivation of the dysonschwinger equations for systems

away from equilibrium. for simplicity we illustrate this on a single scalar eld .

we start with the action s[] where  is linearly coupled to an external source j(x).

working with the elds in the heisenberg picture, the operator equation of motion can be

written as

s

(x)

[ = j ] + j(x) = 0 ,

(4.2)

where the index j emphasises that  is implicitly jdependent. this dependence will be
made explicit via a unitary transformation connecting j (governed by h  j) with 
(governed by h). if j(x) is switched on at time t = ti we have

j (x) = b1(t; ti)(x)b(t; ti)

= b(ti; tf )b(tf ; t) (x) b(t; ti)

= tc(cid:18)(x) exp (izc

d4y j(y)(y))(cid:19) .

(4.3)

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

100

here we have used the fact that

b(t1; t2) = t(cid:18)exp(iz t1

t2

d4y j(y)(y))(cid:19)

t1 > t2 .

(4.4)

the closetime path c runs along the real axis from ti to tf (tf is arbitrary, tf > ti) and

then back to ti. with this setting we can rewrite (4.2) as

t c (cid:18)(cid:26) s[]



+ j(cid:27) exp(iz d4y (j+(y)+(y)  j(y)(y)))(cid:19) = 0 ,

(4.5)

where, as it is usual [36, 44], we have labelled the eld (source) with the time argument on

the upper branch of c as + (j+) and that with the time argument on the lower branch of c

as  (j). introducing the metric (3) (3 is the usual pauli matrix and ,  = {+;})
we can write j++  j = j (3)  = j  (3) . for the raised and lowered
indices we simply read: + = + and  =  (similarly for j). taking tr( . . .) with
 = [, , . . .] being the density matrix, we obtain

1

z[j]

s

(x)(cid:20)(x) = i



j(x)(cid:21) z[j] = j (x) ,

(4.6)

with z[j] = tr(cid:8) tc exp (cid:0)irc d4y j(y)(y)(cid:1)(cid:9) being the generating functional of greens
functions (which in the nonequilibrium context we shall denote az g). employing the
commutation relation: i 
form, namely

), we may recast (4.6) into more convenient

z = z (  i 

j

j

 j (x) =

s

(x)h(x) + iz d4y g

 (x, y) (3)



(y)i i1 ,

(4.7)

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

101

where the symbol i1 indicates the unit. as usual, the mean eld, , is dened as the

expectation value of the eld operator: (x)  h(x)i. dening z[j] = exp(iw [j]),
twopoint green functions are then dened as g(x, y) = 2w/j (x)j (y). setting
j in (4.6)(4.7) to 0 (i.e. physical condition) we obtain a rst out of innite hierarchy

of equations for greens functions. successive j variations of (4.6)(4.7) generate higher

order equations in the hierarchy. the system of these equations is usually referred to as

the dysonschwinger equations.

for the future reference is convenient to have the expression for the eective action

[c]. this is connected with w [j] via the legendre transform:

following the previous reasonings, one can easily persuade oneself that the expectation

[c] = w [j] zc

d4y j(y)c(y) .

(4.8)

value of  reads

h(x)i = h[(x)]i = [+(x) + iz d4y g+(x, y) (3)



(y)

] i1 .

(4.9)

we have automatically used the subindex + as the elds involved in  have, by de-

nition, the time argument on the upper branch of c.

4.1.2 the jaynesgibbs principle of maximal entropy

in this section we would like to review the jaynesgibbs principle of maximal entropy (also

maximum calibre principle) [24, 25, 31, 39], which we shall employ in the following. the

formalism is a generalisation from an ordinary gibbss principle of maximal entropy to

the systems out of equilibrium. the objective of the principle is to construct the most

probable density matrix which fulls the constraints imposed by experimental/theoretical

data.

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

102

the standard rules of statistical physics allows us to dene the expectation value via

the density matrix  as

h. . .i = tr( . . .) ,

(4.10)

with the trace running over a complete set of physical states describing the ensemble in

question at some initial time ti. the specication (or reasonable approximation) of the

density matrix is thus crucial for determining the macroscopic properties of a given system.

the usual approaches [97100] trying to determine  start with the schrodinger picture.

the merit of this procedure is that one transforms the whole time dependence of the expec-

tation value into the density matrix itself. thus the time evolution of such an expectation

value is equivalent to the time evolution of , and we need not to solve separate equations

for each observable2.

suppose that the system is prepared in such a way that at time t the probability of the

system being in the state |n; ti is pn(t). the density matrix has then the standard form

s(t) =xn

pn(t) |n; tihn; t| .

(4.11)

(bypn we mean; sum over discrete spectrum and integrate over continuous one). we should
stress that the ensemble {|n; ti} in (4.11) not necessary consist of mutually orthogonal
states, although the density matrix can always be formally diagonalised by selecting its

eigenbasis (polar basis). applying the schrodinger equation to (4.11), the evolution of s

reads

where

ds(t)

dt

= i[s(t), h] +

s(t)

t

,

(4.12)

2this advantage does not seem to be relevant for greens functions with dierent time arguments.

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

103

s(t)

t

=xn

dpn(t)

dt

|n; tihn; t| .

(4.13)

for a closed hamiltonian system pn(t) cannot be changed, and so (4.12) reduces to the

celebrated von neumannliouville equation

ds(t)

dt

= i[s(t), h] .

(4.14)

let us mention that the vanishing of the time derivative of pn(t) implies that the von

neumanngibbs entropy sg = tr(slns) is time independent. indeed, in the latter case
the evolution of s can be formally written (c.f. (4.12)) as

s(t) = u(t; t)s(t)u(t; t)1 ,

(4.15)

where the evolution operator is determined from the schrodinger equation

i


t

u(t; t) = h(t)u(t; t),

u(t, t) = 1 ,

and so using the property of a trace operation we have,

sg(t) = tr(s(t)lns(t)) = tr(s(t)lns(t)) = sg(t) .

(4.16)

the time dependence of pn(t) reects the fact that the system in question interacts with

an exterior  a heat bath (whose structure and dynamics are usually unknown). in order

to determine pn(t) one would need to resort to some physical model [100] describing the

dynamics of the environmental system  task by no means easy. in order to avoid these

diculties it is customary to apply a stochastic description of a systembath interaction

[101, 102], or equivalently use an irreversible master equation [102] for .

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

104

to keep our ideas simple, we shall from the very outset assume that pn is constant. this

means that either no external environment interacts with our system or that the interaction

is reected only in the hamiltonian h (e.g. eective external elds or time dependences)

but the probability of the population of any state stays unchanged - adiabatic interaction.

solving the von neumannliouville equation would be a formidable task. one usually

resorts either to variational method [100,103] with several trial s, or one may recast (4.14)

into an innite hierarchy of integrodierential equations for two-particle, etc. distribution

functions [30] (i.e. bogoliubovborngreenkirkwoodyvon or bbgky hierarchy).

in

the latter approach one hopes that one can device an eective truncation of the hierarchy

allowing to close the system of equations, and then solve it (usually perturbatively). how-

ever, in both aforementioned approaches we must specify the initial value data in order

to solve uniquely the evolution equation(s). this is quite delicate task, and one usually

uses the most simple (and not always physically well motivated) choices of  (e.g. gibbs

(grand)canonical distribution [100], gaussian distribution [95, 98, 99]).

rather than following the previous path, we shall use the heisenberg picture instead.

this seems to be more suitable for our purpose. in our particular case the polar form of

h reads

in the following we shall denote h simply as . in order to determine  explicitly we shall

h =xn

pn|nihn| .

(4.17)

resort to the jaynesgibbs principle of maximal entropy [24, 25, 31, 39]. the latter allows

one to construct  in a way which naturally extends the original gibbs prescription [31,39]

which refers only to equilibrium. the basic idea is borrowed from the information theory.

let us assume that we have criterion of how to characterise the informative content of .

the most probable  is then selected out of those  which are consistent with whatever

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

105

chose more informative  is to presume an extra information which we do not control, and

to make unjustied implicit assumption concerning the information we do not know about.

by c.e.shannon [104], l.brillouin [105] and l.szilard [106] with the result

we know about the system and which have the last informative content (laplaces principle

of insucient reasons). consistency with anything known about  must be kept; while to

it remains to characterise the information content (measure) [] of . this was done
 [] = tr( log2 )
the density matrix is then chosen to minimise [].
a (negative) multiplicative constant [] coincides with sg[], and thus the principle of

it is quite surprising that up to

insucient reasons basically turns out to be the maximal entropy principle3. note that

no assumption about the nature of  was made; namely there was no assumption whether

 describes equilibrium or nonequilibrium situation.

(we were interested only in the

information content of , and not in the underlying dynamics of a system). to put more

esh on the bones, let us rephrase the former into more physical language [24,25]. what we

actually need to do is to maximise sg subject to the constraints imposed by our knowledge

of expectation values of certain operators p1[, ], . . . , pn[, ]. this yields a density

matrix  which incorporates the fact that all the quantum states which are permitted

by the constraints have equal probabilities [25].

in contrast to equilibrium, all pk[. . .]s

may be operators which are not the constants of the motion (both the position and time

dependences are allowed). so namely if one knows that

3 it appendix d we show that the shannon entropy (which is proportional to sg) equals (in base 2 of
logarithm) to the expected number of binary (yes/no) questions whose answer take us from our current
state of knowledge to the one certainty. so, the bigger sg, the more questions one has and consequently
one possess a higher ignorance about a system.

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

106

hpk[, ]i = gk(x1, x2, . . .) ,

the entropy maximalisation leads to

 =

1

z[1, . . . , n]

exp 

n

xi=1 z yj

d4xj i(x1, . . .)pi[, ]! ,

(4.18)

(4.19)

with the partition function

z[1, . . . , n] = tr exp(

n

xi=1 z yj

d4xj i(x1, . . .)pi[, ])! .

(4.20)

it is possible to show that the stationary solution of sg is unique [27] and maximal. the

latter goes on the account of the fact that sg is a concave functional (see appendix d).

both in (4.19) and (4.20) the time integration is not either present at all (so fk is specied

only in the initial time ti), or is taken over the gathering interval (, ti) (i.e. asr ti

if, instead, one has certain partial knowledge about the expectation value of pk[, ] at

 dt . . .).

some discrete times prior ti, the corresponding integration must be replaced by a discrete

summation. note that if we have no prior knowledge about the system, then  = 1/w,
where w is the number of accessible quantum states. equivalently we may say that the
no prior restrictions mean our total ignorance about the system and as a consequence we

must aliate with each quantum state an equal probability.

the lagrange multipliers k might be eliminated if one solves n simultaneous equations

gk(x1, . . .) = 

 lnz

k(x1, . . .)

.

(4.21)

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

107

using the denition of the von neumanngibbs entropy together with (4.19) we get

sg[g1, . . . , gn]|max = tr( ln)|max

= lnz[1, . . . , n] +

n

xi=1 z yj

d4xj i(x1, . . .)gi(x1, . . .) . (4.22)

so one may view sg max as the legendre transformation of lnz. in the equilibrium case the
former is the standard relation between entropy and the grandcanonical potential. having

(4.22), the explicit solution of (4.21) may be formally written as

k(x1, . . .) =

 sg[g1, . . . , gn]|max

gk(x1, . . .)

.

(4.23)

now, in order to reect the density matrix (4.19) in the dysonschwinger equations, we

need to construct the corresponding boundary conditions. this may be done quite straight-

forwardly. using the cyclicity of tr(. . .) together with the relation

eabea =

1
n!



xn=0

cn, c0 = b, cn = [a, cn1] ,

we can write the generalised kms conditions for the npoint green function as

h(x1) . . . (xn)i = h(x2) . . . (xn)(x1)i +

1
k!h(x2) . . . (xn)ck(x1)i ,

(4.24)



xk=1

where a = ln(), b = (x1), x10 = ti. so for the twopoint green functions we have4

g+(x, y) = g+(x, y) +

4in special cases when  = |0ih0| or  = eh /z() the boundary conditions are the well known

feynman and kms boundary conditions, respectively.

1
n!

tr( (x)cn(y)) .



xn=1

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

108

in this chapter we aim to demonstrate that conditions (4.24) together with the causality

condition are sucient to determine greens functions uniquely.

4.2 the o(n ) 4 theory

the o(n) 4 theory is described by the bare lagrangian

n

l =

1
2

xa=1(cid:0)(a)2  m2

0(a)2(cid:1) 

the corresponding canonical energymomentum tensor is 

from eqs.(4.1) and (4.9) its expectation value is

.

0

(a)2!2
8n   n
xa=1
c =pa aagl, and


c (+(x)) = h
x 

y

c (x)i
gcc
++(x, y)|x=y 

+

g0

= ixc
8n xc,d n(cid:16)(c
+ 2(cid:16)c

+(x)d

+(x) + igcd

++(x, x)(cid:17)igcd

+ terms with 3 and 4 .

+(x))2 + igcc

x y gcc

0

++(x, y)|x=y  m2
++(x, x)(cid:17)

+(x))2 + igdd

gi

2 xc n
++(x, x)(cid:17)(cid:16)(d
++(x, x)o

gcc

++(x, x)o

(4.25)

before proceeding further with our development, we want to show how one can signicantly

simplify eq.(4.25) provided that both the density matrix and the hamiltonian are invariant

under rotations in the ndimensional vector space of elds. this situation would occur if

the system was initially prepared in such a way that no eld a was favoured over another.

the fact that  is invariant under o(n) transformations means that

u()[, , . . .]u1() = [, , . . .] ,

(4.26)

where the elds a transform under ndimensional rotations: u()au1() = r1()abb =

[exp(iti)]abb, where r() is the rotation matrix in the ndimensional vector space, and

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

109

the generators ti are real and antisymmetric n  n matrices. it is obvious that the previ-
ous relation for c can be satised for all times only if the full hamiltonian, which governs

the evolution of a, is also invariant against the ndimensional rotations.

let us now consider the generating functional z[j] corresponding to the o(n) symmet-

ric density matrix. employing the cyclic property of tr(. . .) together with the innitesimal

transformation, r() = 1 + iti, we obtain that the variation of z must vanish. the latter

implies the following (unrenormalised) wards identities:

zc

d4y j a(y)

w [j]
j b(y)

=zc

d4y j b(y)

w [j]
j a(y)

.

(4.27)

taking successive variations with respect to source j, we obtain the following results (see

also [96]): npoint green functions with n odd vanish, while for n even (n = 2k, k = 1, 2, . . .)

one has

ga1a2...a2k
1(2k)

(x1, . . . , x2k) = xall pairings yi<j

aiaj

g(2k)
12k (x1, . . . , x2k) ,

(4.28)

where g(2k) is a universal 2kpoint green function. similar results can be obtained for

a1a2...a2k
12...2k (. . .).

finally note that these results enable the expression for the expectation value of the

energy momentum tensor to be simplied signicantly to

h

c (x)i = in

x 
y

n
2

 i

g(cid:16)

n + 2

8

0g(g++(x, x))2

g++(x, y)|x=y 
x 
y

g++(x, y)|x=y  m2

0

g++(x, x)(cid:17)

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

+ terms with (4) .

110

(4.29)

in the rest of this chapter we shall conne ourselves only to situations where both  and h

are o(n) invariant.

4.3 the largen limit

let us now examine behaviour of (4.29) to the order o(1/n). for this purpose it is im-
portant to know how either g(n) or (n) behave in the n   limit. at t = 0 or in
equilibrium the feynman diagrams are available [62, 74] and the corresponding combina-

torics can be worked out quite simply. on the other hand, the situation in oequilibrium

cases is more dicult as we do not have at our disposal wicks theorem. one may devise

various diagrammatic approaches, e.g. kernel method [95], cumulant expansion [59], cor-

relation diagrams [5], etc. instead of relying on any graphical representation (as we done

in section 3.3) we show that for both equilibrium and oequilibrium systems, the situa-

tion may be approached from far more general standpoint using only wards identities and

properties of  and w .

in order to nd the leading behaviour at large n it is presumably the easiest to consider

the legendre transform (4.8). the explicit n dependence may be obtained by setting

c = , which implies j c = j for all the group indices. eq.(4.8) then indicates that both

[] and w [j] are of order n. if we expand [a] in terms of c taking into account wards

identities we get

[] = [0] +

+

1
2
3
4!

nzc
n 2zc

d4x d4y (2)(x, y) (x)(y)

d4x d4y d4z d4q (4)(x, y, z, q)

 (x)(y)(z)(q) +    .

(4.30)

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

111

since the lhs of (4.30) is of order n, (2) must be of order n 0, (4) of order n1, and, in

general, (2n) must be of order n 1n. this suggests that in the expression for the energy

momentum tensor (4.29), terms containing (4) can be ignored. the above argument can

be repeated in a similar way for w .

hence, collecting our results together, the expectation value of the energymomentum

tensor to leading order in n may be written as

h

c (x)i = in

x 
y

 i

n
2

g(cid:16)

n
8

0g(g++(x, x))2

g++(x, y)|x=y 
x 
y

g++(x, y)|x=y  m2

0

g++(x, x)(cid:17) .

(4.31)

this result is surprisingly simple: the expectation value of the energymomentum ten-

sor, and thus the hydrostatic pressure, is expressed purely in terms of twopoint greens

functions. the latter can be calculated through the dysonschwinger equations (4.7). fur-

thermore, these equations have a very simple form provided that both the largen limit

and wards identities are applied. if we perform a variation of (4.7) with respect to j(y)

we obtain, to order o(1/n), the following dysonschwinger equations for twopoint green
functions:

0 +

i0
2

(cid:18)2 + m2
= (y  x)(3) .

g(x, x)(cid:19) g(x, y)

(4.32)

these dynamical equations for twopoint green functions are better known as the kadano

baym equations [40].

let us mention one more point. the generalised kms conditions for g are signi-
cantly simple in the largen limit. this is because in sum (4.24) only terms of order o(n 0)
contribute. this implies that only quadratic operators pi[, ] in the density matrix are

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

112

relevant. as a result, the jaynesgibbs principle naturally provides a vindication of the

popular gaussian ansatz [98100].

4.4 outofequilibrium pressure

the objective of the present section is to show how the outlined mathematical machinery

works in the case of the hydrostatic pressure.

in order to gain some insight we start

with rather pedagogical, but by no means trivial examples; translationally invariant, non-

equilibrium density matrices. we consider the more dicult case of translationally non

invariant density matrices in our future work.

4.4.1 equilibrium

as an important special case we can choose the constraints

hpk[, ]i|ti = gk = constant ,

(4.33)

where ti is arbitrary. eq.(4.33) then implies that pks are integrals of motion. since in the

nite volume systems the spatial translational invariance is destroyed, the only integral of

motion (apart from conserved charges) is the hamiltonian. thus the system is in thermal

equilibrium and the laws of thermodynamics [37, 59] prescribe that g =r t

is the heat capacity at constant volume v and t is temperature). eq. (4.23) determines

0 dt cv (t ) (cv

the lagrange multiplier;  = 1/t = . the density matrix maximising the sg is then

the density matrix of the canonical ensemble:  =

invariance of , the kadanobaym equations read

exp(h)

z[]

. due to the translational

(cid:0)2x + m2

r(t )(cid:1) g(x  y) = (x  y)(3) ,

(4.34)

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

113

where the temperaturedependent renormalised mass is (see, for example [62,74]); m2

r(t ) =

m2

0 + i0
2

g(0). the corresponding kms boundary condition is

g+(x, ti; y, 0) = g+(x, ti  i; y, 0) .

(4.35)

because mr(t ) is a spatial constant, a fourier transform solves equations (4.34). the

solutions of (4.34) subject to condition (4.35) are then the resumed propagators in the

keldyshschwinger formalism

i
k2  m2
r  i

+ 2fb(|k0|)(k2  m2
ig(k) =
r)
ig(k) = 2 {(k0) + fb(|k0|)} (k2  m2
r) ,

(4.36)

with fb(x) = (exp(x)  1)1 being the boseeinstein distribution.

now, the total hydrostatic pressure in d dimensions is classically dened as [36,74,107]

p(x, t ) = 

1

(d  1)hi

i(x)i .

because 
c

is a composite operator, a special renormalisation is required [36, 65, 66, 94].

as we have shown in [74], for translationally invariant systems the renormalised pressure

coincides with the, so called, thermal interaction pressure p (see eq.(3.38)). the latter
reads

p(t ) = p(x, t )  p(x, 0) = 

1

(d  1)(cid:8)hi

c ii  h0|i

c i|0i(cid:9) .

(4.37)

let us remind that the energymomentum tensor  need not to be the canonical one

(however, the canonical one is usually the simplest one), c.f. section 3.2. as a second point

we should mention that prescription (4.37) retains its validity for nonequilibrium media

as well. this is because the shortdistance behaviour of g++(x, y), which is responsible for

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

114

the singular behaviour of , comes from the particular solution of the kadanobaym

equation (4.34). the latter can be chosen to be completely independent of the boundary

conditions (actually it is useful to chose the feynman causal solution). on the other hand,

the homogeneous solution of (4.34), which is regular at |xy|  0, reects all the boundary
conditions. one may see then that the uv singularities which trouble  may be treated

in the same way as at the t = 0. incidentally, the former is an extension of the well known

fact that in order to renormalise a nite temperature qft, it suces to renormalise it at

t = 0.

inserting the solution (4.36) into the expression for the energymomentum tensor (4.31)

we arrive at the thermal interaction pressure per particle (compare section 3.4, see also

[85, 94])

p(t ) =

t 4 2
90 

r(t )

t 2 m2
24

+

r(t )

t m3
12

+

r

8 (cid:18) t 4
144 

t 3 mr(t )

24

+

t 2 m2

r(t )

162 (cid:19)

+ o(cid:18)m4

r(t ) ln(cid:18) mr(t )

t 4 (cid:19)(cid:19) ,

(4.38)

where the renormalised coupling constant r comes from the t = 0 renormalisation prescrip-

tion: (4)

aabb(s = 0) = r/n (s is the usual mandelstam variable). a direct calculation of

(4) in the largen limit were performed in section 3.2 with the result:

r = 0 

1
2

0r

1

(4)d/2  [2  d/2](cid:0)m2

r(cid:1)d/22 .

(4.39)

to regularise the theory we have used the usual ms scheme with the dimensional regular-

isation (d 6= 4). the high temperature expansion of the pressure (4.38) to all orders can
be found in section 3.4 where the calculations, however, were approached from a dierent

standpoint.

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

115

4.4.2 oequilibrium i

the next question to be addressed is how the above calculations are modied in the non

equilibrium case. to see that let us choose the following constraint

g(k) = hh(k)i|ti = h h(k)i|ti .

(4.40)

here ti is arbitrary, and function g(k) is specied by theory/experiment. the h(k) is a
quadratic operator fullling the condition hhi|n = h hi. as g(k) is nite, both h and
h must be renormalised (i.e. we must subtract the zero temperature part). obviously

h(k) = ka(k)a(k) ,

with k = k2 + m2 and

m2 = m2

0 +

i
2

0z ddk

(2)d

g++(k) .

in the largen limit the corresponding density matrix (4.19) reads

 =

1
z()

exp(cid:18)z

d3k

(2)32k

(k) h(k)(cid:19) ,

(4.41)

(4.42)

with (k)/2(2)3k being the lagrange multiplier to be determined. using eq.(4.21), we

nd that

g(k) =

v

k

(2)3

e(k)k  1

,

(4.43)

where v denotes the volume of the system. clearly, expression (4.43) can be interpreted as

the density of energy per mode. the fact that (k) is not constant indicates that dierent

modes have dierent temperatures.

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

116

the kadanobaym equations coincide in this case with those in (4.34) provided

mr(t )  m. the boundary condition can be worked out simply using the prescription
(4.24). this gives

g+(k) = e(k)k0 g+(k) .

(4.44)

the fundamental solution of the kadanobaym equation is

g(k) =

(3)

k2  m2 + i  2i(k2  m2)f(k) ,

 = (3) .

(4.45)

let us mention one more point. the boundary condition (4.44) is not by itself sucient to

determine fs. (this fact is often overlooked even in the equilibrium qft.) it is actually

necessary to substitute this condition with an additional condition, namely the condition

of causality. the causality condition, i.e. vanishing of the commutator [(x), (y)] for
(x  y)2 < 0, importantly restricts the class of possible fs. to see this, let us look
at the paulijordan function h [(x), (y)]i. the latter is the homogeneous solution of
the kadanobaym equation with the initialtime value data: h [(x), (y)]i|x0=y0 = 0
(i.e. causality condition) and 0h [(x), (y)]i|x0=y0 = 3(x  y). thus the paulijordan
function is uniquely determined and its fourier transform reads

f.t.(h[(x), (y)]i)(k) = i2(k2  m2) (k0) .

(4.46)

relation (4.46) immediately implies that

f+(k) = (k0) + f (k)

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

f+(k) = (k0) + f(k) ,

117

(4.47)

with f being, so far arbitrary, and for both f+ and f+ identical, function. the f is then
xed via the generalised kms condition (4.44). similarly, the causality condition species
that g++(k)  g(k) = pp{ 1/(k2  m2)} (the symbol pp denotes the principal part).
by inspection of the denition of g one may easily realise that

g++ + g = g+ + g+
g+(k) = (g+(k))
g++(k) = (g(k))

.

(4.48)

from these relations follows that f++ = f = f and f (k) = ( f (k)). the f is the same
as in (4.47).

since the divergences in g come from the rst term in (4.45) (i.e. from the particular

solution), we can shift the corresponding (zero temperature) poles at d = 4 to the bare

mass. in this case we can write

m2  m2

r + m2 ,

(4.49)

where mr is the renormalised mass in the vacuum and m is the mass shift due to an

interaction with the nonequilibrium medium.

inserting the ++ components of (4.45)

into (4.41), we obtain

m2 = m2

0 +

1
2

where

0"md4

(4)

d
2

 [1  d/2] + n(m2)# ,

n(m2) =z ddk

(2)d 2(k2  m2)f++(k) .

(4.50)

(4.51)

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

118

in an equilibrium system f++ would be the boseeinstein distribution fb. note that

because (4.51) corresponds to a homogeneous solution of the kadanobaym equation at

|x  y| = 0 it is automatically nite. thus for a translationally invariant medium (both
equilibrium and nonequilibrium) f++ must act as a regulator in the uv region.

let us consider the expression for the expectation value of  given in (4.31). it is a

matter of a few lines to show that

hir = inz ddk

(2)d kk [g++(k)  g(k)]  i

n
4

gm2z ddk

(2)d [g++(k) + g(k)] ,

(4.52)

with g being the t = 0 causal green function. using (4.39), (4.41) and (4.45) one may

directly check that eq.(4.52) does not contain uv singularities when the limit d  4 is
taken. this veries our introductory remark, that (4.37) is nite even in nonequilibrium

context. from the generalised kms condition (4.44) and from (4.45) we obtain that f++ is

f++(k) =

1

e(k)k  1

.

(4.53)

so far the results obtained were completely general and valid for any translationally invari-

ant system. let us now consider a system in which g(k) = v k

(2)3 exp (k/). as we shall
see, this condition corresponds to systems where the lowest frequency modes depart from

strict equilibrium, whilst the high energy ones obey standard boseeinstein statistics. this

behaviour is typical of many oequilibrium systems, eg.

ionised atmosphere [108], laser

stimulated plasma [109], hot fusion [110], etc. the  is usually referred to as the ionisation

halfwidth of the energetical spectrum. from (4.43) we can determine (k) as a function

of the physical parameter :

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

119

(k) =

1


+

1
k



xn=1

(1)n+1

n

enk/ .

(4.54)

to proceed, some remarks on the interpretation of (k) are necessary. firstly, eq.(4.54)

implies that for a suciently large k (k  ) the function (k) is approximately constant,
and equals 1/. thus at high energies the distribution f++ approaches the boseeinstein

distribution with the global temperature t  . in other words, only the soft modes were
sensitive to processes which created the nonequilibrium situation. the interpretation of

 as an equilibrium temperature, however, fails whenever   k. instead of  one may
alternatively work with the expectation value of (k), i.e.

hi = r d3k (k)ek/
r d3k ek/
+ pn=1

1


(1)n+1
n(n+1) k1((n + 1)m/)
mk2(m/)

=

,

(4.55)

where kn is the bessel function of imaginary argument of order n. because the system is for

the signicant part of the energetical spectrum in thermal equilibrium, 1/hi approximates
the corresponding equilibrium temperature to high precision. an interesting feature of

(4.55) is that it is quite insensitive to the actual value of m. dependence of hi on m for
a sample value  = 100mev is depicted in fig.4.1. an important observation is that the
asymptotic behaviour of hi at    goes like hi  a/, where a = 1 + 1
ln2 + 2/24  1.1.

2pn=1

(1)n+1
n(n+1)2 =

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

120

hi [mev]

0.011

0.0108

0.0106

0.0104

0.0102

200

400

600

800

1000

m [mev]

figure 4.1: a plot of hi vs. m at  = 100 mev.

using (4.37) and (4.52) we get for the pressure per particle

p() =

1

22 (cid:20)m22k2(m/) +

m2

4 mk1(m/)(cid:21)  p0 ,

(4.56)

where

p0 =

1

3842 (m2)m2

r(cid:18)2 +

m2
m2

r (cid:19) +

1
642 m4

r(cid:18)1 +

m2
m2

r (cid:19) ln(cid:18)1 +

m2
m2

r (cid:19) .

(4.57)

note that p0 comes from the uv divergent parts of (4.52). whilst the separate contributions
are uv divergent, they cancel between themselves leaving behind the nite p0. as we
already emphasised, the divergences come from the particular solutions of the kadano

baym equations. because the former do not directly reect the boundary conditions, the

form of p0 must be identical for any translationally invariant medium. the nontrivial
information about the nonequilibrium pressure is then encoded in terms in the brace [. . .]

in (4.56).

let us now perform the hightemperature expansion of the pressure (4.56). as a

temperature parameter we may chose . in this case we have

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

121

p () =

2

m2

4 (cid:19)

22 (cid:18)m2 
2(cid:19) 
xk=0
ck(cid:26)m2(cid:18)(k + 1) +

4
2 
 ln(cid:18)m

 m2(cid:18)2(k + 1) +

xk=0



ck(2m2  m2 (k + 2))

1

2(k + 1)(cid:19) (k + 2)
(k + 1)(k + 2)(cid:19)(cid:27)  p0 ,

(2k + 3)

(4.58)

where

ck =

m2k+2

222k+4k!(k + 2)! 2k .

the (. . .) is eulers psi function. for a suciently large  the leading behaviour of m2

may be easily evaluated. to do this, let us rst assemble (4.39) and (4.49)(4.51) together.

this gives us the (renormalised) gap equation

m2 =

=

2 ]

1

d
2

(4)

20 ([1  d
2 (cid:26) (m2

r

r, m2) +

(cid:0)md4  md4

r

(cid:1) + n(m2))

1

22 mk1[m/](cid:27) ,

(4.59)

with

(. . .) =

1
2

1

322(cid:26)(m2

r + m2)ln(cid:18)1 +

m2
m2

r(cid:27) .
r (cid:19)  m2

setting x = m2/m2

r and s = /mr we obtain the following transcendental equation for x

1
r =

1

322(cid:26) 1

xh(1 + x)ln(1 + x)  x + 8s1 + x k1[1 + x/s]i(cid:27) .

(4.60)

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

122

the graphical representation of eq.(4.60) is depicted in fig.4.2.

1/s

1
1

0.5
0.5

1.5

2

20

40

x

60

80

100

r

0.06

0.04
0.04

0.02
0.02

0.08

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

a)

b)

200

150

100

50

0

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

figure 4.2: a plot of the eq.(4.60): a) the general shape, b) a small x behaviour.

from this one may read o that for large x (x > 50) there exists a critical value of r above

which the gap equation has no solution. (the plateau is actually bent downward with a

very gentle slope.) fig.4.2b clearly shows that if r  1/s < 1 then x  1. using the
asymptotic behaviour of k1[z] for z  0 (k1  (z)1) we arrive at more precise estimate

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

123

of r for which x  1; namely r  1/s2 = m2
asymptotic expansion of m2. for a suciently high  we may write

r/2. this estimate is very helpful for the

(m2)2

2m2

+ (m2)4
12m6
r

6m4
r

r  (m2)3

m2 = r

r2
42 + o(mln(m/)) .

322

=

+ . . .

+

1

42 (m k1[m/])|


(4.61)

(4.62)

inserting this back into (4.56) we get

p() =

4
2 

2 m2
22 +

r

8 (cid:18) 2m2
644 

43

44(cid:19) + o(cid:0)m2ln(m/); 2
r(cid:1) .

it is interesting to note that 1/2  2/97 which is almost the stefanboltzmann constant.
this once more vindicates our interpretation of  as a temperature. a plot of the pressure

as a function of  is depicted in fig.4.3.

p[(gev)4]

41010

31010

21010

11010

t, [gev]

200

400

600

800

1000

figure 4.3: a plot of pressure as a function of t ,  for mr = 100mev. the gray line corresponds
to equilibrium pressure, the black line corresponds to pressure (4.62).

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

124

p[(gev)4]

3109

2.5109

2109

1.5109

1109

5108

200

400

600

800

1000

t, [gev]

figure 4.4: a plot showing the dierence of equilibrium and nonequilibrium pressures for mr =
100mev.

it is due to the low frequence modes contribution to the pressure that p () < p (t ). this

is a direct result of our choice of g(k), namely that  cannot be interpreted as temperature

for the low frequence modes (i.e. k < ). the smaller  is the less important contribution

from nonequilibrium soft modes and so the smaller dierence between both pressures.

the result (4.62) can be alternatively rewritten in terms of hi . using, for instance,

the pade approximation [111] for hi, we arrive at

p(hi) = 0.0681122hi4  0.0415368hi2m2

+ r (cid:0)0.000647hi4 + 0.0000164hi2 m2(cid:1)
+ o(cid:0)m2ln(mhi); 2
r(cid:1) .

(4.63)

the coecient 0.0681122  2/145 is 1.6 times smaller than the required value for the
stefanboltzmann constant, so the parameter hi is a slightly worse approximation of the
in practice, however, it is a matter of taste and/or a
equilibrium temperature than .

particular context which of the above two descriptions is more useful.

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

125

4.4.3 oequilibrium ii

as was noted above, it is the specic form of the constraint g(k) which prescribes the

behaviour of (k). let us now turn our attention to systems which depart slightly from

equilibrium, i.e. when g(k) in (4.40) deviates a little from the equilibrium density of energy

per mode. in this case the constraint (4.40) reads

g(k) =

v

k

(2)3

e0k  1

+ g(k); g(k)  g(k) ,

(4.64)

with 0 = 1/t0 being an inverse of the equilibrium temerature. as a special example of

(4.64) we choose

g(k) =

v

k

(2)3

e0k1(k)  1

; (k, 0)  1 .

(4.65)

the inverse mode temperature (k) is then 0ln((k))/k. so ln() measures (in units
of k) the deviation of the mode temperature from the equilibrium one. the particular

value of (k, 0) depends on the actual way in which the system is prepared. to avoid

unnecessary technical complications, we select (k, 0) to be a momentumspace constant

(generalisation is, however, straightforward). this choice represents the change in the

mode temperature which is now inversely proportional to k; the deviation is bigger for

soft modes and is rapidly suppressed for higher modes. obviously, t0 becomes the global

temperature if k  ln(). the generalised kms conditions (4.44) together with solutions
(4.45) determine f++ as

f++(k) =



e0k  

.

(4.66)

eq.(4.66) is a reminiscent of the, so called, juttner distribution5 with fugacity  [112, 113].

5it should be mentioned that this similarity is rather supercial. the jutner distribution describes

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

126

now, using (4.37) and (4.52) we get for the pressure per particle

p(t0) + p0 =

1

22 "m2

2
0



xn=1

n

n2 k2(nm0) + mm2

40

n
n

k1(nm0)# ,



xn=1

where m2 satises the gap equation

m2 =

r

2 (cid:18) (m2

r, m2) +

1

22z 

0

k2dk
k



e0k  (cid:19) .

(4.67)

(4.68)

if we set, as before, x = m2/m2

r and s = 1/0mr we get the transcendental equation for x

1
r =

1

322x(cid:26)(1 + x)ln(1 + x)  x + 8(1 + x) z 

1

dz z2  1



ez x+1/s  (cid:27) .

(4.69)

the corresponding numerical analysis of (4.69) reveals that for x  1 , 1/s  1. so at
x  1, r  m2/t 2
0 . this estimate is important for the asymptotic expansion of m2.
however, in order to carry out the asymptotic expansion of (4.68) (and consequently (4.67))

we need to cope rst with the sum pn=1 nkk(nm0)/nk (k = 1, 2) (also called bradens

function). expansion of kk(. . .) yields a double series which is very slowly convergent,

and so it does not allow one to easily grasp the leading behaviour in t0. in this case it is

useful to resume (4.67)(4.68) by virtue of the mellin summation technique [36]. (it is well

known [36, 74, 82] that at equilibrium this resummation leads to a rapid convergence for

high temperatures.) as a result, for a suciently large t0 we get

m2 =

r t 2
0
24 

rt0m

4

systems which are in thermal but not chemical equilibrium. (as we do not have a chemical potential,
chemical equilibrium is ill dened concept.) the fugacity then parametrises the deviation from chemical
equilibrium.

(cid:20) 1

2

(1  r2)1/2

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

127

 r(cid:18)1  ln(cid:18) m
+ o(ln t0) ,

2t0(cid:19)(cid:19)  (1  r2)1/2 arcsin(r)(cid:21)

(4.70)

where we have set r = ln()t0/m. the corresponding expansion of the pressure (4.67)
reads

p(t0) =

3

2t 4
0
90
1

2 t 3
0 r 
2(cid:18)1 
r
2 +

+ m(3)
3(cid:0)1  r2(cid:1)
9(cid:0)1  r2(cid:1)(cid:16)  r3 + 3  3(cid:0)1  r2(cid:1)

(cid:0)1  2r2(cid:1)  m3t0
0 m2
t 2
24
2t0(cid:19)(cid:19)
r2(cid:19)(cid:18)1  2 ln(cid:18) m
2
3
2 (cid:17) arcsin(r)i

42

1

 (cid:20)

+

2

(m2)2

2r

+ o(ln t0) .

(4.71)

where (3)  1.202. note that for  = 1 we regain the equilibrium expansion (4.38). the
corresponding plot of p as a function of t0 and  is depicted in fig.4.5.
in passing it may be mentioned that the expansion (4.71) is mathematically justiable only
for   er/24 r  1.

4.5 conclusions

in order to get a workable recipe for nonequilibrium pressure jaynesgibbs principle of

maximal entropy, the dysonschwinger equations, and the hydrostatic pressure. the basic

steps are as follows.

to nd quantitative results for pressure one needs to know the explicit form of the

greens functions involved. these may be nd if we solve the dysonschwinger equations.

the corresponding solutions are unique provided we specify the density matrix  (the

construction of  is one of the cornerstones of our approach, and we tackled this problem

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

128

p[(gev)4]

100000

50000

0

0.9

0.8

0.7



200
200

400
400

t0[gev]

600
600

800
800

0.6

figure 4.5: behaviour of the pressure (4.67) as a function of  and t0 at mr = 100mev.

using the jaynesgibbs principle of maximal entropy). with  at our disposal we showed

how to formulate the generalised kubomartinschwinger (kms) boundary conditions.

to show how the outlined method works we have illustrated the whole procedure on

an exactly solvable model, namely o(n) 4 theory in the largen limit. this model is

suciently simple yet complex enough to serve as an illustration of basic characteristics

of the presented method in contrast to other ones in use. in order to nd the constraint

conditions we have considered two gedanken experiments in which the system in question

was prepared in such a way that only low frequence modes departed from the strict equilib-

rium behaviour. such processes can be found, for example, in ionised atmosphere, in laser

stimulated plasma or in hot fusion. in both alluded gedanken experiments we were able

to work out the hydrostatic pressure exactly. furthermore, after identifying a tempera-

chapter 4. pressure in outofequilibrium media

129

ture parameter (virtually temperature of high modes) we carried out the corresponding

hightemperature expansions.

as it was discussed, one of the main advantages of the jaynesgibbs construction is

that one starts with the (physical) constraints (i.e. parameters which are really controlled

and measured in experiments). these constraints directly determine the density matrix and

hence the generalised kms conditions for the dysonschwinger equations. this contrasts

with the usual approaches where the density matrix is treated as the primary object. in

these cases it is necessary to solve the von neumannliouville equation. this is usually

circumvent using either variational methods [100,103] with several trial s or reformulating

the problem in terms of the quantum transport equations for wigners functions [23]. it

is, however, well known that the inclusion of constraints into transport equations is a

very delicate and rather complicated task (the same is basically true about the variational

methods) [23, 114].

chapter 5

summary and outlooks

in this dissertation we have explored various aspects of equilibrium and nonequilibrium

quantum eld theory.

in chapter 2 we dealt with certain aspects of infrared eects in nitetemperature qft.

it is well known [34, 36] that these eects are far more subtle at nite temperature than

at t = 0. the latter is ascribed to the fact that there is no nitetemperature bloch

nordsieck mechanism [53, 115] at our disposal. intuitively, however, one might expect that

if thermal qft is a well posed theory, no infrared divergences should be present. this point

was extensively studied on particles that decay and scatter inside a plasma (or heat bath).

as a byproduct we proposed an easy mathematical formalism allowing one to calculate

the plasma particle number spectrum formed when a particle(s) decays (scatter) within

the plasma. this formalism which is based on the largesttime equation and the dyson

schwinger equations, is embodied in a oneline modication to the corresponding thermal

cut diagrams. such diagrams arise naturally when the imaginary part of a green function

is computed, and the whole calculations are immensely simplied by the observation that

the thermal cut diagrams are virtually the same as the kobessemeno diagrams in the

keldysh formalism.

130

chapter 5. summary and outlooks

131

the vital part of chapter 2 was dedicated to the study of the modications which must

be made in various quantum eld contexts (scalar elds, spinor elds and gauge elds in

temporal gauge). it was found that the modied propagators have an easy interpretation

in terms of emission, absorption and uctuation of the plasma particles. to demonstrate

how the method works, we used various heat baths (photon, and electronphoton) in which

two uncharged scalar particles scatter into a pair of charged particles. we calculated the

leading  behaviour for the resulting changes in the plasma particles number spectra. we

also found that the energy density dn/d is nite as  tends to zero.

in chapter 3 we have turned our attention to pressure. pressure is undoubtedly one of

the important parameters characterising quantum media at nite temperature. an exten-

sion of the pressure calculations to oequilibrium systems should enhance our predicative

ability in such areas as (realistic) phase transitions, early universe cosmology or hot fu-

sion dynamics. unfortunately, the standard approaches based on the partition function

do not allow such an extension because there is no such thing as the grandcanonical po-

tential away from equilibrium. we considered an alternative approach based on the, so

called, hydrostatic pressure. as a warming up exercise we started with thermal equilib-

rium. the whole procedure was then illustrated on a toy model (4 theory with o(n)

internal symmetry in the largen limit). the result obtained matches that found in [61]

for the thermodynamic pressure. (whilst these two pressures agree in equilibrium , there

is no thermodynamic pressure out of equilibrium.)

we took advantage to probe various mathematical techniques (composite operators

renormalisation, dysonschwinger diagrammatic equations, nite temperature coupling

renormalisation, mellin transform) which are indispensable in calculations of the hydro-

static pressure (most of them also being applicable to nonequilibrium as well). one of the

chapter 5. summary and outlooks

132

key results obtained was the prescription for the renormalised pressure (eqs.(3.36), (4.40)

and (4.37)). this was achieved by means of the zimmerman forest formula.

the model in question has the undeniable merit of being exactly solvable. in particular,

one could nd the pressure by means of a nonperturbative treatment. this is because

of the fact that the largen limit eliminates nasty classes of diagrams in the dyson

schwinger expansions. the surviving class of diagrams (superdaisy diagrams) could be

exactly resumed because the (thermal) proper selfenergy  as well as the renormalised

coupling constant r were momentum independent. the resulting expression for the pres-

sure obtained was then in a suitable form which allowed us to take advantage of the mellin

transform technique, and we were able to evaluate the pressure in d = 4 (both for massive

and massless elds) to all orders in the hightemperature expansion.

as we have already mentioned, there are various motivations to be interested in the non

equilibrium pressure. one of them is based on the belief that the pressure (as an easily

measurable parameter) should exhibit a discontinuity in its derivative(s) when a local phase

transition occurs. this has been observed in solid state physics and uid dynamics and it

may play a central role in, for example, detection of the quarkgluon plasma or in various

baryogenesis scenarios.

in chapter 4 we approached the problem of pressure in a nonequilibrium quantum

plasma by extending the notion of the hydrostatic pressure to systems out of equilibrium.
on the equilibrium level the hydrostatic pressure; i.e. p =  1
ii (here  is the energy
momentum tensor of a system in question), has a well dened microscopic picture, which can

3hi

be carried over to an oequilibrium as we have showed in chapter 3. unlike in equilibrium,

the nonequilibrium expectation value is sensitive to the particular choice of the energy

momentum tensor (see chapter 3), though fortunately in translationally invariant media

chapter 5. summary and outlooks

133

this sensitivity is not relevant. our strategy for the calculation of pressure was simple. to

nd quantitative results for pressure one needs to know the explicit form of the greens

functions involved. these may be found if we solve the corresponding dysonschwinger

equations. the solution is unique provided we specify the density matrix , and hence the

generalised kms conditions. in order to construct the density matrix we invoke the jaynes

gibbs principle of maximal entropy. the jaynesgibbs principle is basically the bayesian

inference about the most probable density matrix . this is based on the maximalisation of

the shannon (or information) entropy, subject to the prior knowledge which one has about

the system (usually specied at some initial time ti).

to show how the outlined method works we have illustrated the whole method on our

favoured o(n) 4 theory in the largen limit. in order to specify the initialtime con-

straints we have considered two gedanken experiments in which the system in question was

prepared in such a way that only low frequency modes departed from the strict equilib-

rium behaviour. such processes can be found, for example, in ionised atmosphere, in laser

stimulated plasma or in hot fusion heated up by ultrasound waves. furthermore, after

identifying a temperature parameter (virtually the temperature of the high modes) we

carried out the corresponding hightemperature expansions. the leading hightemperature

coecients coincided to a good approximation with the stefanboltzmann constant which is

precisely what one would expect: at high temperature particles do no feel nonequilibrium

background and consequently their distribution approaches the equilibrium one.

the next logical step in our investigation would be to calculate the pressure in a non

equilibrium, nontranslationally invariant medium. in contrast to the previous situation,

one is confronted now with two conceptual diculties. as we have shown in section 4.4.2, in

order to get the renormalised pressure one has to consistently use the renormalised energy

chapter 5. summary and outlooks

134

momentum tensor ( is a composite operator). unfortunately there are innitely many

renormalised energymomentum tensors (generated from each other via paulis transfor-

mation), and these give rise to dierent pressures. the choice of the correct  is then

crucial for the next investigation. (as we discussed in sections 3.2 and 4.4, in translation-

ally invariant media pressure does not depend on a particular form of .) our future

strategy is based on the observation that because the pressure is an observable, one should

obviously work with an energymomentum tensor which is an observable as well (or the

corresponding hermitian operator). we propose to use the belinfante energymomentum

tensor. the fact that the physical signicance of the belinfante tensor (both in classical and

quantum systems) is greater than that of other energymomentum tensors was pointed out

successively by belinfante [116], rosenfeld [117] and jackiw [68]. in scalar qft the belin-

fante energy-momentum tensor coincides with the, so called, improved energymomentum

tensor [68]. the generic form of the improved energymomentum tensor for the o(n) 4

theory was derived in section 3.2 eq.(3.33). because the corresponding  function is ex-

actly solvable in thelarge n limit [13] we expect that constant c(r; d) is exactly solvable

as well, and consequently the improved energymomentum tensor can be written in closed

form.

the second problem to be solved is connected with the fact that the corresponding

dysonschwinger equations are far more involved than in the translationally invariant case.

even, for the o(n) 4 theory in the largen limit the kadanobaym are not any more

hyperbolic equations. this fact, among others, complicates the renormalisation program

(one cannot use the momentum space renormalisation). for this purpose we intend to resort

to dierential renormalisation [118]. solving the renormalised kadanobaym equations

(at least numerically) is the next step in our study.

appendix a

finitetemperature dysonschwinger
equations

a.1 functional formalism

eq.(2.18) gives us an alternative denition of wicks theorem in terms of the functional

derivation



(x) . we refer to eq.(2.18) as the dysonschwinger equation because the

classical t = 0 dysonschwinger equations are implied by it (see appendix a.3). let us

rst show that (2.18) is consistent with wicks theorem (2.16)(2.17). to be specic, let

us consider an ensemble of noninteracting particles in thermodynamical equilibrium. in

order to keep the work transparent, we shall suppress all the internal indices. there is no

diculty whatsoever in reintroducing the necessary details. let us rst realize that for any

(well behaved) functional the following taylors expansion holds [42]

x[] =xn z dx1 . . .z dxnn(x1 . . . xn)(x1) . . . (xn) ,

(a.1)

the same is true if  is an operator instead. in the latter case the n(. . .) are not gen-

erally symmetric in the xs 1. when fermi elds are involved, we might, for the sake of

1if x = x[, ], the n may also contain derivations working on the various elds.

135

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

136

compactness, include in the argument of  the space-time coordinate, the dirac index, and

a discrete index which distinguishes  from . in the latter case r dx pr dx, where

summation runs over the discrete indices. with this convention, the expansion (a.1) holds

even for the fermi elds. an extension of (a.1) to the case where dierent elds are present

is natural. particularly important is the case when  is a eld in the interaction picture,

using wicks theorem and decomposition (a.1) one can then write

n(x1 . . . xn)

hg[](x)f []i =

= xm,n(cid:18)z dx(cid:19)n(cid:18)z dy(cid:19)m
= xn (cid:18)z dx(cid:19)n
+ xm (cid:18)z dy(cid:19)m
with (cid:0)r dx(cid:1)n

m(y1 . . . ym)

n

n(x1 . . . xn)m(y1 . . . ym)*  n
(xk)! (x)
yk
(xk)f []+
(1)nlh(xl)(x)i* n
xl
yk6=l
(yk)+ .
(1)l1h(x)(xl)i*g[]
yk6=l
xl

m

m

m

yk

(yk)+

(a.2)

= r dx1 . . .r dxn. the  stands for fermions and + for bosons. on the

other hand, using the formal prescriptions (2.19) and (2.21) for




(x) one can read


 f []

(z)+ =
m(y1 . . . ym)z dzh(x)(z)i

z dzh(x)(z)i*g[]
= xm (cid:18)z dy(cid:19)m
= xm (cid:18)z dy(cid:19)m
similar expression holds for r dzh(x)(z)i(cid:28) g[]

m(y1 . . . ym)

xl

m

exactly the same sort of arguments leads to

m

xl

(1)l1(z  yl)*g[]
(yk)+ .

m

yk6=l

(1)l1h(x)(yl)i*g[]

(yk)+

m

yk6=l

(a.3)




(z) f [](cid:29). putting latter two together we

get precisely (a.2). this conrms the validity of (2.18). it is easy to persuade oneself that

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

137

 f []

(z)+

h(x)f []i =z dzh(x)(z)i* 
ht ((x)f [])i =z dzht ((x)(z))i*t   
(z)!+
hg[]t ((x)f [])i =z dzht ((x)(z))i*g[]t  

 f []

 f []

(z)!+ +

+z dzh(z)(x)i* g[]

(z) t (f [])+ ,



etc.

(a.4)

(a.5)

(a.6)

with t being either the chronological or antichronological time ordering symbol. at
(x) directly follows that
this stage it is important to realize that from the denition of







(x) ;

[




(y) ] = 0 (  holds for bosons and + for fermions). indeed,


2f []

(x)(y)

= xn=2xi<j (cid:18)z dx(cid:19)n2
 n(x1 . . .

y . . .

xj

xi

(n(x1 . . .

xi

x . . .

xj

y . . . xn) 

x . . . xn))(1)i+j

(xm) = 


2f []

(y)(x)

.

n

ym6=i,j

similarly [




(x) ;




(y) ] = 0. analogously we might prove


2

f []

(x)(y)


2f []

(x)(y)

,

=

and


2(f []g[])
(x)(y)

=


2

f []

(x)(y)

g[] + (1)p f []


(x)


 g[]
(y)

(a.7)

(a.8)

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

138

+

f []

(y)


 g[]
(x)

+ f []


2g[]

(x)(y)

.

(a.9)

the p is 0 for bosons and 1 for fermions. with (2.18) and (a.4)(a.6) one can easily

construct more complicated expectation values. for example, using (2.18) and (a.4) we get

h(x)(y)f []i =
= z dz1dz2
 * 

2

(h(x)(z1)ih(y)(z2)i + (1)ph(x)(z2)ih(y)(z1)i)
2f []

(z1)(z2)+ + h(x)(y)ihf []i .

similarly, using (2.18) and (anti)commutativity of the arrowed



(x) , we get

2

hg[](x)(y)f []i =
= z dz1dz2
 *g[]
+ z dz1dz2
 * g[]


2

(z1)(z2)

f []+


2f []

(h(x)(z1)ih(y)(z2)i + (1)ph(x)(z2)ih(y)(z1)i)
(z1)(z2)+
(h(z1)(x)ih(z2)(y)i + (1)ph(z2)(x)ih(z1)(y)i)

2

+ z dz1dz2(h(z1)(x)ih(y)(z2)i + (1)ph(x)(z2)ih(z1)(y)i)
 * g[]

(z2)+ + h(x)(y)ihg[]f []i .


(z1)


 f []

(a.10)

(a.11)

we could proceed further having still higher powers of elds and variations. however, there

is a quite interesting generalisation in case when we have (anti)time ordered operators.

let us have f [] = t (f []), in this case

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

139

n

hf []i = xn (cid:18)z dx(cid:19)n

(xi)i

yi=1
n(. . .)ht (
= xn=1(cid:18)z dx(cid:19)n n(. . .)
n xi,j
ym6=i,j
pht ((xi)(xj))iht (
= z dz1dz2ht ((z1)(z2))i* 
(z2)(z1)+ + hf [0]i ,

2f []

n

(xm))i + 0(. . .)

(a.12)

where f [] diers from f [] in the replacement n(. . .)  n(...)
comparison with (a.4)(a.11), the 0(. . .) (i.e. the pure t = 0 contribution) does matter

(n starts from 1 !). in

n

here. note that 0(. . .) generally involves nonheatbath elds with corresponding space-

time integrations. similar extension is true if f [] = tc(f []), where tc is the time path
ordering symbol. in that case

hf []i = xn (cid:18)zc

dx(cid:19)n

n

n(. . .)htc(

(xp))i
dz1dz2htc((z1)(z2))i* 
(z2)(z1)+

2f []

yp=1

= zc
+ hf [0]i ,
with2 rc dx = rc dtrv dx and (x)

product of elds has an obvious form

(a.13)

(y) = c(x  y) . wicks theorem for the tcoriented

htc((x1) . . . (x2n))i =xj

j6=i

phtc((xi)(xj))i htc(yk6=i;j

(xk))i .

(a.14)

2a contour -function c (x  y) is dened as rc dzc(z  z



)f (z) = f (z



), see [51, 119].

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

140

this can be directly derived from wicks theorem (2.17), realizing that

tc((x1) . . . (xm)) =xp

p c(tp1, . . . , tpm)(xp1) . . . (xpm) ,

(a.15)

where p refers to the permutation of the indices and c(t1, . . . , tm) being a contour step

function [73] dened as

c(t1, . . . , tm) =(cid:26) 1 (t1, . . . , tm are tc-oriented along c)

0 (otherwise)

so for example (a.6) may be written as

htc((x)f [])i =zc

dz htc((x)(z))i*tc  

 f []

(z) !+ .

(a.16)

(a.17)

particularly important is the keldyshschwinger path [34, 73, 120] (see fig.3.3). in the

latter case

2f []

dz1dz2ht ((z1)(z2))i* 
dz1dz2ht ((z1)(z2))i* 
dz2h(z1)(z2)i* 
dz1zc1

(z2)(z1)+
(z2)(z1)+
(z2)(z1)+

hf []i = zc1
+ zc2
+ 2zc2
+ hf [0]i .

2f []

2f []

(a.18)

application to the product g[]f [] with f [] = tc1(f []) and g[] = tc2(g[]) is
straightforward and reads

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

141

hg[]f []i = z dz1dz2ht ((z1)(z2))i*

(z2)(z1)

+ z dz1dz2ht ((z1)(z2))i* g[]
+ 2z dz1dz2h(z1)(z2)i* g[]


(z1)

+ hg[0]f [0]i ,

g[]


2


2f []

f [] +
(z2)(z1) +
(z2) +


 f []

(a.19)

where the overlining indicates that we work with n(...)m(...)

n+m

instead of n(. . .)m(. . .), we

dz to r dzrc1
have also abbreviated rc1
(a.19) is (x  y) rather than c(x  y).

dz. we should also emphasise that (x)

(y) used in

in eq.(2.36) it has been used the inverted version of (a.19), namely



h(g[]f [])


2

2

(z2)(z1)

ht ((z1)(z2))i* g[]
i = z dz1dz2
ht ((z1)(z2))i*g[]
+ z dz1dz2
+ z dz1dz2h(z1)(z2i* g[]

f []+
(z2)(z1)+
(z2)+ ,


(z1)


2f []


 f []

2

(a.20)

here (g[]f []) has the coecients n(. . .)m(. . .) (n+m)

2

instead of n(. . .)m(. . .). note,

that the 0(. . .)0(. . .) does not contributes and thus we do not have any pure t = 0

contributions. eq.(a.20) has a natural interpretation. whilst the lhs tells us, that from
each thermal diagram (constructed out of hg[]f []i) with n+m
lines we must take n + m identical copies, the rhs says, that this is virtually because we

internal heatbath particle

2

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

142

sum over all possible distributions of one heat-bath particle line inside of the given diagram.

the pictorial expression of (a.20) is depicted in fig.a.1 .

 (number of lines)

=



i j
i=j/

xi

xj

+



i j
i=j/

yi

yj

xi

yj

+



i j

figure a.1: diagrammatic equivalent of eq.(a.20). the cut separates areas constructed out of
f [] and g[].

a.2 graphical formalism

(this section is partially based on refs. [72, 121].)

in chapter 3 we heavily used a graphical representation of the dysonschwinger equations.

in this section we provide a short derivation of such a representation and in the section to

follow we perform a comparison with the functional dysonschwinger equations of section

2 and appendix a.1.

the dysonschwinger equations were originally constructed [122, 123] with the motiva-

tion that they could provide some information about the complete greens functions outside

the scope of perturbative theory. the basic philosophy is to directly use the equations of

motion in order to construct the hierarchy of (integral) equations for full greens functions.

the usefulness of these equations is usually conned to the cases where some approximation

(truncation) is available in order to bring them into manageable form. in this appendix we

aim to derive the nitetemperature dysonschwinger equations using the more intuitive

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

143

pathintegral formalism. the alternative derivation in the nonequilibrium context (based

purely on operatorial approach) is discussed in section 4.1.1.

let us start with the (t 6= 0) generating functional of greens functions z[j] (the

partition functions with an external source j)

z[t ] =z d exp{i(s[; t ] +zc
s[; t ] =zc

d4x l(x) .

d4x j(x)(x))}

(a.21)

hererc d4x =rc dx0rv d3x with the subscript c indicating that the time runs along some

contour in the complex plane. in the realtime formalism, which we adopt throughout, the

most natural version is the so called keldyshschwinger one [34,36], which is represented by

the contour in fig.3.3. within the pathintegral the cnumber elds are further restricted

by the periodic boundary condition (kms condition) [34, 36, 38] which for bosonic elds

reads:

(ti  i, x) = (ti, x) .

(a.22)

the zero temperature generating functional may be recovered from (a.21) if we integrate

over the closetime path (no vertical parts) and omit the kms condition (a.22). now, the

lhs of (a.21) is independent of , thus particularly it is invariant under innitesimal point

transformation

where f is an arbitrary ( independent) function which fulls the periodic boundary con-

(x)  (x) + f (x) ,

(a.23)

ditions

f (ti  i, x) = f (ti, x) .

(a.24)

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

144

from (a.23) is obvious that the corresponding functional jacobian is 1, i.e., d = d.
this immediately implies that

z[j] = z d exp(cid:26)i(s[  f ] +zc

d4x j(x)(x)  zc

d4x j(x)f (x))(cid:27)

= iz d(cid:26)zc

d4x(cid:18) s



(x) + j(x)(cid:19) f (x)(cid:27) exp(is[] + izc

j) + o(2)

+ z[j] ,

 0 = z d(cid:26)zc

d4x(cid:18) s



(x) + j(x)(cid:19) f (x)(cid:27) exp(is[] + izc

j) .

(a.25)

as (a.25) is true for any f (. . .) fullling the condition (a.24) one may write

0 = zc
0 = (cid:28) s[h]

d4x(cid:28) s[h ]

(x) + j(x)(cid:29) f (x) ,
 (cid:20)
(x) + j(x)(cid:29) =(cid:18) s







ij(x)(cid:21) + j(x)(cid:19) z[j] .

(a.26)

employing the commutation relation: i 
more appropriate form, namely

j z = z(  i 

j ), we may recast (a.26) into

 j(x) =

s

 (cid:20)(x)  i



j(x)(cid:21) i1 =

s

 (cid:20)(x) + izc

d4z dc(x, z)



(z)(cid:21) i1 .

(a.27)

so, for instance, for  4 theory we have

3! (cid:8)((x))3 + i3(x) dc

(x, y) dc

(x, w) (3) (y, w, z) dc

(x, x)

 j(x) = (2 + m2

0)(x) 
z d4y d4w d4z dc
0)(x) 
0)(x) +

= (2 + m2
= (2 + m2

0

0

0
3!

3! (cid:8)((x))3 + i3(x) dc

d(3)

(x, x, x) ,

(z, x)(cid:27)
(x, x)  dc (3)

(x, x, x)(cid:9)

(a.28)

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

145

(no sum over !)3 or, using identity; (2x + m2

0) d

f (x, y) = (3)(x y), we may invert

the dierential operator and write equivalently

z d4y j(y) d

f (y, x) = (x) +

0

3! z d4y d

f (x, y) d(3)

(y, y, y).

(a.29)

eq.(a.29) has the following graphical representation

x


      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      


x


p=1,2

j



x
 

1

6p=1,2





      

       

       

      

       

       

      

       

       

      

       

       

      

       

       

      

       

       




where the hatched blob refers to the (full) 1point amputated greens function, the dotted

blob refers to the (full) 3point amputated greens function, the cross denotes the source

j, while the heavy dot without coordinate indicates that the vertex must be integrated over

all possible positions. the corresponding graphical representation in terms of the connected

greens functions reads (c.f. eq.(a.28))

3in (a.28) we have implicitly used the identities;

1
z

nz

nw

j(x1) . . . j(xn)

j(x1) . . . j(xn)
(x)
j(y)
 dc

= dc(x, y) ;
= z dy4

(x, y)
 (z)

= (1)n+1i d(n)(x1, . . . , xn)
= (1)n+1 dc (n)(x1, . . . , xn)

n

(x1) . . . (xn)

= (n)(x1 . . . xn)

1 dy4
2

dc

(x, y1)(3) (y1, y2, z) dc

(y2, y) .

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

146

x


       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       


       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       


x


p

j



i

2p

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    


x


      
     


    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    




    

    

x
    

    

    
      
    



    

    

    

    




    

    

    

    


    

    

    

    


    

    

    

    


1

6p

1

6p,,,

x




    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    

    






     

     

     

     

     




here the doublehatched blob describe the 3point vertex function and the hatched blobs

refer, as before, to the connected (truncated) greens functions.

to see how to obtain the corresponding dysonschwinger equations for the 2point

(connected) greens functions, let us perform in eq.(a.27) (or, for simplicitys sake, in

eq.(a.28)) variation w.r.t. j(y). this directly gives us

(2x + m2

0) dc

(x, y) 

0
3!

d(4)

(x, x, x, y) +

0i
3!

(y) d(3)

(x, x, x) = (3)(x  y) ,

or, inverting the dierential operator, we may equivalently write

dc
(x, y) = df (x, y) 
+

0

3! z d4z d 
3! z d4z d 

0i

f (x, z) d(4)

(z, z, z, y)

f (x, z) d(3)

(z, z, z) (y) .

(a.30)

eq.(a.30) is graphically represented as follows

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

147

x


       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       

       


y


x


y


1

6p=1,2

i

6p=1,2

x


x






y


      


    

    

    

    

    


y


this may be reformulated purely in terms of the connected greens functions and the

vertex functions, indeed, performing variation w.r.t. j(y) in rst two lines in eq.(a.28),

and inverting the dierential operator as before we obtain

     


      


         


x


       

       

       

       

       

       


y


x


x


y


 1
2p

    

    

    

    


    

    

    

    


     

     

     

     

     


     

     

     

     

     


             


    
    

    

    


 y




   

   

   


x


               


   

   

   

   


y




 1
2p

      

      

      

      


      

      

1


3


2

    

    

    


    

    

    


    

    

    


x


    

              

    

    



4


1

x


+ 1

6pi

y



3

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      



2


5

       

       

       

       

       

       

       



4

y


 i
2pi

x


+ 1

2pi


1

    

    

    

    



5

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

     

      

      

      

      

      


      

7


6


3

    

    

    

    



2

      

      

      

      

      

      



4
    

    

    

    


y


note that if the symmetry is unbroken (i.e. when m2

0 > 0) then after setting j = 0 the

second, fourth and sixth term on the rhs will vanish.

it is important to mention that similarly as for the connected greens functions we may

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

148

write the dysonschwinger equations for the vertex functions. those may be obtained

directly from eq.(a.27) provided that one performs the corresponding number of variations

w.r.t. . so, for instance, for the 4 theory the 1point vertex function (1)

 (x) = 

(x) =

j(x) is graphically represented (c.f. eq.(a.28)) as

     

     

     

     


    

    

    

    

    


     

     

     

     

     


     

    

     

    

     

    

     

    

     


x


    

    

    

    




1
6

x



+

1
2

x



     

     

     

     


x


       

       

       

       

       

       

       


x


+ 1

6p

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      








       

       

       

       

       

       

       


here the slash stands for the inverse free thermal propagator. particularly important ex-

amples are the 2 and 4point vertex functions (2) and (4), respectively, which are indis-

pensable in the renormalisation prescription (see chapter 3). in the case of the o(n) 4

in the largen limit the corresponding graphical representations were explicitly calculated

in chapter 3 (see sections 3.3.13.3.2).

a.3 comparison

in order to nd a link between the previous two approaches, let us start with the full n

point greens function at t = 0. it is well known that in this case, the full greens function

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

149

may be expressed by means of the gellmann and low formula [53, 70, 115, 121]

h0|t (h (x1) . . . h(xn))|0i = d0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)t (cid:16)(x1) . . . (xn)eir d4xli (x)(cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(cid:10)0(cid:12)(cid:12)t (cid:0)eir d4xli (x)(cid:1)(cid:12)(cid:12) 0(cid:11)

0e

,

(a.31)

which may be equivalently rewritten in the schwinger form [124] as

h0|t (h (x1) . . . h (xn))|0i =d0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)tc(cid:16)(x1) . . . (xn)eirc d4xli (x)(cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

0e ,

(a.32)

where h is a eld operator in the heisenberg picture, while  and li, are operators
in the interaction picture, the subindex c denotes the schwingerkeldysh time contour.

the schwinger (but not the gellmann and low!) formula can be directly extended to

nite temperature as we have mentioned in chapters 2 and 4, the only dierence is that

h0| . . .|0i  h. . .i. the following results will be equally valid for both t = 0 and t 6= 0
provided we take into account corresponding expectation values. in order to be concise,

we shall restrict ourselves to bosonic elds. the necessary extension to fermions and gauge

elds is straightforward.

for one eld h in the presence of an external resource j(x) we have

(x) = hh(x)i =dtc(cid:16)(x)eirc d4x(li (x)+j(x)(x))(cid:17)e .

(a.33)

setting in (a.17) f [] = eirc d4x(li (x)+j(x)(x)), we get

hh(x)i +zc

d4z df (x, z)(cid:28)tc(cid:18)rc d4yli(y)

(z)

(cid:19)h(cid:29) = zc

d4z df (x, z)j(z) ,

(a.34)

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

150

where i df (x, z) = htc((x)(z))i. for instance, for the 4 theory (li =  i0
have

4! 4) we

hh(x)i 

0

3! zc

d4z df (x, z)h3

h (z)i = zc

d4z df (x, z)j(z) ,

(a.35)

or in the thermalindex notation; , , ,  = {1, 2},

(x) +

0

3! z d4z d

f (x, z) d(3)

(z, z, z) = z d4z d

f (x, z)j(z) .

(a.36)

in (a.36) we can recognise the dysonschwinger equation (a.29) for the 4 theory from

the previous section.

to get further equations in an innite tower of couplet integral equations we may perform

successive variations in (a.35) with respect to j(y), or we may alternatively set in (a.17)
f [] = (y) eirc d4x (li (x)+j(x)(x)). in both cases we obtain for 4 theory the following

identity

d(x, y) = d

f (x, y) 

f (x, z) (3) htc(3

h (z)h (y))i

i0

3! z d4z d
+ iz d4z d
3! z d4z d
3! z d4z d

i0

0

f (x, z) j(z) (y)

f (x, z) d(4) 

 (z, z, z, y)

 dc (x, y) = d

f (x, y) 
+

f (x, z) d(3)

(z, z, z) (y) .

(a.37)

note that (a.37) precisely coincides with the dysonschwinger equation (a.30) derived in

the previous section.

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

151

let us mention one more point in the connection with eq.(a.37). if, instead of setting

f [] = (y)eirc d4x (li (x)+j(x)(x)), as we have done in the previous case, we would set
g[] = 1, f [] = eirc d4x(li (x)+j(x)(x)) in (a.10) or (a.11), we would get somewhat dierent

identity, namely

d(x, y) = d

f (x, y) z d4z1d4z2 d

f (x, z1)(3)

 (cid:28)tc(cid:18)2(irc d4x(li(x) + j(x)(x)))h

(z1)(z2)

(cid:19)(cid:29)

(3) d

f (z2, y) , (a.38)

which in the case of 4 theory eq.(a.38) may be explicitly written as

i0

2 z d4z1 d
f (x, z1)(3) htc(3

f (x, z1)(3)(cid:10)2

h(z1)3

h (z1)(cid:11) (3) d
h (z2))i (3) d

f (z1, y)

f (z2, y)

d(x, y) = d

2
0

f (x, y) 
(3!)2 z d4z1d4z2 d

z d4z1d4z2 d

f (x, z1) j(z1) d

f (z2, y) j(z2) .

(a.39)

it is, however, not complicated to persuade oneself that (a.39) is equivalent to (a.37).

indeed, using (a.36) we get the desired equality (a.37). in (a.38) we can recognise the

dyson equation with dtc(cid:16) 2(ir d4x(li (x)+j(x)(x)))h

(z1)(z2)

(cid:17)e being the selfenergy [41] i (z1, z2).

introducing a proper selfenergy , which is a selfenergy that cannot be separated into

two pieces by cutting a single line (i.e. in the matrix form  =  + df  + . . .) the series

(a.38) can be summed formally to yield

d(x, y) = d

f (x, y) +z d4z1d4z2 d

f (x, z1)(i(z1, z2))d(z2, y) ,

appendix a. finitetemperature dysonschwinger equations

152

which is the usual form of the (thermal) dyson equation (c.f. equation (3.43)). so the second

in the hierarchy of the dysonschwinger equations is nothing but the dyson equation for

the full twopoint greens function. analogous procedure can be repeated for the dyson

schwinger equations involving the higherpoint green functions. as a result we can see

then that the usual dysonschwinger equations emerge naturally as a special subclass of

identities derived in appendix a.1. another subclass of identities which may be derived

from the functional formalism of appendix a.1 are thermal wards identities. for example,

for the o(n) 4 theory we immediately get from (a.10) that d

a a(x, y) = d
d
a b (x, y) = 0 if a 6= b. we, however, do not intend to dwell on this point more.
we thus nd that our functional formalism derived in appendix a.1 provides a unify-

b b (x, y) and

ing framework embracing such diverse concepts as wicks theorem, the dysonschwinger

equations and wards identities.

appendix b

surface term in eq.(4.69)

in this appendix we give some details of the derivation of eq.(3.69). we particularly show

that the surface integrals arisen during the transition from (3.68) to (3.69) mutually cancel

among themselves. as usual, the integrals will be evaluated for integer values of d and

corresponding results then analytically continued to a desired (generally complex) d.

the key quantity in question is

+



1

2 z
2 z

1

ddq

(2)d1(cid:18) 2q2
(2)d1(cid:18) 2q2

(d  1)(cid:19) (q0)
eq0  1
(d  1)(cid:19) +(q2  m2

ddq

r(0)).

(q2  m2

r(t ))

(b.1)

(b.1) = nt (m2

+ lim
r
 lim
r

1

r(t ))  n (m2
2(d  1)z
2(d  1)z

1

r(0))
dq0

(2)d1 zsd2
(2)d1 zsd2

dq0

r

r

ds q (q2  m2

r(t )) (q0) (cid:18)

2

eq0  1

+ 1(cid:19)

ds q (q2  m2

r(0)) (q0).

(b.2)

as usual, ab =pd1

i=1 aibi and sd2

r

is a (d2)-sphere with the radius r. the expressions

153

appendix b. surface term in eq.(4.69)

154

for nt and n are done by (3.70).

with the relation (b.2) we can show that the surface terms cancel in the large r limit.

let us rst observe that

lim

r z

= lim
r

= lim
r

r

d1

2

dq0

2 rd1

(2)d1 zsd2
z
(cid:0) d1
2 (cid:1)
2 (cid:1)z 
r2+m2
2d2(cid:0) d1

2 rd1

1d



r(t ))

ds q (q2  m2
dq0

(2)d1 (q2

0  r2  m2

2(q0)
eq0  1
r(t ))

2(q0)
eq0  1

dq0

2

eq0  1

= 0.

(b.3)

r(t )

in 2-nd line we have exploited gausss theorem and in the last line we have used lhopitals

rule as the expression is in the indeterminate form 0/0. the remaining surface terms in

(b.2) read

lim

rz

= lim
r

r

1d

dq0

(2)d1 zsd2
ds q (cid:8)(q2  m2
(z 
r(t ) z 
r2+m2
2d2(cid:0) d1
2 (cid:1)

2 rd1



r(t ))  (q2  m2
r(0)) dq0 = 0.

r2+m2

r(0))(cid:9) (q0)

(b.4)

the last identity follows either by applying lhospitals rule or by a simple transformation

of variables which renders both integrals inside of {. . .} equal. expressions on the last lines
in (b.3) and (b.4) can be clearly (singlevaluedly) continued to the region red > 1 as they

are analytic there. we thus end up with the statement that

(b.1) = nt (m2

r(t ))  n (m2

r(0)).

appendix c

hightemperature expansion of the
gap equation

in this appendix we shall derive the hightemperature expansion of the mass shift m2(t )

in the case when elds a are massive (i.e. m2

r(0) 6= 0).

consider eqs.(3.40) and (3.49). if we combine them together, we get easily the following

transcendental equation for m2(t )

m2(t ) = 0(cid:26)m(m2

r(t ))  m(m2

r(0)) +

1
2

i0(m2

r(0) + m2(t ))(cid:27) .

(c.1)

here m and i0 are done by (3.42) and (3.78), respectively.

now, both 0 and m are divergent in d = 4.

if we reexpress 0 in terms of r,

divergences must cancel, as m2(t ) is nite in d = 4. the latter can be easily seen if we

taylor expand m, i.e.

m(m2

r(t )) = m(m2

r(0)) + m2(t ) m(m2

r(0)) + m(m2

r(0); m2(t )).

(c.2)

obviously, m is nite in d = 4 as m is quadratically divergent. inserting (c.2) to (c.1)
and employing eq.(3.55) we get

155

appendix c. hightemperature expansion of the gap equation 156

m2(t ) = r(cid:26) m(m2

r(0); m2(t )) +

i0(m2

1
2

r(0) + m2(t ))(cid:27) .

(c.3)

this is sometimes referred to as the renormalised gap equation. in order to determine m
we must go back to (c.2). from the former we read o that

m(m2

r(t ); m2(t ))

r(0))

2 1  m2(t )(

d

d

d

1

d4=

r(0))

r(0))  m2(t ) m(m2
2 1  (m2
r(t ) ln(cid:18)m2
r(0)(cid:19)  m2(t )(cid:27) .
(m2(0) + m2(t )) ln(cid:16)1 + m2(t )

r(t ))  m(m2
= m(m2
(1  d
2 )
2 (cid:26)(m2
=
r(t ))
2(4)
322(cid:26)m2
m2(t ) = r


r(t )

322

m2

m2

r(0) (cid:17)  m2(t )

+

1
2

.

(c.5)

i0


d
2  1) (m2

r(0))

d

2 2(cid:27)

(c.4)

so

eq.(c.5) was rstly obtained and numerically solved in [61]. it was shown that the solution

is double valued. the former behaviour was also observed by abbott et al. [78] at t = 0,

and by bardeen and moshe [77] at both t = 0 and t 6= 0. the relevant solution is only
that which fulls the condition m2(t )  0 when t  0. for such a solution it can be
shown (c.f. [61], fig.3) that m2(t )
r(0)  1 for a suciently high t . so the hightemperature

m2

expansion of (c.5) reads

m2(t ) = r


(m2(t ))2

2m2

r(0) + (m2(t ))4
r (0)  (m2(t ))3
322

12m6

6m4

r (0) + . . .

.
=

r
2

i0 =

rt 2
24 

rmr(t )

8

t + o(cid:18)m2

+

1
2

i0

t 4 (cid:19)(cid:19) .
r(t ) ln(cid:18)mr(t )

(c.6)

appendix d

derivation of the shannon
(information) entropy

(this section is based on refs. [26, 28, 104, 125].)

in chapter 4 we intensively used the concept of the shannon (or information) entropy

which we identied (up to a negative multiplicative constant) with an information content

associated with a (macro) system in question. the objective of the present appendix is

to formulate mathematically more clearly the rather vague notion of informative content

and to nd a link between statistical physics and information theory. as a next step we

derive the basic properties of the shannon entropy.

let us rst introduce the concept of information in the context of probability calculus

and of information theory. we shall consider a set of events (or ensemble of all possible

messages) {x1, . . . , xn} with respective probabilities {p1, . . . , pn}. so, for example, if only
single letter messages are transmitted

{x1, . . . , xn} = {a, b, . . . , z} ,

then the corresponding set of ps characterises a particular language1. because events {xi}
1for instance, p(a) in english is 0.0703, 0.0645 in french is and 0.0693 in czech, the least frequent

157

appendix d. derivation of the shannon (information) entropy 158

are all possible dierent messages which might be send from a sender to a recipient, the

corresponding probabilities must sum up to one: pn
one says that m is the amount of information conveyed by the message xm if m is a
nonnegative and continuous function  of pm dened on the range 0 < pm  1. moreover,
the more likely a message is, the less information is conveyed by the knowledge of its

i pi = 1.

actual occurrence (the more stereotypical a message is (i.e. the larger is the probability for

being received), the less information it imparts). this implies that m = (pm) must be
decreasing function of pm on the interval [0, 1], and particularly (pm = 1) = 0.

in order to get more qualitative results let us consider rst a simple system with only two

possible messages x1 and x2 and the corresponding language {p1, p2}. since the probability
of receiving the amount of information 1 is p1 and that of 2 is p2, the expected averaged
amount of information received is

i(p1, p2) = p1(p1) + p2(p2) ,

or, more generally, for n mutually dierent messages {x1, . . . , xn} with the language {pi}
the average amount of information received is2

i(p1, . . . , pn ) = p1(p1) + . . . + pn(pn) .

(d.1)

let us note that (d.1) implies that i(. . .) is symmetric and continuous in all its arguments.

as we shall see, these conditions will strongly restrict a possible class of feasible is. a

further, sever restriction on the possible form of i(p1, . . . , pn ) is imposed by the, so called,

letter z has p(z) = 0.0005 in english, 0.0006 in french and 0.0008 in czech. in information theory is usual
to call a set of ps a langue even if a message itself is not composed of actual letters

2we may also say that the averaged amount of received information is the averaged gain of information
associated with the transmitted message or equivalently, the ignorance of a receiver, that is removed by
recipe of the message.

appendix d. derivation of the shannon (information) entropy 159

additivity law for information [92]. to understand the basic features of the latter, let us

start with n = 3.

in order to determine the degree of uncertainty about the system (or equivalently, the

expected amount of information received), we may, e.g., rst evaluate the degree of un-

certainty connected with the fact that we do not know whether x1 or x1 (complement

of x1) occured and add the degree of uncertainty whether the message in x1 is x2 or x3.

the amount of uncertainty due to (or information conveyed by) the rst determination is

obviously

i(p1, p1) = p1(p1) + p1(p1) .

the amount of uncertainty due to the second determination is

i(x1, x2|x1) := i(p(x2|x1), p(x3|x1)) = p(x2|x1)(p(x2|x1)) + p(x3|x1)(p(x3|x1)) .

using the bayess formula for the conditional probabilities (p(xy ) = p(x)p(y |x)) and
the fact that if x  y = x then p(xy ) = p(x) (x and y denote sets of events) we may
write

i(x1, x2|x1) =

p(x2)

p(x1)(cid:18)p(x2)

p(x1)(cid:19) +

p(x3)

p(x1)(cid:19) .
p(x1)(cid:18)p(x3)

(d.2)

however (d.2) is the amount of information conveyed only when the x1 event occurs, so

the total amount of information conveyed on average must be

i(p1, p2, p3) = i(p1, p1) + p1i(x2, x3|x1)
p1(cid:19) .
p3

= i(p1, p1) + p1 i(cid:18)p2

p1

,

(d.3)

appendix d. derivation of the shannon (information) entropy 160

we shall now show that the additivity law (d.3) together with symmetry and continuity of

i(. . .) suce to determine i(. . .) uniquely up to a multiplicative constant. the proof will

be done in three steps.

let us assume that we have events {x1, . . . , xn1, y1, . . . , ym} and the corresponding
(the way we perform a splitting into xs and ys is

alphabet {p1, . . . , pm , q1, . . . , qm}.
actually irrelevant.) we shall show now that the following important identity holds

step 1

i(p1, . . . , pn1, q1, . . . , qm ) = i(p1, . . . , pn ) + pn i(cid:18) q1

pn

, . . . ,

qm

pn(cid:19) ,

(d.4)

where pn = pm

i=1 qi. we may think of events {x1, . . . , xn1} as a one composite event x.
for m = 1 eq.(d.4) is then trivially fullled. if m = 2, eq.(d.4) coincides with eq.(d.3)

and so is true as well. let us now take an induction step and let assume that (d.4) is true

for a general m > 2 and let us prove that this must hold also for m + 1. actually, due to

the induction hypothesis we may directly write for m + 1

i(p1, . . . , pn1, q1, . . . , qm +1) = i(p1, . . . , pn1, q1, pn ) + pn i(cid:18) q2

pn

, . . . ,

qm +1

pn (cid:19) ,

(d.5)

with pn =pm +1

of (d.5) as

i=2 qi. using now relation for m = 2 we may write the rst term on the rhs

i(p1, . . . , pn1, q1, pn ) = i(p1, . . . , pn ) + pn i(cid:18) q1

pn

,

pn

pn(cid:19) ,

(d.6)

appendix d. derivation of the shannon (information) entropy 161

with pn = q1 + pn =pm +1

we may write

i=1 qi. using the symmetry of i(. . .) and the induction hypothesis

pn

i(cid:18) q1
 pn i(cid:18) q2

pn

, . . . ,

, . . . ,

qm +1

,

pn (cid:19) = i(cid:18) q1
pn (cid:19) = pn i(cid:18) q1

pn

pn

qm +1

pn

pn(cid:19) +

, . . . ,

qm +1

pn (cid:19)

pn

, . . . ,

pn
pn
qn +1

i(cid:18) q2
pn (cid:19)  pn i(cid:18) q1

pn

,

pn

pn(cid:19) .

(d.7)

plugging both (d.6) into (d.7) into (d.5) we receive the desired relation for m + 1, and so

this proves that eq.(d.4) holds.

in this step we extend our reasoning to an arbitrary number, say n, of groups of the

messages, i.e., we want to evaluate the amount of information

step 2

i(p1,1, . . . , p1,n1, p2,1, . . . , p2,n2, . . . , pn,1, . . . , pn,nn) .

using the result (d.4) we may directly write the former as

i(p1,1, . . . , p1,n1, . . . , pn1,1, . . . , pn1,nn1, pn) + pn i(cid:18) pn,1

pn

, . . . ,

pn,nn

pn (cid:19) ,

where pn = pnn

get

i=1 pn,i. if we now shift pn to the very left in i(. . .) and iterate further we

i(pn, p1,1, . . . , p1,n1, . . . , pn1,1, . . . , pn1,nn1) = i(pn, p1,1, . . . , pn2,nn2, pn1)
pn1 (cid:19) ,
pn1,nn1
i=1 pn1,i. shifting pn1 to the very left and repeating iteration we get

+ pn1 i (cid:18) pn1,1
pn1

, . . . ,

with pn1 =pnn1

appendix d. derivation of the shannon (information) entropy 162

i(pn, pn1, p1,1, . . . , p1,n1, . . . , pn2,nn2) = i(pn, pn1, p1,1, . . . , pn3,nn3pn2)
pn2 (cid:19) ,
pn2,nn2

+ pn2 i(cid:18) pn2,1
pn2

, . . . ,

with pn2 =pnn2

p1 we nally obtain

i=1 pn2,i. shifting pn2 to the very left and repeating iteration, etc. up to

i(p1,1, . . . , pn,nn) = i(p1, p2, . . . , pn) +

eq.(d.8) is the desired result.

n

xi=1

pi i(cid:18) pi,1

pi

, . . . ,

pi,ni

pi (cid:19) .

(d.8)

step 3

in this last step we shall actually solve eq.(d.8). before we start let us dene one useful

function. if all the messages were equiprobable, i.e., all pi = 1/n with n being the number

of all possible messages, then we dene

(n) := i(cid:18) 1

n

, . . . ,

1

n(cid:19) ; n  2; i(1) = 0 .

the rst noticeable fact about (x) is that it fulls a very simple functional relation, namely

(mn) = i(cid:18) 1

mn

, . . . ,

1

mn(cid:19) = i(cid:18) 1

n

= (n) + (m) ,

, . . . ,

1

n(cid:19) +

n

xi=1

1
n

i(cid:18) 1

m

, . . . ,

1

m(cid:19)

(d.9)

where in the rst line we have used eq.(d.8). the functional identity (d.9) has the well

known solution3; (x) = k ln(x). the constant k is the only ambiguity which the solution

possesses. we shall specify k latter on.

3a simple way how to solve (d.9) is to assume that (x) is a continuous function. if we were able to

appendix d. derivation of the shannon (information) entropy 163

let us now assume that probabilities {p1, . . . , pn} on the rhs of (d.8) are rational
numbers, i.e., we may write p1 = n1/n, p2 = n2/n, . . . , pn = nn/n with n = pn
i=1 ni.

in this case

i(p1, p2, . . . , pn) = i(cid:18)n1

n

, . . . ,

nn

n (cid:19) .

inserting this back into eq.(d.8) we may rewrite (d.8) as

i(cid:18) 1

n

, . . . ,

1

n(cid:19) = (n) = i(cid:18)n1

n

, . . . ,

n

xi=1

ni
n

i(cid:18) 1

ni

, . . . ,

1

ni(cid:19)

nn

n (cid:19) +
xi=1

ni
n

n

(ni)

n

= i(cid:18)n1
n (cid:19) = (n) 

nn

, . . . ,

nn

n (cid:19) +
xi=1

ni
n

n

 i(cid:18) n1

n

, . . . ,

(ni) = k

n

xi=1

ni
n

n(cid:19) .
ln(cid:18)ni

(d.10)

as i(. . .) is by assumption continuous function we may analytically continue result (d.10)

to irrational probabilities, and so generally

n

note that the structure of eq.(d.11) is precisely that as in (d.1). comparing both (d.1)

i(p1, . . . , pn) = k

xi=1

pi ln(pi) .

(d.11)

and (d.11) we may identify the amount of information m of the message xm as (pm) =

nd the solution of the relation (xy) = (x) + (y) for continuous arguments we could at the end restrict
our attention only to discrete ones. assuming this continuity we may perform derivation w.r.t. x and get

d(yx)

dx

= y (yx) = (x) .

setting yx = z we obtain the dierential equation

where k is constant. so the solution is obvious: (x) = k ln(x).

z (z) = x (x) = k ,

appendix d. derivation of the shannon (information) entropy 164

k ln(pm). because (. . .) is a nonnegative, decreasing function of its argument, the
constant k must be positive4.

the constant k clearly xes the units of information. in information theory k is chosen

to be 1 with the logarithm in the base 2, so i(. . .) = pi pi log2(pi). the reason for choice
this is quite pragmatic. the messages are usually written in the binary characters ({0, 1},
yes/no). the most elementary message is composed of two equiprobable events (unbiased

choice between two possible messages about which a receiver does not posses any further

information).

in this case the information entropy is i(1/2, 1/2) = (1/2) = 1. thus

the most elementary message carries the unit amount of information. this unit is called

bit 5. if one transmits only nletter messages (i.e. 111 . . . 11, 111 . . . 10, . . . , 000 . . . 00)

then the amount of information is clearly (2n) = n. consequently such messages convey

information with n bits.

as it was mentioned, in information theory eq.(d.11) refers to the situation after the

reception of a message. accordingly we interpret (d.11) as the average gain in the infor-

mation associated with the transmitted message (the greater the initial uncertainty, the

greater the amount of information conveyed.

if there is no initial uncertainty or doubt

to be resolved, the alphabet {pi} shrinks to a single case {pj = 1, pk6=j = 0} and hence
the shannon entropy (gained information) is zero). let us note that if events {xi} are
equiprobable the information entropy equals to the expected number of binary (yes/no)

questions whose answer take us from our current knowledge to the one of certainty6.

4note: if k = log2e the amount of information (d.11) is called both the shannon and information

entropy. for a dierent choice of k only notion of the shannon entropy is used.

5if the base of the logarithm is e (k = 1), then the information is measured in nats.
6for instance, for i(1/2, 1/2) the binary question may sound: is it 1 which is transmitted ? in the case
of the nletter messages we may ask whether the transmitted message has on the rst position 1 (yes/no),

appendix d. derivation of the shannon (information) entropy 165

in physical systems, however, no message is send, so to speak. we may, nonetheless,

in accordance with the previous derivation view (d.11) as the mean information about

the system which is not transmitted yet (i.e. the recipient is waiting for it). from this

standpoint i(. . .) appears as entropy of the language, that is as uncertainty (or ignorance)

about the ensemble of all possible messages which may be received. the only dierence is

that the uncertainty (ignorance) cannot never be completely removed, as in the case when

the message is received, but it may be removed partially, namely when one performs a

measurement on the system. we shall return to this point in a while.

now, question stands what k we should choose in real (macroscopic) physical systems.

it is clear that in statistical physics, the systems are too complex and the amount of all

possible transmittable information is so vast that k must be chosen very small in order for

one to get judiciously large numerical values of the shannon entropy in typical processes.

because k should be a constant valid for all systems, its numerical value depends only on

the choice of physical units and hence may be determined via arbitrary, but suitably chosen

system. for example, we may dene as a unit entropy the entropy corresponding to one

mole of spins of free valence electrons in a piece of iron. assuming that all the 2na spin
congurations are equiprobable (avogadros number na = 0.6024 1024 mol1), then this
yields i(. . .) = (2na) = kna = 1 mol1. from this reasoning we would get k  1024.
in order to obtain a connection with the usual von neumanngibbs entropy of statistical

physics we may note that the shannon entropy coincides with the von neumanngibbs one
provided we x k/ln(2) = kb = 1.3804  1023jk1.

  inherent to a system of interest. let us assume that the system had originally the

in connection with statistical physics we may dene a notion of information content

on the second position 1 (yes/no), . . . , at the n-th position 1 (yes/no).

appendix d. derivation of the shannon (information) entropy 166

information entropy i0(. . .) (i.e., entropy of the ensemble of all possible transmittable results

or all possible results of a measurement). entropy i0 is often called apriory entropy.

then measurement is made but because of experimental errors or impossibility to measure

all phenomena there is a whole new ensemble of values, each of which could give rise to

posteriori ensemble. the latter expresses how much uncertainty still left unresolved after

the one observed. the information entropy, say i1(. . .) may be dened also for this a

measurement. let us now dene the informative content  as an amount by which the
  = i0  i1 ,
 . after discarding the (constant) additive entropy i0 the lat-

or equivalently i1 = i0 
ter leads to the statement that the informative content is equivalent to negative entropy

uncertainty about a system has been reduced, i.e.

(negatropy). that is, as our information about a physical system increases, its entropy

must decrease7 . this result is due to szilard [106] and brillouin [105].

the passage to quantum mechanics is simple. if the macrostate of a system is repre-

sented by the density matrix

then the information entropy turns out to be (for simplicity we omit from now on the

pn|nihn| ,

(d.12)

(d.13)

(d.14)

h =xn

  = tr( log2 ) .

i() = tr( log2 ) ,

subindex h)

and the information content

7note that in information theory i1(. . .) = 0.

appendix d. derivation of the shannon (information) entropy 167

in the language of information theory the ensemble of all possible messages is set of all

possible results of a measurement of a given system of observables. the corresponding

alphabet is {p1, p2, . . .}.

some properties of the shannon entropy

 concavity: the shannon entropy is concave on the set of s on a given hilbert

space.

concavity of i() means that for any pair 1 and 2 and 0 <  < 1 we have

i(1 + (1  )2)  i(1) + (1  )i(2) .

this may be proven very simply with a help of the inequality

tr(xlog2 y )  tr(xlog2 x)  (trx  try )log2e .

(use the spectral decomposition of x and y and the inequality lnx  (1  x)) the gener-
alised concavity identity reads

i(xi

i) xi

ii() ,

where i > 0 and pi i = 1.

 maximum: if the possible kets in the spectral decomposition (d.12) span a nite

wdimensional subspace of the hilbert space then

i()  log2w ,

appendix d. derivation of the shannon (information) entropy 168

with the equality only in the case when all probabilities in (d.12) are equal, i.e. pi = p =

1/w.

to prove this we may look at the dierence

i()  log2w = tr( (log2 1w)) .

taking the spectral decomposition of  together with the inequality lnx  (1 x) (note the
equality is fullled only when x = 1) we obtain i()  log2w  0. the latter is equal to 0
if and only if w/pi = 1 for all pi.

 minimum: the shannon entropy has a minimum equal to zero. this happen only

when  describes a pure state.

because log2(. . .) is a convex function, one may use jensenss inequality of statistical
mathematics [37, 59]: if f (. . .) is a convex function then hf (x)i  f (hxi). thus i() =
hlog2i  log2hi = 0, so

i()  0 .

i() = 0 only if there is no uncertainty about a message, i.e. when alphabet {pi} shrinks
to a single case {pj = 1, pi6=j = 0}, i.e. when  describes the pure state.

appendix e

some mathematical formulae

e.1 integrals in d dimensions

(this section is based on refs. [42, 49, 50, 53].)1

throughout our dissertation we frequently apply dimensional regularisation; i.e. we replace

the dimension 4 by a lower dimension d where the corresponding (loop) integrals are

convergent. bellow we provide a short list of integrals which we found useful during our

calculations (cf. sections 3.2, 3.3, 3.4 and 4.4, appendices b and c).

the paradigmatic integral of the dimensional regularisation is

ddqe

e + x)n = d/2 (n  d

(n)

2 )

(q2

z

xn+

d
2 .

n < 2 .

(use ddimensional polar coordinates and the fact that r d = sd1 = 2

clidean regime is dened via wicks rotation as; q0 = iq0

2 ) ) eu-
e, q = qe, ddq = iddqe. although

2 /( d

d

the lhs as a ddimensional integral is senseful only for integer values of d, the rhs has an

analytic continuation for all d  c with d 6= 2n (so namely for d = 4 2 ( > 0,   0)).
performing the change of variables qe  qe + le we get

1note: all the quantities entering formulae bellow are dimensionless!!

169

appendix e. some mathematical formulae

170

ddqe

e + 2leqe + x)n = d/2 (n  d

(n)

2 )

(q2

(x  l2

e)n+

d
2 .

z

successive derivatives with respect to l

e then yield

z ddqe
z ddqe

q

(q2 + 2leqe + x)n = d/2 l

e

(n  d
2 )
(n)

(x  l2

e)n+

d
2 .

qq

(q2 + 2leqe + x)n =

e)n+

d
2

d/2
(n)

(x  l2
 (cid:26)(n  d
2 )l

1
2

2 )(x  l2
the analytical continuation to minkowski regime (i.e. wicks rotation of both q

(n  1  d

e +

el

e)(cid:27) .

e and l
e)

together with eq.(3.75) gives

ddq
(2)d

z

i

q2  m2  i

=

(1  d
2 )
(4)d/2 (m2)d/21
m2
162 (cid:0)  lnm2 + 1 + o()(cid:1) ,

= 

with

(for convenience we have introduced the usual factor 1/(2)d) previous results together

 =

1
   + ln4 .

with the feynman parametrisation: 1/ab =r 1
(q2  m2 + i)((q + p)2  m2 + i)

ddq
(2)d

z

i

0 dt 1/[at + b(1  t)]2, yield

ddq
(2)d

ddq
(2)d

z

z

(k2  m2 + i)((q + p)2  m2 + i)

i q

=

i qq

(k2  m2 + i)((q + p)2  m2 + i)

162(cid:18) z 1
= 1

0

dt ln(m2 + p2(t2  t)) + o()(cid:19)

p

322 (cid:18) z 1

0

dt ln(m2 + p2(t2  t)) + o()(cid:19)
162 (cid:0)ga(p2, m) + ppb(p2, m)(cid:1) ,

1

=

appendix e. some mathematical formulae

171

with a(p2, m) and b(p2, m):

a(p2, m) =

b(p2, m) =

1

+ 1

2   1
3 z 1

3(cid:26)m2(cid:20) 3
4 p2(cid:20) + 2
3p2 (cid:26)m2(cid:20) 3
2   1
4(cid:20) + 1 z 1
 1

4

0

2lnm2 + 3

2 z 1

0

dt ln(m2 + p2(t2  t))(cid:21)

0

dt ln(m2 + p2(t2  t))(cid:21) + o()(cid:27)
2lnm2 + 3 z 1
dt ln(m2 + p2(t2  t))(cid:21) + o()(cid:27) .

dt ln(m2 + p2(t2  t))(cid:21)

0

note: the integral r 1

0 dt (. . .) might be evaluated explicitly, the result reads

z 1

0

dt ln(m2 + p2(t2  t)) = ln(m2)  2 + 2r4  a

a

arctan(cid:18) a

4  a(cid:19) ,

with a = p2/m2.

e.2 special functions and important relations

(this section is based on refs. [36, 41, 42, 53, 74, 80, 83, 84].)

the gamma function (x) and the riemann zeta function (x) are dened as follows:

(x) =z 
xn=1

(x) =

0


dt ettx1

rex > 0

nx

rex > 1 .

the above denitions converge only in the specied regions of the complex plane, but they

can be analytically (singlevaluedly) continued. the following important relations (used

appendix e. some mathematical formulae

172

in section 3.4) are valid in the entire complex plane (save for the points x = n, (n =
0, 1, 2, . . .) where the simple pole residue is (1)n
n! )

(x + 1) = x(x)





cos(x)
1

2

sin(x)

(x)(1  x) =
+ x(cid:19) (cid:18)1
2  x(cid:19) =
(cid:18)1
22x1
2(cid:19)
(x)(cid:18)x +

2 (cid:19) 
2 (x) = (cid:18)1  x
(cid:16)x
2(cid:17)  x

(2x) =

x1

2 (1  x) .

for n being integer

(cid:18)1

2  n(cid:19) = (1)n

2n
(2n  1)!!

.

important numerical values of (x) used in the text are :

x

(x)

0

1
2

3
2

2.612

2

2
6

5
2

3

1.341

1.202

4

4
90

5

1.037

(0) =(cid:18)d(x)

dx (cid:19)x=0

=  1

2 ln(2) .

(note: only numerical values of (2n + 1) are available)

important numerical values of (x) used in the text are :

x

(x)

1
2



1

1

5
4

0.906

3
2

1

2

7
4

0.919

appendix e. some mathematical formulae

173

both (x) and (x) appear in expansions of the following denite integrals used in the text

(n > 0):

0

z 
z 
z 
z 

0

0

0

dt

dt

dt

dt

tn1
et  1
tn1
sinht
tn1
cosht

xn1
cosh2t

= (1  (1  1)2n)(n)(n)
= 2(1  2n)(n)(n)

(einsteins integrals)

= 2(n)



xk=0

(1)k(2k + 1)n

= 22n(1  22n)(n)(n  1) .

eulers  function (or digamma) was used both in section 3.4 and section 4.4. (. . .) is

dened as the logarithmic derivation of  function:

(x) =

1

d(x)

(x)

dx

= z 

0 (cid:18)et
t 

ezt

1  et(cid:19) dt .

the former directly implies that

(x + 1) = (x) +

1
x
2) = (1)  2ln2 ,

( 1

or recursively (n is integer)

(x + n) = (x + 1) +

1

1 + x

+

1

2 + x

+ . . . +

1

(n  1) + x

.

dening the eulermascheroni constant  = (1) (the only numerical value is known:
 = 0.5772156649 . . .), we get directly
n1

1
k

xk=1

(n) =  +
2 + n) =   2ln2 + 2(cid:18)1 +

( 1

1
3

+ . . . +

1

2n  1(cid:19) .

appendix e. some mathematical formulae

174

in section 4.4 we use functions kn, which are the bessel functions of imaginary argument

of order n (we deal only with n being integer). kn is dened as:

kn(x) =

=

( 1
2 x)n
(n + 1
( 1
2 x)n
(n + 1

2)z 
2)z 

0

0

dt ezcoshtsinh2nt

dt ezt(t2  1)n 1

2 .

the former implies the important relation: k0(x) = k1(x).

in section 4.4 we use the

following relations:

0

z 
z 
z 

m

0

dt

dt

dt

ept

tept

pt(t + a)
t2  m2
(t + a)ept
t2 + 2at

= e

ap

2 k0(cid:16)ap
2 (cid:17)

= mk1(mp)

= aeapk1(ap) .

the limiting form for small arguments x (n xed) reads:

kn(x)  1

2(n)( 1

2x)n .

some miscellaneous functions used in the text:

 beta function b(z; y) (see section 3.4):

b(x; y) =z 1

0

dt tx1(1  t)y1 =z 

0

tx1

(1 + t)x+y =

(x)(y)
(x + y)

.

 gauss hypergeometric functions 2f1[. . .] (see section 3.4):
(a + k)(b + k)

(c)



2f1[a, b; c; x] =

(a)(b)

xk=0
b(b; c  b)z 1

1

0

=

(c + k)

xk
k!

dt tb1(1  t)cb1(1  tx)a .

appendix e. some mathematical formulae

175

(note: 2f1 converges for |x| < 1 with a branch point at x = 1, for c = n(n = 0, 1, . . .)
2f1 is undetermined)

the following relations for 2f1 are used in section 3.4:

2f1[a, b; a  b + 1;1] = 2a
2] = 
2; 1

2f1[a, b; 1

2a + 1

2b + 1

( 1

(1 + a  b)
2a  b)( 1
2a + 1
2b)
2 + 1

2b)

2a)( 1

(1 + 1
( 1
2 + 1
2 + 1

.

2 + 1

2a)

 bernoulli numbers b (see section 3.4) are dened through the series :

x

ex  1

=



x=0

b

x
!

|x| < 2 .

important numerical values of b used in the text are :



b

0
1
1  1

2

2
4
6  1

1

30

bibliography

[1] d. a. kirzhnitz and a. linde. phys. lett., b42: 471, 1972.

[2] s. weinberg. phys. rev., d9: 3357, 1974.

[3] l. dolan and r. jackiw. phys. rev., d9: 3320, 1974.

[4] j. c. collins and m. perry. phys. rev. lett., 34: 1353, 1975.

[5] p.a. henning. nucl. phys., b337: 547, 1990.

[6] j. berges and k. rajagopal. hep-ph/9804233.

[7] m. a. halasz, a. d. jackson, r. e. shrock, m. a. stephanov and j. j. m. ver-

baarschot. phys. rev., d58: 096007, 1998.

[8] j. i. kapusta. nucl. phys., b148: 461, 1979.

[9] e. w. kolb and m. s. turner. the early universe. addisonwesley, london, 1994.

[10] t. w. b. kibble. acta phys. polon., b13: 723, 1982.

[11] v. a. rubakov and m. e. shaposnikov. phys. usp., 39: 461, 1996.

[12] e. w. kolb, a. linde and a. riotto. phys. rev. lett., 77: 4290, 1996.

[13] a. d. sakharov. pisma zhetf, 5: 32, 1967.

176

bibliography

177

[14] a. riotto and m. trodden. hep-ph/9901362.

[15] t. w. b. kibble. j. phys., a9: 1389, 1976.

[16] v. m. h. ruutu, v. b. eltsov, a. j. gill, t. w. b. kibble, m. krusius, yu. g.

makhlin, b. placais, g. e. volovik and wen xu. nature, 382: 334, 1996.

[17] p. c. hendry, n. s. lawson, r. a. m. lee, p. v. e. mcclintock and c. d. h. williams.

nature, 368: 315, 1994.

[18] i. chuang, r. durrer, n. turok and b. yurke. science, 251: 1336, 1991.

[19] w. h. zurek. acta phys. polon., b24:1301, 1993.

[20] u. heinz. hep-ph/9902424.

[21] j. p. dougherty. phil. trans. roy. soc. london, 346: 259, 1993.

[22] w. t. grandy. principle of maximal entropy and irreversible processes, 2 vols.

d.reidel, amsterdam, 1980.

[23] r. balescu. equilibrium and nonequilibrium statistical mechanics. john wiley &

sons, 1975.

[24] e.t. jaynes. am. j. phys., 33: 391, 1965.

[25] e.t. jaynes. phys. rev., 106, 108: 620, 171, 1957.

[26] e. t. jaynes. papers on probability, statistics and statistical mechanics. d.reidel,

amsterdam, 1983.

[27] b. buck and v.a. macaulay. maximum entropy in action. oxford press, oxford,

1991.

bibliography

178

[28] r. balian. from microphysics to macrophysics; methods and applications of statis-

tical physics, vol.ii. springerverlag, london, 1992.

[29] i. prigogine. introduction to thermodynamics of irreversible processes. interscience,

new york, 1969.

[30] r. balescu. statistical dynamics, matter out of equilibrium. imperial college press,

london, 1997.

[31] r.c. tolman. the principles of the statistical mechanics. clarendon press, oxford,

1938.

[32] p. ehrenfest and t. ehrenfest. the conceptual foundations of the statistical approach

to mechanics. cornell university press, 1959.

[33] n. n. bogoliubov. problems of a dynamical theory in statistical physics. nort-holland,

london, 1962.

[34] m. lebellac. thermal field theory. cambridge university press, cambridge, 1996.

[35] a. das. finite temperature field theory. world scientic, london, 1997.

[36] n. p. landsman and ch. g. van weert. physics report, 145: 141, 1987.

[37] r. kubo. statistical mechanics. northholland publishing company, oxford, 1965.

[38] t. altherr. int. j. mod. phys., a8: 5605, 1993.

[39] j.w. gibbs. elementary principles in statistical mechanics. dover publications, new

york, 1960.

bibliography

179

[40] l.p. kadano and g. baym. quantum statistical mechanics. benjamin, reading,

1962.

[41] a.l. fetter and j.d. walecka. quantum theory of many particle systems. mcgraw-

hill, new york, 1971.

[42] p. ramond. field theory, a modern primer. the benjamin/cummings publishing

company, inc, london, 1981.

[43] d.n. zubarev. nonequilibrium statistical thermodynamics. consultants bureau,

london, 1974.

[44] k.c. chou, z.b. su, b.l. hao and l.yu. phys. rep., 118: 1, 1985.

[45] p. v. landsho. nucl. phys., b430: 683, 1994.

[46] p. v. landsho. phys. lett., b386: 291, 1996.

[47] l. v. keldysh. sov. phys.  jetp, 20: 1018, 1964.

[48] p. van nieuwenhuizen. canonical methods in quantized gauge eld theories. teylers

lectures, leyden univerity, 1992.

[49] m. veltman. diagrammatica  the path to feynman diagrams. cambridge univer-

sity press, cambridge, 1994.

[50] g. t hooft and m. veltman. diagrammar. cern jellow report, 73-9, 1973.

[51] r. mills. propagators for manyparticle systems. gordon and breach, new york,

1969.

[52] t. s. evans and d. a. steer. nucl. phys., b476: 481, 1996.

bibliography

180

[53] c. itzikson and j. b. zuber. quantum field theory. mcgraw-hill, new york, 1980.

[54] r. l. kobes and g. w. semeno. nucl. phys., b272: 329, 1986.

[55] p. v. landsho and a. rebhan. nucl. phys., b410: 23, 1993.

[56] m. jacob and p. v. landsho. phys lett., b281: 114, 1992.

[57] a. j. niemi and g. w. semeno. nucl. phys., b230: 181, 1984.

[58] t. s. evans and a. c. pearson. phys. rev., d52: 4652, 1995.

[59] g. morandi. statistical mechanics, an intermediate course. world scientic pub-

lishing co. pte. ltd., london, 1995.

[60] m.c.j. leermakers and ch.g. van weert. nucl. phys., b248: 671, 1984.

[61] i.t. drummond, r.r. horgan, p.v. landsho and a. rebhan. nucl. phys.,

b524: 579, 1998.

[62] i.t. drummond, r.r. horgan, p.v. landsho and a. rebhan.

phys. lett.,

b398: 326, 1997.

[63] w.a. van leeuwen s.r. de groot and ch.g. van weert. relativistic kinetic theory.

principles and applications. north-holland publishing company, oxford, 1980.

[64] g.k. batchelor. an introduction to fluid dynamics. cambridge university press,

london, 1967.

[65] j. collins. renormalization; an introduction to renormalization, the renormalization

group, and the operatorproduct expansion. cambridge university press, cambridge,

1984.

bibliography

181

[66] l.s. brown. ann. phys., 126: 135, 1979.

[67] y. nambu. prog. theor. phys. (kyoto), 7: 131, 1952.

[68] r. jackiw. in s.b. treiman, r. jackiw, b. zumino and e. witten, editor, current

algebra and anomalies. world scientic publishing co. pte.ltd., singapore, 1985.

[69] s. coleman c.g. callan and r. jackiw. ann. phys., 59: 42, 1970.

[70] g. sterman. an introduction to quantum field theory. cambridge university press,

cambridge, 1993.

[71] w. zimmermann.

in s.deser et al., editor, lectures on elementary particles and

quantum field theory. m.i.t. press, cambridge (mass.), 1970.

[72] p. cvitanovic. field theory. nordita, copenhagen, 1983.

[73] m. van eijck. thermal field theory and the finite-temperature renormalization

group. phd thesis, university of amsterdam, 1995.

[74] p. jizba. phys. rev., d57: 3634, 1998.

[75] h.j. schnitzer. phys. rev., d10: 1800, 1974.

[76] j.m. cornwall, r. jackiw and e. tomboulis. phys. rev., d10: 2428, 1974.

[77] w.a. bardeen and m. moshe. phys.rev., d28: 1372, 1983.

[78] l.f. abbot, j.s. kang and h.j. schnitzer. phys. rev., d13: 2212, 1976.

[79] g. amelino camelia. hep-th/9811236.

[80] f. oberhettinger. tables of mellin transforms. springer, berlin, 1974.

bibliography

182

[81] h.w. braden. phys. rev., d25: 1028, 1982.

[82] h.e. haber and h.a. weldon. j. math. phys., 23: 1852, 1982.

[83] a. erdelyi. tables of integral transformations i. mcgrawhill, london, 1954.

[84] i.s. gradshteyn and i.m. ryzhik. tables of integrals, series, and products. academic

press, inc., london, 1980.

[85] g. amelino camelia and s.-a. pi. phys. rev., d47: 2356, 1993.

[86] t.d.lee. pp 113. in w.c. haxton and e.m. hanley, editor, symmetries and funda-

mental interactions in nuclei. columbia university press, 1997.

[87] s.n. white. nucl. instrum. methods, a409: 618, 1998.

[88] h. heiselberg and a.d. jackson. to be published in the proceedings of 3rd workshop

on continuous advances in qcd (qcd98), minneapolis, mn, 1619 apr. 1998.

[89] r. hagedorn. z. phys., c17: 265, 1983.

[90] t. haruyama, n. kimura and t. nakamoto. to be published in the proceedings of

17th international conference on cryogenic engineering (icec 17), bornemounth,

england, 1417 jul. 1998.

[91] t. haruyama, n. kimura and t. nakamoto. to be published in the proceedings of the-

cryogenic engineering conference and international cryogenic materials conference

(cec / icmc 97), portland, or, 27 jul  1 aug. 1997.

[92] s. hull, d.a. keen, r. done and c.n. uden. ral-91-089. to be published.

[93] j. staun olsen, l. gerward and u. benedict. desy sr-84-22. to be published.

bibliography

183

[94] p. jizba. hep-th/9801197. to be published in phys. rev. d.

[95] e. calzetta and b.l. hu. phys. rev., d37: 2878, 1988.

[96] p. jizba and e.s. tututi. work in progress.

[97] f. cooper, s. habib, y. kluger, e. mottola and j.p. paz. hep-ph/9405352. to be

published.

[98] f. cooper and e. mottola. phys. rev., d36: 3114, 1987.

[99] f. cooper, s. habib, y. kluger and e. mottola. phys. rev., d55: 6471, 1997.

[100] o. eboli, r. jackiw and soyoung pi. phys. rev., d37: 3557, 1988.

[101] d.c. brody and l.p. hughston. to be published.

[102] c.w. gardier. handbook of stochastic methods for physics, chemistry and the nat-

ural sciences. springerverlag, new york, 1985.

[103] f. floreanini and r. jackiw. phys. rev., d37: 2206, 1988.

[104] c.e. shannon and w. weaver. the mathematical theory of communication. uni-

versity of illinois press, urbana, 1949.

[105] l. brillouin. j. applied phys., 22: 334, 1951.

[106] l. szilard. z. physik, 53: 840, 1929.

[107] g. marc and w.g. mcmillan. in i. prigogine and s. rice, editor, advances in chem-

ical physics, volume vol. lviii. wiley, new york, 1985.

bibliography

184

[108] v. petviashvili and o. pokhotelov. solitary waves in plasmas and in the atmosphere.

gordon and breach science publishers, philadelphia, 1992.

[109] s.

ichimaru.

basic principles of plasma physics, a statistical approach.

w.a.benjamin, inc. london, 1973.

[110] m. gavrila. atoms in intense laser fields. academic press, san diego ca., 1992.

[111] g.a. baker. essentials of pade approximation. academic press, london, 1975.

[112] r. baier, m. dirks, k. redlich, and d. schi. phys. rev., d56: 2548, 1997.

[113] m. strickland. phys. lett., b331: 245, 1994.

[114] j. baacke, k. heitmann and c.p. patzold. hep-th/9711144. to be published.

[115] m. lebellac. quantum and statistical field theory. clarendon press, oxford, 1991.

[116] f. j. belinfante. physica, 7: 449, 1940.

[117] l. rosenfeld. mem. roy. acad. belg. cl. sci., 6: 18, 1940.

[118] p. e. haagenson and j. i. latorre. hep-ph/9203207. to be published.

[119] a. j. niemi and g. w. semeno. ann. phys., 152: 181, 1984.

[120] j. i. kapusta and p. v. landsho. nucl. part. phys., 15: 267, 1989.

[121] j. zinnjustin. quantum field theory and critical phenomena. oxford science

publisher, oxford, 1996.

[122] j. schwinger. proc. nat. acad. sc., 37: 452, 1951.

bibliography

185

[123] f. j. dyson. phys. rev., 75: 1736, 1949.

[124] j. schwinger. j. math. phys, 2: 407, 1961.

[125] m. rasetti. modern methods in equilibrium statistical machanics. world scientic

poblishing co. pte. ltd., singapore, 1986.

