0
0
0
2

 
c
e
d
4

 

 
 

3
v
0
0
1
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

facts and fictions about anti de sitter
spacetimes with local quantum matter

harry lehmann in memoriam

bert schroer

institut fur theoretische physik

fu-berlin, arnimallee 14, 14195 berlin, germany

presently: cbpf, rua dr. xavier sigaud, 22290-180 rio de janeiro, brazil

schroer@cbpf.br

revised version, november 2000

abstract

it is natural to analyse the adsd+1-cqftd correspondence in the
context of the conformal- compactication and covering formalism.
in
this way one obtains additional inside about rehrens rigorous algebraic
holography in connection with the degree of freedom issue which in turn
allows to illustrates the subtle but important dierences beween the orig-
inal string theory-based maldacena conjecture and rehrens theorem in
the setting of an intrinsic eld-coordinatization-free formulation of alge-
braic qft. i also discuss another more generic type of holography related
to light fronts which seems to be closer to t hoofts original ideas on
holography. this in turn is naturally connected with the generic concept
of localization entropy, a quantum pre-form of bekensteins classical
black-hole surface entropy.

1 historical and sociological background

there has been hardly any problem in particle physics which has attracted
as much attention as the problem if and in what way quantum matter in the
anti desitter spacetime and the one dimension lower conformal eld theories
are related and whether this could possibly contain clues about the meaning of
quantum gravity.

in more specic quantum physical terms the question is about a conjectured
[1][2][3] (and meanwhile in large parts generically and rigorously understood
[6]) correspondence between two quantum eld theories in dierent spacetime
dimensions; the lower-dimensional conformal one being the holographic image
or projection of the ads theory.

1

the entire globalized community of string physicist has placed this problem
in the centre of their interest and treated as the dominating problem of theoret-
ical particle physics with the result that there have been approximately around
100-150 papers per month during a good part of 1999. even if one takes into
account the increase in the number of particle physicist during the last decades
and compares it with the relative number of participants in previous fashionable
topics (the s-matrix bootstrap, regge theory, the su (6)-^u (12) symmetric and
the so-called relativistic quark theory, to name some of them) which also led to
press-conferences, interviews and articles in the media (but not to awards and
prizes), it remains still an impressive sociological phenomenon. just imagine
yourself working on this kind of problem and getting up every morning turning
nervously to the hep-th server in order to check that nobody has beaten you on
similar results. what a life in an area which used to require a contemplative
critical attitude!

this is clearly a remarkable situation in the exact sciences which warrants
an explanation. this is particularly evident to somebody old enough to have
experienced theoretical particle physics at times of great conceptual and calcu-
lational achievements as e.g. the derivation of scattering theory and dispersion
relations from local eld; achievements with which the name of harry lehmann
(to whose memory this article is dedicated) is inexorably linked. in those times
the acceptance of a theoretical proposal in particle physics was primarily cou-
pled to its experimental veriability and its conceptual standing within physics
and not yet to the beauty of its dierential-geometric content. there were also
fashions, but if they did not deliver what they promised they were allowed to
die.

in the opinion of roger penrose [31], the new totalitarian attitude in particle
physics is the result of the rapid and propagandistic communication through the
new electronic media which favors speedy calculations with no or only insu-
cient supercial physical interpretation to more contemplative and not instantly
protable conceptual investments. he cites supersymmetry and ination cos-
mology as examples of theories which achieved a kind of monopolistic domi-
nance despite a total lack of experimental fact (or even convincing theoretical
arguments). it seems to me that this phenomenon receives an even stronger
illustration from string theory and i am not the only one who thinks this way
[30].

leaving the nal explanation of this phenomenon to historians or sociolo-
gists of the exact sciences, i will limit myself to analyze the particle physics
content of the so-called anti desitter- conformal qft correspondence from the
conservative point of view of a quantum eld theorist with a 30 year professional
experience who, although having no active ambitions outside qft, still nour-
ishes a certain curiosity about present activities in particle physics as e.g. string
theory or the use of noncommutative geometry. some of the consistency calcu-
lations one nds there are really surprising and if one could consider them in
the critical bohr-sommerfeld spirit as ciphers encoding possibly new principles
in fundamental physics and not as a theory (let alone a theory of everything),

2

these observations may have an enigmatic use. but for this to be successful
one would have to make a much more serious attempt at confronting the new
mathematical consistency observations with local quantum physics on a more
conceptual level beyond the standard formalism. only in this way one can be
sure to confront something new and not just a new formalism which implements
the same principles in a dierent way.

the ads model of a curved spacetime has a long history [4][5] as a theoretical
laboratory of what can happen with particle physics in a universe which is the
extreme opposite of globally hyperbolic in that it possesses a self-closing time,
whereas the proper de sitter spacetime was once considered among the more
realistic models of the universe. the recent surge of interest about ads came
from string theory and is dierent in motivation and more related to the hope
(or dream) to attribute a meaning to quantum gravity from a string theory
viewpoint.

fortunately for a curious outsider (otherwise i would have to quit right here),
this motivation has no bearing on the conceptual and mathematical problems
posed by the would be ads-conformal qft correspondence, which turned out to
be one of those properties discovered in the setting of string theory which allow
an interesting and rigorous formulation in qft which conrms some but not
all the conjectured properties. the rigorous treatment however requires a refor-
mulation of (conformal) qft. the standard formalism based on pointlike eld
coordinatizations which underlies the lagrangian (and the wightman) fomula-
tions does not provide a natural setting for the study of isomorphisms between
models in dierent spacetime dimensions, even though the underlying physi-
cal principles are the same. one would have to introduce too many additional
concepts and auxiliary tricks into the standard framework. the important as-
pects in this isomorphism are related to space and time-like (einstein,huygens)
causality, localization of corresponding objects and problems of degree of free-
dom counting. all these issues are belonging to real-time physics and in most
cases their meaning in terms of euclidean continuation (statistical mechanics)
remains obscure; but this of course does not make them less physical.

this note is organized as follows. in the next section i elaborate the kine-
matical aspects of the adsd+1-cqftd situation as a collateral result of the
old (1974/75) compactication formalism for the conformalization of the d-
dimensional minkowski spacetime. for this reason the seemingly more demand-
ing problem of studying qft directly in ads within a curved spacetime for-
malism1 can be bypassed. the natural question whose answer would have led
directly from cqf t4 to ads5 in the particle physics setting (without string
theory as a midwife) is: does there exist a quantum eld theory which has the
same so(4, 2) symmetry and just reprocesses the cqf t4 matter content in
such a way that the conformal hamiltonian (the timelike rotational generator
through compactied m becomes the true hamiltonian? this theory uniquely
exists and is an ads theory with a specic local matter content computable

1this was also done in the 70ies by fronsdal. there was a good reason why he missed the
isomorphism to cqft despite his musterful handling of (noncompact) group theory: it was
the degree of freedom (multiplicity) problem which will be addressed later.

3

from the cqft matter content. the answer is unique, but as a result of the
dierent dimensionality one cannot describe this unique relation between mat-
ter contents in terms of pointlike elds. this will be treated in section 3, where
we will also compare the content of rehrens isomorphism [6][8] with the mal-
dacena, witten at al [1][2][3] conjectures and notice some subtle but potentially
serious dierences. whoever is aware of the fact that subtle dierences often
have been the enigmatic motor of progress in good physics times will not dismiss
such observations.

the last section presents some general results of aqft on degrees of freedom
counting and holography. closely connected is the idea of chiral scanning i.e.
the encoding of the full content of a higher dimensional (massive) eld qft
into a nite number of copies of one chiral theory in a carefully selected relative
position within a common hilbert space. in this case the prize one has to pay
for this more generic holography (light-front holography) is that some of the
geometrically acting spacetime symmetry transformations become fuzzy in
the holographic projection and some of the geometrically acting symmetries on
the holographic image are not represented by dieomorphisms if pulled back
into the original qft.

2 conformal compactication and ads

the simplest type of conformal qft is obtained by realizing that zero mass
wigner representation of the poincare group with positive energy (and discrete
helicity) allow for an extension the conformal symmetry group so(4, 2)/z2 with-
out any extension of the hilbert space. besides scale transformations, this larger
symmetry also incorporates the fractional transformations (proper conformal
transformations)

x =

x  bx2

1  2bx + b2x2

(1)

it is often convenient to view this formula as the action of the translation group
t (b) conjugated with a (hyperbolic) inversion i

i : x 

x
x2

x = it (b)ix

(2)

(3)

i does not belong to the above conformal group, although it is unitarily repre-
sented (and hence a wigner symmetry) in these special wigner representations.
for xed x and small b the formula (1) is well dened, but globally it mixes nite
spacetime points with innity and hence requires a more precise denition in
particular in view of the positivity energy-momentum spectral properties in its
action on quantum elds. hence as preparatory step for the quantum eld the-
ory concepts one has to achieve a geometric compactication. this starts most
conveniently from a linear representation of the conformal group so(d, 2) in

4

d+2-dimensional auxiliary space r(d,2) (i.e. without eld theoretic signicance)
with two negative (time-like) signatures

g

g =


1

+1




(4)

and restricts this representation to the (d+1)-dimensional forward light cone

lc(d,2) = { = (, 4, 5); 2 + 2

d  2

d+1 = 0}

(5)

0  ~2 denotes the d-dimensional minkowski length square. the
where 2 = 2
compactied minkowski space md is obtained by adopting a projective point of
view (stereographic projection)

md =(cid:26)x =



d + d+1

;   lc(d,2)(cid:27)

(6)

it is then easy to verify that the linear transformation which keep the last two
components invariant consist of the lorentz group and those transformations
which only transform the last two coordinates yield the scaling formula

d  d+1  es(d  d+1)

(7)

leading to x  x,  = es . the remaining transformations, namely the trans-
lations and the fractional proper conformal transformations, are obtained by
composing rotations in the i-d and boosts in the i-d+1 planes.

a convenient description of minkowski spacetime m in terms of this d+2

dimensional auxiliary formalism is obtained in terms of a conformal time 

md = (sin, e,cos ), e  sd1

t =

sin

ed + cos

, ~x =

~e

ed + cos

ed + cos > 0,  <  < +

(8)

(9)

so that the minkowski spacetime is a piece of the d-dimensional wall of a cylin-
der in d+1 dimensional spacetime which becomes tiled with the closure of in-
nitely many minkowski worlds. if one cuts the wall on the backside appropri-
ately, this carved out piece representing d-dimensional compactied minkowski
spacetime has the form of a d-dimensional double cone symmetrically around
 = 0, e = (0, ed = 1) without its boundary2. the above directional compacti-
cation leads to an identication of boundary points at innity and give e.g.
for d=1+1 the compactied manifold the topology of a torus. the points which
have been added at the innity to m namely m\m are best described in terms
2the graphical representations are apart from the compactication (which involves iden-
tications between past and future points at time/light-innity) the famous penrose pictures
of m.

5

of the d-1 dimensional submanifold of points which are lightlike with respect to
the past innity apex at m = (0, 0, 0, 0, 1,  = ). the cylinder walls form

the universal covering fmd = sd1  r which is tiled in both  -directions by

innitely many minkowski spacetimes (heavens and hells) [12]. if the only
interest would be the description of the compactication m , then one may as
well stay with the original x-coordinates and write the d+2 -coordinates follow
dirac and weyl as

 = x,  = 0, 1, 2, 3

(10)

4 =

5 =

1
2
1
2

(1 + x2)

(1  x2)

i.e. (  )2 = (x  x)2

since  is only dened up to a scale factor, we conclude that lightlike dier-
ences retain an objective meaning in m even though the space- and time-like
separation does loose its meaning. an example of a physical theory on m are
free photons. the impossibility of a distinction between space- and time- like
nds its mathematical formulation in the huygens principle which says that the
lightlike separation is the only one where the physical elds do not commute
and hence where an interaction can happen. in the terminology of local quan-
tum physics this means that the commutant of an observable algebra localized
in a double cone consists apparently of a (einstein causal) connected spacelike-
as well as two disconnected (huygens causality) timelike- pieces. but taking
the compactication into consideration one realizes that all three parts are con-
nected and the space/time-like distinction is meaningless on m . in terms of
wightman correlation functions this is equivalent to the rationality of the an-
alytically continued wightman functions of observable elds which includes an
analytic extension into timelike jost points [36][18].

therefore in order to make contact with particle physics aspects the use of

either the covering fm or of more general elds (see next section) on m is very

important since only in this way one can implement the pivotal property of
causality together with the associated localization concepts. as rst observed
by i. segal [11] and later elaborated and brought into the by now standard form
in eld theory by luscher and mack [12], a global form of causality can be based
on the sign of the invariant

((e,  )  (e,  ))2

 0, hence

|   |  2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
4 (cid:19) 1
arcsin(cid:18) e  e

(11)

= |arccos (e  e)|

where the < inequality characterizes global spacelike distances and > corre-
sponds to positive and negative global timelike separations. whereas the glob-

6

ally spacelike region of a point is compact, the timelike region is not. the
concept of global causality solves the so called einstein causality paradox of
cqft [13]. in the next section we will meet a global decomposition method
which also avoids this paradox without the necessity to use covering space.

the central theme, namely the connection with qft on ads enters this
section naturally if one asks the question whether one can instead of the surface
of the forward light cone alternatively use a mass hyperboloid hd+1 inside the
forward light cone of the same ambient d+2 dimensional space

hd+1 =(cid:8); 2 = 1(cid:9)
0 =p1 + r2sin
d+1 =p1 + r2cos

i = rei, i = 1, ...d

(12)

this space which because of its formal relation to the analogous desitter space-
time (which is dened by the spacelike hyperboloid) is called anti desitter
spacetime is noncompact. it is obvious from its construction that its asymptotic
part is the same as md. it was conjectured by maldacena and others [1][2][3]
that there is also a correspondence between quantum eld theories. this con-
jecture implies the tacit assumption (not explicitly stated in these papers) that
an adsd+1 qft which coalesces asymptotically with an cqf td theory has
a unique extension into the ads bulk since there can be no mapping between
pointlike elds on spacetimes of dierent dimensions. it came about from some
speculations concerning possible relations of string theory with some supersym-
metric gauge theories (sym) far away from the present setting. in the 70s, at
the time of the conformal compactications, free elds on ads4 where stud-
ied from a particle physics viewpoint by fronsdal [4]. the correspondence to
cqf t3 was overlooked since despite the group theoretical connection through
the common so(3, 2) the multiplicites of the discrete ads free hamiltonian
is too big for those of the conformal hamiltonian, a fact which will nd its
explanation in the next section.

although the two spacetime cannot be mapped into each other, their shared
spacetime symmetry group so(4, 2) suggests that there is at least a correspon-
dence between certain subsets which may be obtained from projecting down
wedge regions from the ambient space onto the two spacetime manifolds. wedges
have a natural relation to so(4,2); they may all be generated from standard

wedge wst = (cid:8)1 >(cid:12)(cid:12)0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:9) and the xed point group of a wedge consists of a

boost and transversal translations and rotations3. the projected wedges pw
on ads are by denition again wedges in ads/cqft and the so(d, 2) symme-
try group has the same transitive action i.e the system of wedges is described
by so(d, 2) modulo the xed point subgroup. this geometric situation suggests

3if one adds the two longitudinal lightlike translations which in one direction cause a

compression into the wedge, one obtains a 8-dimensional galilei group [21].

7

that on should consider algebras associated with these wedges. on the confor-
mal side this includes all double cone algebras of arbitrary small size. the logic
of algebraic qft requires to continue this to all intersections obtained from
wedges. in this way one expects to arrive at an isomorphism which carries the
full content of both theories and which includes the asymptotic relation in terms
of eld coordinatizations ala maldacena et al in order to obtain a rigorous proof,
one must check some consistency conditions in the conversion of maps between
spacetime regions and algebras indexed by those regions. this was achieved by
rehren and will be briey comment on his theorem (including its relation to
the original conjecture) in the next section.

according to our previous remarks interacting conformal local elds live on

the covering space fm . fortunately the geometric isomorphism between wedge
regions can be carried to an gadsd+1  fm correspondence. the conformal de-

composition theory of the next section avoids the use of the rather complicated
coverings.

3 the conformal hamiltonian as the true hamil-

tonian

there is another less geometric but more particle physics type of argument
which leads to the ads-cqft correspondence.

for this one should recall that in so(d, 2) there are besides the usual trans-
lations with innity as a xed point also conformal translations which act
on the compactied m without xed points as some kind of rotations. they
are the analogs of the chiral rotation r() (l()
in standard virasoro algebra
notation) and their connection with the light ray translation p () with which
they share the positivity of their spectrum is

0

r() = p () + k ()
k () = i ()p ()i ()

(13)

where i is the representer of the chiral conformal reection x   1
x (in linear
lightray coordinates x) and k is the generator of the fractional special conformal
transformation (1). for free zero mass elds the discrete r-spectrum can be
understood in terms of that of a hamiltonian for a massless model in a spatial
box. this is however not possible for the r-spectrum of chiral theories with
anomalous scale dimension (the r-spectrum is known to be identical to the
that of scale dimensions). in that case the only theory for which the spectrum
is that of its hamiltonian is ads2. so if one wants to read the sl(2, z) modular
characters of chiral conformal eld theory in the spirit of a hamiltonian gibbs
formula one should use the ads side. an analogous statement holds in higher
dimensions where the m rotation is described in terms of a lorentz vector r

r = p + ipi

8

where the inversion i was dened at the beginning of the previous section. it
leads to a family of operators with discrete spectrum of er which are dependent
on a timelike vector e. again the operator r0 is the true hamiltonian of only
one theory with the same symmetry group and the same system of algebras
(but with a dierent spacetime indexing): the associated d+1 dimensional ads
theory.

now it is time to quote (are rather adapted to our purpose) and comment

rehrens theorem

theorem 1 the geometric bijection between projected wedges pw on adsd+1
and the conformal double cones in md which constitute the asymptotic innity
of pw (as described in the previous section) extends to an isomorphism of the
corresponding algebras. both theories share the same hilbert space and the same
family of operator algebras but their spacetime organization and with it their
physical interpretation changes.

for the proof we refer to rehren [6].
some comments are in order. there is no additional restrictive assumptions
(supersymmetry, vanishing -functions) on either side. if the algebras of the
ads theory are generated by pointlike elds then the associated conformal al-
gebra cannot be generated by a eld which has an energy-momentum tensor or
obeys a causal equation of motion. this is one of rehrens conclusions and it is
very instructive to illustrate this with an example.

consider a free scalar ads eld [7]. a simple calculation reveals that it cor-
responds to a generalized free eld with homogeneous kallen-lehmann spectral
function. generalized free elds are physically suspect and if there spectral func-
tions increases in the manner as in this case, one can even prove that primitive
causality [17] is violated since the algebra on a piece of time-slice (represented
as a chain of small double cones) is not equal to its causal completion (causal
shadow) algebra. as one moves up in time inside the causal shadow from the
time-slice more and more degrees of freedom coming from the inner parts of
the bulk enter the causal shadow which were not in the time-slice. rehrens
graphical representation [32] of the cqft world on the wall of an ads cylinder
makes this neatly visible. this free eld situation is generic in the sense that
pointlike ads elds always carry too many degrees of freedom which leads to
causality violation in the aforementioned sense. therefore the nice idea [33]
to circumvent the diculties of constructing lagrangian conformal models (the
-function restrictions) by starting with ads lagrangians does not work, since
the resulting conformal theories all share the above defect.

in passing we mention that the brane idea shares the same causality conict
with pointlike eld. whereas from a mathematical viewpoint a manifold of
interest may in certain cases be considered a brane of a larger dimensional
space, the assignment of a physical reality to the larger spacetime generates
causality problems of the above kind for restrictions to the brane of pointlike
eld theories in the larger ambient spacetime. only if the ambient degrees
of freedom are carefully tuned to the brane can such causality violations be

9

avoided. note that it is always the causal shadow property which may get lost
in such constructions and not the einstein causality. as a matter of fact not
even the quasiclassical klein-kaluza reduction has been shown to be consistent
with causal qft. for this one would have to demonstrate that the idea works
on the ready made qft and not just on the objects involved in the formal
quantization approach which is used in the tentative construction of a qft.
as far as the strict conceptual requirement of causality and haag duality in
aqft are concerned, the k-k mechanism, to the extend that it is not just a
mathematical trick (but an asymptotic property of a genuine inclusion of two
local quantum physics worlds) has at best remained an enigmatic speculative
idea (and at worst a tautology caused by not doing what one actually is claiming
to do).

the above degree of freedom discussion creates the suspicion that good
causal conformal theories may have too few degrees of freedom in order to yield
ads pointlike elds. this is indeed the case and can be seen by starting from
the wigner zero mass representation space of the poincare group

hw ig =(cid:26)(~p)|z |(~p)|2 dd1p

2 |~p|

< (cid:27)

(14)

which without extension provides an irreducible representation space of so(d, 2).
the subspace of modular wedge-localized wigner wave functions consists of
boundary values of wave functions  which are analytic in the rapidity strip
0 < im <  where for the standard wedge

px =qp2

y + p2

zsinh, p0 =qp2

y + p2

zcosh

(15)

this wave function space is in common regardless whether we are talking about
the standard wedge on md or the corresponding adsd+1 wedge. whereas this
space in the md interpretation is easily rewritten in terms of covariant x-space
wave functions with the expected support properties, an analog -spacetime
covariantization for ads does not work. the best one can do is to introduce
(olsen-nielsen) string-like wave functions in -spacetime which do not depend
on w and which behave under so(d, 2) transformations as objects which depend
on an additional direction (the string direction). so instead of pointlike elds one
obtains string-like objects (with weaker covariance properties) which emanate
from the points on the asymptotic boundary and extend through the bulk and
which are linear in the same momentum space creation/annihikation operators
as those which appear in the free conformal elds. this is the way in which the
ads formulation maintains the conformal degrees of freedom and the primitive
causality. the string objects of the rehren theorem are perfectly within causal
localizable aqft, and hence they are not objects of string theory proper. the
degree of freedom issue is not related to einstein causality which remains valid
irrespective of whether the local algebras are generated by pointlike elds or
not, but rather to the causal propagation property which is not guarantied by
einstein causality.

10

the maldacena et. al conjecture [1][2][3] is that some high dimensional true
string theories is in some eective not precisely specied sense equivalent with
conformally invariant supersymmetric yang-mills (sym) theories. to the ex-
tend in which the argument supporting this conjecture uses a correspondence
between pointlike (lagrangian) ads5 qft and a conformal sym it is contra-
dicted by the above theorem. antinomies and contradictions about important
topics in earlier times were often the source of progress and one would hope that
they continue to receive their due attention. the issue is somewhat delicate as
a result that the euclidean functional integral formalism in which the original
conjectures were presented is at most an heuristic starting point since feynman-
kac representations in strictly renormalizable qfts are simply not valid for the
physical (renormalized) results and for this reason the chosen method poses an
obstacle against converting the conjecture into a proof. this conceptual aw
of the functional action approach is one of the raisons detre of algebraic qft
which to balance the starting calculational denitions with the properties of the
constructed models. one could of course try to argue exclusively in terms of
dierential geometric concepts by abstacting from the action formulation purely
geometric denitions of what constitutes syms and the associated string theo-
ries. but in doing this one will lose the relation to local quantum physics and
the obtaines theorem may be void of an particle physics content.

if the lagrangian perturbation method applied to the ads side of the cor-
respondence cannot be used for the construction of additional conformal qfts
as argued above, the question arises whether there are other construction meth-
ods. a closer investigation reveals that the spectrum of anomalous dimensions
of interacting conformal eld theories is determined in terms of a timelike braid
group structure. a convenient way of presenting this structure is to work with
nonlocal component elds [14] which result from the decomposition of the charge

carrying globally local elds f on fm under the reduction of the center of the

conformal covering group ( ^s(d, 2))

f (x) =x,
z =x

f,(x), f,(x)  pf (x)p

(16)

e2ip

in terms of projectors pa which appear in the spectral decomposition of the
generator z of the center( ^s(d, 2)) = {z n, n  z}. in a way the existence of this
decomposition facilitates the use of the standard parametrization of minkowski
space augmented by the quasiperiodic central transformation

zf,(x)z  = e2i( )f,(x)

(17)

and hence one may to a large part avoid the use of the complicated covering
parametrization and its ^so(d, 2) transformations which the unprojected elds

f would require. for the latter elds on fm the notation would be insucient;

one also has to give an equivalence class of path (the number n 0 of the

11

heaven/hell one is in) with respect to our copy of m embedded in fm . the

projected elds on the other hand are analogous to sections in a trivialized
vectorbundle. with the help of conformal 3-point functions one shows that
the -phases are related to the anomalous dimensions. the component elds
f,(x) are the suitable objects for the formulation of the timelike braid group
commutation relations which take the form of an exchange algebra

f,(x)g,(y) =x 

r(,)

,  g, (y)f ,(x), x > y

(18)

where the r-matrices are determined from admissible braid group representa-
tions. for more on the timelike braid group structure in higher dimensional
conformal qft we refer to [18].

since the ads-cqft isomorphism implies a radical reprocessing on the
physical side, it would be interesting to perform the timelike commutation re-
lation analysis directly within the ads setting. this has not been done yet.

4 generalized holography in local quantum physics

the message we can learn from the ads-conformal correspondence is two-fold.
on the one hand there is the recognition that there are situations where it is
necessary to avoid the use of eld coordinates in favor of directly working
with local algebras. in most concrete situations there were always convenient
eld coordinatizations available in terms of which the calculations simplied.
for the ads-conformal correspondence is however a new type of problem for
which the best way is to stay intrinsic, i.e. to use the net of algebras.

the second message is that there may exist a holographic relation between
qfts and their lower dimensional boundaries. we have argued that the de-
grees of freedom of adsd+1 are the same as in the corresponding cqf td on the
boundary even though the hamiltonians and the associated thermal aspects are
dierent. this is the only known case of a bijection of nets of algebras associ-
ated with spacetimes of dierent dimensions but with the same dieomorphisms
group.

another more frequent kind of holography occurs for spacetimes with a
causal horizon.
in that case certain spacetime dieomorphisms of the origi-
nal spacetime act in a fuzzy nongeometric manner thus accounting for the
fact that the dieomorphism group of the horizon is smaller. let us consider
a simple example: the holographic image of a two-dimensional massive theory
in the vacuum representation restricted to the standard wedge i.e. a rindler-
unruh situation. we want to restrict the restrict the wedge algebra a(w ) to its
upper half-line horizon r+. in a massive theory we expect that both operator
algebras are globally identical

a(w ) = a(r+)

(19)

12

although their local net structure is quite dierent. classically this corresponds
to the fact that characteristic data on either of the two horizons determine
uniquely the function in the wedge4. it is very important to controll the data
on the entire upper horizon r+; compact intervals on r+ do not cast two-
dimensional causal shadows, in contradistinction to a spacelike interval. the
physical reason is of course that each point in a small neighborhood below that
interval is in the backward inuence cone of some points on r+ which are far
removed to the right outside that interval. only if we take all of r+ we will
have w as its two-dimensional causal shadow.

in the general approach to qft the von neumann algebra of a compact
spacetime region is, according to the causal shadow property of aqft (which
is a local version of the time-slice property mentioned in the previous section
[17]), identical to the algebra of its causally completed region. each eld theory
with a causal propagation (in particular lagrangian eld theory) fullls this
requirement. if one takes a sequence of spacelike intervals which approximate
a lightlike interval, the causal shadow region becomes gradually smaller and
vanished in the limit. the only way to counteract this shrinking is to extend
the spacelike interval gradually to the right in such a way that the larger lower
causal shadow part becomes the full wedge in the limit. the correctness of this
intuitive idea which suggests the correctness of (19) can be checked against other
rigorous results. one rigorous result from wigner representation theory (which
therefore is limited to free eld theories) together with the application of the
weyl or car (for halnteger spin) functor is the statement that the cyclicity
spaces for an interval i on r+ agree with the total space [19]

a(i) = a(r+) = a(w ) = h

(20)

i.e.
the validity of the reeh-schlieder theorem on the light ray subalgebra.
in fact this holds for all positive energy representations including zero mass,
except zero mass in d=1+1 in which case the decomposition in two chiral factors
prevents its validity. therefore one only needs to proof the spatial statement
a(r+) = a(w ) = h in order to derive (19). but this spatial completeness
follows from the causal shadow property for spacelike half-lines l starting at
the origin since the space a(l) = h and this completeness property cannot
get lost in the light ray limit l  r+. the step from spaces to (19) is done
with the help of takesakis theorem (mentioned later).

we still have to rigorously dene the holographic algebra a(r+) (which
turns out to be chiral conformal) and its net structure a(i) from a(w ). this
is done by the modular inclusion technique which is one of aqft most recent
mathematical achievements [20][19].

the modular way of associating a chiral conformal theory with e.g. a d=1+1
massive theory is the following . start from the right wedge algebra a(w ) with
apex at the origin and let an upper lightlike translation a+ (which fullls the
energy positivity!) act on a(w ) and produce an inclusion (all the algebras are

4this is true in any dimension. the only exception is d=1+1, mass=0 in which case both

horizons are needed to specify the two chiral components of conformal theories.

13

von neumann algebras)

a(wa+ )  a(w )

(21)

this inclusion is halfsided modular, i.e. the modular group5 it of (a(w ), )
which is the lorentz boost acts on a(wa+ ) for t<0 as a compression

adita(wa+ )  a(wa+ ), t < 0

(22)

the assumed nontriviality of the net i.e. the intersections6 of wedge algebras
entails that the relative commutant (primes on algebras denote their commutant
in b(h))

a(wa+ )  a(w )

(23)

is also nontrivial. such inclusions are called standard.
it is known that
standard modular inclusions correspond to chiral conformal theories, i.e. the
classication problem for the latter is identical to the classication of all stan-
dard modular inclusions [34]. in the case at hand the emergence of the chiral
theory is intuitively clear since the only living space in agreement with ein-
stein causality (within the closure of w and spacelike with respect to the open
wa+ ) which one can attribute to the relative commutant is the lightray interval
of length a+ starting at the origin. from the abstract modular inclusion set-
ting the hilbert space which the relative commutant generates from the vacuum
could be a subspace h+  h, h+ = p h of the original one, but the already
mentioned causal shadow property assures that h+ = h, i.e. p = 1 with the
help of the l-boost (=modular group it of (a(w ), ) one then denes a net
on the haline r+ and a global algebra

a(r+) = alg(cid:8)t<oadit(a(wa+ )  a(w ))(cid:9)  a(w )

a(r+) = h, y a(r+) = a(w )

(24)

the modular group it of the original algebra leaves this lightray algebra invari-
ant and hence we are in the situation of the takesaki theorem which states that
a subalgebra together with the vacuum which is left invariant by the modular
group of the larger algebra has modular objects which are restrictions of those
of (a(w ), ) and the algebras coalesce i a(r+) = h. the identity (19)
means that the original modular inclusion was standard and hence the theory
on the light ray is conformal. the identity of this conformal theory with the
massive wedge algebra also shows that identication of chiral conformal theories
with zero mass is a prejudice. whether chiral theories are describing massless

5for presentations of the tomita-takesaki modular theory which are close to the present
concepts and notations see [10]. a more extensive presentation which pays due attention to
the importance of modular theory for the new conceptual setting of qft is that by borchers
[35].

6the nontriviality of the intersections is in some sense the algebraic counterpart of the
renormalizable short distance behaviour in a quantization approach which is believed to be
required by the mathematical existence of the lagrangian theory.

14

or massive situations depends on the identication of the mass operator.
in
the present case there exists another lightray translation along the lower hori-
zon and the mass operator is given by the product p+p. even though the
spectrum of each p is gapless as required by conformal invariance, there is a
mass gap in the physical mass operator. since the lightray algebra is identical
to the wedge algebra, the lower a lightray translation also acts on it, not as a
dieomorphism but rather in a fuzzy [21] totally nonlocal way relative to the
local moebius group action. so in the lightray representation of the wedge alge-
bra only the lorentz boost (which becomes a scale transformation on r+) and
the upper lightray translation are shared as local dieomorphism operations in
both representations. the lower lightray translation is nonlocal on a(r+) and
the moebius rotation (after compactication of r+) is newly created and acts
only partially geometrically on w. it is one of the characteristic features of this
generalized holography that in addition to the local and nonlocal encoding of
dieomorphisms of the original theory into its lower dimensional holographic
image, there are also partially geometric symmetries as the moebius rotations
transferred back from the image into the original theory. the degrees of free-
dom of the chiral conformal a(r+) are in some intuitive sense more than in
a standard chiral conformal theory associated with a chiral energy momentum
tensor because such a model would be to small in order to carry additional fuzzy
transformations.

still another related idea about relations of qfts on dierent but this time
equal dimensional spacetimes which uses modular techniques in an essential way
has recently appeared under the name transplantation of local nets [37].

the present modular inclusion approach to lightray physics, including the
localization and degrees of freedom aspect is another illustration of the con-
ceptual power of the eld coordinate free approach and the modular inclusion
method. in the standard setting there are several fake as well as genuine (re-
quiring a change of eld coordinates) problems with light cone- restrictions
and quantizations. standard approaches are usually entirely formal and tend
to overlook localization problems whose understanding is vital for the physical
interpretation of the formalism.

this is is even more so in higher dimensions where the wedge horizons are
lightfronts. a typical case which requires new concepts is d=1+2. in that case
the modular method applied to one wedge only transfers a small fraction of the
geometric structure of the original theory into a chiral conformal theory obtained
by modular inclusion which localization-wise should really be associated with
the upper light front horizon of the wedge. but since its transversal localization
remains completely unresolved, the so obtained light front theory only contains
the longitudinal localization data of a chiral conformal net. let me explain
the way to get a transversal resolution. in that case one tilts the wedge by a
l-boost which leaves the upper dening light ray for the initial wedge invariant
[9][10]. one then convinces oneself that this newly positioned second wedge
has a modular associated chiral conformal theory which, though being unitarily
equivalent to the rst one, carries the missing information (which is needed for
the reconstruction of the original d=1+2 theory) in form of its relative position

15

in the common hilbert space h. the tilted wedge can be used to give a net
stucture to the original wedge in the transversal direction. again the holographic
projection of the original net into the horizon has besides geometric actions also
fuzzy and partially local actions.

but instead using the 2-dim. horizon for a constructive approach with the
modular inclusion and intersection method it would be somewhat more natural
to describe the original theory in terms of the two chiral theories which the
modular inclusion associates with the original wedge and the tilted wedge. in
the general d-dimensional case one would encode the original theory in terms
of d-1 copies of one and the same chiral theory in dierent positions within one
hilbert space. the name chiral scanning would be more appropriate than
holography for such a procedure. of course adding nice names to structural
relations is by itself not very constructive. the hope is that by more profound
future studies one may develop criteria which allow a more universal intrinsic
algebraic characterization of those relative positions and chiral theories which
allow to construct a d-dimensional qft. chiral theories are the simplest and
best understood qfts and the study of d-1 copies of them seems to be simpler
than to confront higher dimensional eld theories directly.

in fact t hoofts original holography [23] proposal and susskinds [22] subse-
quent work are more related to the light front encoding or the related scanning
than to the ads holography with its high geometric symmetry. therefore the
present use of modular inclusions may be seen as an attempt to nd a rmer
conceptual and mathematical basis for those ideas.

the importance of causal horizons in the above considerations suggests to
look for a localization entropy of causally localized matter as a rst step to-
wards a quantum explanation of the universal bekenstein area law in black hole
physics. but there is a hurdle right at the start: unlike qm where a quantiza-
tion box denes a inside/outside division of the hilbert space and the quantum
mechanical algebra (type i von neumann factor) through a tensor product
factorization, the nature of the double cone algebras (the relativistic causally
closed analogs of boxes) in qft is totally dierent since as hypernite type iii1
von neumann factors they contain neither minimal projectors nor are there any
pure states among its normal states. this unusual state of aairs requires the
introduction of the split property in order to construct the relativistic ana-
logue of the qm box [16]. the physical mechanism behind this property is the
strong vacuum uctuations of partial charges at the surface of its localization
volume v, one of the oldest and most characteristic phenomena which set apart
qft from qm.

let us rst try to understand this phenomenon in a mathematically rened
formulation of its original discovery by heisenberg. using a smooth spacetime
smearing function consisting of a spatial part gr,(x) with thickness  and lo-
calization radius r multiplied by a compact support time-smearing f in the
denition of the partial charge

16

qr =z j0(x)f (x0)gr,(x)dsx

gr,(x) =(cid:26) 1, |x| < r
f (x0)  0, z f (x0)d x0 = 1

0, |x| > r + 

(25)

one nds that the square norm of the partial charge applied to the vacuum
hqrqri diverges with   0 and increases for xed  in the limit r   as
rd2 where d is the spacetime dimension [24].

but what if any could be the message of this area law with that of the would
be localization entropy? we rst have to understand the algebraic analogue
of the surface vacuum uctuation of the partial charges. this turns out to be
the split property i.e. the necessity to work with fuzzy space time boxes in the
form of double cones with a collar region of thickness  separating the inside
of the smaller box of radius r from the outside of the bigger with radius r+.
in this split situation we do recover the quantum mechanical inside/outside
tensor factorization which refers to a fuzzy box algebra n which extends be-
yond the smaller box into the collar without sharp geometric boundaries [16].
this sets the stage for dening von neumann entropy which needs the type i
tensor-factorization of boxes in qm. there remains however another important
dierence to schrodinger quantum mechanics in that the vacuum state remains
entangled i.e. does not split into an inside/outside part but rather remains a
highly entangled state with the hawking-unruh temperature. this has paradig-
matic consequences for the conceptual framework of the measurement process
in local quantum physics [25]. it is also the origin of the localization entropy
which we have been looking for. one can show that the vacuum state restricted
to the fuzzy qft box leads to a nontrivial entropy which diverges with   0
and increases with the size r of the box in agreement with the above analogy
which intuitively pictures the box entropy of the vacuum as being related to
a partial hamiltonian charge via a gibbs formula in the above sense. as
in that case one also would expect that the validity of an entropical area law
is restricted to large ratios of the diameter divides by the collar size and that
the matter dependence would show up, if not in area law itself, at least in its
correction terms.

various intuitively equivalent forms of localization entropy related to the
split inclusion situation were introduced via the concept of relative entropy for
a pair of states in the work of h. narnhofer [26]. the most managable version for
the purpose of extracting a possible area law which refers directly to the states
seems to be the relative entropy of the vacuum relative to the split vacuum
on the restricted tensor product algebra a  b, a  n , b  n  where a
is the smaller double cone algebra and b the commutant of the bigger one.
kosaki [27] discovered a nice variational formula for such relative entropy of a

17

von neumann algebra m between two states i, i = 1, 2

s(1|2)m =  hlog1,2i2

= supz 1

0 (cid:20) (1)

 1(y(t)y(t)) 

1 + t

(26)

1
t

2(x(t)x(t))

dt

t (cid:21)

x(t) = 1  y(t), x(t)  m

here 1,2 is the relative modular operator and for the case at hand we
have to identify 1 = , 2 =    (the split vacuum) and m = a  b. using
some previous nuclearity estimates of buchholz and wichmann [16], narnhofer
carried out a rough estimate for this entropy and found that it increases less
than the volume of the relativistic box of size r [26]. in the present setting her
result may be interpreted as a rst indication in favor of a bekenstein area law
for localized quantum matter. i order to obtain more structural inside into this
fundamental and universal phenomenon i started to investigate this problem
in the mathematically more controllable situation of double cones in conformal
theories [10]. by conformal invariance the large r behaviour becomes coupled
to the short distance behavior in the collar size   0. one expects to have an
easier conceptual grasp on this ultraviolet behavior as a consequence of the fact
that it reects truely intrinsic properties of the local algebras and has nothing
to do with short distance divergencies of particular eld coordinates. besides,
conformal theories from an analytic viewpoint are the simplest theories after
free elds. there are as yet no results wothwhile to be reported here.

to avoid misunderstanding, i am not saying that the area law for black holes
is a simple consequence of the area law for localized quantum matter. it would
be a pity if it would because then not much would be revealed about the still
extremely speculative issue of quantum gravity. rather i believe that it is the
seemingly very nontrivial conversion of localization entropy of local quantum
physics into the more geometric killing horizon entropy of black holes7 which
will be the crucial step.

5 epilogue

the present analysis of the ads-cqft correspondence has its roots in the lsz
setting of particle physics from which the conformally invariant qft should
result in the zero mass limit [29]. the step from the traditional use of pointlike
(lagrangian) elds to operator algebras indexed by spacetime regions has been
taken a long time ago with the intention to obtain a more profound understand-
ing of the observed insensitivity of the s-matrix obtained as the asymptotic limit
in the setting of the lehmann symanzik-zimmermann formalism to changes of
eld coordinates (interpolating elds) within the (borchers) equivalence class.
this led to a more intrinsic formulation of qft called algebraic qft (aqft)
which relegates the role of elds to a coordinatization of local algebras in terms

7the role of the double cone restricted vacuum in the black hole situation is played by the

hartle-hawking state restricted to the outside of the black hole [28].

18

of selection of particular generators. if one wants to use eld-coordinatizations
alltogether, as was needed in rehrens proof of the ads-cqft isomorphism, it
is appropriate to avoid the word eld and talk about local quantum physics
[16]. as the step from dierential geometry with coordinates to the modern
intrinsic coordinate-free formulation did not represent a change of the geomet-
rical content, one does not change physical principles (but only some concepts
for their implementation) by passing from qft to lqp. since certain prob-
lems, as e.g. the abominable short-distance problem in the pointlike formula-
tion (coordinate singularities? which eld coordinate?)8 which always seemed
to threaten the existence of lagrangian qft become deemphasized in favor of
apparantly dierent aspects (ultraviolet divergenciesnontriviality of certain
intersection of algebras) in the new formulation, this reprocessing of concepts
represents a very healthy change.

the conjecture about the ads-cqft correspondence comes from string
theory. although string theory has been the dominant way of thinking in par-
ticle physics publications for at least two decades, its main achievements seems
to be that (with some training) it allows theoretical physicists to contribution
to mathematics. its historical origin in the dual s-matrix model of veneziano
was very close to the framework of lsz scattering theory; in fact it started as
a proposal for a nonperturbative crossing symmetric s-matrix which fullled
a very strong form (not suggested by qft) of crossing called duality (satura-
tion of crossing on the level of reggeized one-particle states). this forced the
s-matrix to live in a high-dimensional spacetime of at least 10 dimensions (by
invoking another invented structure: supersymmetry). the next step in the
lsz logic would have been to ask for the high dimensional qft (i.e. the unique
equivalence class of elds or the local net of algebras) which has this s-matrix
as a bona de physical s-matrix i.e.a large time lsz limit. unfortunately this
never happened; instead the o-shell transition happened at a completely dif-
ferent purely technical place. it was based on the auxiliary observation that the
particle towers which appeared in the lowest order (or lowest genus of riemann
surfaces which is the analogue of schwingers auxiliary eigentime in qft) can
be reproduced by the mass spectrum of a string. in the original strong interac-
tion representation of the model this tower was thought to lead to resonances
(poles in the second riemann sheet) resulting from higher order interactions
destabilizing the higher-lying particles in the tower.
it was this step (which
occurred even before the decree of the use of string theory as a quantum the-
ory of gravity) which is responsible for the lost (and never recovered) relation to
causality and localization which are the cornerstones of qft. whereas in earlier
times quantum eld theorist have thought (without any success) about nonlocal
alternatives in the form of an elementary length or a cuto, recent developments
in algebraic qft have made abundantly clear that einstein causality and its

8there are also intrinsic ultraviolet aspects of the local algebras. for example if one uses
the split property for the denition of the vauum entropy of a local algebra with a collar
for controlling the vacuum uctuations near the causal horizon of the localization region, the
entropy diverges with shrinking collar size in a way which is characteristic for the model but
not for one of its eld coordinates [10].

19

strengthed form haag duality is inexorably linked with the mathematics of the
tomita-takesaki modular theory. this is an extremely deep theory which is
able to convert abstract domain properties of operators and subspaces obtained
by applying algebras of local quantum physics to distinguished state vectors
into concrete spacetime localization geometry (without the necessity to impose
any additional structure from the mathematics of noncommutative geometry).
all structural insight obtained up to now, the charge superselection structure,
tcp, braid group statistics9, v. jones- as well as the new modular inclusion
theory mentioned in this paper, the universal nature of holography and the con-
cept of localized entropy, all these properties depend on the causality aspects
of qft. so the reasons for giving them up must be very strong (theoretical or
experimental) and amount to much more than the esthetics of dierential geo-
metric consistency observation. the biggest dierence to the a more scholarly
and less marketing zeitgeist in previous times becomes visible if one looks at
the terminology. whereas e.g. the quasiclassical bohr-sommerfeld theory was
presented in a way that left no doubt about its transitory character and the
step towards quantum mechanics was the de-mystication of the quasiclassical
antinomies and loose ends, string theorist often advertise their product as a
theory of everything and proudly invite their fellow physicist to read the big
latin letter m as mystery. i think the analogy with the bohr-sommerfeld the-
ory and its historical mission goes deeper. the present problems of holography,
transplantation, chiral scanning and the associated apparent paradoxa related
with degrees of freedom counting and the seemingly universal and ubiquitous
surface behavior of localization entropy are indicators that the standard formal-
ism of eld coordinatizations is already overburdened though there is no visible
violation of the underlying physical principles as compared to what they were
at the time of harry lehmanns famous contributions to particle physics.

having enjoyed the good fortune of proximity to harry lehmann to whose
memory i have dedicated this paper, the present crisis often reminds me nat-
urally of good and healthy times in particle physics when he made his lasting
contributions to particle physics. it would seem to me that in the present ab-
sence of profound experimental discoveries it would be more reasonable and
safer to develop local quantum physics according to its very strong intrinsic
logic and guidance of its underlying physical principles instead of taking o into
the blue yonder under the maxim everything goes.

but apart from a few exceptions there is a lamentable dominance of ideas
which despite their long age have not contributed anything tangible to particle
physics. this danger emanating from this dominance which seriously threatenes
the chance of our most gifted and original young minds to contribute to the
progress of particle physics (and which may even wipe out the very successful
scholarly traditions in the exact sciences altogether) was certainly realized by
the late harry lehmann who reacted to it with his characteristc mocking irony
which his friends and collaborators will not forget easily, and which besides

9including the appearance of temporal plektonic structures in higher dimensional conformal

eld theories mentioned at the end of the third section.

20

his scientic achievments probably explaines wolfgang paulis sympathy and
support extended to him.

there are indications that members of the older generation (who have been
keeping silence in the face of the mathematical brilliance and exclusiveness be-
hind some of the present dominant fashion in particle physics) are slowly be-
coming aware of the potential danger [30].

references

[1] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, (1998) 231

[2] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov, a. m. polyakov, phys.lett. b428 (1998) 105

[3] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, (1998) 253

[4] c. fronsdal, phys. rev. d10, (1974) 589

[5] s. j. avis, c. j. isham and d. storey, phys. rev. d18, (1978) 3565

[6] k.-h. rehren, ann, henri poincare 1, (2000) 607

[7] m. bertola, j. bros, u. moschella and r. schaeer, ads/cft correspon-

dence for n-point functions, hep-th/9908140

[8] d. buchholz, m. florig and s. j. summers, hawking-unruh temperature

and einstein causality in anti-de sitter space-time, hep-th/9905178

[9] b. schroer, ann. phys. (n.y.) 275, (1999) 190 and references therein

b. schroer, local quantum theory beyond quantization,
in quantum
theory and symmetries, ed. h.-d. doebner, v.k dobrev, j.-d. henning
abd w. luecke, world scientic (2000), hep-th/9912008

[10] b. schroer, j. math. phys. 41, (2000) 3801

[11] i. e. segal, causality and symmetry in cosmology and the confor-
mal group, montreal 1976, proceedings, group theoretical methods in
physics, new york 1977, 433 and references therein to ealier work of the
same author.

[12] m. luescher and g. mack, commun. math. phys. 41, (1975) 203

[13] m. hortacsu, b. schroer and r. seiler, phys. rev. d5, (1972) 2519

[14] b. schroer and j. a. swieca, phys. rev. d10, (1974) 480, b. schroer, j.

a. swieca and a. h. voelkel, phys. rev. d11, (1975) 11

[15] a. a. belavin, a. m. polyakov and a. b. zamolodchikov, nucl. phys.

b247, (1984), 83

[16] r. haag, local quantum physics, springer verlag (1992)

21

[17] r. haag and b. schroer, j. math. phys. 3, (1962) 248

[18] b. schroer, anomalous scale dimensions from timelike braiding, hep-

th/0005134

b. schroer, space- and time-like superselection rules in conformal quan-
tum field theory, hep-th/0010290

[19] d. guido, r. longo, j.e. roberts and r. verch, charged sectors, spin
and statistics in quantum field theory on curved spacetimes, math-
ph/9906019

[20] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, rmp vol 12 no 2 (feb 2000) 301-326

[21] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, rmp vol 12 no 1 (jan 2000) 139

b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, looking beyond the thermal horizon:
hidden symmetries in chiral models, to appear in rmp vol 12 no 3 (march
2000)

[22] l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36, (1995) 6377

[23] g.t hooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity,
festschrift, a. ali et al. eds., world scientic 1993, page 284

in salam-

[24] d. buchholz, s. doplicher, r. longo and j. h. roberts, rev. math. phys.

special issue (1992) 49

[25] rob clifton and hans halvorson, entanglement and open systems in al-
gebraic quantum field theory, university of pittsburgh preprint jan.2000

[26] h. narnhofer, in the state of matter, ed. by m. aizenman and h. araki

(wold-scientic, singapore) 1994

[27] h. kosaki, j. operator theory 16, (1986) 335

[28] r. m. wald, quantum field theory in cuved spacetime and black hole

thermodynamics, university of chicago press (1994)

[29] b. schroer, phys. lett. b 494, (2000) 124, hep-th/0005110

[30] i. t. todorov, two-dimensional conformal eld theory and beyond. lessons

from a continuing fashion, math-phys/0011014

[31] r. penrose, how to compute-help-and hurt scientic research, convergence

winter 1999, page 30

[32] k.-h. rehren, local quantum observables in the anti de sitter-conformal

qft correespondence, hep-th/0003120

[33] j. kupsch, w. ruehl and b. c. yunn, ann. phys. (n.y.) 89, (1975) 141

22

[34] h.-w. wiesbrock, lett. math. phys. 31, (1994) 303, d. guido, r. longo

and h.-w. wiesbrock, commun. math. phys. 192, (1998) 217

[35] h. j. borchers, j. math. phys. 41, (2000) 3604

[36] nicolay m. nikolov and ivan t. todorov, rationality of conformally in-
variant local correlation functions on compactied minkowski space, hep-
th/0009004

[37] d. buchholz, j. mund and s. j. summers, transplantation of local nets
and geometric modular action on robertson-walker space-times, hep-
th/0011237

d. buchholz, algebraic quantum field theory, a status report hep-
th/0011015

23

