cgpg-99/11-8

asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times:

conserved quantities

abhay ashtekar and saurya das

center for gravitational physics and geometry

department of physics, the pennsylvania state university

university park, pa 16802-6300, usa

abstract

asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times are considered in a general di-
mension d  4. as one might expect, the boundary conditions at innity
ensure that the asymptotic symmetry group is the anti-de sitter group (al-
though there is an interesting subtlety if d = 4). asymptotic eld equations
imply that, associated with each generator  of this group, there is a quantity
q which satises the expected balance equation if there is ux of physical
matter elds across the boundary i at innity and is absolutely conserved
in absence of this ux. irrespective of the dimension d, all these quantities
vanish if the space-time under considerations is (globally) anti-de sitter. fur-
thermore, this result is required by a general covariance argument. however,
it contradicts some of the recent ndings based on the conjectured ads/cft
duality. this and other features of our analysis suggest that, if a consistent
dictionary between gravity and conformal eld theories does exist in fully
non-perturbative regimes, it would have to be more subtle than the one used
currently.

pacs: 04.20.-q, 04.20.ha, 11.25.-w

9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
9
2

 

 
 

1
v
0
3
2
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

typeset using revtex

1

i. introduction

in the early to mid eighties, interest in asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times was
sparked by the discovery that anti-de sitter space-times generically arise as ground states
in certain supergravity theories which at the time were considered to be among the most
promising candidates for quantum gravity. in particular, the relevant boundary conditions
at innity, asymptotic symmetries and associated conserved quantities were discussed by
a number of authors. (see, e.g,. [17]). some of the early investigations used intuitively
natural but somewhat imprecise boundary conditions based on the behavior of metric co-
ecients in certain coordinate systems. these coordinates referred (sometimes implicitly)
to an underlying anti-de sitter metric to which the given physical metric was to approach.
unfortunately, given a candidate asymptotically anti-de sitter space-time, there are ambi-
guities in picking out the anti-de sitter metric to which the given metric approaches. as a
result, the denitions of conserved quantities had certain ambiguities.1

in [6], it was pointed out that these problems can be avoided by using penroses conformal
techniques [10]. if, in addition to the restrictions required in penroses conformal completion,
one imposes reective boundary conditions, the boundary i becomes conformally at and
the asymptotic symmetry group reduces to the group of its conformal isometries, i.e., the
anti-de sitter group o(d1, 2) in four dimensions [3,6]. a detailed analysis of the asymptotic
eld equations showed that it is possible to dene conserved quantities as 2-sphere integrals
involving the electric part of the weyl tensor and conformal killing elds on i representing
innitesimal asymptotic symmetries. in particular, since the weyl tensor vanishes identically
in the anti-de sitter space-time, all conserved quantities vanish as well. finally, there exists a
rigorous analysis of the mixed initial-value boundary-value problem within einsteins theory
which shows that there exists a large class of asymptotically anti-de sitter solutions satisfying
these boundary conditions [11].

the investigations mentioned above were carried out in four space-time dimensions. dur-
ing the last three years, higher dimensional asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times have
attracted a great deal of attention because of a bold conjecture put forward by maldecena
[12]. in particular, inspired by the anti-de sitter/conformal eld theory (ads/cft) corre-
spondence proposed in this conjecture, the issue of conserved quantities in such space-times
was investigated in higher dimensions [1315]. the starting point of these analyses is the
introduction of an appropriate action. as in asymptotically minkowski space-times, the

1there is an analogous problem at null innity in the asymptotically minkowskian context. in
presence of generic gravitational radiation, it is not possible to single out the minkowski metric to
which a physical metric approaches and this leads to the well-known super-translation ambiguities
in the denition of angular-momentum at null innity [8]. however, that problem is intrinsic in
the sense that it is tied to the enlargement of the asymptotic symmetry group from the poincare
group to the bondi-metzner-sachs group [9].
in the asymptotically anti-de sitter context, all
treatments (correctly) assumed that the asymptotic symmetry group was the anti-de sitter group
and the ambiguities arose simply because of imprecision in techniques; limits to innity are now
delicate because some of the metric coecients diverge there.

2

einstein-hilbert action of asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times diverges [16] (even when
one restricts oneself to a space-time region bounded by two space-like surfaces with a nite
time-like separation). the strategy [14,15] is to use a counter-term subtraction method,
where the counter-terms depend on the geometry of the space-time boundary, which in turn
encodes the property that the space-time under considerations is asymptotically anti-de
sitter. by varying the action with respect to the boundary metric, one obtains an eec-
tive stress-energy tensor on the boundary. note that, contrary to the normal usage of the
term stress-energy in the general relativity literature, this tensor eld does not refer to
any physical matter elds near the boundary, but is meant to encode the purely gravita-
tional contribution to the conserved quantities. more precisely, the conserved quantities are
obtained by rst computing (d  2)-sphere integrals of this eective stress energy tensor,
contracted with vector elds representing asymptotic symmetries, and then taking the limit,
as the boundary goes to innity.

these methods have led to some intriguing results on the relation between conserved
quantities calculated in general relativity and analogous quantities calculated using an ap-
propriate conformal eld theory on the boundary. in particular, while the energy of the pure
anti-de sitter space-time does vanish when d = 4 as in earlier analyses [6], it fails to vanish
for d = 5. thus, using these methods, from purely gravitational considerations one nds that
there is a vacuum energy in 5-dimensional asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times. this
seems puzzling from the conventional general relativity standpoint. however, it has been
argued that the ads/cft correspondence illuminates the origin of this vacuum energy:
its value agrees precisely with the casimir energy in the dual (n = 4, super-symmetric)
yang-mills theory on the boundary used in the maldecena conjecture. this agreement is
striking because the two calculations are so dierent. the calculation on the gravity side
is non-perturbative; it refers to the full non-linear theory rather than the linearized theory.
the casimir energy on the yang-mills side, on the other hand, uses only linear quantum
elds. even more surprising is the feature that the rst calculation is purely classical while
the second refers to a quintessential quantum eect. in particular, the value of the casimir
energy is proportional to h and has no analog in the classical yang-mills theory. and yet,
the available dictionary in the conjectured ads/cft correspondence converts the relevant
parameters in such a way that the quantum casimir energy of gauge elds is translated
precisely to the classical vacuum energy in general relativity. therefore, the agreement has
been used as a a clear example of the power and subtlety of the ads/cft duality which
interpolates between a gravity theory in the bulk and a yang-mills theory on the boundary.
it is therefore desirable to understand various aspects of this calculation as thoroughly
and as deeply as possible. the purpose of this note is to re-examine the gravity side of the
calculation using penroses conformal methods which, as discussed above, avoid a number
of pitfalls associated with boundary conditions and limiting procedures.

in sections ii and iii, we extend the analysis of [6] to higher dimensions. we nd
that all results of [6] directly generalize to d > 4 (although there is a small but interesting
dierence in in the treatment of asymptotic symmetries). in particular, in any dimension
d  4, we nd that all conserved quantities at i vanish identically in pure anti-de sitter
space-times. at rst sight, whether these quantities vanish or not may seem to depend on
how one chooses their ground state values which may in turn depend on ones approach
to the problem. however, one can give a simple argument to show that, if the denition of

3

these quantities is covariant, they must vanish in the anti-de sitter space-time, irrespective
of the method used to dene them. at its crux, it is the same reasoning that one invokes to
conclude that the angular momentum of a spherically symmetric conguration must vanish.
there is thus a tension between our results and those inspired by the ads/cft cor-
respondence. to clarify the issue, in section iv we explicitly calculate the dierence be-
tween our conserved quantities and those constructed using the counter-term subtraction
procedure. although the starting points are quite dierent, we show that, if d = 4, the
two denitions agree for general asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times (i.e., not just for
kerr-anti-de sitter space-times for which explicit calculations are available). if d = 5, as
one would expect, the two denitions disagree but the dierence is nite in all asymptoti-
cally anti-de sitter space-times. we provide an explicit expression for the dierence. in the
schwarzschild-anti-de sitter family, the dierence is a constant shift by the vacuum energy.
however, as far as we can tell, for more general asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times,
there are some additional terms. these dierences suggest that the ads/cft dictionaries
currently used to go between gravity theories in the bulk and conformal eld theories on the
boundary have certain unsatisfactory features in the non-perturbative regimes. this issue
is discussed in section v.

this note is addressed to both general relativity and string theory communities.

in
the hope of to bridging some apparent gaps, we have included introductory remarks on
the ads/cft conjecture and some details on higher dimensional gravity and conformal
techniques.

ii. asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times

this section is divided in to two parts. in the rst, we present the basic denition of
asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times and illustrate the penrose completion with a simple
example. in the second, we work out the basic consequences of the conditions introduced in
the denition. throughout this section, we work in d-dimensional space-times with d  4.
(the d = 3 case needs a special treatment already in the asymptotically minkowskian
context [17] and will be discussed elsewhere.) for simplicity, all elds will be assumed to be
smooth (i.e., c ) on the domain of their denitions.

a. denition

a d-dimensional space-time ( m , gab) will be said to be asymptotically anti-de sitter

if
there exists a manifold m with boundary i, equipped with a metric gab and a dieomorphism
from m onto m  i of m (with which we identify m and m  i) and the interior of m
such that:

1. there exists a function  on m for which gab = 2gab on m ;
2. i is topologically sd2 r,  vanishes on i but its gradient a is nowhere vanishing

on i;

4

3. on m , gab satises rab  1

r gab + gab = 8g(d) tab, where  is a negative constant,
g(d) is newtons constant in d-dimensions, and the matter stress-energy tab is such
that 2d tab admits a smooth limit to i.

2

4. the weyl tensor of gab is such that 4dcabcd is smooth on m and vanishes at i.
the meaning of the conditions in the denition is as follows. the rst condition ensures
that the physical metric gab is conformally related to the new metric gab which is mathe-
matically more convenient. the second condition ensures that the topology of the boundary
is the one suggested by the geometry of anti-de sitter space-times. since the conformal
factor  vanishes on i, the boundary attached in the conformal completion is at innity
with respect to the physical metric gab. the condition that a is nowhere vanishing on
i ensures that  can be used as a good (radial) coordinate in a neighborhood of i in the
completed space-time (m, gab). (in terms of the physical metric, heuristically, the condition
tells us that  falls o as 1/r.) the conformal rescaling brings the boundary (at innity
of ( m, gab)) to a nite distance (with respect to gab). therefore, the delicate operations
involving limits of various elds in m can now be reduced to simple local dierential geom-
etry of elds at i in the completed space-time. this simple fact removes ambiguities in the
limiting procedures and streamlines manipulations at innity.
the third condition restricts the asymptotic behavior of matter elds. (in the analyses
based on the counter-term subtraction it is implicitly assumed that there is no physical
matter in a neighborhood of innity, whence this condition is trivially met.) the fall-o
condition on tab is motivated by the analysis of test elds in anti-de sitter space-time; it
ensures that the uxes of conserved quantities associated with test elds across i are well-
dened. we will see that for the coupled einstein-matter eld system, it will also ensure
that we obtain the physically expected balance equations for conserved quantities when
there is ux of matter elds across i. finally, since the weyl tensor vanishes identically in
the anti de-sitter space-time, it is natural to expect it to fall o at an appropriate rate in
asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times. the precise rate is given in the fourth condition.
it is suggested by the following dimensional considerations. one expects the leading non-
zero contribution to the components of the weyl tensor in an orthonormal tetrad to behave
asymptotically as g(d)m/rn for some n, where m is a measure of the total mass. physical
dimensions of the weyl tensor and g(d) dictate n = d  1. using the behavior   1/r and
the conformal rescalings of orthonormal tetrads in the passage from gab to gab we arrive at
the fall o given in the fourth condition. however, this condition can be weakened because
the rst three conditions already constrain the asymptotic weyl curvature. these and other
details will be discussed elsewhere.

next, let us consider a simple example to illustrate how this denition works. let ( m, gab)
be schwarzschild-anti-de sitter space-time. then, in an asymptotic region (away from the
horizon) the metric gab can be taken to be

gabdxadxb =  f 2(r)dt2 + f 2(r)dr2 + r2d2 ,

r2
2  (

ro
r

with

f 2(r) = 1 +

)d3

(2.1)

where d2 is the line-element of the round, unit d  2-sphere metric. following the usual
conventions we have set

5

 = 

(d  1)(d  2)

22

and m(d) =

(d  2)(d  3)a(d2)rd3

0

16gd

(2.2)

where m(d) is the schwarzschild mass and a(d2) the area of the unit (d2)-sphere. to show
that this space-time satises our boundary conditions, we need to rst pick a conformal factor
 and then carry out the completion by attaching to m the  = 0 surface. set  = 1/r.
by replacing r by 1/ in (2.1) we obtain

gabdxadxb := 2gabdxadxb = f 2()dt2 + f 2()d2 + d2 ,

with f 2() = 2 f 2(r) = (

1
2 + 2  rd3

o d1)

(2.3)

the surface  = 0 did not belong to m since it corresponds to r = ; indeed, if we simply
attached it to m , the metric gab would be singular there. however, in the (t, , angles) chart,
it is trivial to extend m by attaching to it a boundary i dened by  = 0. the rescaled
metric gab is well-dened at this boundary.
let us now set m = m  i and verify that the conditions of the denition are satised.
clearly, gab is smooth on m (i.e., its components in the chart (t, , angles) are all smooth).
i is topologically sd2  r; the conformal factor  vanishes at i but its gradient a
does not (indeed, gabab = 1/2 on i). the third condition is trivially satised since
the stress energy tensor tab of physical matter elds vanishes identically on m . finally,
a direct calculation or the dimensional argument given above shows that the condition on
weyl curvature is also satised.

we will conclude with some remarks on the conformal freedom. first, note that we
could choose the conformal factor  to be 1/r in all dimensions; there is no d-dependence
in the power of r. however, there is considerable freedom in the choice of . in particular,
 =  is an equally good conformal factor provided  is a smooth, nowhere vanishing
function on m. in schwarzschild-anti-de sitter space-times, the choice  = 1/r is adapted
to the isometries and, in particular, to the rest frame selected by the time translation killing
eld /t. in the anti-de sitter space-time, on the other hand, there is no natural rest frame
and choices of conformal factors associated with distinct frames are related by a  which is
non-vanishing on i. because of this conformal freedom, for physical quantities dened at
i, covariance with respect to the physical space-time is tied to conformally invariance at i.
this point will play an important role in section iii.

b. asymptotic elds and their equations

we now wish to analyze physical elds near i and explore equations they satisfy. these
equations will lead us to the asymptotic symmetry group and conserved quantities in section
iii.

let us begin by introducing some notation. the riemann tensor of the metric gab can

be decomposed in to the weyl and ricci tensors as follows:

rabmn = cabmn +

2

d  2(cid:16)ga[msn]b  gb[msn]a(cid:17) ,

(2.4)

6

where sab is given by

sab = rab 

r

2(d  1)

gab .

(2.5)

next, under the conformal rescaling gab = 2gab on m , the weyl tensor transforms trivially,
cabc

d, while the ricci pieces transform via

d = cabc

sab = sab + (d  2)1anb   d  2

2 ! 2gabncnc , where na := a

(2.6)

field equations enable us to express sab in terms of the cosmological constant and the matter
stress-energy as

sab 


d  1

gab = 8g(d)  tab 

t

d  1! gab

(2.7)

multiplying (2.6) by 2, taking the limit as  tends to 0 and using the fact that 2d tab

admits a smooth limit to i, we obtain:
n  n b=

2

(d  2)(d  1) 

1
2 ,

(2.8)

where b= denotes equality restricted to i. (we will use this notation extensively in the rest
of the paper.) thus, na is space-like at i, whence i is a time-like surface. now, if a smooth
eld f vanishes on i, then f = 1f admits a smooth limit to i. hence it follows that
1 (n  n  1/2) admits a smooth limit. now, multiplying (2.7) by  and taking limit to
i we obtain

next, it is easy to verify that under a conformal rescaling  = , we have

i

2anb b=(cid:20)lim
anb b=

1(cid:18)ncnc 

1

l2(cid:19)(cid:21) gab b=

2
d

(cnc)gab

1
d

(cnc)gab + (ncc)gab

where  is the derivative operator compatible with gab = 2gab and na = a. hence, by

suitable rescaling, we can always obtain a conformal completion in which

(2.9)

(2.10)

(2.11)

anb b= 0

from now on, we will only use such conformal completions. (the explicit completions of the
schwarzschild-anti-de sitter space-times given in section ii a meet this condition.) there

is still a remaining conformal freedom:  7  where naa b= 0. note that the value of
 at i is unrestricted.
tive of (2.6) and using einsteins equation (2.7):

the rst key equation for obtaining conserved quantities results from taking the deriva-

7

[asb]c +  d  2

2 ! c d

abc nd = 8g(d) td[agb]c nd + 8g(d)[a tb]c

(2.12)

where tab = tab( t /d  1)gab. the second key equation is the (contracted) bianchi identity
on (m, gab)

dcabcd +

2(d  3)
(d  2) [asb]c = 0 .

(2.13)

we can now eliminate the sab term in (2.12) using (2.13). since the fourth condition in the
main denition ensures that

kabcd := lim

i

3dcabcd

(2.14)

admits a smooth limit to i, using the fall-o condition on tab given in the main denition,
we obtain

dkabcd b= lim
i 
finally, by projecting this equation via nanchb
metric on i, we obtain,

2(d  3)
(d  2)

2d 8g(d) h td[agb]cnd + [a( tb]c)i

(2.15)

m, where hab b= gab  2nanb is the intrinsic

ddemd = 8g(d) (d  3) tabnahb

m .

(2.16)

here, d is the intrinsic derivative operator on i compatible with hab, eab b= 2kambnnmnn
is the electric part of the (leading order) weyl tensor kamnb at i and tab = lim 2d tab.
(note that eab and tab are smooth elds at i.) this is the key identity that will enable us
to introduce conserved quantities at innity.

iii. symmetries and associated charges

this section is divided in to two parts. in the rst, we discuss asymptotic symmetries
and in the second we introduce the conserved quantities associated with these symmetries.

a. asymptotic symmetries

in the physical space-time picture, the asymptotic symmetry group g is the quotient
(di m /dio m ) of the group of dieomorphism which preserve the boundary conditions
by its sub-group consisting of asymptotically identity dieomorphisms. in the conformally
completed space-time, g is the subgroup of the dieomorphism group on i which preserves
the universal structure at i, i.e., the structure that is common to boundaries of all asymp-
totically anti-de sitter space-times. let us begin by exploring this structure.
since anb b= 0, it follows that the extrinsic curvature kab of i vanishes. hence, the
intrinsic curvature tensor rabcd of (i, hab) is given by: rabcd b= ha

trmnst. now,

mhb

nhc

shd

8

our boundary conditions imply that the weyl tensor cabcd of gab vanishes on i for all d  4.
hence, using (2.4) it now follows that the intrinsic weyl tensor cabcd of i vanishes. thus,
if d > 4, (i, hab) is conformally at in all asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times. hence
g is just the d(d + 1)/2 dimensional conformal group, i.e., the anti-de sitter group in d
dimensions.
if d = 4, however, i is a 3-manifold and vanishing of cabcd imposes no restriction at
all. let us examine this case in some detail. note rst that, in any dimension d > 4,
we used only the rst three conditions in the main denition to derive all equations up to
(2.13). therefore, using (2.12) and the fall-o conditions on the stress energy tab, we can

conclude cabcdnd b= 0 without any reference to the fourth condition in the denition on the
fall-o of weyl tensor. this in particular implies that the electric and magnetic parts of the
weyl tensor cabcd must vanish at i. now, in four dimensions, the weyl tensor has no other
independent components and hence we can conclude cabcd b= 0. therefore, if d = 4, the
fourth condition in the denition is redundant. however, as noted above, in this case, the
denition does not imply that the intrinsic geometry of i is conformally at. in the anti-de
sitter space-time, on the other hand, this geometry is indeed conformally at.
therefore, to fully capture the idea that ( m, gab) is asymptotically anti-de sitter in four
dimensions, we need to impose a new condition which may be regarded as a replacement of
the fourth condition in the denition. let us suppose that the magnetic part

bab := kambnnmnn  lim

7i

1cambnnmnn

(3.1)

of the asymptotic weyl curvature kambn vanishes on i. then, one can show that (i, hab)
is conformally at and g is the anti-de sitter group in four dimensions [6]. (a completely
analogous condition is necessary to obtain poincare group as the asymptotic symmetry
group at spatial innity of asymptotically minkowskian space-times [18,19].) the condition

bab b= 0 is sometimes referred to as the reective boundary condition [3].
thus, as one might intuitively expect, the asymptotic symmetry group is the anti-de
sitter group in all cases (i.e., for all d  4). note that, since i is not endowed with
additional universal structure, g can not be further reduced.
in any one completion, of
course, one can single out the isometry group of hab as a sub-group of g. however, this
group, and indeed even its dimension, will vary with the choice of the conformal factor
(which determines hab). it is only the equivalence class [hab] of conformally at metrics on
i and the full conformal isometry group g that have an invariant meaning. on the other
hand, if one restricts oneself to a specic space-time ( m , gab) admitting isometries, in any
conformal completion of that space-time, one can select a preferred subgroup of g (since
every killing vector of gab admits an extension to i and is a conformal killing eld of hab
irrespective of the choice of .)

b. conserved quantities

eq (2.16) is a dierential conservation law which immediately leads us to the required
conserved charges. given any innitesimal asymptotic symmetry (i.e., a conformal killing
eld a on i) and a d  2 sphere cross section c on i we can now dene a conserved
quantity

9

q[c] := 

1

8g(d)



n  3 ic eabadsb

(3.2)

it now follows immediately from (2.20) that q satises a balance equation: given two
cross-sections c1 and c2 which form boundaries of a d  1 dimensional region i of i, we
have

q[c2]  q[c1] =zi

tabadsb

(3.3)

where we have used the fact that eab is trace-free. thus the dierence between values
of q evaluated at the two cross-sections is precisely the ux of that physical quantity,
associated with matter, across the portion i of i. it is only when the matter ux vanishes
that the quantity is absolutely conserved (whence the use of inverted commas in the label
conserved).

as in section ii a, let us consider the example of a schwarzschild-anti-de sitter space-
time. since there is no physical matter eld anywhere, all the q are absolutely conserved.
it is straightforward to evaluate them explicitly. if the conformal killing eld  corresponds
to the time-translation killing eld on ( m , gab), then q = m, the mass parameter in the
metric. all other conserved quantities vanish. in particular, if ( m , gab) is the anti-de sitter
space-time, all q vanish identically, irrespective of the dimension d.

we will now present a general argument based on covariance to show that this last con-
clusion is robust and not tied to the specic procedure we used to dene conserved quantities.
let us suppose that one has a covariant procedure that leads to a conserved quantity q
associated with each conformal killing eld a on i (i.e., a procedure which uses only the
boundary conditions and does not refer to additional structures such as preferred coordi-
nates or background elds.) let us rst x a general asymptotically anti-de sitter space-time
( m , gab) in which there are no matter elds near innity and compute its d(d + 1)/2 abso-
lutely conserved charges q. apply a dieomorphism  which is an asymptotic symmetry,
i.e., denes an element of g. the image g
ab = (gab) of gab is again asymptotically anti-de
 = q where  is given
sitter and, by covariance, values q of its conserved charges are q
by the action of g on i. (more precisely, the d(d + 1)/2 charges q dene an anti-de sitter
momentum which lies in the dual of the lie algebra of g and the anti-de sitter momenta
of gab and g
ab are related by the natural action of g on the dual of its lie algebra.) now,
let ( m, gab) be the anti-de sitter space-time itself and choose for  an isometry of gab. then
g
ab = gab. hence we must have q

 for all  in g. this is possible only if q = 0.2

the crux of the argument is quite simple. in the asymptotically minkowskian context,
the same argument tells us that if the total 4-momentum at spatial innity is dened by a

 = q

2note that (like the rest of our analysis) this argument does not go through if d = 3. in this case,
there are two possible sets of boundary conditions at innity [20] and neither yields o(2, 2) as the
asymptotic symmetry group. with the more commonly used weaker set, the asymptotic symmetry
group is innite dimensional and does not admit o(2, 2) as an invariant sub-group. therefore, the
last line in our argument need not hold. this issue will be discussed in detail elsewhere.

10

covariant procedure, then it must vanish in minkowski space since the minkowski metric is
invariant under lorentz transformations and there is no non-zero lorentz invariant 4-vector.

we will conclude this section with three remarks.

1. the anti-de sitter space-time is conformally at. therefore, it was natural to require the
weyl curvature of asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times to vanish at innity. the physical
observables q are dened using its residue near innity. by contrast, the extraction
of this physical information from metric components is much more dicult and delicate:
since the components of the anti-de sitter metric diverge at innity in standard charts,
the extraction involves a comparison between two innite quantities. note also that even
in the asymptotically minkowskian context, one can dene energy-momentum and angular-
momentum at spatial innity in terms of the asymptotic behavior of the weyl tensor [18,19].
furthermore, this approach oers perhaps the clearest way to weed out the unwanted super-
translations.
2. if there are no physical matter elds near i, all d(d + 1)/2 quantities q are absolutely
conserved. this is in striking contrast with the situation at null innity of asymptotically
minkowskian space-times, where, even in the absence of matter, gravitational radiation can
and does carry away energy-momentum and angular momentum (see, e.g., [9,10,21]). on
the other hand, matter elds can carry away these quantities in both cases. thus, in certain
respects the boundary i in the asymptotically anti-de sitter context is analogous to spatial
innity [18,19] in the asymptotically minkowskian space-times and in other respects it is
analogous to null innity [9,10,21].
3. finally, note that since a are conformal killing elds on (i, hab), q would not be
absolutely conserved even in absence of matter if eab had not been trace-free. thus, in that
case, conserved charges would not exist. this is quite distinct from the issue of whether
or not the poisson algebra between conserved charges yields a normal or an anomalous
representation of the lie algebra of the asymptotic symmetry group.

iv. comparison

in this section we will present an explicit comparison between the conserved charges q
of section iii and the quantities q obtained by the counter-term subtraction method. as
noted in the introduction, the quantities q are constructed from an eective stress-energy
tensor which we will denote by ab (to distinguish it from the stress energy-tensor tab of
physical matter elds). q are dened by
i i c
q[c] = lim

ab ad sb

(4.1)

where c are (d  2)-spheres in m converging to the cross-section c of i and a is a vector
eld in m which tends to an innitesimal asymptotic symmetry a on i. in this work it
is (implicitly) assumed that there is no physical matter eld in a neighborhood of innity.
therefore, in this section, we set tab = 0. also, since the expressions for ab become rapidly
complicated in higher dimensions, we restrict ourselves to d = 4 and d = 5, although our
qualitative conclusions hold also in higher dimensions.

11

let ( m, gab) be asymptotically anti-de sitter in the sense of our denition and let
(m, gab, ) be a conformal completion satisfying our conditions. denote by i the (d  1)-
dimensional sub-manifolds of m on which  is constant. in a suciently small but nite
neighborhood of i, each i is a time-like surface. denote by hab the intrinsic metric induced
on i by gab, by gab its einstein tensor and by kab the extrinsic curvature. (following the
standard sign conventions used in general relativity [21], we will set kab = ha
n m n,
where hab is the intrinsic metric and a the unit outward radial normal on i. this sign
convention is opposite to the one used in [14].) then, motivated by considerations of [22],
an explicit expression of ab was obtained in [14]:

mhb

ab =

1

8g(d) "



n  3

gab 

n  2



hab  kab + khab#

(4.2)

we will now relate ab to the eld eab we used to dene our conserved charges. note rst
that, using the relation between the riemann tensors of gab and hab, we can express the
electric part eab of the weyl tensor cambn of gab as:

eab := cambn m n =  rac + k kac  kab k b

c +

hab

2
d  1

hence, it follows that

8g(d) ab +

eab =



d  3





d  3(cid:20) k kab  k c
d  2
2

hab  kab + khab

a

kbc +

1
2

( k mn kmn  k 2)hab(cid:21)

(4.3)

(4.4)

to take limit to i, let us express the relevant hatted elds (constructed from gab) in
terms of the corresponding unhatted elds (constructed from gab). first, it is straightfor-
ward to show that

kab = 1kab  2(  n)hab

(4.5)

where, as before, na = a and a is the unit outward normal to i with respect to gab.
next, using (2.11) and (2.8), it is easy to show that the bold-faced elds in

kab = 1kab,

and f = 2 (l(  n) + 1)

(4.6)

admit smooth limits to i. using these facts, one can rewrite (4.4) as:

8g(d) ab +

eab = 2 [



d  3



d  3(cid:18)kkab  k c
d  2
2

+ f(kab  khab) 
= 2ab,

1
2

(kmnkmn  k2)hab(cid:19)

a kbc +

f 2hac]

(4.7)
by inspection, ab admits a smooth limit to i. finally, since a admits a smooth limit a
to i and d sb = 3ddsb, we can express the dierence between the two sets of charges as:

say .

12

q[c]  q[c] =

1

8g(d) ic

d5 abadsb

(4.8)

it follows immediately that the two charges agree if d = 4 but they do not if d = 5. to
our knowledge, in four dimensions the equality had been established only in the case of
kerr-anti-de sitter space-times and the focus was on energy, i.e., on the case when the
innitesimal symmetry a corresponds to the time translation isometry of this space-time.
eq (4.8) establishes the result in all asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times and for all
asymptotic symmetries.

let us investigate the situation in d = 5 further. let ( m , gab) be the anti-de sitter
space-time itself. choose a rest-frame, express gab in the adapted chart, set  = 1/r and
consider the resulting conformal completion as in section ii a. then, it is easy to verify
that

kab =

1


(1 + 22)1/2atbt

and f = 2h1  (1 + 22)1/2i .

(4.9)

it therefore follows that ab = (3/8)3hab. since eab = 0 on m , as noted before, all q[c]
vanish identically. hence, if we choose  = /t the time translation adapted to our initial
choice of rest frame, we obtain

qt[c] =



8g

3
8

a(3)

(4.10)

where, as before, a(3) is the area of the unit 3-sphere. this is the ground state energy of
the counter-term subtraction method [14].

in the string theory literature [14,15], quantities q (and their higher dimensional ver-
sions) are generally interpreted as the gravitational analogs of the symmetry generators in
the confor eld theory. it is important to examine if they are viable as candidate hamilto-
nians generating asymptotic symmetries on the gravitational side. now, as noted in section
iii b the fact that qt fails to vanish in pure anti-de sitter space-time implies that q are
not dened in a covariant fashion. indeed, if there is a well-dened, non-zero ground state
energy, the obvious question is: what rest frame does it refer to? there is no preferred rest-
frame in pure anti-de sitter space-time and covariance prevents us from saying that the right
side of (4.10) is the ground state energy in every rest frame. finally, from the perspective
of classical general relativity, it would have been rather strange if there were a ground state
energy in ve dimensions but not in four. if this energy is to have physical signicance, one
should be able to measure it in terms of planetary (i.e. test particle) motions and it is
dicult to imagine such a qualitative dierence in four and ve dimensions.

in general asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times, the remainder term ab has a more
complicated form. although we do not have a denitive result, it seems unlikely that the
extrinsic curvature terms will always conspire to cancel each other out. if they do not, the
dierence between q and q would not be just a constant shift. then, there would be
two independent sets of conserved quantities in asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times.
this seems implausible. and indeed, there is another problem with the denition of q.
as noted in section 3.3, the trace-free property of eab is essential for q to be conserved.
unfortunately, ab is not trace-free. hence, even though there is no physical matter elds

13

near innity, the charges q[c] fail to be conserved; their values depend on the choice of the
cross-section [c]. this fact can go unnoticed if one focuses on a specic conformal factor and
on the asymptotic symmetries a which are killing elds of the resulting hab. however, this
procedure introduces an additional structure and thus breaks covariance. as emphasized
in sections ii a and iii a, in general there is no preferred metric on i, and we must deal
squarely with the full equivalence class [hab] of conformally at metrics.

v. discussion

in its original version [12], the ads/cft conjecture suggests that two quite distinct
theories are equivalent: i) n = 4 supersymmetric su(n) yang-mills theory in four dimen-
sional minkowski space-time; and, ii) type-iib string theory in ten space-time dimensions
subject to the boundary conditions that the space-time is asymptotically a product of a
(metric) 5-sphere and 5-dimensional anti-de sitter space-time, where the radius of the 5-
spheres equals the anti-de sitter radius . (the parameters of the two theories are related
by  = (4gsn)1/4h where gs is the string coupling constant and t = 1/2 is the string
tension.) although the boundary conditions used on the gravitational side are not of direct
physical interest, the conjecture is fascinating from a mathematical physics perspective. in
this respect it has had remarkable successes, especially in the perturbative regimes [12]. in
particular, all low energy states of supergravity (corresponding to the type iib string theory
in the conjecture) can be mapped to states in the yang-mills hilbert space. furthermore,
in the large n limit with gsn constant, several interactions also agree: in this limit, 3-point
functions can be calculated either in the supersymmetric yang-mills theory or in supergrav-
ity. finally, it was possible to show that the entropy of schwarzschild-anti-de sitter black
holes is proportional to their horizon area in the limit rs   where rs is the schwarzschild
radius.
because of such surprising agreements, hopes have been expressed that this duality may
enable one in particular to describe classical gravity (with asymptotically anti-de sitter
boundary conditions) entirely in terms of the at space, supersymmetric yang-mills theory.
to test these ideas, one needs an appropriate dictionary between the two theories. a natural
strategy is to begin with simple, basic observables which have obvious correspondence in
the two theories. since the two theories share symmetry groups, observables generating these
symmetries are natural candidates. one needs to rst calculate these observables separately
within each theory and then analyze if it is consistent to map one set to the other.

in this note, we obtained conserved charges q corresponding to asymptotic symmetries
 purely from the gravitational perspective. the eld equations and the boundary conditions
dening asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times naturally led us to dierential identities
which, upon integration, yielded the expression of q. in four space-time dimensions, our
charges q agree with the quantities q obtained by the counter-term subtraction method
[14]. however, in ve (or higher) dimensions they do not. furthermore, we were able to give
a general argument to show that the ground state energies obtained in that method can
not result from any covariant procedure. therefore, from the perspective of classical general
relativity, q appear to be unacceptable as hamiltonians generating asymptotic symmetries.
on the other hand, it has been argued that the results of the counter term subtraction

14

method on the gravitational side agree with those obtained from the supersymmetric yang-
mills theory and are in fact related to such fundamental features of that theory as the
existence of a casimir energy. let us suppose this is the case.3 then, one would have to
conclude that there is a tension between gravity and gauge theories: the natural dictionary
would be incorrect. this is somewhat unsettling because the problem occurs for the most
basic of observables on both sides. furthermore, these are essentially the only explicitly
known dieomorphism invariant observables in non-perturbative general relativity.

an outstanding issue then is whether a consistent dictionary does exist. since any two
separable hilbert spaces are isomorphic, a useful correspondence between two theories has to
achieve much more than than an isomorphism between their hilbert spaces: the isomorphism
should map a complete set of observables in one theory to a complete set of corresponding
observables in the other. therefore, it would not suce to just compare the ground states
and their energies in the two theories. one must also account for other dierences between
q and q. indeed, the dierence ab in the integrands of the two expressions does not
appear to be just a constant shift but may vary from one space-time to another, especially in
the non-stationary context. more importantly, while all ten q are conserved in the absence
of uxes of physical matter elds across i, the ten q are not. thus, our results seem to
provide guidelines as well as constraints on possible dictionaries.
we will conclude by listing two open problems on the gravitational side. first, it would
be desirable to probe the structure of ab in detail. are there asymptotic equations which
we have overlooked that force a cancellation between some of the terms? a simplication
in the form of ab may be necessary in the construction of a consistent dictionary. second,
our analysis is based directly on asymptotic eld equations. it should not be dicult to
examine the situation using a covariant phase space formulation [23,24]. it should also be
possible to construct these quantities starting with a manifestly nite action and performing
the legendre transform; indeed it would be surprising if innite subtractions are essential
in purely classical treatments of hamiltonians. in the asymptotically minkowskian context,
this seems to be possible. the asymptotically anti-de sitter case is under investigation.

acknowledgments

we would like to thank vijay balasubramanian, gary horowitz, kirill krasnov,
parthasarathi majumdar, robert wald and especially donald marolf for correspondence.
this work was supported in part by the nsf grants phy94-07194, phy95-14240, int97-
22514 and by the eberly research funds of penn state.

3however, it is possible that these arguments overlooked some subtlety in the gauge theory. in
the calculation of the casimir energy of a eld conned inside a physical box, the full anti-de sitter
invariance is broken because the box denes a rest frame. however, it is not obvious that there
is such a preferred rest frame in the supersymmetric yang-mills theory used in the ads/cft
conjecture.

15

references

[1] abbot l f and deser s 1982, stability of gravity with a cosmological constant, nucl.

phys. 195 76

[2] breitenlohner p and friedman d z 1982, stability in gauged extended super-gravity,

ann. phys. 144 249

[3] hawking s w 1983, the boundary conditions for gauged super-gravity, phys. lett.

b126 175

[4] gibbons g w, hawking s w, horowitz g t and perry m j 1983, positive mass theorems

for black holes, commun. math. phys. 88 295

[5] boucher w, gibbons g w and horowitz g t 1984, a uniqueness theorem for anti-de

sitter space-time, phys. rev d 30 2447

[6] ashtekar a and magnon a 1984, asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times, class. &

quantum grav. 1 l39

[7] henneaux m and teitelboim c 1984, hamiltonian treatment of asymptotically anti-de

sitter spaces, phys. lett. b142 355;
henneaux m and teitelboim c 1985, asymptotically anti-de sitter spaces, commun.
math. phys. 98 391

[8] winicour j 1980, angular momentum in general relativity, in general relativity and
gravitation: one hundred years after the birth of albert einstein, vol.2, ed. a held
(new york: plenum)

[9] bondi h, van der burg, m g j and metzner a w k 1962, gravitational waves in
general relativity. vii. waves from axi-symmetric isolated systems, proc. roy. soc.
london a269 21

[10] penrose r 1963, asymptotic properties of elds and space-times, phys. rev. lett. 10

66;
penrose r 1965, zero rest mass elds including gravitation: asymptotic behavior, proc.
roy. soc. london a284 159

[11] friedrich h 1995, einsteins equations and conformal structure: existence of anti-de

sitter type space-times, j. geometry & phys. 17, 125

[12] maldacena j 1998, the large n limit of superconformal eld theories and super-gravity,

adv. theor. math. phys. 2 231; hep-th/9711200;
aharony o, gubser s s, maldacena j, ooguri h and oz y 1999, large n field theories,
string theory and gravity, report no. hep-th/9905111

[13] henningson m and skenderis k 1998, the holographic weyl anomaly, jhep 9807

023, report no. hep-th/9806087;
arutyunov g e and frolov s a 1999, on the origin of supergravity boundary terms in
the ads/cft correspondence, nucl. phys. b544 576, report no. hep-th/9806216;
horowitz g t and myers r c 1999, the ads/cft correspondence and a new pos-
itive energy conjecture for general relativity, phys. rev. d59 026005, report no.
hep-th/9808079;
hyun s, kim w t and lee j 1999, statistical entropy and ads/cft correspondence
in btz black holes, phys. rev d59 084020, report no. hep-th/9811005

16

[14] balasubramanian v and kraus p 1999, a stress tensor for anti-de sitter gravity, report

no. hep-th/9902121

[15] mann r b 1999, misner string entropy phys. rev. d60 104047,

report no.

hep-th/9903229;
myers r c 1999, stress tensors and casimir energies in ads/cft correspondence, re-
port no. hep-th/9903203;
emparan r, johnson c v and myers r c 1999, surface terms as counter-terms in the
ads/cft correspondence, phys. rev. d 60 104001 hep-th/9903238;
kraus p, larsen f and siebelink r 1999, the gravitational action in asymptotically
ads and at space-times, report no. hep-th/9906127;
solodukhin s n 1999, how to make the gravitational action on non-compact space -
nite, report no. hep-th/9909197;
awad a m and johnson c v 1999, holographic stress energy tensors for kerr-ads
black holes, report no. hep-th/9910040;
ho j 1999, holographic counter-term actions and anomalies for asymptotically ads and
at spaces, report no. hep-th/9910124;
debenedictis a and viswanathan k s 1999, stress energy tensors for higher dimen-
sional gravity, report no. hep-th/9911060

[16] hawking s w and horowitz g t 1996, the gravitational hamiltonian, action, entropy

and surface terms, class. & quantum grav. 13 1487, report no. gr-qc/9501014

[17] ashtekar a, bicak j and schmidt b g 1997, asymptotic structure of symmetry re-

duced general relativity, phys. rev. d55 669, report no. gr-qc/9608042

[18] ashtekar a and hansen r o 1978, a unied treatment of spatial and null innity in
general relativity: universal structure, asymptotic symmetries and conserved quantities
at spatial innity, j. math. phys. 19 1542;
ashtekar a 1980, asymptotic structure of the gravitational eld at spatial innity,
in general relativity and gravitation: one hundred years after the birth of albert
einstein ed a. held (new york: plenum)

[19] ashtekar a and romano j d 1992, spatial innity as a boundary of space-time, class.

& quantum grav. 9, 1069

[20] brown j d and henneaux m 1986, central charge in the canonical realization of asymp-
totic symmetries: an example from three dimensional gravity, commun. math. phys.
104, 207

[21] wald r m 1984 general relativity (chicago: the university of chicago press)
[22] brown j d and york j w 1993, quasi-local energy and conserved charges derived from

the gravitational action, phys. rev. d 47 1407

[23] ashtekar a, bombelli l and reula o 1990, covariant phase space of asymptotically
flat gravitational fields, in mechanics, analysis and geometry: 200 years after la-
grange ed. m francaviglia and d holm (amsterdam: north holland)

[24] wald r m and a. zoupas, 1999, a general denition of conserved quantities in general

relativity and other theories of gravity; report no. gr-qc/9911095

17

