1
0
0
2

 

n
u
j
 

7

 
 

4
v
0
0
1
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

facts and fictions about anti de sitter
spacetimes with local quantum matter

dedicated to the memory of harry lehmann

bert schroer

institut fur theoretische physik

fu-berlin, arnimallee 14, 14195 berlin, germany

presently: cbpf, rua dr. xavier sigaud, 22290-180 rio de janeiro, brazil

schroer@cbpf.br

november 1999

abstract

it is natural to analyse the adsd+1-cqftd correspondence in the
context of the conformal- compactication and covering formalism.
in
this way one obtains additional inside about rehrens rigorous algebraic
holography in connection with the degree of freedom issue which in turn
allows to illustrates the subtle but important dierences beween the orig-
inal string theory-based maldacena conjecture and rehrens theorem in
the setting of an intrinsic eld-coordinatization-free formulation of alge-
braic qft. i also discuss another more generic type of holography related
to light fronts which seems to be closer to t hoofts original ideas on
holography. this in turn is naturally connected with the generic concept
of localization entropy, a quantum pre-form of bekensteins classical
black-hole surface entropy.

1 historical background

there has been hardly any problem in particle physics which has attracted
as much attention as the problem if and in what way quantum matter in the
anti desitter spacetime and the one dimension lower conformal eld theories
are related and whether this could possibly contain clues about the meaning of
quantum gravity.

in more specic quantum physical terms the question is about a conjectured
[1][2][3] (and meanwhile in large parts generically and rigorously understood
[6]) correspondence between two quantum eld theories in dierent spacetime
dimensions; the lower-dimensional conformal one being the holographic im-
age or projection of the ads theory. conjectures, dierent from mathematical

1

proofs; allow of course almost always a certain margin in their precise mathemat-
ical formulation and in their physical interpretation. the eld theoretic content
of this conjecture has often been interpreted as a correspondence between two
lagrangian eld theories (e.g. between a conformally invariant 4-dimensional
sym and a higher dimensional spin=2 gravitational-like theory). the exact
theorem says that such a correspondence cannot exist; one side has to be non-
lagrangian. there is no exception to this proposition; not even the assumption
of supersymmetry helps here. one of our goals is to spell this out in detail and
to illustrate this interesting point with a simple model.

the community of string physicists has placed this correspondence problem
in the center of their interest. remembering the great conceptual and calcula-
tional achievements as e.g. the derivation of scattering theory and dispersion
relations from eld theory with which the name of harry lehmann (to whose
memory this article is dedicated) is inexorably linked, i will limit myself to
analyze the particle physics content of the so-called anti desitter conformal
qft-correspondence from the conservative point of view of a quantum eld
theorist who, although having no active ambitions outside qft, still nourishes
a certain curiosity about present activities in particle physics as e.g.
string
theory or noncommutative geometry. in the times of harry lehmann the ac-
ceptance of a theoretical proposal in particle physics was primarily coupled to
its experimental veriability and/or its conceptual standing within physics.

the ads model of a curved spacetime has a long history [4][5] as a theoretical
laboratory of what can happen with particle physics in a universe which is the
extreme opposite of globally hyperbolic in that it possesses a self-closing time,
whereas the proper de sitter spacetime was once considered among the more
realistic models of the universe. the recent surge of interest about ads came
from string theory and is dierent in motivation and more related to the hope
(or dream) to attribute a meaning to quantum gravity from a string theory
viewpoint.

fortunately for a curious outsider (otherwise i would have to quit right here),
this motivation has no bearing on the conceptual and mathematical problems
posed by the would be ads-conformal qft correspondence; the latter turned
out to be one of those properties discovered in the setting of string theory which
allow an interesting and rigorous formulation in qft which conrms some, but
not all the conjectured properties.

the rigorous treatment however requires a reformulation of (conformal) qft
within a more algebraic setting. the standard formalism based on pointlike
eld coordinatizations which underlies the lagrangian (and the wightman)
fomulations does not provide a natural setting for the study of isomorphisms
between models in dierent spacetime dimensions, even though the underlying
physical principles are the same. one would have to introduce many additional
concepts and auxiliary tricks into the standard framework to the extend that
the formulation appears contrived containing too many ad hoc prescriptions.
the important aspects in this isomorphism are related to space and time-like
(einstein,huygens) causality, localization of corresponding objects and problems
of degree of freedom counting. all these issues are belonging to real-time physics

2

and in most cases their meaning in terms of euclidean continuation (statistical
mechanics) remains obscure; but this of course does not make them less physical.
this note is organized as follows. in the next section i elaborate the kine-
matical aspects of the adsd+1-cqftd situation as a collateral result of the
old (1974/75) compactication formalism for the conformalization of the d-
dimensional minkowski spacetime. for this reason the seemingly more demand-
ing problem of studying qft directly in ads within a curved spacetime for-
malism1 can be bypassed. the natural question whose answer would have led
directly from cqf t4 to ads5 in the particle physics setting (without string
theory as a midwife) is: does there exist a quantum eld theory which has the
same so(4, 2) symmetry and just reprocesses the cqf t4 matter content in
such a way that the conformal hamiltonian (the timelike rotational generator
through compactied m ) becomes the true hamiltonian? this theory indeed
exists, it is an ads theory with a specic local matter content computable from
the cqft matter content. the answer is unique, but as a result of the dierent
dimensionality one cannot describe this one-to-one relation between spacetime
indexed matter contents in terms of pointlike elds. this will be treated in sec-
tion 3, where we will also compare the content of rehrens isomorphism [6][8]
with the maldacena, witten at al. [1][2][3] conjectures and notice some subtle
but potentially serious dierences in case one interpretes the conjecture (as it
was done in most of the subsequent literature) as a relation between two la-
grangian theories. who is aware of the fact that subtle dierences often have
been the enigmatic motor of progress, will not dismiss such observations.

the last section presents some general results of aqft on degrees-of-freedom-
counting and holography. closely connected is the idea of chiral scanning i.e.
the encoding of the full content of a higher dimensional (massive) eld qft
into a nite number of copies of one chiral theory in a carefully selected relative
position within a common hilbert space. in this case the prize one has to pay
for this more generic holography (light-front holography) is that some of the ge-
ometrically acting spacetime symmetry transformations become fuzzy in the
holographic projection and some of the geometrically acting symmetries on the
holographic image are not represented by dieomorphisms if pulled back into
the original qft.

2 conformal compactication and ads

the simplest type of conformal qft is obtained by realizing that zero mass
wigner representation of the poincare group with positive energy (and discrete
helicity) and allow for a natural extension to the conformal symmetry group
so(4, 2)/z2 without any enlargement of the hilbert space. besides scale trans-
formations, this larger symmetry also incorporates the fractional transforma-

1this was also done in the 70ies by fronsdal. there was a good reason why he missed the
isomorphism to cqft despite his musterful handling of (noncompact) group theory: it was
the degree of freedom (multiplicity) problem which will be addressed later.

3

tions (proper conformal transformations)

x =

x  bx2

1  2bx + b2x2

(1)

it is often convenient to view this formula as the action of the translation group
t (b) conjugated with a (hyperbolic) inversion i

i : x 

x
x2

x = it (b)ix

(2)

(3)

i does not belong to the above conformal group, although it is unitarily repre-
sented (and hence a wigner symmetry) in these special wigner representations.
for xed x and small b the formula (1) is well dened, but globally it mixes -
nite spacetime points with innity and hence requires a more precise denition
in particular in view of the positivity energy-momentum spectral properties
in its action on quantum elds. hence as preparatory step for the adequate
formulation of quantum eld theory concepts, one has to achieve a geometric
compactication. this starts most conveniently from a linear representation
of the conformal group so(d, 2) in d+2-dimensional auxiliary space r(d,2) (i.e.
without eld theoretic signicance) with two negative (time-like) signatures

g

g =


1

+1




(4)

and restricts this representation to the (d + 1)-dimensional forward light cone

lc(d,2) = { = (, 4, 5); 2 + 2

d  2

d+1 = 0}

(5)

0  ~2 denotes the d-dimensional minkowski length square. the
where 2 = 2
compactied minkowski space md is obtained by adopting a projective point of
view (stereographic projection)

md =(cid:26)x =



d + d+1

;   lc(d,2)(cid:27)

(6)

it is then easy to verify that the linear transformation, which keep the last two
components invariant consist of the lorentz group and those transformations
which only transform the last two coordinates, yield the scaling formula

d  d+1  es(d  d+1)

(7)

leading to x  x,  = es . the remaining transformations, namely the trans-
lations and the fractional proper conformal transformations, are obtained by
composing rotations in the i-d and boosts in the i-d+1 planes.

4

a convenient description of minkowski spacetime m in terms of this d + 2

dimensional auxiliary formalism is obtained in terms of a conformal time 

md = (sin, e,cos ), e  sd1

t =

sin

ed + cos

, ~x =

~e

ed + cos

ed + cos > 0,  <  < +

(8)

(9)

so that the minkowski spacetime is a piece of the d-dimensional wall of a cylin-
der in d+1 dimensional spacetime which becomes tiled with the closure of in-
nitely many minkowski worlds. if one cuts the wall on the backside appropri-
ately, this carved out piece representing d-dimensional compactied minkowski
spacetime has the form of a d-dimensional double cone symmetrically around
 = 0, e = (0, ed = 1) without its boundary2. the above directional compacti-
cation leads to an identication of boundary points at innity and give e.g.
for d=1+1 the compactied manifold the topology of a torus. the points which
have been added at the innity to m namely m\m are best described in terms
of the d-1 dimensional submanifold of points which are lightlike with respect to
the past innity apex at m = (0, 0, 0, 0, 1,  = ). the cylinder walls form

the universal covering fmd = sd1  r which is tiled in both  -directions by

innitely many minkowski spacetimes (heavens and hells) [12]. if the only
interest would be the description of the compactication m , then one may as
well stay with the original x-coordinates and write the d+2 -coordinates follow
dirac and weyl as

 = x,  = 0, 1, 2, 3

(10)

4 =

5 =

1
2
1
2

(1 + x2)

(1  x2)

i.e. (  )2 = (x  x)2

since  is only dened up to a scale factor, we conclude that lightlike dier-
ences retain an objective meaning in m even though the space- and time-like
separation does loose its meaning. an example of a physical theory on m are
free photons. the impossibility of a distinction between space- and time- like
nds its mathematical formulation in the huygens principle which says that the
lightlike separation is the only one where the physical elds do not commute
and hence where an interaction can happen. in the terminology of local quan-
tum physics this means that the commutant of an observable algebra localized
in a double cone consists apparently of a (einstein causal) connected spacelike-
as well as two disconnected (huygens causality) timelike- pieces. but taking

2the graphical representations are apart from the compactication (which involves iden-
tications between past and future points at time/light-innity) the famous penrose pictures
of m.

5

the compactication into consideration one realizes that all three parts are con-
nected and the space/time-like distinction is meaningless on m . in terms of
wightman correlation functions this is equivalent to the rationality of the an-
alytically continued wightman functions of observable elds which includes an
analytic extension into timelike jost points [37][18].

therefore in order to make contact with particle physics aspects, the use

of either the covering fm or of more general elds (see next section) on m is

very important since only in this way one can implement the pivotal property of
causality together with the associated localization concepts. as rst observed
by i. segal [11] and later elaborated and brought into the by now standard form
in eld theory by luscher and mack [12], a global form of causality can be based
on the sign of the invariant

((e,  )  (e,  ))2

 0, hence

|   |  2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
arcsin(cid:18) e  e
4 (cid:19) 1

(11)

= |arccos (e  e)|

where the < inequality characterizes global spacelike distances and > corre-
sponds to positive and negative global timelike separations. whereas the glob-
ally spacelike region of a point is compact, the timelike region is not. the
concept of global causality solves the so called einstein causality paradox of
cqft [13]. in the next section we will meet a global decomposition method
which also avoids this paradox without the necessity of using covering space.

the central theme, namely the connection with qft on ads enters this
section naturally if one asks the question whether one can instead of the surface
of the forward light cone alternatively use a mass hyperboloid hd+1 inside the
forward light cone of the same ambient d+2 dimensional space

hd+1 =(cid:8); 2 = 1(cid:9)
0 =p1 + r2sin
d+1 =p1 + r2cos

i = rei, i = 1, ...d

(12)

this space which because of its formal relation to the analogous desitter space-
time (which is dened by the spacelike hyperboloid) is called anti desitter
spacetime is noncompact. it is obvious from its construction that its asymptotic
part is the same as md. it was conjectured by maldacena and others [1][2][3]
that there is also a correspondence between quantum eld theories. this con-
jecture implies the tacit assumption (not explicitly stated in these papers) that
an adsd+1 qft which coalesces asymptotically3 with an cqf td theory has a
unique extension into the ads bulk. since there can be no mapping between

3using the previous cylindric representation of the conformal covering, the covering of ads

corresponds to the full cylinder of which its mantel is the conformal covering.

6

pointlike elds on spacetimes of dierent dimensions the question of the origin
of this unique extension is non-trivial. the conjecture came from some specula-
tions concerning possible relations of string theory with some supersymmetric
gauge theories (sym) i.e.
from ideas far removed from the present particle
physics setting which will not be explained here.

in the 70s, at the time of the conformal compactications, free elds on ads4
were studied from a particle physics viewpoint by fronsdal [4]. the correspon-
dence to cqf t3 was overlooked; probably because of the fact that despite the
obvious group theoretical connection through the common so(3, 2), the multi-
plicites of the discrete ads free hamiltonian turned out too big for matching
those of the rotational conformal hamiltonian; a fact which will nd its expla-
nation in the next section.

although the two spacetime cannot be mapped into each other, their shared
spacetime symmetry group so(4, 2) suggests that there is at least a correspon-
dence between certain subsets which may be obtained from projecting down
wedge regions from the ambient space onto the two spacetime manifolds. wedges
have a natural relation to so(4, 2); they may all be generated from standard

wedge in the ambient auxiliary space wst =(cid:8)1 >(cid:12)(cid:12)0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:9) . the xed point group

of this transitive action on wedges consists of a boost and transversal trans-
lations and rotations4. the projected wedges pw on ads are by denition
again wedges in ads/cqft and the so(d, 2) symmetry group has the same
transitive action i.e the system of wedges is described by so(d, 2) modulo the
xed point subgroup. this geometric situation clearly suggests that on should
consider algebras associated with these wedges instead of looking for a relation
between pointlike elds. on the conformal side this includes all double cone
algebras of arbitrary small size since the noncompact wedge regions are confor-
mally equivalent to compact double cones regions. the logic of algebraic qft
requires to continue this algebraic correspondence to all intersections obtained
from wedges. in this way one expects to arrive at an isomorphism which carries
the full content of both theories and which includes the asymptotic relation (on
the conformal surface of the aforementioned cylinder) in terms of eld coordina-
tizations used by maldacena et al. in order to obtain a rigorous proof, one must
check some consistency conditions in the conversion of maps between spacetime
regions and algebras indexed by those regions. this was achieved by rehren
[6] and will be briey comment on his theorem (including its relation to the
original conjecture) in the next section.

according to our previous remarks, interacting conformal local elds live on

the covering space fm . fortunately the geometric isomorphism between wedge
regions can be lifted to an gadsd+1  fm correspondence. the conformal de-

composition theory of the next section avoids the use of the rather complicated
coverings by using an operator analog of bre bundles on m

4if one adds the two longitudinal lightlike translations which in one direction cause a

compression into the wedge, one obtains a 8-dimensional galilei group [21].

7

3 the conformal hamiltonian as the true hamil-

tonian

there is another less geometric, but more particle physics type of argument,
which leads to the ads-cqft correspondence.

for this one should recall that in so(d, 2) there are besides the usual trans-
lations with innity as a xed point also conformal translations which act on
the compactied m without xed points as some kind of timelike rotations.
they are the analogs of the light-like chiral rotation r() (l()
in standard
virasoro algebra notation) and their connection with the light ray translation
p () with which they share the positivity of their spectrum is

0

r() = p () + k ()
k () = i ()p ()i ()

(13)

where i is the representer of the chiral conformal reection x   1
x (in linear
lightray coordinates x) and k is the generator of the fractional special conformal
transformation (1). for free zero mass elds the discrete r-spectrum can be
understood in terms of that of a hamiltonian for a massless model in a spatial
box. this is however not possible for the r-spectrum of chiral theories with
anomalous scale dimension (the r-spectrum is known to be identical to the that
of scale dimensions). in that case the only theory for which the spectrum is that
of its hamiltonian is the qft on ads2. so if one wants to read the sl(2, z)
modular characters of chiral conformal eld theory in the spirit of a hamiltonian
gibbs formula one should use the ads side. an analogous statement holds in
higher dimensions where the m rotation is described in terms of a lorentz vector
r

r = p + ipi

where the inversion i was dened at the beginning of the previous section. it
leads to a family of operators with discrete spectrum of er which are dependent
on a timelike vector e. again the operator r0 is the true hamiltonian of only
one theory with the same symmetry group and the same system of algebras
(but with a dierent spacetime indexing): the associated d+1 dimensional ads
theory.

now it is time to quote (adapted to our purpose) rehrens theorem and

comment on it.

theorem 1 the geometric bijection between projected wedges pw on adsd+1
and the conformal double cones in md which constitute the asymptotic innity
of pw (as described in the previous section) extends to an isomorphism of the
corresponding algebras. both theories share the same hilbert space and the same
family of operator algebras but their spacetime organization and with it their
physical interpretation changes.

8

for the proof we refer to rehren [6].
some comments are in order. there is no additional restrictive assumptions
(supersymmetry, vanishing -functions) on either side. if the algebras of the
ads theory are generated by pointlike elds then the associated conformal al-
gebra cannot be generated by a eld which has an energy-momentum tensor or
obeys a causal equation of motion. this is one of rehrens conclusions and it is
very instructive to illustrate this with an example.

consider a free scalar ads eld [7]. a simple calculation which will not be
repeated here reveals that it corresponds to a conformal generalized free eld
with homogeneous kallen-lehmann spectral function. generalized free elds
always have been physically suspect and if there spectral functions increases
in the manner as the homogeneous degree demands in this case, one can even
prove that primitive causality [17] is violated since the algebra on a piece of
time-slice (represented as a chain of small double cones which approximate the
compact slice rom the inside) is not equal to its causal completion (causal
shadow) algebra. as one moves up in time inside the causal shadow from the
time-slice more and more degrees of freedom coming from the inner parts of
the bulk enter the causal shadow which were not in the time-slice. rehrens
graphical representation [33] of the cqft world on the wall of a full ads
cylinder makes this undesired sidewise propagation geometrically visible. this
free eld situation is generic in the sense that pointlike ads elds always carry
too many degrees of freedom which leads to a violation of causal propagation
in the aforementioned sense5. such theories have to be abandoned for general
physical reasons (not just because they do not t into a lagrangian picture
which automatically implies causal propagation). therefore the nice idea [34]
to circumvent the scarcity in constructing lagrangian conformal models (the -
function restrictions) by starting instead with ads lagrangians does not work,
since the resulting conformal theories all share the above defect.

in passing we mention that the brane idea shares the same causality conict
with pointlike eld. whereas from a mathematical viewpoint a manifold of
interest may in certain cases be considered a brane of a larger dimensional
space, the assignment of a physical reality to the ambient spacetime generates
causality problems of the above kind for restrictions to the brane in case of
pointlike eld theories in the larger ambient spacetime. only if the ambient
degrees of freedom are carefully tuned to the brane can such causality violations
be avoided. note that it is always the causal shadow property which may get
lost in such constructions and not the einstein causality. this is not visible if
one restricts ones attention to (semi)classical solutions concentrated on a brane
and or to euclidean formulations. whereas the principles of aqft conrm in
a very precise way that there exists an isomorphism it is very interesting that
there is a clash with certain concepts which have been used in string theory
for the last two decades. this clash extents beyond the above remarks on the

5contrary to a widespread belief, the number of degrees of freedom of causally propagating
ads theories is always larger than that of causally propagating conformal theories so that the
isomorphism cannot be one among causally propagating theories. if the ads theory is pointlike
and causally propagating, the associated conformal theory has no causal propagation.

9

ads-cqft and the brane concept and casts doubt on the consisteny of such
quasiclassical pictures as the kaluza-klein dimensional reduction.

as a matter of fact not even the quasiclassical klein-kaluza reduction idea
has been shown to be consistent with causal qft. for this one would have
to demonstrate that the idea works on the ready made qft and not just on
the objects involved in the formal quantization approach which is used in the
tentative construction of a qft. as far as the strict conceptual requirement of
causality and haag duality in aqft are concerned, the k-k mechanism, to the
extend that it is not just a mathematical trick (but an asymptotic property of a
genuine inclusion of two local quantum physics worlds) has at best remained an
enigmatic speculative idea (and at worst a tautology caused by not doing what
one actually is claiming to do).

the above degree of freedom discussion creates the suspicion that good
causal conformal theories may have too few degrees of freedom in order to yield
ads pointlike elds as the other side of the coin of the above observation that
pointlike ads elds create causally bad conformal theories this is indeed the
case and can be seen by starting from the wigner zero mass representation space
of the poincare group

hw ig =(cid:26)(~p)|z |(~p)|2 dd1p

2 |~p|

< (cid:27)

(14)

which without extension provides an irreducible representation space of so(d, 2).
the subspace of modular wedge-localized wigner wave functions consists of
boundary values of wave functions  which are analytic in the rapidity strip
0 < im <  where for the standard wedge

px =qp2

y + p2

zsinh, p0 =qp2

y + p2

zcosh

(15)

this wave function space is in common regardless whether we are talking about
the standard wedge on md or the corresponding adsd+1 wedge. whereas this
space in the md interpretation is easily rewritten in terms of covariant x-space
wave functions with the expected support properties, an analog -spacetime
covariantization for ads does not work. the best one can do is to introduce
(olsen-nielsen) string-like wave functions in -spacetime which do not depend
on w and which behave under so(d, 2) transformations as objects which depend
on an additional direction (the string direction). so instead of pointlike elds one
obtains strand-like objects (with weaker covariance properties) which emanate
from the points on the asymptotic boundary and extend through the bulk and
which are linear in the same momentum space creation/annihilation operators
as those which appear in the free conformal elds. this is the way in which the
ads formulation maintains the conformal degrees of freedom and the primitive
causality.

at this point an ardent string theorist might say: didnt i tell you that start-
ing from a conformal eld theory you should expect to encounter ads strings!
however the strand-like objects of the rehren theorem [6] are perfectly within

10

causal localizable aqft, and hence they are not objects of string theory proper.
the main characteristics of the strings of string theory namely the enhancement
of the degrees of freedom due to the internal excitation structure is missing in
the case of our strands.
in order to avoid misunderstandings we emphasize
again that the degree of freedom issue is not related to einstein causality which
remains valid irrespective of whether the local algebras are generated by point-
like elds or not, but rather to the causal propagation property which requires
einstein causality as a prerequisite, but is not guarantied by the lattter.

the maldacena et. al conjecture [1][2][3] is that some high dimensional true
(i.e. not the above kinematical strands) string theories in some eective and not
precisely specied sense is equivalent with conformally invariant supersymmet-
ric yang-mills (sym) theories. to the extend in which the argument support-
ing this conjecture uses a correspondence between pointlike (lagrangian) ads5
qft and a conformal sym it is contradicted by the above theorem.

antinomies and contradictions about important topics in earlier times were
often the source of progress and removal of prejudices and one would hope that
they continue to receive their due attention. the issue is somewhat delicate as
a result that the euclidean functional integral formalism in which the original
conjectures were presented is at most an heuristic starting point since feynman-
kac representations in strictly renormalizable qfts are simply not valid for the
physical (renormalized) results. for this reason the chosen method poses an ob-
stacle against converting the conjecture into a proof. this conceptual aw of the
functional action approach is one of the raisons detre of algebraic qft which
succeeds to balance the starting calculational denitions with the properties of
the constructed models. one could of course try to argue exclusively in terms of
dierential geometric concepts by abstacting from the action formulation purely
geometric denitions of what constitutes syms and the associated string theo-
ries. but in doing this one will lose the relation to local quantum physics and
the obtaines theorem may be void of an particle physics content.

if one admits that, as argued above, the lagrangian perturbation method
applied to the ads side of the correspondence cannot be used for the con-
struction of additional conformal qfts, the question arises whether there are
other construction methods. a closer investigation reveals that the spectrum
of anomalous dimensions of interacting conformal eld theories is determined
in terms of a timelike braid group structure. a convenient way of presenting
this structure is to work with nonlocal component elds [14] which result from

the decomposition of the charge carrying globally local elds f on fm under the

reduction of the center of the conformal covering group ( ^s(d, 2))

f (x) =x,
z =x

f,(x), f,(x)  pf (x)p

(16)

e2ip

in terms of projectors pa which appear in the spectral decomposition of the
generator z of the center( ^s(d, 2)) = {z n, n  z}. in a way the existence of this

11

decomposition facilitates the use of the standard parametrization of minkowski
space augmented by the quasiperiodic central transformation

zf,(x)z  = e2i( )f,(x)

(17)

and hence one may to a large part avoid the use of the complicated covering
parametrization and its ^so(d, 2) transformations which the unprojected elds

one also has to give an equivalence class of path (the number n 0 of the

f would require. for the latter elds on fm the notation would be insucient;
heaven/hell one is in) with respect to our copy of m embedded in fm . the

projected elds on the other hand are analogous to sections in a trivialized
vectorbundle. with the help of conformal 3-point functions one shows that
the -phases are related to the anomalous dimensions. the component elds
f,(x) are the suitable objects for the formulation of the timelike braid group
commutation relations which take the form of an exchange algebra

f,(x)g,(y) =x 

r(,)

,  g, (y)f ,(x), x > y

(18)

where the r-matrices are determined from admissible braid group representa-
tions. for more on the timelike braid group structure in higher dimensional
conformal qft we refer to [18].

since the ads-cqft isomorphism implies a radical reprocessing on the
physical side, it would be interesting to perform the timelike commutation re-
lation analysis directly within the ads setting. this has not been done yet.

4 generalized holography in local quantum physics

the message we can learn from the ads-conformal correspondence is two-fold.
on the one hand there is the recognition that there are situations where it is
necessary to avoid the use of eld coordinates in favor of directly working
with local algebras. in most concrete situations there were always convenient
eld coordinatizations available in terms of which the calculations simplied.
for the ads-conformal correspondence is however a new type of problem for
which the best way is to stay intrinsic, i.e. to use the net of algebras.

the second message is that there may exist a holographic relation between
qfts and their lower dimensional boundaries. we have argued that the degrees
of freedom of adsd+1 are the same as in the corresponding cqf td on the
boundary even though the hamiltonians and the associated thermal aspects
are dierent6. this is the only known case of a bijection of nets of algebras

6contrary to a widespread belief, the number of degrees of freedom of causally propagating
pointlike adsd+1 theories is always larger than that of a causally propagating conformal
theories cqftd so that the isomorphism cannot be one among causally propagating pointlike
theories i.e. if the ads theory is pointlike and causally propagating, the associated conformal
theory has no causal propagation and hence has to be discarded as unphysical.

12

associated with spacetimes of dierent dimensions but with the same maximal
spacetime dieomorphisms group.

another more frequent kind of holography7 occurs for spacetimes with a
causal horizon. in that case certain spacetime dieomorphisms of the original
spacetime act in a fuzzy nongeometric manner, thus accounting for the fact
that the dieomorphism group of the horizon is smaller. let us consider a
simple example: the holographic image of a two-dimensional massive theory
in the vacuum representation restricted to the standard wedge i.e. a rindler-
unruh situation. we want to restrict the restrict the d=1+1 wedge algebra
a(w ) to its upper half-line horizon r+. in a massive theory we expect that
both operator algebras are globally identical

a(w ) = a(r+)

(19)

although their local net structure is quite dierent. classically this corresponds
to the fact that characteristic data on either of the two horizons determine
uniquely the function in the wedge8. it is very important to control the data
on the entire upper horizon r+;
in contradistinction to a spacelike interval
compact intervals on r+ do not cast two-dimensional causal shadows. the
physical reason is of course that each point in a small neighborhood below that
interval is in the backward inuence cone of some points on r+ which are far
removed to the right outside that interval. only if we take all of r+, we will
have w as its two-dimensional causal shadow.

in the general approach to qft the von neumann algebra of a compact
spacetime region is, according to the causal shadow property of aqft (which
is a local version of the time-slice property mentioned in the previous section
[17]), identical to the algebra of its causally completed region. each eld theory
with a causal propagation (in particular lagrangian eld theory) fullls this
requirement. if one takes a sequence of spacelike intervals which approximate
a lightlike interval, the causal shadow region becomes gradually smaller and
approaches an interval on the light ray in the limit. the only way to counteract
this shrinking is to extend the spacelike interval gradually to the right in such
a way that the larger lower causal shadow part becomes the full wedge in the
limit.

the correctness of this intuitive idea which suggests the correctness of (19)
can be checked against other rigorous results. one rigorous result from wigner
representation theory (which therefore is limited to free eld theories) together
with the application of the weyl- or car- (for halnteger spin) functor is the
statement that the cyclicity spaces for an interval i on r+ agree with the total
space [19]

a(i) = a(r+) = a(w ) = h

(20)

7since our approach tries to relate the holographic aspects via modular localization ideas to
the old principles of particle physics, we do not have to invoke a new holographic principle.
8this is true in any dimension. the only exception is d=1+1, mass=0 in which case both

horizons are needed to specify the two chiral components of conformal theories.

13

i.e.
the validity of the reeh-schlieder theorem on the light ray subalgebra.
in fact this holds for all positive energy representations including zero mass,
except zero mass in d=1+1 in which case the decomposition in two chiral factors
prevents its validity. therefore one only needs to proof the spatial statement
a(r+) = a(w ) = h in order to derive (19). but this spatial completeness
follows from the causal shadow property for spacelike half-lines l starting at
the origin since the space a(l) = h and this completeness property cannot
get lost in the light ray limit l  r+. the step from spaces to (19) is done
with the help of takesakis theorem (mentioned later).

we still have to rigorously dene the holographic algebra a(r+) (which
turns out to be chiral conformal) and its net structure a(i) from a(w ). this
is done by the modular inclusion technique which is one of aqft most recent
mathematical achievements [20][19].

the modular way of associating a chiral conformal theory with e.g. a d=1+1
massive theory is the following . start from the right wedge algebra a(w ) with
apex at the origin and let an upper lightlike translation a+ (which fullls the
energy positivity!) act on a(w ) and produce an inclusion (all the algebras are
von neumann algebras)

a(wa+ )  a(w )

(21)

this inclusion is halfsided modular, i.e. the modular group9 it of (a(w ), )
which is the lorentz boost acts on a(wa+ ) for t < 0 as a compression

adita(wa+ )  a(wa+ ), t < 0

(22)

the assumed nontriviality of the net i.e. the intersections10 of wedge algebras
entails that the relative commutant (primes on algebras denote their commutant
in b(h))

a(wa+ )  a(w )

(23)

is also nontrivial. such inclusions are called standard.
it is known that
standard modular inclusions correspond to chiral conformal theories, i.e. the
classication problem for the latter is identical to the classication of all stan-
dard modular inclusions [35]. in the case at hand the emergence of the chiral
theory is intuitively clear since the only living space in agreement with ein-
stein causality (within the closure of w and spacelike with respect to the open
wa+ ) which one can attribute to the relative commutant is the lightray interval
of length a+ starting at the origin. from the abstract modular inclusion set-
ting the hilbert space which the relative commutant generates from the vacuum

9for presentations of the tomita-takesaki modular theory which are close to the present
concepts and notations see [10]. a more extensive presentation which pays due attention to
the importance of modular theory for the new conceptual setting of qft is that by borchers
[36].

10the nontriviality of the intersections is in some sense the algebraic counterpart of the
renormalizable short distance behaviour in a quantization approach which is believed to be
required by the mathematical existence of the lagrangian theory.

14

could be a subspace h+  h, h+ = p h of the original one, but the already
mentioned causal shadow property assures that h+ = h, i.e. p = 1 with the
help of the l-boost (=modular group it of (a(w ), ) one then denes a net
on the haline r+ and a global algebra

a(r+) = alg(cid:8)t<oadit(a(wa+ )  a(w ))(cid:9)  a(w )

a(r+) = h, y a(r+) = a(w )

(24)

the modular group it of the original algebra leaves this lightray algebra in-
variant and hence we are in the situation of the takesaki theorem [19][36] which
states that a subalgebra together with the vacuum which is left invariant by the
modular group of the larger algebra, has modular objects which are restrictions
of those of (a(w ), ) and the algebras coalesce i a(r+) = h. the iden-
tity (19) means that the original modular inclusion was standard and hence the
theory on the light ray is conformal.

the identity of this conformal theory with the massive wedge algebra also
shows that identication of chiral conformal theories with zero mass is a prej-
udice. whether chiral theories are describing massless or massive situations
depends on the identication of the mass operator. in the present case there
exists another second lightlike translation along the lower horizon and the mass
operator is given by the product p+p. even though the spectrum of each p is
gapless, as required by conformal invariance, there is a mass gap in the physical
mass operator. since the lightray algebra is identical to the wedge algebra, the
lower a lightray translation also acts on it; but not as a dieomorphism but
rather in a fuzzy [21] i.e. totally nonlocal way relative to the local moebius group
action coming from the geometry of the upper lightray. so in the lightray rep-
resentation of the wedge algebra only the lorentz boost (which becomes a scale
transformation on r+) and the upper lightray translation are shared as local
dieomorphism operations in both representations. the lower lightray transla-
tion is nonlocal on a(r+) and the moebius rotation (after compactication of
r+) is newly created and acts only partially geometrically on w.

it is one of the characteristic features of this generalized holography that in
addition to the local and nonlocal encoding of dieomorphisms of the original
theory into its lower dimensional holographic image, there are also partially
geometric symmetries as the moebius rotations transferred back from the image
into the original theory. the degrees of freedom of the chiral conformal a(r+)
are in some intuitive sense more than in a standard chiral conformal theory
associated with a chiral energy momentum tensor, because such a standard
model would algebraically be to small in order to carry an additional fuzzy a
lightray translation.

still another related idea about relations of qfts on dierent but this time
equal dimensional spacetimes which uses modular techniques in an essential way
has recently appeared under the name transplantation of local nets [38].

the present modular inclusion approach to lightray physics, including the
localization and degrees of freedom aspect is another illustration of the con-
ceptual power of the eld coordinate free approach and the modular inclusion

15

method. in the standard setting there are several fake as well as genuine (re-
quiring a change of eld coordinates) problems with light cone- restrictions and
quantizations. standard approaches are usually entirely formal; they tend to
overlook localization problems whose understanding is vital for the physical in-
terpretation of the formalism and furthermore often use eld coordinatizations
which become singular on the lightray.

these problems continue in higher dimensions where the wedge horizons are
lightfronts. a typical case which requires new concepts is d=1+2. in that case
the modular method, applied to one wedge, only transfers a small fraction of
the geometric structure of the original theory into a chiral conformal theory ob-
tained by modular inclusion, which localization-wise should really be associated
with the upper light front horizon of the wedge. the lightfront quantization
(or innite momentum frame method) with respect to one lightfront only
cannot account for the full locality informations. since its transversal localiza-
tion remains completely unresolved, the so obtained theory only contains the
longitudinal localization data of a chiral conformal net.

let me explain the way to get a transversal resolution. in that case one tilts
the wedge by a l-boost which leaves the upper dening light ray for the initial
wedge invariant [9][10]. one then convinces oneself that this newly positioned
second wedge has a modular associated chiral conformal theory which, though
being unitarily equivalent to the rst one, carries the missing information (which
is needed for the reconstruction of the original d=1+2 theory) in form of its
relative position in the common hilbert space h. the tilted wedge together
with the original one can be used to give a net structure to the original wedge
in the transversal direction. again the holographic projection of the original
net into the horizon has besides geometric actions also fuzzy and partially local
actions.

but instead using the transversal resolution of the 2-dim. horizon for a
constructive approach based on the modular inclusion and intersection method,
it would be somewhat more natural to describe the original theory in terms of
the two chiral theories which the modular inclusion associates with the original
wedge and the tilted wedge. in the general d-dimensional case one would encode
the original theory in terms of d-1 copies of one and the same chiral theory in
dierent positions within one hilbert space. the name chiral scanning would
hence be more appropriate than holography for such a procedure.

adding nice names to structural relations is of course by itself not very
constructive. the hope is that by more profound future studies one may develop
criteria which allow a more universal intrinsic algebraic characterization of those
relative positions and chiral theories which allow to construct a d-dimensional
qft. chiral theories are the simplest and best understood qfts and the study
of d-1 copies of them seems to be simpler than to confront higher dimensional
eld theories directly.

in fact t hoofts original holography [23] proposal and susskinds [22] sub-
sequent work appear much more related to the light front encoding and/or the
related scanning than to the ads holography with its high geometric symmetry
restriction. the present use of modular inclusions may be seen as an attempt

16

to nd a rmer conceptual and mathematical basis for those ideas.

the importance of causal horizons in the above considerations suggests to
look for a localization entropy of causally localized matter as a rst step
towards a quantum explanation of the universal bekenstein area law in black
hole physics. but there is a hurdle right at the start: unlike qm where a
quantization box denes a inside/outside division of the hilbert space and the
quantum mechanical algebra (type i von neumann factor) through a tensor
product factorization, the nature of the double cone algebras (the relativistic
causally closed analogs of boxes) in qft is totally dierent, since as hypernite
type iii1 von neumann factors they contain neither minimal projectors nor
are there any pure states among its normal states [36]. this unusual state of
aairs requires the introduction of the split property in order to construct the
relativistic analogue of the qm box [16]. the physical mechanism behind this
property is the strong vacuum uctuations of partial charges at the surface of
its localization volume v, one of the oldest and most characteristic phenomena
which set apart qft from qm.

let us rst try to understand this phenomenon in a mathematically rened
formulation of its original discovery by heisenberg. using a smooth spacetime
smearing function consisting of a spatial part gr,(x) with thickness  and lo-
calization radius r multiplied by a compact support time-smearing f in the
denition of the partial charge

qr =z j0(x)f (x0)gr,(x)dsx

gr,(x) =(cid:26) 1, |x| < r
f (x0)  0, z f (x0)d x0 = 1

0, |x| > r + 

(25)

one nds that the square norm of the partial charge applied to the vacuum
hqrqri diverges with   0 and increases for xed  in the limit r   as
rd2 where d is the spacetime dimension [24].

but what, if any, could be the message of this area law with that of the would
be localization entropy? we rst have to understand the algebraic analogue of
the surface vacuum uctuation of the partial charges. this turns out to be the
split property i.e. the necessity to work with fuzzy space time boxes in the form
of double cones with a collar region of thickness  separating the inside of
the smaller box of radius r from the outside of the bigger with radius r+. in
this split situation we do recover the quantum mechanical inside/outside tensor
factorization which refers to a fuzzy box algebra n which extends beyond the
smaller box into the collar without sharp geometric boundaries [16]. this sets
the stage for dening von neumann entropy which needs the type i tensor-
factorization of boxes in qm.

there remains however another important dierence to schrodinger quan-
tum mechanics in that the vacuum state remains entangled i.e. does not split

17

into an inside/outside part but rather remains a highly correlated state with the
hawking-unruh temperature. this has paradigmatic consequences for the con-
ceptual framework of the measurement process in local quantum physics [25].
it is also the origin of the localization entropy which we have been looking for.
one can show that the vacuum state restricted to the fuzzy qft box leads to
a nontrivial entropy which diverges with   0 and increases with the size r of
the box in agreement with the above analogy which intuitively pictures the box
entropy of the vacuum as being related to a partial hamiltonian charge via
a gibbs formula in the above sense. as in that case one also would expect the
validity of an entropical area law at least for large ratios of the diameter divides
by the collar size and that the matter dependence would show up, if not in the
coecient of the area law itself, at least in its correction terms. the hamilto-
nian charge which we intuitively relate with a gibbs formula is not expected
to be associated to a geometrical symmetry but rather to one of the innitely
many modular-generated fuzzy/hidden symmetries which any qft possesses.
in particular we nd the use of the conformal rotational hamiltonian which
appeared in the recent literature [26] physically ad hoc, especially in view of
the fact that bekensteins area law does not require conformal invariance. even
if in very special conformal situations its spectrum happens to be similar to
that of the logarithm of the modular operator of the splitting box algebra with
respect to the vacuum and the resulting entropy complies with the bekenstein
area law, such an enigmatic observation will be helpful only if it leads to a gen-
eral physical concept; by itself it cannot be a substitute for a deeper conceptual
understanding. the minkowski analog of black hole thermodynamics/statistical
mechanics in our view is more the understanding of thermal aspects resulting
from (modular) localization rather than the application of the heat-bath gibbs
formalism.

various intuitively equivalent forms of localization entropy related to the
split inclusion situation were introduced via the concept of relative entropy for
a pair of states in the work of h. narnhofer [27]. the most managable version for
the purpose of extracting a possible area law which refers directly to the states
seems to be the relative entropy of the vacuum relative to the split vacuum
on the restricted tensor product algebra a  b, a  n , b  n  where a is
the smaller double cone algebra and b the commutant of the bigger one. there
exists [28] a nice variational formula in terms of states only for such relative
entropy of a von neumann algebra m between two states i, i = 1, 2

s(1|2)m =  hlog1,2i2

= supz 1

0 (cid:20) (1)

 1(y(t)y(t)) 

1 + t

(26)

1
t

2(x(t)x(t))

dt

t (cid:21)

x(t) = 1  y(t), x(t)  m

here 1,2 is the relative modular operator and for the case at hand we
have to identify 1 = , 2 =    (the split vacuum) and m = a  b. using
some previous nuclearity estimates of buchholz and wichmann [16], narnhofer
carried out a rough estimate for this entropy and found that it increases less

18

than the volume of the relativistic box of size r [27]. in the present setting her
result may be interpreted as a rst indication in favor of a bekenstein area law
for localized quantum matter. i order to obtain more structural inside into this
fundamental and universal phenomenon i started to investigate this problem in
the mathematically more controllable situation of two double cones separated
by a collar in conformal theories [10]. by conformal invariance the large r be-
haviour becomes coupled to the short distance behavior in the limit of vanishing
collar size   0. one expects to have an easier conceptual grasp on this ul-
traviolet behavior as a consequence of the fact that it reects truely intrinsic
properties of the local algebras and has nothing to do with short distance di-
vergencies of particular eld coordinates. besides, conformal theories from an
analytic viewpoint are the simplest theories after free elds. there are as yet
no suciently concrete results worthwhile to be reported here.

to avoid misunderstanding, i am not saying that the area law for black holes
is a simple consequence of the area law for localized quantum matter. it would
be a pity if it would, because then not much would be revealed by black hole
physics about the still extremely speculative issue of quantum gravity. rather i
believe that it is the seemingly very nontrivial conversion of localization entropy
of local quantum physics into the more geometric killing horizon entropy of
black holes11 which will be the crucial step.

5 epilogue

the present analysis of the ads-cqft correspondence has its roots in the lsz
setting of particle physics from which the conformally invariant qft should
result in the zero mass limit [30]. the step from the traditional use of pointlike
(lagrangian) elds to operator algebras indexed by spacetime regions has been
taken a long time ago with the intention to obtain a more profound understand-
ing of the observed insensitivity of the s-matrix obtained as the asymptotic limit
in the setting of the lehmann symanzik-zimmermann formalism to changes of
eld coordinates (interpolating elds) within the (borchers) equivalence class.
this led to a more intrinsic formulation of qft called algebraic qft (aqft)
which relegates the role of elds to a coordinatization of local algebras in terms
of selection of particular generators. if one wants to use eld-coordinatizations
alltogether, as was needed in rehrens proof of the ads-cqft isomorphism, it
is appropriate to avoid the word eld and talk about local quantum physics
[16]. as the step from dierential geometry with coordinates to the modern
intrinsic coordinate-free formulation did not represent a change of the geomet-
rical content, one does not change physical principles (but only some concepts
for their implementation) by passing from qft to lqp. since certain prob-
lems, as e.g.
the abominable short-distance problem in the pointlike formu-

11the role of the double cone restricted vacuum in the black hole situation is played by the

hartle-hawking state restricted to the outside of the black hole [29].

19

lation (coordinate singularities? of which eld coordinate?)12 which always
seemed to threaten the existence of lagrangian qft through its long jorney
through renormalization theory, become deemphasized in favor of apparantly
dierent aspects (ultraviolet divergenciesnontriviality of certain intersection
of algebras) in the new formulation, this reprocessing of concepts represents a
very healthy change.

the conjecture about the ads-cqft correspondence comes from string the-
ory. although string theory has been the dominant way of thinking in particle
physics publications for at least two decades, its main achievements seems to be
that (with some training and coaching) it allows theoretical physicists to make
contributions to mathematics. its historical origin in the dual s-matrix model
of veneziano was very close to the framework of lsz scattering theory; in fact it
started as a proposal for a nonperturbative crossing symmetric s-matrix which
fullled a very strong form (not suggested by qft) of crossing called duality
(saturation of crossing on the level of reggeized one-particle states). this forced
the s-matrix to live in a high-dimensional spacetime of at least 10 dimensions
(by invoking another invented structure: supersymmetry).

the next step in the lsz logic would have been to ask for the understanding
of this high dimensional qft (i.e. the unique equivalence class of elds or the
local net of algebras) which has this s-matrix as a bona de physical s-matrix
i.e. as a large time lsz limit. unfortunately this never happened; instead
the o-shell transition was performed at a completely dierent purely techni-
cal place. it was based on the auxiliary observation that the particle towers
which appeared in the lowest order (or lowest genus of riemann surfaces which
is the analogue of schwingers auxiliary eigentime in qft) can be reproduced
by the mass spectrum of a string. in the original strong interaction represen-
tation of the model this tower was thought to lead to resonances (poles in the
second riemann sheet) resulting from higher order interactions destabilizing
the higher-lying particles in the tower. it was this step (which occurred even
before the decree of the use of string theory as a quantum theory of gravity)
which is responsible for the lost (and never recovered since) relation to causality
and localization which are the cornerstones of qft. whereas in earlier times
quantum eld theorist have thought (without success) about nonlocal alter-
natives in the form of an elementary length or a cuto, recent developments
in algebraic qft have made abundantly clear that einstein causality and its
strengthed form haag duality is inexorably linked with the mathematics of the
tomita-takesaki modular theory. this is an extremely deep theory which is
able to convert abstract domain properties of operators and subspaces obtained
by applying algebras of local quantum physics to distinguished state vectors
into concrete spacetime localization geometry (without the necessity to impose
any additional structure from the mathematics of noncommutative geometry).

12there are also intrinsic ultraviolet aspects of the local algebras. for example if one uses
the split property for the denition of the vauum entropy of a local algebra with a collar
for controlling the vacuum uctuations near the causal horizon of the localization region, the
entropy diverges with shrinking collar size in a way which is characteristic for the model but
not for one of its eld coordinates [10].

20

all structural insight obtained up to now, the charge superselection structure,
tcp, braid group statistics13, v. jones- as well as the new modular- inclusion
theory mentioned in this paper, the universal nature of holography and the con-
cept of localized entropy, all these properties depend on the causality aspects
of qft. so the reasons for giving them up must be very strong (theoretical or
experimental) and amount to much more than the esthetics of dierential geo-
metric consistency observation. the biggest dierence to the a more scholarly
and less marketing zeitgeist of previous times becomes visible if one looks at
the terminology. whereas e.g. the quasiclassical bohr-sommerfeld theory was
presented in a way that left no doubt about its transitory character and the
step towards quantum mechanics was the de-mystication of the quasiclassical
antinomies and loose ends, string theorist often praise their product as a theory
of everything and invite their fellow physicist to read the big latin letter m as
mystery in a science whose main aim used to be de-mystication.

having enjoyed the good fortune of proximity to harry lehmann to whose
memory i have dedicated this paper, the present crisis often reminds me of good
and healthy times in particle physics when he made his lasting contributions to
particle physics. it would seem to me that in the present absence of profound
experimental discoveries it would be more reasonable and safer to develop local
quantum physics according to its very strong intrinsic logic and guidance of its
underlying physical principles instead of taking o into the blue yonder under
the maxim everything goes.

but apart from a few exceptions there is a lamentable dominance of ideas
which despite their long age have not contributed anything tangible to particle
physics. this danger eminating from this dominance which seriously threatenes
the chance of our most gifted and original young minds to contribute to the
progress of particle physics (and which may even wipe out the very successful
scholarly traditions in the exact sciences altogether) was certainly realized by
the late harry lehmann who reacted to it with his characteristc mocking irony
which his friends and collaborators will not forget easily, and which besides
his scientic achievments probably explaines wolfgang paulis sympathy and
support extended to him.

there are indications that members of the older generation (who have been
keeping silence in the face of the mathematical brilliance and exclusiveness be-
hind some of the present dominant fashion in particle physics) are slowly be-
coming aware of the potential danger [31][32].

note added: although the majority interest has recently shifted away from
the eld theoretic ads-cqft problem, we nd that it serves as an ideal ilustra-
tion how the powerful concepts of aqft can solve a problem which otherwise
(despite a very large number of papers) would have remained unsolved.

acknowledgement i am indebted to gerhard mack for valuable sugges-

tions and encouragements.

13including the appearance of temporal plektonic structures in higher dimensional conformal

eld theories mentioned at the end of the third section.

21

references

[1] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, (1998) 231

[2] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov, a. m. polyakov, phys.lett. b428 (1998) 105

[3] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, (1998) 253

[4] c. fronsdal, phys. rev. d10, (1974) 589

[5] s. j. avis, c. j. isham and d. storey, phys. rev. d18, (1978) 3565

[6] k.-h. rehren, ann, henri poincare 1, (2000) 607

[7] m. bertola, j. bros, u. moschella and r. schaeer, ads/cft correspon-

dence for n-point functions, hep-th/9908140

[8] d. buchholz, m. florig and s. j. summers, hawking-unruh temperature

and einstein causality in anti-de sitter space-time, hep-th/9905178

[9] b. schroer, ann. phys. (n.y.) 275, (1999) 190 and references therein

b. schroer, local quantum theory beyond quantization,
in quantum
theory and symmetries, ed. h.-d. doebner, v.k dobrev, j.-d. henning
abd w. luecke, world scientic (2000), hep-th/9912008

[10] b. schroer, j. math. phys. 41, (2000) 3801

[11] i. e. segal, causality and symmetry in cosmology and the confor-
mal group, montreal 1976, proceedings, group theoretical methods in
physics, new york 1977, 433 and references therein to ealier work of the
same author.

[12] m. luescher and g. mack, commun. math. phys. 41, (1975) 203

[13] m. hortacsu, b. schroer and r. seiler, phys. rev. d5, (1972) 2519

[14] b. schroer and j. a. swieca, phys. rev. d10, (1974) 480, b. schroer, j.

a. swieca and a. h. voelkel, phys. rev. d11, (1975) 11

[15] a. a. belavin, a. m. polyakov and a. b. zamolodchikov, nucl. phys.

b247, (1984), 83

[16] r. haag, local quantum physics, springer verlag (1992)

[17] r. haag and b. schroer, j. math. phys. 3, (1962) 248

[18] b. schroer, anomalous scale dimensions from timelike braiding, hep-

th/0005134

b. schroer, space- and time-like superselection rules in conformal quan-
tum field theory, hep-th/0010290

22

[19] d. guido, r. longo, j.e. roberts and r. verch, charged sectors, spin
and statistics in quantum field theory on curved spacetimes, math-
ph/9906019

[20] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, rmp vol 12 no 2 (feb 2000) 301-326

[21] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, rmp vol 12 no 1 (jan 2000) 139

b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, looking beyond the thermal horizon:
hidden symmetries in chiral models, to appear in rmp vol 12 no 3 (march
2000)

[22] l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36, (1995) 6377

[23] g.t hooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity,
festschrift, a. ali et al. eds., world scientic 1993, page 284

in salam-

[24] d. buchholz, s. doplicher, r. longo and j. h. roberts, rev. math. phys.

special issue (1992) 49

[25] rob clifton and hans halvorson, entanglement and open systems in al-
gebraic quantum field theory, university of pittsburgh preprint jan.2000

[26] e. verlinde, on the holographic principle in a radiation dominated uni-

verse, hep-th/0008140.

[27] h. narnhofer, in the state of matter, ed. by m. aizenman and h. araki

(wold-scientic, singapore) 1994

[28] h. kosaki, j. operator theory 16, (1986) 335

[29] r. m. wald, quantum field theory in cuved spacetime and black hole

thermodynamics, university of chicago press (1994)

[30] b. schroer, phys. lett. b 494, (2000) 124, hep-th/0005110

[31] i. t. todorov, two-dimensional conformal eld theory and beyond. lessons

from a continuing fashion, math-phys/0011014

[32] r. penrose, how to compute-help-and hurt scientic research, convergence

winter 1999, page 30

[33] k.-h. rehren, local quantum observables in the anti de sitter-conformal

qft correespondence, hep-th/0003120

[34] j. kupsch, w. ruehl and b. c. yunn, ann. phys. (n.y.) 89, (1975) 141

[35] h.-w. wiesbrock, lett. math. phys. 31, (1994) 303, d. guido, r. longo

and h.-w. wiesbrock, commun. math. phys. 192, (1998) 217

[36] h. j. borchers, j. math. phys. 41, (2000) 3604

23

[37] nicolay m. nikolov and ivan t. todorov, rationality of conformally in-
variant local correlation functions on compactied minkowski space, hep-
th/0009004

[38] d. buchholz, j. mund and s. j. summers, transplantation of local nets
and geometric modular action on robertson-walker space-times, hep-
th/0011237

d. buchholz, algebraic quantum field theory, a status report hep-
th/0011015

24

