itep/th-56/99

dualities in integrable systems and n=2

susy theories

a.gorsky 1

itep, moscow, 117259, b.cheryomushkinskaya 25

9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
5

 

 
 

1
v
7
3
0
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

abstract

we discuss dualities of the integrable dynamics behind the exact solution to the

n=2 susy ym theory. it is shown that t duality in the string theory is related to

the separation of variables procedure in dynamical system. we argue that the are

analogues of s duality as well as 3d mirror symmetry in the many-body systems of

hitchin type governing low-energy eective actions.

1

integrability and low-energy eective actions for

n=2 susy gauge theories

the description of the strong coupling regime in the quantum eld theory remains a
challenging problem and the main hope is connected to discovery of new proper degrees
of freedom which would provide the perturbative expansion distinct from the initial one.
the rst successful derivation of the low energy eective action in n=2 susy yang-mills
theory clearly shows that solution of the theory involves new ingredients which are not
familiar in this context before like riemann surfaces and meromorphic dierentials on it
[1].

the general structure of the eective actions is dened by the symmetry arguments,
in particular they should respect the ward identities coming from the bare eld theory.
for example the chiral symmetry xes the chiral lagrangian in qcd and the conformal
symmetry provides the dilaton eective actions in n=0 and n=1 ym theories. since
the eective actions have a symmetry origin one can expect universality properties and
generically dierent uv theories can ow to the same ir ones. it is the symmetry origin
of the eective actions that leads to the appearance of the integrable systems on the scene.
the point is that the phase spaces for the integrable systems coincide with some moduli

1 talk given at qfthep-99, moscow, may 29 - june 2

1

space or the cotangent bundle to the moduli space. we can mention kdv hierarchy
related to the moduli of the complex structures of the riemann surfaces, the toda lattice
related to the moduli of the at connections or hitchin like systems connected with the
moduli of the holomorphic vector bundles. in any case moduli spaces come from some
additional symmetry of the problem.

identication of the variables in the integrable system responsible for some eective
action is a complicated problem. at a moment there is no universal way to introduce
the proper variables in the theories which are not topological ones but there is some
experience in 2d theories [2] which suggests to identify the nonperturbative transition
amplitudes among the vacuum states as the dynamical variables. as for the space-
time variables, coupling constants and sources are the most promising candidates. it is
expected that the partition function evaluated in the low-energy eective theory is the
so called  - function in integrable hierarchy which is the generating function for the
conserved integrals of motion. the particular solution of the equations of motion in the
dynamical system is selected by applying the ward identities to the partition function of
the eective theory.

the arguments above explain the reason for the search of some integrable structures
behind the seiberg-witten solution to n=2 susy yang-mills theory. this integrable
structures which capture the hidden symmetry structure have been found in [3] where
it was shown that anc ane toda chain governs the low energy eective action and
bps spectrum of pure n=2 sym theory. the generalization to the theories with matter
involves calogero-moser integrable system for the adjoint matter [4] and xxx spin chain
for the fundamental matter [5]. in ve dimensions relativistic toda chain appears to be
relevant for the pure gauge theory [6] while anisotropic xxz chain for sqcd [8]. at
the next step completely anisotropic xyz chain has been suggested as a guide for 6d
sqcd [8] while the generalization to the group product case is described by the higher
spin magnets [7]. the candidate system for 6d theory with adjoint matter based on the
geometry of elliptically bered k3 manifold was suggested in [25] (see also [27]. therefore
there are no doubts in the validity of the mapping between eective low-energy eective
theories and integrable nite dimensional systems.

the list of correspondences between two seemingly dierent issues looks as follows.
the solution to the classical equation of motion in the integrable system can be expressed
in terms of higher genus riemann surface which can be mapped to the complex liouville
tori of the dynamical system. it is this riemann surface enters seiberg-witten solution,
and the meromorphic dierential introduced to formulate the solution coincides with the
action dierential in the dynamical system in the separated variables. the coulomb
moduli space in n=2 theories is identied with the space of the integrals of motion in
the dynamical system, for example t r2 where  is the adjoint scalar eld coincides with
the hamiltonian for the periodical toda system. the parameters of the eld theory like
masses or qcd determine the parameters and couplings in the integrable system. for
instance in sqcd fundamental masses provide the local casimirs in the periodical spin
chains.

in spite of a lot of supporting facts it is necessary to get more transparent explanation
of the origin of integrability in this context. to this aim let us discuss the moduli spaces

2

in the problem at hands. classically there is only coulomb branch of the moduli space in
pure gauge theory so one can expect dynamical system associated with such phase space.
coulomb branch can be considered as a special kahler manifold [1] while the hitchin
like dynamical system responsible for the model has a hyperkahler phase space [11]. the
resolution of the contradiction comes from the hidden higgs-like branch which has purely
nonperturbative nature [12, 7]. it is the dynamical system on this hidden phase space
provides the integrable system of the hitchin or spin chain type. therefore there are two
moduli spaces in our problem and one expects a pair of dynamical systems. this is what
we have indeed; dynamical system on the higgs branch yields the hitchin like dynamics
with the associated riemann surfaces while the integrable system on the coulomb branch
gives rise to the whitham dynamics. the physical meaning of the hitchin system is to
incorporate the nonperturbative instanton like contributions to the eective action in the
supersymmetric way while the whitham dynamics is nothing but the rg ows in the
model [3] 2.

the next evident question is about the degrees of freedom in both dynamical systems.
the claim is that all degrees of the freedom can be identied with the collective coordinates
of a particular brane conguration. first let us explain where the higgs branch comes
from. the basic illustrative example for the derivation of the hyperkahler moduli space
in terms of branes is the description of adhm data as a moduli for a system of coupled
d1-d5 or d0-d4 branes [15].
if the gauge elds are independent on some dimension
one derives nahm description of the monopole moduli space in terms of d1-d3 branes
conguration [16]. the transition from adhm data to the nahm ones can be treated
as a t duality transformation. at the next step the hyperkahler hitchin space can be
obtained by reducing the dependence (or additional t duality transformation) on one more
dimension. this corresponds to the system of d2 branes wrapped around some surface
 holomorphically embedded in some manifold. the most relevant example concerns t 2
embedded into k3 manifold [17]. the t duality along the torus transforms it to the
system of d0 branes on the dual torus, which is the most close picture for the toda
dynamics in terms of d0 branes. the related discussion for the derivation of the hitchin
spaces in terms of instantons on r2  t 2 can be found in [18].

let us now proceed to the explicit brane picture for the n=2 theories. there are
dierent ways to get it, one involves 10d string theory which compactied on the manifold
containing the toda chain spectral curve [20], or the m theory with m5 brane wrapped
around the noncompact surface which can be obtained from the spectral curve by deleting
the nite number of points [21]. this picture can be considered as the perturbative one
and nonperturbative degrees of freedom have to be added. for this purpose it is useful to
consider iia projection of the m theory which involves nc d4 branes between two ns5
branes located on a distance ls
g2 along, say x6 direction. field theory is dened on d4
branes worldvolume [22] and the extensive review concerning the derivation of the eld
theories from branes can be found in [23]. the additional ingredient yielding the hidden
higgs branch comes from the set of nc d0 branes, one per each d4 brane [12, 7]. it is
known that d0 on d4 brane behaves as a abelian point-like instanton but now we have

2the latest developments within whitham approach as well as list of references can be found in [10]

3

the system of interacting d0 branes. the coupling constant is provided by the qcd
parameter which can be most naturally obtained from the mass of the adjoint scalar
breaking n=4 to n=2 via dimensional transmutation procedure.

one way to explain the need for the additional d0,s in iia theory or kk modes in m
theory looks as follows. it is known that any nite-dimensional integrable system with the
spectral parameter allows the canonical transformation to the variables  spectral curve
with the linear bundle. the spectral curve role is transparent and kk modes provide
the linear bundle. as we have already noted they are responsible for the nonperturbative
contribution but the summation of the innite instanton sums into the nite number
degrees of freedom remains the challenging problem. it is worth noting that both canonical
coordinates in the dynamical system come from the coordinates of d0 branes in dierent
dimensions. the necessity for the additional nonperturbative degrees of freedom has been
also discussed in [13].

to show how the objects familiar in the integrability world translate into the brane
language consider two examples. first let us consider the equations of motion in the toda
chain which has the lax form

= [t, a]

(1)

dt
ds

dt
dt

with some ncnc matrixes t and a. the lax matrix t can be related to nahm matrix for
the chain of monopoles using the identications of the spectral curves for cyclic monopole
conguration and periodic toda chain [14]. all these results in the following expression
for the toda lax operator in terms of the nahm matrixes ti

t = t1 + it2  2it3 + (t1  it2)2

i

t1 =

2xj=1
t2 = xj=1

qj(e+j + ej)

qj(e+j  ej)
2xj
i

pjhj,

t3 =

(2)

(3)

where e and h are the standard su(n) generators, pi, qi represent the toda phase space,
and  is the coordinate on the cp 1 above. this cp 1 is involved in the twistor construction
for monopoles and a point on cp 1 denes the complex structure on the monopole moduli
space. with these denitions toda equation of motion and nahm equation acquire the
simple form

= [t, a]

(4)

with xed a. having in mind the brane interpretation of the nahm data [16] we can claim
that the equations of motion provide the conditions for the required supersymmetry of
the whole conguration.

as another example of the validity of the brane-integrability correspondence mention
the possibility to incorporate the fundamental matter in the gauge theory via branes in

4

two ways. the rst one concerns the semiinnite d4 branes while the second one the
set of nf d6 branes. one can expect two dierent integrable systems behind and they
were found in [24] and [5].
it was shown in [7] that they perfectly correspond to the
brane pictures and it appears that the equivalence of two representations agrees with
some duality property in the dynamical system. recently one more ingredient of the
brane approach - orientifold has been recognized within integrability approach [9]. to
conclude the discussion of the many-body dynamical systems let us mention that one can
inverse the logic and use the possible integrable deformations of the dynamical system to
construct their eld theory counterparts. along this line of reasoning we can expect some
unusual eld theories with the several  type scales [7].

2 dualities in integrable systems and sym theories

we are going to study the phenomenon of duality whose precise denition is presented
shortly. duality is a subject of much recent investigation in the context of (supersymmet-
ric) gauge theories, in which case the duality is an involution, which maps the observables
of one theory to those of another. the duality is powerful when the coupling constant in
one theory is inverse of that in another (or more generally, when small coupling is mapped
to the strong one). for example, a weakly coupled (magnetic) theory can be dual to the
strongly coupled (electric) theory thus making possible to understand the strong coupling
behavior of the latter. in particular, it was shown [1] that using the concept of duality
one can nd exact low-energy lagrangian of n = 2,d = 4 su(2) gauge theory. a more
fascinating recent development is that the duality connecting weak and strong coupling
regimes of one or dierent theories may have a geometric origin. the most notorious
example of that is provided by m-theory. having in mind the relation between many-
body systems and eective actions in sym theories it is natural to obtain the natural
dualities within the integrability approach. both dynamical systems and gauge theories
benet from establishing of this correspondence which was formulated in [26, 25]. brane
picture for the hitchin like systems presented above plays important role in derivation of
the proper degrees of freedom.

2.1 t duality and separation of variables

there are three essentially dierent dualities which manifest themselves in dynamical
systems of the hitchin type. let us start with the analogue of t duality in the hitchin
like systems [26]. it appears that the proper analogue of t duality can be identied with
the separation of variables in the dynamical systems.

a way of solving a problem with many degrees of freedom is to reduce it to the
problem with the smaller number of degrees of freedom. the solvable models allow to
reduce the original system with n degrees of freedom to n systems with 1 degree of
freedom which reduce to quadratures. this approach is called a separation of variables (

5

sov). recently, e. sklyanin formulated magic recipe for the sov in the large class of
quantum integrable models with a lax representation [29]. the method reduces in the
classical case to the technique of separation of variables using poles of the baker-akhiezer
function (see also [24]) for recent developments and more references). the basic strategy
of this method is to look at the lax eigen-vector ( which is the baker-akhiezer function)
(z, ):

l(z)(z, ) = (z)(z, )

(5)

with some choice of normalization. the poles zi of (z, ) together with the eigenvalues
i = (zi) are the separated variables. in all the examples studied so far the most naive
way of normalization leads to the canonically conjugate coordinates i, zi.

remind that the phase space for the hitchin system can be identied with the cotan-
gent bundle to the moduli space of holomorphic vector bundle t m on the surface .
the following symplectomorphysms can be identied with the separation of variables pro-
cedure. the phase space above allows two more formulations; as the pair (c,l) where c
is the spectral curve of the dynamical system and l is the linear bundle or as the hilbert
scheme of points on t  where the number of points follows from the rank of the gauge
group. it is the last formulation provides the separated variables. the role of hilbert
schemes on t  in context of hitchin system was established for the surfaces without
marked points in [33] and generalized for the systems of calogero types in [34, 35, 26].

in the brane terms separation of variables can be formulated as reduction to a system
of d0 branes on some four dimensional manifold. it reminds a reduction to a system of
point-like instantons on a (generically noncommutative [30]) four manifold. one more
essential point is that separated variables amount to some explanation of the relation of
periodic toda chain above and monopole chains. indeed, monopole moduli space have
the structure resembling the one for the toda chain in separated variables; both of them
are the hilbert schemes of points on the similar four manifolds.

the abovementioned constructions of the separation of variables in integrable systems
on moduli spaces of holomorphic bundles with some additional structures can be described
as a symplectomorphism between the moduli spaces of the bundles (more precisely, torsion
free sheaves) having dierent chern classes.

to be specic let us concentrate on the moduli space m~v of stable torsion free coherent
sheaves e on s. let as = 1  [pt]  h(s, z) be the a-roof genus of s. the vector
~v = ch(e)q as = (r; ~w; d  r)  h(s, z), ~w  3,19 corresponds to the sheaves with the

chern numbers:

ch0(e) = r  h 0(s; z)
ch1(e) = ~w  h 2(s; z)
ch2(e) = d  h 4(s; z)

(6)

(7)

(8)

type iia string theory compactied on s has bps states, corresponding to the dp-
labelled by ~v 
branes, with p even, wrapping various supersymmetric cycles in s,
h(s, z). the actual states correspond to the cohomology classes of the moduli spaces
m~v of the congurations of branes. the latter can be identied with the moduli spaces
m~v of appropriate sheaves.

6

the string theory, compactied on s has moduli space of vacua, which can be identied

with

ma = o(cid:16)4,20(cid:17)\o(4, 20; r)/o(4; r)  o(20; r)

where the arithmetic group o(4,20) is the group of discrete authomorphismes. it maps
the states corresponding to dierent ~v to each other. the only invariant of its action is
~v2.

we have studied three realizations of an integrable system. the rst one uses the
non-abelian gauge elds on the curve  imbedded into symplectic surface s. namely,
the phase space of the system is the moduli space of stable pairs: (e, ), where e is rank
r vector bundle over  of degree l, while  is the holomorphic section of 1
  end(e).
the second realization is the moduli space of pairs (c,l), where c is the curve (divisor)
in s which realizes the homology class r[] and l is the line bundle on c. the third
realization is the hilbert scheme of points on s of length h, where h = 1

2 dimm.

the equivalence of the rst and the second realizations corresponds to the physical
statement that the bound states of n d2-branes wrapped around  are represented by
a single d2-brane which wraps a holomorphic curve c which is an n-sheeted covering of
the base curve . the equivalence of the second and the third descriptions is natural to
attribute to t -duality.

let us mention that the separation of variables above provides some insights on the
langlands duality which involves spectrum of the hitchin hamiltonians. the attempt to
reformulate langlands duality as a quantum separation of variables has been successful
for the gaudin system corresponding to the spherical case [32]. the consideration in [25]
suggests that the proper classical version of the langlands correspondence is the transition
to the hilbert scheme of points on four-dimensional manifold. this viewpoint implies
that quantum case can be considered as correspondence between the eigenfunctions of
the hitchin hamiltonians and solutions to the baxter equation in the separated variables.

2.2 s-duality

now let us explain that s-duality well established in the eld theory also has clear coun-
terpart in the holomorphic dynamical system.

the action variables in dynamical system are the integrals of meromorphic dierential
 over the a-cycles on the spectral curve. the reason for the b-cycles to be discarded
is simply the fact that the b-periods of  are not independent of the a-periods. on
the other hand, one can choose as the independent periods the integrals of  over any
lagrangian subspace in h1(tb; z).

this leads to the following structure of the action variables in the holomorphic setting.
locally over a disc in b one chooses a basis in h1 of the ber together with the set of
a-cycles. this choice may dier over another disc. over the intersection of these discs one
has a sp(2m, z) transformation relating the bases. altogether they form an sp(2m, z)

7

bundle. it is an easy excercise on the properties of the period matrix that the two form:

vanishes. therefore one can always locally nd a function f - prepotential, such that:

(9)

(10)

the angle variables are uniquely reconstructed once the action variables are known.

to illustrate the meaning of the action-action aa duality we look at the two-body

system, relevant for the su(2) n = 2 supersymmetric gauge theory :

h =

+ 2 cos(q)

(11)

with 2 being a complex number - the coupling constant of a two-body problem and at
the same time a dynamically generated scale of the gauge theory. the action variable
is given by one of the periods of the dierential pdq. let us introduce more notations:
x = cos(q), y = p sin(q)
2 . then the spectral curve, associated to the system which
is also a level set of the hamiltonian can be written as follows:

2 , u = h

di i  di d

i

i d
i =

f
i i

p2
2

which is exactly seiberg-witten curve . the periods are:

(12)

(13)

dx

y2 = (x  u)(x2  1)
dx, i d =z u
4(u2  1)!(cid:18)

1s x  u
i =z 1
x2  1
  d2
du2 +

1

1 s x  u
x2  1
i d(cid:19) = 0

i

they obey picard-fuchs equation:

which can be used to write down an asymptotic expansion of the action variable near
u =  or u = 1 as well as that of prepotential . the aa duality is manifested in the
fact that near u =  (which corresponds to the high energy scattering in the two-body
problem and also a perturbative regime of su(2) gauge theory) the appropriate action
variable is i (it experiences a monodromy i  i as u goes around ), while near u = 1
(which corresponds to the dynamics of the two-body system near the top of the potential
and to the strongly coupled su(2) gauge theory) the appropriate variable is i d (which
corresponds to a weakly coupled magnetic u(1) gauge theory and is actually well dened
near u = 1 point) . the monodromy invariant combination of the periods [28]:

ii d  2f = u

(14)

(whose origin is in the periods of calabi-yau manifolds on the one hand and in the
properties of anomaly in theory on the other) can be chosen as a global coordinate on the
space of integrals of motion . at u   the prepotential has an expansion of the form:

f 

1
2

u log u + . . .  i 2 log i +xn

fn
n

i 24n

let us emphasize that s-duality maps the dynamical system to itself. we have seen
that the notion of prepotential can be introduces for any holomorphic many-body system
however its physical meaning as well as its properties deserve further investigation.

8

2.3 mirror symmetry in dynamical systems

the last type of duality we would like to discuss concerns dualities between pair of dynam-
ical systems [37, 25]. to start with let us remind how this symmetry is formulated within
the eld theory. the initial motivation amounts from the 3d theory example [36] where
mirror symmetry interchanges coulomb and higgs branches of the moduli space. the
specics of three dimensions is that both coulomb and higgs branches are hyperkahler
manifolds and the mirror symmetry can be formulated as a kind of hyperkahler rotation.
the attempt to formulate the similar symmetry for 4d theory was performed in [19].

in [25] the general procedure for the analogous symmetry within integrable system in
terms of hamiltonian and poissonian reductions was formulated. symmetry maps one
dynamical system with coordinates xi to another one whose coordinates coincide with the
action variables of the initial system and vise versa. it appears that taking into account
the relation between dynamical systems and low-energy eective actions this duality in
general maps higgs and coulomb branches of the moduli space in the gauge theories in
dierent dimensions.

qualitatively this symmetry is even more transparent in terms of separated variables.
as was discussed above the proper object in separated variables is the hyperkahler four
dimensional manifold which provides the phase space.
in most general situation the
manifold involves two tori or elliptically bered k3 manifold. one torus provides momenta
while the seconds coordinates. the duality at hands actually interchanges momentum and
coordinate tori and in generic case self-duality is expected. corresponding eld theory
counterpart is the hypothetical six-dimensional theory with adjoint matter.

all other cases correspond to some degeneration. degeneration of the momentum torus
to c/z2 corresponds to the transition to the ve-dimensional theory while degeneration
to r2 corresponds to four-dimensional theory. since the modulus of the coordinate torus
has the meaning of the complexied bare coupling in the theory the interpretation of the
degeneration of the coordinate torus is dierent. degeneration to the cylinder corresponds
to the switching o the instanton eects while the rational degeneration corresponds to
the additional degeneration.

we will see below that the mirror symmetry maps theories in dierent dimensions to
each other. instanton eects in one theory map into the additional compact dimension
in the dual counterpart. we will discuss mainly classical case with only few comments on
the quantum picture. since the wave functions in the hitchin like systems can be identied
with some solutions to the kz or qkz equations the quantum duality would mean some
relation between solutions to the rational, trigonometric or elliptic kz equations. recently
the proper symmetries for kz equations where discussed in [31].

2.3.1 two-body system (su(2))

let us discuss rst two-body system corresponding to su(2) case. two-particle systems
which we are going to consider reduce (after exclusion of the center of mass motion) to
a one-dimensional problem. the action-angle variables can be written explicitly and the

9

dual system emerges immediately once the natural hamiltonians are chosen. the problem
is the following. suppose the phase space is coordinatized by (p, q). the dual hamiltonian
(in the sense of ac duality) is a function of q expressed in terms of i, , where i,  are
the action-angle variables of the original system : hd(i, ) = hd(q). in all the cases
below there is a natural choice of hd(q).

consider as example elliptic calogero model whose hamiltonian is:

h(p, q) =

p2
2

+ 2 (q).

here p, q are complex,  (q) is the weierstrass function on the elliptic curve e :

 (q) =

1
q2 +

x(m, n)  z 2

(m, n) 6= (0, 0)

1

(q + m + n )2 

1

(m + n )2

(15)

(16)

let us introduce the weierstrass notations: x =  (q), y =  (q). we have an equation
dening the curve e :

y2 = 4x3  g2( )x  g3( ) = 4

3yi=1

(x  ei),

3xi=1

ei = 0

(17)

the holomorphic dierential dq on e equals dq = dx/y. introduce the variable e0 =
2e/2. the action variable is one of the periods of the dierential pdq
2 on the curve
e = h(p, q) :

1

2 iaq2(e  2 (q)) =

1

4iia

i =

q(x  e1)(x  e2)(x  e3)
the angle variable can be determined from the condition dp  dq = di  d:

dxx  e0

d =

1

2it (e)

dx

qq3
i=0(x  ei)

where t (e) normalizes d in such a way that the a period of d is equal to 2:

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

t (e) =

thus:

2it (e)d =

d =

1

4iia

dx

qq3
i=0(x  ei)
dx
q4q3
i=0(x  ei)
dt
q4q3
i=1(t  ti)

10

where

 = 2it (e)e01e02e03 =
3xi=1

x  e0

1
e0i

t =

1
3

+

1

where eij = ei  ej

introduce a meromorphic function on e :

1

2 ia

; ti =

dt
i=1(t  ti)
eji

e0ie0j

q4q3
3xj=1

1
3

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

where z has periods 2 and 2 . it is an elliptic analogue of the cosine (in fact, up to a
rescaling of z it coincides with the jacobi elliptic cosine). then we have:

x  e3

ccn (z) =s x  e1
hd(i, ) = ccn (z) = ccne ()s1 
i=1(t  ti)(cid:17).(cid:16)ia
e =(cid:16)ib
q4q3

q4q3

dt

2e13

2e  2e3

dt

i=1(t  ti)(cid:17).

where e is the modular parameter of the relevant spectral curve v2 = 4q3

i=1(t  ti):

for large i, 2e(i)  i 2.

therefore the elliptic calogero model with rational dependence on momentum and
elliptic on coordinate maps into the mirror dual system with elliptic dependence on
momentum and rational on coordinate. on the eld theory side d=4 theory with ad-
joint matter maps into the d=6 theory with adjoint matter with the instanton corrections
switched o. the coordinates on the coulomb branch in d=4 theory becomes the co-
ordinates on the higgs branch  in d=6 theory which explains the origin of the term
mirror symmetry in this context.

2.3.2 many-body systems

now we would like to demonstrate how the mirror transform can be formulated in
terms of hamiltonian or poissonian reduction procedure. it appears that it corresponds
in some sence to the simultaneous change of the gauge xing and hamiltonians. more
clear meaning of these words will be clear from the examples below.

we summarize the systems and their duals in rational and trigonometric cases in the

following table:

r  0
  0

rat.cm  rat.cm
trig.cm  rat.rs
trig.rs  trig.rs







11

  0
r  0

(28)

here cm denotes calogero  moser models and rs stands for ruijsenaars  schneider.

the parameters r and  here are the radius of the circle the coordinates of the parti-
cles take values in and the inverse speed of light respectively. the horizontal arrows in
this table are the dualities, relating the systems on the both sides. most of them were
discussed by simon ruijsenaars [37]. we notice that the duality transformations form a
group which in the case of self-dual systems listed here contains sl2(z). the generator
s is the gorizontal arrow described below, while the t generator is in fact a certain nite
time evolution of the original system (which is always a symplectomorphism, which maps
the integrable system to the dual one). we begin with recalling the hamiltonians of these
systems. throughout this section qij denotes qi  qj.

consider the space at2 of su(n) gauge elds a on a two-torus t2 = s1  s1. let
the circumferences of the circles be r and . the space at2 is acted on by a gauge group
g , which preserves a symplectic form

(29)

 =

k

42 z tra  a,

with k being an arbitrary real number for now. the gauge group acts via evaluation at
some point p  t2 on any coadjoint orbit o of g, in particular, on o = cipn1. let
(e1 : . . . : en ) be the homogeneous coordinates on o. then the moment map for the
action of g on at2  o is

kfa + j2(p),

jij = i(ij  eiej )

(30)

fa being the curvature two-form. here we think of ei as being the coordinates on cn

constrained so that pi |ei|2 = n and considered up to the multiplication by a common

phase factor.

let us provide a certain amount of commuting hamiltonians. obviously, the eigen-
values of the monodromy of a along any xed loop on t2 commute with themselves. we
consider the reduction at the zero level of the moment map. we have at least n  1
functionally independent commuting functions on the reduced phase space m.

let us estimate the dimension of m. if  = 0 then the moment equation forces the
connection to be at and therefore its gauge orbits are parameterized by the conjugacy
classes of the monodromies around two non-contractible cycles on t2: a and b. since
the fundamental group 1(t2) of t2 is abelian a and b are to commute. hence they are
simultaneously diagonalizable, which makes m0 a 2(n  1) dimensional manifold. notice
that the generic point on the quotient space has a nontrivial stabilizer, isomorphic to the
maximal torus t of su(n). now, in the presence of o the moment equation implies that
the connection a is at outside of p and has a nontrivial monodromy around p. thus:

aba1b1 = exp(rj)

(31)

(the factor r comes from the normalization of the delta-function ). if we diagonalize
a, then b is uniquely reconstructed up to the right multiplication by the elements of t .
the potential degrees of freedom in j are eaten up by the former stabilizer t of a at
connection: if we conjugate both a and b by an element t  t then j gets conjugated.

12

now, it is important that o has dimension 2(n  1). the reduction of o with respect
to t consists of a point and does not contribute to the dimension of m. thereby we
expect to get an integrable system. without doing any computations we already know
that we get a pair of dual systems. indeed, we may choose as the set of coordinates the
eigen-values of a or the eigen-values of b.

the two-dimensional picture has the advantage that the geometry of the problem

suggest the sl2(z)-like duality. consider the operations s and t realized as:

s : (a, b) 7 (aba1, a1); t : (a, b) 7 (a, ba)

(32)

which correspond to the freedom of choice of generators in the fundamental group of a
two-torus. notice that both s and t preserve the commutator aba1b1 and commute
with the action of the gauge group. the group  generated by s and t in the limit
, r  0 contracts to sl2(z) in a sense that we get the transformations by expanding

a = 1 + p + . . . , b = 1 + rq + . . .

for r,   0.

the disadvantage of the two-dimensional picture us the necessity to keep too many
redundant degrees of freedom. the rst of the contractions actually allows to replace the
space of two dimensional gauge elds by the cotangent space to the (central extension of)
loop group:

t  g = {(g(x), kx + p (x))}

which is a deformation of the phase space of the previous example (q(x) got promoted to
a group-valued eld). the relation to the two dimensional construction is the following.
choose a non-contractible circle s1 on the two-torus which does not pass through the
marked point p. let x, y be the coordinates on the torus and y = 0 is the equation of the
s1. the periodicity of x is  and that of y is r. then

p (x) = ax(x, 0), g(x) = p expz r

0

ay(x, y)dy.

the moment map equation looks as follows:

kg1xg + g1p g  p = j(x),

(33)

with k = 1
r . the solution of this equation in the gauge p = diag(q1, . . . , qn ) leads to the
lax operator a = g(0) with r,  exchanged. on the other hand, if we diagonalize g(x):

then a similar calculation leads to the lax operator

g(x) = diag(cid:16)z1 = eirq1, . . . , zn = eirqn(cid:17)
b = p expi 1

p (x)dx = diag(eii) exp irr

k

with

rij =

1

1  eirqji

, i 6= j;

rii = xj6=i

rij

13

(34)

thereby establishing the duality a  b explicitly.

when yang-mills theory is formulated on a cylinder with the insertion of an appropri-
ate time-like wilson line, it is equivalent to the sutherland model describing a collection
of n particles on a circle. the observables trk are precisely the integrals of motion
of this system. one can look at other supercharges as well.
in particular, when the
theory is formulated on a cylinder there is another class of observables annihilated by a
supercharge. one can arrange the combination of supercharges which will annihilate the
wilson loop operator. by repeating the procedure similar to the one in one arrives at
the quantum mechanical theory whose hamiltonians are generated by the spatial wilson
loops. this model is nothing but the rational ruijsenaars-schneider many-body system.

the self-duality of trigonometric ruijsenaars system has even more transparent phys-
ical meaning. namely, the eld theory whose quantum mechanical avatar is the ruijse-
naars system is three dimensional chern-simons theory on t2  r1 with the insertion of
an appropriate temporal wilson line and spatial wilson loop. it is the freedom to place
the latter which leads to several equivalent theories. the group of (self-)dualities of this
model is very big and is generated by the transformations s and t .

finally let us comment on six dimensional theory compactied on a three dimensional
torus t3 down to three dimensions. as was discussed extensively in [38] in case where two
out of three radii of t3 are much smaller then the third one r the eective three dimen-
sional theory is a sigma model with the target space x being the hyper-kahler manifold
(in particular, holomorphic symplectic) which is a total space of algebraic integrable sys-
tem. the complex structure in which x is the algebraic integrable system is independent
of the radius r while the kahler structure depends on r in such a way that the kahler
class of the abelian ber is proportional to 1/r.

the theory in three dimensions which came from four dimensions upon a compact-
ication on a circle whose low-energy eective action describes only abelian degrees of
freedom can be always dualized to the theory of scalars/spinors only, due to the vector-
scalar duality in three dimensions. in this way dierent sets of vector and hypermultiplets
in four dimensions can lead to the same three dimensional theory [36, 19].

i am indebted to v. fock, n.nekrasov and v. roubtsov for the collaboration on this

subject. this work is supported in part by grant intas-97-0103.

references

[1] n.seiberg and e.witten, nucl.phys. b426 (1994) 19; hepth/9407087
n.seiberg and e.witten, nucl.phys. b431 (1994) 484; hepth/9408099

[2] s.cecotti and c.vafa , comm.math.phys. 158 (1993) 569

[3] a.gorsky, i.krichever, a.marshakov, a.mironov and a.morozov, phys.lett. b355

(1995) 466; hepth/9505035

14

[4] r.donagi and e.witten, nucl.phys.b460(1996),299, hepth/9510101

[5] a.gorsky, a.marshakov, a.mironov and a.morozov, phys.lett. b380 (1996), 75;

hepth/ 9603140

[6] n.nekrasov, nucl. phys. b531 (1998) 323; hepth/9609219

[7] a.gorsky, s.gukov and a.mironov, nucl.phys.b517 (1998) 409; hep-th/9707120

[8] a.gorsky, s.gukov and a.mironov, nucl.phys. b518 (1998) 689; hep-th/9710239

[9] a. gorsky and a. mironov , nucl.phys. b550 (1999) 513

[10] k. takasaki, hepth/9905224

[11] n.hitchin, duke. math. jour.54 (1987), 91

e.markman, comp. math. 93(1994)255
a.gorsky and n.nekrasov, hepth/9401021

[12] a.gorsky, phys.lett. b410 (1997) 22; hepth/9612238

[13] j.barbon and a.pasquinucci, hepth/9712135 ; hepth/9708041

a.karch, d.lust and d.smith, , hepth/9803232

[14] p.m.sutclie, phys. lett. b381 (1996) 129; hepth/9605192

[15] m.douglas, hepth/ 9604198

[16] d.e.diaconescu, nucl.phys. b507 (1997) 220; hepth/ 9608163

[17] m.bershadsky, v.sadov and c.vafa, nucl.phys. b463(1996), 420; hepth/9511222

[18] a.kapustin and s.sethi, hepth/9804027

[19] a.kapustin, hepth/9804069

[20] a.klemm, w.lerche, p.mayr, c.vafa and n.warner, nucl.phys.b477 (1996) ;

hepth/ 9604034

[21] e.witten, nucl.phys. b500 (1997) 3; hepth/9703166

[22] e.witten, nucl.phys.b460 (1996), 335; hepth/ 9510135

[23] a.giveon and d.kutasov, hepth/9802067

[24] i.krichever and d.phong, hep-th/9708170

[25] v. fock, a. gorsky, n. nekrasov and v. roubtsov, hepth/9906235

[26] a. gorsky, n.nekrasov and v. roubtsov, hepth/9901089

[27] g. braden, a. marshakov, a. mironov and a. morozov, hepth/9906240

15

[28] m.matone, phys.lett. b357 (1995) 342, hep-th/9506102;.

j.sonnenschein, s.theisen and s.yankielowicz, phys.lett. b367 (1996) 145; hep-
th/9510129;
t.eguchi and s.k.yang, mod.phys.lett. a11 (1996) 131, hep-th/9510183;
p.howe and p.west, nucl.phys. b486 (1997) 425, hep-th/9607239;
e.dhoker,
th/9610156.

i.krichever and d.h.phong, nucl.phys., b494 (1997) 89; hep-

[29] e. sklyanin, solv-int/9505003

[30] n. nekrasov and a. schwarz, hepth/9802068

[31] p. etingof and a. varchenko , math/9907181

[32] e.frenkel, q-alg/9506003

[33] j. hurtubise, duke. math. journal 83 (1996) 19-50

[34] g. wilson, inv. math. 133 (1998), 1-41

[35] h. nakajima, alg-geom/9610021

[36] k. intrilligator and n. seiberg, phys. lett. b387 (1996) 513

[37] s. ruijsenaars, , cmp 115 (1988), 127-165

s. ruijsenaars, finite-dimensional soliton systems, in integrable and super-
integrable systems, eds. b. kupershmidt, world scientic, singapore, 1986
s. ruijsenaars, action-angle maps and scattering theory for some finite-
dimensional integrable systems ii, iii, publ. rims, kyoto univ 30 (1994),
865-1008 and 31 (1995), 247-353

[38] n. seiberg and e. witten, hepth/9607163

16

