spontaneous time asymmetry due to horizon

ramesh anishetty, r.parthasarathy

the institute of mathematical sciences, chennai - 600 113, india

we show that quantized matter elds in the presence of background metrics with horizon exhibit
spontaneous time asymmetry. all quantized matter elds have to vanish at the horizon. some
phenemenological applications of this in the context of black holes and early universe are considered.

9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
9
2

 

 
 

1
v
6
2
2
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

matter interaction in minkowski space-time are well
described by local quantum eld theories. these theories
have poincare invariance along with several other con-
tinuous and discrete symmetries. we draw our attention
to a discrete symmetry namely time reversal symmetry
t . this says that the dynamics of the matter elds is
such that if we evolve the system backwards in time it
is perfectly allowed, i.e. time symmetric. more precisely
the correlation functions, for instance < (t)(t) > as
dened by the feynmans path integral, are symmetric
functions of t  t [1]. while this is self evident from
the lagrangian of the fundamental theory , there are
many physical situations which do not appear to obey
this symmetry. some well known examples [2] are given
below. decelerating electromagnetic charges radiate pho-
tons while the time reversed phenomenon, namely,the ac-
celerating charges absorbing photons, is never allowed.
entropy in suciently large subspaces is always increas-
ing even if the large subspaces are causally disconnected.
in the context of cosmolgy, we are witnessing uniform
expansion of the universe and growth of inhomogeni-
eties thereof and never observed the time reversed phe-
nomenon so far. these examples are suggesting that the
vaccum state of the universe does seem to break time re-
versal invariance and thereby setting the arrow of time.
in the standard model of particle physics [3], there is
a small parameter which violates cp invariance where
c stands for charge conjugation and p for spatial parity.
since cpt is still a good symmetry[4], it implies t has
to be broken. the origin of this parameter in the theory
is not understood.

it is also true that time asymmetry can be arranged
by appropriate boundary conditions in time [5]. this
may model the phenomenon but it still begs the ques-
tion: why that particular boundary condition? in this
paper we suggest a mechanism which imposes a bound-
ary condition due to dynamics itself and thus exhibit
spontaneous time asymmetry.

we now turn to gravity and its coupling to matter as
described by einsteins equation. the quantum theory
of gravity is a major unsolved problem of the century.
inspite of this, some limited progress is made in realms
where we suspect the back recation of matter uctuations
on gravity is small due to small gravitational coupling
constant[6]. in this realm gravity does inuence classi-
cally as background gravity. indeed our understanding

1

of cosmolgy after the plancks time rests on this assump-
tion.

we address time reversal invariance of matter elds
in the presence of background gravity. the metric is
minkowskian at any space time point; however glob-
ally it is not minkowskian.a generic background metric
does not have any symmetries.phenomenologically [7]the
background gravity of the universe does appear to have
some symmtries: how this comes about is an another
interesting issue. here we will assume that the back-
ground gravity does have time translational invariance.
that is, there is a time like killing vector. by a suitable
general co-ordinate transformation we can always choose
the metric as given by the proper distance ds to be

ds2 = pb(~x) (a(~x)dt2  g

ij(~x)dxidxj ),

(1)

where a, b and g
ij the three dimensional metric are all
time independent. we further made a choice of denition

such that the four volume density detg = b and

a det g = 1. b eld is necessarily taken to be nonzero
and positive everywhere. (if b is negative then it corre-
sponds to wrong signature metric and if it is zero, then
it corresponds to dimensional reduction of space time.
these alternatives can be entertained in some formalisms
of gravity; we shall not consider them here.) if the eld
a is positive everywhere then the time translation oper-
ator d
dt is time-like , and the dynamics on such metrics
have the same qualitative features as that of minkowski
space.

consider a situation where a becomes negative in
some region of space.
in that region, the killing vec-
tor, namely, the translation operator in t, will be space-
like. by continuity, a then has to vanish on some region.
the region where a(~x) = 0 denes a two-surface when
the space dimension is three. this two-surface is what
we call the horizon. horizon in general can be open or
closed and if closed it could be topologically non-trivial
as well.

in the literature some of the well known examples as-
sume spherical symmetry. a convenient choice of the
metric which is static and spherically symmetric is [7]

ds2 = b(r)[a(r)dt2  a1dr2]  r2 d2,

with detg = br2sin. the following examples as-

sume sphere topology for the horizon : for static de sitter
space, b(r) = 1 and

(2)

a(r) = 1 

r2
2 ,

(3)

 = exp(iet)e(r)yjm(, ),

(8)

where  is a constant; static black hole solutions which
approach minkowski space time at innity: b(r) = 1
and

a(r) = 1 

2m
r

+

c2
r2 ,

(4)

where m is related to the mass and c2 is to the charge
of the black hole. near the horizon, the ricci tensor
is not singular.
(the apparent singularity in the met-
ric at r = 2m for c = 0 in (4), can be removed
by eddington-finkelstein transformation and this intro-
duces drdt term in (2). based on this, time asymmetry
had been argued in [8].) it is however conjectured based
on the positive energy condition that almost all riemann
curvature singularities are hidden behind the horizon.
(cosmic censorship hypothesis)[9]. for example in (4),
for c = 0, the riemann curvature is singular as m/r3
near r = 0 which is enclosed by the horizon which is a
sphere of radius 2m . there are other situations such as
static de sitter (3) or rindler spaces where the horizon
is not enclosing singularities. it is noticed that in these
other examples the space at innity is not minkowskian.
now we shall analyze how horizon generates sponta-
neous time reversal non-invariance. the essential ingre-
dients of our proof are already contained in the spheri-
cally symmetric context. as for matter elds, for techni-
cal simplicity, we consider a scalar eld of mass m in a
spherical symmetric background metric (2), given by the
action

s =

+

1

2 z dtdrr2dna1(cid:0)t(cid:1)2
+ m22io.
r2sin2(cid:0)(cid:1)2

1

 a(cid:0)r(cid:1)2

 bh 1

r2(cid:0)(cid:1)2

(5)

the quantum theory can be envisaged by the following

path integral given by the partition function z,

where e is the radial and yjm are the angular mo-
mentum parts.the radial function satises the following
equation on mass shell i.e. when  = 0.

1

bne2a1 + 1

r2 rr2ar  b[ j(j+1)

r2

+ m2]oe(r) = 0.

(9)

in the succeeding analysis we would like to assert some
general features of the eigenvalues e. let us say that the
horizon is at r = r+. a(r) for r > r+ is positve and
negative for r < r+. near r+

a(r)  a(r  r+).

(10)

usually [6,10], the quantum theory is studied outside the
horizon. we shall consider this region rst. consider any
state which is nonvanishing in the region r  r+. the
rst term in the eqn.(9) has a pole at r = r+, this can
be cancelled only if the eigenfunction near r+ has the
behaviour

e(r)  k(r  r+)ie/a.

(11)

therefore the eigenfunction oscillates wildly near r = r+
if e is positive or negative. in general we can allow e
to be complex. however if imginary part of e is pos-
itive the eigenfunction blows up near the horizon and
hence not normalizable. if imaginary part of e is nega-
tive the eigenfunction necessarily vanishes at the horizon.
we will show that only the latter is the allowed alterna-
tive. taking scalar product with (9) i.e. multiplying
with br2dr
e(r) and integrating from r+ to innity, we
obtain

e2rr+

drr2a1| e |2 +rr+
rr+

dr

e(r)r(r2are(r))

b[j(j + 1) + m2r2]| e(r) |2 = 0.

(12)

z = z [d]exp(is).

(6)

performing the integration by parts in the second term,

we obtain

the lagrangian density in the above is manifestly invari-
ant under time reversal t  t with  transforming as a
scalar.a more precise denition of the functional integral
is given by expanding the eld  into the eigen modes
 of the covariance operator, namely of the eigenvalue
problem

1

bna12
t +

1

1

r2 r r2ar + bh
  m2io = ,
2

(sin)

r2sin2

r2sin

+

1

(7)

where  are the eigenvlues and  the eigen modes.

due to translational invariance in t, a good choice of

eigen modes are

2

dr(cid:16)r2a| re |2 + b[j(j + 1) + m2r2]
a (ee )o,

e2 = inrr+
| e |2(cid:17) + ik 2er2
where i 1 = r drr2a1| e |2. we have assumed that

the eigenfunction and its derivative vanish for large r. in
the region of integration a is always positive.

+(limitrr+)(r  r+)

i

(13)

from (13) we see that if the imaginary part of e is
negative then it is infact zero and the real part of e
can be positive or negative. moreover for every possible
positve real e there is also an eigenstate with e. if the
imaginary part of e is positive then it is also innite and
the radial integrals in (12,13) are also not normalizable.
hence we conclude the allowed eigenvalues are

e = e  i,

(14)

where e is the real part and  is innitesimally positive.
to summarize, the operator as dened by the left hand
side of (9) has normalizable eigenfunctions only if imagi-
nary part of e is negative which in turn implies the eigen-
function necessarily has to vanish at the horizon and all
the energy eigenvalues are real on shell. this shows any
eigenfunction which is nonvanishing outside the horizon,
necessarily vanishes at the horizon. the results (11) and
(14) hold true for o-shell ( 6= 0) case of (7) as well.
exactly the same analysis as above goes through inside
the horizon i.e for r  r+. we again arrive at the con-
clusion e has only negative imaginary part. therefore
we have shown that all eigenfunctions have a node at the
horizon which inturn implies (14).
consider the correlation function

< (x)(x) > = z ded

(x)(x)
(e  i, )

,

(15)

where s are the eigenvalues of the operator which in
turn is explicitly a function of e = e  i and other
quantum numbers which we have collectively called them
as . the explicit form is quite complicated in general.
(for example see [10] for static de sitter space metric).
the important feature is that now the correlation func-
tion is necessarily time reversal non-invariant due to .
the imaginary part of e has always only one sign, this
in turn implies that we only have retarded (or only ad-
vanced by the alternate choice) propagation. this demon-
strates that in spite of manifest time reversal invariance
of the lagrangian the system picks a time reversal non-
invariant vacuum, i.e., the vacuum breaks time reversal
invarince spontaneously.

in contrast, in background minkowski space, which has
no horizon, we have many alternatives for vacuum state,
namely, only retarded or only advanced propagation or
the average of the retarded and advanced. the last is
the choice made in the stuckelberg-feynman i prescrip-
tion, [1,11] which is manifestly time reversal invariant.
it is clear that the above argument actually rested to-
tally on the zero of a.
indeed all the above steps of
the proof prevail even if we discard spherical symmme-
try and if there are more than one horizons which are
disconnected. this phenomenon is in fact quite generic
whenever there are any horizons.

we can construct an example of an horizon which is
open, such as the metric given by (1) and a(x, y, z) =
x ; b = 1 and gxx = 1/x; gyy = gzz = 1 and all the
other components of the metric zero. the horizon is the
(y,z) plane our previous analysis goes through exactly
the same way leading to the same conclusion that the
energy eigenvalues are e  i.
matter self interactions do not alter the esssential con-
clusions. matter elds such as fermionic or gauge elds
also yield the same qualitative result as discussed above.

namely they all generically exhibit a node at the hori-
zon, however they can pass through it.
inkling of this
phenomenon is already present in the unquantized mat-
ter. for instance a particle moving along its geodesic in
the presence of schwarzschild black hole, in its own ref-
erence frame, has zero velocity and zero acceleration at
the horizon.

it is interesting to note that in all the cases the a func-
tion has to vanish linearily at the horizon; if a vanishes
quadratically or fractional power, then we cannot nd
any eigen solutions for (7). this pathology is resolved by
noting that: a continuous function vanishing linearily
is a generic situation. however when two horizons coa-
lesce then the a function does have quadratic zeros and
this situation is certainly not a static background; under
those circumstances our analysis does have to consider
the interaction of gravity and matter as a time depen-
dent phenomenon which involves the einstein equation
as well. we have not considered that here.

we consider some phenomenological applications of
this phenomenon, namely horizons do cause time as-
symetry. time asymetry is essential to produce baryon
number violation in the universe. we suggest that since
every black hole has a horizon they in turn might have
the signature that they produce more particles than anti-
particles. furthermore all quantized matter elds have
to have a node at the horizon, this manifests itself as
if all particles are repelled from the horizon. this phe-
nomenon can be used as a signature for compact black
holes.

in the context of early universe at plancks time we
need to consider both matter and gravity quantum uc-
tuations. while this is least understood, feynman path
integral for gravity and matter is an acceptable math-
ematical framework.
in this framework metric uctu-
ations are taken into account with amplitude given by
einstein action or some modication thereof which de-
pend on the riemann tensor. let us consider metric
uctuations which create horizons. these congurations
generically do not produce large riemann curvatures, in-
fact near the schwarzschild horizon ricci tensor vanishes.
hence as quantum uctuations horizons can be produced
prolically. these horizons need not necessarily be one
of those which hide a singularity such as that of black
holes. it is suggestive from functional integral that the
horizon as a quantum uctuation can be one which has
no singularity for the ricci tensor anywhere. our own
early universe might have generated one such at the be-
ginning. this horizon can cause the primodial baryon
anti-baryon asymmetry.the understanding of dynamics
in these contexts where exchange of energy between grav-
ity and matter modes is profusive is yet to be done. we
speculate that as matter eld repel the horizon, perhaps
the early universe horizon manifests its presence by the
present hubble expansion of all matter elds away from
the center of the universe and thereby setting the arrow

3

of time. the creation of the horizon itself can be thought
as the initial time of the universe. this creation being
on a two surface, the so called initial point singularity of
the big bang [9] has no role to play. this phenomenon
warrants a more careful study.



electronic
:
sarathy@imsc.ernet.in

address

ramesha@imsc.ernet.in

and

[1] n.n.bogolubov and d.v.shirkov, introduction to the

theory of quantized fields, ny.interscience., 1959.
k.nishijima, fields and particles, w.a.benjamin, inc.,
1969.

[2] see the contributions of j.wheeler, and m.gell-mann
in physical origins of time asym-
and j.b.hartle,
metry., edited by j.j.halliwell, j.perez-mercader and
w.h.zurek. cambridge university press, 1994.
w.unruh, in times arrows today. edited by s.f.savitt,
cambridge university press, 1995.

[3] r.e.marshak, conceptual foundations of modern parti-

cle physics, world scientic, singapore, 1993.
e.leader and e.predazzi, an introduction to gauge the-
ories and modern particle physics, vol.i and ii, cam-
bridge university press, 1996.

[4] g.luders, ann.phys. 2 (1957) 1.

g.luders and b.zumino, phys.rev. 110 (1958) 1480.

[5] see the contributions by s.w.hawking and r.laamme
in physical origins of time asymmetry., edited by
j.j.halliwell, j.perez-mercader and w.h.zurek, cam-
bridge university press, 1994.

[6] n.d.birrell and p.c.w.davies, quantum fields

in

curved space., cambridge university press, 1982.

[7] s.weinberg, gravitation and cosmology: principles and
applications of the general theory of relativity, john-
wiley and sons, inc. new york. 1972.
h.stephani, general relativity: an introduction to the
theory of gravitational eld, cambridge university press,
1982.

[8] d.finkelstein, phys.rev. 110 (1958) 965.
[9] s.w.hawking and g.f.r.ellis, the large-scale structure

of space-time, cambridge university press, 1973.

[10] d.lohiya and n.panchapakesan, j.phys.a:math.gen. 11

(1978) 1963; 12 (1979) 533.

[11] r.p.feynman, quantum electrodynamics, benjamin,

new york, 1973.

4

