outp-99-49p, imperial/tp/990/12

hep-th/9911156

9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
9
1

 

 
 

1
v
6
5
1
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

heterotic anomaly cancellation in five dimensions

andre lukas1 and k.s. stelle2

1department of physics, theoretical physics, university of oxford

1 keble road, oxford ox1 3np, united kingdom

2the blackett laboratory, imperial college, london sw7 2bz, uk

abstract

we study the constraints on vedimensional n = 1 heterotic mtheory imposed by a
consistent anomalyfree coupling of bulk and boundary theory. this requires analyzing the

cancellation of triangle gauge anomalies on the fourdimensional orbifold planes due to anomaly

inow from the bulk. we nd that the semisimple part of the orbifold gauge groups and

certain u (1) symmetries have to be free of quantum anomalies. in addition there can be several

anomalous u (1) symmetries on each orbifold plane whose anomalies are cancelled by a non

trivial variation of the bulk vector elds. the mixed u (1) nonabelian anomaly is universal and

there is at most one u (1) symmetry with such an anomaly on each plane. in an alternative

approach, we also analyze the coupling of vedimensional gauged supergravity to orbifold gauge

theories. we nd a somewhat generalized structure of anomaly cancellation in this case which

allows, for example, nonuniversal mixed u (1) gauge anomalies. anomaly cancellation from
the perspective of fourdimensional n = 1 eective actions obtained from e8  e8 heterotic
string or mtheory by reduction on a calabiyau threefold is studied as well. the results

are consistent with the ones found for vedimensional heterotic mtheory. finally, we consider

some related issues of phenomenological interest such as model building with anomalous u (1)

symmetries, fayetilliopoulos terms and threshold corrections to gauge kinetic functions.

1

introduction

greenschwarz type anomaly cancellation of gauge and gravitational quantum anomalies [1] is one

of the key ingredients of string theory. its role became even more pronounced in the wider context of

mtheory, particularly in situations where branes are coupled to higherdimensional bulk theories.

in those cases, quantum anomalies that may arise on the brane worldvolume are cancelled by an

anomalous variation of the bulk theory which is of greenschwarz type. this mechanism is also

referred to as anomaly inow [2, 3] from the bulk into the brane. a prominent example is given by

the mtheory vebrane. once coupled to 11dimensional supergravity, its quantum anomaly is

cancelled by anomaly inow induced by the variation of a greenschwarz term that has to be added

to 11dimensional supergravity [4]. another example, that is of particular relevance for the present
paper is provided by the horavawitten construction [5, 6] of strongly coupled e8  e8 heterotic
string. in this construction, 11dimensional supergravity on the orbifold s1/z2 is considered. the
quantum anomalies of the e8 gauge elds residing on the two 10dimensional orbifold xed planes
as well as gravitational anomalies arising on those planes are cancelled by anomaly inow from

11dimensional supergravity.

greenschwarz anomaly cancellation mechanisms are particularly relevant from two dierent

perspectives. first, they provide a tool to construct consistent anomalyfree theories, particularly

those in which branes are coupled to bulk theories.
in fact, anomaly cancellation has been the
main guidance in the construction of 11dimensional supergravity on the orbifold s1/z2 [5, 6]
as well as on other orbifolds [7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. secondly, greenschwarz anomaly cancellation or

certain remnants thereof arising in lowenergy eective theories associated with string or m

theory compactications are of considerable phenomenological importance. correspondingly, such

lowenergy cancellation mechanisms, that is the anomalous u (1) symmetries that typically arise

in this context, have been investigated early on, particularly in heterotic theories [12, 13, 14, 15,

16, 17, 18]. a more recent analysis for string orbifolds can be found in ref. [19].

aspects of anomalous u (1) symmetries in the context of heterotic mtheory have been addressed

in ref. [20, 21, 22]. particularly, ref. [21] contains an interesting discussion of some of the issues

that become apparent in the strongly coupled limit. recently, there is also considerable interest

in anomaly cancellation of lowenergy models from type i string theory [23, 24, 25, 26, 27] and its

relation to heterotic models [25].

the purpose of the present paper is to investigate systematically lowenergy anomaly cancel-
lation in the context of the e8  e8 heterotic string or mtheory. that is, we will determine the
structure of anomalous u (1) symmetries both from the viewpoint of the four and vedimensional

eective actions. this will be done in a threefold way. in a rst step, we will investigate anomaly

cancellation in vedimensional heterotic mtheory [28, 29, 30]. this theory is obtained from its

1

11dimensional counterpart (that is, the horavawitten construction) by reduction on a calabi

yau threefold with a nonzero mode of the antisymmetric tensor eld and general vector bundles.

properties of such nonstandard embedding vacua with general bundles, within the context of the

strongly coupled heterotic string, have been considered in ref. [31, 32, 21, 33]. the vedimensional

eective actions associated to such vacua have been analyzed in ref. [33]. these theories consist
of a vedimensional n = 1 gauged bulk supergravity coupled to two fourdimensional orbifold
planes that carry n = 1 gauge theories. within this setting we will study the cancellation of quan-
tum (gauge) anomalies on the orbifold planes induced by anomaly inow from the vedimensional

bulk supergravity theory.

in other word, we are analyzing, within the framework of heterotic

mtheory, the set of fourdimensional gauge theories that can be consistently coupled to gauged
vedimensional n = 1 supergravity.

in a second step, we will study a similar question in a somewhat more general context. we will

consider plain 11dimensional supergravity reduced on a calabiyau three fold in the presence of an

internal nonzero mode of the antisymmetric tensor eld. the resulting vedimensional theory is
again a gauged n = 1 supergravity similar to the bulk part of vedimensional heterotic mtheory.
then we shall consider this vedimensional theory on an s1/z2 orbifold, viewed as a background
solution to the ve-dimensional supergravity equations. by the use of anomaly cancellation, we
shall investigate which fourdimensional n = 1 gauge theories (arising as twisted states on the
orbifold xed planes) can be consistently coupled to this vedimensional supergravity theory. note

that in this approach, in contrast to the previous one, the orbifold planes and their particle content

are not necessarily inherited from the 11 dimensional horavawitten construction. it is therefore

more general and can be expected to lead to a wider class of models.

both the above approaches are aimed at nding consistent vedimensional mtheory models

coupled to fourdimensional gauge theories by using the constraints arising from anomaly cancel-

lation. clearly, these models are of considerable phenomenological interest as they may lead to
potentially realistic n = 1 supergravity models in four dimensions. finally, to complement the
vedimensional approaches and to investigate more closely the phenomenological aspects, we will

perform a similar analysis directly for the fourdimensional eective actions associated with the
e8  e8 heterotic string or mtheory reduced on s1 times calabiyau threefolds. that is, we
will analyze the structure of anomalous u (1) symmetries from a fourdimensional viewpoint.

given the considerable literature already existing on anomalous u (1) symmetries in heterotic

theories, what is the motivation for our present study? first of all, we are interested in the new ve

dimensional aspects of the problem such as anomaly inow. moreover, the vedimensional picture

appears to immediately run into conict with certain assumptions that are usually made about
anomalous u (1) symmetries in the e8  e8 heterotic theory. let us cite some of these standard
assumptions. the starting point is the assertion that the various u (1) quantum anomalies are

2

cancelled by a shift of the dilaton s. due to its universal coupling, there is at most one anomalous

u (1) symmetry which has the same mixed gauge anomaly coecients for all gauge factor (and, in

fact, for gravity, as well) in the observable and the hidden sector. this implies that there have to be

matter elds charged under this u (1) symmetry in both sectors. in this sense, the anomalous u (1)

symmetry extends over the observable and the hidden sector. how can such a u (1) symmetry

arise in a vedimensional theory in which the hidden and the observable sector are conned to

fourdimensional brane worldvolumes that are spatially separated by a gravity only bulk? in this

paper, we attempt to resolve this puzzle as well as related ones, thereby establishing a consistent
picture of e8  e8 lowenergy anomaly cancellation.

in the next section we begin by deriving the eective vedimensional action of heterotic m

theory. while some of the results have already been obtained in the literature [28, 29, 30, 33],

we will focus on those aspects that are particularly relevant for our purposes. specically, we will

derive all parts of the eective action that are related to bulk antisymmetric tensor elds. care

will be taken, in this derivation, to incorporate the most general structure of gauge elds on the

orbifold planes. as a result, we obtain the most general form of bulk chernsimons terms as well

as bianchi identities. the latter controls the coupling between the bulk antisymmetric tensor elds

and the gauge elds on the orbifold planes. we will nd it useful to split the associated lowenergy
gauge groups gn, where n = 1, 2 numbers the orbifold planes, into two parts, that is, gn = hnjn.
the rst part, hn contains the semisimple part of the gauge group and certain u (1) factors. we
will describe these u (1) factors as being of type ii. they are characterized by the property that
the u (1) factor is not part of the internal bundle structure group. on the other hand, jn contains
u (1) factors that we shall describe as being of type i. their dening property is that the u (1)

symmetry is part of the internal bundle structure group. this distinction between two types of

u (1) symmetries is not new [12, 17]. however, it is frequently not taken into account explicitly.

in section 3, we shall study the classical variation of the vedimensional action under orbifold

gauge symmetries. this classical variation arises due to a nontrivial gauge transformation law of
the bulk vector elds residing in the n = 1 gravity and vector multiplets. an important role is also
played by a certain bulk chernsimons term that originates from the internal nonzero mode of the

antisymmetric tensor eld and is closely related to the gauging of the vedimensional supergravity

theory [28, 30]. carrying out an index theorem calculation [34, 35], we check explicitly that this

classical variation cancels the quantum variation on the orbifold planes due to triangle diagrams. as

a result, we obtain the triangle anomaly coecients in terms of topological data of the underlying

calabiyau compactication. this implies the following general structure of anomalies. first of all,

anomaly cancellation works independently on each orbifold plane due to anomaly inow from the
bulk. further, the hn parts of the gauge groups are quantum anomalyfree, that is, cubic anomalies
within hn and mixed gravitational anomalies of hn gauge elds vanish. for the semi-simple part

3

of hn this result is wellknown [34]. in addition, we conclude that the type ii u (1) symmetries
in hn are anomalyfree in above sense. the remaining u (1) symmetries of type i in jn may have
quantum anomalies that are cancelled by anomaly inow. the associated anomaly coecients for

the hidden and the observable sector are generically unrelated. on each orbifold plane, the anomaly

coecients for the mixed u (1) gauge anomalies (diagrams with one type i u (1) gauge eld and
two gauge elds from hn), the mixed u (1) gravitational anomalies (diagrams with one type i u (1)
gauge eld and two gravitons) and the cubic u (1) anomalies (diagrams with three type i u (1)

gauge elds) can be nonzero and are likewise generically unrelated. however, the mixed u (1)
gauge anomaly is the same for each factor within hn and is in this sense universal. this implies
that, in each sector, there is at most one type i u (1) symmetry with all three types of anomalies

nonvanishing.

in addition, there can be other type i u (1) symmetries with vanishing mixed

gauge anomaly but nonvanishing gravitational and cubic anomaly. we stress again that those

statements apply independently two both sectors. there could, for example, be two anomalous

u (1) symmetries, one in each sector, both with mixed gauge anomalies but unrelated anomaly

coecients. as another example, there could be an anomalous u (1) symmetry in the observable

sector while the hidden sector is nonanomalous.

in section 4, we will study vedimensional anomaly cancellation in the somewhat more general

context described above. while, of course, we reproduce all the models that were found in the

context of vedimensional heterotic mtheory, there are also some generalizations. most notably,
the total size of the orbifold gauge groups gn is not restricted to t into e8 and the mixed u (1)
gauge anomaly can also depend on the factor in hn, that is, it can be nonuniversal. although those
generalizations can be realized by coupling fourdimensional gauge theories to a special version of

vedimensional supergravity obtained from mtheory, it is not clear whether they are actually

part of mtheory. one may attempt to realize such models in the framework of heterotic m

theory on calabiyau threefolds with vebranes [33, 36, 37, 38]. although this is of considerable

phenomenological interest we will not explicitly address this issue here.

in section 5, we derive the relevant parts of the fourdimensional eective actions associated
with e8  e8 heterotic string or mtheory on s1 times a calabiyau threefold. again, we
study the classical variation of this action to nd the pattern of anomalous u (1) symmetries.

as required on general grounds, the results turn out to be consistent with the ones obtained for

vedimensional heterotic mtheory. we also gain some more insight into the fourdimensional

mechanism that leads to greenschwarz cancellation. in the standard gauge kinetic functions for
hn given by fn = s  sit i it is a shift of the t i moduli rather than the dilaton s that leads
to anomaly cancellation. this resolves the puzzle raised above, since the standard assumptions

about anomalous u (1) symmetries are based on a cancellation induced by a dilaton shift. in fact,

the confusion is precisely one between the type i and type ii u (1) symmetries. anomalous type

4

ii (as well as presumably type i) u (1) symmetries arise in models originating from the so(32)

heterotic theory on a calabi-yau threefold. in those cases, the type ii anomaly cancellation works

via a shift of the dilaton and, hence, the u (1) symmetry should have the universal properties that
are commonly assumed. however, in models originating from the e8  e8 heterotic theory on
a calabiyau threefold, we have seen that type ii u (1) symmetries are alway nonanomalous.

the basic reason for this dierence [17] is that so(32) has an independent fourth order invariant
while e8 has not. hence, applying the type ii anomaly cancellation patterns to e8  e8 models is
not appropriate as type ii symmetries are always anomalyfree in such models. the type i u (1)
symmetries that may be anomalous in e8  e8 models, however, have a very dierent pattern of
anomaly cancellation, as described above.

finally, in section 6, we shall discuss some phenomenological consequences of our results. we

start with some general remarks about possible applications to modelbuilding with anomalous

u (1) symmetries. we also point out that, within special classes of compactications, our results

can be used to further constrain the structure of the anomaly coecients. as an example, we

discuss symmetric vacua which have recently been constructed [39]. an important issue related to

anomalous u (1) symmetries are fayetilliopoulos terms. we show that such terms arise from the

dilaton part of the kahler potential, despite the dierent role of the dilaton. in accordance with

the required independence of the two sectors, we may have two fi terms, one in each sector. they

are proportional to the respective mixed u (1) gauge anomaly coecients. finally, we also analyze

the gauge kinetic functions of the type i u (1) symmetries, which turn out to be more complicated
than the standard ones for the hn parts of the gauge group.

before proceeding to the details of the m-theory anomaly cancellation, we would like to raise

the general question of whether the present results support the idea that m-theory is simply d = 11

supergravity, properly quantized (and thus including its essential brane sectors). one indication

that may go in this direction is the analysis of m-theory/heterotic duality given in ref. [40], taken in

the context of d = 11 supergravity with branes wrapped and stacked around cycles of calabi-yau
manifolds. in this analysis, the horava-witten orbifold s1/z2 appears in a certain singular limit
of 11dimensional supergravity on a k3 surface. the e8  e8 gauge elds on the orbifold xed
points arise from membranes wrapping spheres within k3 that collapse in the singular limit. a

central question here is whether the full gauge group structure in the resulting d = 5 theory can

be viewed as arising in a similar way. the results of ref. [40] would seem to suggest that this is

indeed the case for the analysis of sections three and ve, that is, for all vedimensional theories

obtained by a reduction of 11dimensional horava-witten theory. the details of how that works

will have to be addressed in a future publication.

5

2 the vedimensional eective action of heterotic mtheory

in this section we shall derive the vedimensional eective action of heterotic mtheory. this

action has rst been given in ref. [28, 29, 30] for the case of a standard embedding. some of the

generalizations that emerge upon allowing general vector bundles in the vacuum have been given in

ref. [33]. however, certain aspects, particularly some relevant for the question of anomaly cancel-

lation, have not been explicitly addressed in the literature. for the sake of clarity, we will therefore

present the reduction in a systematic way, focusing on issues related to anomaly cancellation. this

implies, in particular, that we need to consider the most general structure for the e8 vector bundles.

2.1 the horavawitten action in d = 11

the starting point of our reduction is the action for 11dimensional supergravity on an s1/z2
orbifold, due to horava and witten [5, 6]. more precisely, we consider 11dimensional supergravity
on the space m11 = s1/z2  m10 where m10 is a smooth 10dimensional manifold. the orbifold
coordinate is denoted by y throughout the paper and is taken to be in the range y  [, ].
the z2 symmetry acts as y  y (or y  y + 2a for reections around points other than y = 0).
hence, selecting the reection point y = 0 (with a conjugate reection point at the reidentication

point y = ) there exist two 10dimensional xed hyperplanes, m (1)
10 at
y = y2  . the bulk action is given by 11dimensional supergravity with the metric g and the
threeindex antisymmetric tensor eld c as the bosonic elds. in the bulk, the eld strength g of

10 at y = y1  0 and m (2)

c is given by g = dc. this bulk theory is coupled to two 10dimensional e8 superyangmills
multiplets each residing on one of the orbifold xed planes. we denote the corresponding gauge
elds by an and their eld strengths by fn, where n = 1, 2. generators t a are always normalized
such that tr(t at b) = ab where, as usual, tr is dened to be 1/30 of the trace in the adjoint.

the action for this theory can be organized as an expansion in powers of 2/3, where  is the

11dimensional newton constant. in order to simplify the notation, it is helpful to introduce the
specic combination 1

then the action has the structure

 =

c

22 (cid:16) 

4(cid:17)2/3

.

s11 = s0 + s1 + s2 ,

(2.1)

(2.2)

where the subscripts on the right hand side refer to the order in . in the following, we shall focus

on the bosonic part of this action, which will be sucient for the purpose of the present paper. to

1in horava and wittens original formulation of the theory the coecient c was determined to be c = 1. subse-

quently, it was found in ref. [41, 42] that c = 21/3. in this paper, we will use c = 21/3.

6

zeroth order, we have the action of 11dimensional supergravity
2
3

22 s0 = zm11"g r + g  g +

c  g  g# .

(2.3)

the yangmills theories on the orbifold xed planes appear at rst order in . they are specied

by

22 s1 = 


2

2

xn=1zm (n)

10

g(cid:20)trf 2
n 

1
2

trr2(cid:21) .

(2.4)

at order 2, a greenschwarz term [4] and associated r4 terms [43, 44] arise in the bulk. here,

we only need the greenschwarz term which is given by

22 s2 =

2
3

2zm11

c  x8

where the anomaly polynomial x8 reads 2

x8 = 

1
8

trr4 +

1
32

(trr2)2 .

(2.5)

(2.6)

finally, the bianchi identity for g has to be modied by source terms supported on the orbifold

planes that appear at order . this modied bianchi identity reads

dg = 

2

xn=1

jn  dy (y  yn) .

(2.7)

the sources jn depend on the gauge eld and the curvature on the orbifold planes and are explicitly
given by

jn = trf 2

n 

1
2

trr2 |y=yn .

2.2 vacuum conguration

we would like to consider the above theory on a spacetime m11 with structure

m11 = x  s1/z2  m4

(2.8)

(2.9)

where x is a calabiyau threefold. eventually, we will be interested in the vedimensional
theory on m5 = s1/z2  m4 that is obtained by compactication on the calabiyau space x. let
us describe the background congurations adequate for such a compactication [28, 30].

in the bulk, we have a calabiyau background metric g and an associated curvature twoform
r related to the tangent bundle t x of the calabiyau space x. here and in the following we use
the bar to indicate elds with components exclusively in the internal space x.

2here and in the following we will frequently omit the wedge symbol  in writing wedge products in order to

simplify the notation.

7

furthermore, we should specify the internal parts of the e8 gauge elds. rather than making
any specic choice, such as the standard embedding of the spin connection into the gauge group, we

would like to consider the general situation. that is, we would like to cover all choices of internal

gauge elds compatible with the consistency requirements imposed by the theory. allowing for this

most general situation is, of course, crucial in our context since those gauge elds play a key role in

anomaly cancellation. we start with two e8 vector bundles v1 and v2 which are restricted so as to
preserve supersymmetry, possessing thus a property that is known formally as semi-stability (see,

e.g. [17]). integrating the bianchi identity (2.7) over a vecycle consisting of a fourcycle within

the calabiyau space times the orbifold leads to the familiar constraint

ch2(v1) + ch2(v2) = ch2(t x)

(2.10)

on those bundles. here ch2 is the second chern character. the eld strengths associated to the
bundles vn are denoted by fn, where n = 1, 2. we also introduce the internal parts jn of the
sources in the bianchi identity (2.8) by

the consistency relation (2.10) can then be written in the equivalent form

jn = tr f 2

n 

1
2

tr r2 |y=yn .

( j1 + j2) = 0

zc4i

(2.11)

(2.12)

where {c4i}i=1,...,h1,1 is a basis of calabiyau fourcycles. furthermore, it is useful to introduce
the topological indices i and i by

i = 

= 

i = 

1

1

1

j1

82 zc4i
82 zc4i(cid:20)tr f 2
1 
82 zc4i

tr r2 .

1
2

tr r2(cid:21)

(2.13)

(2.14)

it is important to be somewhat more specic about the group structure of our vector bundles.

following ref. [12, 17] we write the structure groups gn of the bundles vn as products

gn = hn  jn .

(2.15)

here hn is the semisimple part and jn contains the u (1) factors. we also allow for wilson lines
which can be thought of as discrete parts of the gauge bundle. we choose the associated discrete
structure group to be part of hn. correspondingly, we write the bundles and the gauge eld
strengths as

vn = wn ma

la
n ,

fn = fn +xa

f a
nqa
n

8

(2.16)

where the bundles wn and associated gauge elds fn correspond to the semisimple part (and
possible wilson lines) while the line bundles la
n correspond to the
various u (1) factors. the associated u (1) generators are denoted by qa
n. here and in the following
we label these u (1) factors by indices a, b, . . . . in order to satisfy the eld equations, the u (1) eld

n with u (1) gauge elds f a

strengths have to be harmonic twoforms. hence they can be written as

f a
n = v1/3i

nai .

(2.17)

here {i}i=1,...,h1,1 is a basis of harmonic (1, 1) forms on the calabiyau space dual to the basis
of fourcycles mentioned above. for dimensional reasons, we have also included a power of the
calabiyau coordinate volume v in the above denition. as usual, the coecients i

na in this
expansion are quantized in suitable units. we have mentioned above that the vector bundles vn
have to be semistable so as to preserve supersymmetry. in particular, this implies for the line
bundles la

n that

    c1(la

n) = 0

(2.18)

where  is the kahler form. clearly, this condition cannot be satised for h1,1 = 1. hence, only for
calabiyau spaces with h1,1 > 1 can the u (1) factors introduced above occur. the conditions (2.18)

in fact constitute restrictions on the calabiyau kahler moduli space [12]. more explicitly, this
can be seen by writing the kahler form as  = aii with the (1, 1) moduli ai. then, inserting this
into eq. (2.18) along with the expansion (2.17) of the u (1) gauge elds leads to

the constants dijk are the calabiyau triple intersection numbers dened as

dijki

naajak = 0 .

dijk =zx

i  j  k .

(2.19)

(2.20)

in order to satisfy the equations (2.19) we have to adjust the kahler moduli since the coecients
i
na, once chosen, are xed due to the quantization rule.

finally, we have to specify the background value of the antisymmetric tensor eld strength g.

in fact, a nonvanishing internal g is forced upon us by the bianchi identity (2.7) taking into
account the generically nontrivial internal sources jn. this background value for g, also called a
nonzero mode, plays an important role in the derivation of the vedimensional eective theory,

as has been demonstrated in ref. [28, 30]. as we will see, taking into account this nonzero mode

is also crucial in order to understand anomaly cancellation in ve dimensions. solving the bianchi

identity (2.7) subject to the sources (2.11) along with the equation of motion for g leads to the

following expression for the nonzero mode

g = 42 ii (y) .

9

(2.21)

here {i}i=1,...,h1,1 forms a basis of harmonic (2, 2) forms on the calabiyau space dual to the
basis {i} of harmonic (1, 1) forms. the stepfunction (y) is dened to be +1 for y  0 and 1
otherwise.

note that the presence of the stepfunction in this background value for g breaks the ve-
dimensional translation invariance at the selected orbifold points y = 0, y = . accordingly,
the d = 5 eld theory will be found to have extendedobjects at the locations of the stepfunction

jumps. at the present time, however, we see only a hint of this structure in (2.21), which constitutes

a generalization of the usual kind of kaluza-klein ansatz for eld congurations in the internal

dimensions. note nally that although (2.21) breaks the d = 5 translation invariance, it actually
restores the z2 symmetry y  y of the d = 11 theory, which would otherwise be broken if the
stepfunction were not present in (2.21), since g is a z2 odd quantity.

2.3 zero modes

we would now like to summarize the structure of zero modes arising for backgrounds of the above

type. let us start with bulk zero modes. as we will see, for the discussion of vedimensional

anomalies, we can focus on the zero modes of the antisymmetric tensor eld related to the constant

calabiyau mode and the (1, 1) sector. in addition, we will consider the bulk modes needed to
complete n = 1 multiplets in ve dimensions.

the calabiyau breathing mode v is dened as

v =

g .

1

v zx

(2.22)

in the previous subsection we have already introduced the (1, 1) moduli ai, where i = 1, . . . , h1,1.

those are, however, not independent from the volume modulus v . to remove the redundancy, it
is useful to dene the shape moduli bi by

bi = v 1/3ai .

(2.23)

those h1,1 quantities are subject to one constraint. hence they represent only h1,1  1 independent
degrees of freedom. neglecting contributions from harmonic (2, 1) forms, the antisymmetric tensor

threeform and its eld strength can be written as

c = c + c + 3 + 
g = g + g + x  3 + x   

3 + bi  i

3 + di  i .

(2.24)

(2.25)

here c and g represent the nonzero mode background specied in the previous subsection. the
eld c, with eld strength g, represent a threeindex antisymmetric tensor eld in the external
ve dimensions that is associated to the constant mode on the calabiyau space. the complex

10

scalar  and its eld strength x arise from the harmonic (3, 0) form 3. furthermore, we have h1,1
gauge elds bi with eld strengths di related to the harmonic (1, 1) forms i.

in ve dimensions, these zero modes give rise to the following multiplets. the vedimensional
metric along with a certain linear combination of the vectors bi form the bosonic part of the
n = 1 gravity multiplet. the remaining h1,1  1 vectors bi together with the scalars bi represent
h1,1  1 vector multiplets. finally, the volume modulus v , the complex scalar  and the dual of
the threeform c (which is a scalar in ve dimensions) form the universal hypermultiplet.

next we should consider the zero modes arising on the orbifold planes. after compactication,

these planes become fourdimensional hyperplanes m (n)
located at y = yn in the vedimensional
space. recall, that the internal gauge groups have a product structure gn = hn  jn where hn
are the semisimple parts and jn contains the u (1) factors. the surviving lowenergy groups gn
are the commutants of these internal groups within e8. their structure is given by

4

gn = hn  jn .

(2.26)

where n = 1, 2. note that the u (1) factors commute with themselves. hence jn is part of the
lowenergy gauge groups as well. we will call such u (1) factors in jn that have a counterpart in
the internal structure group u (1) symmetries of type i, or ui (1) in short. the remaining parts
of the lowenergy groups contain the nonabelian factors and are denoted by hn. note, however,
that the groups hn do not necessarily have to be semisimple. the lowenergy group may contain
u (1) factors other than the type i ones mentioned above, which would then be contained in hn.
we will call these type ii u (1) symmetries, or uii (1) in short. it is clear, from their relation to
the internal structure groups, that type i and type ii u (1) elds are of very dierent nature. this

will become apparent in the discussion of anomaly cancellations. we also introduce gauge elds
an with eld strengths fn for the group hn and u (1) gauge elds aa
the type i u (1) factors in jn.

n with eld strengths f a

to discuss anomalies, we also need some information about the n = 1 chiral multiplets on the

orbifold planes. as usual we decompose the adjoint of e8 under the subgroup gn  gn as

n for

248e8 mr

( lr

n, lr
n)

(2.27)

n) of gn  gn. then, in general, we expect
where the sum runs over all representations ( lr
chiral n = 1 multiplets in all representation lr
n of the external gauge group gn that appear in this
decomposition. fortunately, all we need to know in this context is the chiral asymmetry of such
multiplets in lr

n. from the index theorem this asymmetry is given by

n which we denote by n r

n, lr

n r

n =

1
6

1

(2)3 zx(cid:20)tr lr

n

f 3
n 

1
8

tr lr

n

fntr r2(cid:21) .

(2.28)

11

denotes the trace taken in the representation lr

where tr lr
also that fn and r are the internal gauge eld and curvature backgrounds.

n of the internal gauge group gn. recall

n

2.4 the vedimensional eective action

we are now ready to summarize the parts of the vedimensional eective action that are essential

for our purpose. starting from the 11dimensional theory and using the backgrounds and the zero

modes introduced above one nds

s5 = skin + stop + sbound .

here skin contains the kinetic terms of the antisymmetric tensor elds and is given by

22

5 skin = zm5(cid:2)2gijdi  dj + 2v 1x  x  + v 2g  g(cid:3) .

(2.29)

(2.30)

we have omitted the kinetic terms of all other moduli since they will not be relevant for the

subsequent discussion. the kahler moduli space metric gij will not be explicitly needed here. the
topological part of the action reads

22

5 stop = 

2zm5(cid:20) 22

6v2/3

i bi  trr2 

82
v2/3

(y) i bi  g +

1
3

dijkbidjdk

+i(g  x   g  x)] .

(2.31)

for the boundary part we have

sbound = 

1
4g2
0

2

xn=1zm (n)

4

g"v trf 2

n + v xa

n)2 + (matter)# .
(f a

furthermore, the above action has to be supplemented with the following bianchi identities

2

dg = 
dx = (matter)

xn=1

jn  dy (y  yn)

ddi = 2v1/3

2

xn=1

i
naf a

n  dy (y  yn) + (matter)

where the sources are given by

jn = trf 2

n +xa

f a
n  f a

n 

1
2

trr2 .

12

(2.32)

(2.33)

(2.34)

(2.35)

(2.36)

those bianchi identities directly descend from the 11dimensional one, eq. (2.7). it is also useful

to write them in their integrated form

2

g = dc  
x = d + (matter)

xn=1

wn  dy(y  yn)

di = dbi  2v1/3

2

xn=1

i
naaa

n  dy(y  yn) + (matter)

with the chernsimons form wn dened by

dwn = jn .

(2.37)

(2.38)

(2.39)

(2.40)

we have also introduced the vedimensional newton constant 5 and the gauge coupling g0. they
are given in terms of 11dimensional quantities by

2
5 =

2
v

,

g2
0 =

2
52

.

(2.41)

a few comments concerning notation are in order. in the previous subsections we have distin-

guished vedimensional elds from their 11dimensional counterparts by a tilde. from now on,

we will be working in ve dimensions and we shall omit the tilde for notational simplicity. so, for

example, c is the vedimensional threeindex antisymmetric tensor eld with eld strength g.
furthermore, an are the gauge elds with gauge group hn and eld strength fn, while f a
n are the
ui (1) vector elds with associated gauge group jn. we also recall that dijk are the calabiyau
intersection numbers (2.20) and i and i are topological numbers dened in terms of the internal
bundles by eq. (2.13) and (2.14). although matter elds on the orbifold planes do play an impor-

tant role in the following their explicit contributions to the action and the bianchi identities is not

essential. their presence has, however, been indicated in the above action.

it is instructive, for the following, to understand the 11dimensional origin of some of the above

terms. for example, the rst term in the topological part of the action is the reduction of the
c  x8 term [45] given in eq. (2.5). all other topological terms originate from the chernsimons
term cgg of 11dimensional supergravity. particularly, the second term in eq. (2.31) results by

taking one of the eld strengths g in cgg to be the internal nonzero mode (2.21). this term

causes the gauging of the universal hypermultiplet as has been shown in ref. [28, 30]. it will also

be essential to understand anomaly cancellation in the vedimensional theory. another essential

part in the above action is the right hand side of the bianchi identity (2.39). the ui (1) gauge eld
strengths f a
n in this bianchi identity arise because their associated gauge group jn is part of the
internal structure group at the same time. in fact, only in this case can one have a non-vanishing
result for the trace trf 2, where one f is taken to have internal indices and the other one to have

13

external indices. it is for this reason, that the ui (1) elds of type i in jn play a special role. note
that the uii (1) elds, contained in the hn part of the low-energy gauge group, do not appear in
the bianchi identity (2.39).

3 anomaly cancellation in ve dimensions

we now shall study anomaly cancellation in the vedimensional action of heterotic mtheory that

we have just derived. we expect the anomaly cancellation to rely on an interplay between bulk and

orbifold planes in much the same way as in 11 dimensions. more precisely, in the vedimensional

theory, the gauge theories on the orbifold planes might have quantum anomalies at one loop due to

the familiar triangle diagrams. these apparent anomalies should then be cancelled by a classical

gauge anomaly of the bulk theory supported on those orbifold planes or, in other words, by anomaly

inow from the bulk. let us work this out in some detail, starting with the anomalous variation of

the bulk action.

3.1 classical variation of the bulk action

an anomalous variation of the bulk action (2.30), (2.31) should be triggered by the bianchi identities

(2.33)(2.35) as they represent the only way in which the orbifold gauge elds directly communicate

with the bulk elds. clearly, then, the bulk antisymmetric tensor elds are the only bulk elds that

potentially transform under the gauge transformations associated to the orbifold gauge elds. as

in 11 dimensions, our strategy will be to keep the antisymmetric tensor eld strengths invariant so

that the kinetic part (2.30) of the action remains inert. this, however, typically implies assigning

nontrivial gauge transformations to the antisymmetric tensor elds themselves.

in the case at

hand, we can see from the eqs. (2.37)(2.39) that we need to assign such transformation to the
bulk threeform c and the bulk vector elds bi. specically, while c transforms under the hn parts
of the orbifold gauge groups, the vector elds bi transform under the ui (1) gauge transformations
of type i. we note, however, that the bulk action depends on c only through its eld strength

g. therefore, the variation of c is not relevant for our purpose. hence, we can already draw
the important conclusion that the hn parts of the gauge groups have to be nonanomalous. more
precisely, the oneloop anomalies due to hn triangle diagrams have to vanish since, as we have just
seen, there is no corresponding bulk variation available to cancel them. we will come back to this

in a more systematic way later on.

for now, we should be more explicit about the gauge variation of the ui (1) elds and the
transformation of the bulk vector elds that they induce. we denote the transformation parameters
of these ui (1) elds a

n and write

n = da
n .

aa

14

(3.1)

then, demanding that the vector eld strengths di be invariant, we conclude from eq. (2.39) that
the vector elds bi should transform as

bi = 2v1/3

2

xn=1

i
naa

n dy (y  yn) .

(3.2)

as we have already mentioned, the kinetic part of the bulk action (2.30) remains invariant under this

transformation. the variation of the topological part (2.31), however, is nontrivial and consists

of terms that are supported purely on the orbifold planes. the latter, of course, is caused by the

delta functions in the transformation law (3.2). to further evaluate this anomalous variation, we
need to know the values of the antisymmetric tensor eld strengths g and di on the orbifold planes
y = yn. to be more specic, we need only the components of those elds transverse to the orbifold
since that is all that the anomalous variation depends on. the reason for this is the presence of the

dy dierential in eq. (3.2) which projects onto those components. fortunately, those components

are z2 odd and, hence, their behavior close to the orbifold planes is completely determined by the
source terms in the bianchi identities. solving the bianchi identities (2.33) and (2.35) along with
the equations of motion for c and ba

n leads to

dy  di |y=yn = v1/3i
dy  g |y=yn = 

jn  dy .


2

na f a

n  dy

with these expressions we nally nd for the anomalous variation of the bulk action

(3.3)

(3.4)

(3.5)

cls5 = 

c3

1283

2

xn=1zm (n)

4

a

n(cid:20)(2ii

na)trf 2

n (cid:18)i 
+(cid:18)2ii

1
12

natrr2

i(cid:19) i
1
62 dijki

nabc +

naj

nbk

nc(cid:19)f b
n(cid:21) .
nf c

here and in the following, when we use alternating signs, the upper sign refers to the rst orbifold

plane, n = 1, while the lower sign refers to the second plane, n = 2. the above classical variation

of the bulk action should be cancelled by quantum anomalies on the orbifold planes that originate

from the usual triangle diagrams. that this is possible at all is due to the obvious but nonetheless

important fact that the gauge variation of the bulk action consists solely of terms supported on the

orbifold planes. from the form of the above variation it is obvious which types of triangle diagram

should be responsible for the cancellation. the rst term in (3.5) corresponds to a mixed gauge
anomaly with one ui (1) current of type i and two currents from the hn parts of the gauge groups.
the second term should be cancelled by a mixed gravitational anomaly with one ui (1) current
and two gravity currents. finally, the structure of the third term corresponds to a cubic anomaly

of the ui (1) gauge elds. in the following subsection we will show explicitly that the anticipated
cancellation indeed works.

15

3.2 quantum variation on the orbifold planes

above we have mentioned the types of triangle diagrams whose anomalous variation should be

cancelled by (3.5). clearly, since we have done our reduction from d = 11 to d = 5 consistently,

we expect this cancellation to work. the consistently derived vedimensional eective theory

should be anomaly-free in the same way as the 11 dimensional action. we still nd it useful, if only

as a crosscheck of our result, to verify this explicitly. to do this, we need to know the anomaly

coecients of the various types of triangle diagrams dened as follows

cn = xr
cna = xr
cnab = xr
cnabc = xr
= xr
c(l)
na = xr
c(l)

n

n r

n trlr

n(t 3
n )

n r

n trlr

n(qa

nt 2
n )

n r

n trlr

n(qa

nqb

ntn)

n r

n trlr

n(qa

nqb

nqc
n)

n r

n trlr

n(tn)

n r

n trlr

n(qa

n) .

(3.6a)

(3.6b)

(3.6c)

(3.6d)

(3.6e)

(3.6f)

here tn denotes any generator in the hn parts of the gauge group. recall that qa
n are the generators
of the ui (1) gauge groups. furthermore, lr
n denotes the possible matter representations of the
low energy gauge group gn on the orbifold plane n, that is, the representations appearing in the
decomposition (2.27). fortunately, all that enters the anomaly is the chiral asymmetry n r
n of those
representations which can be expressed in terms of the internal bundles via the index theorem (2.28).

the rst four anomaly coecients above cover the possible combinations of ui (1) gauge elds with
gauge elds in hn. the nal two coecients measure the mixed gravitational anomalies of hn
and the ui (1) elds, respectively. note that although there are no purely gravitational anomalies
in ve dimensions, the mixed gravitational-gauge anomalies involve the orbifold planes, which are

four-dimensional. in four dimensions, mixed gravitationalgauge anomalies can arise [48, 49], which

is precisely what happens in (3.6e,3.6f).

now, following ref. [34, 35], we replace n r

n in the above anomaly coecients using the index
theorem and further simplify the expressions by means of the trace formulae collected in appendix

a. this allows one to completely express the anomaly coecient in terms of topological calabiyau

16

and bundle data. we nd

cn = 0
cna = 
cnab = 0
3
cnabc =
c(l)
c(l)
na =

= 0
3

n

1
8

i
nai

8 (cid:20)ii
2 (cid:18)i 

n(abc) +

1
122 dijki

naj

nbk

nc(cid:21)

1
12

i(cid:19) i

na .

(3.7a)

(3.7b)

(3.7c)

(3.7d)

(3.7e)

(3.7f)

as before, the upper (lower) sign refers to the rst (second) orbifold plane. the quantum variation

due to the triangle diagrams is then given by

qs5 =

1

162

2

xn=1zm (n)

4

a

n(cid:20)cnatrf 2
n 

1
24c(l)

na trr2 +

1
3cnabcf b

n(cid:21)
nf c

(3.8)

with the anomaly coecients c as given in eqs. (3.7a3.7f). this quantum variation cancels the
classical one in eq. (3.5) except for the rst term in the cubic anomaly coecient. in the quantum

variation (3.8), this rst term is symmetrized in all three indices while this is not the case in the

classical variation (3.5). this, however, is not a problem. the form of the anomaly in eq. (3.8)

that we have chosen corresponds to a specic way of regularizing the triangle diagrams. using

the known ambiguity in the fourdimensional anomaly, we can, however, regularize the diagrams

associated to the cubic anomaly dierently and put them exactly in the appropriate form so as to

cancel the classical variation (3.5). hence, we indeed have (cl + q)s5 = 0 and the total anomaly
cancels.

3.3 discussion

let us now discuss the signicance of the above results in some detail. first, we would like to do

this in relation to the 11dimensional origin of the vedimensional theory.

as we have seen, the anomalous classical variation originates from the rst three terms in the

topological part (2.31) of the vedimensional bulk action. the 11dimensional origin of these

terms is as follows

c  x 8  i bitrr2
cgg with non-zero mode  i bi  g

cgg  dijkbidjdk .

(3.9)

(3.10)

(3.11)

recall here that cgg is the chernsimons term of 11dimensional supergravity (2.3) while c  x8
is the greenschwarz term dened in eq. (2.5). the nonzero mode that, inserted into cgg, leads

17

to the second term above, is a purely internal conguration for the 11dimensional antisymmetric

tensor elds strength g.
it was explicitly given in eq. (2.21). the crucial ingredient forcing
us to assign gauge transformations to the bulk antisymmetric tensor elds bi was the bianchi
identity (2.39). it directly results from the 11dimensional bianchi identity (2.7) with two of the

indices being taken internal and the others external. as we have seen, given such a conguration
of indices, the sources in the vedimensional bianchi identities for di can only receive nontrivial
contributions from the ui (1) gauge elds. as a consequence, only those ui (1) elds appear on
the right hand side of (2.39) and the bulk vector elds bi transform under the type i gauge
transformation only. what is the individual contribution of the above three bulk terms to the

anomalous variation? the rst term (3.10), originating from the 11dimensional greenschwarz

term, causes only the second contribution proportional to i in the mixed gravitational anomaly
in eq. (3.5). likewise, the third term (3.11), originating from the 11dimensional chernsimons

term, leads to only one term, namely the second one in the cubic anomaly in eq. (3.5). the most

important part of the anomalous variation results from the second term (3.10).

it leads to all

terms in eq. (3.5) proportional to i and, hence, contributes to all three types of anomalies that
we have encountered. this shows again the importance of this term, which is also responsible for

the gauging of the supergravity theory [28, 30]. had we missed this term, or equivalently, had we

missed the underlying nonzero mode, we would clearly be unable to uncover the vedimensional

anomaly structure.

let us now move on to discuss this vedimensional structure in detail. to do this, let us focus

on the expression (3.8) for the quantum variation. the nontrivial information resides in the com-

parison between the general denition (3.6a3.6f) of the anomaly coecients and the expressions

(3.7a3.7f) that one obtains for those coecients within the context of heterotic mtheory. a pri-

ori, from their denition (3.6a3.6f), the anomaly coecients could have taken any value depending

on the gauge groups and particle contents on the orbifold planes. we are told, however, that in

heterotic mtheory they have a precise structure in terms of the underlying compactication. more

concretely, they are given by the calabiyau intersection numbers dijk, the topological numbers
i and i related to second chern characters of the internal gauge and tangent bundles and the
coecients i
na that specify the u (1) parts of the internal gauge bundles. clearly, this structure
reects the restrictions that heterotic mtheory imposes on the particle content residing on the

orbifold planes. in a bottom up approach we can also turn this around and use the anomaly

structure to learn about these restrictions. for a more precise discussion, we rst remark that the

expressions (3.7a3.7f) are rather symmetric with respect to the two orbifold planes. it is worth

pointing out that the two gauge theories on those planes are completely hidden with respect to one

another, that is, they only interact gravitationally. correspondingly, anomaly cancellation works

completely independently for the two planes. obviously, there cannot be any u (1) gauge elds

18

extending over both planes not to mention u (1) gauge elds that got displaced into the bulk in

between. consequently, we have only nonvanishing triangle diagrams that couple gauge currents

on the same plane. our subsequent discussion, focusing on a single orbifold plane, therefore applies

to either one of the two orbifold planes.

the rst crucial observation is that some of the anomaly coecients vanish within heterotic m

theory. this implies that the classical as well as the quantum variation should be zero individually.
specically, we see from eq. (3.7a) and (3.7e) that the diagrams coupling three currents in the hn
part of the gauge group as well as the mixed gravitational anomaly with one hn and two gravity
currents vanish. in this sense, the hn part of the gauge group is anomalyfree. recall that hn
contains the complete nonabelian part of the gauge group as well as the uii (1) elds of type ii.
it is wellknown that the nonabelian part of the gauge group is anomalyfree [34]. in addition,

we learn here that the same is true for uii (1) factors of type ii. as a consequence, nonvanishing
diagrams always involve the ui (1) elds of type i. among those diagrams the one coupling two
ui (1) elds to a eld in hn vanishes from eq. (3.7c). this is trivial for the nonabelian part of
hn (since then trlr
n(tn) = 0 always). however, it gives a nontrivial information for the uii (1)
factors in hn, namely that the ui (1)2uii (1) triangle diagram vanish. we are left with three types
of anomaly that can be nonzero in general. these are the mixed ui (1) gauge anomaly (3.7b), the
ui (1)3 cubic anomaly (3.7d) and the mixed ui (1) gravitational anomaly (3.7f). from the general
form of the mixed ui (1) gauge anomaly, there could in principle be a dependence on the specic
generator tn of hn that has been chosen. however, eq. (3.7b) shows that the anomaly coecient
is, in fact, independent of this choice. hence, we conclude that the mixed ui (1) gauge anomaly
coecient is the same for all nonabelian factors and all uii (1) factors in hn. in this sense, the
mixed gauge anomaly may be called universal.

how many anomalous ui (1) symmetries are there? as we have seen, we start with a given
number kn of ui (1) factors on each orbifold plane n = 1, 2 which is determined by the specic
it is clear from
compactication. not all of them, however, necessarily have to be anomalous.

eq. (3.7b), for example, that we can always choose a basis such that only one of the ui (1) factors
has a mixed gauge anomaly while this type of anomaly vanishes for all the other ui (1). here
we stress again that this statement as well as the subsequent ones apply to each orbifold plane

separately. hence, in sum, we may have two ui (1) groups with mixed gauge anomalies, one on
each orbifold plane. each of these ui (1)s may have mixed gravitational and cubic anomalies at
the same time. those are xed in terms of topological data by eq. (3.7d) and (3.7f). however,

these expressions also show that the three anomaly coecients are not related in any universal way.

that is to say, without further information about the type of compactication and the associated

topological data, they are practically independent. we have therefore identied one ui (1) factor
on each orbifold plane that has a universal mixed gauge anomaly (independent of the gauge factor)

19

as well as generally unrelated cubic and mixed gravitational anomalies. while the remaining kn  1
ui (1) factors are now free of mixed gauge anomalies by construction, they may have gravitational
and cubic anomalies, however. again, we can diagonalize these remaining ui (1)s such that at most
one of them has a mixed gravitational and a cubic anomaly. finally, then, the other kn  2 ui (1)s
which are now free of mixed gauge and gravitational anomalies may have cubic anomalies only.

let us summarize this discussion briey. recall that hn consist of the nonabelian and the
uii (1) gauge elds, collectively called an. furthermore, we denote ui (1) gauge elds by aa
n,
where a = 1, . . . , kn and the graviton by g. we then refer to a triangle diagram by specifying the
triple of gauge elds to which it couples. then the anomaly structure on each orbifold plane in

vedimensional heterotic mtheory is as follows :

 the hn part of the gauge group is anomalyfree in the sense that the a3

n and angg anomalies

vanish.

nab

nan anomalies vanish.

 the mixed aa
 after a suitable choice of basis there is at most a single ui (1) gauge eld, say a1

n with
all three remaining types of anomalies nonvanishing. that is, we may have anomalies of
type a1
ngg. in terms of the topological data the associated anomaly
coecients are given in eq. (3.7b), (3.7d) and (3.7f). the remaining ui (1) factors are free of
mixed gauge anomalies, that is the aa

nanan anomaly vanishes for a > 1.

nanan, a1

naa

nab

n and a1

 the coecient of a1

nanan is independent of which specic gauge eld an within hn is
considered. apart from this restriction, the three nonvanishing anomaly coecients are

generically unrelated.

 after another choice of basis there is at most one among the remaining ui (1) symmetries,
n, with mixed gravitational and cubic anomaly. in other words, the anomalies of type
n can be nonvanishing. again the two associated anomaly coecients are

say a2
a2
ngg and a2
generically unrelated. all other aa

naa

nab

n for a > 2 have cubic anomalies at most.

4 fivedimensional anomaly cancellation  a dierent viewpoint

in the previous section, we have analyzed anomaly constraints on the particle spectrum residing

on the orbifold planes of vedimensional heterotic mtheory.

in doing so we have used all of

the knowledge arising from the 11dimensional horavawitten construction upon descent down

to ve dimensions. the derivation of this 11dimensional theory and, in particular, the e8 gauge
multiplets to which it couples is, however, based upon anomaly cancellation as well. a natural

question, therefore, is whether one can avoid using some of this 11dimensional knowledge and

20

derive the anomaly constraints directly on a vedimensional basis. concretely, we would like to

start from pure 11dimensional supergravity, that is, we are not coupling any e8 gauge elds to
the theory. we can then consider this theory in the background of a calabiyau threefold and

a nonzero mode conguration of the antisymmetric tensor eld. the resulting eective action is
a vedimensional n = 1 gauged supergravity, given by the bulk part of the action that we have
described in the previous section. subsequently, we would like to consider this vedimensional
theory on the orbifold s1/z2. our main question is then the following. which constraints does
vedimensional anomaly cancellation impose on the twisted states residing on the two four

dimensional xed planes of this orbifold? hence, we are asking, in analogy with the original 11

dimensional construction, how vedimensional mtheory can be put on an orbifold consistently.

given that one is usually bound to use anomaly cancellation as the basic tool, this question might

be no less fundamental than the corresponding one in 11 dimensions.

4.1 starting point  vedimensional gauged supergravity

we start with the action of 11dimensional supergravity (2.3) including the greenschwarz term (2.5).

we would like to consider this theory on a spacetime background of the structure

m11 = x  s1  m4

(4.1)

where x is a calabiyau threefold and m4 is fourdimensional minkowski space. in addition to the
metric background, we would also like to allow a nonzero mode background for the antisymmetric

tensor eld strength g in the internal calabiyau space. given that g has to be an element of
h 4(x) the most general form of such a background is given by

g = 42 ii (y) .

(4.2)

recall here that {i}i=1,...,h1,1 is a basis of h 4(x), the constant  was dened in eq. (2.1) and (y)
is the step-function. the coordinate of the circle s1 is called y and we use the same conventions

as previously for the orbifold coordinate.

as we have mentioned previously in section 2, the appearance of the step function (y) in the
background (4.2) is motivated by the wish to leave the y  y z2 symmetry unbroken. making
a generalized kaluza-klein ansatz such as (4.2) without the (y) would break the z2 symmetry
because g is z2 odd. this choice is also motivated by the wish to have interesting solutions to
the resulting d = 5 eld equations, because these eld equations acquire a cosmological potential

term [28, 30] which rules out at space, or indeed any maximally symmetric space, as a solution.

including the (y) in the ansatz (4.2) allows solutions that have the character of 3-brane domain

walls from a d = 5 perspective, although from a d = 11 perspective they appear as 5-branes

wrapped around two-cycles of the calabiyau space and piled into stacks for reduction in the

21

other four calabiyau directions [28, 30]. this purely eld-theoretic background solution accords

precisely with the horravawitten orbifold structure that appears to be a non-intrinsic injection

into the theory from the d = 11/d = 10 perspective of section 2. thus, in d = 5, the orbifold

becomes a natural aspect of the eld-theoretic background.

the form (4.2) for the nonzero mode is identical to the one we used in section 2, eq. (2.21).

an important dierence, however, is that the constants i, although quantized as usual, are here
taken to be otherwise undetermined. in section 2, the nonzero mode was forced upon us due to

gauge eld and gravity sources in the nontrivial bianchi identity of horavawitten construction.

correspondingly, the i were determined in terms of those sources by eq. (2.13). here, the non
zero mode and the coecients i in particular may be freely chosen. for example, they could be
set to zero if desired.

the form (4.2) of the kaluza-klein ansatz corresponds to having just two regions in the y

coordinate, with equal and opposite non-zero mode charges. this choice can be extended by the

inclusion of additional extended objects at various y values, by the inclusion of additional step

functions in ansatze such as (4.2). all such cases will be constrained, however, by a cohomological

condition [33]

xs 1 patches (n)

(n)
i = 0 .

(4.3)

this is derived by requiring that, although the bianchi identity for g is modied by the inclusion of

deltafunction terms such as in (2.7), the form dg should still be exact in the full d = 11 spacetime,

hence requiring that its integral vanish when integrated over any closed cycle. the ansatz (4.2)

gives the simplest nontrivial solution to this cohomological requirement.

the vedimensional eective theory on m5 = s1m4 obtained by reducing on the calabiyau
space with the generalized ansatz (4.2) is given by gauged n = 1 supergravity. we are interested
here in the parts of this action involving the antisymmetric tensor eld. these are identical to the

bulk parts of the action (2.29) used in section 2 which we repeat here for convenience. the kinetic

and topological terms are given by

22

5 skin = zm5(cid:2)2gijdi  dj + 2v 1x  x  + v 2g  g(cid:3)

and

22

5 stop = 

2zm5(cid:20) 22

6v2/3

i bi  trr2 

82
v2/3

(y) i bi  g +

dijkbidjdk

1
3
+i(g  x   g  x)] .

(4.4)

(4.5)

we note that the constant i are proportional to the second chern classes of the calabiyau tangent
bundle and have been dened in eq. (2.14). the constants dijk are the calabiyau intersection

22

numbers (2.20). hence, both i and dijk are still given to us by topological properties of the
compactication. the non-zero mode charges i are topological quantities related to the quantized
ux of antisymmetric tensor elds on the internal manifold, but are not related to the topology

of the calabi-yau space itself. another dierence with respect to the previous section concerns

the viewpoint one takes with respect to the modied bianchi identities. here, this modication is

seen to follow from the ansatz (4.2), corresponding to the inclusion of magnetically charged objects
located at the stepfunction jump points y = 0, y = . in section 2, the modications to the
bianchi identity were prescribed externally as a consequence of the horavawitten d = 11/d = 10

orbifold construction. note that the modication to the bianchi identity that we have so far, just

from the background ansatz (4.2), is still quite modest, corresponding just to the usual source for

a static magnetically charged extended object without further worldvolume excitations. moreover,

the bianchi identity modications implied by (4.2) have nonvanishing projections only with four

indices in the calabi-yau directions, and the remaining one in the orbifold y direction. the bianchi

identity modications presented in section 2, on the other hand, are more extensive, containing also

sources for orbifold-plane modes that we have not yet seen from the d = 5 eld-theoretic viewpoint,

and which have projections with all indices in the d = 5 space. to see the role of such modes, we

now turn to a closer inspection of the modied bianchi identities.

4.2 orbifolding and modifying the bianchi identities

we would now like to consider solutions to the above d = 5 theory having the spacetime character

m5 = s1/z2  m4

(4.6)

that is including a circle orbifolded by z2. our conventions here are the same as those described in
the beginning of section 2.1. we shall accordingly have two fourdimensional orbifold planes m (n)
,
where n = 1, 2, located at the stepfunction jump points y = y1  0 and y = y2    . it
is then easy to see from (4.5) that bi and g have to be z2 odd elds 3. we already know that
there exists a static bps double domain wall solution of the bulk supergravity with the threebrane

4

domain walls identied with the two orbifold planes [28, 30].

let us now assume the existence of twisted states on these orbifold planes. the ve

dimensional bulk gravitino, corresponding to eight states, is subject to a chirality constraint on
the orbifold planes. hence, on these planes we have fourdimensional n = 1 supersymmetry cor-
responding to four supercharges. we start by assuming a set of n = 1 gauge elds on each plane
with associated gauge groups

3we call an antisymmetric tensor eld even (odd) if its components orthogonal to the orbifold are even (odd).

gn = hn  jn .

(4.7)

23

n with eld strength f 

here hn is the semisimple part and the u (1) factors are collected in jn. we denote hn gauge
elds by a
n where  runs over the simple factors. furthermore the u (1)
elds are denoted by aa
n where a labels the various u (1) factors. also we
assume the existence of n = 1 chiral multiplets on each plane transforming in the representations
lr
n of gn. of course the conguration we choose cannot be completely arbitrary since the full
theory has to be anomalyfree. more precisely, anomalies should cancel on each plane individually.

n with eld strengths f a

while this can be done, of course, by choosing a eld content with vanishing triangle anomalies

on each plane we know from the previous experience that this is not the most general case. we

may allow for some nonvanishing triangle anomalies provided they can be cancelled by anomaly

inow from the bulk. we know that such an inow should be generated by a nontrivial variation

of the topological part (4.5) of the action due to a gauge transformation of the antisymmetric

tensor elds. such a gauge transformation may originate from a nontrivial bianchi identity with

sources supported on the orbifold planes and depending on orbifold gauge elds. to incorporate

this possibility, we would like to modify the bianchi identity in the most general way. we write

2

dg = 

xn=1
ddi = 2v1/3

jn  dy (y  yn)

2

xn=1

i i
n  dy (y  yn)

(4.8)

(4.9)

with fourforms jn and twoforms i i
n which reside on the orbifold plane. they should be given in
terms of orbifold gauge elds eventually but are kept arbitrary for the moment. note that we have

not considered the bianchi identity for the eld  here. the reason is that the smallest gauge

invariant form on the orbifold planes is a twoform which does not t on the right hand side of the

 bianchi identity. we also write the integrated form of the above identities

2

g = dc  

xn=1
di = dbi  2v1/3

wn  dy(y  yn)

2

xn=1

vi
n  dy(y  yn)

where the chernsimons forms wn and vi

n satisfy

dwn = jn ,

4.3 variation of the action

dvi

n = i i

n .

(4.10)

(4.11)

(4.12)

to compute the classical gauge variation of the action, we rst note that the topological part of

the action (4.5) depends on c only through its eld strength g. as in the previous section, we are

24

therefore only concerned with the transformation of bi. we start with some transformation law

vi

n = di
n

(4.13)

for the forms vi
di = 0, we nd from eq. (4.11) that

n, where the i

n are transformation parameters to be determined later. requiring

bi = 2v1/3

2

xn=1

i
ndy (y  yn) .

(4.14)

to compute the variation of the action we will also need the behavior of the eld strengths close

to the orbifold planes. from eqs. (4.8) and (4.9) and the associated equations of motion one nds

dy  g |y=yn = 
jn  dy
dy  di |y=yn = v1/3i i

n  dy .


2

the classical variation of the bulk action is then given by

cls5 = 

c3

1283

2

xn=1zm (n)

4

i

n(cid:20) 1

12

itrr2  2ijn + dijki j

n(cid:21) .
n  i k

(4.15)

(4.16)

(4.17)

to proceed further, we obviously need to know more about the gauge eld parts of the sources jn
and i i
n. its most general form is given by an arbitrary linear combination of all gauge invariant

forms of the correct degree. this leads to

jn = x
naf a

i i
n = i

n

kntr(f 

n )2 +xa,b

hnabf a

nf b

n  lntrr2

(4.18)

(4.19)

where kn, hnab, ln and i
na are arbitrary constants. here, the index  runs over the various simple
groups contained in the semisimple part hn of the gauge group. writing the transformation
parameters i

n as

n = i
i

naa
n

(4.20)

with new parameters a

n we learn from eq. (4.19) that our initial transformation (4.13) actually

describes the u (1) gauge variation

n = da
n .

aa

(4.21)

hence, similarly as in the previous section, the bulk vector elds bi transform under the u (1) gauge
symmetries only. this also implies that triangle anomalies not involving those u (1) eld must be
zero as they cannot be cancelled by anomaly inow. in this sense, the semisimple parts hn of the

25

gauge groups must be anomalyfree on both orbifold planes. depending on the coecients i

na in
eq. (4.19) some of the u (1) gauge elds might not enter the bianchi identity (4.9). to bring our

conventions in line with the previous section, we will call such u (1) elds to be of type ii and add
them to the semisimple parts hn of the gauge group. all u (1) elds that do contribute to the
bianchi identity will be called type i and remain in the jn part.

then, inserting the above ansatze into the variation (4.17) we arrive at

cls5 = 

c3

1283

2

xn=1zm (n)

4

a

n"(ii

na)x

kntr(f b

n)2 (cid:18)2lni 

1
12

i(cid:19) i

natrr2

+(cid:18)2ii

nahbc

n +

1
62 dijki

naj

nbk

nc(cid:19)f b
n(cid:21)
nf c

(4.22)

for the classical variation of the action. the meaning of the three terms above is obvious. they

correspond to a mixed ui (1) gauge anomaly, a mixed ui (1) gravitational anomaly and a ui (1)
cubic anomaly. this expression has to be compared with the quantum variation due to triangle
diagrams on each boundary. let us dene the triangle anomaly coecient c as in eqs. (3.6a3.6f).
unlike in the previous section, we have no further information about the particle content on the

orbifold plane. we simply require, at this point, the associated triangle anomaly to be such that

it is cancelled by the anomaly inow (4.22). this gives the following specic form for the anomaly

coecients

cn = 0
cna, = 
cnab = 0
3
cnabc =
c(l)
c(l)
na =

= 0
3

n

1
8

i
naikn

8 (cid:20)ii
2 (cid:18)2lni 

n(ahnbc) +

1
122 dijki

naj

nbk

nc(cid:21)

1
12

i(cid:19) i

na .

(4.23a)

(4.23b)

(4.23c)

(4.23d)

(4.23e)

(4.23f)

the associated quantum variation of the gauge theories on the orbifold planes then takes the form

qsbound =

1

162

4.4 discussion

2

xn=1zm (n)

4

a

n"x

cna,tr(f 

n )2 

1
24

c (l)

na trr2 +

1
3

cnabcf b

n# .
nf c

(4.24)

let us now discuss our results. we would like to compare the general structure of anomalies, as

given in eqs. (3.6a3.6f), with the specic form (4.23a4.24) that we have found by considering ve

dimensional gauged supergravity (as obtained from 11dimensional supergravity) on an orbifold.

also, we would like to compare those constraints to the corresponding ones (3.7a3.7f) that we have

26

obtained within heterotic mtheory. as far as the relation of the two orbifold planes is concerned,

the general discussion in subsection 3.3 applies. anomaly cancellation works independently on both

planes and the subsequent discussion should be applied to either one of them.

let us rst discuss the vanishing anomaly coecients in our list. from eq. (4.23a4.23f) those
are the cubic anomalies for the hn part of the gauge group, the mixed gravitational anomaly of
hn and the mixed anomaly of one hn eld with two u (1) elds. in particular, we conclude that
the semisimple part of the orbifold gauge groups always has to be anomalyfree. this structure

of vanishing coecients is the same as in heterotic mtheory as given in eqs. (3.7a3.7f).

in

both cases we remain with three types of nonvanishing coecient. while the structure of those

remaining coecients is similar, there are also some signicant dierences. to discuss these it is

useful to distinguish various classes of parameters that determine those coecients. first, there

is topological data of the calabiyau space, namely the second chern class of the calabiyau

tangent bundle i and the intersection numbers dijk. clearly this data is determined in terms
of the underlying compactication in both cases and it enters the respective formulae in a very
similar way. secondly, there are the coecients i and i
na. they appear in a very similar way
in the anomaly coecients, but their interpretation is dierent in the two cases. while they are

determined in terms of topological data of the internal vector bundles in the case of heterotic m

theory, they are merely just parameters here. while the i parameterize the nonzero mode that
we have put in to compactify 11dimensional supergravity, the i
na appear as free parameters in
our ansatz (4.19) for the sources in the bianchi identities. thirdly, we have the parameters kn,
hnab and ln that appear in the ansatz (4.18) for the sources. those parameters arise because of our
lack of knowledge about the precise form of the bianchi identity for the fourform g in the present

case. in heterotic mtheory they were determined exactly, as comparison of the ansatz (4.18) with

eq. (2.36) shows.

as a result, we have a number of signicant dierences with respect to the earlier discussions.

some numerical freedom in the anomaly coecient as compared to heterotic mtheory is in-
troduced by the arbitrariness of the second group of parameters, that is, i and i
na. however,
given that one cannot completely classify the allowed values for those parameters even for heterotic

mtheory (as they depend, for example, on the choice for the calabiyau manifold) it is hard to

quantify this dierence. more signicant are some of the dierences related to parameters in the
third class. we note, however, that hnab can be absorbed into a redenition of the u (1) elds aa
n.
while the parameters ln make the mixed gravitational anomaly (4.23f) more exible, the crucial
dierence comes from the parameters kn in eq. (4.23b). recall, here, that the index  labels
the various simple groups in hn and, according to our above convention, also the various uii (1)
factors of type ii in hn. the presence of the parameters kn indicates that the mixed ui (1) gauge
anomaly (4.23b) can be dierent for each of those factors. such a nonuniversal mixed anomaly

27

is rather dierent from what we found in heterotic mtheory (compare with eq. (3.7b) where it

was always gaugefactor independent. finally, a crucial dierence concerns the size of the orbifold

gauge groups. while, within the context of heterotic mtheory, they are bound to t within e8 on
each plane no such restriction arises in the present context.

to summarize, we have found anomaly cancellation in the setting of this section to be more

exible than in vedimensional heterotic mtheory in two important ways. firstly, nonuniversal

mixed u (1) gauge anomalies are possible. secondly, the orbifold groups are not restricted to t into

e8. it is clear that both generalizations can be of considerable phenomenological importance. an
important question is whether such generalizations have an interpretation in terms of mtheory.

it would be very interesting to search for such an interpretation, for example in the context of

heterotic mtheory models with vebranes [33, 36, 37, 38]. however, we will not pursue this

further in the present paper.

5 heterotic anomaly cancellation in four dimensions

in section 3 we have analyzed e8  e8 heterotic anomaly cancellation from a vedimensional
viewpoint. however, upon dimensional reduction vedimensional heterotic mtheory reproduces
the eective fourdimensional action of the e8 e8 heterotic string [30], at least to oneloop order.
hence, the results for the structure of anomaly cancellation that we found in ve dimensions should

be directly applicable to the fourdimensional theory. this seems rather puzzling, however, since

this structure contradicts in various ways what is commonly assumed about anomaly cancellation
in the fourdimensional e8  e8 heterotic string. usually, it is stated that there is at most one
anomalous u (1) symmetry that extends over the hidden and the observable sector. its quantum

anomaly is supposed to be cancelled exclusively due to a nontrivial transformation law of the dila-

ton supereld. as a consequence of the universal dilaton coupling, in order for such a cancellation

to work, all triangle anomaly coecients (including the cubic and the mixed gravitational one) have

to be in xed proportions. on the other hand, the structure that we found in ve dimensions turned

out to be signicantly more exible. various anomalous u (1) symmetries were possible, hidden

and observable sectors were greatly independent, and some of the triangle anomaly coecients were

generically unrelated. moreover, the cancellation mechanism was due to a transformation of the

vedimensional vector elds, which, from a fourdimensional viewpoint, are associated with the

t moduli rather than with the dilaton. as we will see, these discrepancies are resolved by a careful

distinction between u (1) symmetries of type i and type ii and their properties. firstly, however,

we would like to study fourdimensional anomaly cancellation systematically in order to conrm

our previous results and gain some condence. the eective fourdimensional action that we are

going to need for this can be obtained in two ways. firstly one can reduce the 10dimensional

28

e8  e8 heterotic action on a calabiyau threefold to four dimensions. secondly, we can start
with the vedimensional heterotic mtheory as given in section 2 and reduce it to four dimensions.

both methods have to agree since the ve and the fourdimensional theories, as well as the 11

and 10 dimensional theories are equivalent. this has been explicitly veried in references [30] and

[46], respectively. here we will use the rst approach, if only to have a better comparison to the

weakly coupled heterotic string.

5.1 the 10dimensional action

we are interested in the part of the 10dimensional e8  e8 heterotic eective action that involve
the twoindex antisymmetric tensor eld b with eld strength h = db +  as well as certain
terms involving the curvature and the e8  e8 gauge elds a with elds strength f . this part of
the action is given by

where

s10 = skin + stop

1
22

10 zm10(cid:20)e2h  h +


4

(trf 2  trr2)(cid:21)

skin = 
stop = kzm10

b  w8 .

here  is the dilaton and the constant k is given by

the nontrivial bianchi identity for h reads

k =

c3

32  275

.

furthermore, the anomaly polynomial w8 has the wellknown form

dh = 


22

(trf 2  trr2) .

(5.1)

(5.2)

(5.3)

(5.4)

(5.5)

.

(5.6)

w8 =

1
24

trf 4 

1

7200(cid:0)trf 2(cid:1)2

1
240



trf 2trr2 +

trr4 +

1
8

1

32(cid:0)trr2(cid:1)2

as usual, tr denotes the trace in the adjoint, while tr = tr/30. it is useful for our purpose to

express the anomaly polynomial in terms of the individual e8 gauge elds an with eld strengths
fn. writing f = f1 + f2, one obtains

w8 =

1

1(cid:1)2
4(cid:0)trf 2

+

1

2(cid:1)2
4(cid:0)trf 2

1
4



trf 2

1 trf 2

2 

1

8(cid:0)trf 2

1 + trf 2

2(cid:1) trr2 +

trr4 +

1
8

1

32(cid:0)trr2(cid:1)2

. (5.7)

we would like to reduce the above theory on a background spacetime

m10 = x  m4

29

(5.8)

where x is a calabiyau threefold with metric4 g10 and curvature twoform r. as far as the
gauge elds are concerned, the background conguration is exactly as described for the reduction

of horavawitten theory. we will not repeat this here but simply refer back to section 2.2.

let us list the relevant zero modes around this background. we dene the breathing modulus

v to be

v =

e2

v zx

g10 .

(5.9)

10 appear in the expansion of the kahler form 10 = ai

the (1, 1) moduli ai
10i in terms of the basis
{i}i=1, ,h1,1 of harmonic (1, 1) forms. for the antisymmetric tensor eld and its eld strength we
write

b = b + ii
h = h + x i  i

(5.10)

(5.11)

where b is the fourdimensional twoform with eld strength h and i, where i = 1, , h1,1 are
axionic scalars with eld strengths x i. we have dropped contributions from (2, 1) modes which
are not important in our context. in terms of fourdimensional multiplets, v and the dual of b
10 and i represent the bosonic eld
form the bosonic part of the dilaton supereld s, whereas ai
content of the t i moduli. for the gauge eld zero modes originating from e8  e8, exactly the
same discussion as in the 11dimensional case applies. we adopt the notation of section 2.3 to

which we refer back for details.

5.2 the fourdimensional eective action

by straightforward calculation, using the above setup, we nd the part of the fourdimensional

eective action relevant for anomaly cancellation

s4 = s4,kin + s4,top

(5.12)

where the kinetic part is given by

s4,kin = 

1
22

4 zm4(cid:2)v 2h  h + 2gij x i  x j(cid:3)
0 zm4

1
4g2



the topological part reads

gv "trf 2

1 + trf 2

(f a)2# .

2 +xa

(5.13)

s4,top = 62kzm4(cid:20)2i i

ab  f a + i(cid:18)itrf 2

1 + itrf 2

2 + fiabf af b +

1
12

itrr2(cid:19)(cid:21) . (5.14)

4here and in the following, the index 10 refers to quantities measured in the 10dimensional string metric, as

opposed to the 11dimensional einstein metric used earlier.

30

from the reduction of the 10dimensional bianchi identity we have for the eld strengths

h = db 
x i = di 

3


22

2v1/3

i
aaa

with the chernsimons form 3 satisfying

d3 = trf 2

1 + trf 2

2 +xa

(f a)2  trr2 .

(5.15)

(5.16)

(5.17)

to simplify the notation, we have used indices a, b, to denote the two e8 factors as well as the
various ui (1) factors. so, for example, a = (na) where n = 1, 2 and a runs over the ui (1) factors
in each sector. correspondingly, we have dened the following shorthand notation

i
a = (i

1a, i

2a) ,

and

i
a = (i

1a, i

2a)

fiab =  1

1ak

62 dijkj
122 dijkj
 1

1b  iab

1ak
2b

122 dijkj
 1
62 dijkj

2b + iab !

1ak
2b

2ak

1

(5.18)

(5.19)

for the various coupling constants in the eective action. the fourdimensional newton constant

4 and the gauge coupling g0 are dened as

2
4 =

2
10
v

,

g2
0 =

22
10
v

.

(5.20)

it is useful to recall the structure of the gauge elds. the lowenergy gauge group gn in each sector
is given by the product

gn = hn  jn ,

(5.21)

where hn contains the semisimple part and the uii (1) generators (which are not part of the
internal structure group) while jn contains the ui (1) generators (which are part of the internal
structure group). gauge elds in hn are denoted by an with eld strengths fn. the ui (1) elds
n or aa and f a in the above index convention.
of type i are denoted by aa
we also recall that the topological numbers i and i, related to the second chern characters of
the internal bundles, have been dened in eq. (2.13) and (2.14), respectively. furthermore, dijk
are the calabiyau intersection numbers (2.20).

n with eld strengths f a

5.3 classical variation of the action

we would now like to compute the classical gauge variation of the above action. we introduce the
transformation parameters a for the ui (1) elds aa and the transformation parameters n for

31

the gauge elds an in hn. furthermore, we will need the spin connection w and the associated
transformation parameter l. we write explicitly

aa = da
an = dn + ann  nan
w = dl + wl  lw .

(5.22)

(5.23)

(5.24)

it is useful to note the resulting transformation of the chernsimons form w3 dened in eq. (5.17).
it is given by

w3 =xa

af a +

2

xn=1

d tr(ndan)  d tr(ldw) .

(5.25)

as before, the nontrivial gauge transformations of antisymmetric tensor elds are triggered by the
bianchi identities (5.15) and (5.16). requiring the eld strengths h and x i to be gauge invariant,

we nd the transformation laws

b =

i =



22 xa

af a +

2

xn=1

tr(ndan)  tr(ldw)!


2

i
aa .

this leads to the following classical variation of the action

cls4 = 322kzm4(cid:26)a(cid:20)i

a(cid:18)itrf 2
+(cid:0)i

afibc + i i

1 + itrf 2

2 +

1
12

itrr2(cid:19)
cab(cid:1)f bf c(cid:21)

+ i i

a [tr(1da1) + tr(2da2)  tr(ldw)] f a(cid:27) .

(5.26)

(5.27)

(5.28)

to understand the structure of this variation and to compare it to the previous results we should

write it in a more explicit form and split all terms explicitly into the two sectors. doing this, one

32

arrives at the somewhat uncomfortable form

cls4 = 322kzm4(cid:26)

a

1atrf 2

1 + ii

1atrf 2

2 +

1abc  ii

1cab +

1bk

1c(cid:19)f b
1f c

1

1(cid:20)  ii
+(cid:18)ii
+(cid:18)ii
+(cid:18)ii
2(cid:20)  ii
+(cid:18)+ii
+(cid:18)ii
+(cid:18)ii

a

2atrf 2

+tr(1da1)(cid:20)  ii
+tr(2da2)(cid:20)  ii
+tr(ldw)(cid:20)ii
1af a

ii

1aj

1atrr2

1
12
1
62 dijki
1b2ck(cid:19)f b
1f c
2b2ck(cid:19)f b
2(cid:21)
2f c
2atrr2

ii

2

2cab 

1abc +

1aj

1aj

1
62 dijki
1
62 dijki
2atrf 2

2

2 +

2bk

2aj

2abc +

2cab +

1 + ii

2bac 

1
12
1
62 dijki
1b2ck(cid:19)f b
2aj
1f c
1b1ck(cid:19)f b
1(cid:21)
1f c
2(cid:21)
2aif a
2(cid:21)
2aif a
2(cid:21)(cid:27)
2aif a

2abc  ii
1
62 dijki
1
62 dijki
1 + i
1af a
1af a
1  i

1 + i

2aj

2c(cid:19)f b
2f c

2

(5.29a)

(5.29b)

(5.29c)

(5.29d)

(5.29e)

(5.29f)

(5.29g)

(5.29h)

(5.29i)

(5.29j)

(5.29k)

for the classical variation.

5.4 quantum variation of the action

the fourdimensional eective action that we have computed should be anomalyfree in the same

way as the 10dimensional action that it originates from is. as a consequence, the classical variation

of the action computed above should cancel the quantum variation due to triangle diagrams. as a

check we would like to verify this explicitly.

the triangle anomaly coecients have already been generally dened in eqs. (3.6a3.6f). in

fact, their specic form has to be exactly the same as for the vedimensional heterotic mtheory,

since they depend on the particle content in the gauge sectors only. we can, therefore, just use the

33

result from section 3.2 which we repeat here for convenience

cn = 0
cna = 
cnab = 0
3
cnabc =
c(l)
c(l)
na =

= 0
3

n

1
8

i
nai

8 (cid:20)ii
2 (cid:18)i 

n(abc) +

1
122 dijki

naj

nbk

nc(cid:21)

1
12

i(cid:19) i

na .

(5.30)

(5.31)

(5.32)

(5.33)

(5.34)

(5.35)

the upper (lower) sign refers to the n = 1 (n = 2) sector. in ve dimensions, the quantum variation

was split into two parts, one on each orbifold plane. the fourdimensional quantum variation is,

of course, just the sum of these two parts. from eq. (3.8) it is given by

qs4 =

1

162

2

xn=1zm4

a

n(cid:20)cnatrf 2
n 

1
24c(l)

na trr2 +

1
3cnabcf b

n(cid:21) .
nf c

(5.36)

given that this quantum variation was cancelled by the classical variation of the vedimensional

action (3.5), how can it be cancelled by the signicantly more complicated fourdimensional classical

variation (5.29)? again the answer is related to the ambiguity in the triangle anomaly. the classical

variation (5.29) wants to cancel a quantum variation in a specic regularization. comparing the

fourdimensional classical variation (5.29) with its vedimensional counterpart (3.5) there are two

essential complications. first, in addition to the anomalous variations of the ui (1) elds that we
had in ve dimensions, the fourdimensional expression contains anomalous variations of the hn
parts of the gauge symmetries and gravity as well. secondly, whereas in ve dimensions the terms in

the anomalous variation were naturally split between the two orbifold planes, the fourdimensional

variation contains terms that mix the two sectors.

the rst complication can be accounted for by regularizing the mixed ui (1) gauge and gravi-
tational anomalies in a nonstandard way. usually, this is done such that the ui (1) is anomalous
while the rest of the gauge group and gravity are anomaly free. here we should adopt a mixed

scheme in which all parts become anomalous. rewriting the rst two terms in the quantum varia-

tion (5.36) in such a way, they can be cancelled by the terms in (5.29a), (5.29e) and (5.29i5.29k)

in the classical variation (5.29). to check that this works, one has to verify that the coecients

of the corresponding terms in (5.29a), (5.29e) and (5.29i5.29k) add up to what is required from

the standard form of the anomaly (5.36). this is indeed the case. what about the cubic anomaly

terms? here we can use the same ambiguity and rewrite the last term in the quantum variation

to be cancelled by the remaining terms in (5.29). in particular, in this way one can account for

the terms in (5.29) that mix the two sectors. to see this, one should add up the coecients of

34

corresponding terms in (5.29b5.29d) and (5.29f5.29h). doing this, we see that indeed all mixed

coecients cancel. this is essential, because a real anomaly that mixes the two sectors would

be inconsistent. the two sectors are completely hidden with respect to one another so there are

simply no fermions available that could generate a mixed sector anomaly. we nally conclude that

fourdimensional classical and quantum variations indeed cancel as they should.

5.5 discussion

what is the structure of fourdimensional anomaly cancellation from these results? all the essential

information can be extracted by comparing the general denition of the anomaly coecients (3.6a

3.6f) and their special form (5.30)(5.35) along with the anomalous (quantum) variation which we

can take to be in its standard form (5.36). it is clear, that this leads to exactly the same conclusions

as in the case of heterotic mtheory in ve dimensions.

let us summarize the results from section 3.3 briey. recall that hn consist of the nonabelian
and the uii (1) gauge elds, collectively called an. furthermore, we denote the ui (1) gauge elds
by aa
n, where a = 1, . . . , kn and the graviton is denoted by g. we then refer to a triangle diagram
by specifying the triple of gauge elds to which it couples. then the anomaly structure in each

sector is as follows :

 the hn part of the gauge group is anomalyfree in the sense that the a3

n and angg anomalies

vanish.

nab

nan anomalies vanish.

 the mixed aa
 after a suitable choice of basis there is at most a single ui (1) gauge eld, say a1

n with all
three remaining types of anomalies nonvanishing. that is, we may have anomalies of type
a1
nanan, a1
coecients are given in eq. (3.7b), (3.7d) and (3.7f). the remaining ui (1) factors are free of
mixed gauge anomalies, that is the aa

in terms of the topological data, the associated anomaly

nanan anomaly vanishes for a > 1.

naa

nab

n and a1

ngg.

 the coecient of a1

nanan is independent of which specic gauge eld an within hn is
considered. apart from this restriction, the three nonvanishing anomaly coecients are

generically unrelated.

 after another choice of basis there is at most one among the remaining ui (1) symmetries,
n, with mixed gravitational and cubic anomaly. in other words, the anomalies of type
n can be nonvanishing. again the two associated anomaly coecients are

say a2
ngg and a2
a2
unrelated generically. all other aa

naa

nab

n for a > 2 have cubic anomalies at most.

we have seen that the four and vedimensional pictures are completely consistent with one

another. however, the essential structure is much easier seen in ve dimensions where the two

35

sectors of the theory are located on the orbifold planes and, hence, are neatly separated. what

causes the complication in four dimensions? a reduction on the orbifold is not a simple truncation

of all elds.

in kaluza-klein terms, setting all the y-dependent modes equal to their vacuum

expectation values (zero or other constant values) does not constitute a consistent truncation of
the d = 5 theory down to d = 4.5 instead, what one has to do is to integrate out all the higher

kaluza-klein elds of the bulk theory. this generates interactions across the orbifold and gives

rise, among other things, to the more complicated structure of anomaly terms. in particular, the

resulting d = 4 anomaly structure contains cross terms between the two e8 sectors that from
a purely d = 4 perspective would not appear to be necessary (i.e. they could be removed by

appropriate regularization or renormalization), but which are unavoidable here as a result of the

higher-dimensional anomaly structure.

5.6 dualizing b

usually, the fourdimensional twoform b is dualized to a scalar . while this does not eect the

anomalous variation of the action under gauge symmetries, of course, it is nevertheless instructive

to carry this out explicitly. we write h0 = db and add the term

to the action (5.12)(5.14). then, integrating out h0 we nd

1
2

4 zm4

h0  d

1
22

4 zm4(cid:20) 1

v 2    + 2gijx i  x j(cid:21)



1
4g2

0 zm4

s4,kin = 

and

gv "trf 2

1 + trf 2

(f a)2# .

2 +xa

(5.37)

(5.38)

s4,top =


2

2

4zm4

w3    62kzm4

i(cid:18)itrf 2

1 + itrf 2

2 + fiabf af b +

1
12

itrr2(cid:19) . (5.39)

where the constants i
and x i are given by

a, i

a and fiab have been dened in (5.18)(5.19) and the eld strengths 

 = d + 122k2
x i = di 

2v1/3

4 i i
aaa
i
aaa .



(5.40)

(5.41)

5the lack of kaluza-klein consistency in the 5  4 reduction, with consequent impact upon the d = 4 interaction

structure, should be compared with the essentially consistent reduction from d = 11 to d = 5 on the calabi-

yau manifold.

in the latter case, integration of the higher kaluza-klein modes of the calabi-yau manifold does

not produce corrections in the d = 5 eective action, at least at the level of terms containing no more than two

derivatives [47].

36

recall here that  is the axionic part of the dilaton supereld s while i are the axions in the t i

moduli. as usual, the two last equations can be used to deduce gauge transformation laws for the

dilaton and the t moduli (for the t moduli the transformation has been given in eq. (5.27)) by

requiring the eld strengths to be gauge invariant. we see that also the dilaton transforms non

trivialy, in general, as did its dual b. however, unlike for the t moduli, the dualized action (5.38),

(5.39) is invariant under this transformation of the dilaton since it depends only on the eld strength

. in particular, the universal coupling of the dilaton to the gauge elds is not given by dw3 but
by w3. hence we see that the anomaly cancellation is essentially controlled by the transformation
of the t moduli. this works thanks to the wellknown t i dependent threshold correction to the

gauge kinetic function, of which the second part of eq. (5.39) represents the imaginary part.

5.7 relation to the usual picture

finally, we should discuss how the above results relate to the usual picture of fourdimensional

heterotic anomaly cancellation. to do this, it is useful to review the standard argument given in

the literature [13]. one starts with the 10dimensional greenschwarz term, i.e. roughly with an

expression of the form

b  f 4 .

(5.42)

taking three of the gauge elds to be internal and the remaining one to be external, this leads to

a fourdimensional term of the form

where b is the fourdimensional twoform, f = da is a fourdimensional u (1) gauge eld strength

and c is some coecient. dualizing b to the axion eld , the above term becomes

cb  f

(5.43)

ca .

(5.44)

in analogy with the previous subsection, this term shows that  should be transformed under the
gauge symmetry associated to a. due to the coupling f 2 and r2 of the dilaton to all gauge

elds and gravitation this then leads to an anomalous classical variation that should cancel the

u (1) triangle anomalies associated to a. from this line of reasoning a number of properties of the

quantum anomaly can be deduced. it should be universal, that is, it should be the same for all

factors of the gauge group and for gravity. in particular, this includes the hidden and the observable

gauge group. the reason for this property is the universal coupling of the dilaton. furthermore,

there is at most one such anomalous u (1) symmetry. this is the standard reasoning.

there are two hidden assumptions in the above line of argument. first, it is assumed that only

the dilaton, but not the t moduli, vary under the a gauge symmetry. secondly, it is assumed

37

that the coecient c in (5.43) is nonzero. the rst assumption necessarily implies that the u (1)

symmetry in question is of type ii. otherwise (if it were type i) the u (1) would be part of the
internal structure group. from the trf 2 terms in the (10dimensional) bianchi identity with one f
external and the other internal, this would then lead to a term proportional to a in the t i bianchi
identities. in other words, a would appear on the right hand side of eq. (5.41) and hence the t i

would have to transform under the u (1) symmetry. we have assumed that this is not the case

and, hence, we are dealing with a type ii symmetry. on the other hand, we have shown that the

type ii symmetries are always anomaly free. this must mean that the coecient c in eq. (5.43) is

zero and, therefore, the second assumption above is violated. in fact, it is easy to understand why

c vanishes for type ii symmetries [17]. the only term in the anomaly polynomial (5.6) that could
lead to a coupling (5.43) is the rst term proportional to tr(f 4). this is because an expression
of the form tr( f f) involving the internal eld strength f always vanishes if f is of type ii. on
the other hand, it is known that e8 has no independent quartic invariant. as a consequence,
the anomaly polynomial can be written in terms of second order invariants only, as it has been

done in eq. (5.7). this explains why c is always zero for uii (1) symmetries and, hence, why
the coupling (5.43) does not exist in this case 6. to summarize, we have found that one of the

assumptions in the standard argument is not satised and, hence, that the conclusions about the
structure of lowenergy anomaly cancellation do not apply to the e8  e8 case. essentially, the
statement is that the conventional anomaly properties described above apply to an anomalous type

ii u (1) symmetry. while for the so(32) heterotic theory type i as well as type ii u (1) symmetries
can be anomalous, we have seen that type ii symmetries are always anomalyfree in the e8  e8
case. using the standard (type ii) assumptions about anomalous u (1) symmetries for e8  e8
means, therefore, applying them to an empty set. on the other hand, we have seen that type i
u (1) symmetries can be anomalous in the e8  e8 case and that their properties are quite dierent
from the usual ones.

6 phenomenological issues

6.1 model building with anomalous u(1) symmetries

from the perspective of lowenergy model building it is an important question as to which anoma-

lous u (1) symmetries (with the quantum anomaly being cancelled by the greenschwarz mecha-

nism) can be added to the mssm (or extensions thereof) within the context of heterotic string or

mtheory eective actions. this question is answered by our results for the anomaly coecients.
we remind the reader, that, within each sector, we have split our lowenergy gauge groups gn,
6this is dierent for the so(32) heterotic theory where there exists an independent fourth order invariant. in

fact, the standard embedding leads to an example of an anomalous type ii symmetry in this case [13].

38

where n = 1, 2 labels the observable and the hidden sectors, into two parts, namely

gn = hn  jn

(6.1)

here hn contains the complete semisimple part of the gauge group as well as the u (1) symmetries
of type ii. the jn part, on the other hand, contains the u (1) factors of type i. the generators of
hn are generically called tn, with the associated gauge elds an. the jn generators are denoted
by qa
n, where a runs over the various u (1) factors in jn. in eqs. (3.6a3.6f)
we have dened in general all possible anomaly coecients between those two parts of the gauge
group and also with gravity. their specic forms within e8  e8 models, in terms of data related
it is these latter equations
to the underlying compactication, has been given in (5.30)(5.35).

n with gauge elds aa

that constitute the crucial input for anomalous u (1) model building in the bottom up approach.
recall that, from those coecients, the hn parts of the gauge group are anomalyfree while the jn
contain the potentially anomalous u (1) symmetries. the generic structure of the anomalous u (1)
symmetries in jn that results has been discussed in section 5.5. here we would like to comment
on a few specic aspects conceivably relevant for model building.

a general feature of our structure is the independence of the observable and the hidden sector.

for example, one may have two anomalous u (1) symmetries, one in each sector, with generically

unrelated anomaly coecients. this could conceivably be important for relevant hidden sector

physics such as supersymmetry breaking. we also gain some exibility in the observable sector.
the anomaly coecients for the mixed gauge anomaly (aa
nanan diagrams), the mixed gravitational
anomaly (aa
n diagrams) are
generically unrelated. there can also be more than one anomalous u (1) symmetry in the observable

ngg diagrams where g is the graviton) and the cubic anomaly (aa

nab

nac

sector.

a radical new feature would have been the possibility of having mixed u (1) gauge anomaly
coecients (aa
nanan diagrams) depending on the gauge group factor within hn. however, as we
have shown these anomaly coecients are always gaugefactor independent in heterotic string

theory or mtheory. in our more general vedimensional approach, adopted in section 4, we have,

however, found that such a possibility can be realized. although the associated vedimensional

models are anomalyfree by construction, it is not yet clear whether or not they are part of m

theory. it is conceivable that they can be obtained in the context of heterotic mtheory vacua with

vebranes [33, 36, 37, 38].

6.2 special classes of compactications

so far, we have discussed the generic structure of anomaly cancellation. this is the structure that

arises without any further information about the details of the compactication. within a given

class of compactications, however, the information can be much more precise. technically speak-

39

ing, for such a class of compactications one typically has some additional information about the

topological numbers that determine the anomaly coecients via the relations (5.30)(5.31). this

in turn, restricts the structure of the anomaly coecients and, hence, the structure of anomalous

u (1) symmetries within the given class.

as an illustration of this, let us present an example. a special role within heterotic mtheory

is played by vacua for which the topological numbers i, dened in eq. (2.13), vanish. such vacua
are also called symmetric. recently, it has been shown [39] that such vacua based on calabiyau
threefolds indeed exist 7. the characteristic property of lowenergy theories based on symmetric

vacua is the vanishing of the oneloop corrections to the fourdimensional eective action.

in

our context, we can use eq. (5.30)(5.35) to derive the special anomaly structure associated to

symmetric vacua. we simply have to set i = 0 in those equations. as the most remarkable
simplication, we then nd from eq. (5.31) that the mixed gauge anomalies (aa
nanan diagrams)
vanish in this case. that is, within eective theories originating from symmetric vacua, the ui (1)
symmetries of type i may have at most mixed gravitational and cubic anomalies.

6.3 fayetilliopolous terms

an important question in the context of anomalous u (1) symmetries concerns the possible asso-

ciated fi terms. the structure that we have found is suciently dierent from the usual one to

reanalyze the question.

as usual, the fi terms can be read o from the d = 4, n = 1 kahler potential. the moduli
10 +i2i.

superelds are dened in terms of their bosonic components as s = v +i2 and t i = ai
with these denitions, using the kinetic terms (5.38) along with eq. (5.40) and (5.41), we nd for

the moduli kahler potential k

2

4 k =  ln(cid:20) 1

6

dijk(cid:18)t i + t i 


v1/3 i
22caaa(cid:19) .

4c3
2

 ln(cid:18)s + s +

aaa(cid:19)(cid:18)t j + t j 


v1/3 j

bab(cid:19)(cid:18)t k + t k 


v1/3 k

cac(cid:19)(cid:21)

(6.2)

recall that the indices a = (na) run over the two sectors as well as over the various ui (1) symme-
tries in each sector. let us rst focus on the t part of this kahler potential. expanding to linear

order in the gauge elds, we nd that the fi terms from this part are proportional to

dijki

aajak

(6.3)

where ai  ai

10 are the (1, 1) moduli. we have seen in eq. (2.19), however, that the (1, 1) moduli
7it should be said that the examples of ref. [39] do not directly apply to the present situation since they were
restricted to calabiyau spaces with h1,1 = 1. however, one expects symmetric vacua to exist for some calabiyau
spaces with h1,1 > 1.

40

are constrained in such a way that these expressions vanish [12]. hence, we conclude that the t

part of the kahler potential does not lead to fi terms.

what about the dilaton part? we nd

sfi = 

2

xn=1zm4

g nada

n

where the coecients a are given by

na =

c3m 2g2

0(re(s))1
162

cna .

(6.4)

(6.5)

here m is the reduced planck mass with m 2 = 2
4 . the anomaly coecient cna is related to
the mixed u (1) gauge anomaly (aa
nanan diagrams). this coecient has been generally dened in
eq. (3.6b) and its specic form has been given in eq. (5.31). the result (6.5) is very reminiscent of

the one usually given in the literature [13, 15, 16, 18]. however, there are some crucial dierences.

usually, it is assumed that all anomaly coecients have to be in xed proportions to one another.

the fi term can then be expressed in terms of either one of them. here we have seen that the

anomaly coecients for the mixed gauge, the mixed gravitational and the cubic anomaly are, in

fact, generally dierent. what we have found is that it is the mixed gauge anomaly coecient that

determines the size of the fi term. we have also seen that, after a suitable choice of basis, there

can be one u (1) symmetry with a mixed gauge anomaly per sector. this means that we potentially

have two fi terms, one for the observable the other one for the hidden sector. in particular, one

could have a situation with only a hidden sector fi term. the exibility gained this way could

conceivably be useful for some purposes such as dterm inationary model building.

6.4 threshold corrections

another related question concerns the threshold corrections to the gauge kinetic function, partic-

ularly for the ui (1) elds. these can be read o from the action (5.14). the relevant part of the
action can be written in the form

sthreshold = 

s
4g2

0 zm4

where the strong coupling expansion parameter s is given by

im(t i)(cid:0)itrf 2

1 + itrf 2

2 + fiabf af b(cid:1) .

(6.6)

(6.7)

s =(cid:16) 

4(cid:17)2/3 2c2

.

v2/3

this implies the usual result for the gauge kinetic functions of the hn parts of the gauge group
namely

fn = s  sit i .

41

(6.8)

for the ui (1) elds of type i we nd

fab = s ab + sfiabt i .

(6.9)

the coecients fiab were explicitly dened in eq. (5.19). note that the index a = (na) runs
over the two sectors as well as the various ui (1) symmetries. generally, the coecients fiab have
odiagonal pieces that mix type i ui (1) elds from the observable and the hidden sector.

acknowledgments a. l. would like to thank graham ross for discussions. a. l. is supported

by the european community under contract no. fmrxct 960090. the work of k.s.s. was

supported in part by pparc under spg grant 613.

appendix

a calculation of anomaly coecients

in this appendix, we would like to be more explicit about the calculation of the triangle anomaly

coecients (3.7a3.7f) using standard technology [34, 35]. we start by listing some useful trace
properties. for an e8  e8 gauge eld f we have

tr(f 6) =

1
48

tr(f 2)tr(f 4) 

1

14400 (cid:0)tr(f 2)(cid:1)3

where tr is the trace in the adjoint and we dene as usual tr = tr/30. using a standard trick, we
write f = t +  f where t and f are in e8  e8 and  and  are arbitrary coecients. inserting
this into the above formula and extracting the 33 term we nd

(a.1)

(a.2)

(a.3)

tr(t 3 f 3) =

tr(t f 3)tr(t 2) +

1
240

tr( f 2)tr( f t 3) +

1
80

tr(t f )tr(t 2 f 2)

1
240


1

tr(t 2)tr(t f )tr( f 2) 

24000

1

36000(cid:0)tr(t f )(cid:1)3 .

furthermore we need the e8 relation

tr(f 4) =

1

100(cid:0)trf 2(cid:1)2

where f is now an e8 gauge eld. inserting f = t +  f , as above, where t and f are now in
e8 we nd from the 3 and the 22 terms

tr(t f 3) =

tr(t 2 f 2) =

1
100
1

tr(t f )tr( f 2)

150(cid:0)tr(t f )(cid:1)2 +

42

1
300

tr(t 2)tr( f 2) .

(a.4)

(a.5)

the above relations are useful to express the anomaly coecients in terms of compactication data.

to see this let us dene the generic coecient

c(t ) =xr

n r

n trlr

n(t 3)

(a.6)

for some e8  e8 generator t . using the index theorem (2.28) this can be put into the form

c(t ) =

1

6(2)3 zx(cid:20)tr(t 3 f 3) 

1
8

tr(t 3 f )tr r2(cid:21) ,

(a.7)

where f and r are the internal yangmills and gravity curvatures. we can rewrite this expression
using eq. (a.2). then choosing the generator t to be part of one of the e8 factors, that is t = tn,
and using eqs. (a.4) and (a.5) we can simplify this further. finally, with the denition of the

topological numbers and the internal gauge elds given in section 2.2 we nd for the anomaly

coecient

c(tn) =

3

8 (cid:20)tr(t 2

n )tr(tnqa

n)i

nai +

1
122 tr(tnqa

n)tr(tnqb

n)tr(tnqc

n)i

naj

nbk

ncdijk(cid:21) .

(a.8)

a similar calculation can be carried out for the coecient relevant for the mixed gravitational

anomaly dened by

c(l)(tn) =xr

n r

n trlr

n(tn) .

(a.9)

then, choosing tn appropriately in these formulae, one derives the various anomaly coecients
(3.7a3.7f).

references

[1] m. b. green and j. h. schwarz, phys. lett. b149 (1984) 117.

[2] c. callan and j. a. harvey, nucl. phys. b250 (1985) 427.

[3] j. blum and j. a. harvey, hep-th/9310035, nucl. phys. b416 (1994) 119.

[4] m. j. du, j. t. liu, r. minasian, hep-th/9506126, nucl. phys. b452 (1995) 261.

[5] p. horava and e. witten, hep-th/9510209, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 506.

[6] p. horava and e. witten, hep-th/9603142, nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 94.

[7] k. dasgupta and s. mukhi, hep-th/9512196, nucl. phys. b465 (1996) 399.

[8] e. witten, hep-th/9512219, nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 383.

43

[9] a. sen, hep-th/9602010, phys. rev. d53 (1996) 6725.

[10] a. sen, hep-th/9603113, mod. phys. lett. a11 (1996) 1339.

[11] m. faux, d. lust and b. a. ovrut, hep-th/9903028, nucl. phys. b554 (1999) 437.

[12] m. dine, n. seiberg, x. g. wen and e. witten, nucl. phys. b289 (1987) 319.

[13] m. dine, n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl. phys. b289 (1987) 589.

[14] w. lerche, b. e. w. nilsson and a. n. schellekens, nucl. phys. b289 (1987) 609.

[15] j. attick, l. dixon and a. sen, nucl. phys. b292 (1987) 109.

[16] m. dine, i. ichinose and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b293 (1987) 253.

[17] j. distler and b. greene, nucl. phys. b304 (1988) 1.

[18] m. dine and c. lee, nucl. phys. b336 (1990) 317.

[19] t. kobayashi and h. nakano, hep-th/9612066, nucl. phys. b496 (1997) 103.

[20] j. march-russell, hep-ph/9806426, phys. lett. b437 (1998) 318.

[21] z. lalak, s. pokorski and s. thomas, hep-ph/9807503, nucl. phys. b549 (1999) 63.

[22] p. binetruy, c. deayet, e. dudas and p. ramond, hep-th/9807079, phys. lett. b441 (1998)

163.

[23] l. e. ibanez, r. rabadan and a. m. uranga, hep-th/9808139, nucl. phys. b542 (1999) 112.

[24] e. poppitz, hep-th/9810010, nucl. phys. b542 (1999) 31.

[25] z. lalak, s. lavignac and h. p. nilles, string dualities in the presence of anomalous u (1)

symmetries, bonn-th-99-06, hep-th/9903160.

[26] l. e. ibanez, r. rabadan and a. m. uranga, sigma model anomalies in compact d = 4,

n = 1 type iib orientifolds and fayetilliopoulos terms, ftuam-99-14, hep-th/9905098.

[27] l. e. ibanez and f. quevedo, anomalous u (1)s and proton stability in brane models,

ftuam-99-4, hep-ph/9908305.

[28] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut, k.s. stelle and d. waldram, hep-th/9803235, phys. rev. d59 (1999)

086001.

[29] j. ellis, z. lalak, s. pokorski and w. pokorski, hep-ph/9805377, nucl. phys. b540 (1999)

149.

44

[30] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut, k. s. stelle and d. waldram, hep-th/9806051, nucl. phys. b552

(1999) 246.

[31] k. benakli, hep-th/9805181, phys. lett. b447 (1999) 51.

[32] s. stieberger, hep-th/9807124, nucl. phys. b541 (1999 109.

[33] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, hep-th/9808101, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 106005.

[34] e. witten, phys. lett. b149 (1984) 351.

[35] m. b. green, j. h. schwarz and e. witten, superstring theory, vol. 2, cambridge university

press (1987).

[36] r. donagi, a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, hep-th/9811168, j. high energy phys. 05

(1999) 018.

[37] r. donagi, a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, hep-th/9901009, j. high energy phys. 06

(1999) 034.

[38] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, hep-th/9901017, j. high energy phys., 04 (1999)

009.

[39] a. lukas and b. a. ovrut, symmetric vacua in heterotic mtheory, outp-99-37-p, hep-

th/9908100.

[40] p. s. aspinwall, hep-th/9707014, adv.theor.math.phys 1 (1998) 127.

[41] j. o. conrad, hep-th/9708031, phys. lett. b421 (1998) 119.

[42] t. harmark, hep-th/9802190, phys. lett. b431 (1998) 295.

[43] m. b. green and m. gutperle, hep-th/9701093, nucl. phys. b498 (1997) 195.

[44] m. b. green, m. gutperle and p. vanhove, hep-th/9706175, phys. lett. b409 (1997) 177.

[45] s. ferrara, r. r. khuri and r. minasian, hep-th/9602102, phys. lett. b375 (1996) 81.

[46] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, hep-th/9801087, nucl. phys. b540 (1999) 230.

[47] m.j. du, s. ferrara, c.n. pope and k.s. stelle, nucl. phys. b333 (1990) 783.

[48] r. delbourgo and a. salam, phys. lett. b40 (1972) 381; t. eguchi and p. freund, phys. rev.

lett. 37 (1976) 1251.

[49] l. alvarez-gaume and e. witten, nucl.phys. b234 (1984) 269.

45

