su-itp-99-48
hep-th/9911002

9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
2

 

 
 

1
v
2
0
0
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the holographic principle for general backgrounds

raphael bousso

department of physics, stanford university, stanford, california 94305-4060
bousso@stanford.edu

abstract.

we aim to establish the holographic principle as a universal law, rather than a
property only of static systems and special space-times. our covariant formalism
yields an upper bound on entropy which applies to both open and closed surfaces,
independently of shape or location.
it reduces to the bekenstein bound whenever
the latter is expected to hold, but complements it with novel bounds when gravity
dominates.
in particular, it remains valid in closed frw cosmologies and in the
interior of black holes. we give an explicit construction for obtaining holographic
screens in arbitrary space-times (which need not have a boundary). this may aid the
search for non-perturbative denitions of quantum gravity in space-times other than
ads.

based on a talk given at strings 99 (postdam, germany, july 1999). more details,

references, and examples can be found in refs. [1, 2].

1. entropy bounds, holographic principle, and quantum gravity

how many degrees of freedom are there in nature, at the most fundamental level? in
other words, how much information is required to specify a physical system completely?
the world is usually described in terms of quantum elds living on some curved
background. a planck scale cuto divides space into a grid of planck cubes, each
containing a few degrees of freedom. applied to a spatially bounded system of volume
v , this reasoning would seem to imply that the number of degrees of freedom, ndof , is
of the order of the volume, in planck units:

ndof(v )  v.

(1.1)

manifestly, the thermodynamic entropy of a system cannot exceed the number of degrees
of freedom: s  ndof. one might expect maximally disordered systems to saturate the
inequality, whence

smax(v )  v.

(1.2)

this conclusion, however, will have to be rejected when gravity is taken into
account. the overwhelming majority of states have so much energy that the system

 strictly, we dene ndof to be the logarithm of the number of independent basis elements of the
quantum hilbert space.

the holographic principle for general backgrounds

2

will be inside its own schwarzschild radius. if gravitational stability is demanded, these
states will be excluded and the maximal entropy will be much lower than in eq. (1.2).
guided by the second law of thermodynamics, bekenstein [3] obtained a quantitative
result in 1981. for spherically symmetric thermodynamic systems it implies that

s(v )  a/4,

(1.3)

where a is the surface area of the system in planck units. this result does not depend
on the detailed properties of the system and can thus be applied to any spherical
volume v of space in which gravity is not dominant. the bound is saturated by the
bekenstein-hawking entropy associated with a black hole horizon. in other words, no
stable spherical system can have a higher entropy than a black hole of equal size.

the bekenstein bound does not refer to the degrees of freedom underlying the
entropy, so one might think that it leaves the earlier conclusion, eq. (1.1), intact.
all expected degrees of freedom, a few per planck volume, may well be there; the
only problem is that if too many of them are used for generating entropy (or storing
information) the system collapses under its own gravity.

however, a stronger interpretation was proposed by t hooft [4] and susskind [5]:
degrees of freedom that cannot be utilized should not be considered to exist. thus the
number of independent quantum degrees of freedom contained in a given spatial volume
v is bounded from above by the surface area of the region:

ndof(v )  a/4

(1.4)

a physical system can be completely specied by data stored on its boundary without
exceeding a density of one bit per planck area. in this sense the world is two-dimensional
and not three-dimensional as in eq. (1.1). for this reason the conjecture is called the
holographic principle.

the holographic principle constitutes an enormous reduction in the complexity of
physical systems and has dramatic conceptual implications. it is far from obvious in a
description of nature in terms of quantum eld theories on curved space. there ought
to be a formulation of the laws of physics in which eq. (1.4) is manifest: a holographic
theory.
it is widely believed that quantum gravity must be formulated as
a holographic theory. this view has received strong support from the ads/cft
duality [68], which denes quantum gravity non-perturbatively in a certain class of
space-times and involves only the physical degrees admitted by eq. (1.4) [9].

indeed,

2. limitations of the original formulation

the holographic principle, eq. (1.4), was proposed as a universal property of theories
that include gravity. it is believed to be necessary for (and perhaps to hold the key to)
the formulation of quantum gravity. in particular, of course, it should apply to common
classical solutions of einsteins equation.

the validity of the bekenstein bound, however, is restricted to systems of limited
self-gravity [3], i.e., systems in which gravity is not the dominant force. indeed, it is

the holographic principle for general backgrounds

3

easy to violate the bound in regions where gravity is dominant, such as a collapsing star.
the surface area becomes arbitrarily small, while the enclosed entropy cannot decrease.
thus eq. (1.3) will not hold. another example is a super-horizon size region in a at
friedmann-robertson-walker (frw) universe [10]. in this system gravity is dominant
in the sense that the overall dynamics is dictated by the cosmological expansion. the
entropy density is constant, and volume grows faster than area. therefore, the entropy
contained in a large enough sphere will exceed the bound.

since s  ndof, the violation of the entropy bound implies that the holographic
principle does not hold in these examples. this means that the principle, as it was
stated above, is not a universal law.

3. light-sheets

the limitations of the original proposals motivate us to seek a new, more general
formulation of the holographic principle and the associated entropy bound. we shall
retain the formula s  a/4 and start by specifying an arbitrary boundary surface a.
the task is to nd a rule that tells us which entropy we mean by s.

3.1. follow the light

we shall be guided by a demand for covariance. given a closed surfacek of area a,
the traditional formulation bounds the entropy on the enclosed volume, or spacelike
hypersurface. but the hypersurface we select will depend on the choice of time coordinate
(fig. 1a). one way to make the statement covariant would be to demand that the
bound hold for all spacelike hypersurfaces enclosed by a. but this possibility is already
excluded by the counterexamples given above. therefore we must use a null hypersurface
bounded by a, following fischler and susskind (fs) [10]. (several concepts crucial to a
light-like formulation were recognized earlier in ref. [16].)

generalizing from the simple example shown in fig. 1b, it is easy to see that
in fact every 2-dimensional surface, regardless of shape or size, bounds exactly four
null hypersurfaces. they may be contructed by following the past- and future-directed
orthogonal lightrays leaving the surface on either side. but which of the four should be
selected for the entropy bound? and how far should the light-rays be followed?

3.2. go inside

fs [10] considered spherical areas and proposed that the past-directed ingoing null
hypersurface be used. the resulting entropy bound works well for large regions in at

 this diers from a more conservative approach taken in refs. [1115] which aimed to establish the
range of validity of the bekenstein bound in certain cosmological solutions. our formalism is able to
resolve this interesting question as a special case (see sec. 5).
k by a surface we mean a surface at some xed time, i.e., a 2-dimensional spatial submanifold. we
do not mean the history of a surface (which would be 2 + 1-dimensional).

the holographic principle for general backgrounds

4

time

space

v
1

v2

a

a

(a)

(b)

a

(c)

        (d1)   (d2)    (d3)

figure 1. [in (a,b) we have suppressed one spatial dimension (surface  line).
in (c,d) we have suppressed two (surface  point). a xed light-like angle
separates spacelike and timelike directions.]

the spatial volume v enclosed by a surface a depends on time slicing (a).
thus the original formulation of the holographic principle was not covariant.
however, a is the 2d boundary of four 2+1d light-like hypersurfaces (b). they
are covariantly generated by the past- and future-directed light-rays going to
either side of a. e.g., for a normal spherical surface they are given by two
cones and two skirts (b).

in a penrose diagram, where spheres are represented by points, the
associated null hypersurfaces show up as the 4 legs of an x (c). null
hypersurfaces with decreasing cross-sectional area, such as the two cones in
(b), are called light-sheets. the entropy passing through them cannot exceed
a/4 (covariant entropy bound).

the light-sheets for normal (d1), trapped (d2), and anti-trapped (d3)
if gravity is weak, as in (b), the light-sheet
spherical surfaces are shown.
directions agree with our intuitive notion of inside (d1). for surfaces in
a black hole interior, both of the future-directed hypersurfaces collapse (d2).
near the big bang, the cosmological expansion means that the area decreases
on both past-directed hypersurfaces (d3).

in closed or
frw universes, to which the bekenstein bound could not be applied.
collapsing space-times, however, the fs bound is not valid [10, 14]. at the root of this
diculty lies the ambiguity of the concept of inside in curved, dynamic space-times.
for a closed surface in asyptotically at space, the denition seems obvious: inside is
the side on which innity is not. but what if space is closed? for example, which side
is inside the equatorial surface (an s 2) of a three-sphere?

we propose a dierent denition which is unambiguous, local, and covariant. inside
is where the cross-sectional area decreases. consider a two-sphere in at space (fig. 2a).
let us pretend that we do not know which side is inside. we can make an experiment to
nd out. we measure the area of the surface. now, we move every point of the surface
by some xed innitesimal distance along surface-orthogonal rays (radial rays in this
case), to one particular side. if this increases the area, it was the outside. if the area

the holographic principle for general backgrounds

has decreased, we have gone inside.

a

(a)

a

increasing area decreasing area

caustic

(b)

a


5

a

[time and one spatial dimension are suppressed.] we dene the
figure 2.
inside of a 2d surface a to be a light-like direction along which the cross-
sectional area decreases (a): a  a, or equivalently,   0. such light-rays
generate 2+1d light-sheets, the entropy on which is bounded by a/4.

this denition can be applied to open surfaces as well (b). light-sheets end
on caustics, as  becomes positive there. if one stops earlier, the bound can be
strengthened to (a  a)/4 [17].

it is useful to introduce a slightly more formal language. the expansion  of a
family of light-rays is dened as the logarithmic derivative of the innitesimal cross-
sectional area spanned by a bunch of neighbouring light-rays [18,19]. thus  is positive
(negative) if the cross-sectional area is locally increasing (decreasing). so the inside
condition is simply:

  0.

(3.1)

in other words, those light-rays leaving a with negative or zero expansion generate an
inside null hypersurface bounded by a, which we call a light-sheet. the entropy on a
light-sheet will not exceed a/4.

if the expansion is positive for the future-directed light-rays to one side, it will
be negative for the past-directed light-rays to the other side and vice-versa. therefore
at least two of the four directions will be allowed.
if the expansion is zero in some
directions, three or even all four null hypersurfaces will be light-sheets.

it turns out that our covariant denition of inside has unexpectedly paved the
way for a vast generalization of the formalism of holography and entropy bounds: in
contrast to the naive denition, there is no need for the surface a to be closed.
it
works just as well for open surfaces, selecting at least two of the four null hypersurfaces
bounded by a. this is illustrated in fig. 2b. in fact the denition is local, so that we
can split a surface into innitesimal area elements and construct allowed hypersurfaces
piece by piece. (this permits us to assume, without loss of generality, that the inside
directions are continuous on a; if they ip, we split a into suitable domains.)

3.3. know when to stop

how far do we follow the light-rays? we need a rule telling us, for example, to stop at
the tip of each of the cones in fig. 1b. otherwise, the light-rays would go on to generate
another cone which could become arbitrarily large. this is clearly undesirable.

the holographic principle for general backgrounds

6

an elegant and economical feature of the decreasing area rule is that it has already
resolved this question. we simply insist that   0 everywhere on the null hypersurface,
not only in the vicinity of a. when neighbouring light-rays intersect, they form a
caustic or focal point (fig. 2b). before the caustic, the cross-sectional area is
decreasing ( < 0); afterwards, it increases and one has  > 0. this forces us to stop
whenever a light-ray reaches a caustic, such as the tip of a light-cone.

3.4. summary

let a be an arbitrary surface. we dene a light-sheet l(a) as a null hypersurface that
is bounded by a and constructed by following a family of light-rays orthogonally away
from a, such that the cross-sectional area is everywhere decreasing or constant (  0).
since the expansion  is a local quantity, the entire construction is local. the
decreasing area rule enters in two ways: we use it to determine the inside directions;
as we stressed above, there will be at least two, and each will yield a distinct light-sheet.
having picked one such direction, we then follow each light-ray no further than to a
caustic, where it intersects with neighbouring light-rays and the area starts to increase.

4. covariant entropy bound and holographic principle

we are now ready to formulate a covariant entropy bound: let a be an arbitrary
surface area in a physical space-time, and let s be the entropy contained on any one
of its light-sheets. then s  a/4.

for spherical surfaces, our conjecture can be viewed as a modication of the fs
bound [10]. it diers in that it considers all four light-like directions without prejudice
and selects some of them by the criterion of decreasing cross-sectional area. unlike
previous proposals, the covariant bound associates entropy-containing regions with any
surface area in any space-time in a precise way. gravity need not be low. the area can
have any shape and need not be closed.

the covariant bound makes no explicit reference to past and future. it is manifestly
invariant under time-reversal.
in a law about thermodynamic entropy, this is a
mysterious feature. it cannot be understood unless we interpret the covariant bound
not only as an entropy bound, but more strongly as a bound on the number of degrees
of freedom that constitute the statistical origin of entropy: ndof  a/4, where ndof is
the number of degrees of freedom present on the light-sheet of a. since no assumptions
about the microscopic properties of matter were made, the limit is fundamental [1].
there simply cannot be more independent degrees of freedom on l than a/4, in planck
units. thus we have obtained a holographic principle for general space-times+.

 this requirement is further discussed in ref. [1], and in the appendix.
+ logically, of course, the entropy bound follows from the holographic principle, since s  ndof . we
have found it interesting to consider the entropy bound rst, because the mystery of its t-invariance
leads naturally to the holographic conjecture. the analogous step had to be considered bold when it
was taken by t hooft [4] and susskind [5], since more conservative interpretations of the bekenstein

the holographic principle for general backgrounds

we summarize our conjectures:

holographic principle:

ndof (light-sheet)  a/4

covariant entropy bound:

s(light-sheet)  a/4

7

(4.1)

(4.2)

their non-trivial content lies in the construction of light-sheets given above.

the bound takes its strongest form when the light-sheet is made as large as possible,
i.e., if we stop only at caustics. it remains correct, but becomes less powerful if we choose
to stop earlier, as this will decrease the entropy on the light-sheet, but not the boundary
area. flanagan, marolf and wald (fmw) [17] have pointed out, however, that the
bound can be strengthened to (aa)/4 in this case. here a is the surface area spanned
by the endpoints of the light-rays (fig. 2b), which goes to 0 as a caustic is approached.
this expression is particularly pleasing because it makes the bound additive over all
directions on the light-sheet, including the transverse (null) direction. in this form the
covariant entropy bound implies the generalized second law of thermodynamics [17].

5. evidence for the conjecture

5.1. the bekenstein bound as a special case

the rst important test is whether the covariant bound implies the bekenstein bound.
the covariant formulation uses null hypersurfaces, so how can it bound the entropy
on spatial volumes, as the bekenstein bound does? the corresponding argument is
it relies on assumptions which can be taken as a denition of
presented in fig. 3.

time

space

l

a

v

figure 3. the covariant bound implies the bekenstein bound. consider a closed
surface a. we expect the bekenstein bound to hold only if a encloses a spatial region
v of limited self-gravity. this allows us to make two assumptions. 1. a possesses
a future-directed light-sheet l going to the side dened by v (otherwise, v would
contain trapped or anti-trapped surfaces, which implies strong gravity). 2. the light-
sheet l has no boundary other than a, i.e., it closes o in the center of the enclosed
region (otherwise, the space-time would end within a light-crossing time, which implies
strong gravity). by causality and the second law, all entropy on the spatial region v
(or more) must pass through the light-sheet; by the second assumption there are no
holes through which it can escape. therefore, s(v )  s(l). by the covariant bound,
s(l)  a/4. thus we obtain the bekenstein bound, s(v )  a/4.

bound were available (see sec. 1). given the covariant bound, on the other hand, the necessity for a
holographic interpretation is much more obvious.

the holographic principle for general backgrounds

8

bekensteins limited self-gravity condition.

as an immediate application, we are able to settle a controversial question which has
received much attention [1115]: in cosmological solutions, what is the largest surface
to which bekensteins bound can be reliably applied? various types of horizons were
suggested and counter-examples found. we have established that the bekenstein bound
holds if the surface permits a complete, future-directed, ingoing light-sheet. this singles
out the apparent horizon, which usually separates a normal from an anti-trapped region.
nevertheless, the claim that the bekenstein bound holds for the apparent horizon [13]
is not always valid [14], since the completeness condition must also be satised [1].

while it yields a precise formulation of the bekenstein bound as a special case,
the covariant entropy bound is more general. we have already stressed that it applies
also to open surfaces. moreover, it is valid in strongly gravitating regions for which no
entropy bounds were previously available (or even hoped for). as an illustration of this
claim, let us test the bound for surfaces deep inside a black hole.

5.2. trapped surfaces and a new type of entropy bound

one can set up a worst-case scenario in which one considers the horizon surface a of
a small black hole at some moment of time. it possesses a future-directed light-sheet
l which will coincide with the horizon as long as no additional matter falls in. far
outside the black hole, we may set up a highly enthropic shell of arbitrary mass. in
order to avoid angular caustics [1], which would terminate parts of the light-sheet, we
assume exact spherical symmetry. entropy will be carried in radial modes and can be
arbitrarily large. the shell is allowed to collapse around the small black hole. when
it reaches the light-sheet, the conguration is already deep inside a much larger black
hole of the shell mass, and no conventional entropy bound applies. one might expect a
violation of the bound, since all of the shell will necessarily squeeze through the radius
of the small black hole and reach the singularity at the center.
it is not dicult to
verify, however, that the light-sheet l ends before any entropy in excess of a/4 passes
though it [1]. if the shell entropy exceeds a/4, the light-sheet will reach r = 0 before all
of the shell does. the bound can be saturated, but not exceeded. thus we see that for
trapped surfaces, the covariant formalism implies genuinely new entropy bounds, which
could not have been anticipated from the original formulation.

5.3. the closed universe

it is particularly instructive to verify the covariant bound for a closed, matter-dominated
frw universe, to which the fs bound [10] could not be applied. consider a small two-
sphere near the turn-around time (fig. 4a). the fs bound would consider the entropy
on a light-cone which traverses the large part of the s 3 space (fig. 4b). this would be
almost the entire entropy in the universe and would exceed the arbitrarily small area of
the two-sphere. the covariant bound, on the other hand, considers the entropy on light-
sheets which are directed towards the smaller part (the polar cap). this entropy vanishes

the holographic principle for general backgrounds

9

as the two-sphere area goes to zero [1]. this illustrates the power of the decreasing area
rule.

s3

s.p.

 

)
0
=

(

 

future singularity

 

)

=

(

 

s2

n.p.

e
l
o
p

 

h
t
u
o
s

e
l
o
p

 

h
t
r
o
n

light-sheets

fs

(a)

past singularity

(b)

(c)

figure 4. the closed frw universe. a small two-sphere divides the s3
spacelike sections into two parts (a). the covariant bound will select the small
part, as indicated by the normal wedges (see fig. 1d) near the poles in the
penrose diagram (b). after slicing the space-time into a stack of light-cones,
shown as thin lines (c), all information can be holographically projected towards
the tips of wedges, onto an embedded screen hypersurface (bold line).

5.4. questions of proof

more details and additional tests are found in ref. [1]. no physical counterexample
to the covariant entropy bound is known (see the appendix). but can the conjecture
be proven? in contrast with the bekenstein bound, the covariant bound remains valid
for unstable systems, for example in the interior of a black hole. this precludes any
attempt to derive it purely from the second law. quite conversely, the covariant bound
can be formulated so as to imply the generalized second law [17].

fmw [17] have been able to derive the covariant bound from either one of two sets
of physically reasonable hypotheses about entropy ux. in eect, their proof rules out
a huge class of conceivable counterexamples. because of the hypothetical nature of the
fmw axioms and their phenomenological description of entropy, however, the fmw
proof does not mean that one can consider the covariant bound to follow strictly from
currently established laws of physics [17]. in view of the evidence we suggest that the
covariant holographic principle itself should be regarded as fundamental.

6. where is the boundary?

is the world really a hologram [5]? the light-sheet formalism has taught us how to
associate entropy with arbitrary 2d surfaces located anywhere in any spacetime. but
to call a space-time a hologram, we would like to know whether, and how, all of its
information (in the entire, global 3+1-dimensional space-time) can be stored on some
surfaces. for example, an anti-de sitter world is known to be a hologram [6, 9]. by
this we mean that there is a one-parameter family of spatial surfaces (in this case, the

the holographic principle for general backgrounds

10

two-sphere at spatial innity, times time), on which all bulk information can be stored
at a density not exceeding one bit per planck area. such surfaces will be called screens
of a spacetime. can analogous screens be found in other space-times?

the trick is to slice the 3+1 space-time into a one parameter family of 2+1 null
hypersurfaces h( ). on each null hypersurface h( ), locate the 2d spatial surface
amax( ) of maximum area. unless it lies on a space-time boundary, this surface divides
h( ) into two parts. but the cross-sectional area decreases in both directions away
from amax( ) by construction. thus the entropy on the entire hypersurface h( ) cannot
exceed amax( )/2. in other words, all the physics on h( ) can be described by data
stored on amax( ) at a density not exceeding 1 bit per planck area.

by repeating this construction for all values of the parameter  , one obtains a
one parameter family of 2d screens, amax( ). it forms a 2+1 hypersurface a, which is
embedded in the bulk space-time and on which the entire space-time information can be
stored holographically. as an example, fig. 4c shows the construction of a holographic
screen hypersurface in a closed, matter-dominated frw universe.

other examples can be found in ref. [2]. note that a will depend on the choice
of slicing, and will not always be connected. in minkowski space, one nds that either
one of the two null innities can play the role of a global screen. in global de sitter, one
must use both past and future innity; however, the observable part of de sitter can be
encoded on the event horizon, which forms a null hypersurface of nite area.

7. dreams of a holographic theory

the stunning success of the ads/cft duality [6] has led to speculations that a non-
perturbative denition of quantum gravity would involve theories on holographic screens
in other space-times as well. such hypotheses were vague, however, because no general
denition of holographic screens was available. in particular, it was completely unclear
how holography could be compatible with space-times that had no boundary, such as a
closed frw universe.

what we have shown is that embedded holographic screens exist in any space-
time, and how to construct them. this result lends strong support to the holographic
hypothesis. we hope that it will be of use in the search for a fully general, manifestly
holographic unied theory.

indeed, the structure of screens in cosmological solutions provides interesting
constraints on the general formulation of holographic theories. generically, the screen
area (and thus the number of degrees of freedom of a manifestly holographic theory
dened on screens) will be time-dependent. moreover, the causal character of the screen
hypersurface a can change repeatedly between euclidean and lorentzian.

these pathologies appear to exclude the possibility of formulating a well-dened,
conventional theory on the screens. moreover, in generalizing a screen theory approach
`a la ads one would encounter the basic drawback that the screen itself must be put in
by hand, for example by constraining oneself to asymptotically ads spaces. ideally, all

the holographic principle for general backgrounds

11

geometric features should come out of the theory.

a background-independent holographic theory is likely to require a more radical
approach. we suspect that quantum gravity is a pre-geometric theory containing a
sector from which classical general relativity can be constructed. the recovery of local
physics will likely be highly non-trivial, as can be gleaned from the example of ads/cft
duality. one would need to build the geometry from a pre-geometric set of degrees of
freedom in such a way that the covariant holographic principle is manifestly satised.
this would be the fundamental origin of the principle.

appendix

here we add some comments on the generality of the covariant entropy bound. we also
discuss energy conditions and respond to recent criticism.

classical gravity.
the covariant entropy bound applies to all physical solutions
of classical general relativity. this constitutes an enormous generalization compared
to previous formulations of entropy bounds [3, 10]. we obviously do not mean to
assume that h is exactly zero. rather, the term classical refers to space-times
in which quantum gravitational eects are negligible. this holds for most known
solutions, in particular for cosmology on scales larger than the planck scale, for ordinary
thermodynamic systems, and for black holes on time-scales less than the evaporation
time. the covariant entropy bound (and the bekenstein bound, where applicable)
provides a simple, yet highly non-trivial and powerful relation between area and entropy
in such space-times. this renders nugatory the observation by lowe [20] that the bound,
a/4gh, diverges for h  0.

quantum and semi-classical gravity.
the holographic principle may hold a key to
the non-perturbative formulation of string theory and quantum gravity. this does not
mean that we should expect it to remain useful in the strong quantum regime, where
an approximation to classical geometry need not exist. indeed, the very concept of area
might become meaningless. as we argued above, the fundamental role of the holographic
principle would then be in the recovery of classical relativity from a suitable sector of
a pre-geometric unied theory. in semi-classical gravity, however, there ought to be a
place for the holographic principle. indeed, we are unaware of any semi-classical counter-
examples to the covariant entropy bound. however, the situation is more subtle than in
classical gravity. it is easy to construct apparent problems, but they turn out to stem
from limitations of the semi-classical description, not of the holographic principle.

consider, for example, a sphere just outside a black hole horizon. this surface
possesses a future-directed light-sheet which crosses the horizon and sweeps the entire
interior of the black hole. how much entropy is on the light-sheet? naively, we might
count rst the bekenstein-hawking entropy of the horizon (a/4, which by itself saturates
the bound).
in addition, we might count the ordinary thermodynamic entropy of
the matter which formed the black hole and passes through the interior part of the

the holographic principle for general backgrounds

12

light-sheet. this would lead to a violation. the breakdown is not in the holographic
principle, however, but in our naive interpretation of the semi-classical picture. we
have overcounted. the horizon entropy represents the potential information content of
the system to an observer outside the black hole. the matter entropy represents the
actual information to an observer falling in. the viewpoints are complementary, and it
is operationally meaningless to take a global stance and count both entropies.

resolving lowes objection. lowe [20] has argued that the covariant entropy bound [1]
fails for a semi-classical black hole in thermal equilibrium with a surrounding heatbath.
he considers a surface a on the black hole horizon, which possesses a future-directed
outgoing light-sheet l. two assumptions are made about this set-up [20]. 1) l will
coincide with the black hole horizon forever. 2) the conguration is stable and thus
eternal. by the second assumption, an innite amount of entropy crosses the black hole
horizon. by the rst assumption, this entropy crosses the light-sheet l of a nite area
a. thus, it would seem, the bound is violated.

because black holes have negative specic heat, however, the conguration is
in fact unstable [21]. the black hole decays in a runaway process of accretion or
evaporation. this invalidates lowes second assumption and thus his conclusion. the
static approximation used in ref. [20] breaks down completely within a time of the
order of the black hole evaporation time-scale, m 3. during this time, the bound will
be satised, since no more than the black hole entropy, a/4, gets exchanged in an
evaporation time. (we thank l. susskind for a discussion.)

can lowes criticism be strengthened?
stable semi-classical black holes actually do
exist in ads space. however, they do not provide a counter-example either, because the
global structure of ads does not permit us to pipe information through a black hole as
would be required in order to violate the bound. instead, the hawking radiation forms a
thermal atmosphere around the black hole. no new entropy can be introduced without
increasing the area of the black hole.

it is interesting to note that lowes rst assumption is also problematic. it does
hold, of course, for a classical black hole in vacuum. in a semi-classical equilibrium,
however, the ingoing radiation necessarily possesses microscopic uctuations. they will
get imprinted on the expansion  of the light-sheet generators. thus,  will not vanish
exactly at all times. the 2-term in raychauduris equation eectively provides a bias
towards negative values of :

 = 

1
2

2 + terms which average to zero

(7.1)

we see that the eects of in- and out-going radiation on the expansion will not cancel
out. eq. (7.1) leads to a runaway process in which the light-sheet l departs from the
apparent horizon and collapses.

it is not clear whether, in a baroque twist, one could set up a demon to keep
the black hole at constant size. the demon would have to maintain a position close
enough to the black hole to react to temperature changes by increasing or decreasing

the holographic principle for general backgrounds

13

the matter inux, and it would have to perform this task for a time longer than m 3
without violating the self-consistency of the solution. but even if we assume that this
was possible, and that the black hole could be kept at a constant size, the light-sheet
would collapse due to small uctuations. the black hole horizon might last forever, but
a light-sheet with   0 will not. thus one might be able to transfer an innite amount
of entropy through the horizon, but not through the light-sheet.

further objections. lowe also points out that angular caustics [1] cannot protect the
bound if only radial modes carry entropy. because we shared this concern, however,
we addressed the issue explicitly in sec. 6.2 of the criticized paper [1], where it was
shown that the bound can be saturated, but not exceeded, in the worst-case scenario of
exactly-spherical collapse of an arbitrarily massive shell. the various objections raised
by lowe against the bekenstein bound have previously been answered by bekenstein
and others (see, e.g., refs. [2225]).

conditions on matter.
in particular, we stress that the covariant bound, like the
bekenstein bound, is conjectured to hold only for matter that actually exists in nature.
it thus predicts that the fundamental theory will not contain an exponentially large
number of light non-interacting particles [25] or permit the kind of negative energy
densities that would be needed to break the bound. these requirements are met
both empirically and by current theoretical models.
in this sense we conjecture the
bound to be generally valid. we cannot spell out precise conditions on matter until the
fundamental theory is fully known. its matter content is unlikely to satisfy any of the
usual energy conditions on all scales. however, at the price of making the conjecture
slightly less general than necessary, we can obtain a testable prediction for a huge class
of space-times by demanding the dominant energy condition [1].

a proposed modication.
instead of using the   0 rule to determine where to end
a light-sheet, tavakol and ellis (te) [26] have suggested an interesting modication.
they propose to terminate when generating light-rays depart from the boundary of
the causal past or future of a. basically, this amounts to the following dierence. in
our prescription [1], one stops only when neighbouring light-rays intersect locally, i.e.,
at caustics. the te proposal would be to stop also when non-neighbouring light-rays
intersect. this makes no dierence in spherically symmetric situations, but generically it
leads to smaller light-sheets and thus to a weaker bound. in the absence of any counter-
examples to our formulation [1], and in view of the fmw results [17], this relaxation
does not appear to be necessary.

moreover, the te formulation is not self-consistent unless one gives up one of the
its locality in the area. this is
most attractive features of the light-sheet formalism:
most easily seen by considering (in a nearly empty 2+1d world) a 1d oval surface
a consisting of two half-circles, a1 and a2, joined by long, parallel line segments a3
and a4. non-neighbouring light-rays intersect on a line midway between a3 and a4. if
 we thank ted jacobson for discussions of related ideas.

the holographic principle for general backgrounds

14

one stopped there, the 1+1d light-sheet would take the shape of a roof. now consider
only one of the parallel line segments, a3, by itself.
if we construct its light-sheet
individually, the light-rays will continue indenitely unless they are bent into caustics
by some matter. the entropy on this large light-sheet will be bounded by a3/4. thus,
if we applied the alternative rule [26] to each area element separately, and added up the
resulting bounds, we would recover the covariant entropy bound in our formulation [1].
tavakol and ellis [26] correctly point out that light-sheets can be extremely
complicated structures in inhomogeneous space-times. but this should not motivate us
to change the   0 rule, just as we would not discard the standard model merely because
its application becomes impractically complicated when one is describing an elephant.
of course, it may often be practical to consider the smaller light-sheets suggested by
te. but we are interested mostly in the fundamental theoretical role of the holographic
principle. therefore we advocate its strongest and most general formulation [1, 2, 17].

acknowledgments

[1, 2] appeared,

since refs.
i have enjoyed stimulating discussions and useful
correspondence with many friends and colleagues, including nima arkani-hamed, vijay
balasubramanian, jacob bekenstein, ramy brustein, sean carroll, andrew chamblin,
eanna flanagan, edi halyo, stephen hawking, gary horowitz, ted jacobson, nemanja
kaloper, andrei linde, juan maldacena, don marolf, amanda peet, simon ross,
steve shenker, lee smolin, andy strominger, lenny susskind, reza tavakol, gabriele
veneziano, bob wald, and ed witten.

i would like to thank the organizers of strings 99 for a stimulating meeting.

references

[1] r. bousso: a covariant entropy conjecture. jhep 07, 004 (1999), hep-th/9905177.
[2] r. bousso: holography in general space-times. jhep 06, 028 (1999), hep-th/9906022.
[3] j. d. bekenstein: a universal upper bound on the entropy to energy ratio for bounded systems.

phys. rev. d 23, 287 (1981).

[4] g. t hooft: dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, gr-qc/9310026.
[5] l. susskind: the world as a hologram. j. math. phys. 36, 6377 (1995), hep-th/9409089.
[6] j. maldacena: the large n limit of superconformal eld theories and supergravity. adv. theor.

math. phys. 2, 231 (1998), hep-th/9711200.

[7] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov and a. m. polyakov: gauge theory correlators from noncritical string

theory. phys. lett. b428, 105 (1998), hep-th/9802109.

[8] e. witten: anti-de sitter space and holography. adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 253 (1998), hep-

th/9802150.

[9] l. susskind and e. witten: the holographic bound in anti-de sitter space, hep-th/9805114.

[10] w. fischler and l. susskind: holography and cosmology, hep-th/9806039.
[11] r. easther and d. a. lowe: holography, cosmology and the second law of thermodynamics, hep-

th/9902088.

the holographic principle for general backgrounds

15

[12] g. veneziano: pre-bangian origin of our entropy and time arrow , hep-th/9902126.
[13] d. bak and s.-j. rey: cosmic holography, hep-th/9902173.
[14] n. kaloper and a. linde: cosmology vs. holography, hep-th/9904120.
[15] r. brustein: the generalized second law of thermodynamics in cosmology, gr-qc/9904061.
[16] s. corley and t. jacobson: focusing and the holographic hypothesis. phys. rev. d 53, 6720 (1996),

gr-qc/9602043.

[17] e. e. flanagan, d. marolf and r. m. wald: proof of classical versions of the bousso entropy bound

and of the generalized second law , hep-th/9908070.

[18] s. w. hawking and g. f. r. ellis: the large scale stucture of space-time. cambridge university

press, cambridge, england (1973).

[19] r. m. wald: general relativity. the university of chicago press, chicago (1984).
[20] d. a. lowe: comments on a covariant entropy conjecture, hep-th/9907062.
[21] d. j. gross, m. j. perry and l. g. yae: instability of at space at nite temperature. phys. rev.

d 25, 330 (1982).

[22] j. d. bekenstein: entropy bounds and the second law for black holes. phys. rev. d 27, 2262 (1983).
[23] j. d. bekenstein: entropy content and information ow in systems with limited energy. phys. rev.

d 30, 1669 (1984).

[24] m. schier and j. d. bekenstein: proof of the quantum bound on specic entropy for free elds.

phys. rev. d 39, 1109 (1989).

[25] j. d. bekenstein: non-archimedean character of quantum buoyancy and the generalized second

law of thermodynamics, gr-qc/9906058.

[26] r. tavakol and g. ellis: on holography and cosmology, hep-th/9908093.

