9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
0
3

 

 
 

1
v
1
4
2
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

singletons and neutrinos

christian frnsdal

physics department, university of california,

los angeles, ca 90095-1547 usa

e-mail: fronsdal@physics.ucla.edu

dedicated to the memory of my friend moshe flato.

abstract

the rst half is a rapid review of 30 years of work on physics in anti-
de sitter space, with heavy emphasis on singletons. principal topics
are the kinematical basis for regarding singletons as the constituents of
massless particles, and the eect of (negative) curvature in the infrared
domain. ideas that lead to an alternative to big bang cosmology are
merely sketched. the second half presents new ideas inspired by ex-
perimental results on neutrino oscillations. since leptons are massless
before symmetry breaking it is natural to view them as composite states
consisting of one bose singleton (the rac) and one fermi singleton (the
di). this gives rise to a particular formulation of the phenomenology
of electroweak physics, and strong suggestions for an expansion of the
standard model. an expansion of the higgs sector seems inevitable,
and avor changing symmetry, complete with a new set of heavy vector
mesons, is a very attractive possibility.

1 introduction

this talk is intended as a modest oering to the memory of moshe flato, the
most original physicist that i have known, and my best friend for more than
25 years.

perhaps you will say that moshe was a mathematician as much as he was a
physicist. indeed, he was a professor of mathematics and he created, from noth-
ing, one of the nest departments of mathematical physics anywhere; neverthe-
less, his great passion was physics. others will tell you about some of moshes

2

christian frnsdal

greatest accomplishments in mathematics and in mathematical physics; it falls
on me to summarize his work on the physics of spaces of constant curvature,
an endeavor that is entirely in the realm of physics.

as it happens, this work, on which i shall report, was done in collaboration
with others, including daniel sternheimer and myself, and the early part of
it was initiated before we started to publish together, but moshes inuence
dates back to the beginning.

2 physics in anti-de sitter space

the initial problematics was very simple: the cosmological constant is small,
but it can never be shown, experimentally, to be exactly zero. any value other
than zero is incompatible with the idea that the poincare group is the basic
symmetry group of space time, but it is consistent with a symmetry group
that has the same dimension as the poincare group; all of the most important
concepts of at space physics can be extended to a space of constant curvature
that admits the global action of one of the two de sitter groups, so(3, 2) or
so(4, 1).

this idea was not new in the mid-sixties (see e.g.

[w50, gl, n67]). but
up to that time, of the two possibilities, so(4, 1) had received the most at-
tention although it was known, already, that symmetry under this group leads
unavoidably to spontaneous creation of matter (see e.g. [n68]).

both of us had a great admiration for wigners work [w39] on the unitary
representations of the poincare group that led to the rst classication of ele-
mentary particles, in terms of mass and spin (or helicity). it was very natural
to apply the same philosophy to the classication of elementary particles in
(anti-) de sitter space. the unitary representations of both groups were es-
sentially known at the time (cf. [t, dx] for so(4, 1) and [e] for the discrete
series of so(3, 2); the full unitary dual was calculated only at the end of the
seventies [a79]), but the interpretation in terms of elementary particles was
not yet well developed.

when the problem is approached in this way, then immediately one is led
to favor so(3, 2), the symmetry group of anti-de sitter space (so called later
on, and now abbreviated as ads), over the other alternative. this is because
so(3, 2) has representations that can be associated with elementary particles,
while so(4, 1) does not. the energy spectrum of every unitary representation
of so(4, 1), except the trivial one, is the real line, unbounded in both directions
[s68], and if there is one physical principle that has stood the test of time, it

singletons and neutrinos

3

is the requirement that energy must be bounded below. consequently, all our
work was concerned exclusively with so(3, 2) and anti-de sitter space time.
the choice of so(3, 2) implies a negative curvature. this curvature, in the
cosmological context, is very small, and it was never expected to be measur-
able. our project was not concerned with the magnitude of the cosmological
constant, but merely with the fact that, as a matter of principle, it need not
be zero. it was expected that physics in a space of constant, negative curva-
ture was possible and above all that its elaboration would be very educational.
that it would actually turn out to suggest new types of physical phenomena
was a great surprise.

the rst indication of new physics appeared in connection with massless
particles. it turns out that masslessness is a term that can be applied to
certain irreducible representations of so(3, 2) with as much justication as
in the context of the poincare group [affs]. one instance of masslessness
appears in anti-de sitter electrodynamics [f75].

for the sake of simplicity, i shall not deal directly with realistic maxwell
theory, but instead with the theory of a spinless, massless eld. all the inter-
esting features of a gauge theory are then lost, but the features that i want to
discuss are not. (the realistic picture involves gupta-bleuler triplets and inde-
composable representations [f75, ff88].) in at space free (spinless) photons
are associated with an irreducible representation of the poincare group; this
particular representation has the interesting property of having a unique ex-
tension to the conformal group [af78]. the conformal group in anti-de sitter
space time is the same as the conformal group in at space, locally isomorphic
to so(4, 2), and the same irreducible representation of the conformal group
appears in (scalar) electrodynamics, in both cases. but in the case of anti-de
sitter space this irreducible representation breaks up into two inequivalent rep-
resentations of so(3, 2). this means that there are two kinds of photons, with
dierent propagators. in order to incorporate conformal invariance into the
theory of free quantum elds, one must quantize the eld in such a way that
both types propagate. the big surprise is that this is incompatible with the
self-adjointness of the hamiltonian. in other words, energy is not conserved.
to conserve energy, one must use only one of the two types of photons; this
amounts to spontaneous breakdown of conformal symmetry.

now i should like to present here for the rst time an idea that would have
been elaborated by moshe and myself if moshe had been given more time. it
is a radical idea, for it suggests an alternative to the big bang, and thus it is
likely to irritate some people; but i will risk it. the idea is to accept the lack
of energy conservation that is implied by conformal invariance of qed. this

4

christian frnsdal

will lead to spontaneous creation of energy, locally throughout the universe.
conceivably, the amount of energy (and matter) created could balance the loss
occasioned by the divergence of matter in the form of visible galaxies, and lead
to a kind of steady state model of cosmology, characterized by a mean mass
density that is constant in time. note that thermal equilibrium would not be
reached, and some of the ideas [sa] that attempt to explain the preponderance
of baryons would become more viable. some people (including fred hoyle [h])
are more comfortable with this scenario.

before we turn to the more spectacular aspects of anti-de sitter physics,
it is worth while to stress, one more time, the theoretical benets of negative
curvature, however small. the energy spectra of elementary particles in anti-
de sitter space are positive denite; thus there are no infrared singularities.
given the pivotal role of the infrared catastrophy in qcd, i marvel at the
fact that no attempt has yet been made to investigate the eect of negative
curvature on the connement problem.

3 singletons.

by far, the most dramatic consequence of allowing for a small negative curva-
ture is the existence of singletons. these are highly degenerate representations
of so(3, 2), with positive energy and thus at rst sight associated with ele-
mentary particles. they were discovered by dirac in 1963 [di]. as elementary
particles they were at rst dismissed by us on the grounds that these represen-
tations have too few states to allow for the formation of localized wave packets.
(one manifestation of this is the singleton black body spectrum: it turns out
to be that of ordinary particles in 3-dimensional space-time [f75].) but this
property is precisely what gives singletons their fascinating properties [ff80].
a free singleton with xed energy has a well dened angular momentum. if
the energy is large enough to be measurable then the angular momentum is
enormous and the state may be associated with sloshing modes of the uni-
verse; if the angular momentum is small then the energy is of the order of the
curvature and thus too small to be observed.

our rst important observation was that all 2-singleton states are massless;
in fact the action of so(3, 2) on the space of 2-singleton states breaks up into
an innite direct sum of massless representations. for example, if (x) creates
a singleton, then (x)(x) creates a massless particle with spin zero, and
(x)(x) creates a photon. this property of singletons, for which there is
no analog in at space, suggests a model of massless particles as 2-singleton

singletons and neutrinos

5

composites. no interaction and no binding energy is associated with this type
of compositeness; it is just a kinematical fact. composite electrodynamics
was presented in [ff88] and the linear approximation to composite gravity in
[ff98].

4 singletons and electroweak interactions

rather than continuing with this review of work that has been published (ref-
erences may be found in our last paper with moshe [ffs99]) i prefer to present
some new ideas. moshe had a very strong belief in the physical role of single-
tons. as a tribute to moshe, daniel sternheimer and i have done our best to
vindicate this idea  feeling that it is something we owe our friend.

the standard model is based on the weak group, sw = su(2)  u(1),
and more precisely on the glashow representation of this group, that is carried
by the triplet (e, el; er) and by each of the other generations of leptons. let
us now suppose that

(a) there are three bosonic singletons (rn rl; rr) = (ra)a=n,l,r (three

racs) that carry the glashow representation of sw ;

(b) there are three spinorial singletons (d, d; d ) = (d)=,, (three
dis). they are insensitive to sw but transform as a glashow triplet
with respect to another group sf (the avor group), isomorphic to
sw ;

(c) the vector mesons of the standard model are rac-rac composites, the
leptons are di-rac composites, and there is a set of vector mesons that
are di-di composites and that play exactly the same role for sf as the
weak vector bosons do for sw :

a = rbra,
w b
 = rad,
la
 = dd.
f 

the vector mesons are associated with conserved currents and fall into a cat-
egory of composite particles that was described in moshes last paper [ff98].
there is not any strong evidence, at this time, that sf is isomorphic to sw ,
only that sf has a representation of dimension 3. the assignments of trans-
formation properties of dis and racs can be interchanged.

6

christian frnsdal

we propose a slightly more economical model; namely we shall identify the
two u(1)s with each other. there is only one u(1); the symmetry group is
su(2)w  u(1)  su(2)f . the subgroup su(2)w acts on the racs, su(2)f
acts on the dis, and the hypercharge generator of u(1) acts on both.

let us concentrate on the leptons (a = n, l, r;  = , ,  )

(la

 ) = 


el

e
er
 l r
r


l


 .

(1)

it is a remarkable fact that there are very good reasons to believe that
this collection of leptons, precisely three complete generations, is complete.
if leptons are composite, and if lepton elds are related to bilinears, then
the constituents must include both bosons and fermions and the factorization
la
 = rad is strongly urged upon us by the nature of the phenomenological
summary in eq.(1).

fields in the rst two columns couple horizontally to make the standard
electroweak current, those in the last two pair o to make dirac mass-terms.
particles in the rst two rows combine to make the (neutral) avor current
and couple to the avor vector mesons.

the higgs elds have a yukawa coupling to lepton currents,

lyu = gyu l

alb

 h a
b .

(2)

the standard model was constructed with a single generation in mind, hence
it assumes a single higgs doublet, and must therefore introduce three indepen-
dent yukawa coupling constants, gyuh a

b  

 gh a
b .

however, an early and remarkable property of weak interaction phenomen-
ology was electron-muon universality. in a theory based on intermediary vector
mesons, this is expressed as an equality of the coupling constants of the basic
interaction lepton-lepton-meson. in weinberg-salam theory, with its sponta-
neous breakdown of yang-mills symmetry, this equality of coupling constants
is natural and of geometric origin. if, as has been proposed, the higgs eld
also has a geometrical meaning [cl, c93], then it is natural to suppose that
the yukawa couplings lepton-lepton-higgs are also characterized by a universal
coupling constant; the same for electron, muon and (?) tau. this symmetry
between leptons is broken only spontaneously, by the spread of the vacuum
expectation values (vevs) of the higgs eld.

symmetry with respect to the group su(2)w  u(1)  su(2)f does not
justify eq.(2) with a single yukawa coupling constant. we shall return to this
point below. it is assumed that all the neutrinos are lefthanded.

singletons and neutrinos

7

if the great number of components of higgs elds is unwelcome, it should
be kept in mind that the usual higgs eld is not widely believed to correspond
to an elementary particle. if it is composite, then there is no reason to expect it
to have only two components. in our model, where leptons and vector mesons
are composed of singletons, it would be natural to suppose that the higgs eld
is likewise composed of singletons, and the topological structure of singleton
eld theory even suggests that there may be no elementary particles associated
with the higgs eld in the full dynamical theory of the future.

nonvanishing vacuum expectation values of the neutral components are

directly related to charged lepton masses,

gyuhh l

ri = m,  = , , .

(3)

the coupling constants in m and m must be equal, but the third one, asso-
ciated with the tau, can be dierent. if these are the only components with
nonvanishing vev, then the following masses are induced for the weak vector
mesons:

m2(w ) = g2 x



hh l

ri2, m2(z) = (g2 + g2)x



hh l

ri2,

(4)

where g and g are the two fundamental coupling constants of the standard
model (tan w = g/g), and

m2(c ) = h2(hh l

ri2  hh l

ri2),

(5)

where h is the gauge coupling constant associated with the avor group su(2)f .
the theory is still invariant under the three abelian groups associated with the
three lepton numbers, but only l l is gauged, by the avor gauge boson c3
that remains massless, so far. the hypercharges of the leptons are the same as
in the standard model and the hypercharges of the higgs eld are determined
by the postulated invariance of the interaction.

5 the new developments

neutrino oscillations, especially between the two neutrinos associated to the
muon and to the tau, appear to have been rmly established [sk, bgg, os,
fkm, p]. this suggests non-vanishing neutrino masses but does not imply it,
especially if new avor changing interactions are not ruled out [gnppz, gps,
jm]. nevertheless, there are several attractive mechanisms that account for

8

christian frnsdal

most of the data and give masses to at least some of the neutrinos, without
introducing any additional leptons. the most economical assumption is that
the masses of  and  are of the order of .1 ev and that of e even smaller,
possibly zero. it was pointed out, almost 20 years ago [gr, ggn, k], that
there is room for an additional higgs eld, an su(2) triplet, and that this
implies non-vanishing neutrino masses. our proposal is slightly dierent.

we postulate additional higgs elds, coupled to leptons in the following

way,

l

yu = hyula

 lb

 k 

ab + h.c..

(6)

as in the case of eq.(3), this formula should not be taken quite literally, for
symmetry does not require that all the couplings have the same strength.

we now give a nonvanishing vacuum expectation values to the neutral

components (generalizing [gr])

hk 

n ni, ,  = , , .

(7)

this implies a general, symmetric neutrino mass matrix. in addition, one of
the two remaining massless vector mesons becomes massive. the masses are

m2(w ) = g2(x



hh l

ri2 + 2x

hk 

n n i2),



m2(c ) = 2h2(hh l

ri  h l

ri)2,

m2(c 3) = h2 x



hk 

n n i2,

m2(z) = (g2 + g2)(xhh l

ri2 + 4x



hk 

n n i2).

6 other predictions of the model.

the interpretation of the atmospheric neutrino experiments must take into
account, not only neutrino masses and mixing, but also the eect of the avor-
changing interactions induced by the new vector mesons. to account for the
observed smallness of avor changing interactions it is necessary that the new
vev be at least of the order of magnitude of 100 gev, so that hyu must be
very small. strong constraints on hyu, and h are imposed by past and future
experiments involving neutral currents. as these become more accurate the
model may fail.

singletons and neutrinos

9

references

[a79]

angelopoulos, e. so0 (3, 2): linear and unitary irreducible repre-
sentations in quantum theory, groups, elds and particles, 101
148, math.phys.stud. 4, d. reidel, dordrecht-boston (1983).
sur les representations unitaires irreductibles de so0(p, 2),
c.r.acad.sci.paris ser.i math. 292 (1981), 469471.

[af78]

angelopoulos e. and flato m. on unitary implementability of con-
formal transformations, lett.math.phys. 2 (1978), 405412.

[affs] angelopoulos e., flato m., fronsdal, c. and sternheimer d. mass-
less particles, conformal group and de sitter universe, phys.rev.
d23 (1981), 1278-1289.

[bgg]

[c93]

[cl]

[di]

[dx]

[e]

bilenky, s.m., giunti, c. and grimus, w. phenomenology
of neutrino oscillations, prog.part.nucl.phys. 43 (1999), 1-86
(hep-ph/9812360).

connes, a. interpretation geometrique du mod`ele standard de
la physique des particules et structure ne de lespace-temps.
c.r.acad.sci.paris ser.gen.vie sci. 10 (1993) no3, 223234.

connes, a. and lott, j. particle models and noncommutative
geometry. in: recent advances in eld theory (annecy-le-vieux,
1990), nuclear phys. b proc. suppl. 18b (1990), 2947 (1991).

dirac, p. a. m. a remarkable representation of the 3 + 2 de sitter
group. j. mathematical phys. 4 (1963), 901909.

dixmier, j. representations integrables du groupe de de sitter.
bull.soc.math.france 89 (1961), 941.

evans, n.t. discrete series for the universal covering group of the
3 + 2 de sitter group. j. mathematical phys. 8 (1967), 170184.

[fkm]

fisher, p., kayser, b. and mcfarland, k.s. neutrino mass and
oscillation. hep-ph/9906244, in annual review of nuclear and
particle science, 49 (1999).

[ff80]

flato m. and fronsdal c. on dis and racs, physics letters 97b
(1980), 236240.

10

[ff88]

[ff98]

christian frnsdal

flato m.
j.geom.phys. 5 (1988), 3761.

and fronsdal c.

composite electrodynamics.

flato m. and frnsdal c. interacting singletons, lett. math.
phys. 44 (1998), 249-259 (hep-th/9803013).

[ffs99] flato m., frnsdal c. and sternheimer, d. singletons, physics
composite neutrinos.

in ads universe and oscillations of
lett.math.phys. 48 (1999), 109119.

[f75]

[ggn]

[gr]

[g]

[gps]

fronsdal, c. elementary particles in a curved space. iv. massless
particles, phys.rev.d (3) 12 (1975), 38193830.

georgi, h., glashow, s.l. and nussinov, s. unconventional model
of neutrino masses, nucl.phys.b 193 (1983) 297.

gelmini, g.b. and roncadelli, m. left-handed neutrino mass scale
and spontaneously broken lepton number, phys.lett. 98b (1981),
411415.

grimus, w. phenomenology of neutrino masses and mixing,
hep-ph/9910340.

grimus, w., pfeier, r. and schwetz, t. a 4-neutrino model with
a higgs triplet, hep-ph/9905320.

[gnppz] guzzo, m.m., nunokawa h., peres o.l.g., pleitez v. and
zukanovich funchal r. flavor changing models with strictly mass-
less neutrinos, hep-th/9908038.

[gl]

[h]

[jm]

[k]

[n67]

gursey, f. and lee, t.d. spin 1/2 wave equation in de sitter
space. proc. nat. acad. sci. u.s.a. 49 (1963), 179186.

hoyle, f., the nature of the universe, new am. lib., n.y., 1955.

johnson, l.m., mckay d.w. revising neutrino oscillation
parameter space with direct flavor-changing interactions,
hep-ph/9909355.

kim, j.e. light pseudo-particles, particle physics and cosmology,
phys.rep. 150 (1987) 1.

nachtmann, o.
comm.math.phys. 6 (1967) 116.

quantum theory

in de sitter

space,

singletons and neutrinos

11

[n68]

[os]

[p]

[sa]

[s68]

[sk]

nachtmann, o. continuous creation in a closed world order,
z.phys. 208 (1968) 113.

ohlsson, t. and snellman, h. neutrino oscillations and
mixings with three avors, phys.rev. d60 (1999) 093007
(hep-ph/9903252); three avor neutrino oscillations in matter,
hep-ph/9910546.

peccei, r.d. neutrino physics, in proceedings of the viii escuela
mexicana de particulas y campos (hep-ph/9906509).

sakharov, a.d.,violation of cp invariance, c asymmetry, and
baryon asymetry of the universe, pisma zh.eksp.teor.fiz. 5
(1967), 3235.

sternheimer, d. proprietes spectrales dans les representations de
groupes de lie. j. math. pures appl. (9) 47 (1968), 289319.

the superkamiokande collaboration: y. fukuda et al. evidence
for oscillation of atmospheric neutrinos, phys.rev.lett. 81 (1998),
15621567 (hep-ex/9807003).
the superkamiokande collaboration. measurement of the ux
and zenith-angle distribution of upward through-going muons
by super-kamiokande, phys.rev.lett. 82 (1999), 26442648
(hep-ex/9812014) and neutrino-induced upward stopping muons
in super-kamiokande (hep-ex/9908049).

[t]

thomas, l.h. on unitary representations of the group of de sitter
space. ann. of math. (2) 42 (1941), 113126.

[w39] wigner, e. on unitary representations of the inhomogeneous

lorentz group. ann. of math., ii.ser. 40 (1939), 149204.

[w50] wigner, e.p. some remarks on the innite de sitter space. proc.

nat. acad. sci. u.s.a. 36 (1950), 184188.

