9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
4
1

 

 
 

1
v
0
0
1
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

facts and fictions about anti de sitter
spacetimes with local quantum matter

bert schroer

institut fur theoretische physik

fu-berlin, arnimallee 14, 14195 berlin, germany

presently: cbpf, rua dr. xavier sigaud, 22290-180 rio de janeiro, brazil

schroer@cbpf.br

november 1999

abstract

viewing the adsd+1 spacetime in the context of the conformal- com-
pactication and covering formalism, it is natural to interpret rehrens
algebraic holography between the bulk ads quantum matter and that
of cft as a kind of pull-back of the global d-dimensional conformal
(block) decomposition theory (which results from the resolution of the
apparant einstein causality paradox in conformal qft) when one substi-
tutes the lightcone in r(d,2)with an hyperboloid. whereas in the case of
lightcone this is possible in terms of elds, the use of algebras is more nat-
ural for the ads hyperboloid. we also mention other ways of associating
(a nite set of) chiral eld theories with higher dimensional qfts.

1 historical and sociological background

there has been hardly any problem in particle physics which has attracted as
much attention as the problem if and in what way the anti de sitter spacetime
and the one dimension lower conformal eld theory are related and whether this
could possibly contain clues about the meaning of quantum gravity. in more
specic quantum physical terms the question is about a conjectured [1][2] (and
meanwhile in large parts rigorously understood) correspondence between two
quantum eld theories in dierent spacetime dimensions, the lower-dimensional
conformal one being the holographic image or projection of the ads.

virtually the entire globalized community of string physicist (3000) has
placed this problem in the centre of their interest and there have been approx-
imately around 100-150 papers per month during the last half year. even if
one takes into account the steep population growth in the number of particle
physicist during the last decades and looks only at the percentage of involved
particle physicist and compares it with the relative number of participants in

1

previous similar phenomena (the s-matrix bootstrap of chew, regge theory,
the su (6)-^
u (12) symmetric so-called relativistic quark theory, to name some of
them) which also led to press-conferences, interviews and articles in the media
(e.g. time magazine), it remains still an impressive sociological phenomenon.
just imagine yourself working on this problem and getting up every morning
turning nervously to the hep-th server in order to check that nobody has beaten
you on similar results. what a life in an area which used to require a contem-
plative critical attitude! this is clearly a remarkable sociological situation in
the exact sciences which warrants an explanation.

leaving the explanation of these mass manifestations (on a subject which is
probably more remote from tangible physics than anything before in this rich
physics century) to historians or sociologists of the exact sciences, i will limit
myself to analyze the situation from the point of view of a quantum eld theo-
rist with a 30 year professional experience who still nourishes a certain curiosity
about string theory with its many successful and sometimes even impressive
formal mathematical consistency tests, but who has no active experience nor
ambitions in that area. whether you consider this is an advantage or disadvan-
tage depends on your background, age and personal point of view.

the ads model of a curved spacetime has a long history [3][4] as a theoretical
laboratory of what can happen in a universe which is the extreme opposite of
globally hyperbolic in that it processes a self-closing time, whereas the proper
de sitter spacetime was once considered among the more realistic models of the
universe. the recent surge of interest about ads came from string theory and
is totally dierent in motivation and more related to the hope (or dream) to
attribute a meaning to quantum gravity from a string theory viewpoint.

fortunately for a curious outsider (otherwise i would have to quit right here),
this motivation has no bearing on the conceptual and mathematical problems
posed by the would be ads-conformal qft correspondence, which turned out
to be an entirely quantum eld theoretical problem in a particular curved space-
time. as a result of this peculiarity (related to the mentioned historical role of
the ads model), there are some fundamental and interesting aspects which this
problem generates in qft which are all related to causality, charge transport,
superselection sectors and the plea for an intrinsic formulation of qft [5] away
from coordinatizations (of algebras of observables) in terms of pointlike co-
variant elds. all these issues are related to real-time physics and in most cases
their meaning in terms of euclidean continuation (statistical mechanics) remains
obscure, but this does not make them less physical.

this note is organized as follows. first i elaborate the kinematical aspects
of the adsd+1-conformal qftd situation as a collateral result of the compact-
ication formalism for the conformalization of the d-dimensional minkowski
space. for this reason the seemingly more demanding problem of studying qft
directly in ads within a curved spacetime formalism can be bypassed. from
this relation between the two spacetimes we see that apart from the boundary
at innity of ads there is no pointlike relation between the spaces but rather
a relation between bulk sets which includes in particular the wedges whose

2

eld theoretic distinction already appeared in many other contexts. therefore
the eld theory in the third section follows closely the recent (conceptually as
well as mathematically) rigorous solution of the ads-conformal qft correspon-
dence presented by rehren [5] and some closely related work which supports and
extends those results [6] [7].

since one of the most important messages is the holographic aspects, we
then present in the fourth section some recent more general results obtained by
the methods of algebraic qft which relate the structure of an arbitrary qft
to a nite set of chiral quantum eld theories and their relative position in a
common hilbert space. in massive d=1+1 theories this amounts to lightray
holography, but in higher dimensions it is more appropriate to refer to this
process as scanning. although such an extension of holographic ideas is not
required for the understanding of the ads-conformal correspondence, it gives a
good glimpse of the future perspective of fresh attempts at a nonperturbative
constructive approach to qft [8] and hopefully also some clues on quantum
gravity (commented on in the last section). in that last section we also return to
the theme of facts and ctions by including the string theoretical point of view
as mentally processed by a curious, critical and altogether sceptical quantum
eld theorist.

2 conformal compactication and ads

one possibility to get to conformal qft is to notice that the wigner representa-
tion theory for the poincare group for zero mass particles allows an extension to
the conformal symmetry: poincare group(d) so(d, 2). besides scale transfor-
mations, this larger symmetry also incorporates the fractional transformations
(proper conformal transformations)

x =

x  bx2

1  2bx + b2x2

(1)

it is often convenient to view this formula as the translation group transformed
with the hyperbolic inversion

x 

x
x2

(2)

acting as an equivalence transformation within an extended group. for xed x
and small b the formula (1) is well dened, but globally it mixes nite spacetime
points with innity and hence requires a more precise denition in particular
in view of the positivity energy-momentum spectral properties in its action on
quantum elds. hence as preparatory step for the quantum eld theory concepts
one has to achieve a geometric compactication. this starts most conveniently
from a linear representation of the conformal group so(d,2) in 6-dimensional
auxiliary space r(d,2) (i.e. without eld theoretic signicance) with two negative

3

(time-like) signatures

g

g = 


1

+1




(3)

and restricts this representation to the (d+1)-dimensional forward light cone

lc(d,2) = { = (, 4, 5} ; 2 + 2

d  2

d+1 = 0}

(4)

2

0  ~

where 2 = 2
denotes the d-dimensional minkowski length square. the
compactied minkowski space is obtained by adopting a projective point of view
(stereographic projection)

m (d1,1)

c

= (cid:26)x =



d + d+1

;   lc(d,2)(cid:27)

(5)

it is then easy to verify that the linear transformation which keep the last two
components invariant consist of the lorentz group and those transformations
which only transform the last two coordinates yield the scaling formula

d  d+1  es(d  d+1)

(6)

leading to x  x,  = es . the remaining transformations, namely the trans-
lations and the fractional proper conformal transformations, are obtained by
composing rotations in the i-d and boosts in the i-d+1 planes.

the so obtained spacetime is most suitably parametrized in terms of a con-

formal time 

m (d1,1)

c

= (sin , e,cos ), e  s3
~e

sin

ed + cos

ed + cos

t =

, ~x =

(7)

ed + cos > 0,  <  < +

so that the conformally compactied minkowski space is a piece of a multi-
dimensional cylinder carved out between two d-1 dimensional boundaries which
lie symmetrically around  = 0, e = (0, ed = 1) where they touch each other
[10]; but the projective aspect of hilbert space vectors as representing physical
states demands that we use the universal covering space which is the full cylinder
(which has a tiling into innitely many ordinary minkowski spaces)

^
c

m (d1,1)

= sd1  r

(8)

indeed in order not to be limited by the narrow connes of huygens principle
(which tends to limit relativistic system to non-interacting ones [7]), the na-
ture of local quantum physics demands the use of the covering space (or as
the substitute a conformal decomposition theory of local elds into irreducible

4

components with respect to the center of the conformal covering) as will become
clear in the next section. the relevance of this covering space for the notion of
relativistic causality was probably pointed out rst by i. segal [9][12] and nicely
presented and illustrated within the context of qft by luescher and mack [10].
formally it solves the einstein causality paradox of conformal quantum eld
theory [11] which originated with would be conformal models of quantum eld
theory as the massless thirring model which violates huygens principle. the
naive reason for this apparent violation was that there exist continuous curves of
conformal transformations which lead from spacelike separations via the light-
like innity to timelike separation which obviously generates a contradiction
with the structure of the thirring model whose timelike anti-commutator un-
like the spacelike one does not vanish. the covering structure formally solves
this causality problem by emphasizing that the path through lightlike innity
was in fact a path which led into another sheet and it is only the unjustied
projection of one of the end-point back into the compact minkowski space re-
gion (7) which has a timelike distance and not the point itself (which remains
causally disjoint). if one depicts the covering space as a cylinder, then it con-
tains innitely many copies of the original minkowski space (in d=1+1) of which
the above one (7) is (for d=1+1) a compact region which allows a nice picture
[10].

using the above parametrization in terms of e and the conformal time  ,
one can immediately globalize the notion of time like distance and one nds the
following causality structure

((e,  )  (e,  ))2
    > 2arcsin(cid:18) e  e
4 (cid:19)

> 0, hence

1
2

= arccos (e  e)

(9)

in order to get the ads manifold into the game, we may instead of using the
directions on the light cone also use the asymptotic directions on the forward
hyperboloid 2 = r2. this is admittedly a round-about way to obtain the
conformal compactied minkowski space, but a very interesting one; as it turns
out this (d+1)-dimensional hyperboloid denes (after a z2 identication  
) the anti de sitter spacetime. if one only wants to use this ads spacetime
in order to describe the compactied geometry including the covering aspects,
one may simply parametrize the ads as (for r=1)

i = rei, i = 1, ..d

0 = p1 + r2sin
d+1 = p1 + r2cos

and verify that the ensuing covering parametrization of ads for r  (properly
rescaled) approaches the covering parametrization of the conformal boundary.
if it would be only for this asymptotic statement, the relation between ads
and the conformal space would not be very exiting. but as the d-dimensional

5

c

conformal spacetime and the local quantum physics on it can be pulled back
onto the d+1 dimensional forward light cone by dening correlation functions
fullling certain homogeneity properties [10], one could ask whether such a pull-
back is also possible into the ads hyperboloid instead of the light cone. if one
relaxes the requirements and goes beyond points and lines (direction) to more
general sets, such a correspondence is indeed possible within the conceptual
framework of aqft [5]. the idea of how to formulate such a correspondence
comes from the fact that ads(d,1) and m (d1,1)
and their coverings share the
same spacetime symmetry namely so(d, 2) resp. ^
so(d, 2). therefore one may
start from a wedge region (reaching into the boundary) in the d+2 dimensional
auxiliary space which is dened in terms of two light rays and left invariant under
an appropriate boost transformation. if we call the projection of an ambient
wedge in r(d,2) onto ads (ads-) wedge and notice that its projection on the
conformalized minkowski spacetime is generically a double cone (a conformal
wedge is a special case since it is conformally equivalent to a double cone),
then we have a starting point from which we can build up a correspondence.
it would be natural (and without alternative) to relate the correspondence by
letting the symmetry group act in both worlds and extend this correspondence
to transformed regions and their intersections. we refer to a paper by rehren
[5] where this has been carried out and on which this and the following section
rely heavily. now the old problem which historically led to ads, namely the
existence of timelike closed lines and the apparently weird causality situation
of local quantum physics in such a world, can receive a helping hand from the
conformal side1 where it has a less overt counterpart in the form of an apparent
einstein causality paradox whose solution in terms of conformal blocks was
already found a quarter century ago [12] and which we will present in the present
context in the next section.

3 conformal qft pulled back into ads

the formulation in terms of conformal covering space would be useful if the
world, including laboratories of experimentalists, would also be conformal, which
certainly is not the case. therefore it is helpful to know that there is a way
of re-phrasing the physical content of local elds (which violate the huygens
principle and instead show the phenomenon of reverberation [11] inside the
forward light cone) without running into the trap of the causality paradox of the
previous section. such elds, although behaving irreducibly under innitesimal
conformal transformations, transform reducibly under the action of the global
center of the covering z( ^
so(d, 2)). as a unitary abelian group it is generated
by the 2-translation in the conformal time  . a local covariant eld a(x) (local
in the sense of the causal structure of ^

so(d, 2)) corresponding unitary operator

1meanwhile k.-h. rehren informed me that one of his collaborators is studying this prob-

lem in detail.

6

z  z( ^

so(d, 2)) can be decomposed as [12]

ad(x) = z !

0

a

d(x)d

(10)

with a

d formally given by

a

d(x) =



xn=

from which one gets

z nad(x)z nexp [in(d  2)]

(11)

adza

d(x) = exp [i(d  2)] a

d(x)

(12)

the notation is the following: d is the scaling dimension of the local (causal in
the covering sense) eld ad(x) and the -integration is the decomposition into
its centrally irreducible components. these component elds, unlike the origi-
nal globally causal elds, do not fulll the reeh-schlieder theorem (sometimes
referred to as the eldeld-state-vector correspondence), rather they have a
source and a range and their application to a non-matching source subspace
vanishes. their physical interpretation is easily obtained from the conformal
analysis of 3-point functions

hcdc(x)ad(y)bdb(z)i = dcdc(x)a

d(y)bdb(z)e

(13)

 =

(d + db  dc) mod(1)

1
2

hence the quantum number of the irreducible components is related to the
dimensional spectrum (critical indices) of the theory and the -dependent phase
factors enter the transformation law which comes close to the naive classical
transformation

u (b)a

d(x)u 1(b) =

1

[+(b, x)]d [(b, x)] a

d(x)

(14)

whereas the more complicated law for the local eld follows from the decompo-
sition formula (10). structural properties of the real time formulation as this
remain totally hidden in the euclidean formulation. in the case of d=1+1 for
which the group (as well as its center) factorizes ^
su (1, 1)  su (1, 1)
and one obtains the well-known bpz [13] conformal block decomposition theory
with the additional remark that it was already discovered 10 years before2. in
order to facilitate the reading of our 74/75 papers [12] on the subject, i have
used exactly the same normalizations and notation. there is a special aspect of
this chiral decomposition theory. it is the only case for which one has a classi-
cation theory of the possible spectra of dimensions/critical indices. it is given

s(2, 2) = ^

2the new result in the bpz work were the nonabelian illustrations (minimal models) which
went far beyond the abelian exponential bose eld and current algebra of one decade before.

7

by the spectrum of phases of the so-called statistical parameter which occurs
within the superselection theory of aqft, and in the case at hand is inexorably
related to the braid group exchange algebra structure of the nonlocal irreducible
components a
d.

now the path to a nontrivial i.e. interacting qft on ads which can with-
stand the causality challenge appears in a clearer light: pull-back the nontrivial
centrally irreducible conformal block (superselected charge sector) algebras in-
stead of elds and use the wedge techniques of rehren. by construction the
pulled-back charge sector algebras (and their intersections) will satisfy the cor-
rect phase relations with the generator of the center z which are needed for the
avoidance of causality paradoxes. for ads2 the operators from these block al-
gebras are even expected to fulll an exchange algebra with r-matrix structure
constants. the pull-back method, unlike for the light cone pull-back cannot be
done in terms of eld-coordinatizations unless one admits also multiply localized
eld with a charge transport tube between them [5].

4 generalized holography in local quantum physics

the message we can learn from the ads-conformal correspondence is two-fold.
on the one hand there is the recognition that there are situations where it is
necessary to avoid the use of eld coordinates in favor of directly working
with local algebras. although this idea is a rather old enrichment of advanced
qft and forms the backbone of aqft, in most concrete situations there were
always convenient eld coordinatizations available in terms of which (in analogy
to preferred coordinates in dierential geometry) the calculations simplied. for
the ads-conformal correspondence the best way is however to stay intrinsic, i.e.
to use the net of algebras.

the second message is that there may exist a holographic relation between
qfts and lower dimensional conformal qft. here we are entering a much
more recent issue of qft which is still in its infancy. let us consider the
simplest case: the chiral conformal holographic image of a two-dimensional
massive qft or, using an older terminology (which will hereby attain a rigorous
and at least partially new meaning), the light ray restriction (quantization). let
us start from the right wedge algebra of a massive 2-d qft (either generated
from a wightman eld or from the algebraic net approach) a(w ). we want to
introduce the restriction of this theory on its upper horizon r+ which is half of
the total line of the light ray r. we rst notice that compact intervals on r+
do not cast two-dimensional causal shadows, in contradistinction to a spacelike
interval. the physical reason is of course that each point in an -neighborhood
below that interval is in the backward inuence cone of the points on r+ which
are outside that interval. the situation changes if we take all of r+. in that
case the causal shadow is the wedge region; this holds only for the massive case,
since for d=1+1 massless theories there are independent characteristic data on
the lower light ray horizon of the wedge (doubling of the degrees of freedom). in
the general approach to qft the von neumann algebra of a compact spacetime

8

region is, according to the causal shadow property of aqft (which is a local
version of the time-slice property [14]), identical to the algebra of its causally
completed region. each lagrangian eld theory, to the extend that it exists
beyond perturbation, fullls this requirement3. if one tilts the spacelike interval
into the lightlike direction, the causal shadow region becomes gradually smaller.
the only way to counteract this shrinking is to extend the spacelike interval say
gradually to the right in such a way that the larger lower causal shadow part
becomes the full wedge in the limit. the correctness of this intuitive idea which
suggests

a(r+) = a(w )

(15)

can be checked against other rigorous results. one rigorous result from wigner
representation theory (which therefore is limited to free eld theories) together
with the application of the weyl or car (for halnteger spin) functor is the
statement that the cyclicity spaces for an interval i on r+ agree with the total
space [15]

a(i) = a(r+) = a(w ) = h

(16)

i.e.
the validity of the reeh-schlieder theorem on the light ray subalgebra.
in fact this holds for all positive energy representations including zero mass,
except zero mass in d=1+1 in which case the decomposition in two chiral factors
prevents its validity. the step from spaces to (15) is done with the help of
takesakis theorem (mentioned later) the second argument is that any eld
theory for which the wedge algebra has polarization f ree generators (pfg)
generators f automatically fullls (15). here pfg means that

f  = z f (p) |pi

ddp
2

locf = w

(17)

i.e. the one time application of the wedge localized generator onto the vacuum
is a one particle state without any admixture of higher particle-antiparticle pair
states (vacuum polarization clouds). it is highly surprising and nontrivial that
this is possible in the presence of interactions. in some way the pfgs behave
like free elds even in the presence of interactions, and to resolve this apparent
contradiction they must be suciently nonlocal (i.e. wedge-localized). in fact
it can be shown that the wedge region is the smallest for which this is possible;
any smaller spacetime region, in particular any compact region leads to the ad-
mixture of incoming scattering states with arbitrarily high particle number as a
characteristic inexorable attribute of localization in the presence of interactions.
the argument that (15) is a consequence of the fact that a(w ) can be generated
by such fs can be found in [8] and will not be repeated here. again one shows

3postulates as this in fact have been abstracted from the lagrangian quantization setting
with the idea to separate the good physical content from the damocles sword of existence of
lagrangian qfts.

9

rst cyclicity (16) from the properties of pfgs and then the result follows by
invoking a theorem of takesaki on conditional expectations for subalgebras in
relation to their modular groups. since this theorem and its setting in aqft is
very deeply related to the noncommutative structure of local quantum physics
and gives an excellent look into the natural workshop (i.e. the noncommuta-
tive aspect is intrinsic and not imposed by decorating (euclidean) commutative
structures with noncommutative geometry) let me briey explain it, although
it is already somewhat outside the title of my note.

all structural investigations in aqft start with a net of operator algebras
as subalgebras of the algebras of the algebra of all operators b(h) in a hilbert
space h. these subalgebras are indexed by spacetime regions o in minkowski
space

o  a(o)

(18)

and fulll a few entirely physically motivated properties which constitute the
principles of local quantum physics. this eld-coordinatization independent
approach brought a wealth of new physical results (including the old pertur-
bative results which depend on the use of pointlike elds) but it always run
into problems if one tried to extract from it an algorithm for the construction
of specic models. all this has changed recently, due to the recognition of the
revolutionary role4 of the modular tomita-takesaki theory in local quantum
physics. whereas the discovery that the wedge algebra a(w ) together with
the vacuum state leads to modular objects which are related with two impor-
tant objects in qft (the modular conjugation j with the tcp-operator and
the modular group it with the wedge aliated lorentz boost) was already
made in the middle of the 70ies, its inverse namely the construction of a wedge
algebra and its extension into a net by covariance and intersections is a more
recent discovery. it turns out that the wedge algebra has on-shell generators,
namely the above mentioned pfgs which are determined in terms of the phys-
ical s-matrix. therefore in cases where the old s-matrix bootstrap program
of chew works i.e. for the factorizing d=1+1 models, the modular machinery
can be directly applied. the modular program works especially well for chiral
conformal theories for which the wedge is replaced by the haline and instead
of the physical s-matrix one deals with an unitary operator with another inter-
pretation. in more general cases one has two options, either nd a new kind of
perturbation theory for these pfgs or one must nd some way to decompose
an actual theory into chiral conformal ones. the way of associating a chiral
conformal theory with e.g. a d=1+1 massive theory is the following [16]. start
from the right wedge algebra a(w ) with apex at the origin and let an upper
lightlike translation a+ (which fullls the energy positivity!) act on a(w ) and
4in mathematics it played a crucial role in the work of alain connes on the classication
of von neumann algebras and it is also present (but as a result of the assumed niteness of
algebras not as prominent) in vaughan jones work on subfactors; both contributions led to a
fields medal.

10

produce an inclusion

a(wa+ )  a(w )

(19)

this inclusion is halfsided modular, i.e. the modular group it of (a(w ), )
(which is the lorentz boost, as previously stated) acts on a(wa+ ) for t<0 as a
compression

adita(wa+ )  a(wa+ ), t < 0

(20)

the assumed nontriviality of the net i.e. the intersections5 of wedge algebras
entails that the relative commutant (primes on algebras denote their commutant
in b(h))

a(wa+ )  a(w )

(21)

is also nontrivial and insures that the inclusion is what has been termed stan-
dard. but it is known that standard modular inclusions correspond to chiral
conformal theories, i.e. the classication problem for the latter is identical to
the classication of all standard modular inclusions. in the case at hand the
emergence of the chiral theory is intuitively clear since the only living space in
agreement with einstein causality (within the closure of w and spacelike with
respect to the open wa+ ) which one can attribute to the relative commutant
is the lightray interval of length a+ starting at the origin. from the abstract
modular inclusion setting the hilbert space which the relative commutant gen-
erates from the vacuum could be a subspace h+  h, h+ = p h of the original
one. with the help of the l-boost (=modular group it of (a(w ), ) one then
denes a net on the haline r+ and a global algebra

a(r+) = alg(cid:8)t<oadit(a(wa+ )  a(w ))(cid:9)  a(w )

a(r+) = h+

(22)

the modular group it of the original algebra leaves this lightray algebra
invariant and hence we are in the situation of the takesaki theorem which
states that a subalgebra together with the vacuum which is left invariant by the
modular group of the larger invariant has modular objects which are restrictions
of those of (a(w ), )

(ares(r+), )  ((it)res, j res)
bres = p bp

notation

:

(23)

in addition the condition on the invariance of the subalgebra is the precise con-
dition under which a conditional expectation e with ares(r+) = e(a(w )) =
5the nontriviality of the intersections are the algebraic counterpart of the good short
distance behaviour in a quantization approach (which is a prerequisite for renormalizability);
both are necessary (and in the algebraic case also sucient) for the existence of the theory.

11

p a(w )p (the noncommutative counterpart of the physicists decimation pro-
cess with the help of integrating out degrees of freedom in the sense of wil-
son/kadano). the existence of pfg generators of a(w ) insures that h+ = h
and in that case the takesaki theorem leads to the desired equality

ares(r+) = a(r+) = a(w )

(24)

the identity shows that identication of chiral conformal theories with zero
mass is a prejudice caused by the naive confusion of covariances with localiza-
tion favored by the quantization point of view. whether chiral theories are
describing massless or massive situations depends on the interplay of covariance
and locality.
in the present case locality and covariance coalesce in the case
of a+ lightray translations and l-boosts which restrict to dilations. these are
the standard covariances which are used to dene a net structure on a(r+).
however the third covariance on a(w ) namely the opposite lightray a trans-
lation, which acts locally on the a(w ) net, becomes enormously nonlocal if one
tries to interprete in terms of the a(r+) net structure. in fact the action is not
geometric at all but rather totally fuzzy [17] : an a translation acting on a
a+-indexed interval spreads all over r+ but does not loose its solid algebraic
meaning in the sense of transforming the original interval-indexed subalgebra
into another one which does not permit any spacetime indexing in the lightray
world. this second hidden symmetry6 is important for the nite mass spec-
trum: although the p spectra (lightray momentum spectrum) separately goes
to zero and mimics a zero mass situation, the product (not a tensor product as
in the massless d=1+1 case!) p+p has a mass gap. hence chiral conformal
eld theory is a very exible instrument for the probing of massive quantum
eld theories in any dimension. unlike string theory its localization is in the
same spacetime as the probe; there is no distinction between a (mysterious)
source space and a target space.

the present modular inclusion approach to lightray physics and degrees
of freedom reduction [18][19] claries some opaque features of light cone quan-
tization, notably those which have to do with locality and covariance, i.e. the
reconstruction of the local massive d=1+1 net from its lightray holography.
on the one hand it brings into the open an old suspicion that lightray physics
is nonlocal (and therefore threatened by lack of physical interpretability), but
on the other hand shows that the situation, if treated with the proper con-
cepts and methods, is not without redemption. it gives additional weight to a
point which was made by rehren in the above context of the ads-conformal
correspondence namely: eld coordinatizations are not so useful for describing
holographic relations, the more intrinsic net structure is better adapted. the
lightray holography remains of course conceptually dierent from the holography
through a boundary at innity (for which the ads-conformal correspondence is
the only known example).

the former two-dimensional illustration has a structurally very rich and only

6the original a(w )-net also has hidden symmetries, e.g.

the two conformal rotations

belonging to chiral theories on r.

12

partially explored generalization to higher dimension. in that case the modular
method applied to one wedge only transfers a small fraction of the structure of
the original theory into a chiral conformal theory which localization-wise should
really be associated with the upper light front horizon of the wedge. but since
its transversal localization remains completely unresolved, the so obtained light
front theory only contains the longitudinal localization data of a chiral conformal
net. let me explain the transversal resolution in the simplest case of a d=1+2
theory. in that case one tilts the wedge by a l-boost which leaves the upper
dening light ray for the initial wedge invariant [8]. one then convinces oneself
that this newly positioned second wedge has a modular associated chiral con-
formal theory which, though being unitarily equivalent to the rst one, carries
the missing information (which is needed for the reconstruction of the original
d=1+2 theory) in form of its relative position in the common hilbert space
h. this method should be more appropriately called scanning by (a family of)
chiral conformal theories. the idea is to approach the existence and construc-
tion problem of higher dimensional qfts by the apparently simpler looking
problem of studying a nite family of chiral conformal theories in a prescribed
relative position. almost all complex problems owe their solution to chopping
up one dicult problem into several less dicult ones and the progress (outside
perturbation) on this issue (of construction of qft) left much to be desired just
because the problem proved too viscous against such chopping up attempts.

for a more detailed analysis with emphasis on thermal aspects (localization

temperature and entropy) we refer to [8]

5 lessons on quantum gravity: fact or fic-

tion?

despite the interesting messages about the nature of the ads-conformal cor-
repondence, there is no hint at possible properties which could point into the
direction of quantum gravity which after all was the prime reason why string
theorist revived the interest in the ads model.

the strange socio-scientic situation described in the introduction requires
an explanation. even if one takes into account the new marketing aspect which
accentuates fashions on a globalized scale (and from which also other areas of
exact sciences were not spared), one still nds it dicult to explain the mere size
if over a thousand papers in a relative short time on a special model for only one
special purpose (to get a glimpse of quantum gravity) in view of the fact that
there are many interesting and theoretically challenging problems around even
more than at any other time in this century. ones surprise and bewilderment
(i am talking about physicists which had a professional life already before the
new string time) even increases if one notices, as we did in this note, that there
is a nice solution [5] of the problem which is not only clear from a mathematical
viewpoint but hardly leaves anything to be desired from a conceptual point of
view. the reason why this has been totally ignored in my view is not just that

13

it argues in a framework outside of the dierential-geometric setting of string
theory. rather one gets the suspicion that it is related to the fact that it does not
conrm those hopes of string theoreticians about quantum gravity. this is why
even though some of their ads conjectures were made precise and rigorously
proven they seem to remain so unhappy about that work. since as a theoretical
physicist i am not qualied to comment on sociological aspects, the only thing
i can do is to go back and try to understand from where this stubborn believe
in the inexorable connection if string theory with quantum gravity is coming
from. this is not possible without a little excursion into history.

the split of string theory away from local quantum eld theory can be
traced back to the time of the invention of the dual model. before there was an
attempt at a pure on-shell s-matrix theory which got bogged down on the insuf-
cient physical (and consequently also mathematical) conceptual understanding
of crossing symmetry. phenomenologist introduced a very special form of cross-
ing called duality.
it consisted in demanding that crossing symmetry for
two-particle scattering should already be enforceable with innitely many one
particle states which via crossing (between the mandelstam s t and u channels)
should form a bootstrapping situation (nuclear democracy) already among
one-particle contributions. it had no basis in qft (nobody ever found a quan-
tum eld theoretical realization) and it is almost impossible to convey to a
contemporary physicist the strange physical ideas which led to it (and totally
unknown among younger string theorist). but it did serve as the prime motiva-
tion for the introduction of venezianos dual model7 which in turn allowed an
interpretation in terms of a quantum string (the birth of the old string theory).
but it should be emphasized that it was not a string in the sense of objects
with semiinnite spacelike localization as envisaged on a formal intuitive level
by mandelstam in local gauge theory or more rigorously as aqft describes
the spacetime carriers of d=1+2 braid group statistics (or more generally of
topological charges in the sense of aqft). rather the string of string theory is
a spectral string in the sense of an oscillator like spectrum for the eigenvalues
of the mass operators (i.e. an innite particle tower). the question of spacetime
localization, so the experts explained at that time (and still keep telling) is ill-
posed in the present string formalism; one has to rst have a second quantized
form (string eld theory) and then one can address this question8. to make
this point a bit more palatable, string theorist invariably point to an alleged
analogue situation between relativistic particle lagrangian (square root of the
minkowski line element) and quantum eld theory. this is done on a basis
of some prescriptions of how to handle such extremely formal functional inte-
gral expressions which are then formulated in such a way that the result is the
well-known schwinger alpha-parameter representation of the free eld feynman
propagator. what is usually forgotten is to say that a theory of interacting par-
ticles on that line of thinking simply does not exist and for precisely this reason

7even in this new setting duality in its original one particle form could not be maintained

but had to receive unitarity corrections.

8there were some courageous attempts in the light cone gauge [21], but it seems that they

have been ignored.

14

one does qft! hence this analogy seems to contain a somewhat detrimental
and undermining message. in the end it does of course not interest in what
way one arrives at an idea as long as it produces some testable experimental
results or relates to existing theoretical principles in an interesting way which
also could mean transcending (but never ignoring) existing principles.

the next step, namely the gravity interpretation of string theory (the old
string was a kind of nonperturbative proposal for strong interactions) consisted
in identifying the string tension constant with the planck length and meant
initially just sliding up the energy scale without but keeping the same mathe-
matical formalism. it was by far the most adventurous step in particle physics,
if not in the entire history of physics (may be this explains the conspicuous
absence of the string theorist of the rst generation as e.g. neveu and most of
his collaborators). many years later, with the ascend of dierential geometric
knowledge among particle physicist, arguments in the spirit of the dierential-
geometric sigma model were proposed in favor of a gravity interpretation for the
spin=2 component (in the spectrum of all spins which a spectral string theory
always contains and which made it useful for regge phenomenology for a num-
ber of years). but it cannot be overstressed that it was the sigma-model reading
and not any physical principle or concept which created the quantum gravity
aspect of string theory. the power of rational arguments in particle physics
is of course limited as in any other human activity9. they are generally not
sucient to undo ingrained prejudices or fundamentalistic believes (especially
if they are related to toes).

as a mathematical physicist the present situation permits me to draw the
conclusion (from the facts presented in this note) that the solution of ads-
conformal correspondence does not shed any more light on this problem than
any other curved spacetime model with a local quantum matter content. besides
string theory there are other ideas [20][8]. to the extend that they use methods
of algebraic qft, they rely heavily on the modular localization properties of
local quantum matter enclosed behind killing or pure quantum horizons and
use many of the concepts touched upon in the previous section (extended into the
direction of thermal properties of such localized matter, including localization
entropy). in such a framework it is suggestive to introduce an equivalence class
of theories which coalesce at the horizon in the hope to nd properties of that
class which one could associate with quantum gravity. but a lot of work has to
be carried out in order to get more physical breath into (or to bury) such ideas.
note added: the well-known relation of complex spacetime geometry re-
lated to the analytically continued (tube, extended tube, permuted extended
tubes, as delt with by the the bwh-theory [22]) correlation functions of co-
variant elds or more general localized operators may be adapted to the ads

9the notion of an sustained progress in fundamental physics on the scale of the great
conceptual conquests of the rst half century is too naive and certainly not compatible with
the post veltman-t hooft period in particle physics.
in contradistinction to some science
writers who attributes this to a forthcoming end of basis science, it seems to me that this
is (as the incredible events happening even at the end of this century in parts of civilized
society ) more related to the unstable and easily seducible aspects of human nature.

15

spacetime in order to nd a complex counterpart of the real spacetime for-
malism of this paper. one expects that the only signicant change (for qft
which are genuinely interacting and therefore violate the huygens principle in
an even number of spacetime dimensions) would consist in the loss of the bwh
uni-valuedness of the correlation functions in the ads-adjusted bwh-domain.
in d=1+1 this phenomenon is well-known and results from the change from
fermi/bose spacelike commutation relations to plektonic ones which reect the
r-matrix structure of the exchange algebras. however in higher dimensions the
analytic ramication properties of the vacuum expectation values of the block
components of centrally reducible local elds are still a terra incognita. i believe
one has two options, either use operators and real geometry/analysis as done
here and also in [5], or study state vectors obtained by multiple application
of elds to the vacuum or correlation functions with the help of complex ge-
omety/analysis. it is however not possible to use complx methods for operators
and therefore the terminology holomorphic elds is an extremely unfortunate
one.

in a recent paper by g. w. gibbons [23] such complex methods were used,
but since the relation to qft is still missing, it is not yet possible to say what
is the precise relation to [5] or to the present work.

references

[1] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, (1998) 231

[2] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, (1998) 253

[3] c. fronsdal, phys. rev. d10, (1974) 589

[4] s. j. avis, c. j. isham and d. storey, phys. rev. d18, (1978) 3565

[5] k.-h. rehren, algebraic holography, hep-th/9905179

[6] m. bertola, j. bros, u. moschella and r. schaeer, ads/cft correspon-

dence for n-point functions, hep-th/9908140

[7] d. buchholz, m. florig and s. j. summers, hawking-unruh temperature

and einstein causality in anti-de sitter space-time, hep-th/9905178

[8] b. schroer, new concepts in particle physics from solution of an old

problem, hep-th/9908021 and references therein

[9] i. e. segal, causality and symmetry in cosmology and the confor-
mal group, montreal 1976, proceedings, group theoretical methods in
physics, new york 1977, 433 and references therein to ealier work of the
same author.

[10] m. luescher and g. mack, commun. math. phys. 41, (1975) 203

[11] m. hortacsu, b. schroer and r. seiler, phys. rev. d5, (1972) 2519

16

[12] b. schroer and j. a. swieca, phys. rev. d10, (1974) 480, b. schroer, j.

a. swieca and a. h. voelkel, phys. rev. d11, (1975) 11

[13] a. a. belavin, a. m. polyakov and a. b. zamolodchikov, nucl. phys.

b247, (1984), 83

[14] r. haag and b. schroer, j. math. phys. 3, (1962) 248

[15] d. guido, r. longo, j.e. roberts and r. verch, charged sectors, spin
and statistics in quantum field theory on curved spacetimes, math-
ph/9906019

[16] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, modular constructions of quantum field
theories with interactions, hep-th/9812251, rev. in math. phys., in print

[17] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, modular theory and geometry, math-
ph/9809003, rev. in math. phys. in print, b. schroer and h.-w. wies-
brock, looking beyond the thermal horizon: hidden symmetries in chiral
models, hep-th/9901031, rev. in math. phys. in print

[18] l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36, (1995) 6377

[19] g. t hooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity,
festschrift, a. ali et al. eds., world scientic 1993, page 284

in salam-

[20] s. carlip, black hole entropy from conformal field theory in any di-

mension, hep-th/9812013, and references therein.

[21] j. dimock, locality in free string theory, math-arc 99-311 and references

therein

[22] r. f. streater and a. s. wightman, pct, spin&statistics, and all that,

w. benjamin, new york 1964

[23] g. w. gibbons, holography and the future tube, hep-th/9911027

17

