9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
6
1

 

 
 

1
v
5
2
1
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

center vortices, nexuses, and fractional topological charge

department of physics and astronomy, university of california, los angeles, los angeles, california 90095

(november 9, 1999)

john m. cornwall

it has been remarked in several previous works that the combination of center vortices and
nexuses (a nexus is a monopole-like soliton whose world line mediates certain allowed changes of
eld strengths on vortex surfaces) carry topological charge quantized in units of 1/n for gauge group
su (n ). these fractional charges arise from the interpretation of the standard topological charge

r g g as a sum of (integral) intersection numbers weighted by certain (fractional) traces. we show

that without nexuses the sum of intersection numbers give vanishing topological charge (since vortex
surfaces are closed and compact). with nexuses living as world lines on vortices, the contributions to
the total intersection number are weighted by dierent trace factors, and yield a picture of the total
topological charge as a linking of a closed nexus world line with a vortex surface; this linking gives rise
to non-vanishing but integral total topological charge. this reects the standard 2 periodicity of the
theta angle. we argue that the witten-veneziano  relation, naively violating 2 periodicity, scales
properly with n at large n without requiring  periodicity of 2n . this reects the underlying
composition of localized fractional topological charge, which are in general widely-separated. some
simple models are given of this behavior. in the intersection-number picture of topological charge,
nexuses lead to non-standard surfaces for all su (n ) and intersections of surfaces which do not
constitute manifolds for n > 2. we generalize previously-introduced nexuses to all su (n ) in
terms of a set of fundamental nexuses, which can be distorted into a conguration resembling the
t hooft-polyakov monopole with no strings. nexuses can also be exhibited with thick non-singular
strings, which generate vortices with nexus (and anti-nexus) world lines appearing as boundaries on
the vortex surface. the existence of localized but widely-separated fractional topological charges,
adding to integers only on long distance scales, has important implications for fermion zero modes
and the existence of standard chiral condensates in chiral symmetry breakdown, avoiding the usual
diculty when the number of avors exceeds one, as we review.

pacs number(s): 11.15 tk, 12.38.-t

i. introduction

a long-standing problem in gauge theories such as qcd is the existence or otherwise of fractional topological
charge (quantized in units of 1/n for gauge group su (n )). on the one hand, the second chern character (i. e., the
total topological charge) is integral for compact d=4 spaces. on the other hand, not only has fractional topological
charge been shown to exist in several circumstances (for the d=2 o(3) non-linear sigma model see ref. [1]; for torons,
existing only in d=4 spaces not admitting fundamental fermions, see ref. [2]; for su (2) charge-1/2 instantons joined
by a sphaleron world line, see ref. [3]), but 1/n charges seem to be essential for the large-n consistency of the
witten-veneziano formula [4,5] relating  parameters to the topological susceptibility. this consistency suggests that
at large n the partition function of the gauge theory, as a function of , is:

z = expz d4xn 2f (/n )

(1)

which in turn suggests a  period of 2n . (the extra n 2 in front comes from the known dependence of the vacuum
energy at  = 0.)

another long-standing problem has to do with fermionic condensates, either those related to chiral symmetry
breakdown (csb) or to gluino condensates in supersymmetric gauge theories. if topological charge exists only in
integral units, then the csb condensate involves nf fermion bilinears, not what is observed for qcd, where there is
a qq condensate.

email address: cornwall@physics.ucla.edu

1

in this work we argue that the combination of center vortices [69] and nexuses1 [1012] automatically solves the
witten-veneziano problem in qcd, and also leads to an understanding of how chiral symmetry breakdown (csb)
works.

there is a closely-related problem in susy gauge theories, which we will not discuss at all in this paper beyond this
paragraph. however, it will be clear that the ingredients we use in the non-supersymmetric case are quite applicable
to the supersymmetric case as well. in the pure susy gauge theory with no fundamental-representation multiplet, the
existence of fermionic zero modes is compatible with the existence of fractional total topological charge, because in the
anomaly the g g term is multiplied by an extra factor of 2n coming from the adjoint trace; the number of fermionic
zero modes is even, by charge conjugation, so a total topological charge  1/n is compatible with an integral number
of zero modes. however, if it is assumed that only integral charge appears, there are 2n zero modes. nonetheless, one
can argue (see refs. [13,14] which include references to earlier works) that susy ward identities and integral-charge
instanton physics lead to a non-vanishing two-gluino (rather than 2n -gluino) condensate hi, with breakdown of a
z2n symmetry to z2, and the appearance of n degenerate vacua, which are permuted with one another as  changes.
these vacua are separated from each other by domain walls. the alternative is a superselection rule, according to
which there is no possibility of connecting these degenerate vacua and no domain walls; which vacuum is to be used
depends on the value of  as it varies between 0 and 2n . some workers [15] claim that the assumption of clustering
made in the susy-instanton calculations is not justied, and that the congurations contributing directly to hi are
of monopole type. so there is controversy about the susy calculations, and it is not easy in broken susy to reveal
what happens in conventional qcd, even if these controversies are resolved within susy.

various hypotheses have been made about the non-susy qcd case. witten [4] reconciles 2 periodicity with
the  physics by assuming the existence of n non-degenerate vacua, one of which is picked out as having minimum
energy at any given ; this is essentially the superselection rule option. others [18] believe the solution is rather like
the susy one.

our solution is similar in spirit to the assertions made [15,16] for periodic instantons (calorons) that these can
be decomposed into fractional topological charges such as monopoles, although in our case the fractional charges
come from what appear to be dierent objects. it remains to be seen whether there is any direct connection, when
periodicity is not imposed and the gauge theory is not broken to u (1)n 1.

in view of these obscurities, one might ask whether there is any direct evidence from lattice calculations concerning
the existence of fractional topological charge. in fact, there is; edwards et al [17] nd su (2) gauge congurations
which have only two adjoint-fermion zero modes instead of the expected four, and interpret this as evidence of
fractional topological charge. exactly what carries this charge has not yet been identied, except that it cannot be
torons, which exist only in certain toroidal spaces not used by these authors.

although center vortices have been around for twenty years, it is only recently that several groups [1921] have found
spectacular evidence that center vortices, and only center vortices, are the mechanism of connement. moreover, de
forcrand and delia give evidence that if center vortices are removed, csb is lost; this is consistent with our arguments
below about the role of center vortices and nexuses in csb.

there is as yet only preliminary lattice evidence for the existence of nexuses; ref. [12] presents both some arguments

and some lattice data arguing for their existence in su (2).

to continue elaborating on center vortices and nexuses as sources of fractional topological charge, we will give in
further sections what we nd is a compelling picture of a vacuum structure in which it is automatic (at least for
compact d=4 spaces) that the total topological charge is indeed integral, but it is composed of fractional sub-charges,
quantized in units of 1/n . these fractional charges are separately localized (to within the characteristic distance
m 1 of qcd, where m is identied with the thickness of center vortices) but are uncorrelated with one another
except on a global distance scale, where the constraint of integral total topological charge operates. as a result, the
topological susceptibility, essentially the mean-square topological charge, is independent of n at large n (equivalent
to the dependence of f on /n in (1)) which insures the consistency of the witten-veneziano formula. these results
for the topological charge and its quantization stem from the observation [22,23,10,11] that topological charge is
essentially a sum of intersection numbers of the closed 2-surfaces which dene center vortices. these intersection
numbers are weighted by traces coming from the ux matrices associated with center vortices and their co-existing
nexuses, leading to fractional topological charge. for simple topological reasons, the charge associated with the
intersection of simple vortices having no nexuses is automatically zero, and essentially for the same reasons vortices

1a nexus, reviewed in the next section, is the closest thing qcd has to a monopole. it constitutes a closed world line sitting
on a vortex, dividing the eld strengths on the vortex into two or more distinct classes, as pointed out in ref. [3]. it is not the
same as monopoles usually cited in gauge theories broken to u (1)n 1.

2

with nexuses have integral and possibly non-zero topological charge. in eect, the nexuses result in non-orientable
surfaces2 and in surfaces which are not manifolds.

similar considerations hold for the chern-simons number in d=3, which is also [22,23,25] a linking number, in this
case of d=1 closed loops, which is what vortices become in this dimension. from time to time in the present paper
we will use gures portraying, or speak of, d=3 vortices, but this is simply for ease of visualization; our interest here
is in d=4. we postpone to another work discussion of the d=3 gauge theory with chern=simons terms for several
reasons; one is that the chern-simons term in the action aects the equations of motion, leading to twisted vortices
[26] carrying chern-simons number, a complexity with no analog in d=4. reconnection of vortices in d=3 may play
an important role in b+l violation in the high-temperature early universe [25].

nexus world lines appear as boundaries on the closed vortex surfaces, dividing it into two or more parts.

in
these dierent parts, the eld strengths associated with center vortices dier, but they always give rise to the same
vortex holonomy, expressed through the fundamental-representation wilson loop as an element of the center zn of
the gauge group. the intersection number of center vortices which expresses the topological charge is actually a
(weighted) linking number of a vortex surface (with or without nexuses) with the world line of a nexus. of course,
the fundamental property of connement by center vortices is also expressed [6] through a linking number, in this
case, that of the linking of the wilson loop with the closed vortex 2-surface. a vortex-loop link number can also be
dened [27] for baryonic wilson loops, which in su (n ) have n lines all of the same orientation going from one point
to another, and which are not one-dimensional manifolds. these baryonic linking numbers are rather similar in their
general topological character to the linking numbers of certain vortices with nexuses.

another important characteristic of the topological charge carried by center vortices and nexuses has to do with
csb in qcd. it is well-known that csb with ordinary integrally-charged instantons leads to a condensate with nf
fermion bilinears, where nf is the number of avors. this happens because of the nf fermionic zero modes, which
are four-dimensionally renormalizable. in fact, in order to get just a fermion bilinear condensate, it is necessary to
have three-dimensional zero modes, that is, zero modes which extend indenitely in a single direction in euclidean
four-space, but are localized in the other three directions [28]. only such d=3 modes can lead to a non-zero and
non-singular density of fermionic eigenvalues at the origin, which is necessary [29] for formation of a bilinear fermion
condensate. in eect, the fermions propagate along a line. in the case of fractional topological charge, there is either
explicitly (for su (2), see [3]) or implicitly such a line joining two or more fractional charges summing to an integer. by
the usual entropy arguments for strongly-coupled gauge theories such as qcd, this line is long and randomly-varying,
and leads to no long-range correlations between the fractional charges except at the scale of the overall system size.
there is one last question which should be discussed to complete the picture. if conventional integrally-charged
instantons coexist with the fractional charges discussed here, they will spoil the witten-veneziano formulas at large
n . in fact, there is no reason why this should happen. in su (2) [3] the existence of 1/2-charge instantons (not
the same as merons!) has been explicitly exhibited, along with the sphaleronic world line joining them. entropy
considerations favor the decay of any unit-charge instanton into two 1/2-charge instantons. similar explicit pictures
are not yet known for n  2, but it is clear that once again a unit-charge instanton lowers the free energy by decaying
into the kind of fractional-charge congurations we discuss here, which have high entropy. there is no topological
barrier to this kind of decay, which preserves the topological charge.

in summary: the fractional topological charges associated with center vortices and instantons are necessarily
grouped into integral charges on a global scale, but are uncorrelated with each other on any shorter scale; the result is
conventional 2 periodicity in  along with witten-veneziano consistency. moreover, these fractional charges should
lead to three-dimensional fermionic zero modes which in turn lead to the usual picture of csb in qcd.

ii. center vortices and nexuses

we give a brief review of center vortices and nexuses, followed by a description for general su (n ) of some funda-
mental nexuses from which all other nexuses can be found. examples of both fundamental (su (2)) and composite
(su (3)) nexuses were given earlier [10]. each nexus, essentially a smeared-out point particle in d=3, or world line in
d=4, must be accompanied by an anti-nexus to which it is joined by pieces of center vortices. from time to time we
will speak of a nexus in isolation, without reference to the anti-nexus to which it must be attached by vortex surfaces.

2this eective non-orientability is not the same as actual non-orientability such as found in klein bottles; there is lattice
evidence [24] that center-vortex surfaces are highly non-orientable in the usual sense.

3

a. review of center vortices and nexuses

center vortices and nexuses arise as quantum solitons of an eective action which reects the main consequence of
infrared instability of qcd in d=3,4, namely, generation [30,31] of a constituent gluon mass m . there is no symmetry
breaking associated with the mass, which appears in the action as a gauged non-linear sigma model term. such a
term, if interpreted as fundamental, can lead to non-renormalizability, but in fact no such problems are encountered
because for consistency with schwinger dyson equations [30] the constituent mass term in the gluonic propagator
must vanish at large momentum [32], in a way depending on the gluon condensate:

m 2(q)  const.

g2hg2i

q2

modulo logarithmic corrections. the massive eective lagrangian density in euclidean space is:3

l = (t r)[

1
2

g2

 + m 2(u 1du )2].

here u is an n  n unitary matrix; the gauge transformation laws

u  v u ; a  v av 1 + v v 1

(2)

(3)

(4)

leave both terms of the lagrangian invariant. it can easily be checked that the equations of motion for u are not
independent, but merely represent the usual identity

[d, [d, g]]  0.

(5)

both center vortices and nexuses are quantum solitons of the eective action (3). we will postpone the discussion
of nexuses to the next subsection, for now noting that nexuses are monopole-like objects on which two or more vortex
sheets terminate.

a center vortex with no nexus structure on it can always be displayed (modulo a regular gauge transformation) as
an abelian structure, representing the underlyling abelian (center) holonomy of the vortices. (once nexuses enter
the picture, non-abelian eects must appear.) the essential contribution of the u terms is a long-range pure-gauge
part which is in itself singular on a closed 2-surface in d=4 (a closed string in d=3). in d=4, a solitonic solution [6]
to the eective action based on equation (3) is essentially a nielsen-olesen vortex:

a(x; q) = (

2q

i

) z 1

2

d [m (x  z)  0(x  z)].

(6)

here q is a matrix in the cartan subalgebra (discussed below), the integral runs over a closed 2-surface z(,  ), and
m,0 is the free propagator of mass m, 0 respectively. the u contribution is the 0 term, which can easily be veried
to be a pure gauge. by itself this term is singular when x = z, but this singularity is exactly cancelled by the massive
term.

in this paper we will only be interested in long-range eects, so for the most part we take m  , drop the m
term, and save only the long-range pure-gauge part. when this is done the resulting eld strength is not identically
zero, but has delta-function strength on the vortex surface. (in this limit these become dirac strings for nexuses.) it
is simplest to express this through the dual eld strength:

g = (

2q

i

)z d (x  z).

it is convenient in the m =  limit to observe [10] that this pure-gauge part can be written as:

a(x; q) = v v 1; v = exp iq

(7)

(8)

3until section iv we drop the coupling g; in fact, all vortex and nexus gauge potentials should have an extra factor 1/g.
the gauge potential is the usual anti-hermitean one: a = (a/2i)aa
 with trab = 2ab, and the covariant derivative is
d =  + a.

4

where  is the so-called magnetic potential, dened as an integral over any 3-volume v whose boundary v is the
surface s over which the vortex is dened:

(x) = z dv0(x  z).

(9)

the delta-function eld strength is reproduced via the 2 jump in  as the volume v is crossed.

the matrix q which appears in the vortex (6) we will call a ux matrix. flux is dened not through a 2 homotopy,
as is often asserted for the abelian monopole case, but by the homotopy 1(su (n )/zn ) = zn . in physical terms,
the magnetic ux is measured by a wilson-loop holonomy going around a vortex string. for gauge group su (n ) the
matrix q is chosen as a sum of the n matrices qi, which (over)span the cartan subalgebra (the sum of all qi is zero):

qi = diag(

1
n

,

1
n

,

1
n

 1,

1
n

, . . .)

(10)

where the -1 is in the ith position. any of the matrices qj has the property that exp(2iqj) = exp(2i/n ), an
element of the center zn . the sum qi + qj + . . . with i 6= j 6= . . . and a total of k terms exponentiates to the center
element exp(2ik/n ).

to describe the eect of vortices on (fundamental) wilson loops, it is not necessary to be so explicit. a set of

independent vortices is described by an overall gauge transformation

v = v (k1)v (k2) . . . v (kj )

(11)

where the v (kj) have holonomies exp(2ikj/n ), when linked once in a positive sense with a given wilson loop. for a
given set of vortices, the value of the wilson loop is given by the product of these holonomies, each counted as many
times as the vortex is linked with the loop. (if the wilson loop is unlinked to a given vortex, that vortex contributes
a factor of unity.) a standard collective-coordinate calculation for a gas of independent vortices then gives [6,33] for
the expectation value of the wilson loop:

ht r p exp[iz dxa(x)]i = exp[

a

n  1 x(e2ik/n  1)]

(12)

where a is the minimal area of a surface spanning the loop,  is the two-dimensional density of vortices of all types
penetrating unit area, and the sum over k goes from [n/2] to +[n/2], but excluding zero, where the brackets indicate
the integral part. one then nds a string tension kf = n/(n  1).

note that the result for the value of the wilson loop in a specied set of vortices (as in equation (11)) is just the
same as if we had actually used the explicit abelian form of the vortices as given in equation (6). one sees here
an application of the splitting principle [34] according to which gauge-invariant functions such as wilson loops and
characteristic classes can be computed as if the gauge connections were diagonal (living in the cartan subalgebra
u (1)n 1 instead of in su (n ).) later we will use this abelian form to calculate topological charge from the chern
second character. in this application nexuses appear as obstructions to global applicability of the splitting principle.

b. fundamental vortex-nexus for su (n )

a nexus is a physical branch point at which up to n vortex surfaces can join. because these surfaces must be
closed, a nexus can only exist along with an anti-nexus, as shown for su (2) in fig. 1 and for su (3) in fig. 2 ; the
nexus or anti-nexus is shown as a dark circle where vortices meet. these particular examples were discussed in detail
in ref. [10]. the general rule for choosing the ux matrices on the individual vortices of the nexus is that the algebraic
sum of all the incoming ux matrices must have only integral eigenvalues. as we will show here, the simple loop
topology of the su (2) nexus is the generic type for all n , and other vortex-nexuses, such as in fig. 2, can considered
to be composites of the fundamental type of fig. 1, with two vortices, a nexus, and an anti-nexus. there is also what
appears to be another type of vortex-nexus combination built on a simple closed loop; this generalization for n > 2
consists of a simple closed loop, as in fig. 1, with vortices divided by up to n nexuses. each vortex segment carries
a dierent ux matrix qi. we leave it to the reader to show that this is a composite of fundamental vortex-nexuses.
a vortex-nexus combination which is a composite of fundamental ones may have dierent eective action from that

ascribed to the fundamentals of which it is a composite; we do not discuss this purely dynamical point here.

fig. 1 and fig. 2 can be interpreted as composed either of one-dimensional strings, as appropriate for d=3 vortices,
or as cross-sections of 2-surfaces, as appropriate for d=4.
in the next section we discuss the d=4 surfaces more
explicitly, but for simplicity of visualization think of d=3 nexuses in what follows. it is most important to note that

5

at nite m these strings are not dirac strings; rather, they are fat strings, in fact identical in local structure to the
center vortices already introduced in equation (6). roughly speaking (for more detail, see [10]) the arrows on the
vortex lines indicate the direction of the magnetic eld of the vortex, and in fig. 2 the numbers indicate which qi is
carried on the labeled line. the sum of the incoming ux matrices at the nexus of fig. 2 is therefore q1 + q2 + q3 = 0.
for the su (2) case of fig. 1, no labels are needed, because the only possibility is that one line carries q1 = (1/2)3,
and the other carries q2 = q1. in this case the sum of incoming uxes is q1  q2 = 23. this is an allowed ux
matrix at the nexus, because this ux matrix has only integral eigenvalues.

as stated above, the general su (n ) nexus obeys the simple rule that the sum of incoming ux matrices at any
nexus must yield a ux matrix with only integral eigenvalues. so fig. 2 could be relabeled; for example, all lines could
carry q1 since 3q1 is integral. it is only such nexuses, carrying non-vanishing but integral ux which can contribute
to non-zero topological charge. note that however we choose the qi on the vortex lines, the holonomies on all lines
are the same. of course, more complicated nexuses can be constructed, in which every line has a ux matrix of the
type qi + qj, with dierent values of i, j for each line; again, the holonomies are the same for every line.

every su (n ) nexus can be written in terms of a set of fundamental nexuses which have just two lines, as in the
su (2) case of fig. 1. on one of the lines the ux matrix is, say, qi; on the other line the ux matrix is qj. the
only non-trivial case is i 6= j. we will use the notation (i, j) for a fundamental nexus, of which there are clearly
n (n  1)/2 dierent varieties. the total ux matrix is qi  qj, which is easily checked from equation (10) to have
all but two eigenvalues of zero, the other two being 1 and -1. that is, for every n and every i 6= j the matrix qi  qj
is twice a generator j3 of an embedded su (2) subgroup.4 this is a key observation, because it allows us to deform a
fundamental nexus for any su (n ) into something resembling a t hooft-polyakov (tp) monopole (except that there
are no adjoint higgs elds to break the symmetry to u (1)n 1). alternatively, of course, we may think of deforming
the tp-monopole of ref. [11], embedded in any su (n ) gauge theory, into a fundamental nexus (and then closing all
the vortex lines involved with an anti-nexus).

consider now an su (3) three-line nexus, such as shown in fig. 2; in an obvious notation, we label such nexuses
generically (i, j, k), so fig. 2 is the nexus (1, 2, 3). by drawing pictures and using the fact that the sum of the qi is
zero, one sees that it can be written as a composite of two fundamental nexuses (along with their partner anti-nexuses)
of type (1, 2), such that two of the lines are merged (beginning at the merger of the nexuses) in such a sense that
the merged lines carry ux matrix q3. similarly one can compound all allowed nexuses out of fundamental ones.

we return to the mapping of a nexus with integral ux onto the tp monopole. this has been discussed in detail
in refs. [10,11] for the su (2) case, so we can be brief about the generalization to su (n ). consider the (1, 2) nexus
of su (3), shown in isolation from the anti-nexus in fig. 3(a). the vortex lines in this gure run along the z-axis.

the rst step in constructing this nexus is to determine the long-range pure-gauge part of the vector potential,
which must be, in the notation of the eective lagrangian of equation (3), u u 1 in order that both terms of the
eective action go to zero at long distances. in the m   limit this is all that is left of the gauge potential. the
necessary gauge part must describe a q1 string on one side and a q2 on the other. one simple possibility, by no
means the only one, is:

u = u1 = ei(/2)3 eiq1 ei(/2)3.

(13)

here  is the usual azimuthal angle and  the usual polar angle. it is easy to verify that this u1 leads to dirac strings
as shown in fig. 3(a).

the next step is to transform u1 into a nexus such as is shown in fig. 3(b), where the (-1) string has been moved

onto the same side of the z-axis as the (2) string. this is easily done by the transform

u1  u2 = eiq1 u1eiq1 .

(14)

the result is a monopole-like object with a half-string whose ux matrix is twice a j3 generator of an embedded
su (2), as described above; for su (3), this generator is (1/2)3. this will be recognized as the presentation of the
wu-yang monopole in the so-called abelian gauge. at this point we will not bother to write out terms in the gauge
potential which do not have dirac strings. if we take the half-string to lie along the negative z-axis, the corresponding
vector potential describing the strings is:

a4 = 0; ai =

i


3 (1  cos ).

(15)

4by incorporating a zero eigenvalue of qi  qj one has a j3 for an embedded so(3); this works just as well.

6

of course, the double ux comes from the 1  cos  factor along the z-axis. by a well-known gauge transformation
this can be transformed into a spherically-symmetric gauge potential with no string:

here ~j are the usual su (2) generators (1/2)(1, 2, 3) embedded in su (3). the result is the familiar presentation
of the wu-yang monopole in the spherical gauge, with no strings:

u2  v u2v 1; v = ei ~j  .

(16)

a4 = 0; ai =

1
2i

ijk rj k.

(17)

this form of the wu-yang potential is, in fact, the asymptotic behavior of the tp monopole in the spherical gauge.
we can now refer to ref. [10] for further developments, in which the wu-yang potential is augmented to account
for nite=m terms needed to remove short-distance singularities and turn the original dirac strings into fat strings
without singularities, such as occur in center vortices. ref. [11] gives the explicit results needed to deform the tp
monopole, originally dened through a theory containing adjoint higgs elds, into one which has no higgs elds but
only the symmetric mass term of equation (3). the resulting monopole has no long-range elds and no strings. by
inverting the series of gauge transformations given above (suitably deformed to avoid singularities), we go from the
spherically-symmetric monopole to the nexus of fig. 3(a). that is, rst one puts in the half-string by means of the
gauge transform in (16), then converts this into a full string as in fig. 3(a) with the gauge transform of (14). the
result is not exactly the original gauge we started with, as shown in equation (13), but is equivalent to it. when these
steps are taken in the su (2) case the resulting nexus gauge can be chosen as:

v = exp(i


2

~  r); ai = v iv 1.

(18)

one easily nds that the singular eld strength points along the z-axis, but with oppositely-directed eld strengths,
as shown in fig. 1. this happens because ~  r = 3 along the z-axis. one also sees that, as discussed above, the
holonomy around either of the two strings attached to the nexus is -1.

the static su (3) nexus of fig. 2, with three strings, can be described analogously (see ref. [10]), but we need not
review that here. it is enough for us to know that this vortex is a composite of two (i, j) vortices, as described above.

iii. topological charge

we rst show that compact closed vortices with no nexuses give rise to zero topological charge, and next that
adding nexuses gives rise to non-vanishing integral topological charge. in both cases the essential feature is that the

topological charge integral r g g is expressible as a (weighted) intersection number.

a. topological charge as an intersection number

first we dene an integral which gives intersection numbers, each weighted by an orientation factor. let sa,b be

two closed, oriented, compact 2-surfaces in d=4 and dene an intersection integral i(a.b) by:

i(a, b) =  z 1

2

d (sa)

1
2

d (sb)(x(a)  x(b)).

the topological charge q is:

q =

1

162 z d4xt r g g .

(19)

(20)

with the help of equations (19) and (7) (giving the dual eld strength of a center vortex), this results in a formula
for the topological charge coming from a number of oriented vortices (for the moment, with no nexuses):

 q = xa,b

t r(qaqb)n (a, b).

(21)

7

here n (a, b) is the number of times, weighted by orientation, that surface a intersects with surface b. this number
is actually twice the value i(a, b) of the integral in (19). the reason is that when one expresses the topological
charge as a sum over a quadratic form in vortex surfaces, mutual intersections are counted twice. in fact, so are
self-intersections, which are counted twice in i(a, a). the reason is that on the surface a we can identify two
neighborhoods, call them 1 and 2, which contain a point of intersection. just like mutual intersections, these bits of
surface are counted twice in i(a, a).

it would now appear from (21) that the total topological charge could be non-integral, because of the trace factors.
this is not so, for simple vortices with no nexuses. the reason is that the intersection number for each trace is
actually zero, reecting the fact that closed surfaces intersect an even number of times, and the orientation factor is
of one sign for half the intersections and the other for the other half (see fig. 4, which shows the same thing but in
d=2).

the conclusion is that for compact closed vortex surfaces with no nexuses, the topological charge is zero. we next

consider the inuence of nexuses.

b. vortices, nexuses, and integral topological charge

nexuses modify equation (7), which expresses the eld strength of a vortex with no nexuses as q times an integral
over a delta function. in the m =  limit, the necessary modication to describe a vortex-nexus combination is that
the matrix q becomes a matrix-valued function q(,  ) of the variables dening the surface x = z(,  ):

g = (

2
i

)z d q(,  )(x  z).

(22)

this function q(,  ) changes on the scale m 1 from qi to qj as one crosses the world-line of a fundamental nexus,
which is embedded in the vortex surface.5 for example, consider the d=3 nexus of fig. 1, applicable to su (2); the
direction of eld strengths changes at the nexus or anti-nexus. to make a closed vortex surface in d=4, rotate the
nexus and the anti-nexus to form two closed world lines, which appear (see fig. 5) as two boundaries dividing a torus
into two parts, with oppositely-directed eld lines in each part. although not shown on the gure, the nexus world
lines are oriented, and oriented oppositely to each other.

if the vortex-nexus combination in fig. 4 intersects a plain vortex with no nexuses, it is possible to generate non-zero
topological charge, provided that one of the two intersection points lies in one region of the vortex-nexus, and the
other lies in the other region, where the eld lines have opposite orientation. this is illustrated in fig. 6, where a
slice of the plain vortex is shown intersecting the vortex-nexus combination.

when there were no nexuses, as in equation (21), we encountered the trace weighting factor

t r(

3
2i

)2  t r(

3
2i

)2 = 0.

(23)

the minus sign reected the fact that the vortex slice of fig. 5 rst entered, then exited the torus. but now, provided
that the two intersection points lie in the two dierent regions of the torus, we nd

t r(

3
2i

)2  t r[(

3
2i

)2] = 1.

(24)

the minus sign inside the trace comes from the reversal of eld strengths.

it is clear that the topological charge is now expressed as a linking number of a vortex with the world line of a
nexus. when this linking number is zero, the topological charge is zero; this can happen either if there is no nexus
(as in the previous subsection or if the two intersection points lie on the same side of the nexus, that is, are not linked
to it.

all of this generalizes to su (n ). in that case, if a plain vortex (k) is linked to the nexus (i, j) of another vortex,

the trace factor which we encounter is:

t rqk(qi  qj) = ik  jk.

(25)

5as we will see below, one cannot choose the ,  dependence of q arbitrarily; the bianchi identities must be respected.

8

the result is always 1 or 0. the reader can supply the generalization to a vortex-nexus combination intersecting
another vortex-nexus combination, to higher linking numbers, and so on. in all cases, the topological charge is an
integer.

non-fundamental nexuses involve higher-genus gures which are awkward to draw in d=3 (just as it is awkward to
draw a klein bottle). for example, an (i, j, k) vortex-nexus, as in fig. 2, requires a genus-two surface which is not a
manifold.

we close this section with some remarks on the formula (22), which generalizes to a nexus-vortex combination
the fundamental m =  vortex of equation (7). with q a non-trivial function of ,  , the bianchi identity is not
automatic. to simplify the issue, we note that q changes only in the immediate vicinity of the nexus line, which can
be parametrized with only one of the two variables ,  . for example, choose these 2-surface coordinates so that the
nexus world line is  = 0; that allows us to choose q to be only a function of  . applying the bianchi identity one
nds, using

where the dot indicates  derivatives and the prime indicates  derivatives, that

d = zz 

  (  ),

 g = (

2
i

)z dz 

{ q + [ za, q]}(x  z).

(26)

(27)

in order that the bianchi identity be satised, the quantity in curly brackets on the right-hand side of (27) must
vanish (wong equation), so that

q( ) = u ( )q(0)u 1( ); u ( ) = p exp(z 

za).

one can then write the vortex-nexus combination as a singular gauge transformation of the pure vortex:

g  u (x)g u 1(x)

(28)

(29)

where u (x) is some suitable extension of u ( ) from a function dened on the vortex surface to one dened everywhere.6
such a singular gauge transformation is of the type described in equation (13), which rotates q1 into q2. this
transformation necessarily does not commute with either of the q-values on the two parts of the vortex-nexus surface.

iv. some simple models

so far we have established that total topological charge is integral, but its constituent charges are fractional (which
reminds one of conventional quark connement). this is the clue to devising models of the dependence of the vacuum
energy on  which are consistent with the witten-veneziano formula (1).

let us recall equation (1) (repeated for convenience) which expresses the partition function in terms of an eective

action:

z = expz d4xn 2f (/n )  exp[z d4xw ()].

(30)

in the rst model, which is purely mathematical, we seek a function f which is both (formally) periodic with period
2 and which has a second derivative at the origin which is o(1/n 2) for the specic case n = 2. the second model
is quasi-physical; for it, we estimate the large-n behavior of the rst two terms in the taylor series expansion of w .
our estimates are not quantitatively accurate, but we believe that they give the right large-n behavior.

6for example, the surface x = z(,  ) can be described as the simultaneous satisfaction of two conditions g(x) = h(x) = 0,
for suitable g, h. then one can choose g, h, ,  as four coordinates, expressible in terms of the x. any function u (g, h, ,  )
such that u (0, 0, 0,  ) = u ( ) is an extension to all space.

9

a. a mathematical model mimicking su(2)

suppose we ip a coin at random, assigning the number +1/2 to every head and -1/2 to every tail. there is a total

of j = n+ + n trials, with n+ heads and n tails. the topological charge q is dened as:

q =

1
2

(n+  n) = n+ 

1
2

j.

evidently if we choose j even we always get integral topological charge, so set j = 2k.

it is elementary to calculate the generating function z() for this distribution:

z() = x

j!

n+!(j  n+)!

(

1
2

)n ei(n+k) = (cos

)j .


2

since j is even we can also write

z() = (

1 + cos )

2

)k,

(31)

(32)

(33)

which shows that z is periodic in  with period 2.

write z() in terms of an eective action density for topological charge, without the factor n 2 = 4 in front which

we have agreed to drop:

z() = ejf (); f () = (

1
2

) ln(

1 + cos 

2

).

(34)

here j plays the role of the system space-time volume (see equation (1)). we calculate the mean-square topological
charge, corresponding to 1/n 2 times the topological susceptibility in the witten-veneziano formula:

hq2i

j

= f ()|=0 =

1
4

.

(35)

the 1/4 is, of course, the factor 1/n 2 we want to have in the witten-veneziano formula (1), coming from the second
derivative of f (/n ) introduced in that formula. so we have a model in which the eective potential density is
formally a periodic function of  with period 2, while at the same time the susceptibility reects the underlying
compositon of the topological charge as a sum of fractional charges.

there is, as one might anticipate, a singularity in the eective potential density at  = , where f is logarithmically
singular and goes to +. there is an innite barrier to cross at  = . once the barrier is crossed, the eective
potential is well-dened in the region  <   2.

similar models can be constructed for larger n , but we will not discuss them here. in every case, the trick is the

occurrence of a logarithm in the eective action, leading to impassable barriers at specic values of .

let us now turn to more physical arguments.

b. a nexus-vortex picture

the object here is to argue for a picture of large-n nexus-vortex dynamics leading to consistency between the
behavior of the vacuum eective-action density at  = 0, which scales (as equation (1) or (30) shows) with n 2, and its
second derivative, which should scale as n 0 to agree with the witten-veneziano formula. in achieving this consistency
we require that globally only integral topological charge is allowed. that is, the dynamics should be consistent with
2 periodicity of . the dynamics of nexuses and vortices in d=4 is very complicated, and all of our considerations
will be qualitative and heuristic. we do not (as we did in the previous model) determine the full  dependence of the
eective action, which is a dicult problem even in a drastically-simplied model.

the picture we oer is supposed to summarize in a heuristic way the results of some elaborate calculation of the
vortex-nexus vacuum, including proper treatment of collective coordinates, soliton-soliton interactions, and the like.
as part of this calculation one would determine a density  of solitons per unit 4-volume. schematically, this density
is determined by:

 = xc.c.

ei

10

(36)

where the sum is over collective coordinates for the solitons, whose action is i. both this collective-coordinate sum and
the action depend on n and on the specic type of soliton. for example, a vortex whose holonomy is exp(2ij/n )
has an action (per unit vortex area) which depends on n, j as:

i/a  (

m 2
g2 )(

j(n  j)

n

)

(37)

(where the factor j(n  j)/n is t rq2 for the appropriate sum over dierent qi) and so it would appear that the
density  goes to zero in the large-n limit. but this need not be so (see, e.g., [33]) because the collective-coordinate
integrals over group cosets contains factors which grow exactly at the rate at which exp(i) decreases. for extended
objects like vortices it is beyond our powers to do the true collective-coordinate integrals, but it is plausible [33] that
the density  scales like a power of n and is not exponentially-small. in any event, that is what we assume. we
will see that for certain fundamental vortices, which is all that we consider explicitly, the scaling   n is needed to
reproduce the n 2 scaling of the vacuum energy at  = 0 (see equation (1) or (30)). we then show that this scaling
leads to a topological susceptibility which scales like n 0.

there are many types of vortex-nexus combinations which can inhabit the vacuum, and to discuss them all explicitly
is more tedious than instructive. we will only consider fundamental vortices with just one nexus-anti-nexus pair on
it, as illustrated in fig. 5; all other types are composites of this case. then we can restrict the sum over vortices,
collective coordinates, and so forth in equation (37) just to the case j = 1, the case of fundamental vortex-nexus
combinations. from equation (37) the action of a fundamental vortex scales like n , and the eective-action density
of the vacuum will scale like n after doing the collective-coordinate calculations. this must be an n 2 scaling, which
suggests, as already mentioned,   n .

previous sections of this paper have shown that the total topological charge q is necessarily integral for vortex-nexus
combinations, and no approximation we have made will change that. the question is what happens to the topological
susceptibility hq2i/v (where v is the volume of space-time).

by standard arguments of random sign and independence of the fractional topological charges qa which live on the
intersection points a of vortex-nexus combinations, the susceptibility depends only on the sum of squares of these
fractional charges:

each q2
with probability (n  1)/n . in view of the trace formula, valid for all n ,

a in this sum is of the form t rqiqj, for various values of i, j. evidently i = j with probability 1/n and i 6= j

h[x qa]2i = hx(qa)2i.

(38)

t rqiqj = ij 

1
n

(39)

it follows that the mean-square topological charge per intersection of the fundamental vortex-nexus combinations is:

hq2

ai =

1
n

(

n  1

n

)2 + (

n  1

n

)

1
n 2 =

n  1

n 2

.

(40)

the topological susceptibility is found by multiplying by the density of intersections, which we argue scales like the
soliton density :

hq2i

v

 hq2

ai  n 0.

(41)

this is the desired result for consistency with the witten-veneziano formula.

v. conclusions

the thrust of this paper is that a theory like qcd does possess fractional topological charge, quantized in units of
1/n for gauge group su (n ). becauses of the special topology of vortices with nexus world lines embedded in them,
the interpretation of total topological charge as an intersection number does not always yield zero, as it would for pure
vortices with no nexuses, but instead yields integral topological charge. at the same time, the fractional topological
charges are essential for consistency with the witten-veneziano formula.
it is not that (in general) all fractional
charges are 1/n , which would require n fold intersections of vortices not describable as manifolds. instead, in the

11

simplest case of fundamental vortex-nexus combinations, integral charge is found because the combination of fractional
charge 1  1/n occurs together with fractional charge 1/n , whose sum is 1. yet these two fractional charges are
not otherwise correlated; they can and generally will be far apart, because entropy considerations cause vortices and
nexus world lines to be very extended and convoluted; there is no long-range correlation between fractional topological
charges except on a global scale.

there are still fermionic zero modes associated with each integral combination of topological charge, but these are,
in eect, not the usual zero modes around an instanton, which fall o in all four directions of euclidean space-time.
instead, because the zero modes must feel two separated fractional charges, they are essentially three-dimensional,
extending without appreciable change along some sort of world line joining the two fractional charges. this is essential
[3,28] in order that chiral symmetry breakdown yield a bilinear fermion condensate instead of a 2n  f -fold fermion
condensate.

so it appears that the combination of center vortices and their associated nexuses have the potential to solve several
problems at once: a  period of 2 (equivalent to only integral charge); a topological susceptibility correctly scaling
with n ; and the problem of getting a bilinear csb condensate.

there remain numerous issues to be resolved. first, the nexus-vortex picture given in section iv is greatly simplied,
and it remains to be veried by real calculations or simulations. (a realistic large-n d=4 simulation of gauge theory
is probably not practical, but there are possible models in d=2 which can be studied for relatively large values of n .)
second, for the picture we have given to work, it is necessary either that conventional integrally-charged instantons
are rare (with relative probability o(1/n 2) or even disallowed, by virtue of entropy-favored transitions to separated
fractional-charge states. the entropy-favored decay of instantons into fractional charges can be seen for n = 2, where
explicit forms were given [3] for half-charges resembling instantons but joined by a sphaleronic world line. standard
entropy arguments favor the extension and randomization of this world line, leading to loss of long-range correlation
or interaction between the half-charged objects. no such explicit forms are known for n > 2, and they should be
sought.

third, there is the question of d=3 gauge theories where there are somewhat similar phenomena, since vortices
and nexuses exist there, and so does fractional topological charge. the chern-simons term is expressible as a linking
number [22,23,25]. we have noted that d=3 gauge theories pose special problems not seen in d=4; for example,
adding a chern-simons term changes the equations of motion and the behavior of vortices [26], giving them twist or
writhe (equivalent to self-linking).

note added: after this work was completed i found a preprint of engelhardt and reinhardt [35], who discuss the
su (2) case of vortices with nexuses in terms similar to mine. they do not discuss the generalization to su (n ) nor
the witten-veneziano problem.

i thank s. cherkis for valuable conversations.

acknowledgments

12

[1] v. a. fateev, i. v. frolov, and a. s.schwarz, nucl. phys. b154, 1 (1979).
[2] g. t hooft, comm. math. phys. 81, 267 (1981).
[3] j. m. cornwall and g. tiktopoulos, phys. lett. b 181, 353 (1986).
[4] e. witten, nucl. phys. b156, 269 (1979).
[5] g. veneziano, nucl. phys. b159, 213 (1979).
[6] j. m. cornwall, nucl. phys. b157, 392 (1979).
[7] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b153, 141 (1979).
[8] g. mack and v. b. petkova, ann. phys. (n.y.) 123, 442 (1979).
[9] h. b. nielsen and p. olesen, nucl. phys. b160, 380 (1979); j. ambjorn and p. olesen, ibid. b170, 60 (1980); b170, 225

(1980).

[10] j. m. cornwall, phys. rev. d 58, 105028 (1998).
[11] j. m. cornwall, phys. rev. d 59, 125015 (1999).
[12] j. ambjrn, j. giedt, and j. greensite, preprint hep-lat/9907021 (unpublished, july 1999).
[13] m. shifman, prog. part. nucl. phys. 39, 1 (1997).
[14] a. smilga, phys. rev. d 54, 7757 (1996).
[15] n. m. davies, t. j. hollowood, v. v. khoze, and m. p. mattis, preprint hep-th/9904116 (unpublished, april 1999); n. m.

davies, t. j. hollowood, v. v. khoze, and m. p. mattis, preprint hep-th/9905015 (unpublished, may 1999).

[16] t. c. kraan and p. van baal, phys. lett. b248, 268 (1998); nucl. phys. b 533, 627 (1998); k. lee, phys. lett. b246,

323 (1998); k. lee and c. lu, phys. rev. d 58, 025011 (1998).

[17] r. g. edwards, u. m. heller, and r. narayanan, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 73, 497 (1999) (proceedings of the 16th

international symposium on lattice field theory, boulder, co, 1998).

[18] i. halperin and a. zhitnitsky, phys. rev. lett. 81, 4071 (1998); s. jaimungal and a. zhitnitsky, preprint hep-ph/9905540

(unpublished, may 1999).

[19] t. g. kovacs and e. t. tomboulis, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 73, 566 (1999); phys. rev. d 57, 4054 (1998); nucl. phys.

b (proc. suppl.) 63, 534 (1998); 53, 509 (1997); phys. lett. b443, 239 (1998).

[20] l. del debbio, m. faber, j. greensite, and s. olenk, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 63, 552 (1998); phys. rev. d 55, 2298
(1997); presentations at the nato workshop new developments in quantum field theory, zakopane, poland, june 1997
(hep-lat/9708023) and at the 31st international symposium on the theory of elementary particles, buckow, germany,
september 2-6. 1997 )hep-lat/9802003).

[21] p. de forcrand and m. delia, phys. rev. lett. 82, 4582 (1999).
[22] j. m. cornwall, in unied symmetry: in the small and in the large (proceedings of the conference, coral gables, fl

1994), ed. b.n. kursonoglu et al (plenum, new york, 1995), p. 243.

[23] j. m. cornwall and b. yan, phys. rev. d 53, 4638 (1996).
[24] r. bertle, m. faber, j. greensite, and s. olenik, preprint hep-lat/9903023 (unpublished, march 1999).
[25] j. m. cornwall, phys. rev. d 56, 6146 (1997).
[26] j. m. cornwall, phys. rev. d 54, 1814 (1996).
[27] j. m. cornwall, phys. rev. d 54, 6527 (1996).
[28] e. floratos and j. stern, phys. lett. b 119, 419 (1982); g.tiktopoulos, nucl. phys. b234, 228 (1984); phys. rev. d 35,

732 (1987).

[29] t. banks and a. casher, nucl. phys. b169, 103 (1980).
[30] j. m. cornwall, phys. rev. d 26, 1453 (1982).
[31] j. m. cornwall, w.-s. hou, and j. e. king, phys. lett. 153b, 173 (1985).
[32] m. lavelle, phys. rev. d 44, r26 (1991).
[33] j. m. cornwall, phys. rev. d 57, 7589 (1998).
[34] see, e.g., t. eguchi, p. b. gilkey, and a. j. hanson, phys. repts. 66, 213 (1980).
[35] m. engelhardt and h. reinhardt, preprint hep-th/9907139 (unpublished, july 1999).

13

fig. 1.

a sketch of an su(2) nexus and anti-nexus (black circles) separating regions of center vortices with oppo-

sitely-directed eld strengths.

1

2

3

fig. 2. an su(3) nexus and anti-nexus.

1

2

(a)

1

2

(b)

fig. 3.

(a) a (-1,2) nexus of su (3) (isolated from its anti-nexus). (b) the (-1) line has been moved to merge with the (2)

line, yielding a ux matrix q2  q1.

fig. 4.

in d=2, two closed lines intersect an even number of times, with opposite sign.

14

fig. 5. generation of a 2-surface in d=4 from the d=3 vortex-nexus combination of fig. 1. note that the nexus world lines

are now closed lines dividing the torus into regions of oppositely-directed eld strength.

fig. 6.

intersection (in d=4) of the vortex-nexus of fig. 2 with an ordinary vortex (slice shown as directed contour).

linking of ordinary vortex with nexus world line produces topological charge.

15

