mcgill-98/37, damtp-1998-173

hep-th/9911164

a naturally small cosmological constant on the brane?

c.p. burgess,a r.c. myersa and f. quevedob

a physics department, mcgill university, montreal, quebec, canada h3a 2t8.

b d.a.m.t.p., silver street, cambridge, cb3 9ew, england.

0
0
0
2

 
l
u
j
 

1

 
 

3
v
4
6
1
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

there appears to be no natural explanation for the cos-
mological constants small size within the framework of lo-
cal relativistic eld theories. we argue that the recently-
discussed framework for which the observable universe is iden-
tied with a p-brane embedded within a higher-dimensional
bulk spacetime, has special properties that may help cir-
cumvent the obstacles to this understanding. this possibility
arises partly due to several unique features of the brane pro-
posal. these are: (1) the potential such models introduce for
partially breaking supersymmetry, (2) the possibility of hav-
ing low-energy degrees of freedom which are not observable to
us because they are physically located on a dierent brane, (3)
the fundamental scale may be much smaller than the planck
scale. furthermore, although the resulting cosmological con-
stant in the scenarios we outline need not be exactly zero, it
may be suppressed relative to the mass splittings of supermul-
tiplets by weak coupling constants of gravitational strength,
in accord with cosmological observations.

i. introduction

there is no understanding, at present, of why the cos-
mological constant should be as small as is required to ex-
plain the enormous size of the observable universe. this
lack of understanding is particularly vexing from the the-
oretical point of view because local quantum eld theories
appear to oer no way to account for the enormous dis-
parity between cosmological scales on one hand, and the
microscopic scales of elementary-particle physics on the
other [1]. if anything, this dismal situation only wors-
ens should better data bear out present indications for
a nonzero, but extremely tiny, cosmological constant [2],
with high-redshift supernova surveys favouring

  (3  103 ev)4,

(1)

in units for which h = c = 1.

the nature of the problem is this. the cosmologi-
cal constant can be considered to be the energy density
of the vacuum, and so samples the quantum zero-point
energy density contributed by physics at any particular
scale. however, as a rule, degrees of freedom at scale m
contribute  = o(m4), leading to unacceptably large
results. this is true, in particular, for the theories which
successfully describe all the well-understood physics as-
sociated with scales between 103 ev and 100 gev.

supersymmetric eld theories are the only known ex-
amples which evade this general statement, since these

1

theories can predict a vanishing cosmological constant
even though they involve massive particles. they can do
so only if the supersymmetry is not spontaneously bro-
ken, since in this case bosons and fermions precisely can-
cel in their contributions to the vacuum energy. unfortu-
nately supersymmetry must be broken if it is to apply to
the real world, and the absence of superpartners for the
known elementary particles implies that the scale of this

breaking must be at least of order m > 100 gev. how-
ever, the resulting failure in the bose-fermi cancellations
implies a cosmological constant which is also o(m4), and
so which is much too large.1

the purpose of this paper is to indicate a possible
way out of this dilemma, based on the recently much-
discussed possibility that all observed nongravitational
particles are conned to a domain-wall-like p-brane which
sits within a larger (4 + n)-dimensional bulk spacetime
[6]. the choice p = 3 gives the simplest picture, in which
we are trapped on one of potentially many three-branes
which sweep out a four-dimensional world volume within
the larger-dimensional bulk space. gravitational interac-
tions, on the other hand, are not restricted to the wall,
and so are responsible for any communication which takes
place between dierent branes. this kind of picture is ac-
tually believed to be realized within string theory, where
the branes involved can be (p + 1)-dimensional dirichlet
branes [7]. we keep this particular realization in mind,
not least since it has the advantage that the resulting
brane and bulk properties are well-formulated and con-
crete.

although we do not yet have a working model, we ar-
gue here that this framework has several new features
which may oer a way out of the usual cosmological-
constant conundrum, our purpose being to identify de-
sirable features that might guide explicit model building.
we believe the brane scenario may have something to
oer for understanding the size of the cosmological con-
stant at both the microscopic and macroscopic levels.

as viewed microscopically, it can do so because: (i)
the extended supersymmetry of the bulk space permits

1although a mechanism for obtaining supermultiplet split-
tings without a large cosmological constant has been proposed
[3] for three-dimensional eld theories, its implementation in
four dimensions is not clear. see [4,5] for other related dis-
cussions of the cosmological constant problem.

the classical contributions of dierent branes to the cos-
mological constant to cancel, and (ii) the inuence of
supersymmetry breaking can be suppressed by powers of
small gravitational couplings because any one brane can
be arranged to only partially break these extended super-
symmetries. further, while similar factors arise in the
mass splitting between superpartners, our brane-world
scenarios may provide an enhanced suppression of the
cosmological constant relative to these masses.

regardless of what happens microscopically, a small
cosmological constant must also be understandable on
more macroscopic scales, right down to energies that are
fractions of an ev. the brane picture can also help here,
since it permits the existence of many low-energy de-
grees of freedom which we do not see because they are
trapped on other branes to which we have no direct ac-
cess. any residual symmetries which relate low-energy
states on these other branes to those on our own might
ensure the cancellation of contributions to  on scales
large compared to the inter-brane separations.

we now elaborate on these ideas, focussing in turn on

the macroscopic and microscopic points of view.

ii. interbrane supersymmetry and the

macroscopic perspective

any intrinsically microscopic understanding of the
smallness of the cosmological constant cannot be com-
plete because it leaves open why well-understood lower-
energy physics, does not ruin the story by contributing
too strongly to . we argue in this section that the brane
picture oers a new perspective for this part of the prob-
lem.

the new possibility which the brane picture introduces
at low energies is the potential it has for hiding low-
energy degrees of freedom from us. the macroscopic part
of the cosmological-constant problem states that the ob-
served low-energy degrees of freedom themselves induce
too large a cosmological constant. however, the di-
culty vanishes if there are other low-energy degrees of
freedom about which we have no nongravitational infor-
mation which can enforce the low-energy cancellations
required in .

as an extreme example, suppose the branes which ll
the universe repel one another and so in equilibrium ar-
range themselves into a lattice. further, suppose there
exist residual unbroken (or very weakly broken) discrete
supersymmetry transformations which relate the bosons
on one brane to the fermions on another. if such a graded
lattice symmetry were to force bosons on one brane to be
degenerate with fermions on another, and vice versa, then
they can cancel in their contributions to the eective 
which is observed on scales much wider than the spacings
between the branes.

we do not have an explicit brane model which exhibits
such a symmetry, but as a rst step we can ask whether

supersymmetric interactions can be devised in such a way
as to be consistent with the related bosons and fermions
living on dierent branes. imagine, therefore, construct-
ing a supersymmetric model consisting of a collections of
scalars, i, living on one brane and a collection of spin-
half superpartners of these bosons, i, living on another
brane. we imagine coupling these elds using a super-
multiplet of bulk scalars and fermions, x = {xa, a},
which couple to both branes. microscopically we would
have to consider a model with supersymmetry relating
elds of dierent branes. macroscopically, at scales larger
than the brane separation, the requirement that the elds
i and i live on dierent branes amounts to asking the
eective lagrangian to have the following additive form:

l = lb(, x) + lf (, x) + lbulk(x).

(2)

an example of a lagrangian of this form, and which
has a supersymmetry relating the components of the su-
permultiplet, i = {i, i} (as well as of xa = {xa, a}),
is obtained by writing a globally-supersymmetric wess-
zumino model with minimal kinetic term, k = 
i i +
x 

axa, and superpotential

w =

mij
2

ij + bi(x) i + c(x),

(3)

since this implies the component interaction terms:

2

bulk(x) =  |mij j + bi(x)|2

alb (cid:16)bi,ab(x) i + c,ab(x)(cid:17) + c.c.(cid:21)

lint
b (, x) + lint
 |bi,a(x) i + c,a(x)|2
(cid:20) 1
lint
f (, x) = 
in this model the explicit supersymmetry is not broken,
it
so the i and i are perforce degenerate in mass.
is this supersymmetry which keeps the vacuum energy
precisely zero. on the other hand, for suciently weak
couplings to the bulk elds, the observable universe on
any one brane consists of either the elds {i, xa, a} or
{i, xa, a}, which would look nonsupersymmetric since
it has in either case a mismatched number of bosons and
fermions.

(4)

1
2

ali bi,a(x) 

1
2

ilj mij + c.c. (5)

in the simple toy model above, we see that the usual
cosmological constant paradox is removed in a surprising
way. there are superpartners degenerate in mass with
all of the observed particles, however, they reside on a
hidden brane, physically separated from our own, and
so cannot be directly detected. with this new feature,
which the brane-world scenarios can provide, the exis-
tence of these superpartners might not be in conict with
observations. a drawback of our toy model is that the
separated superpartners only interact through bulk elds
with gravitational strength couplings. at the moment it
is not clear to us how this mechanism could be imple-
mented for the case where the superpartners are charged

2

under a gauge symmetry. clearly, it would be interest-
ing to nd a realization of this scenario in an explicit
example, in order to better explore its low-energy impli-
cations, as well as its connection with the microscopic
picture, which we now describe.

iii. extended supersymmetry and the

microscopic picture

the previously-described macroscopic scenario for un-
derstanding the smallness of the cosmological constant is
pointless if the integration over more microscopic degrees
of freedom does not also keep the cosmological constant
acceptably small. we now describe what new features
the world-as-a-brane picture might add to this part of
the problem. we wish to argue that  may be very close
to zero because it is protected by more than one super-
symmetry, with not all supersymmetries directly broken
on our own brane.

here we will have in mind a particular scenario involv-

ing a system of branes having the following properties:
1. extended supersymmetry: in the absence of the branes
the bulk-space theory dimensionally reduces to a four-
dimensional system having n  2 supersymmetries.
2. multiple brane species: the compactication involves
several dierent kinds of branes separated in the bulk.
each brane will preserve some fraction of the n bulk-
space supersymmetries, and one of these branes is imag-
ined to be the three-brane on which we ourselves live.
3. partial supersymmetry breaking: although each of
the dierent types of branes preserve some of the super-
symmetry, we imagine that each of the bulk-space su-
persymmetries are broken by at least one brane. we
denote by b the minimum number of branes which are
required to break all of the supersymmetries. for in-
stance, if the bulk has two supersymmetries, while each
brane respects one supersymmetry, then two branes to-
gether could break both supersymmetries of the bulk,
and in this case b = 2.

thus similar to previous discussions [810], supersym-
metry breaking is only transmitted to our own world
from a distant brane. for our discussion of the cos-
mological constant, however, it will be important that
(at tree-level) there exist linearly realized supersymme-
tries on each of the separate branes. in ref. [10], horava
gives an m-theory realization of such a scenario with two
separated branes.

a. the relevant scales

ture mb and ms are both set by the string scale. third,
there is the inverse radius, mc = 1/rc, of n of the extra
bulk-space dimensions. these dimensions are imagined
to be small compared to macroscopic distance scales in
the four-dimensional world, but still (much) larger than
1/mb and 1/ms. for simplicity, we consider n extra di-
mensions all of roughly the same size. we disregard any
further compact dimensions with sizes of the order 1/ms,
as they would play no role in the following analysis.

the scales ms and mc are not independent because
they are related to the four-dimensional planck mass,
mp = (16g)1/2 = 1.72  1018 gev (where g is new-
tons constant). for instance, in string theory this rela-
tion is given by

m 2

p  e2(cid:18) ms

mc(cid:19)n+2

m 2
c ,

(6)

where e is the closed-string coupling, and all other
dimensionless constants are taken to be o(1).

eq. (6) permits the elimination of one of mc or ms in
favour of the other and mp. a recently much-explored
scenario daringly takes ms to be as low as the tev scale
[6], in which case mc ranges from  10 mev (if n =
6) to  103 ev (if n = 2). the requirement for a
small ratio mc/ms  1 is necessary in this picture to
ensure the existence of the hierarchy between mp and
the weak scale, mw. the question of explaining this large
hierarchy is then transferred to understanding why the
extra dimensions are so large.

for the present purposes we must consider a dierent
scenario, in which ms is identied with the intermedi-
ate scale, ms  1010 gev. we must do so because we
envisage some supersymmetries to be breaking on dis-
tant branes, with the news of this breaking reaching our
brane only through gravitational-strength bulk-space in-
teractions. as we shall see, this generally produces su-
permultiplet mass splittings which are of order m 2
s /mp,
which we identify with the electroweak scale, mw. as
is described elsewhere [11], having the string scale at
1010 gev has at least three other attractive features,
namely: (i) the heirarchy problem is solved without in-
troducing a small value for mc/ms as input, since (for
n = 6) mw/mp  m 2
p  e2 (mc/ms)n is accept-
ably small so long as mc/ms  e  1%; (ii) the
strong cp problem can be naturally solved using the
many axions found in string theory,2 since the decay con-
stant for these axions is ms, which precisely ts within
the allowed window set by astrophysical and cosmologi-
cal bounds. (iii) induced neutrino masses are generically

s /m 2

microscopically, there are potentially three fundamen-
tal mass scales in the brane picture. the rst of these is
the scale, mb, associated with the inverse width of the
brane itself. the second is the scale, ms, set by the bulk-
space gravitational couplings. in the dirichlet-brane pic-

2even better, there usually exist brane axions which, un-
like the model independent string axion, only couple to the
standard model gauge elds and not also to the hidden sector
ones.

3

of order m2
regime to account for neutrino-oscillations results.

 /ms  101 ev, putting them in the right
ultimately, our goal is to understand  as arising as a
power of the ratio mc/ms (or, equivalently, of ms/mp).
for these purposes mc itself is taken to be a parame-
ter which is given, with no attempt made to understand
the dynamics which determines why the small dimen-
sions stabilize at the desired radius. the focus instead is
to understand the more dicult problem of how it can
be that the large dimensions can remain large even once
it is granted that the small dimensions are small.

b. cancellations at the highest energies

brane theories get o to a good start because the eec-
tive four-dimensional vacuum energy can naturally cancel
at the very highest energies. we start with a reminder of
how this cancellation works within the d-brane context.
imagine integrating out all of the microstructure of the
branes (such as string-scale physics for dirichlet branes)
to obtain the (higher-dimensional) eective eld theory
at scales below mb. we require the low-energy eective
action which governs long-distance gravitational eects
once these higher-energy modes are integrated out. at
scales just below mb but well above mc we have an eec-
tive (4 + n)-dimensional eld theory of the light closed-
string modes (collectively denoted by , say) of the bulk
space coupled to the light brane modes (denoted by b),
localized on the various branes (which are labelled by b).
the resulting eective action has the additive form:

s = sbulk[] +xb

sb[, b].

(7)

the form for the eective action at this point may be
robustly stated, because the form of the lowest-derivative
terms is dictated (in string theory) by supersymmetry.
the leading terms in a low-energy expansion of the grav-
itational part of the bulk-space action are

sbulk = z d(4+n)x g e2(cid:16)m 2+n

s

r + (cid:17),

(8)

where gmn and r are the (4 + n)-dimensional metric
and scalar curvature, respectively.  here is the dila-
ton eld, which is related to the metric by supersymme-
try, and is normalized so that e is the closed string
coupling strength. notice that supersymmetry precludes
the appearance here of a bulk-space cosmological term,

the analog of eq. (8) for the low-energy action for each

r d(4+n)x g .

brane is

sb = z d(p+1)  e(cid:16)b + (cid:17),

(9)

where xm() is a parameterization of the bth branes
position within the bulk space, and  = gmnxm xn

is the branes induced metric. the ellipses denote de-
pendence on other elds, and on the metrics curvature,
while the constant b denotes this branes tension. the
stability of the modes which describe the overall motion
of the branes centre-of-mass generally requires b to be
positive.

the action of eq. (9) is also dictated by the symme-
tries of the problem, being manifestly invariant with re-
spect to all of the supersymmetries of the underlying
string theory, provided that both brane and bulk elds
are transformed. those supersymmetries which are un-
broken by the brane in question are realized in the usual
way, with particle states grouping into degenerate super-
multiplets. the broken supersymmetries are nonlinearly
realized, however, with particles not grouped into degen-
erate supermultiplets, and some brane fermions, , ac-
quiring shifts under these transformations:  =  + 
[12].
a second kind of brane-like quantity which can arise in
these scenarios is a xed surface which is not free to move.
in string theory, for instance, orientifolds are obtained
by identifying points in spacetime which are related by a
parity transformation, giving rise to xed surfaces at the
xed points of these transformations. the low-energy ac-
tion acquires a contribution similar to eq. (9) from elds
evaluated on these xed surfaces, with the noteworthy
property that the tension, b, for such surfaces may be
negative [7,13].

imagine now integrating out all but the most slowly-

varying bulk-eld congurations, :

ei[] =z d eisbulk[+]yb

db eisb[+,b].

(10)

the eective cosmological constant, , is obtained by fo-
cussing on the lowest-derivative terms in the dependence
of this result on the four-dimensional metric, g,

 = z d4x g(cid:16) + m 2

p r + (cid:17),

(11)

where r is the four-dimensional scalar curvature. no-
tice that for the purposes of identifying  it suces to
consider g innitesimally close to at space.

c. microscopic supersymmetric cancellations

if all of the supersymmetries of the problem are not
broken by the brane conguration of interest, then the
contributions to the cosmological constant from all of
the various branes and xed surfaces are known to cancel
quite generally. since we will later argue that supersym-
metry can suppress the nal cosmological constant, even
when broken, we rst describe the supersymmetric can-
cellation in more detail.

consider rst integrating out b in the classical (tree-
level) approximation within this low-energy theory. this

4

corresponds to simply eliminating these elds using their
classical equations of motion. the cosmological constant,
in this approximation, receives a contribution from the
tension of each brane, which is typically not small for any
one brane, being generically o(m p+1
). our rst goal is
to see how supersymmetry can ensure that the contribu-
tions of the branes and xed surfaces can robustly cancel
in the cosmological constant, without ne tuning.

b

to see why this is possible, consider the case (in string
theory) of several parallel branes which, taken together,
do not break all of the supersymmetry. the exact can-
cellation of the classical cosmological constant is in this
case related to the stability of these congurations due to
the cancellation of the classical forces between the branes
[7,14].

there are three steps involved in understanding this
cancellation. first notice that the unbroken supersym-
metry of any one brane conguration ensures that the
tension of any particular brane is strictly related to the
value of the nonzero ramond charge which it carries.
it is this relation which ensures the precise cancellation
between the long-range gravitational attraction between
parallel branes, and their long-range repulsion due to the
force mediated by the skew-symmetric tensor gauge elds
coupling to the ramond charge.

second, the generalization of gauss law for the skew-
tensor elds requires that the total ramond charge car-
ried by all branes must sum to zero when the transverse
dimensions are compact. this is because there is no place
for the ux of a nonzero charge to go in a compact space.
in orientifold examples the total charge vanishes due to a
cancellation between xed orientifold surfaces (carrying
negative ramond charge), and branes (whose charges are
positive). however, this cancellation of charges then au-
tomatically ensures the cancellation of the negative ten-
sion of the xed surfaces against the positive tension of

the branes, ensuring the sum pb b = 0.

third, supersymmetry ensures that this cancellation
survives quantum corrections to this classical picture.
this is because the bps nature of the branes ensures
the strict equality of their masses and ramond charges
even at the quantum level.

d. partial supersymmetry breaking

the key question is how these arguments are modied
when the brane conguration breaks all of the supersym-
metries. although we do not have an explicit model in
hand [15], we now wish to argue that the partial breaking
of supersymmetries on dierent branes opens a possibil-
ity that the supersymmetric vacuum energy cancellation
might partially persist even after supersymmetry breaks.
recall that in the scenario we wish to consider all of
the supersymmetries of the bulk theory are broken, but
that several of the separated branes are required to do
so.
in this case, because of the supersymmetry break-

5

ing, the forces between branes need no longer strictly
cancel. if they do not, then the branes will move until
they minimize their energy. for instance, if the resulting
forces are repulsive the branes may try to maximize their
distances from one another, perhaps by arranging them-
selves into a lattice within the compact n dimensions. if
they instead attract one another, they may form bound
states, or simply be widely separated from one another.
our assumption is that the resulting stable conguration
continues to break all of the supersymmetries. (the pos-
sible role of slow brane motion of this type for generating
ination was recently considered in ref. [14].)

now there are two important points. first, because su-
persymmetry is broken, the cosmological constant need
no longer vanish. however, it cannot become nonzero
without interactions amongst the branes which are me-
diated by the exchange of bulk states. furthermore, no
such contribution to the vacuum energy is possible from
a bulk exchange that is not complicated enough to know
that there are enough branes to break all of the super-
symmetries.

consider, for example, the case where our brane pre-
serves n = 2 supersymmetry, and that each of these
supersymmetries is broken by a separate hidden brane.
hence diagrams such as those in gures 1a and 1b would
not contribute to , since they only involve interactions
between two of the branes. their contributions to the
eective action would still preserve n = 1 supersymme-
try. an eective cosmological constant is only induced
by vacuum diagrams involving all three branes, as illus-
trated in gure 1c.

the second point is that supermultiplet mass split-
tings are also induced by the interbrane exchange of bulk
modes, however, such masses would be induced by any
such exchange (as long as the branes involved do not
preserve precisely the same supersymmetries). hence to
leading order, interactions between only two branes will
induce mass splittings. still, these exchanges will be sup-
pressed by at least two powers of the (small) bulk-space
coupling, and so we nd m  m 2
b /mp, in accord with
previous supergravity analyses [9] (see details below).

hence in the example of n = 2 supersymmetry consid-
ered above, diagrams such as those in gures 1a and 1b
(with appropriate insertions on the observable brane) will
contribute to the mass splittings. while either diagram
would individually induce a mass matrix which respects
an n = 1 supersymmetry, these are dierent supersym-
metries for each of the diagrams and so the total mass
matrix induced at this order would split the masses of
all of the superpartners on the observable brane. how-
ever, as discussed above, the vacuum energy remains zero
at this order, and so the suppression of the cosmological
constant may be enhanced relative to the mass splitting.

 a

b

c

figure 1: some tree-level graphs which potentially contribute
to the cosmological constant. dotted lines represent the ex-
change of virtual bulk states while fat lines indicate branes
(the magenta line being the observable brane). for the n = 2
scenario (see text), diagram c contributes to the cosmological
constant but is suppressed by powers of the bulk coupling.
diagrams a and b do not contribute to the cosmological con-
stant, but do contribute to mass splitting between superpart-
ner elds.

two comments are noteworthy here: first, this kind
of suppression because of partial supersymmetry break-
ing is an intrinsically braney mechanism. this is be-
cause, in four dimensions, it is dicult to construct mod-
els which partially break an extended supersymmetry,
as is enunciated in a well-known apparent no-go theo-
rem [16,17]. the situation is dierent for supersymmet-
ric theories containing extended objects such as domain
walls or branes. in this case the no-go theorem is evaded
[12,18], with a single brane typically breaking half of the
bulk-space supersymmetries and leaving the others un-
broken. more complicated congurations, involving sev-
eral branes, can then break more of these bulk-space su-
persymmetries. our second point is that there is the
potential in these scenarios to suppress the cosmological
constant relative to the supermultiplet mass splittings.
this enhancement is possible because the number of hid-
den branes involved in bulk exchanges contributing to
these low-energy couplings need not be the same, at least
in scenarios where more than two branes are required to
break all of the supersymmetries. we will consider this
possibility in more detail below.

e. numerology

although we do not have a concrete brane model in
hand, it is nonetheless instructive to estimate the sup-
pression which might be expected for the cosmological
constant due to these arguments, since the results can
suggest the properties to which a more detailed construc-
tion should aspire. imagine, then, integrating out scales
between ms and mc, for which the universe eectively

has 4 + n dimensions. from a four-dimensional perspec-
tive this corresponds to integrating out all of the massive
kaluza-klein (kk) modes whose masses are proportional
to mc.

suppose that, within a particular brane scenario, the
largest contribution with a nonvanishing interaction en-
ergy density requires a couplings of the bulk elds to
the various branes, and b self-couplings amongst the bulk
elds themselves. on dimensional grounds, we may es-
timate the resulting (4 + n)-dimensional vacuum energy
density is of order

 "e(cid:18) mc

ms(cid:19)1+n/2#a+b

(cid:18) 

c (cid:19)a

m p+1

m 4+n

c

,

(12)

where we put a factor of the (4 + n)-dimensional grav-
itational coupling,  = e/m (1+n/2)
for each gravita-
tional interaction, i.e., for each of the bulk couplings and
for each coupling of bulk elds to any brane. for each
bulk-brane coupling, we also include a factor of the brane
tension. the remaining powers of mc are included on di-
mensional grounds since this is the scale of the physics
which has been integrated out. the corresponding four-
dimensional cosmological constant induced in this way is
of order   /m n
c .
at this point, we note that a is at least as large as the
total number, b, of branes required to break all of the
supersymmetries, but to start we also entertain the pos-
sibility that a might be larger than this. furthermore, in
order to produce a connected diagram, we must actually
have b  a  2.
more detailed use of eq. (12) requires an estimate for
the brane scale,   m p+1
. in a string theory scenario
involving dirichlet-branes, we would have   em p+1
.
in this case, eq. (12) becomes

s

s

b

ms(cid:19)
  (e) (cid:18) mc

m 4

c ,

(13)

where the exponents are  = b and  = (n/2  p) a +
(n/2 + 1) b. let us focus on the ratio of mass scales
mc/ms (which we will assume is smaller than the string
coupling e). we are interested in the most dangerous
graphs, which make the largest contribution to , and so
will choose our parameters in order to minimize the ex-
ponent . here we see that we should choose the smallest
possible value of b, i.e., bmin = a  2, which yields

 = (n + 1  p) a  (n + 2) .

(14)

the results beyond this point depend crucially upon
the parameters n and p, which would be xed for a par-
ticular scenario. there are three mutually-exclusive al-
ternatives:

1. if p > n + 1, the coecient of a in eq. (14) is neg-
ative and our estimate for  becomes arbitrarily

6

large as a increases. since this means that nomi-
nally higher-order graphs contribute larger contri-
butions to , we do not consider this case any
further.

2. if p = n + 1, graphs with larger a are suppressed
only by powers of e, and  < 0,
implying
that higher-order graphs can enhance  by an n-
dependent power of ms/mc. for instance, with
p = 3 and n = 2,  = (e)a2m 4
s . of course,
for weak string coupling (i.e., e < 1), the largest
estimate comes from choosing the smallest possible
value for a, which by assumption is the smallest
number of branes which taken together break all
supersymmetries, amin = b.

3. the most interesting case is p < n + 1, for which
the coecient of a in eq. (14) is positive. thus the
largest contribution to  comes from setting a to
its minimum value of a, amin = b, the total num-
ber of branes needed to break all of the supersym-
metries. note, however, the second term in eq. (14)
is negative. hence in order to produce suppression
of  with a positive , we still need

b >

n + 2

n + 1  p

.

(15)

notice that this lower bound for b is minimized
when n is maximized and p is minimized, so when
comparing models sharing the same value for b,
we expect those having largest n and smallest p to
enjoy the largest suppression to .

from here on we restrict ourselves to option 3, for
which p < n + 1, for which graphs with more gravita-
tional interactions are more strongly suppressed by pow-
ers of mc/ms. as an example, consider p = 3 and n = 6,
i.e., with three-branes and six extra dimensions. in this
case, we nd the simple results:  = 4(b  2) and
 (cid:18)e m 4

mp(cid:19)b2

c =(cid:18) mc

s(cid:19)b2

c
m 4

m 4
c

(16)

m 4

.

hence for b > 2, we apparently nd an enormous sup-
pression of the vacuum energy density.

to establish the degree of the suppression more sys-
tematically, we can compare  with an estimate of the
mass splittings within the supermultiplets. let us make
this comparison for the case p = 3, but general n, for
which one nds

 (cid:0)e(cid:1)b2(cid:18) mc

ms(cid:19)(n2)b(n+2)

m 4
c

.

(17)

the condition p = 3 < n + 1 forces us to focus on n > 2,
for which the coecient of b in the exponent is positive.
in analogy to eq. (12), we may estimate the mass split-

tings on dimensional grounds as

m2 "e(cid:18) mc

ms(cid:19)1+n/2#a+b

(cid:18) 

c (cid:19)a1

m p+1

m 2

c , (18)

s

where, as above, a factor of  = e/m (1+n/2)
appears
for each gravitational interaction. the latter includes a
couplings of bulk elds to a brane, and b couplings of
the bulk elds amongst themselves. for all but one of
the bulk-brane couplings, we also include a factor of the
brane tension. this factor is omitted for one of these
couplings as it must involve an operator insertion, e.g.,
a world-volume fermion or boson bilinear, in order that
this exchange contributes to the mass splittings for super-
multiplets on our brane. as above, the remaining powers
of mc are included on dimensional grounds.

to parallel the analysis above for , we set  

in eq. (18) which yields

em p+1

s

m2  (e)  (cid:18) mc
ms(cid:19)



m 2

c ,

(19)

where the exponents are  = b + 1 and  = (n/2  p)a +
(n/2+1)b+p+1. the graphs which contribute the largest
amount to m2 are those having the smallest value for b,
i.e., bmin = a  2, which yields

 = (n + 1  p) (a  1) .

(20)

because our interest is in the case p < n + 1, the largest
m2 is achieved by choosing the smallest possible a.

now comes the key point. as we have argued in the
previous section, the smallest value for a required to
split superpartner masses is not b, the number of branes
needed to break all of the supersymmetries. rather,
as argued above, supermultiplet masses can be split by
adding the contributions of several graphs, each of which
breaks just some of the supersymmetries and not all
of them, although all supersymmetries are broken once
all graphs are added together. so we can instead set
amin = 2, for which  = n + 1  p. focussing on p = 3,
we have

m2  e (cid:18) mc

ms(cid:19)n2

m 2

c  e m 4

s
m 2
p

,

(21)

where the latter result is in accord with previous analyses
involving the low-energy supergravity action [9].

comparing the two results in eqs. (17) and (21), we

nd



m4  (e)b4 (cid:18) mc

ms(cid:19)(n2)b(3n2)

.

(22)

now recall that eq. (15) gives an inequality, b > (n +
2)/(n 2), which must be satised in order that the scale
of the vacuum energy density 1/4 be suppressed rela-
tive to the compactication scale mc, down to which we
are integrating out low-energy degrees of freedom. from

7

eq. (22), we can derive a more interesting (and restric-
tive) inequality

b >

3n  2
n  2

,

(23)

which must be satised if the vacuum energy density,
1/4, is actually suppressed relative to the superpart-
ner mass splitting scale m. as an example, consider
n = 6 (and p = 3). eq. (15) yields b > 2, while eq. (23)
requires b > 4. the essential ingredient in the separa-
tion of scales appearing in eq. (22) was that the number
of branes involved in exchanges contributing to  was
amin = b while that number for m2 was amin = 2.

while

couplings

the bulk-brane

contributing in
eqs. (12) and (18) produce a suppression through the
insertion of a gravitational coupling factor mc/mp, they
also tend to enhance the result due to the brane ten-
in particular, for the above calculations
sion factors.
with   m p+1
, the net eect of these couplings is to
enhance the result if p > n/2, which will hold in most
cases. for example, if p = 3 and n = 6, these couplings
have a neutral eect. hence one can think of the sup-
pressions discussed above as arising from the couplings
of the bulk elds to themselves, which are necessary to
sew the inter-brane exchanges together.

s

s

an even more interesting suppression is possible if
mb < ms, i.e.,  < m p+1
. for example in string the-
ory, the branes of interest could well be described by a
number of d-branes (with positive tension) sitting on an
orientifold plane (with negative tension) leaving a van-
ishing net tension. then the leading term in the eective
action (9) would be absent. as a result, the bulk-brane
couplings for these particular branes also produce sup-
pressions by the planck scale in our estimates.
if for
simplicity we assume all of the branes share this property
of a vanishing tension, the revised estimates are found by
substituting   m p+1
in eqs. (13) and (18), implying the
absence of the leading order factors involving the brane
tension. eq. (13) for the cosmological constant is then
replaced by

c

 "e(cid:18) mc

ms(cid:19)1+n/2#a+b

m 4

c (cid:18) mc

mp(cid:19)a+b

m 4

c . (24)

here, as usual, the largest contribution comes from
choosing the minimum values for both a and b: bmin =
a  2 and amin = b. with these parameters,
 "e2(cid:18) mc
c (cid:18) mc

ms(cid:19)n+2#b1

mp(cid:19)2(b1)

m 4
c

m 4

(25)

and hence there is considerable suppression (relative to
mc) for any number of large extra dimensions and for
branes of any dimension. similarly, eq. (19) for the mass
splitting is replaced by

8

m2  e(cid:18) mc

ms(cid:19)1+n/2!a+b

m 2

c (cid:18) mc

mp(cid:19)a+b

m 2

c .

(26)

again this result is maximized by choosing the smallest
possible values for the exponents, i.e., bmin = a  2 and
amin = 2. this choice yields

m2  e2(cid:18) mc

ms(cid:19)n+2

m 2

mp(cid:19)2
c (cid:18) mc

m 2

c .

(27)

which is also a considerable suppression compared to mc.
within this scenario of tensionless branes, the ratio

(22) is then replaced with



m4 "e2(cid:18) mc

ms(cid:19)n+2#b3

(cid:18) mc

mp(cid:19)2(b3)

.

(28)

hence this scenario yields a remarkable suppression of
the cosmological constant relative to the scale of the su-
permultiplet mass splitting for any b > 3. again the
key ingredient in the separation of scales produced here
was that the number of branes involved in exchanges con-
tributing to  was amin = b while that number for m2
was amin = 2.

iv. discussion

we see that partial supersymmetry breaking in the
world-as-a-brane framework provides a natural mech-
anism by which the vacuum energy is systematically
suppressed by weak coupling constants of gravitational
strength. there is the further potential to suppress the
scale of the cosmological constant relative to that for the
mass splittings amongst supermultiplets.

even more tantalizing, the potential exists for natu-
rally generating phenomenologically interesting nonzero
values for the cosmological constant. this is because the
suppression typically comes as a power of mw/mp, and
comparatively few powers are needed to produce an ac-
ceptably small result. in fact, a relatively small power
w/mp)4 is already numerically roughly of
like   (m 2
order the experimental value of eq. (1).

to see what is required to reproduce such a size for ,
we re-express the ratio (28) in terms of m  mw and
mp, by using eq. (27),

.



(29)

mp(cid:19)b3

m4 (cid:18) m
w/mp)4 is obtained in eq. (29)
a power like   (m 2
in this case we have ms  1013 gev and
for b = 7.
mc  1011 gev, (for n/2 = p = 3) therefore we have a
concrete illustration of the fact that starting from a rela-
tively small hierarchy of mc/ms  102 we can simulta-
neosuly obtain mw/mp  1016 (the hierarchy problem)

and 1/4/mw  1016 (the cosmological constant prob-
lem) 3.
similarly in the case of equation (22) both hierarchies
are reproduced if b = 10 branes are required to break all
supersymmetries, and with branes communicating only
with gravitational strength. both again require: ms =
1011 gev, mc/ms  102. even though smaller values
of b would be more desirable, it is very encouraging that
with such simple setting this scenario has the potential to
explain the large hierarchies. it would be of considerable
interest to explore models of these types in more detail.
of course, as described in section ii, the branes must
also provide some mechanism to maintain the suppres-
sion of  down to lower scales. one of the key ingredi-
ents in the latter separation of scales is that the number
of branes involved in exchanges contributing to  and
m2 need not be the same. if a scenario like this is at
work at the microscopic level, it is ensured down to the
compactication scale, mc, and then it may be perpetu-
ated to lower energies by a macroscopic mechanism, such
as the interbrane symmetry scenario given in section ii.
if no such mechanism were to come into play, the remain-
ing contributions to the cosmological constant would be
expected to be unacceptably large, of order   m 4
c .
needless to say, the discussion and analysis presented
here falls far short of providing a complete solution of
the cosmological constant problem. our primary short-
coming is that we cannot oer an explicit example which
implements the mechanisms discussed above. explicit
models, probably on similar lines as those of [4,19] will
be needed in order to be more specic, and in particular,
improve upon the naive estimates provided above using
simple dimensional analysis. our purpose then is to point
out that the brane-world scenarios do oer a number of
exciting new possibilites for suppressing the cosmological
constant, and in particular, suppressing it relative to the
superpartner mass scales. our hope is that our observa-
tions may stimulate further model building along these
lines.

horava [10] has given an explicit m-theory realiza-
tion of part of our scenario. however, this construction
only involves two separated branes, i.e., boundary nine-
branes. these branes are distinguished by the appear-
ance of a gluino condensate on one of the branes, and not
the other. locally each of the branes still preserves half
of the supersymmetries, but supersymmetry is still bro-
ken as a global eect. while this construction involving
only two branes would not give an enhanced suppression

3notice the weak-scale-string case  ms  1 tev and n =
2, for which mc  103 ev  is not an equally successful
option (even though   m 4
c is the right size, as remarked in
the rst article of [5], for example) because in this scenario
all supersymmetries on our brane must be broken to ensure
particle multiplets are split by the weak scale. in this case no
supersymmetry remains to forbid   (1tev)4.

of the cosmological constant relative to the superpartner
masses, it would still be interesting to examine the model
in more detail in the context of the questions posed here.

a number of remarks bear emphasis:
1. first and foremost, it is remarkable that the world-
as-a-brane scenario may potentially provide loopholes to
the conceptual roadblocks which have thwarted an un-
derstanding of the cosmological constants small size.

2. next, it is striking that a mechanism for produc-
ing a naturally small cosmological constant also points
to nonzero values, possibly in the range currently being
favoured by high-z supernova measurements.

3. since individual branes tend to break half of the
bulk-space supersymmetries at once, the mechanism de-
scribed here suggests that our own brane might have
more than one unbroken supersymmetry, nus  2. of
course, this is precisely the situation in which the cos-
mological constant may be suppressed relative to the su-
perpartner masses. a careful exploration of the number
of possible unbroken supersymmetries implied by these
ideas for our world bears further scrutiny in view of
the phenomenological problems extended supersymmet-
ric models have, such as the diculty obtaining chiral
fermions. we are not daunted by these issues since we
believe them to be easier to deal with than has proven
to be the case with the cosmological-constant problem
itself.

we believe that the world-as-a-brane framework fur-
nishes numerous novel possibilities which may ultimately
explain what keeps the cosmological constant small with-
out the need of ne tuning. notice that the mechanism
crucially involves an interplay between the nonlocality of
brane congurations and supersymmetry. of course, a
key test will be whether models constructed using the
mechanism we are proposing can produce a suciently
small  while still producing a large enough splitting
amongst supermultiplets on our own brane. we believe
a concrete realization of this idea (or variations on our
theme) in terms of explicit string models to be well worth
pursuing.

we acknowledge helpful discussions with luis ibanez
and michael green. our research is supported in part
by n.s.e.r.c. of canada and f.c.a.r. of quebec and
pparc. c.b. would like to thank the departament
destructura i constituents de la materia of the uni-
versity of barcelona and d.a.m.t.p. of cambridge uni-
versity, and r.c.m. would like to thank the institute for
theoretical physics at ucsb, for their kind hospitality
during the nal stages of this work. research at the itp
was supported by nsf grant phy94-07194.

[1] s. weinberg, rev. mod. phys. 61 (1989) 1.

9

[2] n. bahcall, j.p. ostriker, s. perlmutter, p.j. steinhardt,

science 284 (1999) 1481, (astro-ph/9906463).

[3] e. witten, int. j. mod. phys. a10 (1995) 1247,
(hep-th/9409111); mod. phys. lett. a10 (1995) 2153,
(hep-th/9506101).

(1998) 7529 (hep-th/9711197);
z. lalak and s. thomas, nucl. phys. b515 (1998) 55
(hep-th/9707223).

[10] p. horava,

phys.

rev. d54

(1996)

7561

(hep-th/9608019).

[4] s. kachru and e. silverstein, jhep 11 (1998) 1, (hep-

[11] c.p. burgess, l.m. ibanez and f. quevedo, phys. lett.

b447 (1999) 257 (hep-ph/9810535);
see also: k. benakli, phys. rev. d60 (1999) 104002
(hep-ph/9809582).

[12] j. hughes and j. polchinski, nucl. phys. b278 (1986)

147.

[13] s. kachru, j. kumar and e. silverstein, class. quant.

grav. 17 (2000) 1139 (hep-th/9907038).

[14] g. dvali and s.h. tye, phys. lett. b450 (1999) 72

(hep-ph/9812483).

[15] for recent reviews, with references to the literature, of
explicit brane constructions which break supersymmetry
see: a. sen, (hep-th/9904207);
a. lerda, r. russo, (hep-th/9905006);
j. schwarz, (hep-th/9908144);
o. bergman and m. gaberdiel, class. quant. grav. 17
(2000) 961 (hep-th/9908126).

[16] e. witten, nucl. phys. b188 (1981) 513.
[17] j. bagger and j. wess, phys. lett. b138 (1984) 105;

j. bagger, physica 15d (1985) 198;
m. de roo and p. wagemans, phys.lett. b177 (1986)
352;
j.p. gauntlett, phys.lett. b228 (1989) 188.

[18] i. antoniadis, h. partouche and t.r. taylor, phys. lett.
b372 (1996) 83; s. ferrara, l. girardello and m. po-
rati, phys. lett. b376 (1996) 275; j. bagger and a.
galperin, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 1091; h. partouche
and b. pioline, nucl. phys. (proc. suppl.) 56b (1997)
322 (hep-th/9702115);
e. kiritsis and costas kounnas, nucl. phys. b503
(1997) 117 (hep-th/9703059);
s. bellucci, e. ivanov and s. krivonos, phys. lett. b460
(1999) 348 (hep-th/9811244);
i. antoniadis, g. dappollonio, e. dudas and a. sag-
notti, nucl. phys. b553 (1999) 133 (hep-th/9812118);
r. altendorfer and j. bagger, phys. lett. b460 (1999)
127 (hep-th/9904213);
m. rocek and a.a. tseytlin, phys.rev. d59 (1999)
106001 (hep-th/9811232).

[19] i. antoniadis, e. dudas, a. sagnotti, phys. lett.
b464 (1999) 38 (hep-th/9908023); g. aldazabal and
a. m. uranga, jhep 10 (1999) 24 (hep-th/9908072);
g. aldazabal, l. e. ibanez, f. quevedo, jhep 1 (2000)
31 (hep-th/9909172); m. gaberdiel, a. sen, jhep 11
(1999) 8 (hep-th/9908060).

[20] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and j. march-russell,

(hep-th/9809124).

th/9808056); jhep 01 (1999) 4, (hep-th/9810129);
s. kachru, j. kumar and e. silverstein, phys. rev. d59
(1999) 106004 (hep-th/9807076);
j.a. harvey,
(hep-th/9807213);
g. shiu and h. tye, nucl. phys. b542 (1999) 45
(hep-th/9808095);
c. angelantoj, i. antoniadis and k. forger, nucl. phys.
b555 (1999) 116 (hep-th/9904092).

phys. rev. d59

(1999)

26002,

[5] s. nussinov and r. shrock, phys. rev. d59 (1999)

105002 (hep-ph/9811323);
e. kiritsis, jhep 10 (1999) 010 (hep-th/9906206);
p.j.
(1999)
(hep-th/9907080);
n. kaloper, (hep-th/9905210).

phys. lett. b462

steinhardt,

41

[6] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys.
lett. b429 (1998) 263 (hep-ph/9803315); phys. rev.
d59 (1999) 086004 (hep-ph/9807344); i. antoniadis,
n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys.
lett. b436 (1998) 257 (hep-ph/9804398); p. ho-
rava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 94
(hep-th/9603142); nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 506
(hep-th/9510209); e. witten, nucl. phys. b471 (1996)
135 (hep-th/9602070); j. lykken, phys. rev. d54
(1996) 3693 (hep-th/9603133); i. antoniadis, phys. lett.
b246 (1990) 377.

[7] see,

for example: j. polchinski, (hep-th/9611050.),
and c.v. johnson

(hep-th/9806199)

c. bachas,
(hep-th/9812196).

[8] t. banks and m. dine, nucl. phys. b479 (1996) 173

309

(1998)

lett. b416

(hep-th/9605136);
e. dudas and c. grojean, nucl. phys. b507 (1997) 553
(hep-th/9704177);
i antoniadis and m. quiros , phys. lett. b416 (1998)
327 (hep-th/9707208);
e. dudas,
phys.
(hep-th/9709043);
t.li, j.lopez and d. nanopoulos, mod. phys. lett. a12
(1997) 2647 (hep-ph/9702237);
k. choi, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 6588 (hep-th/9706171);
k. choi, h.b. kim and c. munoz , phys. rev. d57
(1998) 7521 (hep-th/9711158);
a. lukas, b. ovrut and d. waldram, nucl. phys. b532
(1998) 43 (hep-th/9710208);
e. mirabelli and m. peskin, phys. rev. d58 (1998)
065002 (hep-th/9712214);
l. randall and r. sundrum, nucl. phys. b557 (1999)
79 (hep-th/9810155).

[9] k.a. meissner, h.p. nilles and m. olechowski, nucl.

phys. b561 (1999) 30 (hep-th/9905139);
h.p. nilles, m. olechowski and m. yamaguchi, nucl.
phys. b530 (1998) 43 (hep-th/9801030); phys. lett.
b415 (1997) 24 (hep-th/9707143);
a. lukas, b.a. ovrut and d. waldram, phys. rev. d57

10

