9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
2

 

 
 

1
v
8
0
0
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

lptens-99/41
hepth/9911008
august 1999

backlund transformations in 10d susy

yangmills theories

(with a preamble on the birth of supersymmetry)

contribution to y. golfand memorial volume
many faces of superworld, world scientic.

jeanloup gervais,

laboratoire de physique theorique de l ecole normale superieure 1,

24 rue lhomond, 75231 paris cedex 05, france.

abstract

a backlund transformation is derived for the yangs type (super) equa-
tions previously derived (hep-th/9811108) by m. saveliev and the author,
from the ten dimensional super yang-mills eld equations in an onshell
light cone gauge. it is shown to be based upon a particular gauge trans-
formation satisfying nonlinear conditions which ensure that the equations
retain the same form. these yangs type eld equations are shown to be
precisely such that they automatically provide a solution of these condi-
tions. this backlund transformation is similar to the one proposed by a.
lesnov for self-dual yang-mills in four dimensions. in the introduction a
personal recollection on the birth of supersymmetry is given.

1umr 8549: unite mixte du centre national de la recherche scientique, et de lecole

normale superieure.

1 remembering the early times.

a general history of the birth of supersymmetry may be found elsewhere in this
volume (see revealing the path to superworld by m.s. marinov), and i will
not try to give a complete overview. as is well known, supersymmetry started
long before the iron curtain was dismanteled, and thus came into existence
separately in the west and the former soviet union. this volume is (rightly)
dedicated to the pionnering contribution of yuri abramovich golfand. with
evgeny likhtman, he took many basic initial steps towards supersymmetry as
we know now. an account of this story may be found in shifmans introduction
to this book, and in likhtmans notes of a former graduate student elsewhere
in this volume. regretfully, i never had the chance to meet golfand in person.
i hope very much that this volume will play an important role in the proper
recognition of his memory.

in order to speak about what i know personally, i will recall that, in the west,
superalgebras were rst considered by a. neveu, j. schwarz and p. ramond as
a basic tool to eliminate ghosts from the spinning string theories, when they rst
introduced them they were thus initially refered to as supergauges. these au-
thors used the covariant harmonic oscillator approach, the only known technics
at that time, without eld theoretic interpretation. preparing the present text
brought back wonderful memories of the time when my long lasting collaboration
and friendship with bunji sakita 2 began. in 1970-71 we started to develop the
worldsheet interpretation of the spinning string unknown at that early time
extending earlier discussions of the purely bosonic case begun by h. hsue b.
sakita and m. virasoro. we recognized that the neveu-schwarz ramond mod-
els include worldsheet twodimensional dirac spinor elds in addition to the
world sheet scalar elds common with the virasoro model. we showed that the
supergauges of the ns-r models correspond to the fact that the two dimensional
worldsheet lagrangian is invariant under transformations with anticommuting
parameters which mix the scalar and spinor elds. in the west, this gave the
rst example of a supersymmetric local lagrangian.

this supersymmetry was closing only onshell for lack of auxiliary elds,
and was two dimensional. in the west, the problems of proceeding o shell and
to four dimensions were initially solved by wess and zumino, as is well known.
these are the historical facts simply stated. it is worth trying to give a more
personal picture of the birth of supersymmetry. for me, the story really begins
during the year 1968-69 which was a sort of turning point. i was just returning
from two years of postdoc at new york university, where i had met b. zumino
(then the head of the theory group), k. symanzik, w. zimmermann (at that
time permanent faculty members) and j. wess (a visitor for one year). before
that my interest was mostly on dispersion relations, regge poles, and s-matrix
theory, but at nyu, i had been fully converted to local eld theory, and much

2then a visiting professor both at the institut des hautes etudes, in bures-sur yvette, and

at the laboratoire de physique theorique et hautes energies, university of orsay, france.

1

impressed by the power of symmetries in that context, be they local or global. of
course, this year saw the beginning of string theory which was, however initially
developed using the covariant operator method within the context of s-matrix
theory, giving what looked like a realisation of g. chews program. on the other
hand, local eld theory also made wonderful progress on its own. the main prob-
lems of that time were the adler-bell-jackiw anomaly, the spontaneous breaking
of symmetries and the quantization of yang-mills theory. for the latter, the
work of l. faddeev and v. popov was gradually becoming more and more pop-
ular. it is hardly necessary to say that these topics now belong to textbooks. at
that time the french government was very generous with temporary positions,
and a handful of key visitors came for long visits 3 during that wonderful year:
d.amati, the late benjamin lee, t. veltman, and b. zumino. i drew much
inspiration from the very stimulating atmosphere they created, together with the
more senior permanent members. in particular, with amati, and bouchiat i
devised the now standard method to compute loops in string theories, using co-
herent states, and with b. lee, i showed how to correctly quantize the linear 
model in the phase where the spontaneous symmetry breaking takes place 4.

this is all to say that, when i rst met bunji sakita in fall 1970, i was
fully motivated to apply eld theory technics to string theories. moreover, the
year before i had shown that the integrand of the veneziano model is equal to
the vacuum expectation of a product of scalar eld which are functions of the
koba nielsen variables. this result, similar to an independent and better known
work by s. fubini and g. veneziano, was indeed a strong hint of the world-sheet
eld theory aspect of string theory. this viewpoint is now a common place, but
at that time it was not at all popular among string theorists. a large majority
prefered the operator method, which achieved striking technical success.

before we met, sakita and his collaborators had already made important
progress in developing world-sheet eld theory technics using path integrals. on
the one hand, h. hsue, b. sakita, and m. virasoro had shown how the analog
model of h.b. nielsen could be derived from the path integral over a free scalar
2d eld. on the other hand, sakita came with the draft of an article where
he had started to discuss feynman-like rules for the veneziano model using the
factorisation of path integrals over sliced riemann surfaces. there were many
basic problems left, and at the beginning, we spent a lot of time establishing
a general scheme. this complicated work was not so well-received, although it
contains many precursive results. for the following, the most important point
was that we made an essential use of the conformal invariance of the path in-
tegral representation over scalar free elds in two dimensions. although we did
not really consider the gauge-xing problem at that time, we were pretty much

3at the laboratoire de physique theorique et hautes energies of orsay (france) where i

was working permanently then,

4 it seems that g. thooft then a student a cargese during the following summer
drew much inspiration for quantizing massive yang-mills theory, from b. lees lecture on
spontaneous symmetry breaking.

2

convinced that conformal invariance of the free world-sheet action is at the ori-
gin of the negative normed state elimination. on spring when we came accross
the rst article of a. neveu and j. schwarz, this motivated us to systematically
discuss conformal eld theories in two dimensions, as a way to classify string
theories, by dening what we called irreducible elds now known as primary
elds, following a. belavin, a. polyakov, and a.b. zamolodchikov. consider-
ing only quadratic actions we recognized that only spin-zero and spin-one-half
elds were possible, covering all existing critical string models of today. this
was all very well except for one fact: the neveu-schwarz model has more ghosts
and needs an additional negative-normed-state killing mechanism as compared
with the veneziano model. this had motivated these authors, as well a ramond
in his seminal work, to introduce in the operator formalism a set of operators
whose anticommutators gave the virasoro generators. the visit of sakita in
france was about to terminate, and he became busy with moving with his fam-
ily, but i quickly started to look for the possible symmetry of the action that
would be the origin of this additional ghost killing. from the form of the ns-r
generators it was immediately clear that the transformed of the boson had to be
a fermion and vice versa. it was not dicult to envisage that the action could be
invariant, except for the mixing between commuting and anticommuting elds
which made everything very confusing. after many hesitations, sakita and i
solved the problem by introducing symmetry transformations with anticommut-
ing parameters, from which the supersymmetry of the world-sheet ns-r action
followed very simply. the paper was completed and thus for us supersymmetry
was born (august 1971) just the day before sakita departed france to ll his new
prestigious position at city college new-york.

at that time, the use of anticommuting c-numbers was not well appreciated
in our communities, and this work did not get much attention in general. in
december 1971 sakita delivered a talk about it at the conference on functional
methods in field theory and statistics at the lebedev institute in moscow,
organised by e. fradkin. on the way back, sakita stopped over in paris, and
we wrote a summary of our ideas for the proceedings which was sent to the
organisers and circulated as a preprint the complete proceedings themselves
were never published 5. through this, there was some early communication of
our work to the soviet scientic community.

scientically we separated at a very unfortunate moment of our research
program. at that time of course there was no email. phone was expensive and
airmail slow. moreover sakita became busy with his new life and responsabili-
ties. i did not push very hard further in the direction of supersymmetry to my
regret. other problems seem more pressing. in the mean time the nambu-gotto
action and the goddard goldstone rebbi and thorn light-cone quantization had
come out. sakita and i showed 6 how the latter may be recovered using path in-

5we later published our text in quantum field theory and quantum statistics, essays in

honour of the sixtieth birthday of e.s. fradkin, vol 2, p. 435, adam hilger, 1987.

6this work was initiated during my one-month visit at city college during october 1972.

3

tegral with the former action using the faddeev-popov method in order to handle
reparametrisation invariance. this work raised much interest and criticism 7.
the main objection was that our gauge depends upon the external sources, and
thus is not easily factorizable, in contrast with our previous path integral formu-
lation. we tried hard to understand what was going on but failed. the answer
was given by s. mandelstam: the light-cone gauge is not conformally invariant,
so that there is only one (prefered) parametrisation where factorization holds
with our gauge xing. with this parametrisation one sees strings (with lengths
equal to their respective p+) which split and join, and our work played a key
role for mandelstams subsequent discussion of scattering amplitudes, which led
to light-cone string eld theory.

on the other hand, there remained the problem of obtaining our free world-
sheet action of the ns-r models by gauge xing from a local lagrangian. this
problem, rst considered by iwasaki and k. kikkawa, played a key role in the
subsequent development of supersymmetry 8. in spring 1973, sakita visited the
niels bohr institute and i made a trip there to meet with him. on the way back
home, he went to cern and gave a talk where zumino was present. sakita
reviewed the work of iwazaki and kikkawa. later on it appeared that this sem-
inar and a later conversation with zumino played a key role in leading wess
and zumino to begin their seminal work on supersymmetry. i also remember
that the latter author asked me questions about our works on various occasions.
after that the whole subject suddenly exploded, and our contribution was tem-
porarily forgotten for lack of reference 9, given the fact that we had turned to
other research directions.

many other basic developments were initiated in those wonderful times. in
particular, and since this article deals with the super yang-mills theories in ten
dimensions which appear in the zero slope limit of type i string theory, it may
be worth recalling that i was at the same time collaborating with a. neveu on
the zero-slope limit of string theories 10.

2

introducing the present work.

three decades later, it obvious that supersymmetry has played a key role in
theoretical physics, although it is so badly broken at accessible energies that it

7in particular from the referee and at a seminar which sakita gave at the institute in

princeton on december 1972,

8 at that time there were both at city college and had much interaction with sakita.
9our original paper was nevertheless reprinted in the rst volume of superstrings

the rst 15 years of superstring theory edited by j. schwarz.

10 which had just been developed for the purely bosonic case by j. scherk, following a
remark by r. omnes at a lunch at orsay where i was also present, and quickly extended
by a. neveu and j. scherk to spinning strings. our work was dug out two decades later
when bern and kossover showed that string inspired rearrangments of feynman graphs give
tremendous simplications in high order perturbation of gauge theories.

4

is not yet veried experimentally. generally speaking, supersymmetric theories
seem to enjoy striking properties which led to remarkable developments.
in
particular non perturbative results have been derived in theories with extended
supersymmetries which show a striking connection between exact integration
and supersymmetry. the present work initiated in collaboration with the late
misha saveliev[1] goes along this line, being connected with the exact integra-
tion of classical super yang-mills in ten dimensions. here as in many recent
theoretical advances, supersymmetry plays a key role. thus it is proper to
present this work as a tribute to the yuri golfand memorial volume.

shifmans introduction to the present volume bears a striking testimony of
the hardships which yuri golfand underwent in the terrible pressure of the
communist system. this is fortunately gone by now. it is a very nice that it
is possible to collabarate freely with the russian scientists who chose to remain
in their native country, although the practical life there has become so dicult
that some of them have died prematurely.

at this point another historical note may be in order. my work with sakita
on functional approach to string theories did not deal with quantum anomalies.
the basic reason is that there is no way to regularize the nambu-gotto action
while preserving reparametrization invariance. this problem was nicely cured
a decade later by s. polyakov using the action of l. brink p. di vecchia and p.
howe. this led me, with a. neveu and others to extensive studies of the exact
quantum solution of the liouville theory. this theory is completely integrable
classically and is a particular case of the toda theories which were nicely solved
by a. lesnov and m. saveliev. with a. bilal, i showed that they obey 11 w
symmetries in general. this raised my interest in toda theories and in integrable
theories in general. this is how i was led me to collaborate with m. saveliev
untill his unfortunate death.
it is now apparent that theories with enough
local supersymmetries are the higher dimensional analogues of two dimensional
conformal/integrable theories. in particular it has been known[4, 5] already for
some time that ten dimensional supersymmetric yangmills are similar to self-
dual yang-mills theories in four dimensions in the sense that the eld equations
are equivalent to atness conditions. more recently, the interest was revived
into (suitably reduced) ten dimensional supersymmetric yangmills theories in
the large n limit since they have been actively considered in the search for
the m theory (see e.g refs[6, 7]). this has motivated us to return to the use of
atness conditions in superspace in order to derive non trivial classical solutions.
our initial idea was to try to apply method inspired by the ones of lesnov and
saveliev to them. however, dierent approaches, more closely inspired from
self-dual yang-mills in four dimensions have turned out to be more fruitful [1]
[2] [3].

let us rst recall some standard formulae in order to establish the notations.

11speaking only about the conformal ones,

5

in ten dimensions the dynamics is specied by the standard action

s =z d10x tr(cid:26) 1

4

ymny mn +

1
2

(cid:0)mm + [xm, ](cid:1)(cid:27) ,

ymn = mxn  nxm + [xm, xn] .

(2.1)

(2.2)

the notation is as follows. xm(x) is the vector potential, (x) is the majorana-
weyl spinor. both are matrices in the adjoint representation of the gauge group
g. latin indices m = 0, . . . 9 describe minkowski components. greek indices
 = 1, . . . 16 denote spinor components. we will use the superspace formulation
with odd coordinates . the super vector potentials, which are valued in the
gauge group, are noted am (x, ), a (x, ). it has been shown [5] that we may
remove all the additional elds and uniquely reconstruct the physical elds xm,
 from am and a if we impose the condition a = 0 on the latter.

with this condition the eld equations derived from the lagrangian 2.1 are

equivalent [4] [5] to the atness conditions

f=0,

(2.3)

where f is the supercurvature

f = da + da + [a, a]+ + 2 (m) am.

(2.4)

d denote the superderivatives

d =   (m) m,

(2.5)

and we use the dirac matrices

m =


01616

(cid:16)(m)(cid:17)

(cid:16)(m)(cid:17)

01616


 , 11 =(cid:18) 11616

0

0

11616 (cid:19) .

(2.6)

the physical elds appearing in equation 2.1 are reconstructed from the super-
elds am a as follows. using the bianchi identity on the super curvature one
shows that one may write

fm = (m) .

then xm,  are, respectively, the zeroth order contributions in the expansions
of am and  in powers of the odd coordinates .

throughout the paper, it will be convenient to use the following particular

realisation:

(cid:16)(cid:0)9(cid:1)(cid:17) =(cid:16)(cid:0)9(cid:1)(cid:17) =(cid:18) 188
(cid:16)(cid:0)0(cid:1)(cid:17) = (cid:16)(cid:0)0(cid:1)(cid:17) =(cid:18) 188

088

088

6

088

188 (cid:19)
188 (cid:19)

088

(2.7)

(2.8)

(cid:16)(cid:0)i(cid:1)(cid:17) =(cid:16)(cid:0)i(cid:1)(cid:17) =(cid:18)

0

(cid:0)i t(cid:1),

i
,

0 (cid:19) ,

i = 1, . . . 8.

(2.9)

the convention for greek letters is as follows: letters from the beginning of the
alphabet run from 1 to 16. letters from the middle of alphabet run from 1
to 8. in this way, we shall separate the two spinor representations of o(8) by
rewriting 1, . . . , 16 as 1, . . . , 8,  1, . . . ,  8.

using the above explicit realisations on sees that the equations to solve take

the form

da + da + [a, a]+ = 2 (a0 + a9) ,
da + da + [a, a]+ = 2 (a0  a9) ,

da + da + [a, a]+ = 2

8xi=1

aii

,.

(2.10)
(2.11)

(2.12)

at this point one makes use of the fact that equations 2.10 and 2.11 are, respec-
tively the integrability conditions of the equations

(d  a) r+ = 0,

(+  a+) r+ = 0,

(d  a) r = 0,

(  a) r = 0,

(2.13)

(2.14)

where r are superelds valued in the gauge group. we let from now on

a = a0  a9,

 =


x0 


x9 .

(2.15)

a straightforward computation shows that equations 2.12 become

d(cid:0)r1 d r(cid:1) = 2

8xi=1

aii

,

r  r+r1
 ,

ai  r(ai + i)r1
 .

in practice, given r, we may derive the eld ai, if the following conditions hold

x

d(cid:0)r1 d r(cid:1) ijk

 = 0,

1  i < j < k  8.

(2.16)

these are complicated non linear  model type equations in superspace which so
far could not be handled. this is basically why these reasonings did not allow yet
to construct any explicit nontrivial physically meaningfull solution. conditions
2.16 only provide a procedure [5] for obtaining innite series of nonlocal, and
rather complicated conservation laws.

7

3 yangs form of the eld equations

in this section, we repeat a previous discussion[1] for completeness.

3.1 a usefull on-shell gauge

under gauge transformations, we have

r  r, am  1 (am + m) , a  1 (a + d) .

thus r is gauge invariant. if  = r1

 , we get

a+  r1+r, a  r1dr, ai  eai,

a  0, a  0.

(3.1)

thus, if the eld equations are satised there exists a gauge (on shell) such that
a = a = 0. after this gauge choice, the atness conditions 2.102.12 boil
down, respectively, to

da + da + [a, a ]+ = 4 a0,

0 = 0,

da = 2

8x1 eaii

,.

the last mixed ones which in general lead to the complicated conditions 2.16
have become linear, and their general solution may be derived in closed form[1].

3.2 dynamical equations for the superpotential eld .

it follows from the dirac algebra that the  matrices satisfy the equations

ijt + jit = 2ij,

i, j = 1, . . . , 8.

(3.5)

we may choose  8 = 1. then it follows that the other matrices, i.e. i,
i = 1, . . . , 7 are antisymmetric. with this choice of realisation, it is convenient
to separate the symmetric and antisymmetric combinations of equations 3.4.
this gives

(3.2)
(3.3)

(3.4)

(3.6)

(3.7)

da + da = 4ea8,
7x1 eaii

da  da = 4

,

by convention greek letters with and without overline take the same numerical
values, so that, for instance,  8
 = 1. next, with the present particular realisa-
tion, one may verify that [d, d]+ = 2, +. thus it follows from equations
3.6 that there exists a supereld , such that

a = d.

(3.8)

8

then one nds that

a8 = 2+.

(3.9)

finally, one may eliminate a from all the remaining dynamical equations using
equation 3.8. this gives

[d, d]  = 4

7x1 eaii

,

dd + dd + [d, d]+ = 4a0.

(3.10)

(3.11)

the general solution of equations 3.10 has been given in closed form[1]. equa-
tions 3.11 are similar to yangs equations. a partial class of solutions of these
equations may be derived[1] using methods similar to the ones developed[10] for
self-dual yang-mills theories in four dimensions. so far, however, it has not been
possible to derive a solution of equation 3.11 which also satises equations 3.10.
thus we have still failed to solve the full yang-mills equations. in the search
for more general solutions of 3.11, it is clear that the existence of backlund
transformations for the solutions of these equations may be very useful. in the
present discussion we concentrate upon this topic, leaving aside the much harder
problem of deriving simultaneous solutions of equations 3.11 and 3.10. we will
have more to say at the end.

before beginning the discussion, it is useful to present a generalisation of an
argument given earlier[1] in the particular case where there is no dependence
upon x1, . . . , x8, since it turns out to be crucial for the existence of the backlund
transformations we have in mind. the point is to show that equations 3.11
are equivalent to a set of dierential conditions which are rst order in the
superderivatives. using the fact that

we rewrite equation 3.11 as

[d, d]+ = 2i

,i

dd + dd + g [d, d]+ = 4 (a0 + 8)

(3.12)

next let us consider the supereld  dened by

 = d 

1
2

[, d]

using equations 3.12 one nds that

d + d = 2(cid:18)2a0 + 28 +

[, ](cid:19)

1
2

it thus follows that we may let  = d. finally equations 3.12 are equivalent
to the conditions

1
2

d = d +

9

[, d]

(3.13)

with

a0 = 8 

1
2

 

1
2

[, ]

(3.14)

at this point it is interesting to recall the four dimensional yang equations
which arose in solving selfdual (purely bosonic) yangmills in four dimensions.
for this, we closely follow an earlier review [10]. there are two bosonic complex
coordinates z, y and their conjugate z, y. one may start from the equations
(indices mean derivatives)

(cid:0)gzg1(cid:1)z +(cid:0)gyg1(cid:1) y = 0,

where g is in the adjoint representation of the gauge group. this is partially
solved by letting

gzg1 = f y, gyg1 = fz.

which leads to the consistency condition

fzz + f yy + [f y, fz] = 0.

(3.15)

(3.16)

in order to draw a parallel with our case, let us recall that, according to equations
3.1, 3.8, we have

a = r1dr = d.

(3.17)

there is a similarity between equations 3.11 and 3.16, and between equations
3.15, and 3.17, except that the indices are paired dierently. on the other
hand, the equations considered bear some similarities with the ones considered
for self-dual yang-mills theories with extended supersymmetries [9].

4 backlund transformations

4.1 the principle

the discussion we are going to present is closely inspired by the corresponding
ideas developed [8] [9] for self-dual yang-mills theories. nevertheless we are
able to somewhat clarify the mechanism which is at work. at this point let us
recall that we want to establish transformations between solutions of equations
3.11. these coincide with the symmetric part of equations 2.12 in the gauge
where a = 0 where the rst and third terms on the left are absent. the new
insight is that a backlund transformation of the type developed so far [8] for
self-dual yang-mills theories, correspond to a particular gauge transformation,
say a  a (from the on-shell light cone gauge we are using, where a = d)
which is such that the symmetric part of equations 2.12 retain the same form;
so that we may dene a supereld  by letting a
 = d thereby obtaining a
new solution of equations 3.11.

10

4.2 denition

let us thus consider consider a gauge transformation a  a where

a

 = sas1  (ds) s1

clearly

a

 =  (ds) s1,
satisfy equations 2.12. thus we get, aftere symmetrizing in  and 

 = s (d) s1  (ds) s1, a

da

 + da

 + da

 +nda

 +(cid:2)a

, a

(cid:3)+ +(cid:2)a

 , a

(cid:3)+o = 4a

8,.

(4.1)
this will have the same form as the corresponding equation for a, i.e. the
symmetric part of equation 3.4, if the terms in bracket is also proportional to
 . after some calculation one sees that this condition is equivalent to the
conditions

d(cid:0)s1ds(cid:1) +(cid:2)d, (cid:0)s1ds(cid:1)(cid:3)+ + {  }  ,

(4.2)

if these conditions can be solved, a
we may dene a supereld  by letting a
and  by the relations

 is such that da

  ,. thus
 = d. thus we nally relate 

 + da

s (d) s1 + sds1 = .

(4.3)

since a
tions

 satises the gauge transformed of equation 2.10,  satises the equa-

dd + dd + [d, d]+ = 2 (a

0 + a

9) .

we have thus obtained a backlund transformation for equation 3.11, since the
latter equations have the same form.

4.3 solving the condition for s

the essential point is that the rst order equations 3.16 which are equivalent
to equations 3.11 are precisely such that the conditions 4.2 may be explicitly
solved. we shall show this for the particular case of the gauge group a1. let
us then write

 = +x + + x  + 0h

with [h, x ] = 2x , [x +, x ] = h. consider the automorphism of the
algebra generated by r which is such that

rx r1 = x ,

rhr1 = h.

11

hs1 (ds) , (cid:16)d (cid:17)i+

+hs1 (ds) , (cid:16)d (cid:17)i+

+d(cid:0)s1ds(cid:1) + d(cid:0)s1ds(cid:1) = 0

first, we change the gauge transformation from s to sr so that the condition
to be satised becomes

where  = rr1. a straightforwrd computation shows that these equations
are satised by letting

s = e

x +

(+)h ,

(4.4)

if the supereld  satises the equations

d  = 2+d0 + d+.

the crucial point is that this latter conditions are almost the same as equations
3.13. indeed, it is easy to see that they are satised if we let

 = + + 0+

(4.5)

where we have used the decomposition  = +x + + 0h + x 

5 outlook

in summary, we have been able to devise a backlund transformation for equa-
tions derived from 2.10 and the symmetric part of equation 2.12, in a gauge
where equation 2.11 becomes trivial. this is yet nother indication that the
system of equations 2.10, 2.11, and the symmetric part of 2.12 is completely
integrable and has similarities with self-dual yang-mills in four dimensions.
another similar property is the existence of a lax representation [2] [3] analo-
gous to the one of belavin and sakharov. as a matter of fact, it is easy to see
that we have solved a variant of the eld equations, 2.102.12 where the last is
replaced by

da + da + [a, a ]+ = 2

8xi=1

aii

, +

7xi,j=1

bij ij8
,.

there appears an additional bosonic supereld bij. the physical meaning of
this modied dynamics is under investigation [11].

the last point is that one may be worried that the backlund transformation,
being based on a gauge transformation maybe trivial. this is not so because we
are able to relate solutions which are both in the same on-shell light cone gauge
although our gauge transformation does not respect this gauge condition. this
is possible since, after transformation, the term in bracket in equation 4.1 may
be lumped into the right hand side. thus in eect, the solutions are not related
by gauge transformations.
acknowledgements. i am indebted to d. fairlie for discussions and for point-
ing earlier references [8] [9].

12

references

[1] j.-l. gervais, m. v. saveliev: progress in classically solving ten dimensional
supersymmetric reduced yang-mills theories, hep-th/9811108, nucl. phys.
b554 (1999) 183.

[2] j.-l. gervais, lax equations in ten dimensional supersymmetric classi-
cal yang-mills theories, hep-th/9903218, contribution to the international
seminar on integrable systems, in memoriam mikhail v. saveliev, max
planck institute for mathematics bonn.

[3] j.-l. gervais, solution generating in ten dimensional supersymmetric clas-
sical yang-mills theories, hep-th/9910235, contribution to the dubna
memorial volume in honour of mikhail v. saveliev.

[4] e. witten: twistorlike transform in ten dimensions, nuclear physics

b266 (1986), 245264.

[5] e. abdalla, m. forger and m. jacques: higher conservation laws for ten
dimensional supersymmetric yangmills theories, nuclear physics b307
(1988), 198220.

[6] t. banks, w. fischler, s.h. shenker, l. susskind: m theory as a matrix

model: a conjecture, hep-th/9610043, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 5112.

[7] r. dijkgra, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, matrix string theory, hep-

th/9703030, nucl. phys. b500 (1997) 43.

[8] a.n. lesnov: backlund transformation of self-dual yang-mills elds for

arbitrary semi simple gauge algebra, protvino preprint ihep 91-145.

[9] ch. devchand, a.n. leznov: backlund transformations for supersymmet-
ric self-dual theories for semisimple gauge groups and a hierarchy of a1
solutions, hep-th 9301098, com. math. phys. 160 (1994) 551.

[10] a. n. leznov and m. v. saveliev: exactly and completely integrable non-

linear dynamical systems, acta applicandae math. 16 (1989) 174.

[11] j.-l. gervais, h. samtleben: integrable structures in o-shell 10d super

yang-mills theory, hep-th in preparation.

13

