9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
7
1

 

 
 

2
v
3
1
1
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

bicocca-ft-99-39
mit-ctp-2924
nsf-itp-99-136
hep-th/9911113

monopoles in string theory

amihay hananya,b and alberto zaaronic,1

(a)institute for theoretical physics, santa barbara, ca 93106, usa.

(b)massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge ma 02139, usa2

(c)i.n.f.n. - sezione di milano, 20133, italy.

abstract

a realization of en+1 monopoles in string theory is given. the
ns ve brane stuck to an orientifold eight plane is identied as
the t hooft polyakov monopole. correspondingly, the moduli
space of many such ns branes is identied with the moduli space
of su(2) monopoles. these monopoles transform in the spinor
representation of an so(2n) gauge group when n d8 branes are
stacked upon the orientifold plane. this leads to a realization of
en+1 monopole moduli spaces. charge conservation leads to a
dynamical eect which does not allow the ns branes to leave the
orientifold plane. this suggests that the monopole moduli space
is smooth for n < 8. odd n > 8 obeys a similar condition. using
a chain of dualities, we also connect our system to an heterotic
background with kaluza-klein monopoles.

november 1999

1e-mail: hanany@mit.edu, alberto.zaaroni@mi.infn.it
2permanent address

1 introduction

string theory has many realizations of the monopole solutions of t hooft and
polyakov. basically, whenever there is an abelian gauge eld which has the
potential of being a subgroup of a non-abelian gauge group then we would
expect an object which will be the analog of the monopole solution in eld
theory.

d branes oer a convenient framework for realizing monopole congura-
tions in supersymmetric gauge theories and studying their moduli space. in
a standard construction [1, 2, 3], monopoles for a non-abelian gauge theory
living on the world-volume of a set of branes are identied with other branes,
of dierent type, ending on them. the type and the extension in space-time
of the branes are chosen in order to have a bps conguration. an overview
of the various possibilities is described in section 2. su(n) monopoles of
magnetic charge k are easily described in this context and orthogonal and
symplectic groups can be studied by introducing orientifold planes. much
more dicult is the study of en groups. in this paper we provide an explicit
example of brane congurations that are naturally interpreted as en bps
monopoles.

en gauge groups, where n runs from 1 to 8, can be described in the
type i string theory using backgrounds where the dilaton is blowing up at
some orientifold plane. these backgrounds with en symmetry are in one-to-
one correspondence with the point in moduli space of the nine-dimensional
heterotic theory where there is a perturbative enhanced symmetry. the
spectrum of electrically charged states in these type i models has been ex-
tensively discussed in the literature, since it provides a non trivial check of
string dualities. in particular, d0 branes, stuck on the orientifold plane, have
been identied with the electrically charged states that become massless at
the point in moduli space where an so(2n) u(1) gauge symmetry realized
on d8 branes and abelian bulk elds is enhanced to en+1. much less atten-
tion has been paid to magnetically charged objects. we will show that stuck
ns branes are naturally interpreted as monopoles. together with systems
of d6 branes stretched between the d8 branes responsible for the so(2n)
symmetry, these ns branes give a stringy description of en+1 monopoles.

in the absence of d8 branes, we obtain a description of k su(2) monopoles
in terms of k ns branes moving on the orientifold plane. the moduli space of
such monopoles is known to be smooth. our ns branes are, by construction,
stuck on the orientifold plane. for living outside the plane, a ns brane

1

needs an image under the orientifold projection and, in principle, two ns
branes could meet and move outside in the bulk. an obvious singularity
would show up in the moduli space of the ns brane if they could leave the
orientifold plane. we will see that a charge conservation argument does not
allow them to leave. this is the string theory explanation for the smoothness
of the monopole moduli space. the very same construction, generalized to
the presence of d8 branes, predicts that the en+1 monopole moduli space is
also smooth.

the existence of monopoles in string theory can be also addressed from a
dierent perspective. they can show up quite naturally in string compact-
ications. sen realized that kk monopoles in the heterotic string can be
identied with bps monopoles of a spontaneously broken gauge symmetry
[4]. the same system was recently studied in order to get the exact moduli
space of the heterotic string near an ale singularity without gauge eld
[5]. we will see that these heterotic congurations are connected with the
ones discussed in this paper by a chain of dualities. this connection is a
further evidence of our identication of stuck ns branes with monopoles.
on the other side, our construction can be used to explain and generalize
the result in [4, 5]. various papers have appeared which tried to connect
the heterotic moduli space with the coulomb branch of three-dimensional
n=4 gauge theories [6, 7, 8]. this connection is expected due to the relation
between the coulomb branch of some three-dimensional n=4 gauge theories
and monopole moduli spaces [3]. our point of view in this paper is that we
look for the existence and the identication of the relevant monopoles in the
problem, leaving three dimensional gauge theories aside.

this paper is organized as follows. in section 2, we give an overview of
the various string theory realizations of monopoles. section 3 contains the
description of the type i conguration that is the object of this paper and
the explicit realization of the en+1 monopoles. section 4 makes a connection
with the kk monopoles in the heterotic string. various comments on the
smoothness of moduli space are contained in section 5. section 6 contains a
brief discussion of the dk case.

2

2 monopoles in string theory

examples of monopoles in string theory have been studied in great detail
and here we summarize some of the cases3.

probably the most studied example is the one realized by a d1 brane
which is stretched between a pair of two d3 branes [1, 10, 11, 12, 2]. this is
the classical example for a spontaneously broken four dimensional n=4 super-
symmetric ym theory with gauge group su(2), the one which was explicitly
used in the solutions of t hooft and polyakov. there are several natural
realizations of such monopole solutions. a dp brane stretched between a
pair of dp+2 branes will be a p  1 brane solution in a p + 3 dimensional
theory, for p  6. the classical solution of the higgs eld represents the
shape of this brane conguration [10]. this family of solutions is related to
the case p = 1 by a set of t-dualities. the eld theory interpretation of such
dualities is dimensional reduction starting from a higher dimensional theory
and reducing some of its dimensions. the case p = 0 is somewhat special
and represents an object which has the interpretation of an instanton in 3
dimensions. it is identied with the euclidean monopole solution of polyakov
[13] and is represented by a euclidean d0 brane.

another example of monopoles in string theory is realized by applying s-
duality to the case p = 3. this gives a conguration of a d3 brane stretched
between a pair of ns ve branes, a conguration which was well studied
[3]. one can apply a further sl(2,z) transformation on this conguration
and get a d3 brane stretched between a pair of (p,q) ve branes.
[3] also
demonstrated a connection to three dimensional gauge theories with n=4
supersymmetry by mapping the coulomb branch moduli space to certain
monopole moduli spaces, a problem which was motivated by eld theory
studies, for the su(2) case in [14] and for su(n) in [15].

one other example is that of [4] in the study of the heterotic string on
a taub-nut space. sen nds that the monopole solution in the form of a
kaluza klein monopole is interpreted as a t hooft polyakov monopole. the
radius of the circle in the taub-nut space plays the role of the scalar vev
in the spontaneously broken su(2) group which becomes enhanced when the
radius approaches the self dual radius.

a common feature to all of these string theory congurations is the fact
that they all represent classical monopole solutions. correspondingly the

3for older realizations of monopoles in string theory see [9].

3

moduli space of solutions for these objects coincides with the moduli space
of monopoles [16]. the structure of the moduli space solution for the simplest
case of 2 monopoles in an su(2) gauge theory was studied in detail in the
book of atiyah and hitchin. the space is known as the atiyah hitchin
space. it has dimension 4 and admits a hyperkhler metric. we intuitively
identify the 4 parameters as the 3 relative positions of the monopoles and
an angle associated with their relative phase. the atiyah hitchin metric
consists of the following three types of contributions. there is a natural
expansion parameter for the monopole moduli space.
it is given by the
distance between the two monopoles as measured in units of inverse scalar
vev. a typical metric component has an expansion of the form [17]

1 

const
hix

+ o(ehix)

(1)

where x is the monopole separation and hi is the higgs vev. for very large
separations the moduli space looks at with two orbifold singularities. there
is a correction to this metric coming with an inverse power of the separation
between the monopoles. this changes the space to a circle bundle over r3.
there are further exponential corrections to the metric which make this space
smooth.

it is interesting to consider how such exponential corrections arise in
each of the examples discussed above. we will mention the corrections for
the moduli space of two su(2) monopoles in each of these cases. for a pair
of dp branes stretched between a pair of dp+2 branes one can stretch a
fundamental string which is bounded by both the dp and the dp+2 branes.
this gives rise to a worldsheet instanton with an action xhi where x is the
separation between the two dp branes interpreted as the separation between
the two monopoles and hi is the scalar vev of the spontaneously broken
su(2), measured as the distance between the two dp+2 branes in units of
l2
s.

the case of a pair of d3 branes stretched between two ns branes gives
rise to a euclidean d1 brane bounded between both the d3 branes and the
ns branes. here hi is the distance between the two ns branes measured in
units of gsl2
s. similarly for a pair of d3 branes stretched between a pair of
(p, q) ve branes the exponential correction is due to a (p, q) string bounded
by both the three branes and the ve branes. hi is the distance between
the two (p, q) ve branes measured in units of the (p, q) string tension.

4

the purpose of this paper is to discuss a certain class of type i theories.
in the spirit of the introduction above, whenever we observe a gauge group we
would like to look for the monopole solutions for this theory. one guide line
for this search will be what we call a generalized montonen olive duality.
this duality in one of its forms states that the monopole spectrum of a
four dimensional n=4 supersymmetric gauge theory with gauge group g
sits on the lattice of the electric spectrum of another four dimensional n=4

supersymmetric gauge theory with gauge group eg. eg is dened as having a

root lattice which is the dual of the root lattice of g. the extension of the
montonen olive duality that we will use is in dimensions dierent than 4. we
will say that the monopole spectrum of a gauge theory with 16 supercharges
in p+3 dimensions and a gauge group g sits on the same lattice as the electric
spectrum for a gauge theory with 16 supercharges in p + 3 dimensions and

backgrounds with various groups g.

gauge group eg. this property will be used when discussing some particular
3 monopoles in type i string theory
type i in its most simple form is described by a background with r9s1/z2
where the z2 acts on the circle by reection of the coordinate while changing
the orientation of the string worldsheet.
it is convenient to think of the
circle as an interval. there are two xed planes under the z2 action which
carry a d8 rr charge of magnitude -8. these planes are called orientifold
planes and are denoted by o8. charge conservation on the interval implies
a constraint on the number of physical d8 branes, which carry rr charge 1,
to be 16. there is an option to replace one of the orientifolds by a positively
charged orientifold, denoted by o8+, with rr charge +8. in this case charge
conservation on the interval implies that there are no physical branes in the
bulk of the interval. the second option, having no physical d8 branes, will be
less interesting for the applications in this paper and will not be considered.
the type i string coupling, or more precisely its inverse, is a varying
function on the positions of the various d8 branes.
it satises a laplace
equation in 1 space dimension with delta function sources at the positions
of the d8 branes on the interval, together with the negative charge source
at the boundaries of the interval. as such it is a piece-wise smooth linear
function. denote the positions of the d8 branes on the interval by xi and the
coordinate on the interval by x, then the string coupling obeys the following

5

equation

ls

gs(x)

=

16xi=1 |x  xi|  8|x|  8|r  x| +

ls
g0
s

.

(2)

when this function vanishes the string coupling diverges and some states in
the string spectrum become massless. such a vanishing can happen only at
the boundaries of the interval since it is a positive function. as discussed
in [18] a half 4 d0 brane which is stuck to one of the orientifold points
becomes massless as the string coupling diverges. this state together with
a massless half anti d0 brane and the gauge eld which sits in the string
coupling multiplet form a gauge group su(2). one can describe this process
as an inverse higgs mechanism for getting an enhanced su(2) gauge group.
the scalar vev is given by the d0 brane mass,

hi =

1

2gsls

.

(3)

the gauge coupling of this gauge theory is given by the usual coupling on a
d8 brane,

1
g2
y m

1
gsl5
s

=

.

(4)

at this point we would like to ask what is the object which can be iden-
tied with the t hooft polyakov monopole for this spontaneously broken
su(2). since it is a bps state it is enough to know its mass in order to
identify its charge. on the other hand we can apply the classical formula for
the tension of the monopole, tmon from its eld theory value,

tmon = hi
g2
y m

=

1
2g2
s l6
s

.

(5)

this formula identies the monopole as a half ns brane which is stuck to
the o8 plane.5 more details on this identication appear in section 4.

the system of ns branes and d8 branes is the same system which was
studied in the context of six dimensional gauge theories in [19] and [20]. for

4half a brane in this case means that the brane carries half of the charge of a physical
brane. away from the orientifold a physical brane consists of a half brane and its image
under space reection. on the orientifold, half a brane can exist with no images.

5one may question the existence of half ns brane on an o8 plane. we thank oren
bergman for raising this issue. however, its existence is imposed by the generalized
montonen olive duality principle.

6

deniteness we will take the ns branes to lie along 012345 directions, the d8
to be point like in direction 6 and, when present, d6 branes will span the
coordinates 0123456.

this picture can be generalized to include additional physical d8 branes
sitting at the o8 plane. for nite string coupling the world volume theory
of n d8 branes stacked at the orientifold plane is so(2n). together with the
u(1) gauge eld, which is in the multiplet which contains the dilaton, this
symmetry is enhanced to en+1 for a diverging dilaton at the xed point of the
interval. we may ask where are the extra states in the adjoint representation
of the en+1 theory. this question was analyzed by [18] who argued that a half
d0 brane stuck at the o8 plane transforms under the spinor representation
of so(2n) and is naturally charged with respect to the u(1) with a charge
1
2. it is amusing to note that such identication requires a non-trivial bound
state of two half d0 branes for the cases e7 and e8 [18]. to nd this bound
state is a non-trivial problem in quantum mechanics of such stuck d0 branes.
with this picture in mind we now turn to the spectrum of monopoles
in such an en+1 theory. at this point we recall the generalized montonen
olive duality principle which was mentioned at the previous section. as
the en+1 root lattice is self dual, the monopole spectrum sits in the adjoint
representation of the en+1 group. this decomposes naturally to monopoles
in the adjoint representation of the so(2n) group and neutral under the
u(1) and to monopoles in the spinor representation of so(2n) charged under
the u(1). the bps objects in the adjoint representation of so(2n) are
monopoles for the d8 branes and are naturally given by d6 branes stretched
between a pair of neighboring d8 branes. this is one of the cases which was
mentioned in the previous section for p = 6. what about the bps objects
in the spinor representation? the u(1) charge of the object and its mass
formula lead to identify it with a half ns ve brane stuck at the o8 plane.
we may ask why it transforms in the spinor representation of so(2n). this
is not a simple problem and we may only give some suggestions. according
to [20] there is a linking number [3] which is induced by the d8 brane on
the stuck ns brane. this linking number is half the unit of charge for a d6
brane. one may ask if there is a state associated with this charge. it must
be a supersymmetric singlet as there are no additional massless multiplets
which are induced by the d8 brane on the ns brane. it is highly suggestive
that quantization of such objects leads the ns brane to transform under the
spinor representation of so(2n). it is not easy to show this, though. it is
again amusing to note that for the cases of e7 and e8 groups the analysis

7

above suggests that there will be non-trivial bound states of a pair of half
ns branes which are required to complete the adjoint representation of the
gauge group. it is an interesting problem to try and show how this arises.

3.1 smoothness puzzle

let us look more carefully at the case of a gauge group e1. this corresponds
to an o8 plane with a diverging string coupling at the enhanced point and
a nite string coupling for the spontaneously broken phase. let us take two
half ns branes stuck on the o8 plane. according to our identication these
two branes are two monopoles in an su(2) gauge group. correspondingly
their moduli space, which consists of 3 relative positions inside the o8 plane
and a relative phase angle in the eleventh direction, is identied as the (re-
duced) moduli space of 2 su(2) monopoles or the atiyah hitchin manifold.
the manifold is known to be smooth. this points to some diculty. there
is apparently a singularity in the moduli space of two half ns branes as they
move inside an o8 plane. they can approach each other along the three
directions inside the o8 plane and leave to the bulk of the interval as a pair
of a brane and its image under the reection of the type i interval. the
motion away from the orientifold plane corresponds to a scalar in a massless
tensor multiplet. this tensor multiplet does not exist as a massless state
in the phase in which the ns branes are stuck to the orientifold. corre-
spondingly, there is a singular point in the hypermultiplet moduli space in
which the tensor multiplet becomes massless. this is in contradiction with
the smoothness of the moduli space of two monopoles!

how can this be solved? we recall that the type i has irregularities in
the form of a cosmological constant in an intermediate region between two
d8 branes or between d8 brane and an o8 plane. we use units where a d8
brane induces a jump in the cosmological constant of magnitude 1. for our
example of the e1 theory the cosmological constant outside the o8 plane is
-8. as discussed in [20], a ns brane in a non-zero cosmological constant back-
ground has d6 brane tails. charge conservation for the ramond-ramond
elds in the presence of a cosmological constant of magnitude m implies a
relation between the numbers nr, nl of d6 branes that end on a ns brane
from the right and from the left [20],

in this formula, left and right refer to the picture where the type i back-

nl  nr = m

(6)

8

n>8

n<8

figure 1: a physical ns brane in the presence of an o8 plane. the dashed
line represents an o8 plane with a stack of n d8 branes and the circle
denotes half a physical ns brane. the solid lines are d6 branes. there are
two cases to consider depending on the number n. for n > 8 the d6 branes
stretch to the o8 plane while for n < 8 they stretch away from it.

ground is represented as a segment limited by two o8 planes. as discussed
in [20], whenever equation (6) is satised the six-dimensional theory living
on the d6 and ns brane system is anomaly free.

for the case of a ns brane near an o8 plane, the cosmological constant
is -8 and, according to equation (6), we have 8 half d6 branes stretching
away from the o8 plane, as in gure 1 for the case n = 0. it is crucial
that the d6 branes are stretched away from the o8 plane. this is the key
point which resolves our puzzle. suppose that a pair of stuck half ns branes
meet and attempt to move away from the o8 plane. this is not possible
due to energetic reasons. long d6 branes can not be formed as soon as the
ns branes leave to the bulk of the interval. we conclude that the pair of
half ns branes can not leave the o8 plane. instead they are conned to
the plane and there are no singular points associated to the motion outside.
the moduli space in question is smoothed out. in some sense this eect can
be thought of as a higher order eect. the classical moduli space of two half
ns branes has a at metric with an orbifold singularity,

r3  s1

z2

.

(7)

the singularity at the origin is interpreted as the point at which naively a pair
of half ns branes meet and attempt to leave the o8 plane. this singularity
is smoothed out by an exponential correction to the metric coming from

9

euclidean d0 branes, which are stretched between the two half ns branes,
of action x
. here x is the distance between the ns branes, gs is the string
gsls
coupling at the o8 plane and ls is the string scale. these objects prevent
the ns branes from meeting on the o8 plane. we can restate this in terms
of the mass for a tensor multiplet. classically, there is a massless tensor
multiplet which arises as the ns branes meet and leave the o8 plane. this
tensor multiplet gets exponential contributions to its mass from instantons
coming from euclidean d0 branes stretched between the two half ns branes.
it is easy to generalize this picture to a higher number, n, of d8 branes
sitting on the o8 plane. as long as n < 8 in gure 1 the charge of the
combined system, o8 and n d8 branes, is negative. consequently, half
physical ns branes are conned to this system and will not leave to the bulk
of the interval as a pair.

the following statement can be used as a prediction on the behaviour of
the moduli space of monopoles for several gauge groups. let us rst consider
the case e1, namely an o8 plane. k half ns branes stuck on this plane
correspond to k su(2) monopoles. their moduli space is identied with the
moduli space of k su(2) monopoles.
it is a 4k dimensional space which
is believed to be smooth. (there is a 4 dimensional trivial part which is
associated to the center of mass motion for the monopoles but the remaining
space is believed to be smooth). the case k = 2 was calculated explicitly
by atiyah and hitchin and was shown to be smooth. our resolution to the
puzzle actually supports the claim that the k su(2) monopole moduli space
is smooth for any k.

we can further extend this claim for en+1 models. here the statement
will only deal with a particular part in monopole moduli space of en+1 which
consists only of those monopoles in the spinor representation of so(2n) under
the decomposition so(2n)  u(1)  en+1. the moduli space of k such
monopoles is smooth for any k. there are no singularities associated with
two such monopoles meeting and leaving to the bulk of the interval.

3.2 n > 8 and an odd puzzle

what about the case of n d8 branes that are enough to make the charge of
the o8 plane positive? in this case a pair of half ns branes is allowed to
leave the plane and a total of n  8 half d6 branes can stretch in between
the two half ns branes. here we face another puzzle which rst appears for
the case n = 9. as already pointed out in [21], consistency with tadpole

10

o8 + n d8

1

n-7

figure 2: a physical ns brane in the presence of an o8 plane and an odd
number, n of d8 branes. there are n  7 half d6 branes stretching between
the half ns brane and its image. there is a half d6 brane stretching away
from the half ns brane.

cancellation restricts the number of d6 branes which cross the o8 plane
to be even. this is not the case for n  8 odd. one would conclude that
n > 8 odd is not a consistent brane conguration. however, there is another
alternative for a physical ns brane in the bulk which is consistent with this
restriction. this is the alternative which was discussed in [21]. for n odd,
one can stretch, as in gure 2, n  7 half d6 branes in between the half ns
brane and its image and a single half d6 brane away from the half ns brane.
this conguration is consistent with charge conservation for the rr 6 brane
charge in the presence of a non-zero cosmological constant.

a brane which is stretched away from the ns brane poses the same prob-
lem that we had for the n < 8 case. suppose that in the background of n odd
d8 branes stacked upon an o8 plane there is a pair of stuck half ns branes.
such a pair can not leave the o8 plane to the bulk of the interval. it is not
allowed by the same energetic reasoning as in the case for n < 8. for even
n > 8 there is no need to stretch a d6 brane away from the ns brane and
therefore a pair of half ns branes is allowed to leave the o8 plane. it is not
clear how to interpret this phenomenon from the point of view of monopoles
in the corresponding gauge theory.

11

3.3 a massless three brane?

singularities in moduli space are typically associated with the appearance
of some massless states, or more generally tensionless objects. the classical
moduli space of two half ns branes, (7), is singular. here classical means
with respect to the natural expansion parameter which is determined from
the form of the atiyah hitchin manifold.
in our case it is the euclidean
d0 brane action x
gsls , with x the distance between the two ns branes. we
may ask what is the object which becomes massless/tensionless in the limit
of a small string coupling. it is easy to nd that this object is given by a
d4 brane which is stretched between the two ns branes 6. this is the only
object which can stretch between two ns branes inside an o8 plane in a
supersymmetric fashion. for small expansion parameter the d4 brane gives
rise to a tensionless three brane as the pair of half ns branes coincide. this
is clearly a naive picture since the moduli space gets smooth by exponential
corrections in the expansion parameter. correspondingly the three brane gets
exponentially small corrections to its tension of the order of exp( x
gsls ). this
three brane actually never gets tensionless as the moduli space is smooth. it
is amusing to note that this object maps in the heterotic string language,
which will be discussed in the next sections in detail, to a small instanton
which wraps a vanishing two-cycle.

4 heterotic string moduli space

in this section, we compare the identication of en+1 monopoles with con-
gurations of d6/d8/ns branes by performing a series of t/s dualities. at
the same time, we make contact with dierent approaches, where monopole
moduli spaces appear in the perturbative description of the heterotic string.
starting with the conguration discussed in the previous section, a t
duality along the 6 direction brings us to the type i theory. at this point an
s duality leads to the heterotic string, where the enhanced gauge symme-
try phenomenon of the en+1 theory can be perturbatively studied. in this
process, the d8 branes are mapped to d9 branes in the type i theory and
the so(32) gauge elds in the heterotic string, while the k ns branes are
mapped into k kaluza-klein monopoles (this is the same as a taub-nut

6one may actually need to consider a pair of half d4 branes in order to avoid problems

of existence for such a conguration. the discussion is not aected by this, though.

12

space) of the type i or heterotic theory. if the identication of the type i
stuck ns branes as monopoles is correct, we expect that the moduli space of
monopoles appears as the space of vacua of the heterotic string dened on
a taub-nut space. it was shown in [4, 5] that the moduli space of k su(2)
monopoles indeed appears in this context. more precisely, sen argued that
the kaluza klein monopole is identied with a t hooft polyakov monopole
of the su(2) gauge group which is enhanced at the self dual radius. study-
ing the problem in the limit where the taub-nut space reduces to an ale
space, witten conjectured a relation to three dimensional gauge theories.
the connection between the two points of view is made by realizing that
the monopole moduli space coincides with the coulomb branch of the three
dimensional gauge theory [15, 3].

we can formulate the problem, from the point of view of the heterotic
string, as follows. we are interested in the moduli space of hypermultiplets
in the heterotic string on k3.
in order to simplify the problem and keep
only few hypermultiplets, we replace k3 with a non-compact space obtained
by zooming on local singularities of the manifold. this is equivalent to con-
sidering the heterotic string dened on an ale space. this conguration
can be continuously deformed to the one we obtained after t and s duality;
a taub-nut space looks near innity like a non-trivial s1 bundle over r3
and reduces indeed to an ale space in the limit where the radius of the s1
becomes large. as a result of the zoom, the 6 dimensional eective theory
describing the moduli for this compactication is decoupled from gravity
and bulk modes. we want to focus on the moduli space corresponding to
the 6 dimensional modes. other parameters, which specify the background,
such as the radius of the taub-nut space or wilson lines for the 10 dimen-
sional gauge elds, are not dynamical, since they are vevs of 10 dimensional
decoupled elds. due to the decoupling of gravity, the 6 dimensional hy-
permultiplet moduli space is a hyper-kahler manifold. the hypermultiplet
moduli space is not corrected by string loops, but receives  corrections.
the classical moduli space is generically singular. in backgrounds with non-
trivial gauge bundles, some singularities, for example those associated with
small instantons, survive quantum corrections and nd their explanation in
in the trivial bundle case, there are exam-
non-perturbative phenomena.
ples where quantum corrections smooth the classical singularity [4, 5].
in
these examples, quantum corrections reproduce the expected moduli space
of monopoles.

13

4.1 the moduli space of kk monopoles

let us review what is known about the moduli space of kk monopoles in
the heterotic string with trivial gauge elds [4, 5]. these results strongly
support our identication of stuck ns branes in the dual type i theory as
bps monopoles.

consider the dynamics of k kaluza-klein monopoles in the heterotic
theory, or, in other words, a multi-centered taub-nut space. their exact
moduli space has been found by sen [4].

the taub-nut space has a metric

ds2 = v (~x)d~x2 + v 1(~x)(dx4 + ~  d~x)2

which is completely specied by the potential

v (~x) = 1 +

kxi=1

1

|~x  ~xi|

(8)

(9)

in the perturbative heterotic string, the moduli space corresponding to this
compactication is parameterized by the expectation values of k 1 six di-
mensional hypermultiplets. the scalar components of these hypermultiplets
are obtained by reducing the metric and the b eld along the k1 two-cycles
of the space. in the dual type i description, these hypermultiplets live on
the world-volume of the stuck ns branes and parameterize their position in
the space transverse to it. the classical moduli space is a symmetric product
of k 1 copies of r3  s1 and is singular. the singularity is the eect of con-
sidering the low energy supergravity; it is smoothed out by higher derivative
corrections. this can be understood as follows [4]. by varying the radius r
of the s1, the so(32) heterotic string can be driven to the self-dual point
(r2 = ) where there is a perturbative enhanced su(2) symmetry. the
w  bosons responsible for enhancing the symmetry from u(1) to su(2) are
perturbative bps string states with (n, m) = (1,1) units of momentum
and winding along s1, as can be seen from the bps formula

m 2

bp s = (

n
r

+

mr
 )2.

(10)

the kaluza-klein monopoles are identied as bps monopoles of the su(2)
enhanced symmetry. a kk monopole has indeed the same magnetic charge
(1,1) with respect to the s1 momentum and winding of a bps monopole.

14

that a kk monopole carries one unit of momentum is part of the denition of
the object. that it also carries 1 unit of winding follows from the equation
(11)

dh = tr f  f  tr r  r

that needs to be satised in any consistent heterotic model. it follows from
this identication that the exact moduli space for k kk monopoles is the
moduli space of k bps monopoles of su(2). this is expected to be a smooth
manifold; for k = 2 it is the atiyah-hitchin manifold.

monopoles exist in the phase where the group is spontaneously broken
to u(1) by the expectation value of some higgs eld. the metric on the
moduli space has an expansion in terms of the product hix of the monopole
distance with the higgs eld vev which is given in formula (1) of section
2. we can identify the gauge theory parameters with the heterotic ones
as follows. the 9 dimensional su(2) group has coupling constant re2h,
where h is the heterotic dilaton. it follows from formula (10) that the vev
of the eld responsible for the spontaneous symmetry breaking is related to
the s1 radius by r/  1/r. we see that the expansion of metric com-
ponents in equation (1) can be interpreted, in the large radius limit, as the
/r2 expansion. for large r2/ we recover the supergravity result, a at
singular metric. the perturbative expansion only contains a one-loop (in )
contribution, which comes with a negative sign. only after including the
non-perturbative corrections due to instantons the metric becomes smooth.
a second example, due to witten [5], deals with the moduli space of
the heterotic string near an ale singularity with no gauge bundle. for a
zk singularity, the relevant 6 dimensional elds are k  1 hypermultiplets
parameterizing the blowing-up modes of the manifold. combining symme-
tries, semi-classical arguments and the assumption of smoothness, the moduli
space for k = 2 was unambiguously identied in [5] with the atiyah-hitchin
manifold. it was then conjectured that the moduli space for a singularity
of type g is the coulomb branch of a three dimensional gauge theory with
8 supercharges and gauge group g. due to the relation between monopole
moduli spaces and three dimensional gauge theories [15], this result agrees
with sens one. this example can be indeed considered as a limit of the pre-
vious one, where the radius r is sent to innity while keeping the blowing-up
parameters xed; this scaling preserves the form of the metric. notice that
the su(2) group is somehow hidden in this approach.

the expansion of the metric components in equation (1) in this example is
just the  expansion. there is a world-sheet one-loop correction to the clas-

15

sical singular metric and a series of world-sheet instanton corrections. notice
that a world-sheet instanton in this case is a fundamental string wrapped over
a two-cycle of the ale space. an s-duality transforms it into a d1 brane
of the type i theory and a t-duality into an euclidean d0 brane stretched
between the ns branes in the type i description. this is in agreement with
the identication made in section 3.1 of d0 branes as responsible for the
corrections to the classical metric. as discussed in section 3.3, we can here
mention again the existence of a bps three brane given by a small heterotic
instanton which wraps a two-cycle of the ale space. classically, when the
metric is singular, it is tensionless. as one includes  corrections the tension
gets exponential corrections and does not vanish anywhere on the moduli
space.

the question of smoothness of the moduli space for the heterotic on ale
is not as clean as in the type i picture. it is not clear how to translate the
statement on charge conservation made in section 3.1. it is also not clear
how to translate the statement that the ns branes are conned to the o8
plane to the heterotic picture. such questions, if answered, would give us a
better perspective on the issue of smoothness of the moduli space from the
heterotic string point of view.

4.2 generalization to the en+1 case

the generalization of sens example to the en+1 case is simple. in the het-
erotic language, we can tune the radius and the wilson lines in such a way
that an en+1 symmetry in enhanced. the bps formula, for generic wilson
lines, reads

(12)

bp s =  n  a  p  ma2/2

r

m 2

mr

 !2

+

where a is a sixteen component vector representing the wilson line and p is
an element of the so(32)/z2 lattice. in type i picture, an entry 0 in the 16
component vector a corresponds to a d8 brane sitting at the orientifold plane
where the coupling constant is blowing up, while an entry 1/2 corresponds
to a d8 brane at the other orientifold. en+1 is obtained by choosing a vector
of the form a = (0, 0, ...., 0, 1/2, ...1/2), with n entries equal to zero. the

critical radius is r2 = (1  a2/2) = q(8  n)/8. at the critical radius,
the gauge symmetry so(2n)  u(1) is enhanced to en+1. the electrically
charged objects that are enhancing the gauge symmetry have typically non-

16

zero winding and momentum, and quantum numbers under so(2n). the
magnetically charged objects with the same quantum numbers are identied
as bps congurations with so(2n) monopoles on a taub-nut space. as the
radius r is taken to be large they become heavier and narrower as expected
from their behavior as monopoles. we can trace what these objects are
from the type i picture. the spinor representation of so(2n) is given by a
taub-nut space where the order of the space corresponds to the monopole
number and the values of the blow up parameters serve as positions of these
monopoles. the adjoint representation of so(2n) is given by fractional small
heterotic instantons. such unusual heterotic background has a moduli space
that is predicted to be the moduli space of en+1 monopoles. once again, the
classical singularity is smoothed out by the world-sheet instanton corrections.

4.3 parameter mapping

we conclude this section by making the mapping of the type i conguration
discussed in section 2 to the heterotic set-up more explicit. we will give a
more precise computation of the masses for electrically and magnetically
charged objects.

the type i background is given by [22, 18, 23]

e  ((x9)/c)5
g = 2(x9)

(13)

where (x9)  c 5/6(b + (8  n)x9))1/6, and where, for simplicity, all the 
and  factors have been ignored. here x9 belongs to the interval [0, ].
the type i background is specied by the parameters b and c. the

relation with the heterotic parameters r, h is given by

dc 5/3  (8  n)1/2[(b + 2(8  n))4/3  b4/3]1/2

re2h  d5c 5

where d2 (a function of b and c) is the factor that converts the 9 dimensional
heterotic metric to the type i metric.

the mass for a d0 brane stuck at the orientifold plane has been worked
out and compared with the heterotic bps formula in [18, 23]. the result is

md0

2

(= (0)e(0)) =

1

d  r
 

8r !
(8  n)

(14)

17

the right hand side vanishes for r = rcrit: this tells us that the type i
electric objects that are becoming massless at the enhanced symmetry point
are d0 branes stuck at the orientifold plane. r  r2
crit/r is identied with
the en+1 higgs vev in the heterotic theory which enhances so(2n) u(1)
to en+1. we see that the mass for a w  bosons is given by the higgs vev
in agreement with the general expectations. the factor of 1/2 takes into
accounts the fact that the d0 brane is stuck while d takes into accounts the
rescaling between the type i and the heterotic metrics.

we can now do a similar check for a stuck ns brane. on general grounds,
its mass should be given by the higgs vev divided by the square of the en+1
coupling constant. the tension for a stuck ns brane is given by

tn s z d6x

1
g2
s l6
s

gi  (0)6e2(0)

(15)

combining equations (13) with the rst of equations (14), we can compute
the ratio

1
g2
y m

=

tn s
md0

= (0)5e(0)  c 5 

1
d5 re2h

(16)

the factor d5 is just the eect of the metric rescaling. in heterotic units,
= re2h, in
we recover the result that the en+1 gauge coupling is
agreement with the perturbative analysis.

1
g2

y m

5 smoothness of the moduli space

we expect the moduli space of monopoles to be a smooth manifold. all the
previous examples were focused on congurations where we expected to get
a smooth moduli space. as discussed in [5], due to the equation

2h = tr f 2  tr r2

(17)

singularities in tr f 2 drive the heterotic string to a non-perturbative regime
where we expect singularities in the moduli space. singularities in tr r2,
on the other hand, keep the theory in the perturbative region and the only
possible singularities may come from a break down of the two dimensional
sigma model description. it was argued in [5] that in the absence of gauge
elds the sigma-model can not fail. in [4, 5], the criterion for having a nite
coupling constant was satised by considering no gauge elds at all. we

18

considered generalizations where the gauge elds are present but still tr f 2 is
regular. the background parameters, such as the radius of s1 and the wilson
lines, were chosen in such a way that the 9 dimensional gauge group so(2n)
is spontaneously broken to the cartan sub-algebra.
in this background,
the only objects (that give rise to 6 dimensional moduli) introduced in the
game were bps monopoles of the space-time gauge group so(2n) and kk
monopoles. bps monopoles have a regular tr f 2 while kk monopoles may
induce only a singularity in tr r2.

it is fairly easy to consider singular congurations. heterotic background
with non trivial gauge elds associated with instantons suer from small in-
stanton singularities. near the singular points, the perturbative description
breaks down, since, due to equation (17), the dilaton is blowing up. the
singularity survives quantum corrections and it is associated with a restora-
tion of a six-dimensional gauge theory via higgs mechanism. in the type i
picture these congurations introduce extra d6 branes wrapped along s1.
when d6 branes touch, some degrees of freedom become massless and there
is an enhanced gauge symmetry.

we can have more general non-perturbative vacua of the heterotic string
with 6 dimensional tensor multiplets. their existence can be easily explained
in the dual type i theory, which can be thought of as a type ii theory moded
out by the world-sheet parity. background with tensor multiplets can be
easily obtained with a zk orbifold.
in type ii, each of the k  1 twisted
sectors give rise to a hypermultiplets and a tensor multiplet. the world-
sheet parity may project out the tensor multiplet or the hypermultiplet.
the various consistent possibilities are associated with the dierent types
of gauge bundles, depending whether they admit vector structure or not.
in such backgrounds, some of the blowing up modes of the ale space are
projected out, and the space-time can not become completely smooth. the
conguration that we considered in this paper corresponds to projecting out
all the tensor multiplets and it corresponds to the compactication on a
smooth ale space. the various 6 dimensional models that may be obtained
in type i orientifold constructions are discussed in [24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31]. the type i description was considered in [19, 21, 32]: the consistent
models are obtained by disposing, in a z2 symmetric way, k ns branes on
the segment. a ns brane in the middle of the segment supports a tensor
multiplet, while a ns brane stuck at one of the orientifold points supports
a hypermultiplet. d6 branes can be stretched between ns branes; they
have the interpretation of small fractional instantons in the heterotic string.

19

the number of d6 branes is xed by rr space-time charge conservation; as
shown in [21], this is completely equivalent to the anomaly cancellation in the
six-dimensional gauge theory. all these moduli space have small instanton
singularities at the origin of the higgs branch.

there is a natural mapping of all these six-dimensional congurations
to three-dimensional n = 4 gauge theories, where mirror symmetry can be
used in order to extract information on the moduli space. for example, it
was explained in [21], using the brane description, how the moduli space of n
small e8 instantons on an ak singularity is mapped to the coulomb branch
of a three dimensional, n = 4 supersymmetric, u(k) gauge theory with n
avors.

the conguration with all the ns branes stuck at one of the orientifolds
was considered in [21] only for a specic example. we see that it generi-
cally represents the type i description of the type i or heterotic vacuum
corresponding to a compactication on a smooth ale space.

6 dn singularities

let us briey consider the case of dk singularities.

from the heterotic point of view, we consider the moduli space of dk
alf spaces. these spaces are asymptotic to (taub-nut)/dk, where dk is
the binary dihedral group of order 4(k  2).
unlike their cousins - the ak alf spaces - that have the very simple
metric (8) with the potential (9), the dk alf space metric is much more
complicated [33, 34, 35, 36]. asymptotically, for large |x|, their metric can
be given in the form of equation (8) with a potential

v (~x) = 1 

4
|x|

+

kxi=1

1

|x  xi|

+

kxi=1

1

|x + xi|

(18)

some explicit construction for the full metric can be found in [33, 34, 35].

consider, for simplicity, a heterotic background without gauge elds.
when we tune the radius r to the self-dual point, we still expect to nd an
su(2) symmetry in the spectrum. with respect to the taub-nut space,
the dk alf spaces have an additional z2 action that combines with the
cyclic group ck to produce the dihedral group dk. this z2 is manifest in
equation (18) and acts non-trivially on the space r3. as a result, the nine-
dimensional su(2) gauge theory is moded out by a z2 that changes sign

20

to three of the nine space-time coordinates. the nine-dimensional lorentz
invariance is explicitly broken; we are dealing with an orbifold gauge theory,
or, in other words, with a theory with impurities. the moduli space of dk
alf spaces is then identied with the moduli space of k monopoles of the
orbifolded su(2) gauge theory. we can easily realize the same monopole con-
guration in terms of branes; for example, with d3 branes stretched between
two ns branes in the presence of an orientifold plane o3. the correspond-
ing monopole moduli space is then identied with the coulomb branch of
an n=4 three-dimensional so(2k) gauge theory by using the standard rules
from [3]. the relation between the moduli space for heterotic on dk ale sin-
gularities and the coulomb branch of this gauge theory has been conjectured
in [5].

the type i description is simple. as discussed in [37], a dk singularity
is modeled in the dual picture using ns branes in the presence of an on 0
plane. there are two on 0 planes, each at the endpoints of the type i
interval. the presence of an o8 plane induces in addition an o6 plane.
there are six-dimensional elds living on the on 0 planes; if we choose an
o6 plane, there is a hypermultiplet on the on 0 plane [37].

-

o8

ns

on -

ns

-

o6

figure 3: dk monopoles is type i. the vertical dashed line represents an
o8 plane. the horizontal dashed line represents an o6 plane. at the
intersection of both there is an on  plane. 2k half ns branes are placed
around the on plane in a symmetric fashion. as for the ak case half ns
branes are conned to the o8 plane.

we will consider only one of the on 0 planes, as the physics is conned to

21

one of the o8 planes. it is more convenient, for our purposes, to think of an
on 0 plane as the combination of a on  plane with a physical ns brane. we
can put extra 2k  2 stuck ns branes on the o8, as in gure 3. we think of
this system as an on  plane with 2k half ns branes stuck to the o8 plane
[37]. since there is an o6 plane, each of the half ns branes has an image
on the o8 plane. we have a total of k hypermultiplets that parameterize
our moduli space. there is a cosmological constant in the bulk that prevents
the ns branes from leaving the orientifold plane. as a consequence, there is
no singularity associated to their motion in the bulk and the moduli space is
smooth.

there is a potential weak point in this argument due to the fact that
two half ns branes in the game arise in a perturbative description of the
on 0 plane as twisted states. the diculty stems from the fact that we
do not have a satisfying description for the on  plane whereas the on 0
plane admits a perturbative description. the two half ns branes related to
the on 0 plane however do not leave the o8 plane by the same argument
of charge conservation valid for the other ns branes. as an example, we
can consider the case k = 2. the heterotic dual contains a d2 singularity.
since d2 is the product of two disjoint a1 singularities, we expect that the
moduli space is the product of two atiyah-hitchin manifolds. for k = 1 the
group d1 is so(2) and the conguration is just an on 0(= on + ns) plane
located at the intersection of the o8 and o6 planes. the moduli space is
at space as expected from half a ns brane and its image as they leave the
on  plane.

in this way, the type i picture suggests that the moduli space of orb-
ifolded gauge theories is smooth despite the singularity in the space where
the monopoles are living. we can also formulate a related conjecture for
three-dimensional gauge theories: the coulomb branch of n=4 sym so(2k)
theories is a smooth manifold.

the generalization to include d8 and d6 branes is straightforward.

7 conclusions

we provided an explicit construction of en+1 monopoles in string theory.
our investigation leads us to identify the monopoles as half ns branes stuck
at an o8 plane in type i. these ns branes transform in the spinor represen-
tation of an so(2n) subgroup of en+1. conservation of rr charge does not

22

allow the ns branes to move outside the orientifold plane, giving a stringy
interpretation for the smoothness of the monopole moduli space. the same
argument can be used to predict smoothness in the moduli space of more
general and less studied gauge theory monopoles.

we also connected our conguration with heterotic backgrounds where
monopoles naturally appear in the form of kk monopoles. we were able to
give an explanation and to generalize some results on the heterotic moduli
space appeared in the literature [4, 5]. we did not discuss the appearance of
three-dimensional gauge theories in this context as they are very natural in
view of our discussion and the results of [15, 3].

in this paper, we just considered an example of a particular class of
monopoles, which, nevertheless, has many ramications and connections with
dierent string backgrounds. many other monopole congurations should
naturally show up in string theory. we already know of monopole moduli
spaces appearing in gauge and string theories in many contexts, stemming
from three-dimensional gauge theories to singular heterotic backgrounds.
every time an atiyah-hitchin manifold shows up in the string moduli space,
it is worthwhile to look around for monopoles.

a natural direct extension of our investigation would be to study systems
with d7 branes. exceptional groups also appear quite naturally in this con-
text. a chain of dualities would lead us to consider more general heterotic
backgrounds and f-theory models.

acknowledgements

we would like to thank nissan yitzhaki for useful discussions and comments.
a. z. would like to thank the institute of theoretical physics, santa barbara,
where this work was initiated, for its kind hospitality. a. h. and a. z.
are partially supported by the national science foundation under grant no.
phy94-07194. a. h. is supported in part by the doe under grant no. de-
fc02-94er40818, by an a. p. sloan foundation fellowship and by a doe
oji award. a. z. is partially supported by infn and murst, and by the
european commission tmr program erbfmrx-ct96-0045, wherein a.
z. is associated to the university of torino.

references

23

[1] a. strominger, open p-branes, phys. lett. b383 (1996) 4447,

hep-th/9512059.

[2] d.-e. diaconescu, d-branes, monopoles and nahm equations, nucl.

phys. b503 (1997) 220, hep-th/9608163.

[3] a. hanany and e. witten, type iib superstrings, bps monopoles, and
three-dimensional gauge dynamics, nucl. phys. b492 (1997) 152190,
hep-th/9611230.

[4] a. sen, dynamics of multiple kaluza-klein monopoles in m and string
theory, adv. theor. math. phys. 1 (1998) 115126, hep-th/9707042.

[5] e. witten, heterotic string conformal eld theory and a-d-e

singularities, hep-th/9909229.

[6] m. rozali, hypermultiplet moduli space and three dimensional gauge

theories, hep-th/9910238.

[7] p. s. aspinwall and m. r. plesser, heterotic string corrections from

the dual type ii string, hep-th/9910248.

[8] p. mayr, conformal eld theories on k3 and three-dimensional gauge

theories, hep-th/9910268.

[9] c. bachas and e. kiritsis, exact string theory instantons by

dimensional reduction, phys. lett. b325 (1994) 103114,
hep-th/9311185.

[10] m. r. douglas and m. li, d-brane realization of n=2 super

yang-mills theory in four dimensions, hep-th/9604041.

[11] m. b. green and m. gutperle, comments on three-branes, phys.

lett. b377 (1996) 2835, hep-th/9602077.

[12] a. a. tseytlin, self-duality of born-infeld action and dirichlet 3-brane

of type iib superstring theory, nucl. phys. b469 (1996) 5167,
hep-th/9602064.

[13] a. m. polyakov, quark connement and topology of gauge groups,

nucl. phys. b120 (1977) 429.

24

[14] n. seiberg and e. witten, gauge dynamics and compactication to

three dimensions, hep-th/9607163.

[15] g. chalmers and a. hanany, three dimensional gauge theories and

monopoles, nucl. phys. b489 (1997) 223244, hep-th/9608105.

[16] m. f. atiyah and n. j. hitchin, the geometry and dynamics of
magnetic monopoles. m.b. porter lectures,. princeton, usa:
univ. pr. (1988) 133p.

[17] g. w. gibbons and n. s. manton, the moduli space metric for well

separated bps monopoles, phys. lett. b356 (1995) 3238,
hep-th/9506052.

[18] o. bergman, m. r. gaberdiel, and g. lifschytz, string creation and

heterotic-type i duality, nucl. phys. b524 (1998) 524,
hep-th/9711098.

[19] i. brunner and a. karch, branes and six dimensional xed points,

phys. lett. b409 (1997) 109116, hep-th/9705022.

[20] a. hanany and a. zaaroni, chiral symmetry from type iia branes,

nucl. phys. b509 (1998) 145, hep-th/9706047.

[21] a. hanany and a. zaaroni, branes and six dimensional
supersymmetric theories, nucl. phys. b529 (1998) 180,
hep-th/9712145.

[22] j. polchinski and e. witten, evidence for heterotic - type i string

duality, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 525540, hep-th/9510169.

[23] d. matalliotakis, h.-p. nilles, and s. theisen, matching the bps

spectra of heterotic type-i - type-i strings, phys. lett. b421 (1998)
169175, hep-th/9710247.

[24] a. sagnotti, open strings and their symmetry groups,. talk

presented at the cargese summer institute on non- perturbative
methods in field theory, cargese, italy, jul 16-30, 1987.

[25] m. bianchi and a. sagnotti, on the systematics of open string

theories, phys. lett. b247 (1990) 517524.

25

[26] m. bianchi and a. sagnotti, twist symmetry and open string wilson

lines, nucl. phys. b361 (1991) 519538.

[27] e. g. gimon and j. polchinski, consistency conditions for orientifolds
and d-manifolds, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 16671676, hep-th/9601038.

[28] e. g. gimon and c. v. johnson, k3 orientifolds, nucl. phys. b477

(1996) 715745, hep-th/9604129.

[29] k. intriligator, rg xed points in six dimensions via branes at

orbifold singularities, nucl. phys. b496 (1997) 177, hep-th/9702038.

[30] j. d. blum and k. intriligator, consistency conditions for branes at

orbifold singularities, nucl. phys. b506 (1997) 223, hep-th/9705030.

[31] j. d. blum and k. intriligator, new phases of string theory and 6d rg

xed points via branes at orbifold singularities, nucl. phys. b506
(1997) 199, hep-th/9705044.

[32] i. brunner and a. karch, branes at orbifolds versus hanany witten in

six dimensions, jhep 03 (1998) 003, hep-th/9712143.

[33] s. a. cherkis and a. kapustin, singular monopoles and

supersymmetric gauge theories in three dimensions, nucl. phys.
b525 (1998) 215, hep-th/9711145.

[34] s. a. cherkis and a. kapustin, d(k) gravitational instantons and

nahm equations, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1999) 1287,
hep-th/9803112.

[35] s. a. cherkis and a. kapustin, singular monopoles and gravitational
instantons, commun. math. phys. 203 (1999) 713, hep-th/9803160.

[36] g. chalmers, m. rocek, and s. wiles, degeneration of alf d(n)

metrics, jhep 01 (1999) 009, hep-th/9812212.

[37] a. hanany and a. zaaroni, issues on orientifolds: on the brane

construction of gauge theories with so(2n) global symmetry, jhep 07
(1999) 009, hep-th/9903242.

26

