preprint typeset in jhep style. - hyper version

hep-th/9911068
runhetc-33-99

tasi lectures on matrix theory

tom banks

department of physics and astronomy
rutgers university, piscataway, nj 08855-0849
e-mail: banks@physics.rutgers.edu

abstract: this is a summary of key issues in matrix theory and its compactica-
tions. it is emphasized that matrix theory is a valid discrete light cone quantization
of m theory with at least 6 noncompact asymptotically at dimensions and 16 or
32 supersymmetry charges. the background dependence of the quantum mechanics
of m theory, and the necessity of working in light cone frame in asymptotically at
spacetimes are explained in terms of the asymptotic density of states of the theory,
which follows from the bekenstein-hawking entropy formula. in four noncompact di-
mensions one is led to expect a hagedorn spectrum in light cone energy. this suggests
the possible relevance of little string theories (lsts) to the quantum description of
four dimensional compactications, because one can argue that their exact high energy
spectrum has the hagedorn form. some space is therefore devoted to a discussion of
the properties of lsts, which were rst discovered as the proper formulation of matrix
theory on the ve torus.

keywords: m-theory, string duality, superstring vacua.

9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
0
1

 

 
 

1
v
8
6
0
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

contents

1.

introduction  limitations on lagrangian quantum mechanics

2. matrix theory in eleven dimensions

2.1 quantum field theory in light cone frame and discrete light cone

quantization

2.2 the holographic principle and the matrix theory lagrangian
2.3 gravitons and their scattering
2.4 general properties of the s-matrix and the graviton wave function
2.5 membranes
2.6 fivebranes

3. m theory on a circle

4. m theory on a two torus

5. three and four tori

6. five and six (where we run out of tricks)

6.1 the seven torus and beyond

1

5

5
8
12
15
17
18

20

23

25

26
32

7. dlcq and holography of (2, 0)k theories and little string theories 33
33
35
36

7.1 dlcq of (2, 0)k theories
7.2 dlcq of the little string theories
7.3 holography

8. conclusions

42

1. introduction  limitations on lagrangian quantum mechan-

ics

this lecture series is about matrix theory [5], a nonperturbative, lagrangian formula-
tion of m theory. there has been a lot of confusion about this theory in the literature,

1

to the extent that it has been characterized as controversial in the popular press [7].
much of this confusion has been caused by misinterpretation and misunderstanding of
what the theory was supposed to do, and too little appreciation of how important it is
to take the large n limit in order to calculate amplitudes of interest to a lorentz in-
variant theory. however, some of the diculties of matrix theory are more important,
and reect crucial issues about any quantum theory of gravity.
i therefore want to
begin with a critical discussion of what we can expect to be the limitations of ordinary
lagrangian quantum mechanics in the description of any quantum theory of gravity.

any theory which contains general relativity (gr) must be time reparametrization
invariant. mathematically this means that the time translation generator for an arbi-
trary denition of time is a constraint, which must vanish on physical states. physically
it means that any nonvanishing denition of energy must be conjugate to a physical
clock variable which measures time. this is certain to cause problems in the quantum
theory, where there must in general be variables which do not commute with the clock.
thus, the very denition of physical time translation implies some sort of semiclassical
approximation in which the clock evolves classically. in a closed cosmology, we cannot
expect such an approximation to be valid with arbitrary precision. however, if the
universe has a boundary and is of innite size, then the boundary conditions at innity
dene frozen classical variables which can be used as clocks. typically, we insist that
the metric at innity approaches that of a noncompact symmetric space (minkowski
or anti-desitter (ads)) and the natural time translation generators are chosen from
the asymptotic symmetry group of the metric. in these lectures we will be concerned
primarily with asymptotically minkowski spaces.

let us rst consider an ordinary lorentz frame at spacelike innity. then there is
a special poincare subgroup of the asymptotic dieomorphisms of the metric [8], and
up to a lorentz transformation, a unique choice of hamiltonian. quantum m theory
(or, for those who are still skeptical, any quantum theory of gravity) will have a hilbert
space on which this generator acts as a hermitian operator. we also expect it to have
a ground state |0i, whose energy eigenvalue must, for consistency, be zero. it might
in fact have a discrete or continuous ground state degeneracy, labelled by expectation
values of poincare invariant operators. we will assume that, as in local eld theory,
there is a large class of interesting operators (hereafter called localizable operators)
that do not disturb the boundary conditions at innity.
if we restrict attention to
localizable operators, the hilbert space breaks up into superselection sectors, each of
which has a unique ground state. given any localizable operator o, we can formally
dene the time dependent heisenberg operator o(t) by

o(t)  eihtoeiht.

(1.1)

2

to investigate the degree of formality of this denition, we compute the two point
function

deeieto(e),

where the spectral density is dened by

ho(t)o(0)i = z 

0

(1.2)

(1.3)

o(e)  xn

(e  en)|h0|o|ni|2 .

the crucial question is now the convergence of this integral representation, or
equivalently, the high energy behavior of the spectral density. in quantum eld theory,
the high energy behavior of the theory is determined by a conformally invariant xed
point. the density of states in volume v behaves like

  ecv (e/v )

(d1)

d

,

(1.4)

where d is the dimension of spacetime. generic operators localized in the volume will
have a spectral density o with the same behavior. however, there is a special class of
local operators of xed dimension, which connect the vacuum only to the states in a
given irreducible representation of the conformal group. the spectral density of these
operators grows only like a power of the energy. note that in either case, we can dene
the greens function by analytic continuation of an absolutely convergent integral in
euclidean time

in a quantum theory of gravity, it is extremely plausible, that for a theory with
four or more asymptotically minkowski dimensions the high energy density of states
is dominated by highly metastable black holes. the existence and gross properties of
these states follow from semiclassical gr. the density of black hole states is given by
the bekenstein-hawking formula

  ek(e/mp )

(d2)

(d3) ,

(1.5)

where mp is the d dimensional planck mass. there are two interesting features of this
formula. the rst is its independence of the volume. this is a consequence of the
jeans instability. if we try to construct an extended translation invariant state other
than the vacuum in a theory containing gravity, we eventually get to an object whose
schwarzchild radius exceeds its physical size and the system collapses into a black hole.
the only translation invariant states are those which are superpositions of a single
black hole at dierent positions in spacetime. secondly, any operator whose matrix
elements between the vacuum and states of energy e are not drastically cut o at
energies above the planck scale, will not have a well dened two point function. thus,

3

although the general formalism of quantum mechanics will be valid, we should not
expect a conventional lagrangian description of the system to be applicable. indeed,
the lagrangian formalism produces greens functions of heisenberg operators as its
fundamental output, and we are supposed to deduce the energy spectrum and the
structure of the hilbert space from this more fundamental data (similar remarks are
of course applicable to any more abstract formalism which takes greens functions as
its basic starting point). in fact, implicit in the denition of the lagrangian formalism
is an assumption that the short time behavior of the system is approximately free.
this assumption is not even valid for a nontrivial xed point theory. however, in eld
theory we can restore the validity of lagrangian methods by realizing the theory as
the limit of a cuto system or (in many cases) by realizing the nontrivial xed point
as an infrared limit of an asymptotically free theory. no such workarounds appear to
be available for the quantum theory of gravity.

another fascinating possibility is that the space of states of a very large black hole
has a group of symmetries which partitions it into irreducible representations in much
the same way that the conformal group partitions the states of charged black branes
with ads horizons. then one could construct operators which connected the vacuum
only to those states in an irrep of the group. if the density of states in an irrep had
subexponential growth then these operators would have sensible correlation functions.
in the absence of such a large black hole symmetry group, there will be no conventional
greens functions in the holographic dual of asymptotically at spacetimes.

it is interesting to contrast these results with our expectations in a light cone
frame. we will discuss light cone formalism more extensively in the next section. for
the moment we will need only the formula for light cone energy:

e  p  =

p2 + m 2

p +

(1.6)

where p (which we will set equal to zero) and p + are the transverse and longitudi-
nal momenta respectively. again assuming that the high energy density of states is
dominated by black holes, we can write the light cone density of states as

  ek(e/mp )

(d2)

2(d3) .

(1.7)

note that we now expect a convergent two point function in light cone time for any
d  5. even for d = 4, we nd only a hagedorn spectrum (rather than the more
divergent form of the black hole spectrum in ordinary energy) and the greens function
will be dened for suciently long euclidean time separations.

the conclusion that i want you to draw from this is that we should only expect
a conventional lagrangian quantum mechanics for m theory in light cone time, and

4

perhaps only for 5 or more noncompact minkowski dimensions. another point to
remember is that the high energy density of states seems to increase as the number of
noncompact dimensions decreases. this suggests that compactied m theory has more
fundamental degrees of freedom than uncompactied m theory a conclusion which we
will see is borne out in the sequel.

some readers will be curious about the case of two or three asymptotically minkowski
dimensions, where there are no black holes. here the story is quite dierent, at least
in those situations with enough supersymmetry (susy) to guarantee that there is a
massless scalar eld in the supergravity (sugra) multiplet. in these cases one can
argue [10] that the system has very few states, because would be localized excitations
so distort the geometry of spacetime that the asymptotic boundary conditions are not
satised. in some sense, the resulting theory is topological.

another interesting example of the arguments used in this section is m theory
in spaces with 3 or more asymptotically ads dimensions (ads2 has the same sort
of problems as two or three dimensional minkowski space [11]). here the boundary of
spacetime is timelike and there is no analog of a light cone frame. there are two natural
inequivalent choices of hamiltonian, corresponding to global and poincare time. the
corresponding black objects are ads schwarzchild black holes and near extremal black
branes of appropriate dimension. both have positive specic heat, which is to say that
their density of states grows less rapidly than an exponential. and in precisely these
cases, we expect [12] that there is an exact description of the system in terms of a
conventional quantum eld theory.

in the next section, we will begin an exploration of m theory in the light cone

frame, starting with the simplest case of eleven noncompact directions.

2. matrix theory in eleven dimensions

2.1 quantum field theory in light cone frame and discrete light cone

quantization

to set the stage for our discussion of matrix theory we begin with a brief introduction
to light cone eld theory [13]. as hinted in the previous section, the basic idea is to
choose a light cone frame pointing in a specic spatial direction. in this basis, the mo-
mentum takes the form (p , p +, p). p  is taken to be the time translation generator
and takes the form e  p  = p2+m 2
p + , where m 2 is the mass squared operator. the
subgroup of the lorentz group which leaves the light cone frame invariant is obviously
isomorphic to the galilean group in d  2 dimensions, with p  transforming like the
galilean energy, p like the galilean momentum, p + like the galilean mass, and m 2

5

like a galilean invariant potential. compared to a true nonrelativistic eld theory the
new feature here is the continuous galilean mass spectrum and the associated possibil-
ity of particles breaking up into others with smaller galilean mass. there are also two
other sets of lorentz transformations. the rst is the longitudinal boost generator,
which rescales p  in opposite directions. the other is the set of null plane rotating
transformations which rotate the direction of the null vector into the transverse direc-
tions. these are typically the most dicult symmetries to realize in building an actual
lagrangian.

in supersymmetric theories, we must also include the supertranslations. since they
are lorentz spinors, they break up into left moving and right moving pieces under
longitudinal boosts. these satisfy the following commutation relations

[qa, qb]+ = abp +

[qa, qb]+ = abp 

[qa, qb]+ = i

abpi

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

it will turn out in matrix theory that it is relatively easy to implement these symme-
tries, but that they give strong constraints on the dynamics of the system.

for the purposes of this brief introduction to light cone eld theory, we will restrict

our attention to a simple scalar lagrangian of the form

l = +  ()2  v ().

(2.4)

standard (dirac) quantization of this lagrangian gives us the commutation relations

which are solved by

[(z, x, t), z(z, x, t)] =

1
2

(z  z)(x  x).

 = z 

0

dp +
p + [a(x, p +)eip +z + a(x, p +)eip +z]

(2.5)

(2.6)

where a and a have the commutation relations of ordinary second quantized nonrel-
ativistic elds. the z independent part of  has no canonical momentum and is a
constraint variable. often one solves for it at the classical level, but this procedure is
unsatisfactory. a better strategy (in principle) is to derive the light cone formalism
from a covariant path integral. then one sees explicitly that the zero longitudinal mo-
mentum degrees of freedom must be integrated out [15] and that there are contributions
to the eective interaction for the nonzero modes at all orders in the loop expansion

6

(and furthermore that the higher order terms are larger than those obtained in the tree
approximation  the semiclassical expansion is not applicable).

in the formalism developed so far, the zero mode problem is mixed up with an
equally vexing problem from modes with nonzero, but arbitrarily small, longitudinal
momentum. the method of discrete light cone quantization [13] (dlcq) is an
attempt to repair this diculty by compactifying the lightlike longitudinal direction
(studying the eld theory on a space where x is identied with x + r) , thus ren-
dering the longitudinal momentum discrete. this has another property which at rst
sight renders dlcq extremely attractive. as one can see from the expansion (2.6), the
fock space of light cone eld theory contains only particles with positive longitudinal
momentum. operators with negative longitudinal momentum are annihilation opera-
tors. if longitudinal momentum is conserved, positive and discrete, then states with
p + = n/r can have at most n particles in them. thus in dlcq in the sector with
n units of momentum, eld theory reduces to nonrelativistic quantum mechanics with
a xed number of particles.

as there is no such thing as a free lunch, there must be a catch somewhere. in
fact, in eld theory there are two. first of all, in order to have a hope of recapturing
lorentz invariant physics one must take the large n limit. field theory in a space with
a periodic lightlike direction is weird, very close to a space with periodic time, which
has apparent grandfather paradoxes1. if n is large, one can hope to make wave packets
which are localized along the lightlike direction. furthermore, since systems with large
longitudinal momenta would be expected to lorentz contract, their physical size in
the longitudinal direction might also be small. the physics of such large n systems
could very well be oblivious to the lightlike identication and reproduce that of the
uncompactied, lorentz invariant, system. the use of words like might, could and hope
in the last three sentences, signals that there is no rigorous argument guaranteeing that
this is the case.

the second catch is integrating out the zero modes. one can get some insight
into how dicult this is in eld theory [15] by viewing lightlike compactication as an
innite boost limit of spacelike compactication on an innitesimally small circle. if we
compactify an ordinary eld theory on a circle of very small radius rs and concentrate
only on the lagrangian of the zero modes, then rs appears as a multiplicative factor.
in other words, the theory of the zero modes is at innitely strong coupling. thus, even
if the original eld theory is weakly coupled, the problem of calculating the eective
lagrangian for the nonzero modes in dlcq appears intractable in general2.

1though resolved in the way rst proposed by r.a. heinlein in [14].
2we will later encounter a eld theory where dlcq leads to a weakly coupled system.

7

given all of these problems, why are we interested in light cone quantization in
m theory? apart from the general motivation given in the introduction, there are
many indications that m theory is much better behaved than eld theory in the light
cone frame. the many successes of light cone string theory attest to this. in particular,
in perturbative string theory in light cone gauge, longitudinal momentum is the spatial
coordinate on the string world sheet. dlcq is a discretization of the string world sheet.
since the uncompactied light cone string theory is a conformal eld theory, the process
of taking the large n limit is controlled by the world sheet renormalization group and
the problems with zero longitudinal momentum modes are encoded in local contact
terms. furthermore, although the actual computation of these counterterms to all or-
ders in perturbation theory would be tedious, the form of light cone string perturbation
theory leads immediately to the guess that the correct answer is given by conformal
eld theory on higher genus riemann surfaces, a prescription which automatically xes
the contact terms by analytic continuation, at least in many cases.

the other reason to be somewhat more hopeful about our prospects for success,
is susy. susy nonrenormalization theorems give us some control over the possible
eects of integrating out the zero modes. in the cases we will study, this is probably
enough to x the eective lagrangian uniquely.

2.2 the holographic principle and the matrix theory lagrangian

for a number of years, charles thorn [16] championed an approach to string theory
in light cone frame based on the notion of string bits, which were taken to be pieces
of string carrying the lowest possible value of longitudinal momentum. full strings,
with higher values of longitudinal momenta were supposed to be bound states of these
more fundamental constituents. thorn explicitly noted that in such a formalism, one
of the dimensions of spacetime appeared dynamically. the fundamental constituents
propagated on a surface of one lower dimension.

in an independent development some years later, g. t hooft [17] proposed that
the apparent paradoxes of black hole physics in local eld theory might be resolved
if the fundamental quantum theory of gravity had degrees of freedom which lived on
hypersurfaces of dimension one lower than that of the full spacetime, with a density
equal to the planck density. the motivation for the latter restriction was the the
bekenstein-hawking formula for the entropy of a black hole. he characterized a theory
of this type as holographic. susskind [18] then realized that light cone gauge string
theory embodied at least half of the holographic principle of t hooft, essentially because
of the properties described in the paragraph above. the bekenstein bound is not
satised in perturbative string theory. if we think of string bits as the fundamental
degrees of freedom, then a string made up of n bits has a transverse extent of order ln n.

8

on the other hand, the bekenstein bound would suggest that the transverse area had to
grow like n. it is not terribly surprising that this part of the holographic principle can
only be realized in a nonperturbative manner in string theory. the bekenstein bound
is formulated in planck units and formally goes to innity when the string coupling is
taken to zero with the string tension xed. morally speaking, it is similar to restrictions
on operators in large n eld theory which stem from the fact that the traces, tr m k, of
an n  n matrix are not all independent. it is well known that such restrictions are
nonperturbative in the 1/n expansion.

in nonperturbative formulations of m theory, such as matrix theory and the
ads/cft correspondence, the second half of the holographic principle is derived by
explicit dynamical calculations [5], [19]. in the latter case it is rather easy to derive
and one nds that the bound is saturated, while in matrix theory the argument is
based on crude approximations and one nds the restriction on the number of degrees
of freedom only as a bound.

let us now proceed to the construction of the matrix theory lagrangian in eleven
at spacetime dimensions. the original construction of [5] used the holographic princi-
ple as its starting point and used the language of the innite momentum frame rather
than light cone quantization. susskind [62] then suggested that the nite n matrix
theory lagrangian was the dlcq of m theory. here we will follow a much cleaner
argument due to seiberg [20] (see also [21]) which begins from the idea that dlcq of a
lorentz invariant theory can be obtained by a boost applied to a system compactied
on a spacelike circle, if the radius, rs, of the spacelike circle is taken to zero, with the
rapidity  of the boost scaling like ln(1/rs). if we wish to be in the sector with n
units of longitudinal momentum in dlcq, then we should work in the sector with n
units of spacelike momentum. this argument is a derivation of susskinds claim.

the crucial feature which distinguishes m theory from most eld theories, is that
the limiting theory on a small spacelike circle is free. indeed, it is free type iia string
theory [22] (i am assuming that all the students at this school are familiar with this
paper or will shortly become so). the sector with n units of momentum around the
circle is the sector of iia string theory with n units of d0 brane charge.
in free
string theory we can characterize this sector as containing n d0 branes and the strings
connecting them, as well as any number of closed strings and d0 brane anti d0 brane
pairs. however, we are interested only in degrees of freedom with nite light cone
energy. the light cone energy is of order e(e  n/rs)  e/rs  n/r2
s. the lowest
energy in the sector with n d0 branes is n/rs. we are clearly interested only in states
whose splitting from this ground state is inversely proportional to the d0 brane mass.
for a single d0 brane, examples of such states are the states of the d0 brane moving
with (transverse from the point of view of the 11 dimensional light cone frame) momenta

9

xed as rs  0. note that the eleven dimensional planck scale remains xed in this
limit, so this is the same as requiring the transverse momenta to be a nite number
of planck units in the weak string coupling limit. for multiple d0 branes separated
by distances of order the planck scale, we must also include degrees of freedom which
create and annihilate minimal length open strings between the branes. the lagrangian
for this system was written down in this context in [23]. it is the dimensional reduction
of ten dimensional super yang mills theory on a nine torus, and, as such, was rst
written down by [24]. we will write it both in string and eleven dimensional planck
units

tr(cid:16) 2 + [i, j]2 + i   [i, i](cid:17)
! .

+ i   r

[x i, i]

[x i, x j]2

l5
p

l3
p

l =

l3
s
gs

l = tr  x2

r

+ r

(2.7)

(2.8)

here i and x i are nine hermitian n n matrices, the former with dimensions of mass
and the latter with dimensions of length. similarly  is a sixteen component so(9)
spinor, which is an hermitian n  n matrix, and has dimensions of [m]3/2, while  has
the same transformation properties, but is dimensionless.

wittens motivation for this lagrangian was that it summed up the leading infrared
singularities of string perturbation theory, that are caused by zero energy open strings
when d0 branes are separated by distances less than the string length. the authors
of [25] gave a careful argument to all orders in string perturbation theory that this
lagrangian in fact captured all of the dynamics at energy scales equal to the kinetic
energy of a d0 brane with planck momenta. seibergs argument is often criticized as
being too slick and the work of [15] is cited as an example of the dangers of naively
ignoring the integration out of the zero modes in dlcq. in fact, the fact that m theory
on a small circle is weakly coupled type iia string theory, and the careful analysis of
[25] (which shows that the kind of perturbative divergences of the small rs limit found
by [15] in eld theory are absent to all orders in perturbation theory) suggest that
the latter reference is completely irrelevant in the present context. about the only
loophole one could imagine in the argument is the possibility that weakly coupled
iia string theory has nonperturbative corrections to (2.7) which somehow survive the
rs  0 limit.

even this loophole can probably be closed by proving the following conjecture:
the lagrangian (2.7) is the only lagrangian for this set of degrees of freedom consis-
tent with the symmetries we will list below. the italicized phrase means in particular
that the lagrangian may not contain time derivatives higher than the rst, though
it may contain higher powers of the rst time derivatives. the conjecture has been

10

partially proven in [24]. in trying to give a more complete proof one should use cer-
tain facts which were not employed in this reference.
in particular, the lagrangian
we have written has a thirty two generator odd subalgebra of its symmetry algebra
and has translation invariance in the transverse directions, as well as galilean boost
invariance. furthermore, its gauge group is u(n) and not su(n)  u(1), so that
arbitrary separations of the trace parts of matrices from their traceless parts are not
allowed. these facts seem to give a fairly straightforward argument for the conjecture
if one restricts attention to lagrangians which can be written as a single trace. i do
not pretend to have a complete proof of this conjecture (although i am convinced it is
correct) and leave it to an enterprising student. to my mind, the strongest arguments
for matrix theory come from its successes in reproducing known facts and conjectures
about m theory as dynamical results of a complete lagrangian system. there are dif-
cult questions about whether the large n limit really reproduces the lorentz invariant
dynamics which interests us. but there seems to be little doubt that in a variety of
backgrounds matrix theory is a correct dlcq of m theory.

to proceed with the exposition of the results of matrix theory we begin with a

list of its symmetries:

the most important of these are susys. the full supertranslation algebra is
preserved in dlcq. only the spectrum of the translation generators is dierent from
that expected in the uncompactied theory. as usual in light cone frame, spinors can
be decomposed as right moving and left moving under the so(1, 1) group of boosts in
the longitudinal direction (which is not a symmetry of dlcq). thus, there are two
sets of spinor susy generators, each transforming as the 16 of the transverse so(9)
rotation group (which is preserved by dlcq). the rst of these is simply realized in
terms of the 16 canonical matrix variables of matrix theory as

qa = s 1
n
the anticommutator of these is ab
r , which identies n as the integer valued, positive
longitudinal momentum p + of dlcq. the anticommutator of the left and right moving
susy generators is

(2.9)

tr a

r

this is realized by

[qa, qb]+ = pab

qa = s r

n

tr (pabb + iij

ab[x i, x j])b

(2.10)

(2.11)

the second term does not contribute to (2.10) but is probably required by the nal

relation of the supertranslation algebra

[qa, qb]+ = abp .

(2.12)

11

in fact, the latter is realized only on u(n) invariant states of the model, which identies
u(n) as a gauge group. the word probably in the penultimate sentence reects the
incompleteness of the uniqueness proof i referred to above.

in addition to these symmetries, the model is invariant under so(9) rotations
and transverse galilean boosts. the missing parts of the eleven dimensional super-
poincare group are the longitudinal boosts and the null plane rotating parts of the
spatial rotation group. these may be restored in the large n limit. note that the
galilean transformations act only on the u(1) center of mass variables and restrict
their hamiltonian to be quadratic in canonical momenta.

finally, i note a discrete symmetry under   t , x i  (x i)t , which commutes
with half of the supertranslations and with p . this symmetry is instrumental in the
matrix theory description of horava-witten domain walls [26].

2.3 gravitons and their scattering

the classical lagrangian of matrix theory has a moduli space consisting of commuting
matrices. the high degree of supersymmetry of the system guarantees that this moduli
space is preserved in the quantum theory. this means that if we integrate out all of the
non moduli space variables, then the eective lagrangian on the moduli space has no
potential. furthermore, the terms quadratic in time derivatives are not renormalized,
and the terms quartic in time derivatives appear only at one loop [28]. furthermore,
for n > 2 there are other terms in the eective lagrangian which receive only a unique
loop correction and thus are exactly calculable [27].

the justication for the description by an eective lagrangian is the born-oppenheimer

approximation. when we go o in some moduli space direction x0 = lk rkinknk,
then variables which do not commute (as matrices) with x0 have frequencies of order
|rk  rl|. thus, if these distances are large, these variables can be safely integrated out
in perturbation theory.

for the su(nk) variables, which commute with x0 the born-oppenheimer argu-
ment depends on a fundamental conjecture about this system, due to witten [23]. that
is, that the su(n) version of this supersymmetric quantum mechanics has exactly one
(up to an obvious spinor degeneracy to be discussed below) normalizable susy ground
state. this conjecture lies at the heart of the m theory - iia duality, and the whole
web of string dualities would collapse if it proved false. more impressively, the con-
jecture has been more or less rigorously proven for n = 2, and arguments exist for
higher values of n [28]. finally, arguments can be given [5] that the typical scale of
energy of excitation of these bound states is of order 1/n p with p < 1. since we will
see that energies on the moduli space are of order 1/n, this justies the use of the
born-oppenheimer approximation for large n.

12

if we accept the bound state conjecture it follows that the large n limit of the model
contains in its spectrum the fock space of free eleven dimensional supergravitons. in
fact, the theorems we have cited show that the lagrangian along the moduli space
direction x0 with large separations, is

nk
2r

n

xk=1

rk

2 + ik k

(2.13)

which is that of a collection of massless eleven dimensional superparticles in light cone
frame. each of the k variables is a 16 component so(9) spinor. the hamiltonian of
this system is  independent, so the fermionic variables serve merely to parametrize
the degeneracy of particle states. they are quantized as 16 cliord variables so their
representation space is 256 dimensional. it decomposes under so(9) as 44 84 128,
which are the states of a symmetric traceless tensor, a totally antisymmetric three
tensor, and a vector spinor satisfying i
b = 0. this is precisely the content of the
11d sugra multiplet. the required bose or fermi symmetrization of multiparticle
states follows from the residual sn gauge invariance on the moduli space (commuting
matrices are diagonal matrices modulo permutations) and the fermionic nature of the
spinor coordinates.

abi

i want to note in particular, that susy was crucial to the cluster property of
these multiparticle states. in the nonsupersymmetric version of the matrix model, an
|rk  rl| potential is generated on the moduli space and the whole system collapses into
a single clump. i think that this may be one of the most interesting results of matrix
theory.
in perturbative string theory, explicit susy breaking is usually associated
with the nonexistence of a stable, interacting vacuum state, and often with tachyonic
excitations which violate the cluster property. matrix theory suggests even more
strongly that susy may be crucial to the existence of a theory of quantum gravity in
which propagation in large classical spacetimes is allowed. in fact, it appears that only
asymptotic susy is strictly necessary for the cluster property. indeed the cancellation
of the large distance part of the potential has to do with the susy degeneracy between
states at extremely high energy. however, simple attempts to break susy even softly
appear to lead to disaster [30].

before beginning our discussion of graviton scattering, i want to clarify what we
can expect to extract from perturbative or nite n calculations in the matrix quantum
mechanics. the basic idea of the calculations that have been done is to study zero
longitudinal momentum transfer scattering by concentrating on the region of cong-
uration space where some number of blocks are very far away from each other. the
intra-block wave functions are taken to be the normalizable ground states in each block.
this leaves the coecients of the unit matrix in each block and the o block diagonal

13

p

variables. in the indicated region of conguration space the frequencies of the latter
are very high, and one attempts to integrate them out perturbatively. there are two
rather obvious reasons why these calculations should fail to give the answers we are
interested in. the rst is that the nominal perturbation parameter for this expansion
is n l3
r3 where r is a transverse distance between some pair of blocks. in order to make
comparisons with sugra we want to take r/lp  1, but independent of n as n
tends to innity. indeed the scattering amplitudes in this regime of impact parameters
should become independent of n (or rather scale with very particular powers since they
refer to exactly zero longitudinal momentum transfer), as a consequence of lorentz in-
variance. this is evidently not true for individual terms in the perturbation expansion.
it should be emphasized that this means we are not interested in the t hooft limit of
this theory.

in addition to this, the perturbation expansion is not even a correct asymptotic
expansion of the amplitudes in the large r region. to leading order in inverse distances,
the interactions between the high frequency o diagonal variables, and the su(ni)
variables in individual blocks does not enter in the expressions for amplitudes. at
higher orders this is no longer the case. the complete calculation involves expectation
values of operators in the individual block wave functions. the fact that the o diagonal
variables have very high frequencies allows us to make operator product expansions and
limits the number of unknown expectation values that come in at a given power of r.
terms like this will give fractional powers of the naive expansion parameter. however,
since the short time limit of quantum mechanics is free, all the operators have integer
dimensions and we are led to expect only integer powers lp in the expansion. the n
dependence of these terms is completely unknown.

the second of these problems is inescapable, but the rst could be avoided if it
were possible to make direct comparisons between nite n matrix theory and dlcq
sugra. it is important to realize that there is absolutely no reason to expect this
to be so. the intuitive reason is that the gravitons of matrix theory are complicated
bound states rather than structureless particles. they only behave like structureless
particles when their relative velocities are very small, because then the scattering state
is almost a bps state. in the large n limit the velocities become arbitrarily small and
one can argue that to all orders in energies over mp they should behave like particles
of an eective eld theory. however, for nite n, there is no reason for this to be so,
even at low energy and momentum transfer. more mathematically, we can note that
sugra is a limit of m theory in which all momenta are small compared to the planck
mass. on the other hand, we have seen that the dlcq system can be viewed as a
system compactied on a tiny circle, with a nite number of units of momentum. thus
every state in the system contains momenta large compared to the planck scale. there

14

is no reason to expect the limit which gives dlcq to commute with the sugra limit.
the reason that some amplitudes are calculable in perturbation theory is that the
system has a host of nonrenormalization theorems. that is, the large susy of the
matrix theory lagrangian so constrains certain terms in the eective lagrangian for
the relative positions that they are given exactly by their value at some order of the
loop expansion. i will not give a description of the state of these calculations, but refer
the reader to the literature [28], [27].

the fact that only quantities determined by symmetries are calculable gives one
pause, i must admit (unless one is able to prove the conjecture above that the sym-
metries completely determine the lagrangian) but one must recognize that this is a
rather generic state of aairs in recent results about m theory. however, what i con-
sider important about matrix theory is that it reduces all questions about m theory
(in the backgrounds where it applies) to concrete, albeit dicult, problems in mathe-
matical physics. we are no longer reduced to guesswork and speculation. of course,
this is no better than the statement that lattice gauge theory reduces hadron physics
to a computational problem. obviously matrix theory will only be truly useful if one
can nd analytic or numerical algorithms for eciently extracting the s-matrix from
the lagrangian. on the other hand, it may be possible to attack certain conceptual
problems before a practical calculation scheme is found.

2.4 general properties of the s-matrix and the graviton wave function

we can easily write down an lsz-like path integral formula for the s-matrix of gravitons
in matrix theory. simply perform the path integral with the following boundary
conditions: as t  , the matrices approach the moduli space

x  xi

0 = mk

rk(t)inknk

(2.14)

with similar formulae for the fermionic variables. rk(t) are classical solutions of the
moduli space equations of motion. they are labelled by the transverse momenta of the
incoming states, while the longitudinal momenta are the nk. similarly, for t   we
have

x  xf

0 = umk

rk(t)inknk u

(2.15)

where we must integrate over the u(n) matrix, u, in order to impose gauge invariance.
of course, the number of outgoing particles, as well as their transverse and longitudinal
momenta, will in general be dierent from those in the initial state.

this formula does not quite give the s-matrix since the su(nk) variables are sent
to zero asymptotically by the boundary conditions. in principle we should allow them

15

to be free, and convolute the path integral with the bound state wave function for
each external state. thus, our path integral computes the s-matrix multiplied by a
(momentum dependent) factor for each external leg equal to the bound state wave
function at the origin.
it is likely that in the large n limit these renormalization
factors will vanish, so we would have to be careful to extract them before computing
the limiting s-matrix.

several of the s-matrix elements for multigraviton scattering at zero longitudinal
and small transverse momentum transfers can be computed with the help of nonrenor-
malization theorems. all of these computations agree precisely with the formulae from
11d sugra. as noted above, we cannot expect to make more detailed comparisons
until we understand the large n limit much better than we do at present.

we can however try to understand what could possibly go wrong with the limiting
s-matrix. assuming the bound state conjecture, we know that the large n theory has
the correct relativistic fock space spectrum. furthermore, the s-matrix exists and is
unitary for every nite n. this implies that individual s-matrix elements cannot blow
up in the limit. furthermore, we know that some t-matrix elements are nonzero so
the s-matrix cannot approach unity (i do not have an argument that amplitudes with
nonzero longitudinal momentum transfer cannot all vanish in the limit). the absence
of pathological behavior in which individual s-matrix elements oscillate innitely often
in the large n limit is more or less equivalent to longitudinal boost invariance, which
states that as the nk get large, s-matrix elements should only depend on their ratios.
thus, proving the existence of generic s-matrix elements is probably equivalent to
proving longitudinal boost invariance.

assuming the existence of limiting s-matrix elements, there is another disaster that
could occur in the limit. this is an infrared catastrophe. that is, the cross section
for reactions initiated by only a few particles might be dominated by production of
a number of particles scaling like a positive power of n. then, the s-matrix would
not approach a well dened operator in fock space.
in 11d sugra the infrared
catastrophe is prevented by lorentz invariance. again we see a possible connection
between the mere existence of the s-matrix, and its lorentz invariance.

a possible avenue for investigating the infrared catastrophe is to exploit the fact
that the production of a large number of particles at xed energy and momentum means
that each of the produced particles has smaller and smaller energy and momentum. it
is barely possible that the nonrenormalization theorems will give us sucient informa-
tion about scattering in this regime to put a bound on the multiparticle production
amplitudes. personally, i believe that a demonstration of the existence and lorentz
invariance of the limiting s-matrix must await the development of more sophisticated
tools for studying these very special large n systems.

16

2.5 membranes

one of the attractive features of matrix theory is the beautiful way in which membranes
are incorporated into its dynamics. this connection has its origin in groundbreaking
work on membrane dynamics done in the late 80s [31].
in that work, the matrix
theory lagrangian was derived as a discretization of the light cone lagrangian for
supermembranes. the idea was to build a theory analogous to string theory, with
membranes as the fundamental objects. the theory appeared to fail when it was
shown that the lagrangian had continuous spectrum [32]. today we realize that this
is actually a sign that the theory exceeds its design criteria:
it actually describes
multibody states of membranes and gravitons, and the continuum states are simply
the expected scattering states of a multibody system.

the membrane/matrix connection has been described so many times in the litera-
ture that i will only give a brief summary of it here. it is simplest to describe toroidal
membranes, though in principle any riemann surface can be treated [33]. one of the
amusing results of this construction is that, for nite n, the topology of the membrane
has no intrinsic meaning. states describing any higher genus surface can be found in
the toroidal construction. it is only in the large n limit that one appears to get sep-
arate spaces of membranes with dierent topology. the question of whether topology
changing interactions (which certainly exist for nite n) survive the large n limit, has
not been studied, but there is no reason to presume that they do not.

the heart of the membrane construction is the famous von neumann-weyl basis

for n  n matrices in terms of unitary clock and shift operators satisfying

u n = v n = uu = v v = 1.

uv = e

2i

n v u

any matrix can be expanded in a series

if, as n   we restrict attention to matrices whose coecients amn approach
the fourier coecents of a smooth function, a(p, q), on a two torus, then it is easy to
show that

(2.16)

(2.17)

(2.18)

(2.19)

(2.20)

and

using these equivalences, one can show that, on this subclass of large n matrices, the
matrix theory lagrangian approaches that of the supermembrane.

a = x amnu mv n

i
n { a, b}p.b.
[a, b] 
tr a  n z dpdq a(p, q)

17

one can extend the construction to more general riemann surfaces (the original
matrix papers cited in [31] worked on the sphere) by noting that the equations (2.16),
(2.17) arise in the theory of the lowest landau level of electrons on a torus propagating
in a uniform background magnetic eld of strength proportional to n. one can then
study an analogous problem on a general riemann surface. note that since all of these
landau systems have nite dimensional hilbert spaces, they can be mapped into each
other. thus, for nite n, the conguration spaces of membranes of general topology
are included inside the toroidal case.

it is interesting to note that, at the level of the classical dynamics of the matrix
model, the condition (2.19) is sucient to guarantee that the membrane states con-
structed as classical solutions of the equations of motion obeying this restriction, will
have energies of order 1/n and are thus candidates for states which survive in the
(hoped for) lorentz invariant large n limit. this suggests that a more general condi-
tion, viz. that the matrices be replaced by operators whose commutator is trace class,
may be a useful formulation of matrix theory directly in the innite n limit.

however, it is not clear that this sort of classical consideration is useful when n
is large. indeed, it can be argued that in a purely bosonic matrix model, the classical
energy of membrane states is renormalized by an amount which grows with n. by
contrast, in the supersymmetric model, the innite at membrane is a bps state [34]
and the energies of large smooth membranes are all of order 1/n in the quantum theory.
the direct formulation of the innite n theory in eleven dimensions is an outstand-
ing problem. it is clear that it is not simply the light cone supermembrane lagrangian.
but perhaps supermembranes do give us a clue to the ultimate formulation.

2.6 fivebranes

we will attack the problem of nding the 5-brane of m theory in matrix theory
by applying seibergs algorithm. in fact for longitudinal 5-branes, this was done by
berkooz and douglas [35] long before seibergs argument was conceived of. a longitu-
dinal 5-brane is one which is wrapped around the longitudinal circle. in the iia string
language, it is an m5 brane wrapped around the small circle, and thus a d4 brane.
berkooz and douglas [35] proposed that the matrix theory model for such a 5-brane
was the large n limit of the nd0-d4 system. this is a supersymmetric quantum me-
chanics obtained as the dimensional reduction of n = 2, d = 4 susy yang mills, with
an adjoint and a fundamental hypermultiplet. for k such longitudinal ve branes we
simply introduce k fundamental hypermultiplets. seibergs argument shows that this is
the appropriate dlcq of m theory with k longitudinal 5-branes. in the large n limit,
one can argue that a dierent procedure [36] which dispenses with the fundamentals,
may be a suciently good description of the system.

18

we now turn to the more problematic question of vebranes in the transverse
dimensions. after all, the longitudinal branes have innite energy (relative to the
lorentz invariant spectrum) in the large n limit. again, we use seibergs argument
and nd ourselves faced with a system containing an ns 5-brane and n d0 branes in iia
string theory with vanishing coupling. this is the system described by (a certain soliton
sector of) the k = 1 iia little string theory [4]. the system of k ns 5 branes in any
string theory with vanishing coupling is a six dimensional lorentz invariant quantum
system which decouples from gravity. that is to say, although it contains states
with the quantum numbers of bulk gravitons (and other closed string modes) in a ten
dimensional spacetime with a linear dilaton eld [37], they are described holographically
[38] in terms of a quantum theory with 5 + 1 dimensional lorentz invariance. it is not
a quantum eld theory, because it has t-duality when compactied on circles [39] and
because it is an interacting theory with a hagedorn spectrum [40].

the absence of a simple description of vebranes in the original eleven dimensional
matrix theory lagrangian is probably the rst indication of a general principle. in
quantum eld theory, the fundamental degrees of freedom are local. when we study
the theory on a compact space we can encounter new degrees of freedom, like wilson
lines, but they are all implicit in the local variables which describe the dynamics in
innite at space. in a theory of fundamental extended objects, we may expect that
this will cease to be true. if there are fundamental degrees of freedom associated with
objects wrapped around nontrivial cycles of a compact manifold, and if, as may be
expected, the energies of all states associated with these degrees of freedom scale to
innity with the volume of the manifold, then the theory describing innite at space
may be missing degrees of freedom.

innite vebranes have innite energy. we may imagine them to arise as limits
of nite energy wrapped vebranes on a compact space whose volume has been taken
to innity. their description may involve degrees of freedom which decouple in the
innite volume limit. we shall see that this appears to be the case. nonetheless, one
feels a certain unease with the asymmetrical treatment of membranes and vebranes3.
perhaps there is a completely dierent formulation of light cone m theory in
which one somehow discretizes the light cone dynamics of the m5 brane. indeed, since
membrane charges are certainly incorporated in the world volume theory of the m5
brane4 one might hope to obtain a more complete formalism in this way.

3which is only partly relieved by noting that the only true duality between the two [29] is realized
in the standard formulation of matrix theory on a three torus, and that this duality is captured by
the matrix theory formulation we will present below.

4m5 branes are in a sense d branes of the m2 brane [3] and so carry charges which measure the
number of m2 branes ending on them. these couple to the two form potential on the world volume.

19

3. m theory on a circle

let us now imagine trying to compactify one of the transverse dimensions of m theory
on a circle of size alp . we are led to study d0 branes in iia string theory with
coupling gs  (rs/lp )3/2  0 on a circle of radius  ag1/3
s ls. this situation is t
dual to n d strings in type iib string theory with coupling gs  g2/3
s . the d strings
are wound on a circle of radius  g1/3
ls/a. the states of this system whose energy
gap above the ground state of the d0 brane system is of order rs are described by
the 1 + 1 dimensional world volume theory of nonrelativistic d strings. this is 1 + 1
dimensional dimensional sym theory with 16 susys. after rescaling to light cone
energy the hamiltonian of the system is

s

p/r9

rlpz l2

0

ds dt tr f 2 + (

dx
l2
p

)2 +

[x i, x j]2

l4
p

+ [d + x, ]lp! .

(3.1)

in this formula, boldface characters are so(8) vectors. x has dimensions of length.
the electric eld strength f has dimensions of [m]2 and  has dimensions of mass (so

that the kinematic susy generator q = 1r r ds tr has dimensions of [m]1/2). r is

the radius of the lightlike circle.  are 1 + 1 dimensional dirac matrices.  is a sixteen
component spinor which transforms as (l, 8c) + (r, 8s) under the lorentz and so(8)
symmetries. the model has (8, 8) susy as a two dimensional eld theory.

it is obvious that as r9 is taken to innity, this system reduces to the 11 dimensional
matrix theory we studied in the previous section. indeed, the compactied theory has
more degrees of freedom than the uncompactied one. in the seiberg analog model,
these correspond to strings connecting the d0 branes which wind around the torus and
they obviously become innitely massive in the limit r9  . amusingly, in terms of
the 1 + 1 dimensional eld theory this decoupling is the standard one of kaluza-klein
states when the radius of a circle compactied eld theory goes to zero. a catchy
phrase for describing this phenomenon is that in matrix theory dimensional oxidation
is t dual to dimensional reduction.

more interesting is the opposite limit r9/lp  0. according to the duality relation
between m theory and iia string theory this limit is supposed to be the free iia string
theory. this argument is based on the bps formula which shows that the iia string
tension is the lightest scale in the theory in this limit, plus the relations between the
low energy 11d and iia sugra lagrangians. it is important to realize that matrix
theory provides us with a true derivation of this relation.
in a sense the relation
between duality arguments and matrix theory is similar to that between symmetry
arguments based on current algebra and the qcd lagrangian.

20

the derivation is easy. in the indicated limit, the mass scale of the sym theory
goes to innity in planck units and we should be left with an eective conformal eld
theory describing any massless degrees of freedom. the only obvious massless degrees
of freedom are those on the moduli space, which is a 1 + 1 dimensional orbifold cft
with target space (supersymmetrized) r8n /sn . this is a classical statement, but the
nonrenormalization theorems for a eld theory with sixteen susys ((8, 8) susy in the
language of 1 + 1 eld theory) assure us that the lagrangian on the moduli space is
not renormalized. indeed, we will see in a moment that the leading perturbation of
this system consistent with the symmetries is an irrelevant operator with dimension
(3/2, 3/2).

first we want to show that the spectrum of the orbifold quantum eld theory at
order p   1/n is precisely that of the fock space of free type iia green schwarz
string eld theory [26]. to do this we note that the orbifold theory has topological
sectors not contained in the r8n cft in which the diagonal matrix elds are periodic
only up to an orbifold gauge transformation in sn . these are labelled by the conjugacy
classes of the permutation group. a general permutation can be written as a product
cn1 . . . cnp of cyclic permutations. within each such sector, we recognize that there
is a residual zn1  . . . znp gauge symmetry of cyclic permutation within each block of
the matrix.

the importance of these topological sectors is that, as the nk  , they contain
states of energy 1/nk.
indeed, a diagonal matrix function on an interval of length
2, satisfying xi( + 2) = xi+1() : mod nk, is equivalent to a single function xi(s)
on an interval of length 2nk. the hamiltonian for fourier modes of xi is h =
1
n. for a general topological sector, the hamiltonian is a sum of p such
single string hamiltonians. it is these long strings which are the strings of perturbative
string theory.

nk pn ni

ni

there are two important constraints which follow from the remnants of the u(n)
gauge symmetry of the original matrix lagrangian. first of all, on the subspace of
states which are generated by nite fourier modes of the x i, the znk residual gauge
symmetries just become translations in the variable s. in the language of string theory,
these are the light cone virasoro constraints: l0 l0 = 0, on physical states. secondly,
for congurations in which several of the long strings are identical, there is a residual
permutation gauge symmetry which exchanges them. this is the conventional statistics
symmetry of quantum mechanics. it picks up the right minus signs because half integral
spin in the model is carried by grassmann variables.

finally, we want to note that the single string lagrangians derived from this model
are type iia green-schwarz superstrings. indeed, the u(n) sym theory from which
we began has an so(8) r symmetry group under which the left and right susy gener-

21

ators transform as the two dierent spinor representations. thus, we may summarize
the results we have derived by the statement that in the r10  0, n   limits, the
hilbert space of states of the matrix theory hamiltonian with energies of order 1/n ,
is precisely the fock space of free light cone gauge type iia string eld theory. this
is a derivation of the famous duality conjecture relating m theory to type iia string
theory.

dijkgraaf, verlinde and verlinde [26] went one step further, and showed that the
rst correction to the free string hamiltonian for nite r10 was an irrelevant operator
which precisely reproduced the mandelstam [41] three string vertex. their argument
used eective eld theory: this is the lowest dimension operator compatible with the
symmetries of the underlying sym theory. thus, they were unable to compute the
coecient of the mandelstam vertex. however, because r10 determines the 1 + 1 di-
mensional mass of the excitations of sym theory which decouple in the zero radius
limit, the dimension ((3/2, 3/2)) of the irrelevant operator determines that the string
coupling scales as gs  (r10/lp)3/2 which is the scaling anticipated from duality con-
siderations. the importance of the result is twofold. it shows that at least to leading
order in the small radius expansion the dynamics of matrix theory is, in the large n
limit, invariant under the ten dimensional super-poincare group. and it shows that the
general structure of string perturbation theory will follow from matrix theory. indeed,
up to contact terms on the long string world sheet, the mandelstam vertex generates
the riemann surface expansion of string perturbation theory. as yet, no one has found
an argument that matrix theory provides the correct contact terms to all orders in
perturbation theory.

let us stress the important points that we have learned in this section. we have
seen in a very explicit way how matrix theory interpolates between the quantum
mechanics of the previous section, which describes 11d sugra, and free string theory.
in particular we have given a very explicit dynamical argument for why the iia strings
are free in the zero radius limit. in previous discussions of the duality between iia
strings and 11d sugra, this was more or less a postulate, supported only by the
behavior of the low energy eective lagrangian. another important lesson was that in
the limit of small radius, positions of objects on the compactied circle become wildly
uctuating quantum variables. indeed, these positions are wilson lines in the gauge
theory, and we are going to the strong coupling limit. there is no longer any sensible
geometrical meaning to the small circle, but the theory itself is perfectly smooth in the
limit.

22

4. m theory on a two torus

to study the theory on t 2 we apply the same set of arguments. d0 branes in weakly
coupled type iia on an 11d planck scale torus are treated by double t duality and
related to d2 branes in a dual (but still weakly coupled) type iia theory. the states
of nite light cone energy are described by maximally symmetric 2 + 1 dimension sym
theory, with nite coupling, compactied on a torus which is dual to the m theory
torus. (in fact, here is an exercise: go through seibergs argument for a general torus
and show that the states of nite light cone energy are those whose energy scale is
given by the coupling of the sym theory obtained by doing t duality on all the radii.
for t 4 and up this sym theory is nonrenormalizable and we will see the implications
of this in the next section.) the two wilson lines of the sym theory represent the
coordinates of particles on the m theory torus.

aspinwall and schwarz [42] argued using string duality that type iib theory in
ten dimensional space was obtained as the zero area limit of m theory on a two torus.
the seeming contradiction that 11  2 = 10 is resolved by noting that in the zero
area limit a continuum of light wrapped m2 brane states appear, and play the role of
momentum in a new tenth dimension. one of the puzzles of this approach is why the
theory should be symmetric under rotations which rotate this new dimension into the
other 9. fundamental (f) and d strings are identied as m2 branes wrapped around
the short resp.
long cycle of the torus. this identies the type iib string coupling
as the ratio of the short and long cycles (more generally, the imaginary part of the
complex structure), explains the sl(2, z) duality of the theory and explains why there
is a t duality between weakly coupled iia and iib theories.

if we try to take the zero area limit of the m theory torus we are led to study the
sym theory on a torus of innite area. again, because the sym coupling is relevant,
this is equivalent to an innite coupling limit in which all but conformal degrees of
freedom decouple. again, the existence of a moduli space ensures us that there is
some sort of conformal limit rather than a completely trivial topological theory. now
however, there is a dierence. in 2+1 dimensions there is a nite superconformal algebra
which has 16 ordinary supercharges. it has an so(8) r subalgebra under which the
supercharges transform as (8,2) (with the 2 standing for their transformation under
the 2 + 1 dimensional lorentz group). furthermore, since the theory is conformal,
it depends only on the complex structure of the limiting t 2 and there is an obvious
sl(2, z) invariance which acts on the complex structure [43].

the niteness of the superconformal algebra allows for the possibility of an inter-
acting theory, and indeed the same interacting superconformal theory was postulated
to describe the interactions of n m2 branes at separations much smaller than the 11d

23

planck scale. here we want the theory to be interacting because on a two torus with -
nite complex structure we are trying to describe interacting type iib string theory. we
can understand the weak coupling limit, and simultaneously get a better understanding
of the so(8) symmetry, by going to large complex structure. in the limit where the a
cycle of the m theory torus is much smaller than the b cycle, the corresponding sym
torus has cycles with the opposite ratio. thus we can do a kaluza klein reduction on
the cycle of the dual torus corresponding to the b cycle and obtain a 1 + 1 dimension
eld theory.

this is best done by going to the moduli space, which is a u(1)n sym theory before
the aspinwall schwarz limit. to take the limit we do an electromagnetic duality trans-
formation, replacing the abelian gauge elds by compact scalars (f  x 8),
which decompactify in the limit. it is then obvious that there is an so(8) symmetry
which rotates this boson into the seven original scalars. indeed the lagrangian on the
moduli space is

l = (x i)2 + aa

(4.1)

here i and a each run from 1 to 8, and the s are two component, 2 + 1 dimensional
spinors. of course, 2+1 lorentz invariance is broken by the compactication on a torus,
but under the sl(2, z) which transforms the radii of the torus, the spinors transform
as a doublet. there is an obvious so(8) symmetry of this lagrangian under which the
x i and a could each transform in any of the eight dimensional representations. note
that both components of a must transform the same way. superconformal invariance
in the aspinwall schwarz limit, assures us that this so(8) group survives in the in-
teracting theory. furthermore it tells us that the scalars must transform in the vector
representation of so(8) and the fermions in one of the two chiral spinors (which one
is a matter of pure convention).

when we further make the kaluza-klein reduction corresponding to large complex
structure the moduli space theory is identical to the light cone gauge iib green-schwarz
string. actually it is n copies of this theory, related by a residual sn gauge symmetry
(as in the previous section). we can rerun the analysis there and show that the theory
is the fock space of free strings in this limit and that the rst correction to the limit
is the correct mandelstam interaction for iib strings, with the right scaling of the
couplings. the so(8) symmetry is seen to be the spacetime rotation symmetry of
iib string theory, and superconformal invariance in 2 + 1 dimensions has given us an
understanding of the reason for emergence of this symmetry (without recourse to a
weak coupling expansion) and of the chirality of the resulting spacetime physics. an
alternative derivation of the so(8) symmetry using the compactication of the theory
on the three torus can be found in [44].

24

one thing which does not work is the continuous perturbative shift symmetry of
the theory under translations of the ramond-ramond scalar. this can be attributed to
the virtual presence in the theory of various longitudinally wrapped branes which are
sensitive to the value of . presumably this will all go away in the large n limit when
the energies of these states go o to innity (relative to the lorentz invariant states).
this example show us that, at least in perturbation theory there can be many versions
of dlcq. a perturbative dlcq of type iib string theory would have preserved the
continuous symmetry.

5. three and four tori

the theory on the three torus is somewhat less interesting. one again obtains a maxi-
mally susy ym theory, which is scale invariant and has an sl(2, z) olive montonen
duality symmetry. this combines with the geometrical sl(3, z) to give the proper u
duality of m theory. there are now no new limits. olive montonen duality is identied
with the m duality [29] which identies m2 branes with m5 branes wrapped on a three
torus, giving a new version of m theory. the four torus is much more interesting.
going through the seiberg scaling one obtains d0 branes in weakly coupled iia theory
on a planck scale four torus. performing four t dualities to get to a a large manifold we
come back to iia theory, but this time with a large coupling gs (because the coupling
rescales by four powers of g1/3
. the zero branes have of course become d4 branes.
large coupling means that we are going back to m theory a new dimension is opening
up, and the d4 branes become m5 branes. we are thus led to the theory of n m5
branes at distances well below the planck length in a new copy of m theory. this is
a 5 + 1 dimensional superconformally invariant eld theory (2, 0)n [45] whose moduli
space is n self dual tensor multiplets with wilson surfaces lying in the self dual u(n)
weight lattice. this proposal was rst made by [46]. in terms of the original iia theory
we can understand the extra momentum quantum number in the eld theory as arising
from d4 branes of the (pre t duality) iia theory wrapped around the planck scale
torus.

s

the (2, 0)n theory is superconformal and lives on a ve torus. the smallest radius
of this torus denes the planck length of m theory and the remaining four torus is the
dual torus to the one m theory theory lives on. the sl(5, z) u duality of m theory
compactied on t 4 is manifest in this presentation of the theory.

berkooz and rozali [47] have suggested that a very similar construction can be
made for m theory compactied on k3 manifolds. one rst uses the seiberg scaling
to relate the problem to d0 branes on a k3 of scale g1/3
ls in the zero coupling limit of
iia string theory. then one uses the k3 t duality to relate this to d4 branes wrapped

s

25

on a dual k3 in a strongly coupled iia string theory and thus to the (2, 0)n theory
compactied on s1  k3. they show that many properties of the theory, including all
of the expected dualities and the f theory [48] limit can be qualitatively understood in
this formulation.

6. five and six (where we run out of tricks)

we now come to the ve torus, where things really start to get interesting. the
standard limiting procedure leads us to d0 branes in weakly coupled iia string theory
on a planck scale 5 torus, which is t dual to d5 branes wrapped on a 5 torus in strongly
coupled iib string theory, which in turn is s dual to ns 5 branes wrapped on a ve
torus in weakly coupled iib string theory. if one goes through the dualities carefully,
then one sees that the scale that is being held xed in the latter theory, is the iib string
scale. we can see this as follows. as usual, in the original picture, we are taking the
dkps limit and the scale which is held xed is the kinetic energy of a single d0 brane
with planck scale momenta. after t duality this always leads at low enough energy
to a sym theory in which the sym coupling is held xed. in type iib theory, with
string coupling gs, the sym coupling is given by

let us rewrite this in terms of the parameters of the s dual iib theory:

g2
sy m = gsl2
s

gs = 1/gs,

2

ls

= gsl2
s.

(6.1)

(6.2)

(6.3)

we learn that a collection of n coincident ns 5 branes in weakly coupled iib string
theory, has, on its collective world volume, a sym theory whose coupling depends
only on the string tension and does not go to zero with the string coupling. as a
consequence we learn (believing always in the consistency of string theory) that the
gs = 0 limit of a collection of n coincident ns 5 branes in the zero coupling limit
of type iib string theory is a consistent interacting quantum theory with manifest
5 + 1 dimensional lorentz invariance. we call this the u(n)b little string theory. the
matrix theory for m theory on a ve torus with planck scale radii and n units of
longitudinal momentum is the u(n)b little string theory compactied on a dual ve
torus. the parameter ls and radii a of the little string theory are related to those
of m theory by

l2

sl9
p

26

r2l1l2l3l4l5

1 =

(6.4)

a =

l3
p
rla

.

(6.5)

here r is the lightlike compactication radius.

the little string theory retains the manifest o(5, 5) t duality of compactied iib
string theory with zero coupling. this is now interpreted as the duality group of
m theory and is in fact the correct u duality group of m theory on a ve torus. this
symmetry has several interesting consequences. first of all, the little string theory
cannot be a quantum eld theory. in quantum eld theory, the variation of correlation
functions with respect to the metric is given uniquely in terms of insertions of the stress
tensor. but t-duality transformations change the metric of the torus without changing
the theory. if we make a small variation of a radius of the torus around some t-self
dual point, then we nd (assuming that we are dealing with a quantum eld theory)

that every matrix element of the operator r g vanishes. it is easy to argue that

this is incompatible with the properties of eld theory. we will nd more evidence
below that little string theories are not eld theories.

another consequence of t duality is the existence of another type of little string
theory, called u(n)a. indeed if we do a t duality transformation on a single radius
of the ve torus, we get n ns ve branes in iia theory. if we now take the innite
torus limit, we obtain a distinct theory. this could have been obtained directly by
considering the zero coupling limit of ns ve branes in the iia theory in innite ten
dimensional spacetime.
indeed, one can construct similar little string theories from
the zero coupling limit of ns ve branes in the heterotic theories. the low energy
limit of the u(n)a little string theory is not a sym theory but rather the (2, 0)n
superconformal eld theory.

an interesting way of understanding the fact that interactions of ns ve branes
survive the limit of zero string coupling is to write down the low energy sugra solution
corresponding to a collection of n ns vebranes. in the string conformal frame this
has the form

gij = ije2

e2 = e20 +

n
r2

hijk = nvijk

(6.6)

(6.7)

(6.8)

here the indices span the four dimensional space transverse to the ve brane and r is
the euclidean distance from the ve brane in this space. vijk is the volume form of
the unit three sphere in this space. e20 = gs
, the square of the string coupling. the
metric components along the vebrane are minkowskian.

2

27

near r = 0 the transverse space has the form of a at innite one dimensional
space times a three sphere of xed radius. the dilaton varies linearly in this at space.
this limiting background is in fact an exact solution of the classical string equations
of motion to all orders in  [58]. indeed, the background h eld converts the three
sphere  model into the level n su(2) wess-zumino-witten (wzw) conformal eld
theory. the linear dilaton is such that the value of the super central charge is c = 10.
this is called the linear dilaton background.

for nite gs this innite space is cut o on one end and merges smoothly into an
asymptotically at space with nite string coupling. however, no matter how small
the asymptotic value of the string coupling, the region near the ve brane is strongly
coupled. the eect of taking gs to zero is to make the linear dilaton background valid
everywhere. as a consequence of the fact that the coupling goes to innity at r = 0,
the higher order terms in the formal genus expansion are innite and the perturbation
expansion is not useful for correlation functions which probe the r = 0 region. we will
see later that for large n, duality allows us to study this region in terms of a dierent
low energy sugra expansion.

in addition to the failure of quantum eld theory to capture the dynamics of dlcq
m theory on t 5, this geometry presents us with another new phenomenon.
in all
previous cases, seibergs argument allowed us to relate dlcq m theory to string
theory, but we then found that most of the string states decoupled in the dlcq
limit. here we have found that the scale which is kept nite is the string scale and we
are left with a little string theory. another name we might have chosen for this is a
kondo string theory. the famous kondo model in condensed matter physics is a free
1 + 1 dimensional eld theory interacting with a localized defect with a nite number of
degrees of freedom. the full system is a rather nontrivial interacting quantum problem,
and the degrees of freedom of the eld theory cannot be thrown away even though they
are free everywhere except at the position of the defect.

maldacena and strominger [37] have argued that the same is true for the little
string theory.
if we analyze the scattering problem of string modes o a ve brane
in the zero coupling limit it is easy to convince oneself that every asymptotic state
of the string theory maps into an asymptotic state of the linear dilaton background.
maldacena and strominger argue that at large n any state of the vebrane with energy
density5 above a certain cuto can be described in a suciently good approximation as
a 1 + 1 dimensional black hole in the low energy eective eld theory. the point is that

5all the experts agree that the same conclusions are valid for localized states of nite energy on
the vebrane, although no calculations have been done for this case. the case of nite energy density
is directly relevant to the toroidally compactied little string theory which is our essential concern in
matrix theory.

28

for large enough n and energy density, the black hole horizon is in the region where
the coupling is still weak. thus, the classic hawking analysis of black hole radiation
is valid and indicates that such vebrane states decay into asymptotic string states. a

standard calculation shows that the hawking temperature is of order 1/qn ls

. this
has two interesting consequences. first it shows that in the large n limit, there is a true
decoupling of these string states. second, since the temperature is independent of the
energy, it implies a hagedorn spectrum of black hole states, which must be interpreted
as states of the little string theory. this is a second indication that little string theories
are not eld theories. we will nd independent conrmation of this spectrum by a very
dierent method below.

2

the large n decoupling of the string states is extremely important, because it is
easy to see that in the matrix theory context these states do not have lorentz invariant
dispersion relations. first of all, since their d0 brane charge vanishes, they have no
longitudinal momentum. secondly, in the dlcq limit they actually have vanishing
transverse momentum as well. indeed, the typical states to which perturbative string
theory applies have transverse momenta of order the string scale as the string coupling
goes to zero. the weakly coupled string theory which we use in the description of
m theory on t 5 is an s-dual type iib theory, whose string length in terms of the
original type iib theory is given by equation (6.3). in turn we have, in terms of the
original iia string coupling gs = o(g5/3
s is of order
g5/6
s l1
s . by contrast, the d0 branes have momenta of order the eleven dimensional
planck scale, which scales like g1/3
s . thus, in the limit, string states of the little
string theory carry zero planck units of m theory transverse momentum.

). thus, a momentum of order l1

s

s l1

this remark explains the otherwise paradoxical fact that the transverse momentum
of string states in the ns 5 brane background is not conserved (note that the o(4)
angular momentum is conserved). from the point of view of the at space string theory
we began from, the string modes are interacting with states which carry innitely more
transverse momentum than they do, and therefore they can gain or lose arbitrary
amounts of (string scale) transverse momentum.

from the m theory point of view then, the string states of the little string theory
are troublesome. they carry nite light cone energy but exactly zero transverse and
longitudinal momentum. they are not consistent with m theory lorentz invariance.
fortunately, they seem to decouple in the large n limit. the maldacena strominger
calculation seems to indicate that excitations on the ve branes do not excite such
states (even if it were energetically possible) in the large n limit.

on the six torus, things get even more out of hand. after performing the seiberg
limit and using t duality we obtain the theory of d6 branes in a strongly coupled type

29

iia string theory. we are instructed to keep the sym coupling on the d6 brane world
volume nite.
it is well known, that in this limit, d6 branes can be viewed as kk
monopoles of 11d sugra compactied on a very large circle. be very careful to note
that this is not the 11d sugra we are trying to model. in fact, the gravitons of this
11d sugra arise from the iia dlcq point of view, as d6 branes wrapped on the
m theory 6 torus. the sym coupling on the kk monopole world volume is just the
planck scale of this (new) 11d sugra.

this is a new wrinkle. previously the theories which described dlcq m theory
did not contain gravity. this was an advance because the conceptual problems of
quantizing gravity seemed to be avoided. this is no longer the case on t 6. the only
saving grace here is that one can again argue that these fake gravitons had better
decouple in the large n limit. indeed, the reader may verify that, just like the string
states of the little string theories, they carry vanishing longitudinal and transverse
momenta from the m theory point of view. this means they had better decouple. a
hand waving argument that they do in fact decouple is the following.

kk monopoles are manifolds which are circle bundles over the space transverse to a
six brane. the radius of the circle is xed at innity (though we must take the limit in
which this asymptotic radius is itself innite) and goes to zero near the six brane. for a
monopole of charge n the rate at which the circle shrinks to zero as the radius is varied,
is multiplied by n. thus gravitons with nonzero momentum6 around the circle will be
repelled from the kk monopoles, and the repulsion will set in at a larger distance for
large n. from the point of view of m theory we want to study the scattering of n
kk monopoles (wrapped on the dual 11d sugra t 6) at transverse separations much
smaller than the dual planck scale (although we want to keep energies which are of
order the dual planck scale). it seems plausible that these scattering processes will not
involve graviton emission in the large n limit. obviously, we could do with a stronger
argument.

the example of t 6 kills once and for all the idea that the nite n dlcq should
reduce to nite n dlcq sugra in the limit of low energy and large transverse
separations. it is clear that at nite n, dlcq m theory contains states of arbitrarily
low light cone energy (wrapped d6 branes in the original description  gravitons in the
t dual description) which are simply not there in dlcq sugra.

one might have thought that the simple scaling arguments above go through for
any compactication on a six manifold. however, seibergs argument implicitly con-
tains assumptions about the moduli space of string theory compactied on manifolds

6it is easy to see that gravitons with zero momentum decouple in the limit that the sugra circle

goes to innity.

30

smaller than the string scale  assumptions which are valid only if there is enough
susy to provide nonrenormalization theorems for the space and the metric on it. the
argument indeed goes through for k3  t 2 but the authors of [49] have pointed out
that things are quite dierent for a general calabi-yau threefold, where there are only
eight supercharges. indeed, it is well known [50] that the kahler moduli space of string
theory on cy 3-folds is corrected when the sizes of cycles reach the string scale. the
exact form of the kahler moduli space and the metric on it can be read o from the
complex structure moduli space of the mirror manifold [51]. the authors of [49] sug-
gest that the point in moduli space corresponding to a planck scale calabi yau is a
mirror cy whose complex structure is very close to the conifold point. this conjecture
is based on the notion that mirror symmetry is obtained [52] by writing the cy as a
t 3 bration and doing t duality on the three torus. it is not precisely clear what this
means since the manifold has no killing vectors with which to perform an honest t
duality transformation. nonetheless, the idea that mirror symmetry would map a very
small (real) 6 fold into a 6 fold with a shrinking three cycle sounds plausible.

if this suggestion is correct, then we know at least that the eective theory for the
dlcq will not contain gravity. indeed, it is known since the seminal work of strominger
[9] that the eective theory of the new massless states coming from wrapping type iib
three branes on the shrinking 3 cycle, is a 3 + 1 dimensional gauge eld theory with a
massless hypermultiplet. the authors of [49] suggest that the whole matrix theory on a
cy threefold may be some sort of 3+1 dimensional eld theory with four supercharges.
this is an interesting idea, but not much follow up work has been done on it. in my
opinion it is a direction which may lead to some interesting progress.

we have seen that matrix theory becomes more and more complicated as we com-
pactify more and more dimensions. this is quite interesting, since it is not the way
eld theory behaves. when we compactify a eld theory we generally lose degrees of
freedom rather than gain them7. this is not completely true. in gauge eld theory
compactication adds wilson lines, and in gravity, it adds the moduli of the compact-
ication manifold. however this addition is far outweighed by the loss of modes with
nontrivial variation on small manifolds. perhaps more importantly, these modes did ex-
ist as gauge degrees of freedom on the noncompact manifold, but with gauge functions
which cannot live on the compactied space.

some of the extra degrees of freedom we have discovered in matrix theory are
artifacts of dlcq. in the low energy sym approximation, the momentum modes of
the eld theory represent (from the original m theory point of view) branes wrapped

7to make this statement more precise, count the number of degrees of freedom below a certain

energy, and ask how this number changes as we shrink the size of the compactication manifold.

31

around both transverse and longitudinal cycles. these states have energy of order one
when n   and should decouple from the hypothetical lorentz invariant limiting
theory.

examples where this can be worked out rather explicitly are the weak coupling
limits of type ii [26] and heterotic [53] strings, as derived from various 1 + 1 and 2 + 1
sym theories. there it is seen that only certain quasi-topological modes of the sym
theory, which vary at a rate 1/n along the sym torus (and manage to be periodic by
wandering a distance of order n in the space of matrices), survive the large n limit.
in my opinion, the key question in the dynamics of matrix theory is to nd a way
to isolate and describe the spectrum of order 1/n with an eective lagrangian, away
from the weak coupling limit.

6.1 the seven torus and beyond

from the point of view described in the introduction, the problems we have encountered
as we increased the number of compactied dimensions beyond four are connected to
the density of states of the theory at large energies. the little string theory has, as
we shall see below, a hagedorn spectrum. this is the essential feature that prevents it
from being a quantum eld theory. the dlcq of m theory on a six torus does not
decouple from gravity. as a consequence, its light cone density of states grows faster
than an exponential, because its high energy light cone spectrum is identical to that of
sugra in an ordinary reference frame.

as we have emphasized, these problems should go away in the large n limit. the
lorentz invariant spectral density of the models grows more slowly than an exponential.
indeed, for both the ve and six tori we have suggested that the oending states
decouple in the large n limit.

on the seven torus we face a problem of a somewhat dierent nature. it has long
been known that massive excitations of a lorentz invariant vacuum in 2+1 dimensional
gravity do not preserve globally asymptotically at boundary conditions. worse, in
theories with massless scalar elds in 2 + 1 dimensions (which includes sugra with
all but the minimal susy) excitations tend to have logarithmically growing scalar
coulomb elds and innite energy. this has been argued to imply [10] that the hilbert
space of lorentz invariant, asymptotically at 1 + 1 or 2 + 1 dimensional string theory
is topological in nature and contains no local propagating excitations.

in dlcq we compactify one more dimension than necessary to describe the lorentz
invariant system we are trying to model. thus, the paucity of states with asymptot-
ically at boundary conditions should become a problem in compactications to four
spacetime dimensions. indeed, following seibergs argument for matrix theory on the
seven torus we are led to a theory of seven branes in type iib string theory. the bps

32

formula tells us that these have logarithmically divergent tension. thus, there is no
sensible dlcq of m theory with 1 + 1, 2 + 1, or 3 + 1 dimensional lorentz invariant
asymptotics. note that we do expect a noncompact formulation of light cone m theory
with 3 + 1 dimensional asymptotics to exist (it should have a hagedorn spectrum, like
little string theory), but it cannot be found as the large n limit of dlcq.

7. dlcq and holography of (2, 0)k theories and little string

theories

in our discussion of compactication of matrix theory we encountered two new types
of lorentz invariant quantum theories which seemed to be decoupled from gravity in
the sense that they could be formulated on xed spacetime manifolds. this is certainly
true for the (2, 0)k theories and their less supersymmetric cousins, which are ordinary
quantum eld theories in six dimensions.
it is likely to be true for the little string
theories as well.

in this section we will introduce two complementary methods for studying these the-
ories. at the moment, both methods make sense only in at six dimensional minkowski
spacetime. even toroidal compactication results in new singularities which are not
well understood. although we could treat the eld theories as limits of the little string
theories we will instead nd it useful to introduce both methods of computation in the
simpler context of eld theory. we begin with dlcq.

7.1 dlcq of (2, 0)k theories

we have remarked above that dlcq is not a terribly useful tool for ordinary eld theory
because the theory compactied on a small spatial circle is usually strongly coupled and
intractable. this is not the case for the (2, 0)k theories. indeed, dimensional reduction
on a small circle leads us to an infrared free 4 + 1 dimensional sym theory.

one simple argument for this comes from the derivation of the (2, 0)k theory as the
eective theory of k coincident m5 branes. if we compactify on a small spatial circle
along the brane then we are studying k coincident d4 branes in weakly coupled type iia
theory. things become even simpler if we ask what in the sym theory corresponds to
momentum around the small circle. the only obvious conserved quantum number is the
instanton number (remember that instantons are particles in 4 + 1 dimensions). that
this is indeed the right identication follows from the bps formula for the instanton
mass mi = 82/g2
sy m . remembering the identication of the coupling in terms of the
radius of the fth dimension, we see that this is just the formula for the mass of a kk
mode, mkk = 2/r5.

33

since the sym coupling is small when the radius is small, and the 4+1 dimensional
sym theory is infrared free, a semiclassical analysis of the dynamics of the instantons is
valid. thus, in the sector with longitudinal momentum n, dlcq of the (2, 0)k theory
would seem to reduce to quantum mechanics on the moduli space of n instantons in
u(k) gauge theory. the fact that this moduli space and the quantum mechanics on
it are calculable from classical considerations follows from the high degree of susy of
the problem8.

well, almost. the y in the ointment is that this moduli space is singular. fortu-
nately, there is an elegant and unique regularization of the moduli space of instantons
in four euclidean dimensions, which appears to make the system completely nite and
sensible. the (2, 0)k theory has 16 ordinary susys. in light cone frame we expect only
half of them to be realized linearly so we expect to nd a quantum mechanics with 8
susys. the target space of the quantum mechanics must therefore be a hyperkahler
quotient. there is a famous construction (called the adhm construction) [64] of in-
stanton moduli space as a singular hyperkahler quotient. it is the solution space of the
algebraic equations

and

[x, x]  [y, y ] + qiqi  (pi)pi = 0

[x, y ] = qipi

(7.1)

(7.2)

modded out by a u(n) gauge symmetry which acts on x and y as adjoints and the
k qi and k pi as fundamentals and antifundamentals respectively. the products of
fundamentals and adjoints appearing in these equations are tensor products of u(n)
representations and are to be interpreted as matrices in the adjoint representation.

these equations also dene the higgs branch of the moduli space of n = 2, d = 4
u(n) sym theory with k fundamental hypermultiplets. the latter interpretation also
introduces the natural regularization of the space, for we can add a fayet iliopoulos
term by modifying the rst adhm equation to read

[x, x]  [y, y ] + qiqi  (pi)pi = in ,

(7.3)

where in is the n  n unit matrix, and  is a real number. note that this is a regu-
larization of the moduli space but not of the yang mills equations as local dierential
equations.
instead it corresponds to solving the yang mills equations on a certain
noncommutative geometry [55].

an important facet of this dlcq of the (2, 0)k theories is the fact that when they
are kk reduced on a circle, the low energy eective theory is ve dimensional sym

8all of these arguments come from the papers [38] and [54], while the regularization below was

invented in the second of these two papers.

34

theory, which is infrared free. thus, the diculties encountered in [15] should be absent
and the semiclassical identication of the system as quantum mechanics on the adhm
moduli space is valid. susy nonrenormalization theorems guarantee that the metric
on this space is unique, and the regularization of the singularities by the fi term is the
unique way to deform the instanton moduli space into a smooth hyperkahler manifold.
the key to nding the spectrum of chiral primary operators in the (2, 0)k theory from
dlcq is the following observation of [54]. these authors observe that the dlcq
procedure preserves a subgroup of the superconformal group of the full theory. they
identify these generators as explicit operators in the quantum mechanics on instanton
moduli space. in particular, they show that a vertex operator is primary, only if it is
concentrated on the singular submanifold of zero scale size instantons. chiral primary
operators can then be identied in terms of the cohomology with compact support
of the fayet-iliopoulos regulated instanton moduli space, which has been investigated
in the mathematical literature. we will not explore the details of these calculations.
suce it to say that they nd the correct spectrum of chiral primary operators.

the way we know this is that the spectrum calculated from dlcq coincides with
that implied by the ads/cft correspondence. this is not just a matter of agreement
between two unrelated conjectures (which in itself would be impressive). rather, the
basis for the ads/cft identication of primary operators comes from a low energy
analysis of the interaction of 11d sugra with vebranes. there must be one primary
for each sugra eld which is in a short multiplet of ads7  s4 susy. as usual
with short multiplets, the number and properties of these multiplets are independent
of parameters, and can be calculated in the low energy approximation.

7.2 dlcq of the little string theories

the papers [38] and [56] described the dlcq of the u(k)a little string theories and
[57] performed the same task for the u(k)b theories. we will restrict attention to the
u(k)a case.

one way to understand the derivation for the type a theory is to consider the
dlcq of type iia string theory as derived in the matrix string picture and add ve-
branes wrapped around the longitudinal direction. the result is the 1 + 1 dimensional
eld theoretical generalization of the model of berkooz and douglas [35] for longitudi-
nal 5 branes in matrix-theory. one obtains a 1 + 1 dimensional eld theory with (2, 2)
susy. it is a u(n) gauge theory with one adjoint and (in the sector with k vebranes)
k fundamentals. as in [26] one takes the weak string coupling limit by descending to
the moduli space. now however we want to be on the higgs branch of the moduli space
(the higgs and coulomb branches obviously decouple from each other in the limit) and
we obtain a  model with target space the adhm moduli space. of course this moduli

35

space is singular, but we can regularize it by adding fi terms. thus, the dlcqn of
u(k)a lst is a sigma model on the moduli space of n u(k) instantons on r4. this
moduli space can be regularized by the addition of fi terms to the adhm equations,
so that the dlcq theory is realized as a limit of a well dened, conformally invariant
(4, 4) supersymmetric sigma model. note that, in contrast to the regularized quantum
mechanics, the sigma model retains its conformal invariance after regularization. how-
ever, the conformal generators of the sigma model are not symmetries of the spacetime
m theory. from the m theory point of view, the spatial momentum on the sigma
model world sheet is a quantum number that counts longitudinally wrapped branes,
and should decouple in the limit of large n.

before regularization the adhm moduli space is locally at. thus, the central
charge c of the scft is just c = 6nk. because the variation of the fi term is a
marginal perturbation of the sigma model, this remains the value of c in the regularized
model. we can immediately turn this into a computation of the high energy density of
states in the dlcq model. the entropy is given by

s(p ) 

2cp  = 6kels

(7.4)

in the last equality we have used the relation between light cone and ordinary energy
for vanishing transverse momentum. this is the hagedorn spectrum that we advertised
for the little string theories. in the dlcq approach, it arises, as in perturbative string
theory, because the light cone energy is identied with the ordinary energy of a 1 + 1
dimensional cft.

the only problem with this derivation is that it applies to the asymptotic density of
states of the dlcq theory, which are not actually states with p  of order 1/n. it has
been argued by ofer aharony [2] that the sigma model contains such states as strings
which wander through of order n instantons before closing (note that the instanton
moduli space has an sn orbifold symmetry). as in our treatment of matrix string
theory, or the maldacena-susskind description of fat black holes [1], these congurations
should have an entropy of the hagedorn form even at energies much lower than those
at which (7.4) is naively valid in the cft. we will see below that a completely dierent
argument produces the same formula for the entropy.

the sigma model on regularized instanton moduli space is a fascinating cft, which
also arises in the study of d1-d5 black holes. its properties have recently been studied
in [6].

7.3 holography

the ads/cft correspondence will be covered by other lecturers at this school. suce

36

it to say that for the (2, 0)n theory9 it provides the leading term in a large n expan-
sion of the correlation functions of the chiral primary operators. the calculation is
performed by solving the classical equations of 11d sugra in the presence of certain
perturbations of an ads7  s4 spacetime, with n units of vebrane ux on the s4.
in order to calculate corrections to higher order in 1/n one needs the higher terms
in the derivative expansion of the eective action. we have only a limited amount of
information about such terms. even in leading order, few calculations have been done
for this case.

just like the dlcq solution of these theories, the ads/cft calculations only work
in uncompactied spacetime. the sugra background corresponding to toroidally
compactied (2, 0)n theories is singular and the derivative expansion does not seem
sensible even for large n.
in this case we can get an inkling of the reason for the
greater degree of singularity of the compactied case. we are used to the fact that
in m theory, singularities correspond to light degrees of freedom which have not been
included in the eective lagrangian. in the toroidally compactied (2, 0)n theory it is
obvious that there are such degrees of freedom. the zero modes along the moduli space,
which are frozen expectation values in the innite volume theory are here zero frequency
quantum variables. indeed it is precisely the scattering matrix of these variables which
one would hope to compute in matrix theory. it seems unlikely that this dynamics
will be easily captured by reliable calculations in sugra.

we now turn to the holographic description of little string theories. it was sug-
gested in [40] that these are simply the exact description of string theory in the linear
dilaton backgrounds. more precisely, these are type ii string theories in the following
background.

ds2 = dt2 + dx2 + d2 + anl2

s d2
3

h = n 3
s = e/n ls
g2

(7.5)

(7.6)

(7.7)

here x are coordinates on the worldvolume of n coincident vebranes, 3 are coordi-
nates on a three sphere transverse to the vebranes, and 3 is its volume form.

there are some interesting dierences in the way holography works in this context,
as compared to the ads/cft correspondence. most of them stem from the fact that the
asymptotic geometry of these backgrounds is minkowski space with an exponentially
vanishing string coupling. therefore, even for nite n, there is an innite region of

9in the previous section, in order to conform to the literature on the subject we used k to signify
the number of ve branes, while n was reserved for the longitudinal momentum. here we will revert
to the standard use of n in the ads/cft correspondence. it denotes the number of vebranes.

37

spacetime in which the description of the system in terms of freely propagating particles
becomes exact. the linear dilaton systems have an s-matrix. by contrast, even though
the geometry of ads space has innite volume, the boundary conditions which dene
a cauchy problem in this space are reminiscent of those for a system in a box.

in the ads/cft correspondence we do not expect to see any sort of large spacetime
unless n is large, but even for n = 1 (note that unlike other systems of this type, the
n = 1 little string theory does not appear to be a trivial gaussian system) or 2 the
little string theories should have asymptotic multiparticle states propagating in the
weak coupling region.

another dramatic dierence between the two types of theories is that the little
string theory has a hagedorn spectrum and is not a quantum eld theory. thus, in
many ways, the little string theory is much closer to string theory in minkowski space
than the ads systems.

we have seen the hagedorn spectrum in the dlcq calculation above.

in the
holographic description one calculates the asymptotic density of states by using the
bekenstein-hawking formula for black hole entropy. this is justied in the linear
dilaton background because the mass of the black hole is inversely proportional to the
string coupling at the horizon. the world outside a large mass black hole is completely
contained in the weak coupling regime.

it is well known [59] that the hawking temperature of linear dilaton black holes
is independent of their mass. this is equivalent to the statement that the entropy is
linear in the energy i.e. we have a hagedorn spectrum10. the hagedorn temperature
can be computed in terms of the cocient which governs the rate of increase of the
dilaton. we again nd that s = 6nels.

the hagedorn spectrum actually solves a potential paradox in the claim of [40].
these authors argue that the s-matrix of string theory in the linear dilaton background
can be interpreted as the correlation functions of observables in the lst. the p particle
s-matrix elements are of course symmetric under interchange of arguments (the sp
group of statistics). they are also 5 + 1 lorentz invariant. if these are to be interpreted
as correlation functions in a quantum theory, their sp symmetry implies that they must
be fourier transforms of time ordered products of heisenberg operators.

lorentz invariance would then imply that lst was a local eld theory, because
time ordered products are only lorentz invariant if the operators commute at spacelike

10it should be noted in passing that this simple calculation shows that all extant nonperturbative
formulations of the c = 1 string theory are wrong. the entropy in all such calculations is that of a 1 + 1
dimensional eld theory rather than the much more degenerate hagedorn spectrum. the c = 1 model
was solved by trying to resum a divergent perturbation expansion. clearly some nonperturbative
states (liouville d branes??) have been missed in this resummation.

38

separations. however, the hagedorn spectrum prevents us from performing the fourier
transform and this conclusion cannot be reached11.

indeed, by calculating two point functions of operators by analogy with ads/cft
(solving linearized wave equations in the linear dilaton background), peet and polchin-
ski [60] showed explicitly that they were not fourier transformable. their behavior
is exponential, with the hagedorn temperature controlling the rate of growth of the
exponent.

peet and polchinskis calculation is easy to summarize: the scalar wave equation

in the linear dilaton background is

[2

 +

(2l + 3)(2l + 1)

4

+ k2n]e3/2 = 0.

for large k and  its solutions have the form

  e(n k2)1/2



(7.8)

(7.9)

in the holographic interpretation the s-matrix computed from these wave functions,
which has the same behavior in momentum space as the wave functions themselves,
is supposed to be the two point function of some operator in the lst. thus, it the
two point function is not fourier transformable, and grows in the way we would expect
from the hagedorn spectrum.

to conclude this brief summary of our knowledge of little string theories, i want
to discuss the question of what the scale of nonlocality is in these theories. what we
know so far suggests two rather dierent answers. seibergs original argument about
t-duality suggests string nonlocality on a scale ls. on the other hand, the length scale
dened by the hagedorn temperature is of order lsn which is much longer. note
however that the argument for the latter scale is based on high energy asymptotics.
thus, although the hagedorn temperature is low for large n, it might be that the
exponential behavior of the density of states does not set in until energies of order l1
s .
the hagedorn temperature controls the rate of growth of the asymptotic density of
states, but does not tell us anything about the nite scale at which the asymptotic

11some readers may be confused by our apparent denial of the possibility of having a hagedorn
spectrum in local eld theory. what, they will ask, about the hagedorn spectrum of large n qcd? in
fact there is no contradiction. two point functions of operators in large n qcd are in fact controlled
by the asymptotically free xed point at short distances. however, the crossover scale, above which
free behavior sets in, depends on the operator. at innite n there are some operators which never get
to the crossover point, because it scales with a positive power of n . this phenomenon of operators
which have rapidly vanishing matrix elements between the vacuum and most of the high energy states,
appears to be connected to the fact that innite n qcd is a free theory, with an innite number of
conservation laws. i do not expect such behavior in a nite system with interaction.

39

behavior begins to dominate. minwalla and seiberg have done a calculation which
suggests that in fact the hagedorn behavior does not set in until scales far above the
hagedorn temperature. they argued that if, in the lsta theory, one takes the limit

ls  0 with lsn xed, then the sugra approximation to scattering amplitudes

with energies of order this xed scale becomes exact. the point is that in lsta,
the strong coupling behavior of the theory is described at low energy by 11d sugra.
minwalla and seiberg show that in the large n limit described above, there is a sugra
description of the scattering amplitude which is valid for arbitrary values of the dilaton.
thus, the full amplitude is calculable by solving partial dierential equations. the
resulting equation is complicated, but minwalla and seiberg obtained a qualitative
understanding of its behavior and were able to solve it approximately in various regimes.
they calculated the amplitude for a single massless string to scatter o the ns 5
brane in this limit, and found a fourier transformable answer. this suggests that for
large n, the density of states in the vicinity of the hagedorn energy scale, increases
more slowly than the hagedorn formula12. it is tempting to suggest that the hagedorn
behavior of the spectrum sets in only above the string scale, which is the scale of
nonlocality indicated by t duality. indeed, in the spacetime picture of this system, the
gap to states propagating in the tube, is the string scale, independent of n. since the
high energy cghs black hole spectrum consists of states far down the tube, one might
imagine that it begins only above the gap. if this conjecture is correct, there is a puzzle
about the nature of the large n limiting theory dened by minwalla and seiberg. naive
application of the logic we applied to the full lst would suggest that it is a quantum
eld theory, since its correlation functions have spacetime fourier transforms, which
can then be interpreted as lorentz invariant time ordered products. but large n limits
are tricky, and i expect that if the minwalla-seiberg limit of all the correlation functions
of lsta exists, it does not dene a quantum eld theory.

finally, i want to discuss an issue raised by the analysis of minwalla and seiberg,
which is not particularly related to the bulk of the material in these lectures. there
is some confusion in the literature, and in discussions i have participated in, about
whether the ads/cft correspondence (and in particular the fact that the theory is
formulated in terms of a hermitian hamiltonian in a well dened hilbert space) says
something denitive about the issue of unitarity in hawking radiation. i would claim
that it does not, because the ads theory does not have an s-matrix13.

12this is not a denitive argument against a hagedorn spectrum because the matrix elements of
operators between the vacuum and high energy spectrum might fall suciently rapidly to give a
fourier transformable two point function. it is however suggestive that the limiting minwalla-seiberg
calculation shows a dierent behavior than that found by peet and polchinski.

13attempts to extract the at space s-matrix from ads/cft, [61], have not progressed to the point

40

the little string theories do have an s-matrix and one can begin to address the
question. in particular, minwalla and seiberg nd a nonzero absorption cross section
for the black vebrane. this could be taken as a signal of lack of unitarity. like many
extremal black holes, the extremal vebrane metric has an analytic completion with
multiple asymptotic regions. one could try to interpret the absorption cross section as
matter being scattered into another asymptotic region, violating unitarity in any given
region.

i would like to present a more conservative interpretation of the absorption cross
section: the vebrane absorbs only because it is innite. there is indeed another
asymptotic region, but this is the region along the innite brane. this is most clearly
seen in the iib case, where the low energy theory on the brane is infrared free 5 + 1
dimensional sym theory. a particle coming in from innity in , can excite gluons
on the brane which propagate o to asymptotic innity in 5 dimensions without any
propagation back o to innite values of . in the iia theory analyzed by minwalla
and seiberg [65], the low energy theory is conformal and has no conventional s-matrix.
however it should still be true that localized disturbances in cft eventually dissipate
out to innity14, so similar physics is to be expected.

the key test of this interpretation is to see what happens when the theory is com-
pactied. indeed, the origin of the absorption cross section is a logarithm in momentum
space which comes from the continuum of low energy modes. since these are described
by eld theory, we understand what happens to them upon compactication. the
modes on the brane are discrete. there will be no absorption at generic energies. all
that will happen is the excitation of resonant modes of the brane, which will eventually
decay back to the vacuum. the only continuum in the system is that describing modes
propagating far from the brane, in the weak coupling region.

on the gravitational side of the holographic correspondence, compactication causes
a singularity to appear on the horizon (the compactication circles have zero radius
there). one cannot conclude anything from this about unitarity, but it certainly does
not contradict the conclusion based on the nongravitational side of the duality. thus,
there is no evidence against unitarity of the lst s-matrix.

little string theories are a fascinating area for future work. they are our only
example of lorentz invariant quantum theories which are neither quantum eld theories
nor theories of gravity (in 5 + 1 dimensions). conventional lagrangian techniques are
applicable only in the light cone frame. it would be of the utmost interest to nd an
alternative, manifestly lorentz invariant, framework for formulating and solving these

where one can decide if the s-matrix is unitary.

14i thank a.zamolodchikov for a discussion of this point.

41

theories.

8. conclusions

matrix theory is a nonperturbative dlcq formulation of m theory in backgrounds
with six or more asymptotically at directions. it provides proofs of a large number
of duality conjectures, and has led to a new class of lorentz invariant, gravity free
theories.
it demonstrates the existence of a new class of large n limits of ordinary
gauge eld theories, in which one concentrates on states with energies of order 1/n.
there is a lot of evidence that the theory becomes simpler in the large n limit, in
the sense that many of the nite n degrees of freedom decouple. a lorentz invariant
formulation awaits the development of techniques to study these new kinds of large n
limit.

in the meantime, we can try to use matrix theory to study a variety of issues
in gravitational physics which do not require us to compactify to low dimensions. a
beginning of the study of black holes in matrix theory may be found in [63].

there are a number of important general lessons about m theory that may be

learned from matrix theory. among these are

1. the statistical gauge symmetry of identical particles arises as a subgroup of a

much larger, continuous, gauge symmetry.

2. the cluster property, and the existence of spacetime itself seems to be closely

intertwined with supersymmetric cancellations.

3. the number of degrees of freedom of the theory increases as we compactify. this

is quite odd from the point of view of quantum eld theory.

4. short distance divergences in the eective gravitational theory turn out to be in-
frared divergences caused by the neglect of degrees of freedom which become light
when particles are brought together. these correspond to light branes stretched
between the particles, and again are very dierent from the kinds of degrees of
freedom encountered in eld theory.

5. as in any generally covariant theory we expect a conventional hamiltonian de-
scription only when space is asymptotically at or ads. in the asymptotically
at case we have argued that conventional hamiltonian quantum mechanics will
only be applicable in the light cone frame and only when there are ve or more

42

noncompact dimensions. the phenomenologically relevant case of four dimen-
sions has a hagedorn spectrum in light cone energy and may be describable by
some kind of little string theory.

the outstanding problem in matrix theory is to nd a way to isolate the dynamics
of the states with dlcq energy 1/n and to write a lagrangian (for dnoncompact  5)
for the innite n system. for the phenomenologically relevant case of d = 4 one
must obtain a sensible substitute for lagrangian methods for systems with a hagedorn
spectrum. another unsolved problem is the formulation of dlcq m theory on calabi-
yau threefolds. beyond this, matrix theory cannot go, for light cone methods do not
appear to be useful for cosmology or for studying the problem of susy breaking (where
the typical ground state of the system may not have null killing vectors).

acknowledgments

i am grateful to the organizers, j.harvey, s.kachru, e.silverstein, and especially k.t.ma-
hantappa for inviting me to this stimulating school. this work was supported in part
by the doe under grant number de-fg02-96er40559.

references

[1] j. maldacena, l. susskind, nucl. phys. b 475 (1996) 679, [hep-th/9604042].

[2] o.aharony, private communication.

[3] a. strominger, phys. lett. b 383 (1996) 44, [hep-th/9512059]; p.k. townsend, nucl.

phys. proc. suppl. 58 (1997) 163 [hep-th/9609217].

[4] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, nucl. phys. b 486 (1997) 77, [hep-th/9603126];

n. seiberg, phys. lett. b 408 (1997) 98, [hep-th/9705221].

[5] t. banks, w. fischler, s. shenker, l. susskind, phys. rev. d 55 (1997) 112
[hep-th/99610043]; t. banks, matrix theory, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 67 (1998), 180,
[hep-th/9710231].

[6] r. dijkgraaf, nucl. phys. b 543 (1999) 545, [hep-th/9810210]; n. seiberg, e. witten,
[hep-th/9903224]; o. aharony, m. berkooz,

j. high energy phys. 9904 (017) 1999,
[hep-th/9909101].

[7] the new york times science section, september 22, 1998.

[8] a. ashtekar, r.o. hansen, j. math. phys. 19, 1542.

43

[9] a. strominger, nucl. phys. b 451 (1995) 96 [hep-th/9504090].

[10] t. banks, l. susskind, phys. rev. d 54 (1996) 1677 [hep-th/9511193].

[11] j. michelson, a. strominger, j. high energy phys. 9902 (011) 1999 [hep-th/9812073].

[12] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, (1998) 231, [hep-th/9711200].

[13] j. kogut, l. susskind, phys. rep. 8 (1973) 75; t. maskawa, k. yamawaki, prog. theor.
phys. 56 (1979) 270 ; s. brodsky, h.c. pauli, in recent aspects of quantum fields, ed.
h.mitter, h.gausterer, lecture notes in physics (springer-verlag, berlin, 1991) vol.
396, and references therein.

[14] r. heinlein, all you zombies in 6  h, gnome press 1959; by his bootstraps in the

menace from earth, gnome press 1959.

[15] s. hellerman, j. polchinski, phys. rev. d 59 (1999) 1250, [hep-th/9711037].

[16] c. thorn, proceedings of sakharov conf. on physics, moscow (1991) 447-454,

[hep-th/9405069].

[17] g. t hooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, gr-qc/9310026.

[18] l. susskind, the world as a hologram, j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 6377 [hep-th/9409089].

[19] l. susskind,

e. witten, the holographic bound

in anti-de

sitter

space,

hep-th/9805144.

[20] n. seiberg, phys. rev. lett. 79 (1997) 3577 [hep-th/9710009].

[21] a. sen, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 51, (1998).

[22] e. witten, string theory dynamics in various dimensions, nucl. phys. b 443 (1995) 85

[hep-th/9503124].

[23] e. witten, nucl. phys. b 460 (1996) 335, hep-th/9510135.

[24] m. claudson, m. halpern, nucl. phys. b 250 (1985) 689; m. baake, m. reinecke,
v. rittenberg, j. math. phys. 26, 1070 (1985); r. flume, annals phys. 164 (1985) 189.

[25] m.r. douglas, d. kabat, p. pouliot, s. shenker, nucl. phys. b 485 (1997) 85,

[hep-th/9608024].

[26] l. motl, hep-th/9701025; t. banks, n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b 497 (1997) 41,
[hep-th/9702187]; r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, nucl. phys. b 500 (1997) 43
[hep-th/9703030].

44

[27] m. dine, nonrenormalization theorems for operators with arbitrary numbers of deriva-

tives in n = 4 yang-mills theory hep-th/9909020.

[28] s. sethi, m. stern, comm. math. phys. 194 (1998) 687 [hep-th/9705046]; s. paban,
s. sethi, m. stern, nucl. phys. b 534 (1998) 137 [hep-th/9805018]; m. porratti,
a. rosenberg, nucl. phys. b 515 (1998) 184 [hep-th/9708119].

[29] o. aharony, string theory dualities from m-theory, nucl. phys. b 476 (1996) 470

[hep-th/9604103].

[30] t. banks, l. motl, a nonsupersymmetric matrix orbifold, hep-th/9910164.

[31] e. bergshoe, e. sezgin, p.k. townsend, annals phys. 185 (1988) 330 ; b. dewit,
j. hoppe, h. nicolai, nucl. phys. b 305 (1988) 545 ; p.k. townsend, phys. lett. b
350 (1995) 184 [hep-th/9501068].

[32] b. dewit, m. luscher, h. nicolai, nucl. phys. b 320 (1989) 135.

[33] i. bars, strings and matrix models on genus g riemann surfaces hep-th/9706177.

[34] t. banks, n. seiberg, s. shenker, nucl. phys. b 490 (1997) 91 [hep-th/9612157].

[35] m. berkooz, m.r. douglas, phys. lett. b 395 (1997) 196 [hep-th/9610236].

[36] t. banks, n. seiberg, s. shenker, op. cit.; o. ganor, s. ramgoolam, w. taylor, nucl.

phys. b 492 (1997) 91 [hep-th/9611202].

[37] j. maldacena, a. strominger, j. high energy phys. 9712 (002) 1997 [hep-th/9710014].

[38] o. aharony, m. berkooz, s. kachru, n. seiberg, e. silverstein, adv. theor. math. phys.

1 (1998) 55 [hep-th/9707079].

[39] n. seiberg, phys. lett. b 408 (1997) 98 [hep-th/9705221].

[40] o. aharony, m. berkooz, d. kutasov, n. seiberg, j. high energy phys. 9810 (004) 1998

[hep-th/9808149].

[41] s. mandelstam, nucl. phys. b 83 (1974) 413.

[42] p. aspinwall, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 46 (1996) 30 [hep-th/9508154]; j. schwarz, phys.

lett. b 367 (1996) 97, [hep-th/9510086].

[43] t. banks, n. seiberg, op. cit.

[44] s. sethi, l. susskind phys. lett. b 400 (1997) 265 [hep-th/9702101].

[45] n. seiberg, e. witten, nucl. phys. b 471 (1996) 121, [hep-th/9603003]; n. seiberg,

nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 67 (1998) 158 [hep-th/9705117].

45

[46] m. rozali, phys. lett. b 400 (1997) 260.

[47] m. berkooz, m. rozali, nucl. phys. b 516 (1998) 229 [hep-th/9705175].

[48] c. vafa, nucl. phys. b 469 (1996) 403.

[49] s. kachru, a. lawrence,

e. silverstein,

phys. rev. lett.

80

(1998)

2996

[hep-th/9712223].

[50] p. candelas, x.c. de la ossa, p.s. green, l. parkes, nucl. phys. b 359 (1991) 21.

[51] p. aspinwall, b. greene, d. morrison, nucl. phys. b 416 (1994) 414 [hep-th/9309097].

[52] r. plesser, d. morrison, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 46 (1996) 177 [hep-th/9508107] ;

a. strominger, s.t. yau, e. zaslow, nucl. phys. b 479 (1996) 243 [hep-th/9606040].

[53] t. banks, l. motl, j. high energy phys. 9712 (004) 1997 [hep-th/9703218]; d. lowe,
phys. lett. b 403 (1997) 243 [hep-th/ 9704041] ; s.j. rey, nucl. phys. b 502 (1997)
170 [hep-th/9704158], p. horava, nucl. phys. b 505 (1997) 84 [hep-th/9705055].

[54] o. aharony, m. berkooz, n. seiberg, adv. theor. math. phys. 1 (1998) 148

[hep-th/9712117].

[55] n. nekrassov, a. schwarz, comm. math. phys. 198 (1998) 689 [hep-th/9802068].

[56] e. witten, j. high energy phys. 9707 (003) 1997 [hep-th/9707093].

[57] o. ganor, s. sethi, j. high energy phys. 9801 (007) 1998 [hep-th/9712071].

[58] c. callan, j. harvey, a. strominger, nucl. phys. b 359 (1991) 611.

[59] c. callan, j. harvey, s. giddings, a. strominger, phys. rev. d 45 (1992) 1005

[hep-th/9111056].

[60] a. peet, j. polchinski, phys. rev. d 59 (1999) 065011 [hep-th/9809022].

[61] j. polchinski hep-th/9901076; l. susskind, [hep-th/9901079].

[62] l. susskind, hep-th/9704080.

[63] t. banks, w. fischler, i.r. klebanov, l. susskind, phys. rev. lett. 80 (1998) 226
[hep-th/9709091], j. high energy phys. 9801 (008) 1998 [hep-th/9711005]; t. banks,
w.fischler, i.r. klebanov phys. lett. b 423 (1998) 54 [hep-th/9712236]/

[64] m. atiyah, v. drinfeld, n. hitchin, y. manin, phys. lett. b 65 (1978) 185

[65] s. minwalla, n. seiberg, j. high energy phys. 9906 (007) 1999 [hep-th/9904142].

46

