9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
3
2

 

 
 

1
v
5
8
1
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

ulbth99/21
hep-th/9911185
november 1999

primordial inflation1

f. englert2

service de physique theorique

universite libre de bruxelles, campus plaine, c.p.225

boulevard du triomphe, b-1050 bruxelles, belgium

and

department of physics and astronomy

university of south carolina, columbia campus
south main street, columbia sc 29208, u.s.a.

abstract

a macroscopic universe may emerge naturally from a planck cell
uctuation by unfolding through a stage of exponential expansion to-
wards a homogeneous cosmological background. such primordial ina-
tion requires a large and presumably innite degeneracy at the planck
scale, rooted in the unbounded negative gravitational energy stored in
conformal classes. this complex planck structure is consistent with a
quantum tunneling description of the transition from the planck scale
to the inationary era and implies, in the limit of vanishing planck
size, the hartle-hawking no-time boundary condition. on the other
hand, string theory give credence to the holographic principle and the
concomitant depletion of states at the planck scale. the apparent
incompatibility of primordial ination with holography either invali-
dates one of these two notions or relegates the nature of the planck
size outside the realm of quantum physics, as we know it.

there are more things in heaven and earth, horatio,
than are dreamt of in your philosophy.

shakespeare (hamlet, act i scene v)

1presented at the erice international school on basics and highlights in fundamental

physics, august 1999.

2 e-mail : fenglert@ulb.ac.be

1

1. introduction

primordial ination is a mechanism whereby a universe emerges from a
planckian uctuation of gravity and matter and is stabilized by an exponen-
tial expansion of the cosmological background1.

the primordial inationary scenario arose from an attempt to understand
in scientic terms the problem posed by the birth of our universe and by the
homogeneity of its huge cosmological background. the idea that our universe
originated from an energy conserving quantum uctuation was rst proposed
by tryon [1]. we used related ideas to search for a mechanism which does not
require a ne tuning of the initial conditions for the cosmological expansion
[2, 3].

when extrapolated backwards in time the adiabatic expansion approaches
one planck time of the classical singularity, the presently observable universe
still comprises about 1087 planck cells. to avoid ne tuning, such a huge
spatial extension requires the existence of a preadiabatic phase in which the
cosmological background can develop causally from an initial planckian cell
uctuation2. the basic ingredient which renders such an evolution possible is
the fact that in general relativity the total hamiltonian of the universe should
be zero, a general feature which is expected to hold in any future development
of gravity theory preserving invariance under time reparametrization. this
feature renders possible the creation of positive matter energy out of the
negative energy stored in conformally at space-times, such as space-times
describing homogeneous isotropic cosmological backgrounds. an expanding
universe could then emerge, without cost of energy, from empty at space-
time. the requirement that this phenomenon be localized to a planck cell
implies that universe-like congurations can occur within a universe [3, 6].

semi-classical considerations indicate that the cosmological expansion
needed to generate matter energy in a self-consistent way is the exponential
expansion of a de sitter space-time [2]. nevertheless, conventional classical
general relativity cannot yield a satisfactory theory of a nascent universe.

1talking about a universe may seem contradictory. the reason for this terminology
is that one has often the prejudice that the universe, comprising everything, is endowed
with a global arrow of time, but there is no theoretical indication that such an entity does
exist. i shall call a universe (or a universe-like conguration) any space-time conguration
with a well-dened arrow of time containing a large number of planck cells, whether or
not such structure resembles our universe.

2i am assuming here and in what follows the validity of classical general relativity up

to the planck scale.

2

extending classical general relativity to the euclidean section, it appears
possible to interpret its birth as a tunneling process. in the limit of vanish-
ing planck size (h  0) one recovers in this way the no-time hartle-hawking
boundary condition [4]. more precisely the no-time boundary appears as the
limit of a thermal state where the original planck cell has innite tempera-
ture3. planck cells appear as very complex structures containing a huge and
perhaps an innite number of degrees of freedom.

primordial ination explains the large scale of a universe, the atness
and the homogeneity of the background.
it also raises the possibility of
creating the entropy of a universe during the inationary phase itself as
internal entropy. the latter would be released as radiation entropy during
the turnover to the adiabatic era [3, 6]. such scenario would be dierent from
the reheating process envisaged in more mundane ination mechanisms where
the entropy is directly formed at turnover [8]. whether this alternative would
aect the seeding of large scale homogeneities as usually predicted by ination
remains to be seen, but is outside the scope of the present considerations.

the huge number of degrees of freedom needed at the planck scale to
accommodate primordial ination is a feature corroborated by semi-classical
considerations on black hole evaporation. but it is at odd with the holo-
graphic principle which states that the number of degrees of freedom within
a given space volume is limited by the number of planck cells of a surface
bounding the volume [9]. the holographic principle appears to be encoded
in the string and m-theory approach to quantum gravity and implies a deple-
tion of quantum states at the planck scale. the incompatibility of primor-
dial ination with holography seems to invalidate one of these two notions.
both could only survive if the complex structure of the planck size would be
outside the realm of quantum physics, as we know it. recently, t hooft ad-
vocated that quantum physics gives a statistical description of an underlying
deterministic and dissipative theory by coalescing fundamental states into
equivalence classes which dene the quantum states [10]. the merging of
all planckian degrees of freedom into a single class or into few classes would
indeed reconcile, in the present context, holography with a complex structure
of the planck size. but no light is shed here on whether planck size physics
should be deterministic or not.

i present a critical review of the semi-classical approach to primordial

3as will be shown in section 3, this result follows from the tunneling approach of

reference [5]. the preheating of matter was anticipated in the references [7].

3

ination in section 2 and i discuss the tunneling approach in section 3.
conclusions are stated in section 4 where the nature of planck cells resulting
from these considerations are confronted with m-theory arguments.

2. the semi-classical approach

the classical action for gravity and matter is

s = sgravity + smatter

= 

1

16g z g r(g) +z g {l(i, g)  }

(1)

where i designate matter elds. the cosmological constant term  is in-
cluded in the matter lagrangian density l.
the invariance of the action eq.(1) under time reparametrization leads
to a constraint equation expressing the vanishing of the total hamiltonian
density. if, as is reasonable to assume for the whole universe, no boundary
term contributes to the total energy, the total hamiltonian h satises

h  hgravity + hmatter = 0 ,

(2)

expressing the vanishing of the total energy. as the matter energy (assuming
the net cosmological constant to be non negative) is positive denite the total
gravitational energy must be negative if matter is present. to understand the
origin of this negative energy let us perform the conformal transformation

g = g exp (2)
and rewrite the gravitational action sgravity as

sgravity = 


1

16g z qg exp (2)r(g)
8g z qg exp (2)g .

3

(3)

(4)

conformal classes are dened by a reference metric g and the eld .
the kinetic energy of the -eld is negative denite in the reference met-
ric. the importance of this observation for cosmology is that all robertson-
walker geometries describing homogeneous cosmological expansion are con-
formally at. they can be described by a reference minkowski space in which

4

the constraint eq.(2) follows from the the energy-momentum tensor in at
space-time deduced from eqs.(4)

t gravity


+ t matter



= 0 ,

with

t gravity


= 


3

[exp (2) 

4g
1
(  g2) exp (2)] .
6

1
2

g exp (2)g  

(5)

(6)

eqs.(5) and (6) give the usual description of the cosmological evolution of
homogeneous matter in a robertson-walker metric. to make this explicit,
let us write the robertson-walker metric

ds2 = dt2  a2(t)d2 = a2()[d2  d2]

(7)

where d2 describes a reference sphere, hyperboloid or at euclidean 3-space.
 is the conformal time dened by dt = a()d.

consider rst the spatially at case. taking g =  = (+1,1,1,1)

and choosing the conformal factor to be

exp () = a() ,

one can write eqs.(5) and (6) as :

(8)

(9)

4g



1

+

d !2
2  da()
t = a4 t matter

a4() = 0 ,

d(a3) = pd(a3) ,

3



where  = t t
is the matter energy density in the comoving
frame and p its pressure. eq.(9) is the usual einstein equation for the spa-
tially at universe written in a way which illustrates the negative kinetic
energy carried by the conformal factor. similarly, with dierent relations
between a and exp , one recovers

1

d !2
2   da()



a2()
2 +



4g

3

a4() = 0

(10)

with the minus (plus) sign for positive (negative) spatial curvature.  is the
radius of the reference sphere or hyperboloid.

5

in absence of matter the only solution to eqs.(5) and (6) is at space-
time if the vacuum energy is canceled by the  term in eq.(1)4. due to
the negative sign in the gravitational energy tensor eq.(6), one may envisage
a energy conserving transition from empty at space-time to a cooperative
phenomenon whereby positive matter energy drives an expansion which in
turn creates more matter energy. fluctuations around the cosmological back-
ground will of course provoke a departure from conformally at metrics but
the expansion energy will remain a driving force encoded in the negative
energy stored in conformal classes.

when matter is described by a scalar eld with non vanishing expectation
value, the cooperative process envisaged here is simply the mundane ination
mechanism : matter energy is produced at constant density as an eective
cosmological constant resulting from some classical scalar eld equation. if
the original transition from zero to a nite eective cosmological constant
could, in such models, originate from gravity-matter interactions, they would
yield a primordial ination.

i shall now review critically a model which explores, in a semi-classical
approximation, the possibility that gravity would generate the eective cos-
mological constant from empty at space [2, 6].

consider a massive scalar eld interacting only with gravity. the matter

action is taken to be

smatter = z g(cid:26)(cid:20) 1

2

g 

1
2

(m 

r
6

)2(cid:21)  (cid:27) .

(11)

the inclusion of the r/6 term restores, when m  0 classical conformal
invariance ; it ensure that the number of massive particle produced by the
cosmological expansion remains nite [11].

at some initial time t =  = 0 the geometry is taken to be empty at
minkowskian space-time. assume provisionally that after a time t > t0,
where t0 is somewhat larger than the planck time, space-time can be de-
scribed by a non trivial conformally at metric g = a(). in the refer-
ence frame g = , the normal modes of the rescaled scalar eld  =  a()
acquire time-dependent frequencies p = (p2 + m 2a2())1/2. expanding  in
creation and destruction operators +(p, 0), (p, 0) at time t =  = 0, one

4this cancellation is imposed here on phenomenological ground. note that if the exis-
tence of a small value for the cosmological constant in our universe is conrmed, one should
not perform a complete cancellation and the at space-time solution would be replaced by
a de sitter space-time of large radius.

6

denes the heisenberg state of the universe |i by (p, 0)|i = 0. as the
universe expands, the time dependent normal modes get populated with a
density np(t) = h+(p, t) (p, t)i. one looks for a self consistent solution for
the gravity-matter system in the semi-classical limit where matter is treated
quantum mechanically but gravity remains classical.

trying, at suciently large time t, the de sitter space-time solution given

by

or equivalently

a(t) = exp(t/ ) ,

a() =  /(  ) ,

one writes the proper energy density due to the created particles as

 = a4(t)z 

0

p2dp
22 np(t)p(t) .

(12)

(13)

(14)

here,  is the radius of the de sitter space-time which is taken to be of
order t0. the zero point energy in eq.(14) has been subtracted to ensure the
vanishing of the cosmological constant in at space-time.

one can show [2, 6] by computing np(t) that  given by eq.(14) becomes
independent of t after a time of order  and thus that the created matter
energy density is, at suciently large time t, constant in time. in addition,
one can verify that p = , in accordance with energy conservation for
creation of a constant energy density. the integral eq.(14) can be performed
analytically to yield

 =

m 4
642 [(

3
2

+ ) + (

3
2  )  2 ln m ]

(15)

where  is the digamma function and  2 = 1/4  (m )2 [12]. from the
asymptotic form of the digamma functions one gets for m  1

m 2
962 2 .

 

(16)

there is an additive correction to eq.(15) revealed by neighboring non con-
formally at metrics, namely the trace anomaly

anomaly =

1

9602 4 .

7

(17)

clearly the anomaly contribution does not aect the asymptotic value of 
given in eq.(16).

11.1
mg 1/2
11

10.9

10.8

10.7

10.6

0

2

4

6

8

mt

10

fig.1 mg as a function of m  . the asymptotic value of m is 6p/g.

equating the total contribution to  due to quantum eects, as given
by eq.(15) and eq.(17), to its value for the de sitter solution of einstein
equation

desitter =

3

8g 2 ,

(18)

one obtains a relation between  and m :

g1/2m = ( (m )2

24

[(

3
2

+ ) + (

3
2  )  2 ln m +

1

2

1

15(m )4 ])

. (19)

this equation was rst solved numerically in reference [13]. the solution is
depicted in fig.1. one sees that for m > 1 a self-consistent solution of the
equations of motion exists only if m exceeds the critical value obtained by
equating the asymptotic value eq.(16) to the de sitter solution eq.(18). the
critical mass is

.

(20)

mcritical = 6r 

g

8

m remains very close to its critical value in the region m > 1.
in this
region the compton wavelength of the particle is small compared to the de
sitter radius and, as  should be greater than g, i shall consider only this
region. the drop towards zero below m = 1 is due to the trace anomaly
which has a negligible eect for m > 1.

it thus appears at rst sight that an exponentially expanding universe,
originating from some uctuation in empty at space-time, can be sustained
through creation of particles of mass close to the critical mass. but there is
a catch. the asymptotic value of  in eq.(16) yields a trace of the energy-
momentum tensor proportional to the curvature and one could absorb it in
a renormalization of the gravitational coupling constant. this would yield a
renormalized matter density ren

ren =

m 4
642 [(

3
2

+ ) + (

3
2  )  2 ln m 

2

3(m )2 +

1

15(m )4 ]

(21)

and a renormalized coupling constant gren

gren =

g

1  gm 2/36

.

(22)

these are well known results [14]. clearly, the renormalization of the grav-
itational constant ensures that the subtraction in the renormalized energy
density does not aect the solution, expressed in terms of the bare g, rep-
resented in fig.1. but what goes wrong is the renormalization procedure
for m greater than mcritical : the renormalized gravitational coupling be-
comes negative precisely at the lowest mass value for which a solution to the
semi-classical equations exists.

the breakdown of the renormalization procedure indicates that new ef-
fects must be taken into account in the gravitational-matter system. this
is not astonishing. the high value of the critical mass suggests that strong
coupling eects appear in the system around this value. these could lead
to the formation of black holes [3], or, if new matter degrees of freedom
are introduced, to extended objects such as strings [15] . the relation
between unrenormalized quantities depicted in fig 1 might still describe ap-
proximately the formation of the massive objects but the scalar eld should
be viewed only as a phenomenological description of such objects [3]. an
interesting possibility is that, in contradistinction with more mundane in-
ation scenario, these objects would carry internal entropy, (as black holes

9

or strings do), which could bring them in (unstable?) thermodynamic equi-
librium with the de sitter background. the conversion of internal entropy,
created exponentially during ination, into radiation entropy at the turnover
to the adiabatic era would then be the source of the cosmic background
radiation5.

up to now, i have considered a spatially at section of a de sitter cos-
mological background emerging from at space-time. to avoid ne tuning,
the original uctuation should be conned to a planck size. as the ination
renders in a few planck times the initial spatial curvature negligible, one is
justied to consider simply spatially at cosmological backgrounds. however
the emergence of the universe should appear as a process localized on its
planck scale and not as a global process in an underlying at background.
to visualize how this could happen, choose a coordinate system in the at
background such that the time coordinate coincides with the conformal time
 of the emerging universe. namely dene a local conformal time (, x) such
that

ds2 = a2(, x)(d2  dx2)

(23)

where the x dependence of the scale factor is introduced to parametrize the

transition region : a = 1 well outside the planckian region |x|  g and
a = a() for |x|  t0 where it describes at some initial time  = 0 the onset
of a de sitter universe of radius   t0. explicitly one has eq.(13) for  > 0
and thus an exponential expansion in the proper time t.
thus, in the external time  the creation process and the whole de
sitter period takes only a time of order  . although the universe has nite
spatial extension of order  in |x|, an internal observer will contemplate an
homogeneous cosmological background as long as his visible horizon is, in
these coordinates, less than  . the appearance of the inhomogeneous drop
in scale at the edge of the universe would signal to the internal observer the
end of his universe. it follows from the conformal atness of the cosmological
background that the whole history subsequent to the de sitter period is
delimited, in the conformal time , by the light rays emitted from the edge
and therefore is also of order  . hence the external observer would describe
the rise and fall of our universe as a uctuation on a scale  comparable to

5the subtracted term in the renormalized energy density eq.(21) includes the dominant
contribution to the number of quanta created for m  > 1. such subtraction can be done
because the number of quanta of local eld excitations is not an invariant in general
relativity, but it becomes questionable in a phenomenological description.

10

the planck scale. the reason we can exist during this seemingly short
time span is the enormous dilation of the proper time t generated by the
primordial ination.

the possibility of generating a universe from a planckian uctuation in
empty at space raises the question of the signicance of this reference space.
is it only a mathematical device or has it physical signicance? if the tran-
sition from a planckian event to the cooperative phenomenon does indeed
occur, the answer must be that the reference space is physical because noth-
ing could prevent a similar phenomenon to occur within our universe, as, on
scales large compared to the planck scale but small compared to cosmolog-
ical scales, any background can be viewed as at. this does not lead to a
contradiction because universe-like congurations within our world would be
only planckian (or transplanckian -see below) uctuations of our space-time.
universes within universes can therefore be generated in a large (innite?)
number of dierent ways and universe-like uctuations may well be dominant
planckian eects. note that there is no reason for two such baby-universes
to have a common comoving time. it is with respect to their own comoving
time that their original planck size has a xed scale and spatial extension.
the comoving time of a baby-universe xes locally in the mother universe
the  variable in the metric eq.(23). in particular two baby-universes may
have opposite arrows of time.



the transition from a planckian event to a universe-like congurations
in an underlying space-time poses a new problem because, as mentioned
above, the scale factor develops a huge gradient at its edge. we see from
eq.(6) that a spatial gradient of the scale factor gives rise to a negative
energy density in t gravity
as does its time derivative hitherto considered.
local compensation by positive energy has to take place, possibly by forming
new universe-like congurations. note that these would seem to occur at
much smaller scales than the planck scale but such transplanckian eects
are ctitious : the planck scale is dened by the baby universe and is the
same as before ; it is only its parametrization in the mother universe which
makes it look dierent. however the generation of such throat-universe would
only further steepen the gradient of the scale factor, thus giving birth to
more and more new universes containing themselves potentially universe-
like congurations. the space-time structure within a universe can thus be
drastically altered at the planck scale : universe-like congurations may form
a foam of universes [3, 6]. although the foam may appear as virtual, the
underlying degrees of freedom should exist.

11

in view of the complexity of the structure due to the negative unbounded
energy of the scale factor and to its necessary compensation by positive
energy, the transition era can probably not be described at the classical or
at the semi-classical level.
if a cosmological background emerges out of a
planck size, h should enter the game in a fundamental way. an approximate
quantum mechanical description of the creation process, taking into account
the complex structure of its planckian origin, should then be possible. let
us explore this approach.

3. the tunneling interpretation

i shall assume that an approximate quantum description of the transi-
tion period can be obtained from a tunneling of the scale factor through a
barrier from the original planck scale to the macroscopic inationary period.
although i cannot justify this procedure, there is an important consistency
check : the tunneling of the scale factor must be consistent with a high
degeneracy of states at the planck side of the barrier and with an a priori
complete lack of information about these states. remarkably this will indeed
be the case.

in order to describe a tunneling process, one must specify boundary con-
ditions. these will be xed from the requirement that the emerging de sitter
space-time has a well dened hawking-gibbons background temperature

 1
gh = 1/(2 )

(24)

and an entropy s given, up to an integration constant, by the quarter of the
area of the event horizon [16]. in our notations

 2
g

.

s =

(25)

to understand how entropy and temperature determine the boundary
condition of the tunneling process, i rst review how entropy can be generated
within a closed system in an energy eigenstate by a tunneling of time [5].
in such system, time evolution can only be dened by correlations between
subsystems. let us assume the existence of a subsystem for which the wkb
limit is valid in certain regions of space ; this subsystem will be called the
clock. we shall see that correlations of subsystems to the clock dene in
these regions the time variable [17, 5] but that the tunneling of the clock can

12

produce entropy. this mechanism will then be generalized to our problem
where the total energy is zero from the constraint eq.(2) and where the role
of the clock will be played by the scale factor.

consider a closed system where a non relativistic object with one very
massive degree of freedom, x, representing the clock, is correlated to the
remaining matter part of the system by energy conservation only. no
explicit interaction between clock and matter is imposed but the argument
below is easily extended to the case of matter following adiabatically the
clock. labeling (unnormalized) matter eigenstate of energy m by |mi, each
eigenstate |mi is correlated by quantum superposition to a clock state vector
of energy e  m. one writes

h|i = (hclock + hmatter)|i = e|i,
hclock = 

2
x2 + u(x) ,

1
2m

hmatter|mi = m|mi .

expanding |i in matter eigenstates
|i = xm

m(x)|mi ,

one gets

( d2
dx2 + 2m [e  m  u(x)]) m(x) = 0 .

(26)

(27)

(28)

here u(x) is some potential which vanishes as x  . i shall take all the
m positive and assume
(29)
in the classically permitted regions, e  u(x) > 0, the wkb forward

m  |e  u(x)| .

wave solution of eq.(28) is

m(x) =

1

qpm(em, x)

exp[iw (em)] .

(30)

w is the classical legendre transform of the classical clock action

w (em, x) = s + emt = z x

xi

pm(em, x)dx

(31)

13

1

qpm(x, em)

1





1

qp(x, e)
qp(x, e)

exp(iw (e, x))m exp[i

w (e, x)

e

m]|mi

exp(iw (e, x)) exp(it hmatter)m|mi

(32)

where t is the time recorded by the clock since a chosen initial position xi.
the clock energy em is equal to e  m and its momentum pm(x, em) is
q2m[em  u(x)].

expanding em to rst order around m = 0 one gets

|i = m

exp[iw (em, x)]|mi

where from the classical action principle

t (e, x) =

w (e, x)

e

.

(33)

it follows from eq.(32) that, under the prescribed conditions, any mat-
ter wave function |i = m|mi evolves according to the time dependent
schrodinger equation with the time recorded by the clock.
this result is valid in the wkb limit as long as backward waves generated
from the second order equation eq.(28) do not aect |i signicantly. an
extreme departure of this condition occurs if the clock has to tunnel through
a barrier between two turning points x = a and x = b, as shown in fig.2 .

let us call the regions x < a and x > b respectively the regions before

and after tunneling.

taking before tunneling forward waves only, backward wave will be
in the limit of large clock mass, coherence
generated after tunneling.
after tunneling between forward and backward wave gets lost. the ratio
nm of the squared forward amplitudes after and before the tunneling of
the clock with energy em = e  m is the corresponding probability ratio
for nding matter with energy m. nm is the inverse transmission coecient
through the barrier. for large barrier it is

where

nm = exp[we(em)]

we(em) = i pe(em, x)dx = i q2m[u(x)  (e  m)]dx

14

(34)

(35)

is the euclidean continuation of the action eq.(31) dened by

we(em, u(x)) = w (em,u(x)) .

taking into account the condition eq.(29), one gets

nm(em) = n0 exp[

we(e)

e

m] = n0em ,

(36)

(37)

where  is the euclidean time spanned by the clock in a round trip under
the barrier, and

n0 = exp we(e) .

(38)

u(x)

e -  e m

a

b

x

fig.2 tunneling of a clock of energy e  m.

the shift of sign in eq.(36) makes the exponent in eq.(37) positive. thus
the probability ratios nm have a boltsmann distribution with a negative tem-
perature  1 = 1. the temperature is negative because higher energies
for matter states mean lower energies for the the clock and hence higher in-
verse transmission coecient nm for the clock. thus higher matter energies
are favored by the tunneling.

to assess the thermodynamic signicance of eq.(37) we rewrite it more

generally as

we(em) = em = em .

(39)

15

this equation is again the classical action principle but formulated for eu-
clidean closed trajectories. consider matter in equilibrium with the clock
and  1
before and after tunneling, respectively at temperatures  1
such that

a

b

(40)
if sb(e) and sa(e) are the corresponding clock entropies, we see that eq.(39)
implies
(41)

 = b  a .

we(e) = sb(e)  sa(e) .

we(e) can be interpreted as the entropy gained by the clock from the back-
ward wave generated by the tunneling process. in the particular case where
matter is in equilibrium with the clock after tunneling at the temperature
 1, the equilibrium temperature before tunneling must be innite and the
entropy of the clock becomes simply we(e), up to an integration constant
sa independent of the clock energy.
thus, this simple model indicates that a macroscopic clock may gain
entropy by tunneling. the above analysis may seem rather academic because
on the one hand the model does not contain dynamic elements to realize
thermal equilibrium and innite temperature and on the other hand the
temperature  is negative. this is not the case. we see from eq.(37) that
the sign of  is related to the sign of the clock hamiltonian. changing indeed
its sign and keeping the matter hamiltonian positive denite would lead to
em = e + m in the equations for w and we. hence in eqs.(37) and (39)
 should be replaced by .6 negative clock energies would lead to positive
equilibrium temperature for matter. one might thus expect that in gravity
where the gravitational clock has negative energy and where dynamics
is contained in the many degrees of freedom, the tunneling of time should
produce entropy and positive temperature. i now show that this is indeed
the case.

in the cosmological context, i shall, as in previous sections, retain from
gravity only the scale factor but i now allow it to be described quantum
mechanically in classically forbidden regions. we shall then see that the
gravitational clock can tunnel from a planck size region to a de sitter back-
ground of radius  . as mentioned above, the boundary condition for the
tunneling process should be consistent with the known entropy and thermal

6 one may verify that the shift of sign does not aect the denition of time in the
classically allowed region because for forward waves, the shift of sign in em is compensated
by a shift of sign in the momentum which is then opposite to the velocity.

16

properties of the de sitter background. this will determine on which side
of the tunneling the wave function of the gravitational clock is small and its
thermal properties on both sides.

the gravity hamiltonian can be deduced, up to a multiplicative factor
from eq.(9) or more generally from eq.(10). the mean matter density ,
that is the cosmological constant of the de sitter space-time, is now included
in the gravitational hamiltonian as the open and at spatial sections of
the de sitter space do not span the geodesically complete manifold, i shall
describe it in terms of closed spatial sections. eq.(10) yields

1
2



a2 

1
2

a2
2 +

4g

3

a4 = 0

(42)

where the prime denotes dierentiation with respect to the conformal time 
and  has been equated to the (dynamic) cosmological constant  of the de
sitter space-time. to obtain the hamiltonian in the dimensionless conformal
time  = /, the left hand side must multiplied by (3/2g)4 to normalize
correctly the (average) matter contribution in the comoving volume 223a3.
dening a2 = (3/2g)a22 one obtains

hgrav = 

1
2

p2
 

1
2

(a2  a4) ;

 =

2g
3 2 ,

(43)

where p is the momentum conjugate to a.

in absence of quantum matter, hgrav = 0. p2

 is positive for a > 1/2 and
reaches zero at a = 0, and the latter point opens up into a nite neighborhood
in presence of positive denite energy matter. as in the non relativistic model
one has a potential barrier, shown in fig.3, separating two turning points.
the turning point at a = 0 can be identied with a planck size wormhole and
classical ination sets up at the turning point a = 1/2. geometrically, the
tunneling region is a half euclidean 4-sphere of radius  . taking the radius
of the reference 3-sphere in eq.(7) to be  , the turning point a = 1/2 is the
3-sphere a = 1 (see fig.4).

to get the entropy we and the temperature dierence  1 of the scale
factor clock it is not necessary to include explicitly the quantum matter
contribution. it suces to evaluate the euclidean action we(e = 0) between
the turning points and the euclidean time spent under the barrier. thus

we(0) = i p(a)da = 2z 1/2

0

z(1  z2)1/2dz =

2
3

=

 2
g

.

(44)

17

this coincides with the horizon entropy of de sitter space-time eq.(25). thus

where c is an energy independent constant.

sdesitter = we(0) + c

(45)

0.5

0.25

0

-0.25

-0.5

-0.75

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

fig.3 potential v (a) = (a2  a4)/2 as a function of a for  = 0.2

consistency between eq.(45) and eq.(41) requires that the equilibrium
temperature before tunneling be innite. this can be checked more directly
by evaluating the time  =  spent under the barrier and showing that this
time is equal to the inverse equilibrium temperature of the de sitter space-
time.

the latter is the (positive) hawking-gibbons background temperature
eq.(24) which is the global equilibrium temperature of de sitter space-time
with static test matter. this global temperature is given by the periodicity
in the time ts of the euclidean continuation of the metric of a static de sitter
patch

ds2 = (1 

r2
 2 )dt2

s + (1 

r2
 2 )1dr2 + r2d2 .

(46)

one easily veries that the ts-period is 2 .

18

eq.(46) is the metric of the 4-sphere which can also be described by the

euclidean continuation of the coordinate system for comoving observers

ds2 = dt2

c + a2(tc)d2 ,

a(tc) = cos(tc/ ) ,

(47)

where d is the line element of a 3-sphere of radius  . the tunneling region
between a = 0 and a = 1/2, shown in fig.3, is depicted in fig.4 as half the
4-sphere of radius  laying between the wormhole at a = 0 and the equatorial
3-sphere abcd at a = 1 .

this 3-sphere, which in the comoving system eq.(47) is a slice of the 4-
sphere at tc = 0, is the union of two static patches : bcd at time ts = 0
and bad at time ts = .
in the static coordinate system, the tunneling
region is spanned by the motion of the patch bed from bcd to bad.
the period of the round trip is  = 2 . thus  1 =  1
gh which is the
equilibrium temperature. this conrms that the equilibrium temperature
before tunneling is innite.

t  = 0c

a=1 a
t  = s

t  = p /2
c
t  = 3p /2
s

b

d

c

t  = 0c

a=1
t  = 0s

e
t = p /2
s

a=0
t  =-c

p /2

fig.4 tunneling through the half euclidean sphere, parametrized by a in fig.3.

the preheating of matter at innite temperature before tunneling is
consistent with the qualitative semi-classical picture discussed in section 2.

19

p
namely, an innite temperature, if realized dynamically, requires a large
density of states at the planckian origin and translates, in the scale factor
approximation, complete ignorance about these states.

these results hinge upon the boundary conditions which must be chosen
so that the wave function for the scale factor is small before tunneling
and exponentially large at the onset of the classical inationary behavior. in

the limit of vanishing planck size (h  0) such boundary conditions are

equivalent to xing the wave function to be zero at a = 0 in the euclidean
section. one thus recovers the no-time hartle-hawking boundary condition
[4]7.

finally we remark that when   0 the entropy gained from tunnel-
ing disappears while the temperature of the mini-de sitter goes to innity,
matching the wormhole temperature. the density of states there must be en-
ergy independent on the scale of matter excitations. if they could be counted
as quantum mechanical states, they would provide an integration constant
to the de sitter entropy which may even be innite. i now discuss this issue.

4. holography and the nature of planck cells

semi-classical arguments on primordial ination lead to a huge complex-
ity of the planck scale and this picture is consistent with the tunneling in-
terpretation. the semi-classical approach to black hole leads to the same
conclusion. indeed, if one assumes, according to the original derivation [20],
that the hawking radiation carries no information about the infalling matter,
one may increase indenitely the information loss by sending more and more
objects into the hole and letting it evaporate [21]. when nally the black
hole evaporates up to the planck size, it would leave an innite or at least
a very large8 entropy. the black hole entropy would then contain, in addi-
tion to the horizon entropy a/4, a very large or perhaps innite integration

7in lindes chaotic ination [18], which may be viewed as a realization of the foam,
the boundary conditions in a tunneling interpretation are the opposite one [19]. namely
the wave function is exponentially small after tunneling. this appears motivated by
considerations of creation probabilities but does not yield the thermal properties of the
de sitter space-time. i want to stress that here there is no global arrow of time for the
universe and that the tunneling operates in the comoving time of the nascent universe.
such tunneling cannot be interpreted as a probability of creation.

8there might be some cut o on the matter that could be send into the hole due for

instance to a nite size universe.

20

constant. the latter, like the integration constant needed in the de sitter
entropy, would count the degeneracy of planckian states.

this is not what comes out of string theory. the most remarkable achieve-
ment of the superstrings and of m-theory considerations is the counting of
quantum states for near extremal black holes. not only is the value a/4
recovered but the integration constant is zero [22]. also the hawking radi-
ation appears to contain the necessary information to ensure unitarity for
the scattering matrix. although no rigorous proof has been established for
schwarzschild black holes, the very fact that it seems possible to connect
them adiabatically to near extremal ones, through performing reversible work
in upper dimensions [23], indicates that these conclusions should not be al-
tered in a fundamental way for schwarzschild black holes. namely the inte-
gration constant should remain zero or small. this supports the holographic
principle which limits the number of quantum degrees of freedom in a volume
l3 by the number of planckian cells on a surface of area l2 [9]. such drastic
reduction in the number of states is expected in general relativity if, in ac-
cordance with the second principle of thermodynamics, the entropy within
the volume is bounded by the area entropy of the largest black hole tting
the volume, provided the integration constant in the entropy is not innite
or exceedingly large.

in the string-m-theory approach to quantum gravity, t-duality and high
temperature analysis [24] also suggest a depletion of states at the planck
scale. even more direct evidence for holography [25], although in a peculiar
local way and in cases which are not directly physically relevant, follows
from the proposed correspondence between anti de sitter space-time and
some conformal field theory living on its boundary, correspondence which
seems to be borne out for some limiting values of the parameters [26] .

we are confronted with a dilemma which raises fundamental questions.

possible alternatives are :

a) the holographic principle is true and the planck size is essentially
empty. primordial ination is incorrect. also incorrect are all semi-classical
considerations for black hole physics and in particular the original derivation
of the hawking radiation. at present, the objection to such conclusion is
mainly of philosophical nature. the notion of space-time, as we use it, is
perhaps not operative beyond the planck scale. but why should physics dis-
appear at a scale which might be the cradle of our universe. such conclusion
would carry a strong anthropomorphic connotation which hitherto did never
improved our ken.

21

b) the holographic principle is wrong and the planck scale has a huge or
innite degeneracy of quantum states. the string-m-theory considerations
would be totally irrelevant for physics. but why should a tentative approach
to quantum gravity, which led to a remarkable understanding of the entropy
of at least some black holes in terms of a counting of quantum states, be
completely void of physical signicance.

c) the holographic principle is true and so is the complexity of a planck
cell, but usual quantum mechanics is not operative beyond the planck scale.
this could mean that the planck energy scale marks the scale below which
the quantum description of the world enters the physical description. the ap-
pearance of the planck constant in physics would then have to be explained.
its origin should be in a scale, such as perhaps the original scale of a universe,
hidden in gravity theory, or in some more fundamental framework at small
distance scale9.

9one shoud keep in mind that these conclusions rest on the assumption (see footnote 2)
that classical general relativity remains valid up to the planck scale. the existence of some
intermediate fundamental scale could open dierent perspectives.

22

references

[1] e. p. tryon, nature 246 (1973) 396.

[2] r. brout, f. englert and e. gunzig, ann. phys. 115 (1978) 78; gen.
rel. grav. 10 (1979) 1; r. brout, f. englert, and ph. spindel, phys. rev.
lett. 43 (1979) 417, 890; r. brout, f. englert, j-m frere, e. gunzig,
p. nardone, c. trun and ph. spindel, nucl. phys. b170(fs1) (1980)
228.

[3] a. casher and f. englert, physics lett. 104 b (1981) 117.

[4] j.b. hartle and s.w. hawking, phys. rev. d28 (1983) 2960.

[5] a. casher and f. englert, class. quantum grav. 9 (1992) 2231.

[6] f. englert, quantum field theory and cosmology, in fundamental
interactions : carg`ese1981, eds m. levy, j.-l. basdevant, d. speiser,
j. weyers, m. jacob, r. gastmans, plenum press (1982).

[7] g. horwitz and d. weil, phys. rev. lett. 48 (1982) 219; 48 (1982) 1136;

r. brout, g. horwitz and d. weil physics lett. 192 (1987) 318.

[8] for a review, see e.w. kolb and m.s. turner, the early universe,

frontiers in physics, addison-wesley publishing company (1990).

[9] g.t hooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity,

in salam-
festschrift, word scientic series in 20th century physics, vol. 4,
eds a. ali, j. ellis and s. randjbar-daemi (1993), gr-qc/9310023; l.
susskind, j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 6377, hep-th/9409089.

[10] g.t hooft, class. quantum grav. 16 (1999) 3263, gr-qc/9903084.

[11] a. grib, s. mamayev and v. mostepanenko, gen. rel. grav. 7 (1976)

535.

[12] ph. spindel, physics lett. 107b (1981) 361.

[13] ph. spindel and p. vandepeutte, numerical investigations in cosmo-
genesis in proceedings of the 26th li`ege international astrophysical
colloquium (universite de li`ege) (1986).

23

[14] j.s. dowker and r. critchley, phys. rev. d12 (1976) 3224; ph. spindel,

phys. rev. d37 (1988) 2092.

[15] y. aharonov, f. englert and j. orlo, physics lett. 199b (1987) 366.

[16] g.w. gibbons and s.w. hawking, phys. rev. d15 (1977) 2738.

[17] t. banks, nucl. phys. b249 (1985) 332; r. brout found. phys. 17

(1987) 603; f. englert, physics lett. 228b (1989) 111.

[18] a.d. linde, physics lett. 129b (1983) 177.

[19] a.d. linde, quantum cosmology and the structure of inationary

universe pascos meeting, baltimore, march 1995, gr-qc/9508019.

[20] s. hawking, commun. math. phys 43 (1975) 199.

[21] y. aharonov, a. casher and s. nussinov, physics lett. 191b (1987) 51.

[22] a. strominger and c. vafa, phys. lett. b379 (1996) 99, hep-th/9601029;
c. callan and j. maldacena, nucl. phys. b472 (1996) 591, hep-
th/9602043; g. horowitz and a. strominger, phys. rev. lett. 77 (1996)
2368, hep-th/9602051; j. maldacena and a. strominger, phys. rev. lett.
77 (1996) 428, hep-th/9603060; c.v. johnson, r.r. khuri and r.c. my-
ers, phys. lett. 378b (1996) 78, hep-th/9603061.

[23] f. englert and e. rabinovici, physics lett. 426b (1998) 269, hep-
th/9801048; r. argurio, f. englert and l. houart, physics lett. 426b
(1998) 275, hep-th/9801053.

[24] j.l.f. barbon and e. rabinovici, nucl.phys. b545 (1999) 371, hep-

th/9805143.

[25] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 253, hep-th/9802150;
e. witten and l. susskind, the holographic bound in anti-de sitter
space, hep-th/9805114.

[26] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200.

24

