9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
0
2

 

 
 

2
v
5
7
0
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

compactified quantum fields. is there life beyond

the cut-off scale?

corneliu sochichiu

abstract. a consistent denition of high dimensional compactied quantum
eld theory without breaking the kaluzaklein tower is proposed. possible
consequences are discussed for the scalar model.

introduction

high dimensional eld theoretical models are interesting from two main points
of view. first one is the possibility to construct unied theories from high dimen-
sional gravities at classical eld level, using the kaluzaklein mechanism (see [1]
for a review). another one is their connection to string models. it is known, that
certain super yangmills and supergravity models are low energy eective models
for superstrings, (see e.g. [2]).

the high dimensional eld theories are non-renormalisable if treated quantically.
compactication reduces the formal dimensionality of the model. the exact com-
pactied model, however, contains in its spectrum not only the low dimensional
propagating eld(s) but also an innite number of kaluzaklein (kk) massive
modes.

the natural strategy would be integrating out this modes in order to get the low
dimensional eective action for remaining propagating elds. loop contribution of
each kk eld taken separately is renormalisable and vanishes due to large mass,
but when summing over all the kk tower it diverges.

the possible one loop counter-terms appearing after integration kk modes were
computed many years ago [3], and are known to lead to non-renormalisability of
the eective action.

these days phenomenological aspects of the compactied high dimensional mod-
els are intensively studied in the framework of gut building, although the nature
of compactied models as qft in these investigations is not yet clear, [4, 5].

a way to avoid the non-renormalisability problem is to treat the problem of
compactication in the underlying string theory. in this case the genuine stringy
modes are put to the work which make possible the absobtion of unwanted di-
vergencies. in refs. [6], the problem of the supersymmetry breaking and coupling
renormalisation induced by compactication was studied in the framework of string
excitations. it was shown that for some compactications the the low dimensional
models feel extra dimensions already at energies  1 t ev .
the aim of the present work is nding the compactication geometry depen-
dence of the low dimensional eective model due to high dimensional qft exci-
tations only. we presume, that the above mentioned nonlocal stringy excitations

work supported by rfbr grant # 99-01-00190, intas grant # 95-0681, scientic school

support grant # 96-15-06208 and hlp 99-10.

1

2

corneliu sochichiu

are important only for contributions vanishing with compactication size going to
zero, therefore, in the limit when the compactication size is of the order of the
cut o scale of the low dimensional model or beyond, one should end up with a
selfconsistent quantum eld model.

we nd that this limit is still non trivial, and allows one to study the dependence

of the model on the geometry of compactied dimensions.

in a previous work [7], we considered compactication of scalar eld to a circle.
to be fully consequent one has to compare contribution from kk modes with one
of high energy modes of low dimensional elds. in the case of s1 compactication
one can see that high energy modes are stronger than kk ones (see the note at
the end of the next section). vanishing of non-renormalisable contributions in this
case (as well as in any compactications with an odd number of compact dimen-
sions) seems to be an artefact of computational scheme. indeed, e.g. divergencies
in dimensional regularisation scheme arise as poles of gamma-function, which is
known to produce no poles for negative half-integer values, in spite of divergence
of dening integral.

below a more careful denition of qft compactication will be given. we will
show that there exists a possibility of consistent description of a high dimensional
compactied qft model. namely, one can dene such a model when the compact-
ication size is of the order of cut o specic to given low dimensional theory.

the plan of the paper is as follows. first we review the possible terms arising
in computation of the low dimensional eective action. after that we nd renor-
malisability conditions for kk contribution, and analyse dependence of the low
dimensional model on the compactication geometry.

1. compactified model renormalisation

consider d + p-dimensional model of a eld  described by the classical action,

(1)

sd+p =zwd+p

dd+px(cid:26) 1

2

m m  

1
2

m2    v ()(cid:27) ,

where high dimensional index m = 0, 1, . . . , d + p 1. we assume (self)interaction
potential v () to be renormalisable in d-dimensions. thus if one compacties this
model to d = 4 the potential v () should be at most quartic in .

let manifold wd+p on which the elds are dened be represented as a product
wd+p = md  kp, where the md is d-dimensional minkowski space-time and
kp is a compact riemannian manifold. in what follows greek indices , , . . . enu-
merates coordinates x of md and latin indices i, j, . . . , respectively, coordinates
yi of kp.

(2)

(cid:3) 

m gmngn = (cid:3) + ,

1

g

where (cid:3) is the dalembert operator dened on elds on md, and  is the scalar
laplace operator on kp.

operator  has discrete spectrum with orthonormal eigenfunctions

(3)

(4)

zkp

nn,

n = 2
dy 

nm = nm,

life beyond...

3

where dy pdet(g)dpy is the invariant volume on kp and n, m span a p-dimensional

(generally irregular) lattice .

as in ref. [7] one can decompose (x, y) in terms of eigenfunctions of ,

(5)

(6)

where,

(x, y) = xn

n(x)n(y),

n(x) =zkp

dy (y)  (x, y).

in terms of this decomposition the classical action (1) looks as follows

(7)

sd =zmd

dx(

1

2xn

(n(cid:3)

n + (m2 + 2

n)|n|2) zkp

dy v () |=p nn) .

to obtain eq. (7) we used orthonormality of the spectrum of .
in what follows we will consider compactications with small compact size, in

this case one can neglect m2 in comparison with nonzero 2

n in eq. (7).

if one drops out the terms with nonzero 2

n one gets classically compactied

d-dimensional model. it is described by the following action,

1
2

(8)

dx(cid:26)

sd =zmd

((cid:3) + m2||2)  v ()(cid:27) ,
where  is the multiplet of zero modes,  = {n0|n0 = 0}.
it, however, may dier in some cases from the naively kk-reduced model. thus
if one has nontrivial cohomology on kp there are more zero modes of  in addi-
tion to the constant one which appear in the d-dimensional reduced action. this
elds have non-trivial y-dependence and cannot be obtained by just throwing away
compact coordinates. we consider situations when action (8) is renormalisable in
d-dimensions.

action (8) plays the role of the bare action which will get corrections from kk
elds in (7). as we mentioned in the introduction to be fully consequent we have to
add also the contribution of high energy modes of . the last could be obtained by
introducing an extra paulivillars (pv) regularisation for -loops with cuto mass
m  m (see e.g. [8]) and computing one-loop contribution from the regulator(s).
each (d + p)-dimensional coupling  in (1) gives rise to a family of couplings in
eq. (7),

(9)

(l)

(l)l  n1...nl
 (l)zkp

n1  nl
dy n1 . . . nl .

n1...nl
(l)

fortunately, the one-loop eective action uses only a small quantity of these cou-
plings. since for nonzero 2
n elds n are non-propagating the one-loop diagrams
contain only vertices quadratic in kk modes n for n 6= 0. in what follows we
consider the trivial topological sector, i.e. compactications where the only zero
modes of  are the constant in y modes. then the only vertices which contribute
are of the following structure,

(10)

(l) = (l)v1 l
v n,n

2 l2nn  (l)l2nn ,

where n is dened as n = 

n, and   0.

4

corneliu sochichiu

to compute the one-loop eective action we also need the propagators of the

elds. they look as follows,

(11)

(12)

d1
nn (p) = p2  2
n + i,
d1(p) = p2  m 2 + i,

for n 6= 0,
for pv regulator,

where i stands for the causal pole prescription1.

consider diagrams with kk/pv elds running in the loop and with external 

legs.

in what follows we use dimensional regularisation for kk-elds and pv regula-
tors. typically, one-loop diagram with n vertices and n (truncated) external legs
looks as follows,

(13) g(k1, . . . , kn ) =

gxn z

d dp
(2) d

l1 dnn (p + k1) . . . ln dnn(p + k1 +  + kn ),

where g is the symmetry factor of the diagram, trace, index contracting, etc., are
assumed if necessary, and integration is performed over d-dimensional minkowski
momentum space. summation in (13) and on is performed through the eigenvalue
lattice of  except n0 term which is substituted by pv regulator. cuto removing
is obtained when d  d. also,
(14)

(li  2) = n .

xi

the formal divergence index of this diagram is g = d  2n . this index,
however, is computed termwise and does not reect possible divergencies due to the
summation over n. the termwise divergencies described by g are the same for kk
an pv modes2. they are due to large momenta in low dimensional directions and
have low dimensional nature. from the other hand, divergencies due to summation
over kk modes correspond to large momenta in compactied directions and, thus
they have the high-dimensional nature.

(and p  p
pv) for each n (n 6= 0). this is legitimate since all integrals are regularised.

let us perform a change of the integration variable, p  p
after these manipulations the integral (13) looks as follows,

n

m for

(15) g(k1, . . . , kn ) =

gxn (cid:0)2

2 )z
n(cid:1)(n  d

d dp
(2) d

a1 d(p + kn

1 ) . . . an d(p + kn

1 +  + kn
n ),

where kn

i = ki
n

.

one can see that all dependence on n in integrand in (15) resides in kn

external momenta kn

i are proportional to a vanishing factor

1
n

i . all
. so, one can

1an alternative choice would be wick rotation to euclidean space-time as was used in [7].
2this property seems to hold also for more complicate models such as e.g. sm, see [4]

life beyond...

5

safely expand feynman integral (15) in powers of ki. this yields,

(16) g(k1, . . . , kn ) =

gi(0)( d, m)xn (cid:0)2

2 )

n(cid:1)(n  d

2

)

+ gi(2)(k, d)xn (cid:0)2
 + gi(r)(k, d)xn (cid:0)2

n(cid:1)(n + 2 d
n(cid:1)(n + r d

2

+

)

+ . . . ,

where integrals i(r) are dened as follows

(17)

i(r)( d) =

d dp
(2) d

r

1
r!

ti1

1 . . . tir

1 . . . qir
qi1
r

l1 d(p + t1) . . . ln d(p + tn ) |ti=0,

r z
we introduced notations qi =pi
j=1 kj. let g,r = d  (2n + r).

one can see that expression (16) is similar to one arising in computation of low
dimensional high energy mode contribution only, except for the series over powers
of 2
n.
these series dene well-known -function of the laplace operator, [9],

(18)

(s) = tr()s =xn



(2

n)s,

where prime means that summation is performed over the nonzero eigenvalues 2
n
(pv masses not included). these series are convergent for re s > p/2, but can be
analytically continued to other values of s.

using denition (18) one can rewrite eq.(16) in the following form,

(19) g(k1, . . . , kn ) =

gi( d) n 

d

2! + gi(2)(k, d) n +

2 ! + . . .
2  d
 + gi(r)(k, d) n +
2 ! + . . . .
r  d

let us analyse singularities of eq. (19). expression in the r.h.s. of eq (19) can
diverge as d  d due to following two factors. first one is singularity of some
i(r)( d) and second one is singularity of (s) in this limit.
as we already mentioned singularities of i(r) do not depend on either this is
kk or pv contribution. therefore, the renormalisability of the low dimensional
reduced model implies possibility to eliminate also singularities of this type due
to kk modes by a modication of already existing low dimensional counter-terms.
let us note that i(r) is proportional to the factor,
r  d
2 (cid:19) ,

(20)

which is singular for n + rd

2 , when d is even. at the same time

(cid:0)n + rd

2 (cid:1) in this points is regular (see [9]). thus, the counterterms required

i(r)( d)  (cid:18)n +
2 = 0,1, . . . , d

6

corneliu sochichiu

to cancel this type of singularities have the form

(21)

z i

n,r =(cid:18)1 + 

n + rd

2 (cid:18)n +

r  d
2 (cid:19)(cid:19) zn,r,

where zn,r is the low dimensional (reduced) model counterterm and  is the
mass unity of dimensional regularisation.

consider now divergencies due to singularities of -function. it is known, that
(s) has a meromorphic extension to the entire complex plane except for isolated

simple poles on the real axis at s = p/2 n, n = 0, 1, . . . ,(cid:2) p

at this points can be expressed in terms of the heat kernel invariants3 a2n() of
the laplace operator,

2(cid:3) 1. residues of (s)

.

a2n()

(cid:0) p
2  n(cid:1)

(22)

res

s= p

2 n

(s) =

one can observe that -function variable is related to the external divergence
index as s =  1
2 g,r. thus, eq. (22) lead to singular contributions corresponding
to several diagrams with negative divergence index. this is extremely dangerous
since such diagrams are nite in original low dimensional model and additional
divergencies may lead to non-renormalisability of kk contribution.

to avoid the introduction of such counterterms to the eective action and, respec-
tively, to avoid the non-renormalisability one may require vanishing of undesirable
singularities.

a weak condition would be the requirement a2n() = 0, for all 0  n < d/2.
this imposes some condition on the geometry of compactied dimensions except for
n = 0 which reads tr 1 = 0, and can be interpreted as the condition that number of
bosonic and fermionic degrees of freedom to be the same. this looks very much as
if there must be a supersymmetry. other equations a2n = 0 n > 0, perhaps, can be
interpreted as conditions of supersymmetry preservation by the gravity background
in a high dimensional supergravity model. the above conditions help to get rid of
non-renormalisable singular contribution in one-loop eective action (it may happen
that also in higher loops), but we cannot prove that this way one gets authentically
renormalisable model since the absence of singularities in dimensional regularisation
scheme does not necessarily imply renormalisability of the model (see the note in
the introduction).

we will adopt a more radical solution to the problem, given by the following.
let us consider the size  of the compact manifold kp. since the low dimensional
model (without kk modes) is well dened and renormalisable this must be the case
also for the compactied one but when the size of the compactied dimensions 
is of the order of cut o scale of the former. in dimensional regularisation scheme
this means that  must be chosen to depend on cut o dimension d in the following
way,

(23)

( d) = 

1

1 f1( d),

where 1 is a (second) mass scale parameter and function f1( d) must satisfy,

(24)

f1( d) = o(cid:16)( d  d)(cid:17) .

3we use notations of the gilkeys book [9].

life beyond...

7

indeed, making -dependence of -function explicit one can express it as follows

(s) = 2s (s),

(25)
where (s) is dimensionless -function describing the shape of kp but not its
size. condition (24) provides compensation of the poles of (s).
to illustrate the above arguments consider the series (18), -function dening
and regularise it. summation in (18) spans an innite (irregular) lattice . at large
values of n the summand behaves as 2s(n2)s. if  is an uv cut o parameter
the regularised sum behaves

,(s)  2sz

dn

p
2  1.

(26)

n2s+1p  2sp2s,

s 
thus the choice ()  o(cid:0)1p(cid:1) compensates the divergence.

the described procedure allows one to get rid of the -function divergencies which
make model non-renormalisable. the price paid is an increase of the singularity in
the renormalisable part of the model,

(27)

(s < 0)|0  |s|.

there is also a point s = 0 where -function is insensible to weil rescaling of the
manifold. at this point, value of (s) for even p is given by the (conformal) weil
invariant, [9],

(28)

(0) = ap res
s=0

(s) = ap.

the value of (0) contributes to renormalisation of dimensionless coupling  of
the model. as it is known, dimensionless couplings are marginally renormalisable
i.e. the most interesting ones.

indeed, if () is one-loop callansimanzik -function computed in the low
dimensional theory without kk modes then from eqs. (21) and(28) it follows that
including kk contribution modies (),

(29)

()  k()  (1 + ap) ().

this modication aects not only the uv behaviour of the eective low dimensional
model, but also introduce kp-geometry dependence of the coupling. using rg
approach one can nd both size and shape dependence of the renormalised
coupling  integrating the equation,

(30)






= k().

to conclude the section let us consider example of compactications to d = 4

of 4 scalar model given by the action (1) where potential term,

(31)

v () =


4!

4.

let analyse the  renormalisation. this case is extremely simple since in this
model there is no eld renormalisation and therefore for our purpose it is sucient
to compute the contribution of a single diagram with two vertices and four legs.

computing the counterterms, plugging them into eq. (30) and solving it yields,

(32)

() =

(0)

1 + (1 + ap()) (0)

322 log 

0

,

8

corneliu sochichiu

where () and (0) are renormalised couplings computed when the size of kp is
 and 0 respectively.
heat kernel invariants a2n arise as quotients of time expansion of heat kernel at

the point t = 0. the rst heat kernel invariants are respectively [9],

(33)

a2() = 

a4() =

a0() =

vp

(4)d/2 ,
1
6(4)d/2 zkp
360(4)d/2 zkp
 ,

1

dy r,

dy (12r + 5r2  2rij

i

krl

jlk + 2rijklrijkl),

where vp is the volume of kp, rijkl and r are respectively riemannian and scalar
curvature. invariants with even index vanish, a2n+1 = 0.
by inserting heat kernel invariants (33) into eq. (32) one can obtain the explicit
dependence of the coupling on the size  as well as on the conformal part of the
metric.

note: if the number of the compact dimensions is odd the coupling gets no
innite contribution from the kk sector, because -function poles are compensated
by zeroes of -function. in this case one has only a nite renormalisation of the
coupling due to kk elds. one still can write the rg equation, but in the case
-function for the dimensionless couplings gets no contribution from the kk elds.
thus, the kk -function in [7] is wrongly computed while the correct one should
be trivial.

discussions

in actual paper we considered compactications of high-dimensional quantum

eld models.

we have shown, that renormalisation of compactied model can be dened when
the size of compact dimensions is of the order of cut o scale of the low dimensional
model. in dimensional regularisation scheme this corresponds to vanishing of cut
o dependent size of compact dimensions vanishes when the cut o dimension d
approaches the physical dimension d. the contribution of the compact dimensions
in this limit, however, is not trivial.

the necessity to take this limit could be explained by the relevance of non-local
stringy modes for renormalisation of high dimensional models for non-zero compact
dimensions if one considers high dimensional eld theories as eective low energy
models for respective string ones. an alternative approach to dene a renormalis-
able compact model may consist in compactications to non-commutative compact
manifolds [10]. such compactications are under intensive study in connection with
matrix models, [11], but the technique for eld theories are also developed [12].

the price paid is some increase of divergencies in the allowed sector of admis-
sible counterterms. we, however, expect that this increase is not dangerous for the
model. indeed, there are two cut o scales in the model. one is the compact size
and the other is the genuine cut o. the self-consistency requires the model to be
independent of the last while it may depend on the rst.

life beyond...

9

so far, we considered the scalar eld model. however, generalisation to other
models both supersymmetric and without supersymmetry is more or less straight-
forward.

in fact one can consider more general compactications, when manifold wd+p
is a bre bundle wd+p = md  kp, where minkowski space md is the base and
kp is the bre. in actual paper one may consider that compactication is of the
later type but the ber kp depends on minkowski space time-point adiabatically.
the last means that for large enough space-time regions this bre bundle should
look almost as a direct product. size of the mentioned regions is determined by the
scale at which quantum eects start to be felt. in this case one can speak about
interaction of compactied gravity and the low dimensional eld which is induced
by gravity dependence of the coupling.

we believe that actual approach allows one to go beyond one-loop approximation.

acknowledgements. i would like to thank a.a. slavnov, d. maison, k. zarembo,
h.j.w. muller-kirsten, r. manvelyan, k. sailer for useful discussions.

this work was completed during my stay at theoretical physics department of
kossuth lajos university in debrecen and department of theoretical physics of
universitat kaiserslautern.

references

[1] r. slansky, group theory for unied model building, phys. rep. 79 (1981), no. 1, 1128.
[2] m.b. green, j.h. schwarz, and e. witten, superstring theory, cambridge university press.
[3] m.j. du, d.j. toms, kaluzaklein kounterterms, cernth3259, published in erice eps:
unication 1981:29; divergencies and anomalies in kaluzaklein theories cernth3248,
published in moscow quant.grav. 1981:0431.

[4] k. dienes, e. dudas, and t. ghergheta, grand unication at intermediate mass scales
through extra dimensions nucl. phys. b537 (1999), 47108; extra space-time dimensions
and unication phys. lett. b436 (1998) 5565.

[5] h.-ch. cheng, b.a. dobrescu, and c.t. hill, gauge coupling unication with extra dimen-

sions and gravitational scale eects, hep-ph/9906327.

[6] i. antoniadis, a possible new dimension at tev phys. lett. b246 (1990), 377384; i. anto-
niadis, k. benakli, limits on extra dimensions in orbifold compactications of superstrings
phys. lett. b326 (1994), 6978.

[7] c. sochichiu, quantum kaluzaklein compactication, phys. lett. b463 (1999), 2732, hep-

th/9906004.

[8] l.d. faddeev, a.a. slavnov, gauge fields: introduction to quantum theory, benjamin, 1980
[9] p.b. gilkey, invariance theory, the heat equation and the atiyahsinger index theorems,

publish or perish, 1984.

[10] a. connes, noncommutative geometry, academic press, 1994.
[11] a. connes, m.r. douglas, a.s. schwarz, noncommutative geometry and matrix theory:

compactication on tori, j. high energy phys. 9802 (1998) 003, hep-th/9711162.

[12] a. connes, gravity coupled with matter and foundation of non-commutative geometry, com-

mun.math.phys. 182 (1996) 155-176, hep-th/9603053

institutul de fizica aplicata as, str. academiei, nr. 5, chisinau md2028, moldova

bogoliubov laboratory of theoretical physics, joint institute for nuclear re-

search, 141980 dubna, moscow reg., russia

e-mail address: sochichi@thsun1.jinr.ru

