9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
1
1

 

 
 

1
v
0
8
0
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

qmw-ph-99-19
hep-th/9911080

duality and strings, space and time

c.m. hull

department of physics

queen mary and westeld college
mile end rd, london e1 4ns, uk

e-mail: c.m.hull@qmw.ac.uk

duality symmetries in mtheory and string theory are reviewed, with particular
emphasis on the way in which string winding modes and brane wrapping modes can
lead to new spatial dimensions. brane world-volumes wrapping around lorentzian
tori can give rise to extra time dimensions and in this way dualities can change
the number of time dimensions as well as the number of space dimensions. this
suggests that brane wrapping modes and spacetime momenta should be on an
equal footing and mtheory should not be formulated in a spacetime of denite
dimension or signature.

1 string theory, m-theory and duality

string theory is dened as a perturbation theory in the string coupling constant gs, which
is valid when gs is small. the fundamental quanta are the excitations of relativistic
strings moving in spacetime and comprise of a nite set of massless particles plus an
innite tower of massive particles with the scale of the mass set by the string tension
t = 1/l2
s, expressed in terms of a string length scale ls. if the spacetime has some circular
dimensions, or more generally has some non-contractible loops, the spectrum will also
include winding modes in which a closed string winds around a non-contractible loop in
spacetime. these have no analogue in local eld theories and are responsible for some
of the key dierences between string theories and eld theories. physical quantities
are calculated through a path integral over string histories, which can be calculated
perturbatively in gs using stringy feynman rules, with string world-sheets of genus n
contributing terms proportional to gn
in the supersymmetric string theories, these
s .
contributions are believed to be nite at each order in gs, giving a perturbatively nite
quantum theory of gravity unied with other forces.

there are ve distinct perturbative supersymmetric nite string theories, all in 9 + 1
dimensions (i.e. nine space and one time), the type i, type iia and type iib string
theories, and the two heterotic string theories with gauge groups so(32) and e8 
e8. the massless degrees of freedom of each of these theories are governed by a 10-
dimensional supergravity theory, which is the low-energy eective eld theory. it has
been a long-standing puzzle as to why there should be ve such theories of quantum
gravity rather than one, and this has now been resolved.
it is now understood that
these are all equivalent non-perturbatively and that these distinct perturbation theories
arise as dierent perturbative limits of a single underlying theory 1,2. we do not have an
intrinsic formulation of this underlying non-perturbative theory yet, but the relationships
between the string theories has been understood through the discovery of dualities linking
them. a central role in the non-perturbative theory is played by the p-branes. these

1

are p-dimensional extended objects, so that a 0-brane is a particle, a 1-brane is a string,
a 2-brane is a membrane and so on. in the perturbative superstring theories there is a
1-brane which is the fundamental string providing the perturbative states of the theory,
while the other branes arise as solitons or as d-branes 3, which are branes on which
fundamental strings can end. the type ii string theories have a fundamental string and
a solitonic 5-brane and a set of dp-branes, where p = 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 for the iia string theory
and p = 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 for the iib string theory.

there are duality symmetries of string theories that relate brane degrees of freedom
to fundamental quanta, so that all the branes are on the same footing. if some of the
spacetime dimensions are wrapped into some compact space k, so that the spacetime is
m  k for some m , then branes can wrap around homology cycles of k and these give
extra massive states in the compactied theory on m . for example, a p-brane wrapping
around an n-cycle with n  p gives a pn brane in the compactied theory. these brane
wrapping modes generalise the string winding modes and are related to the perturbative
states by u-dualities 1, and play an important role in the duality symmetries, as we shall
see.

one of the best-understood dualities is t-duality 4, which relates string theory on a
spacetime s 1  m with a circular dimension of radius r to a string theory on s 1  m
where the circular dimension is now of radius

r =

l2
s
r

(1)

so that the radii r, r are inversely proportional. for bosonic and heterotic string theo-
ries, t-duality is a self-duality, so that heterotic (bosonic) string theory on a large circle
is equivalent to heterotic (bosonic) string theory on a small circle, while it maps the
type iia string theory to the type iib theory, with the result that type iia string theory
on a large circle is equivalent to type iib string theory on a small circle 5,6. t-duality
relates perturbative states to perturbative states, as does mirror symmetry which relates
a superstring theory compactied on a calabi-yau manifold k to a superstring theory
compactied on a topologically distinct calabi-yau manifold, the mirror k of k.

there are also non-perturbative dualities. for example the type iia string theory
compactied on k3 is equivalent to the heterotic string theory compactied on the 4-
torus t 4 1, while the type i theory with string coupling gs is equivalent to the so(32)
2,7,8,9. this is an example of
heterotic string theory with string coupling gs = 1/gs
a strong-weak coupling duality relating the strong-coupling regime of one theory to
the weak-coupling regime of another. such dualities are important as they allow the
description of strong-coupling physics in terms of a weakly-coupled dual theory.

mtheory arises as the strong-coupling limit of the iia string theory 2. the iia string
is interpreted as an 11-dimensional theory compactied on a circle of radius r = lsgs.
then at strong coupling, the extra dimension decompacties to give a theory in 11
dimensions which has 11 dimensional supergravity as a low-energy limit. we will refer
to this 10+1 dimensional theory as mtheory. duality transformations relate this to
each of the ve string theories, and the string theories and mtheory can all be thought
of as arising as dierent limits of a single underlying theory. the iia string theory is
obtained by compactifying mtheory on a circle, the iib string is obtained from the iia
by t-duality or directly from compactifying mtheory on a 2-torus and taking the limit
in which it shrinks of zero size 10, the e8 e8 heterotic string is obtained by modding out
mtheory on a circle by a z2 symmetry or equivalently from compactifying mtheory

2

on a line interval 11, the type i theory is obtained from the iib string by orientifolding
(modding out by world-sheet parity) 5,12, and the so(32) heterotic string is the strong
coupling limit of this 2. the type i theory and the so(32) heterotic string (as well as the
type i  string) can be obtained directly from mtheory compactied on a cylinder as on
13, while the massive iia string theory is obtained from a limit of mtheory compactied
on a t 2 bundle over a circle 14.

in d-dimensional general relativity or supergravity, a spacetime with a large circle
s 1 is physically distinct from one with a small circle s 1, and a spacetime m  k is
physically distinct from the mirror spacetime m  k, but in string theory these dual pairs
of spacetimes dene the same string theory and so dene the same physics. the heterotic
string on m  t 4 is equivalent to the type iia string on m  k3, even though t 4 and
k3 are very dierent spaces with dierent properties (e.g. they have dierent topologies
and dierent curvatures) and there is no invariant answer to the question: what is the
spacetime manifold? in the same way that spacetimes related by dieomorphisms are
regarded as equivalent, so too must spacetimes related by dualities, and the concept of
spacetime manifold should be replaced by duality equivalence classes of spacetimes (or,
more generally, duality equivalence classes of string or mtheory solutions).

in the usual picture, the ve superstring theories and the 11-dimensional theory
arising as the strong coupling limit of the iia string (referred to as mtheory here) are
depicted as being dierent corners of the moduli space of the mysterious fundamental
theory underpinning all of these theories (sometimes also referred to as mtheory, al-
though we shall resist this usage here). more precisely, compactifying string theory or
mtheory gives a theory depending on the moduli of metrics and antisymmetric tensor
gauge elds on the compactication space. each modulus gives rise to a scalar eld in
the compactied theory and the expectation value of any of the scalar elds can be used
to dene a coupling constant. one can then examine the perturbation theory in that
constant. for some choices it will give a eld theory, for others it will give a perturba-
tive string theory and dierent perturbative string theories will correspond to dierent
choices of coupling 15. the string theories and mtheory are each linked to each other
by chains of dualities and so there is only one basic theory.

more recently, other corners corresponding to particular limits of the theory have
been understood to correspond to eld theories without gravity. for example the iib
string theory in the background given by the product of 5-dimensional anti-de sitter
space and a 5-sphere is equivalent to n = 4 supersymmetric yang-mills theory in four
dimensions, with similar results for theories in other anti-de sitter backgrounds 16, and
certain null compactications are equivalent to matrix models 17.

many dualities have now been found which can relate theories with dierent gauge
groups, dierent spacetime dimensions, dierent spacetime geometries and topologies,
dierent amounts of supersymmetry, and even relate theories of gravity to gauge theories.
thus many of the concepts that had been thought absolute are now understood as
relative: they depend on the frame of reference used, where the concept of frame of
reference is generalised to include the values of the various coupling constants. for
example, the description of a given system when a certain coupling is weak can be very
dierent from the description at strong coupling, and the two regimes can have dierent
spacetime dimension, for example. however, in all this, one thing that has remained
unchanged is the number of time dimensions; all the theories considered are formulated
in a lorentzian signature with one time coordinate, although the number of spatial
dimensions can change. remarkably, it turns out that dualities can change the number

3

of time dimensions as well, giving rise to exotic spacetime signatures 18. the resulting
picture is that there should be some underlying fundamental theory and that dierent
spacetime signatures as well as dierent dimensions can arise in various limits. the new
theories are dierent real forms of the complexication of the original mtheory and
type ii string theories, perhaps suggesting an underlying complex nature of spacetime.
we will now proceed to examine some of these dualities in more detail, and in
particular to focus on the way in which extra spacetime dimensions can emerge from
brane wrapping modes.

2 branes and extra dimensions

2.1 compactication on s 1

for a eld theory compactied from d dimensions on a circle s 1
r of radius r, the mo-
mentum p in the circular dimension will be quantised with p = n/r for some integer
n. in the limit r  0 this becomes divergent, so that nite-momentum states must
move in the remaining d  1 dimensions and are described by the dimensionally reduced
theory in d  1 dimensions. for nite r, the states carrying internal momentum can
be interpreted as states in d  1 dimensions with mass (taking the d-dimensional eld
theory to be massless for simplicity)

m = |n|/r

(2)

the set of all such states for all n gives the kaluza-klein tower of massive states arising
from the compactication. if the original eld theory includes gravity, there will be an
innite tower of massive gravitons, and if the theory is supersymmetric, then the tower
ts into supersymmetry representations. in the limit r  0, the masses of all the states
in these towers become innite and they decouple, leaving the massless dimensionally
reduced theory in d  1 dimensions. on the other hand, taking the decompactication
limit r  , all the states in the tower become massless and combine with the massless
d  1 dimensional elds to form the massless elds in d dimensions. such a tower
becoming massless is often a signal of the decompactication of an extra dimension.

for a string theory the situation is very dierent, due to the presence of string
winding modes which become light as the circle shrinks. a string can wind m times
around the circular dimension, and the corresponding state in the d  1 dimensional
theory will have mass mrt where t is the string tension (into which a factor of 2
has been absorbed). the set of all such states for all m forms a tower of massive states
and in the limit r  0 these become massless, so that there is an innite tower of
states becoming massless (and tting into supergravity multiplets, in the case of the
superstring). this signals the opening up of a new circular dimension of radius

r = 1/t r

with the string winding mode around the original circle of mass

m = mrt = m/ r

(3)

(4)

reinterpreted as a momentum mode in the dual circle of radius r. similarly, the momen-
tum modes on the original circle (m = n/r) can now be interpreted as string winding
modes around the dual circle (m = nt r), and the new theory in d dimensions is again

4

a string theory. a state with momentum n/r and winding number m will have mass

m =

n
r

+ mrt =

n
r

+

m
r

(5)

and this is clearly invariant under the t-duality transformation m  n, r  r in-
terchanging the momentum and winding numbers and inverting the radius. then the
original string theory on md1  s 1 (with md1 some d  1-dimensional spacetime) is
equivalent to a string theory on md1  s 1 where s 1 has radius r, with the momentum
modes of one theory corresponding to the winding modes of the other, and this equiva-
lence is known as a t-duality. in the limit r  0, r  , the decompactied t-dual
theory has full d dimensional lorentz invariance. if the rst string theory is a bosonic
(heterotic) string, so is the second, while if one is a type iia string theory, the other is
a type iib string theory. then the type iia string theory compactied on a circle of
radius r is equivalent to the type iib string theory compactied on a circle of radius
r. for 10-dimensional supergravity compactied on a circle of radius r, taking r  0
will give a 9-dimensional supergravity theory while for a string theory a new dimension
opens up to replace the one of radius r that has shrunk to zero size. if r is much larger
than ls, the desciption in terms of string theory on s 1 is useful, while for r << ls, the
t-dual description in terms of string theory on s 1 is more appropriate, with the light
states having a conventional description in terms of momentum modes on s 1 instead of
winding modes on s 1.

2.2

iia string theory and m-theory

the type iia string theory in 9+1 dimensions has d0-brane states, which are particle-like
non-perturbative bps states, with quantized charge n (for integers n) and mass

m 

|n|
gsls

(6)

the state of charge n can be thought of as composed of n elementary d0-branes. in the
strong coupling limit gs  , these states all become massless. moreover, the d0-brane
states for a given n t into a short massive supergravity multiplet with spins ranging from
zero to two and so at strong coupling there is an innite number of gravitons becoming
massless. it was proposed in 2 that this tower of massless states should be interpreted
as a kaluza-klein tower for an extra circular dimension of radius

rm = gsls

(7)

then the strong coupling limit of the iia string theory is interpreted as the limit in
which rm   so that the extra dimension decompacties to give a theory in 10+1
dimensions, and this is mtheory. moreover, for the iia string theory in d = 10
minkowski space, the strong coupling limit is invariant under the full 11-dimensional
lorentz group and the eective eld theory describing the massless degrees of freedom
of mtheory is 11-dimensional supergravity. the radius can be rewritten in terms of the
11-dimensional planck length lp as

rm = g2/3

s

lp

(8)

the iia string theory is really only dened perturbatively for very small coupling
it can now be dened at nite coupling gs as mtheory compactied on a cir-
gs.
cle of radius rm , so that the problem is transferred to the one of dening mtheory.

5

however, at low energies we see that the non-perturbative iia theory is described by
11-dimensional supergravity compactied on a circle, and this leads to important non-
perturbative predictions, so that this viewpoint can be useful even though we still know
rather little about mtheory.

the iia string has dp-branes for all even p, while mtheory has a 2-brane or mem-
brane and a 5-brane. all the branes of the iia string theory have an mtheory origin.
for example, an mtheory membrane will give the fundamental string of the iia theory
if it wraps around the circular dimension and the d2-brane if it does not.

2.3 compactication on t 2

for a d dimensional eld theory compactied on a 2-torus there will be momentum
modes with masses

m s p2

r2

+

q2
r2

2

(9)

1

where r1, r2 are the radii of the circular dimensions, p, q are integers and for simplicity
we take the torus to be rectangular. these will decouple in the limit r1, r2  0 leaving
a theory in d  2 dimensions. for example, for 11-dimensional supergravity, this limit
will give the dimensionally reduced 9-dimensional maximal supergravity theory.

we now compare this with mtheory compactied on t 2. consider rst the circle
of radius r2, say. mtheory compactied on this circle is equivalent to the iia string
theory with coupling constant gs = (r2/lp)3/2, and so the limit r2  0 is the weak
coupling limit of this iia string theory. we now have the iia string theory compactied
on a circle of radius r1, and by t-duality this is equivalent to the iib string theory
compactied on a circle of radius r1 = 1/t r1. taking the limit r1  0 is then the
limit in which r1   and an extra circle opens up to give the iib string theory in
9+1 dimensions. the iia string winding modes provide the tower of states that become
massless in the limit and which are re-interpreted as momentum modes on the circle of
radius r1. moreover, these iia string winding modes are mtheory membranes wrapped
around the 2-torus. these membrane wrapping modes have mass

m  |n|t2r1r2

(10)

where the membrane tension is t2 = 1/l3
p.

then 10 mtheory compactied on a general 2-torus of area a and modulus  is

equivalent to the iib string theory compactied on a circle of radius

rb =

l3
p
a

(11)

with string coupling gs and axionic coupling  (dened as the expectation value of the
scalar eld in the ramond-ramond sector) given by

 =  + i

1
gs

(12)

the states of the iib string carrying momentum in the circular dimension arise from
membranes wrapping the 2-torus while the (p, q) string of the iib theory winding round
the circular dimension (with fundamental string charge p and d-string charge q) arises
from mtheory states carrying momentum p/r1 and q/r2 in the compact dimensions.

6

then in the limit a  0, we lose two of the dimensions, as in the eld theory, leaving
a theory in 8+1 dimensions, but a new spatial dimension opens up to give a theory in
9+1 dimensions.

2.4 compactication on t 3

for 11-dimensional supergravity compactied on a 3-torus, the limit in which the radii
r1, r2, r3 all tend to zero gives the dimensional reduction to the maximal supergravity
in 8 dimensions. for mtheory on t 3, membranes can wrap any of the three 2-cycles
of t 3. from the last section, we know that if r1 and r2 both shrink to zero while
r3 stays xed, an extra dimension opens up with radius r3 = l3
p/r1r2 and the tower
of membrane wrapping states is reinterpreted as a kaluza-klein tower for this extra
dimension. the same picture applies to each of the three 2-cycles, and so if all 3 radii
shrink, there are three extra dimensions opening up, with radii ri given by

ri =

l3
p

rjrk

,

i 6= j 6= k

(13)

then when the original three torus shrinks to zero size, three dimensions are lost but
three new ones emerge, so we are again back in 11 dimensions and the 11-dimensional
theory is again mtheory 19. thus mtheory compactied on a dual t 3 with radii
r1, r2, r3 is equivalent to mtheory compactied on the dual t 3 with radii r1, r2, r3
given by (13).

2.5 compactication on t 4

it is tempting to apply these arguments to higher tori. for example, t 4 has six 2-cycles,
and membranes can wrap any of them. compactifying d = 11 supergravity on a t 4 and
taking all four radii ri  0 gives a d = 7 eld theory, but for mtheory there are six
towers of states becoming massless in the limit arising from membranes wrapping each of
the six shrinking 2-cycles. if each of these towers is interpreted as a kaluza-klein tower,
this would give 6 extra dimensions in addition to the 7 original dimensions remaining,
giving a total of 13 dimensions. however, there is no conventional supersymmetric theory
in 13 dimensions, so it is dicult to see how such a theory could emerge. in fact the
situation here is more complicated, and the 6 towers have a dierent interpretation here.
the dierence here is that there is also a string in the compactied theory arising from
the mtheory 5-brane wrapped around the t 4 which becomes light at the same time
as the 6 towers of membrane wrapping modes 15. it turns out that mtheory on t 4 is
dual to iib string theory on t 3. the mtheory 5-brane wrapped around the t 4 gives
the fundamental string of the iib theory moving in 7 dimensions 15. compactifying the
iib string on t 3 gives in addition three momentum modes and three winding modes,
tting into a 6 of the t-duality group so(3, 3), and these correspond to the 6 towers
of membrane wrapping modes, which themselves transform as a 6 of the torus group
sl(4)  so(3, 3). thus only 3 of the 6 towers can be interpreted as momentum modes
for an extra dimension, the other three being interpreted as string winding modes, and
the spacetime dimension of the dual theory is 10, not 13. note that there is no invariant
way of choosing which three of the six correspond to spacetime dimensions, as t-duality
transformations will relate momentum and winding modes and change one subset of
three to another. in this case, taking the limit in which the t 4 on which the mtheory
is compactied shrinks to zero size does not correspond to a decompactication limit of

7

the dual theory, but to the weak coupling limit in which the coupling constant gs of the
compactied iib string theory tends to zero 15.

3 branes and space and time

we have seen that wrapped branes are associated with towers of massive states and that
in some cases these can be interpreted as kaluza-klein towers for extra dimensions. in a
limit in which such a tower becomes massless (e.g. ri  0 for toroidal compactications,
or gs   for the iia d0-branes), the corresponding dimension decompacties and new
dimensions unfold. the presence of an enlarged lorentz symmetry puts the new braney
dimensions on an equal footing with the other dimensions, and the full theory includes
gravity in the enlarged space. the number of dimensions lost in the limit is not always
the same as the number of extra dimensions, so that the total number of spacetime
dimensions can change (as in the relations between 11-dimensional mtheory and 10-
dimensional type ii string theories considered in sections 2.2 and 2.3). we have also
seen that, as in the case of mtheory on t 4, the towers of wrapped brane states cannot
always be interpreted in terms of extra dimensions, and it is necessary to perform a more
complete analysis to see what is going on.

in all of the above cases, branes were wrapped around spacelike cycles and the extra
dimensions that arose were all spacelike. a brane world-volume can also wrap around
timelike cycles, and we will see that in such cases the extra dimensions can be timelike,
so that the signature of spacetime can change.

it is natural to ask whether it makes sense to consider compact time. there are
many classical solutions of gravity, supergravity, string and mtheories with compact
time and it is of interest to investigate their properties. compact time does not appear
to be a feature of our universe, but almost all spacetimes that are studied are also
unrealistic.the presence of closed timelike loops means that the physics in such spaces
is unusual, but it has often been fruitful in the past to study solutions that have little
in common with the real world. an important issue with these solutions (as with many
others) is whether a consistent quantum theory can be formulated in such backgrounds.
if time were compact but with a huge period, it is not clear how that would manifest
itself.

with a compact time, it is straightforward to solve classical eld equations, imposing
periodic boundary conditions in time instead of developing cauchy data. can quantum
theory make sense with compact time? there is no problem in solving schrodinger or
wave equations with periodic boundary conditions, but it is dicult to formulate any
concept of measurement or collapse of a wave-function, as these would be inconsistent
with periodic time: if a superposition of states collapsed to an eigenstate of an observable
in some measurement process, it must already have been in that eigenstate from the last
time it was measured. in string theory, it is straightforward to study the solutions of the
physical state conditions, but there are new issues that arise from string world-sheets
(and brane world-volumes) wrapping around the compact time. it has proved very fruit-
ful to consider such compactications in string theory. for example, the compactication
of all 25+1 dimensions in bosonic string theory on a special lorentzian torus played a
central role in the work of borcherds on the construction of vertex algebras and their
application to the monster group 20.

4 compactication on lorentzian tori and signature change

8

4.1 compactication on a timelike circle

consider spacetimes of the form md1  s 1 where s 1 is a timelike circle of radius r
and md1 is a riemannian space. the time component of momentum is quantized

p0 =

n
r

(14)

and in the limit r  0, only the states with p0 = 0 survive. for a eld theory, the result
is a dimensional reduction to a euclidean eld theory in d  1 dimensions, on md1.
for example, dimensionally reducing d = 11 supergravity on a timelike circle gives a
supergravity theory in 10 euclidean dimensions, denoted the iiae supergravity theory
in 18. timelike reductions of supergravity theories have been considered in 21,22,23. the
eld theory resulting from such a timelike reduction will in general have elds whose
kinetic terms have the wrong sign. for example, the d dimensional graviton will give
a graviton, a scalar and a vector eld in d  1 dimensions on reducing on a circle,
and if the circle is timelike, then the vector eld will have a kinetic term of the wrong
sign. then the action for the physical matter elds of the reduced theory in d  1
euclidean dimensions will not be positive. this apparent problem is the result of the
truncation to p0 = 0 states. if this truncation is not made and if the full kaluza-klein
towers of states with p0 = n/r for all n are kept, then the theory is the full unitary d
dimensional theory on a particular background, and the d dimensional gauge invariance
can be used to choose a physical gauge locally with a positive action and states with
positive norm. in general such a gauge choice cannot be made globally and there will
be zero-mode states for which the action will not be positive. for example, the states
with p0 = 0 are governed by the non-positive dimensionally reduced action in d  1
dimensions. for a yang-mills theory reduced on a timelike circle, the time component of
the vector potential a0 gives a scalar eld in d  1 dimensions with a kinetic term of the
wrong sign. for the full d dimensional theory compactied on the timelike circle, the
negative-norm a0 can be brought to a constant by d-dimensional gauge transformations,
but one cannot gauge away the degrees of freedom associated with wilson lines winding
around the compact time dimension. (the elds with kinetic terms of the wrong sign
can be handled in the path integral in the same way as the negative-action gravitational
conformal mode is sometimes dealt with, namely by analytic continuation so that the
oending eld becomes imaginary 25.)

in a string theory, however, there will be winding modes in which the 1+1 dimen-
sional string world-sheet winds around the compact time dimension, giving a spacelike
world-line in the compactied theory in d  1 dimensions. as in the spacelike case,
as r  0, a dual circle opens up with radius r = 1/t r, and the new circle is again
timelike. the winding number becomes the p0 of the dual theory, and in this way a
superstring theory in 9+1 dimensions compactied on a timelike circle of radius r is
t-dual to a superstring theory in 9+1 dimensions compactied on a timelike circle of
radius r. such timelike t-dualities were considered for the bosonic and heterotic strings
in e.g. 24, and they take the bosonic string theory to the bosonic string theory and the
heterotic string theory to the heterotic string theory. however, for type ii theories there
is a surprise. it is straightforward to see that timelike t-duality cannot take the iia
string theory to either the iib string or the iia string 25, but must take it to a new
theory, denoted the iib  string theory in 25. similarly, timelike t-duality takes the iib
string to a iia string theory 25.

the iia and iib  strings are taken into each other by t-duality on a spacelike

9

circle, and the iia (iib ) theory is obtained from the iia (iib) string theory by acting
with (i)fl 25 (where fl is the left-handed fermion number). the supergravity limits of
the iia and iib  have non-positive actions for the matter elds (the kinetic terms
for the elds in the r-ns and r-r sectors have the wrong sign) so that the low-energy
eld theories are non-unitary, but the iia and iib  string theories compactied on
a timelike circle are equivalent to the iia and iib string theories on the dual timelike
circle. then, at least when on a timelike circle, the iia and iib  string theories are
precisely the timelike compactications of the usual iia and iib string theories, albeit
written in dual variables. the supergravity limit for the iia or iib variables is the
conventional one, while the supergravity limit for the dual variables is non-unitary. a
physical gauge can then be chosen locally for the iia and iib  string theories on a
timelike circle, and any lack of unitarity or positivity is due to zero-modes.

if time is compact and the physics is periodic in time, the requirements for a sensible
theory are not the same as in minkowski space. a theory that is unstable in minkowski
space (perhaps due to negative energy congurations) need not be pathological if time
is compact: the periodic boundary conditions forbid any runaway solutions and the
system will always return to its starting point after a period. a nonunitary theory in
minkowski space will not conserve probability, but with periodic time, any probability
that is lost will always come back, as the solutions of the wave equations are required
to be periodic. this suggests that the timelike compactications of the iia and iib 
string theories should be consistent, although the question remains as to the status of
the decompactication limit in which the radius of the timelike circle becomes innite.
similar considerations will apply to the other new theories of 18 described in this section.
see 25 for further discussion of the type ii  theories.

4.2 compactication on t 1,1

consider now compactication on the lorentzian torus t 1,1 with one spacelike circle
and one timelike one. (we will use the notation t s,t for a torus with s spacelike circles
and t timelike ones.) for 11-dimensional supergravity, the limit rs, rt  0 gives a
9-dimensional euclidean supergravity theory. for mtheory on a euclidean torus t 2,
we saw in section 2.3 that in the limit in which the torus shrank to zero size, one new
spacelike dimension opened up to give the iib string theory in 9+1 dimensions. here
we expect something similar to happen. considering rst the compactication on the
spacelike circle of radius rs, when rs is small we obtain the iia string theory with
coupling constant gs = (r/lp)3/2. the compactication of this on a timelike circle of
radius rt is t-dual to the iib  string theory compactied on a timelike circle of radius

rt =

1

t rt

(15)

then taking the limit rt  0, we obtain a theory in the expected 9 spacelike dimensions
together with a new time dimension which opens up, the t-dual of the original timelike
dimension. the membranes wrapping around t 1,1 have become the modes carrying the
time component of momentum p0 of the dual iib  theory, and mtheory compactied
on t 1,1 with radii rs, rt is dual to the iib  string theory compactied on a timelike
circle of radius l3

p/rsrt, as was shown in 18.

10

4.3 compactication on t 2,1

we have seen in section 2.3 that mtheory compactied on a euclidean 2-torus t 2 gains
a new spatial dimension in the limit in which the 2-torus shrinks to zero size, replacing
the two which have disappeared, so that the original theory in (10,1) dimensions becomes
a theory in (9,1) dimensions: (9, 1) = (10, 1)  (2, 0) + (1, 0). similarly, we have seen
in section 4.1 that mtheory compactied on a lorentzian 2-torus t 1,1 gains a new
time dimension in the limit in which the 2-torus shrinks to zero size, replacing the (1, 1)
dimensions which have disappeared so that the original theory in (10,1) dimensions again
becomes a theory in (9,1) dimensions: (9, 1) = (10, 1)  (1, 1) + (0, 1). thus a shrinking
t 2 is associated with an extra space dimension while a shrinking t 1,1 is associated with
an extra time dimension.

for mtheory on a shrinking euclidean t 3, an extra space dimension emerges for
each of the three shrinking 2-cycles, so that the three toroidal dimensions which are lost
are replaced by three new spatial dimensions, and we end up back in mtheory in (10,1)
dimensions: (10, 1) = (10, 1)  3  (1, 0) + 3  (1, 0).

consider now the compactication on a lorentzian 3-torus t 2,1 with two spacelike
and one timelike circles. in the limit in which the torus shrinks to zero size, 2+1 dimen-
sions are lost leaving 8 euclidean dimensions and reducing 11-dimensional supergravity
on t 2,1 indeed gives a supergravity in (8,0) dimensions. in mtheory, if the discussion
above applies here, we expect an extra space dimension for every shrinking t 2 and an
extra time dimension for every shrinking t 1,1. the torus t 2,1 has two lorentzian 2-
cycles and one euclidean one, so that this suggests there should be an extra two time
dimensions and one space dimension that open up in this limit, giving a theory in 11
dimensions with two-timing signature (9, 2) = (8, 0) + (1, 0) + 2  (0, 1). if all the towers
of wrapped membranes give extra dimensions, this must be the result, but we have seen
that in some cases towers of wrapped brane states can have other meanings. a more
careful analysis shows that this interpretation is indeed correct and taking mtheory on
a shrinking t 2,1 gives a new theory in 9+2 dimensions 18.

then dualities can change the number of time dimensions as well as the number of
space dimensions. this new theory in 9+2 dimensions was referred to as the m  theory
in 18, and it has an eective eld theory which is a new supergravity theory in 9+2
dimensions. mtheory compactied on t 2,1 is equivalent to m  theory compactied on
a two-time torus t 1,2, with the sizes of the circles related by a formula similar to (13).

4.4 compactications of m  theory

we can now investigate the compactications of m  theory on various tori 18. compact-
ifying the m  theory on a timelike circle gives the iia string theory in 9+1 dimensions,
while compactifying on a spacelike circle gives a new iia-like string theory in 8+2 dimen-
sions. next consider the compactication on 2-tori in the limit in which they shrink to
zero size. for t 0,2 this gives the iib string (compactication on the rst circle gives the
iia theory and the second then gives its t-dual on a timelike circle), for t 1,1 it gives the
iib  theory and for t 2,0 it gives a new iib-like theory in 7+3 dimensions. thus a shrink-
ing t 0,2 gives an extra time dimension, a shrinking t 1,1 gives an extra space dimension
and a shrinking t 2,0 gives an extra time dimension. this can now be used to nd the
results of compactication on a shrinking three-torus. for t 1,2 there are two t 1,1 cycles
and one euclidean t 2 cycle giving a theory in (9, 2)  (1, 2) + 2  (1, 0) + (0, 1) = (10, 1)
dimensions and we are back in mtheory, for t 2,1 there are two t 2 cycles and one t 1,1

11

cycle giving a theory in (9, 2)  (1, 2) + 2  (0, 1) + (1, 0) = (9, 2) dimensions and we are
back in m  theory, while for t 3,0 there are three euclidean t 2 cycles giving a theory in
(9, 2)  (3, 0) + 3  (0, 1) = (6, 5) dimensions, giving a new theory in 6+5 dimensions.
this theory was denoted the m  theory in 18, and m  theory compactied on t 3,0 is
equivalent to the m  theory compactied on a dual t 0,3.

the above analysis can then be repeated for this new m  theory, and it turns out that
only 11-dimensional theories that arise are the m, m  and m  theories, with signatures
(10,1), (9,2) and (6,5), together with the mirror theories in signatures (1,10), (2,9) and
(5,6). reduction on circles gives iia-like theories in signatures 10+0, 9+1, 8+2, 6+4
and 5+5 while reducing on 2-tori gives iib-like theories in signatures 9+1, 7+3, and
5+5. (there are of course also mirror string theories in the signatures 1+9, 2+8 etc
with space and time interchanged.)

in each of these 10 and 11 dimensional cases there is a corresponding supergravity
limit and it is a non-trivial result that these supergravities exist, and it is unlikely that
there are maximal supergravities in signatures outside this list. these theories are linked
to each other by an intricate web of dualities 18, some of which have been outlined above,
and in particular all are linked by dualities to mtheory.

each of these theories has a set of branes of various world-volume signatures 26,27.
for the mtype theories, mtheory has branes of world-volume signature 2+1 and 5+1
(the usual m2 and m5 branes), m  theory has branes of world-volume signature 3+0,1+2
and 5+1 while m  theory has branes of world-volume signature 2+1,0+3, 5+1, 3+3 and
1+5.

5 discussion

in a eld theory, compactication and then shrinking the internal space k to zero
size gives a dimensionally reduced eld theory in lower dimensions.
in compactied
string theory or mtheory, however, new dimensions can emerge when the internal space
shrinks, with the kaluza-klein towers for the new dimensions corresponding to the brane
wrapping modes in which branes wrap around cycles of k. in some cases (e.g. toroidal
compactications of string theory or mtheory on t 3) the number of new dimensions
equals the number that are lost and one regains the original spacetime dimension, while in
others (such as mtheory compactied on t 2) the number of new dimensions is dierent
from the number that are lost and so the dimension of spacetime changes (for mtheory
on t 2 it changes from 11 to 10).

clearly, the notion of what is a spacetime dimension is not an invariant concept,
but depends on the frame of reference, in the sense that it will depend on the values
of various moduli. a given tower of bps states could have a natural interpretation
as a kaluza-klein tower associated with momentum in a particular compact spacetime
dimension for one set of parameters, but could have an interpretation as a tower of
brane wrapping modes for other values, and we have seen many examples of this in
the preceding sections. we are used to considering eld theories in spacetimes of given
dimension and signature, but any attempt to formulate mtheory or string theory as
a theory in a given spacetime dimension or signature will be misleading. in particular,
the theory underpinning all these theories has a limit which behaves like a theory in
10+1 dimensions with a supergravity limit and systematic corrections, but cannot at
the fundamental level be a theory in 10+1 dimensions, as it has some limits which live
9+1 dimensions and others that live in 9+2 or 6+5 dimensions.

12

the supersymmetry algebra in 10+1 dimensions is

{q, q} = c(m pm 

1
2!

m1m2 zm1m2 

1
5!

m1...m5 zm1...m5 ) ,

(16)

where c is the charge conjugation matrix, pm is the energy-momentum 11-vector and
zm1m2 and zm1...m5 are 2-form and 5-form charges, associated with brane charges 28.
there are 11+55+462=528 charges on the right-hand-side, which can be assembled into
a symmetric bi-spinor x. compactifying and then dualising, one nds that some
of the brane charges become momenta of the dual theory and some of the momenta
become brane charges of the dual theory, so that the split of the bi-spinor x into an
11-momentum and brane charges changes under duality.

this suggests that rather than trying to formulate the theory in 10+1 dimensions,
all 528 charges should be treated in the same way. there seem to be at least two ways
in which this might be done. the rst would be a geometrical one in which all 528
charges were treated as momenta and there is an underlying spacetime of perhaps 528
dimensions. the duality symmetries could then act geometrically, and there would be
perhaps some dynamical way of choosing 11 of the dimensions as the preferred ones,
e.g. through the world being an 11-dimensional surface in this space. for example, in
considering t-duality between a string theory on a space m  s 1 and one in the dual
space m  s 1, it is sometimes useful to consider models on m s 1  s 1 in which both the
circle of radius r and the dual circle of radius r are present, with dierent projections
or gaugings giving the two t-dual models; see 4 and references therein.

we have seen that dierent spacetimes related by dualities can dene the same
physics, so that the notion of spacetime geometry cannot be fundamental. this suggests
that dierent degrees of freedom should be used, with spacetime emerging as a derived
concept. an alternative anti-geometrical formulation would be one in which none of
the charges were geometrical, but instead an algebraic approach similar to that of matrix
theory was used. for example, mtheory could be compactied to 0,1 or 2 dimensions
to give a theory that would be expected to have duality symmetry 30 e11, e10 or e9
where e9 is an ane e8, e10 is a hyperbolic algebra discussed, for example, in 31 and
e11 might be some huge algebraic structure associated with the e11 dynkin diagram.
in one dimension the theory might be some matrix quantum mechanics associated with
e10 while in zero dimensions it would be some form of non-dynamical matrix theory. at
special points in the moduli space, some of the charges would be associated with extra
dimensions that are decompactifying. at dierent points, dierent numbers of space and
time dimensions could emerge.

such formulations might be related to the reformulations of 11-dimensional super-
gravity of 32,33,34 in which the tangent space group is enlarged so that some of the duality
symmetries are manifest. for example, in the context of compactications to 2+1 di-
mensions, the usual tangent space group so(10, 1) is broken to so(2, 1)  so(8) and
then anti-symmetric tensor degrees of freedom were used in 33 to reformulate the theory
with tangent space group so(2, 1)  so(16), with the so(16) associated with the usual
local so(16) invariance of 3-dimensional supergravity. these formulations show that
there are alternatives to the usual formulation in 11 spacetime dimensions and it would
be interesting to consider others.

the ve superstring theories and mtheory are dierent corners of the moduli space
of some as yet unknown fundamental theory and the dualities linking them all involve
compactication on riemannian spaces. if this is extended to include compactication
on spaces with lorentzian signature a richer structure emerges. the strong coupling limit

13

of the type iia superstring is mtheory in 10+1 dimensions whose low energy limit is 11-
dimensional supergravity theory. the type i, type ii and heterotic superstring theories
and certain supersymmetric gauge theories emerge as dierent limits of mtheory. the
mtheory in 10+1 dimensions is linked via dualities to m  theory in 9+2 dimensions
and m -theory in 6+5 dimensions. various limits of these give rise to iia-like string
theories in 10+0, 9+1,8+2,6+4 and 5+5 dimensions, and to iib-like string theories in
9+1,7+3, and 5+5 dimensions. the eld theory limits are supergravity theories with 32
supersymmetries in 10 and 11 dimensions with these signatures, many of which are new.
further dualities similar to those of 16 relate these to supersymmetric gauge theories in
various signatures and dimensions, such as 2+2, 3+1 and 4+0. these new string theories
and mtype theories in various spacetime signatures can all be thought of as providing
extra corners of the moduli space. some corners are stranger than others, but in any
case we can only live in one corner (perhaps mtheory compactied on the product of
a line interval and a calabi-yau 3-fold) and there is no reason why other corners might
not have quite unfamiliar properties.

theories in non-lorentzian signatures usually have many problems, such as lack of
unitarity and instability. however, the theories considered here are related to mtheory
via dualities and so are just the usual theory expressed in terms of unusual variables.
for example, the m  theory in 9+2 dimensions compactied on t 1,2 is equivalent to
mtheory compactied on t 2,1, and so the compactied m  theory will make sense
provided mtheory compactied on a lorentzian torus is a consistent theory. then the
problems with formulating a theory in 9+2 dimensions are in this case only apparent,
as the theory can be rewritten as a theory in 10+1 dimensions using dierent variables,
so that the extra time dimension is replaced by the degrees of freedom associated with
branes wrapped around time.

there are several possible generalisations of the notion of a particle to general sig-
natures. a physical particle or an observer in lorentzian spacetime with signature (s, 1)
follows a timelike (or null) world-line while a tachyon would follow a spacelike one. in a
space of signature (s, t ), one can again consider worldlines of signature (0, 1), but other
generalisations of particle might include branes with worldvolumes (time-sheets) of sig-
nature (0, t) with t  t , sweeping out some or all of the times. in a general signature
(s, t ), it is natural to consider branes of arbitrary signature (s, t) with s  s and t  t ,
and the conditions on (s, t) for these to be supersymmetric were given in 26.

in conclusion, we have reviewed part of the intricate web of duality symmetries link-
ing many apparently dierent theories, but since the theories are all related in this way,
they should all be regarded as corners of a single underlying theory. in particular, two
dual theories can be formulated in spacetimes of dierent geometry, topology and even
signature and dimension, and so all of these concepts must be relative rather than abso-
lute, depending on the values of certain parameters or couplings, and such a relativity
principle should be a feature of the fundamental theory that underlies all this.

references

1. c.m. hull and p.k. townsend, nucl. phys. b438 (1995) 109 hep-th/9410167.
2. e. witten, nucl. phys. b443 (1995) 85, hep-th/9503124
3. j. polchinski, hep-th/9611050
4. a. giveon, m. porrati and e. rabinovici, phys. rep. 244 (1994) 77.
5. j. dai, r.g. leigh and j. polchinski, mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 2073;
6. m. dine, p. huet and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b322 (1989) 301.

14

7. c.m. hull, phys. lett. b357 (1995) 545, hep-th/9506194.
8. a. dabholkar, phys. lett. b357 (1995) 307, hep-th/9506160.
9. j. polchinski and e. witten, nucl.phys. b460 (1996) 525, hep-th/9510169.
10. p. aspinwall, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 46 (1996) 30, hep-th/9508154 ;

j.h. schwarz, phys.lett. b360 (1995) 13; erratum-ibid. b364 (1995) 252, hep-
th/9508143 .

11. p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 506, hep-th/9510209.
12. g. pradisi and a. sagnotti,phys. lett. b216 (1989) 59;

m. bianchi and a. sagnotti, phys. lett. b247 (1990) 517; nucl. phys. b361
(1990) 519;
p. horava, nucl. phys. b327 (1989) 461; phys. lett. b231 (1989) 251.

13. e. bergshoe, e. eyras, r. halbersma, j.p. van der schaar, c.m. hull and

y. lozano, hep-th/9812224.

14. c.m. hull, jhep 9811 (1998) 27, hep-th/9811021 .
15. c.m. hull, nucl. phys. b468 (1996) 113 hep-th/9512181.
16. j. maldacena, hep-th/9711200.
17. t. banks, hep-th/9710231;

l. bigatti and l. susskind, hep-th/9712072

18. c.m. hull, jhep 11 (1998) 017 hep-th/9807127.
19. w. fischler, e. halyo, a. rajaraman and l. susskind, nucl.phys. b501 (1997)

409, hep-th/9703102.

20. p. goddard, the work of r.e. borcherds, to appear in proceedings of the inter-

national congress of mathematicians, and references therein.

21. c. m. hull and b. julia, nucl. phys. b534 (1998) 250, hep-th/9803239.
22. e. cremmer, i.v. lavrinenko, h. lu, c.n. pope, k.s. stelle and t.a. tran,

nucl.phys. b534 (1998) 250, hep-th/9803259.

23. k. s. stelle, hep-th/9803116.
24. g. moore, hep-th/9305139,9308052.
25. c.m. hull, hep-th/9806146.
26. c.m. hull and r.r. khuri, nucl. phys. b536 (1998) 219 hep-th/9808069.
27. c.m. hull and r.r. khuri, hep-th/9911nnn.
28. c.m. hull, nucl. phys. b509 (1998) 216, hep-th/9705162.
29. p.k. townsend, hep-th/9712004 .
30. b. julia, in superspace and supergravity, eds. s.w. hawking and m. rocek (cam-

bridge university press, 1981)

31. b. julia, in lectures in applied mathematics, vol. 21 (1985) 355;

h. nicolai, phys. lett. b276 (1992) 333

32. b. de wit, h. nicolai, phys. lett. 155b (1985) 47; nucl. phys. b274 (1986) 363
33. h. nicolai, phys.lett. 187b (1987) 363.
34. h. nicolai, hep-th/9801090.

15

