9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
5
2

 

 
 

1
v
0
0
2
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

recent developments in string

theory

yitp-99-62

jnanadeva maharana

e-mail maharana@iopb.res.in

institute of physics
bhubaneswar - 751005

india

and

yukawa institute for theoretical physics

kyoto university

kyoto 606

japan

abstract

the purpose of this short review is to present progresses in string theory
in the recent past. there have been very important developments in our un-
derstanding of string dynamics, especially the nonperturbative aspects. in this
context, dualities play a cardinal role. the string theory provides a deeper
understanding of the physics of special class of black holes from a microscopic
point of view and has resolved several important questions. it is also recog-
nized that m-theory provides a unied description of the ve perturbatively
consistent string theories. the article covers some of these aspects and high
lights important progress made in string theory.

 permanent address

august, 1999

contents

1. introduction

2. perturbative aspects of string theory

3. duality symmetries in string theory

4. m-theory and unied string dynamics

5. black holes and string theory

6. m-theory and the matrix model

2

7

19

37

44

51

7. anti-de sitter space and boundary field theory correspondence

59

8. cosmology and string theory

9. summary and conclusions

10. references

66

73

75

1

1 introduction

all along the progress in natural philosophy, curious minds have asked deep questions
pertaining to the fundamental constituents of matter and creation and evolution of
the cosmos. in the modern era, physicists have endeavored to comprehend natural
phenomena in terms of a simple set of principles. therefore, the search has contin-
ued to discover the elementary constituents of matter and identify the fundamental
forces responsible for the natural phenomena. it is accepted that there are four fun-
damental forces : gravitation, the weak interaction, electromagnetism and the strong
interaction. the unication of fundamental interactions has remained as one of the
most outstanding challenge for generations of physicists.
in the latter half of this
century, some progress has taken place in this direction through the electroweak uni-
cation scheme. the electroweak theory together with quantum chromodynamics
(qcd), referred to as the standard model, have been tested to a great degree of ac-
curacy. thus, the standard model provides a very good description of the low energy
physics, comprising of the spectrum of elementary particles and their dynamics. the
next step in fullling the dream of unication of forces were the schemes of grand uni-
cations (gut) which attempted to incorporate the three fundamental interactions,
leaving aside gravitational interaction. the qed has been tested to a great degree
of accuracy and two most important characteristics of that theory are the invariance
under local gauge transformations and renormalizability. the electroweak theory and
qcd respect the principle of gauge invariance and are renormalizable. moreover, it
is well known that the einsteins theory of general relativity respects a local symme-
try: invariance under general coordinate transformations. however, the theory is not
renormalizable since the newtons constant carries dimension of (mass)2, unlike the
gauge coupling constants of the standard model which are dimensionless.
although the standard model has successfully passed many stringent experimental
tests, it is recognized that one must seek for a more fundamental theory. the stan-
dard model has many arbitrary parameters: the gauge coupling constants, the cou-
pling constants of the scalars, yukawa couplings of the higgs bosons to fermions
which are eventually responsible for generating fermion masses, just to mention a
few. furthermore, when one extrapolates the gauge coupling constants utilizing the
renormalization group equations towards higher energy scale, there are evidences that
the three coupling constants tend to converge to a point and it is natural to conclude
that beyond that scale there might be a unied description of the standard model.
therefore, these observations lend support to the proposal of guts put forward in
early seventies. as is well known, the existence of electroweak scale in the tev region
and another unication scale in the neighbourhood of 1016 to 1017 gev leads to issues
related to ne tuning of parameters, known as gauge hierarchy problem. the gauge
hierarchy problem can be resolved in an elegant manner if one envisages supersym-
metric version of the standard model (moreover, the convergence of gauge coupling
constants in the unifying scale is more favourable in supersymmetric theories; see

2

mohapatras article in this volume for details). the supersymmetric theories were
constructed so that bosons and fermions can belong to a supermultiplet. the su-
persymmetry appeared in 2-dimensions in the construction of string theories. while
attempts were being made to construct various types of grand unied theories, there
were developments in incorporating gravity into supersymmetric theories which re-
sulted in discovery of supergravity theories. however, it was not possible to construct
renormalizable eld theories which could unify the four fundamental forces. it was
being perceived by many physicists, in the beginning of eighties, that new radical
ideas were required to unify the fundamental interactions.
it is now accepted that string theory holds the promise of unifying all the fundamen-
tal interactions. the progress of the string theory in diverse directions, during the
last fteen years have been truly spectacular. the theory has not only has brought
us nearer to the dream of unication, but also has inuenced our understanding of
various aspects of quantum gravity and has revealed many beautiful features relevant
to the nonperturbative aspects of eld theories.
the string theory was invented to describe the dynamics of strongly interacting par-
ticles. the vast amount of experimental data amassed from high energy accelerators,
during fties and sixties led to discovery of large number of hadronic resonances. one
of the interesting characteristics of those resonances was that when one plots squared
of mass vs spins of these particles, families of the resonances tend to lie on a straight
line, known as the chew-frautschi plot. it was also evident from the high energy of
scattering cross sections of hadrons that they follow a power law behaviour i.e. the
crossed channel regge poles controlled cross sections at high energies. the duality
relation in strong interactions, that is sum over direct channel resonances (from low
energy data) reproduces the regge amplitude, was an important discovery for con-
struction of dual models. veneziano [1] took crucial step step when he proposed a
four point amplitude which satised requirements of duality and crossing symmetry.

(1.1)

(1.2)

t (s, t) = b(s, t) + b(t, u) + b(u, s)

where

b(s, t) =

((s))((t))
((s)  (t))

and (s) = 0 + s is the parameterization of the linear regge trajectory. here s,t
and u refer to the mandelstam variables; when we are in the center of mass frame, s
is the squared of c.m. energy, t and u are related to the c.m. scattering angle. the
b-function has the integral representation

b(s, t) = z 1

0

dww1(s)(1  w)1(t)

(1.3)

subsequently, generalized n-point amplitudes satisfying requirements of duality and
crossing symmetry were proposed by several authors [2] and one such amplitude is

f (p1.....pn ) = |wi  wii||wii  wiii||wiii  wi|z dw1...dwn i<j|wi  wj|2pi.pj(1.4)

3

wi are ordered cyclically, wi, wii and wiii are any three of the variables of the set
{wi}, but are held xed. as in the case of 4-point veneziano amplitude, the full
n-point amplitude is sum of all cyclically inequivalent permutations. it was realized
that it is possible to represent the n-point function in a path integral form [3]

t

2 z2>0

d2ax ax )n eipi .x(wi ) (1.5)

fn  z ,dx ()z dw1...dwn exp(
where ax  = x
a , 1 and 2 are coordinates of a point in the upper plane, x ()
are integrated over all functions of . the boundary condition on x  is 2x  = 0
for 2 = 0. the constant t = 1
2 was later on identied as the tension of the string.
note the presence of x (wi); it is the value of x (1, 2) on the line 1 = w, 2 = 0.
the connection between dual amplitudes and dynamics of a relativistic string was
recognized by several authors independently [4]. now, of course we know that this
amplitude is obtained from an open string theory and the action is that of a string,
there are vertex operator in the path integral formula and the open string boundary
conditions are to be specied. virasoro had constructed another 4-point amplitude [5]
fullling the requirement of duality and crossing symmetry in sequel to venezianos
paper and generalization of that amplitude for n-particle scattering was derived with
a path integral representation [6]. it was realized that the virasoro-shapiro amplitude
could be obtained from a closed string theory. finally, nambu proposed the action
for the string so that one could start studying the dynamics of the string and proceed
to examine the consequences of its quantization.
the string theory as a theory of strong interaction dynamics was not free from short-
comings. while attempts were going on to rectify the pitfalls of the theory and to
construct new string theories as models of strong interactions; qcd was proposed
as the fundamental theory of strongly interacting particle. the theory described in-
teractions of the fundamental constituents, quarks, of the hadrons with gluon as the
carrier of the force. furthermore, the experimental data conrmed predictions of
qcd steadily and consequently; string theory as a theory of strong interaction was
no longer in the center stage.
in 1974, joel scherk and john schwarz [7] made a bold proposition that string theory
should be envisaged as a theory of gravity since the massless spin two particle appears
naturally in the closed string spectrum and this theory might be a vehicle to achieve
the goal of unication of the forces of nature. if string theory were to incorporate
the gravitational interaction, then the string tension should be order of the planck
scale in contrast to the the tension of the original string which was of the order of
one gev, the scale of hadronic interaction determined from the slope of the regge
trajectories. it was realized that one has to go up nineteen orders of magnitude in
the energy scale if the scherk-schwarz proposal was to be realized. at that time, this
radical idea did not receive wide spread acceptance amongst theoretical high energy
physicists. the crucial work of green and schwarz [8] in the summer of 1984 led
to conclusion that 10-dimensional super yang-mills theories coupled to supergravity

4

can be consistently constructed and are free from all anomalies [9] only for the gauge
groups so(32) and e8  e8. the results of green and schwarz had profound im-
pact on the eld of high energy physics. it was recognized that string theory could
fulll the cherished dream of unifying fundamental forces. the construction of the
heterotic string theory [10] was a very important break through towards realization
of this goal since it had the desired gauge groups i.e. so(32) or e8  e8, depending
on the construction one adopted. the ten dimensional theory had chiral fermions,
n = 1 supergravity coupled to supersymmetric yang-mills with appropriate gauge
groups. moreover, when the e8  e8 heterotic string theory was compactied to
four dimensions on a calabi-yau manifold, the resulting theory was shown to possess
several desirable features that one expected from some of the grand unied theories.
furthermore, it was possible to demonstrate that the standard model gauge groups
su(3)  su(2)  u(1) were contained in such four dimensional theories.
indeed,
optimistically, one could feel that a unied theory was in sight and string theory was
popularly named as the theory of everything.
let us recapitulate some of the essential features of string theory. the string is a one
dimensional object which executes motion in spacetime. there are, grossly speaking,
two types of strings: open and closed strings. as the name suggests, the ends of open
strings are free (there are special types whose ends might get stuck to some surfaces
and they play very important roles too) and it is required to satisfy suitable bound-
ary conditions for the end points. the closed string, by denition, has its both ends
glued together, forming a loop. it is well known that when a point particle evolves
in spacetime, it traces out a trajectory describing its history.
in case of an open
string, it sweeps a two dimensional surface and similarly the closed string sweeps a
surface which is that of a cylinder. the natural question is why we do not observe
these strings in high energy collisions. the answer to this question lies in the fact
that the strings are much smaller in size than the present accelerators can probe. if
we could have accelerators which have energies of the order of 1019 gev, then it will
be possible to observe the dynamics of the strings directly and test the predictions
of string theory at the planckian energies. in contrast, the present day accelerators
have energies of the order of tev - almost 16 orders of magnitudes below the string
scale.
the string has tension and it vibrates in an innite number of modes. we identify
each mode of the string with a particle. of course, the string will have the lowest
mode and we identify that with a particular particle. the next mode will correspond
to an excited state and it is separated in energy from the lowest mode in suitable unit
of string tension - separation between two neighboring levels is order of 1019 gev
(recall that for the hadronic models they excitations were on regge trajectories and
there the tension was order of gev). the string theories of interests to us contain
massless particles in their lowest mode. for example, in 10-dimensional heterotic
string theory, we have graviton, antisymmetric tensor and dilaton together with the
super yang-mills multiplets corresponding to the gauge groups so(32) or e8  e8

5

in its massless sector. therefore, in the low energy limit, the string theory eectively
reduces to a point particle eld theory (this is when we want to describe physics at
the present day accelerator energy scales). in other words, the zero slope limits of
string theories correspond to known eld theories - superstring theories go over to
supergravity theories in this limit.
now we give an outline of the rest of the article. since it is to appear in a volume on
field theory, we shall avoid involved technical details. the eld has progressed in
diverse directions and our strategy will be to adopt a course to high light important
developments. we shall attempt to present dierent aspects of string theory in a
pedagogical manner. in order to get across some issues, known examples from eld
theory will be presented. there has been intense activities in this eld since 1984,
when it was recognized that string theory is the most promising candidate for uni-
cation of forces of nature. it is not possible to cover all the important literatures in
a vibrant eld like this within the frame work of this article. i apologize in advance
to all the authors whose works have not been cited. there are two books which cover
all the important aspects of string theory in detail besides several monographs and
reprint collection volumes. the rst one [11], in two volumes provides foundation for
string theory and includes the developments up to 1986. the second one [12] has
laid the emphasis on the progress made after the second superstring revolution.
i
have listed some of the review articles written in the rst phase of the developments
of string theory [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. there are a large number of review articles
written in recent time [19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30] the next section
deals with a brief review of the perturbative aspects of string theory to familiarize the
reader with well known results. first, the string worldsheet action is introduced and
the symmetries of the action are listed. a very quick exposition is given to the solu-
tions of the equations of motion and mode expansions for the string coordinates and
essentials of the virasoro algebra are recalled. the evolution of the string in its mass-
less background in the rst quantized approach is discussed and the consequences
of conformal invariance are noted. section iii deals with the symmetries of string
theory. the theory is endowed with a rich symmetry structure in the target space
besides the worldsheet symmetries. we introduce the duality symmetries since they
play a very important role in our understanding of the string dynamics in various
spacetime dimensions and they unravel the intimate connections between dierent
string theories. the subsequent section, iv, is devoted to to discuss the recent eorts
to unify string theories. besides duality symmetry, spatially extended objects, gener-
ically called p-branes, which appear as solutions to the eective action, are crucial to
our understanding of string dynamics and to test some of the duality conjectures. we
introduce some of the salient features of these objects and provide simple examples
of the solutions. the raison de etre for m-theory is presented. we give an example
how compactication of m-theory provides connections with the string theories and
their various brane content. the fth section deals with issues related to black holes
that appear in string theory. since string theory describes gravity, it is expected that

6

the theory will be able to provide insights into deep questions in quantum gravity.
indeed, some of the issues in the physics of the black holes have been resolved by
string theory. it is known for more than two decades that a black hole is character-
ized by entropy and the hawking temperature from the thermodynamic analogies.
moreover, the seminal work of hawking demonstrated that the black holes radiate
when quantum eects are taken into account. recently, the black hole entropy has
been computed as a microscopic derivation in the frame work of string theory. fur-
thermore, the absorption cross sections for incident particles and the distribution of
hawking radiation emitted from special class of stringy black holes have been evalu-
ated from a microscopic theory. section vi contains a brief account of the m(atrix)
model. the m(atrix) model proposal to describe m-theory has drawn considerable
attention. some of the calculations in this model give surprising agreements with
results of supergravity theories. moreover, when one considers compactication of
the model on torii the resulting theory can be related to supersymmetric yang-mills
theories through duality. we discuss some of the features of the maldacena conjec-
tures in section vii. according to the conjecture, in a concrete form, if one considers
n coincident 3-branes of type iib theory on ads5  s5 then the correlation functions
of supergravity on the ads5 get related to correlation functions of the n = 4 super
yang-mills theory living on the boundary of the ads5. this is a rapidly developing
area and we shall be contented with some of the simple examples. in the last section
we present an overview of the eld. we make a few remarks to convey the reader how
the work in string theory has inuenced research in other branches of physics.

2 perturbative aspects of string theory

we have outlined the historical backgrounds and the developments of string theory
in its early phase in the previous section. in this section, we shall present some of the
essential features of string theory such as its quantization, the perturbative spectrum
of theory and the supersymmetric version of string theory.
nambu had proposed the action for a string in analogy with the action for a relativistic
point particle: the action for point particle in an integral over an line element; the
string action is expected to be an integral over a surface.
the nambu-goto action [34] was introduced almost three decades ago and has the
form

sn g = t z d2q( x.x)2  ( x)2(x)2

(2.1)

where  and  are the coordinates on the surface swept out by the the string, called
 and we shall follow this denition all along
worldsheet;
unless specied otherwise. the equations of motion can be derived after specifying
boundary conditions for the types of string one is dealing with. one important point

 and x = x

x  = x

7

to be noted is that the theory described by the above action satises two constraints

.x = 0,

2 + t x2 = 0

(2.2)

where  = l
x is the canonical momentum of x  obtained from this action. we
reserve the notation p for the canonical momentum of the coordinate derived from
the polyakov action. we shall elaborate signicance of these constraints later.
however, this form of action was not very convenient to deal with the quantization
of string and an alternative form of action was proposed by polyakov [35]

s = 

t

2 z d2abax bx 

(2.3)

ab is the worldsheet metric, ab is its inverse,  is determinant of worldsheet metric
and  is the at space metric of the target space. the variation of the action with
respect to ab results in the worldsheet stress energy momentum tensor

tab = ax.bx 

1
2

abcdcx.dx

(2.4)

tab = 0, since there is no kinetic term i.e. as the analogue of einstein-hilbert piece,

r d2r(2) is a topological term. we can solve for ab from the above equation

ab = ax bx 

(2.5)

if we insert the above expression for worldsheet metric into the polyakov action, then
we recover nambus action.
the action (2.3) has following symmetry properties.
(a) two dimensional reparameterization invariance

ab = ccab + acbc + bcac

and hence  = a(a). the string coordinate transforms as

weyl invariance

x  = aax 

ab = 2ab,

x  = 0

poincare invariance (in target space)

x  = 

 x  + a,

ab = 0

(2.6)

(2.7)

(2.8)

(2.9)

 are antisymmetric parameters associated with the lorentz transformation

where 
and a are the parameters of translation.
note that the weyl invariance implies tracelessness of the two dimensional energy

8

momentum tensor for the classical theory. the quantum invariance of this symmetry
has far reaching consequences in string theory.

if we make the orthonormal gauge choice for the worldsheet metric ab = e2(, )ab

with ab = diag(1, +1) the, form of polyakov action simplies since ab = ab

in this gauge. the condition of the vanishing of tab reduces to two constraints

( x  x)2 = 0

(2.10)

these are the virasoro constraints. they take the following form in the hamiltonian
formalism

px = 0,

h =

(p 2 + t x2) = 0

(2.11)

1
2

where p is momentum conjugate to x  derived from polyakov action. it is easy to
see that the rst constraint generates  translation on the worldsheet, whereas latter
being the canonical hamiltonian generates  translation.
the equation of motion for the string coordinates, in the light-cone variables + =
 +  and  =   , are given by

+x  = 0

(2.12)

we note that the equation of motion is derived with following boundary conditions:
(i) x (,  + 2) = x (, ) for the closed strings, and (ii) x = 0 for  = 0 and
 = 2 in the case of open strings, when we apply the variational method.
let us illustrate the mode expansion for the closed string starting from the equation
of motion with periodic boundary condition in . we rst note that the string
coordinate can be decomposed as a sum of left-moving and right-moving coordinates.

x (, ) = x 

l( + ) + x 

r(  )

(2.13)

then the two can be expanded as follows:

x 

x
2

+

p
4t

( + ) +

l( + ) =

4t x
4t x
the sum is over all integer values of m (m = 0 is excluded) in the above equations.
l,r are real, so are x and p; the fourier

m are the fourier modes 1. since x 

x 
r(  ) =

(  ) +

eim()

p
4t


m
m

eim( +)

x
2

(2.14)

(2.15)

+

i

i


m
m


m and 
modes satisfy

(

m) = 

m,

( 

m) = 

m

(2.16)

1we have adopted a shortcut route and taken the s to be time independent. the proper pro-
cedure would be, since we are yet to quantize, to allow them to be  -dependant and determine their
equations of motion from the poisson bracket with the hamiltonian which in turn would determine
the  -dependence of the s. thus, the systematic steps would have been to take combination of x
coordinates and p s as one does in the case of harmonic oscillator go through the appropriate steps
on this occasion also.

9

h =

1
2

(2.17)

from the reality condition. for the closed string case, the classical hamiltonian is
given by

(x m.m +x m m)
2(x)2 = 0 and t++ = 1

in terms of the fourier modes. the constraint, tab = 0, obtained from the polyakov
action, takes the form t = 1
2(+x)2 = 0, in terms of the
light-cone coordinates, after one has gone over to the on gauge. it is more convenient
to express these constraints in terms of the fourier modes introduced above and dene
the virasoro generators

lm =

1

2 x mnn, and lm =

1

2 x mn n

and

h = l0 + l0

(2.18)

(2.19)

we can obtain classical poisson bracket relations amongst lm, similarly for the set
lm, starting from the canonical poisson bracket between x  and p.

[lm, ln]p b = i(m  n)lm+n

[lm, ln]p b = 0

(2.20)

(2.21)

the pb between { lm} is same as for {lm}. these are classical virasoro algebra.
we have noted earlier that the string theory is endowed with local symmetries in
the worldsheet and the action is that of d-scalar elds in 1 + 1 dimensions, since
 = 0, 1...d1 takes d values. when we proceed to quantize this theory, we encounter
problems similar to the one faced in quantization of gauge theory. in other words
we have to x the gauge here too. one can choose to work in a noncovariant gauge
which has the advantage of dealing with physical degrees of freedoms directly, but
at the price of losing manifest lorentz covariance. on the other hand one can adopt
covariant quantization prescription with all its elegance and power. the light-cone
quantization, although noncovariant, is very useful and gives us a physical picture.
as the rst step, the classical constraints are solved and one is left with less number of
variables recall that there were some remnant symmetries after choosing conformal
(on) gauge: + = 1(+) and 


= 2(). one can utilize this property to write
x + = x+ + p+

(2.22)

dening the light-cone string coordinated x = x 0x 1 one can impose the classical
virasoro constraints ( xx)2 = 0. thus x is determined in terms of the rest of the
(transverse) coordinates, x i; and in this process both x + and x are totally elimi-
nated and we are left with {x i}. then the oscillators of these coordinates will create
the states which could be identied with particles with physical degrees of freedom
only. so it gives us a physical picture of the states. however, as mentioned earlier

10

and as is the case with noncovariant gauge xing in qed or yang-mills theories, the
lorentz invariance must be checked explicitly. for the case of string theory, one is
required to construct the generators of lorentz transformations and ensure that the
generators satisfy the algebra. it is well known that this requirement is not fullled
unless the string propagates in 26-dimensional spacetime. on the other hand, if one
adopts the covariant brst procedure, it is necessary to add the ghost term to the
action and construct the corresponding virasoro generators for the ghosts. thus the
full virasoro generator is a sum of the oscillators coming from string coordinates and
those from the ghosts. when we compute the quantum virasoro algebra, there is an
anomaly of 26 from the ghost sector which gets precisely canceled if the spacetime
dimension is 26 since each bosonic degrees of freedom contributes a factor of one to
the anomaly with a sign just opposite to that coming from ghosts.
there are innite tower of states in string theory. it is useful to arrange them ac-
cording to their oscillator levels. notice that the worldsheet degrees of freedom of
the string are envisaged as a collection of innite number of harmonic oscillators. if
we consider creation operator of one of these oscillators, we could dene a level such
that the number of of units of worldsheet momenta created by this operator while
acting on the vacuum. if we have a state, then the total oscillator level of that state
is the sum of the levels of all the oscillators acting on the fock vacuum to create
this state. for the free string, the coordinates can be decomposed into left moving
and right moving sectors. therefore, one can dene left and right moving oscillator
oscillator levels (same decomposition is valid when we add fermionic degrees of free-
dom). thus one can write l0 = 1
2(e  p ), where e and p are
worldsheet energy and momentum respectively. therefore, l0 and l0 get contribu-
tions from the oscillators and from the fock vacuum. we may remark in passing that
the momenta of the spacetime d-dimensional theory (25 + 1 for bosonic string and
9 + 1 for superstring) are the ones conjugate to the zero modes of the bosonic/and/or
fermionic worldsheet theory. therefore, the ground state of the closed bosonic string
is a tachyon satisfying the relation m2 = 4, with  = 1
2t . the rst excited
(massless) states of closed string are:
 spin 2 state, g, identied as graviton.
 an antisymmetric tensor eld, b.
 a scalar, , called dilaton.
they belong to the irreducible representation of the so(24) group. these states are
created by action of a single creation operator from the left moving sector and an-
other creation operator from the right moving sector. therefore, they will have two
target space lorentz indices and one can decompose them according to irreducible
representations of the corresponding rotation group.

2(e + p ) and l0 = 1

introduction worldsheet fermions has important consequences.

in fact, if one
demands worldsheet superconformal symmetry generalising from the bosonic string
coordinates to include fermionic degrees of freedom, then resulting theory is the su-

11

perstring. first we need to construct two dimensional supergravity action. one needs
to add to the action (2.3) the action



t

2 z d2e{i0aa  iabab 

1
4

0abab}

(2.23)

the notations are as follows [37]:  are worldsheet two component majorana
fermions, ei
a are the zweibeins associated with the worldsheet metric, e is its determi-
nant. a is the gravitino on worldsheet satisfying a = a. the gamma matrices in
the worldsheet have following representations: 0 = 2, 1 = i1 and 5 = 01 = 3,
i being the three pauli matrices. we shall go over to the superorthonormal gauge,
where the worldsheet metric is at metric times a conformal factor (mentioned al-
ready) and gravitino is chosen to be a = a where  is a constant majorana spinor.
then the action (2.23) takes a simple form and is expressed in terms of the weyl
majorana fermions (it is a free fermion theory now)



it

2 z d2[

+(  )+ + 
with the denition of the chiral fermions: + = 1
2(1 + 5), the
spacetime index is suppressed. now it is evident that the fermion equations of motion
will separated according to the chiralities, as is expected for massless fermions. the
worldsheet supersymmetry transformations are

( + )]
2(1 5) and  = 1

(2.24)

x  = 

 = iaax 

(2.25)

(2.26)

for the two component majorana fermions;  is the fermionic parameter associated
with the supersymmetry transformation. the supercharge is the time component of
supercurrent integrated over  variable. the current is

j a = bbx a

(2.27)

next, one denes the super virasoro generators and compute the quantum algebra
and derive the condition for absence of anomaly. in case of the superstring the critical
dimension is ten in contrast to bosonic string where it was 26.
now we shall consider a few points before discussing how spacetime supersymmetry
multiplets appear in the spectrum of the superstring. we had mentioned that the
bosonic string has a tachyon in its lowest level which will render the theory unstable.
although, worldsheet supersymmetric theory moves in ten dimensional spacetime,
the super virasoro algebra does not impose sucient constraints to remove the un-
desirable tachyon from the spectrum in general.
notice from the fermionic equations of motion (we suppress the bosonic part momen-
tarily to focus attentions on fermions only) that there is some freedom in the choice

12

of the boundary condition as  goes over a period of 2. the is due to the fact that
the action remains invariant under    for fermions of either chirality. the
boundary conditions are:
(2.28)

( + 2) = ()

known as neveu-schwarz boundary condition is antiperiodic[38]. the periodic bound-
ary condition

is the ramond condition [39]; the indices are suppressed for notational convenience.
the mode expansion for, say the holomorphic eld, is

( + 2) = ()

(2.29)


+( + ) = n

nen( +)

(2.30)

it is easy to see that for ramond boundary condition, n must be integers. when we
impose ns (neveu-schwarz) boundary condition and expand the fermions in fourier
modes, then n will take half integer values. we note that the ns fermions have no
zero modes, whereas the ramond fermions have zero modes in the fourier expansions.
let us extend the arguments, we used for the bosonic string, for the superstring and
examine their spectrum. the aim is to get rid of the tachyon and to construct states
using bosonic and fermionic operators such that these states transform like fermions
and the resulting theory be endowed with spacetime supersymmetry. we shall con-
sider the light-cone gauge so that physical degrees of freedom become transparent.
in addition to the condition x + = x+ + p+ , one imposes constraint

+ = + = 0

(2.31)

for the ns fermions, when we have ramond fermions, they can be set to zero except
for the zero modes. now we look at the superconformal constraints and solve for
x, ,  in terms of the rest of the coordinates. thus we can use the (physical)
transverse oscillators of both x and  to construct the physical states and keep in
mind the presence of appropriate zero modes. it follows from straight forward calcu-
lation that the ground state in the ns sector is tachyon. the next level obtained by
operating i contains massless states. thus we need to remove the tachyon as well
as some of the unwanted states, at the same time, keeping the massless spectrum
in tact. notice that worldsheet fermions are anticommuting objects, although they
create bosonic states while operating on a state of the theory. this feature is not very
desirable as will be evident from the following example. let us consider a specic
bosonic state of a superstring and then operate on it a worldsheet spinor, i
+, obey-
ing ns boundary condition. the resulting state will still be an integer spin object
even if we have operated by anticommuting operator; this is rather unusual. we can
think of a situation when odd number of ns operators act on a bosonic state and
obviously same situation will continue to prevail, whereas for even number of such
operators we face no problem since even number of anticommuting operators can be
grouped to behave like bosonic operators. if we demand that all the states be even

13

under (1)f , then half of states which had above mentioned undesirable feature, are
removed including the tachyon. this is the gso [40] projection. moreover, after
the unwanted states have been discarded from the spectrum, the remaining states
of the theory belong to the representations of spacetime supersymmetry when we
consider full spectrum of the superstring theory. note that the operator (1)f is
dened up to a sign ambiguity. if we choose the sign convention that the rst excited
state has (1)f = +1 which arises due to action of i, on the ground state, then
we can x (1)f quantum number of the rest of the states. in this sign convention,
tachyon will carry quantum number -1. there is another convention where tachyon
has quantum number +1 and then the massless, rst excited state, carries quantum
number -1. the fermion numbers fl and fr can be introduced separately for the left
and right moving sectors respectively. when one computes supercharge algebra with
ramond condition, the zero modes of the fermions in supercharge give an anomaly
term besides the l0 term (that is hamiltonian) and anomaly vanishes for d = 10.
moreover, the anticommutation relation of the r-zero modes are like dirac gamma
matrices carrying target space indices. one nds that massless states appear in the
r-sector and they satisfy dirac equation. they transform as ten dimensional spinors
(s) or conjugate spinors (c).since we are considering the left moving sector here at
the moment, s has +1 eigenvalue and c has 1 eigenvalue under the (1)fl. when
we construct other excited states on these states they turn out to be massive. in view
of this one need not apply gso projection, no tachyon is to be removed.
when we combine the left and right moving sectors four combinations will appear in
the description of the closed string spectrum. ns-ns, ns-r, r-ns and r-r; where
the rst sector is from left movers and second is from right movers in the above four
combinations. let us look at them one by one.
(i) ns-ns: the states are created due to the action of the creation operators from the
left and the right moving sector. they will transform as tensors under 10-dimensional
lorentz transformation. after gso projection is implemented, the lowest lying states
are massless and they can be decomposed into three groups, symmetric traceless, an-
tisymmetric tensor and a scalar under the rotations.
(ii) ns-r: the gso projection, as discussed is (1)fl = 1 and one keeps the s rep-
resentation of the r sector here. the the massless states consist of spacetime spinors.
(iii) r-ns: here the gso projection on ns sector from right side gives fermion num-
ber 1. we have the choice of keeping s spinor or the c spinor and obviously the states
are spinorial.
(iv) r-r: the fermionic operators act from both sides and therefore, the resulting
state will be bosonic in character.
it will depend what combination we decide to
keep. for example, if one keeps s from left side and c from right side the product
decomposes into a vector and a three index antisymmetric tensor (has to be antisym-
metric - it arises from anticommuting objects). these belong to the bosonic sectors of
type iia theory. there is other combination which s from left and s from right com-
bine and their decomposition is a scalar, 2-form potential and 4-form (antisymmetric)

14

potential whose eld strengths are self-dual in ten dimensions and these states are
bosonic sector of type iib theory.
we are in a position to classify string theories according to their important charac-
teristics. there are two 10-dimensional theories which have n = 2 supersymmetry
in target space. their massless bosonic sectors are as follows: type iia has graviton,
g, antisymmetric tensor b and dilaton, , coming from the ns-ns sector and
a gauge potential a and three index antisymmetric tensor potential c, coming
from the r-r sector. these two theories have 32 generators of supersymmetry; type
iia is called non-chiral theory whereas type iib is known as chiral theory. although
the bosonic elds coming from the rr sectors in these two string theories are tensors
of dierent ranks, the total number of degrees of freedom of these tensors in each of
the theories (a and b) are the same [41] and this can be checked by counting the
physical degrees of freedom rr gauge elds of type iia and iib.
next, we introduce the heterotic string which is very attractive when one tries to
establish connection of string theory with the gauge groups of the standard model.
the heterotic string, in ten dimensions, contains n = 1 supergravity multiplet, super
yang-mills gauge theory along with chiral fermions. there are two possible choices
for the gauge groups: so(32) or e8  e8, in the construction of the heterotic string.
therefore, heterotic string theory fullls green-schwarz anomaly cancellation condi-
tion. moreover, when the theory is compactied to four dimensions on calabi-yau
manifold, the resulting theory has many features of the standard model and the gauge
group su(3)  su(2)  u(1) can be embedded in the 4-dimensional theory. let us
briey discuss how the heterotic string is constructed. we discussed the closed bosonic
string and noted that the string coordinates can be decomposed to left movers and
right movers and each can be expanded in fourier modes. moreover, the virasoro
generators are also separated into two groups, one group is expressed in terms of
oscillators of one kind only (say left mover) and the other group of generators are
expressed in terms of the oscillators of the other types (left movers). when one com-
putes the quantum algebra, the anomaly free condition is imposed on each groups
of virasoro generators.
in case of a closed string with worldsheet supersymmetry,
same situation appears, because the fermion equations of motion is also written in
terms of equations of motion of the weyl majorana fermions. if we were interested in
constructing a string theory which satises requirements of conformal invariance, we
could have a left moving closed bosonic string and a right moving superstring. the
former will satisfy virasoro algebra and latter the super virasoro algebra.
the triumph of the heterotic string is that, when we look at the massless spectrum
of the theory, it has n = 1 spacetime supersymmetry, contains the appropriate gauge
groups (so(32) or e8  e8) as is required for the consistency due to green-schwarz
anomaly cancellation condition. therefore, the closed bosonic string has 16 of its
spatial coordinates compactied so that those coordinates themselves are periodic.
furthermore, using the standard techniques of 1 + 1 dimensional eld theory, the
compact bosonic coordinates could be fermionised to give 32 weyl majorana fermions

15

which are left movers. thus, we have 10 bosonic coordinates and their 10 super part-
ners (in light-cone gauge 8 bosons and 8 fermions) in the right moving sector and 10
bosonic coordinates and 32 fermions (from compact coordinates) on the left moving
sector. whenever, we adopt ns boundary conditions for these fermions arising out
of compactication, tachyon will appear in the spectrum. of course, by introducing
gso projection on the right moving sector we shall have spacetime supersymmetry.
so far as right moving part is concerned, bosonic states come from states with ns
boundary condition and fermions arise due to the ramond boundary conditions. the
choice of boundary conditions on the left moving fermions (coming from compact
directions), give rise to two dierent types of gauge groups. (i) all the left moving
fermions can satisfy r-type (periodic) boundary condition or they can satisfy ns-type
boundary conditions. then there is gso condition which ensures that there are only
states which have even number of these fermions (only one type boundary condition).
thus the massless bosonic spectrum is given by symmetric second rank tensor eld,
antisymmetric tensor eld and a scalar together with 496 gauge bosons belonging to
the adjoint representation of so(32). (ii) the second possible choice of boundary
condition for the left moving fermions is to divide them to two groups containing 16
fermions. now there are four choices of boundary conditions (a) all satisfy r bound-
ary conditions, (b) periodic (r) boundary condition is imposed on both the groups,
(c) all the fermions in rst group (call it i) have r boundary condition and the group
ii has ns antiperiodicity and nally (d) group i belong to ns boundary condition
and ii are in r. the gso projection is such that it keeps even number of fermions
from each group in the spectrum in every sector. when one works out the bosonic
spectrum, it contains again second rank symmetric tensor, antisymmetric tensor of
rank two, the scalar, dilaton and 496 gauge bosons in the adjoint representation of
e8  e8.
there is another superstring theory, known as type i. a simple way to describe type
i string is from the perspective of iib theory. consider the parity operation p on the
worldsheet such that the spatial coordinate    under p. in type iib theory, p
exchanges left and right moving sectors. now, if we demand that we retain only those
states which are invariant under p, we get the type i string. in the ns-ns sector,
graviton and the dilaton survive; the antisymmetric tensor is removed. from the rr
sector, the only surviving eld is the second rank antisymmetric tensor. moreover,
there are weyl majorana fermions and a gravitino surviving the operation giving rise
to n = 1 supergravity multiplet. the open string states are also included in type i
spectrum. in this case, the worldsheet degrees of freedom are same as in the closed
string case. one imposes neumann boundary conditions on the bosonic coordinates
and suitable boundary conditions on worldsheet fermions. the gauge group that
can get attached to the open string is so(32) and thus there is corresponding super
yang-mills theory besides the states we mentioned above.
thus there are ve perturbatively consistent string theories. the scattering of parti-
cles belonging to spectrum of a string theory can be described by introducing vertex

16

operators [43]. they are required to satisfy constraints due to conformal or supercon-
formal transformations. they must transform as representations of lorentz group,
like a wave function. in the rst quantized frame work, one can calculate scattering
of these particles in a well dened perturbation theory. it is one of the great virtues
of the superstring theories that all these calculations are ultraviolet nite. therefore,
we have ve dierent string theories in ten dimensions.
one of the most ecient ways to study properties of string theory is to investigate
the evolution of a string in the background of its massless excitations and then ex-
plore the consequences of conformal invariance for such a situation. let us consider
closed bosonic string in the background of its massless excitations such as graviton,
antisymmetric tensor and dilaton. the action (2.3) generalizes to

t
2

(z d2{abg(x) + abb(x)ax bx } +

1

2 z d2r(2)(x))(2.32)



here r(2) is the scalar curvature of the worldsheet computed with ab. the rst
two terms show the couplings of g and b to the string coordinates.
in close
string theory there is a massless state which transforms as symmetric second rank
tensor and it is identied as graviton and there is an antisymmetric massless second
rank tensor state. the above action describes motion of the string in the background
of these massless states, g and b; the last term is the coupling of the string to
the massless scalar, the dilaton. this is an action for a two dimensional -model
and we can interpret that g and b play the role of coupling constants. at
the classical level the dilaton coupling breaks the conformal invariance explicitly.
however, it is important to explore the consequences of the quantum invariance as
we have seen that the quantum invariance principle imposes strong constraints on the
theory. there is a well dened procedure to compute the conformal anomaly for such
theories[44]. one of the ways to ensure conformal invariance of the quantum theory
is to demand that the two dimensional energy momentum stress tensor has vanishing
trace. as is well known, the conformal anomaly is related to the corresponding -
function of the theory. thus, vanishing of the -functions will ensure conformal
invariance. moreover, the beta functions can be computed order by order in the
-model perturbation theory;  being the expansion parameter. the relevant -
functions are:

= r 

hh 

 + 

1
4

g



b



= [eh]

 =  + 3[()2  2  r +

1
12

h 2]

(2.33)

(2.34)

(2.35)

the notations are as follows: r is the ricci tensor for the target space computed
from the string frame metric g.  = d  26 or d  10 depending on whether we
are dealing with a pure bosonic string or superstring (if we deal with superstring the

17

coupling of worldsheet fermions to the background has to be taken into account), d
being the spacetime dimension. h = b +cycl.perm, is the eld strength of two
form potential b. it might be worthwhile to point out that for the constant value
of dilaton the last term in (2.32) is just the euler character of the surface. when we
write the path integral form with the action, we see that the factor e0 comes out;
where  is the euler character and 0 is the constant value of the dilaton. in this
light the string coupling constant is dened as

gstr = e0/2

(2.36)

let us look for an action in the target space such that the variation of that action with
respect to the backgrounds g, b and  would reproduce the -function equations
we have obtained earlier. we also know that these -functions must vanish (to the
order in  they are computed) in order to respect conformal invariance of the theory.
the resulting action is

s = z ddxge[r + ()2 

1
12

h 2]

(2.37)

this action is called the tree level string eective action. solutions of the equation
of motion of this action (same as solution to -function equation) correspond to
admissible background congurations with respect conformal invariance.
in other
words, every solution is an acceptable vacuum of the string theory to lowest order in
 since the eective action is obtained from the -function equations keeping only
lowest order terms in -model perturbation theory. therefore, if we nd solutions
which correspond to cosmological situation with given g, b and , or a black hole
solution, or a wormhole solution all these types of geometries with the appropriate
matter content, consistent with the equations of motion, can be interpreted as string
vacuum backgrounds.
so far we have been discussing the quantization of string theories and examining the
consequences of conformal invariance. note that all the consistent string theories
are dened in spacetime dimensions higher than four i.e. d = 10. therefore, one
must answer the question what these theories have to do with the spacetime where
we live. this issue has been taken up by kaluza and klein more than seven decades
ago. the basic idea is rather simple.
in order to construct a unied theory of
gravity and electrodynamics, they considered an einstein-hilbert type action in 5-
spacetime dimensions which is invariant under general coordinate transformations in
ve dimensions. let us imagine that one of the dimensions, the 5th one, is a circle of
very small radius which could not be probed today using any particle whole de broglie
wave length is comparable to the size of that circle. then we shall not be aware of
this scale. let us assume, to a rst approximation, that the metric does not depend
on the 5th coordinate. kaluza and klein showed that the resulting theory looks like
einstein theory and maxwell theory in four dimensions. what was general coordinate
invariance in 5-dimensional theory, turned out to be general coordinate transformation

18

and abelian gauge transformation (of maxwell theory) in four dimensions. although,
the original kaluza-klein proposal had many short comings, the idea is very relevant
for construction of four dimensional theories starting from the 10-dimensional string
theories in the present context. we shall explore this aspect and we shall see how
duality symmetries arise for compactied string theories. we shall set t = 1 from
now on, whenever, we shall need to introduce the slope parameter/tension , we shall
explicitly mention in that context.

3 duality symmetries in string theory

one of the marvels of the string theory is its rich symmetry structure. we have
noticed how the conformal invariance imposes strong constraints on the theory: when
we consider at spacetime the dimensionality is xed by this symmetry. on the other
hand if we consider strings in backgrounds, we get the equations of motion for them by
demanding that the corresponding -functions must vanish. moreover, there are local
symmetries like invariance associated with general coordinate transformation due to
the presence of the graviton and an abelian gauge symmetry since the antisymmetric
tensor is also a part of the massless multiplet.
the duality symmetries play a crucial role in understanding various features of string
theory. since string is an extended object, there are symmetries special to string
theory. consider a particle whose motion is on a circular path, the momentum is
quantized in suitable units of the inverse radius in order that the wave function
maintains single valuedness. however, in case of a string, one of whose coordinate
has geometry of a circle, oers more interesting possibilities. in fact a string theory
with one spatial direction compactied as s1 of radius r cannot be distinguished
from another theory whose coordinate is compactied on a circle of radius 1
r. let the
compactied coordinate be denoted by y (,  ) with the periodicity condition

y (,  ) + 2r = y (,  )

(3.1)

furthermore, the string coordinate is also periodic when  goes over 2 for the closed
string. since, the coordinate is compact, zero momentum mode must be quantized
to maintain single valuedness of the wave function just as the case in eld theory.
in case of the string, the string can wind around the compact direction. it will cost
more energy if the string winds m-number time, because it will have to stretch more.
therefore, the eect due to windings has to be taken into account too while estimating
energy levels [45]. thus the mode expansions for left and right moving sectors are:

yr = yr +s 1
yl = yl +s 1

2

2

pr(  ) + oscillators

pl( + ) + oscillators

19

(3.2)

(3.3)

the momentum zero modes pr,l will have the following form to be consistent with

what we said earlier

pr =

1
2

(

n
r  rm), and pl =

1
2

(

n
r

+ rm)

(3.4)

the above equation states that in general the contribution of the kaluza-klein mode
is 1
r times an integer and the winding mode is an integer times the radius. the total
momentum is just p = 12(pr + pl), which is integral of momentum density over .
the total hamiltonian is

h = l0 + l0 =

1
2

(p2

l + p2

r) + oscillators

(3.5)

now we consider the general case of toroidal compactication and present the deriva-
tion as was done in reference [49]. let gandb be constant backgrounds, ,  =
1, ...d, and y (,  ) are the string coordinates. the two-dimensional -model action
containing these coordinates is

icompact =

1

2 z d2 [gabay by  + abbay by ]

(3.6)

where g and b are constant backgrounds. the coordinates are taken to satisfy
the periodicity conditions y   y  + 2. here we take the compactication radius
to be unity for simplicity in calculations. for closed strings it is necessary that

y (2,  ) = y (0,  ) + 2m

(3.7)

where the integers m are called winding numbers.
it follows from the single-
valuedness of the wave function on the torus that the zero modes of the canonical
momentum, p = g y  + by , are also integers n. therefore the zero
modes of y  are given by

y 
0 = y + m + g(n  bn)
where g is the inverse of g. the hamiltonian is given by

h =

1
2

g( y  y  + y y )

(3.8)

(3.9)

where y  and y  are derivatives with respect to  and , respectively. let us
elaborate a little bit on the signicance of what we have done with respect to the
compact coordinates. since the coordinates y , are compact, they satisfy. eq.(3.7).
moreover, these coordinates can be expanded as usual in terms of their zero modes
and the oscillators. however, for the discussion of t-duality, we focus our attentions
on the zero mode parts and the contribution of these parts to the hamiltonian, given
above.

20

since y (,  ) satises the free wave equation, we can decompose it as the sum
l + p
r

of left- and right-moving pieces. the zero mode of p  = gp is given by p
where

p
l =

[m + g(n  bm)]

1
2

p
r =

1
2

[m + g(n  bm)]

(3.10)

(3.11)

the mass-squared operator, which corresponds to the zero mode of h, is given

(aside from a constant) by

(mass)2 = g(p

lp

l + p

rp

r) +



xm=1

d

xi=1

(i

mi

m + i

m i
m)

(3.12)

as usual, {m} and { m} denote oscillators associated with right- and left-moving co-
ordinates, respectively. substituting the expressions for pl and pr, the mass squared
can be rewritten as

(mass)2 =

1
2

gmm +

1
2

g(n  bm)(n  bm) +x(i

mi

m + i

m i
m)
(3.13)

it is signicant that the zero mode portion of (3.13) can be expressed in the form

(m0)2 =

1
2

(m n)m1(cid:18) m
n (cid:19) ,

(3.14)

where m is the 2d 2d symmetric matrix expressed in terms of constant backgrounds
g and b

in order to satisfy -translation symmetry, the contributions of left- and right-moving
sectors to the mass squared must agree; l0 = l0. the zero mode contribution to
their dierence is

m = (cid:18) g1

bg1 g  bg1b(cid:19)

g1b

g(p

lp

l  p

rp

r) = mn

(3.15)

(3.16)

since this is an integer, it always can be compensated by oscillator contributions,
which are also integers.

equation (3.16) is invariant under interchange of the winding numbers m and the
discrete momenta n. indeed, the entire spectrum remains invariant if we interchange
m  n simultaneously let [46]

(g  bg1b)  g1

(3.17)
these interchanges precisely correspond to inverting the 2d  2d matrix m. this is
the spacetime duality transformation generalizing the well-known duality r  1
r in

and bg1  g1b

21

the d = 1 case discussed earlier. the general duality symmetry implies that the 2d-
dimensional lorentzian lattice spanned by the vectors 2(p
r) with inner product

l, p

2 (pl, pr) 

2 (pl, pr)  2g(p
lp

l  p

rp

r ) = (mn + mn)

(3.18)

is even and self-dual ([47]).i for toroidally compactied string theory, the coordinates
satisfy periodicity condition and the conjugate momenta belong to the dual space and
are quantized in suitable units. furthermore, one can dene corresponding metric to
introduce the norm for the coordinates and their dual momentum vectors and dene
an inner product also. for a class of lattices the space of the coordinates (since the
coordinates satisfy periodicity condition it is like crystals) is the same as the dual
space, then the lattice is called self-dual. of special signicance, are the spaces where
the length of the vector is even (with the denition of norm). in that case we have
even self-dual lattice. these types of lattices are very important in construction of
string theories with nonabelian gauge groups and to satisfy consistency requirements
of the theory.

the moduli space parametrized by g and b is locally the coset o(d, d)/o(d)
o(d). the global geometry requires also modding out the group of discrete symmetries
generated by b  b + n and g + b  (g + b)1. these symmetries generate
the o(d, d, z) subgroup of o(d, d). an o(d, d, z) transformation is given by a 2d 2d
matrix a having integral entries and satisfying at a = , where  consists of o-
diagonal unit matrices dened below. under an o(d, d, z) transformation

n (cid:19)  (cid:18) m
(cid:18) m

n (cid:19) = a(cid:18) m

n (cid:19) and m  amat

it is evident that

m  n =

1
2

(m n)(cid:18) m
n (cid:19)
 = (cid:18) 0 1
1 0(cid:19) ,

(3.19)

(3.20)

(3.21)

which appears in eq.(3.16), and m 2
0 in eq.(3.13) are preserved under these transfor-
mations. note that  is symmetric 2d  2d matrix with o diagonal elements which
are d-dimensional unit matrices. the crucial fact, already evident from the spectrum,
is that toroidally compactied string theory certainly does not share the full o(d, d)
symmetry of the low energy eective theory. it is at most invariant under the discrete
o(d, d, z) subgroup.
so far, in discussing issue compactications, we have considered situations when all
the coordinates are compact. however, one can envisage the scenario, when some of
the string string coordinates are compactied and the rest are noncompact. further-
more, we treated the backgrounds to be constant; however, in more realistic situations
the backgrounds should be allowed to depend on noncompact coordinates. this is the
more interesting situation where we have a ten dimensional string theory and six of

22

its spatial coordinates are compactied on a torus t 6 so that the resulting theory is
reduced to a four dimensional eective theory. we shall adopt the general prescription
of dimensional reduction [48, 49, 50] so that we can compactify an arbitrary number
of dimensions so that the eective theory is dened in a lower spacetime dimension,
not necessarily four. this will be useful, since the duality conjectures are in various
spacetime dimensions and string theories are related by the web of dualities in diverse
dimensions.
the starting point is to consider the string eective action in d spacetime dimen-
sions. the coordinates, metric and all other tensors in the d dimensional space are
specied with a hat. the coordinates in d-dimensional spacetime are denoted by
x, , , etc are spacetime indices. therefore, d = d + d. the theory is compact-
ied on a d-dimensional torus, t d, to d-dimension spacetime. the coordinates on
the torus, sometimes referred to coordinates of internal dimensions, are denoted as
y,  = 1, ...d. the bosonic part of the action is given by

s = z d dx q ge [ r( g) + g   

1
12

h  h  ].

(3.22)

note that s is the bosonic part of the string eective action with backgrounds coming
from ns-ns sector. h is the eld strength of antisymmetric tensor and  is the dila-
ton. the backgrounds are taken to be independent of the internal coordinates, y of
the torus. consequently, any transformations of the coordinated y,  = 1, 2, ..d does
not aect the background elds and we recognize that there are d isometries. fur-
thermore, associated with these isometries, there will be d abelian gauge elds since
the d-dimensional metric will have components carrying a d-dimensional spacetime
index and an internal index . there will be components of the d-dimensional metric
which will carry indices of the toroidal coordinates, say ,  and these will transform
as scalars, often refer to as moduli. similarly, if we consider the components of the
d-dimensional antisymmetric tensor eld it will have d d component antisymmet-
ric tensor, d abelian gauge elds coming from spacetime and internal component and
d d dimensional moduli (antisymmetric) when considered from d-dimensional point
of view.

the metric g can be decomposed as
g =  g + a(1)

a(1)


 a(1)

 a(1)



g! ,

(3.23)

where g is the internal metric and g, the d-dimensional space-time metric, de-
pend on the coordinates x. note the appearance of abelian gauge elds a(1) due
to the presence of the isometries. we also expect same number of gauge elds from
the antisymmetric tensor b. thus the dimensionally reduced action is,

sd = z ddxge(cid:26)r + g 

1
12

hh 

23

+

1
8

tr(m1m) 

1
4f i

(m1)ijf j(cid:27).

here  =   1

2 log det g is the shifted dilaton.

h = b 

1
2ai

ijf j

 + (cyc. perms.),

(3.24)

(3.25)

f i
 is the 2d-component vector of eld strengths


f (2)

 ! = ai

 =   f (1)
f i
(recall b = b), and the 2d  2d matrices m and  are

  ai
 ,

(3.26)

 = b + ba(1)



a(2)
dened as

m = (cid:18) g1

bg1 g  bg1b(cid:19) ,

g1b

 = (cid:18) 0

1

1

0(cid:19) .

(3.27)

note that the elements of the matrix m, g and b depend on spacetime coor-
dinates x in contrast to the earlier case (3.15) where those back grounds were taken
to be constant. the action (3) is invariant under a global o(d, d) transformation,

m  t m, t = , ai

  i

jaj

, where   o(d, d).

(3.28)

and the shifted dilaton, , remains invariant under the o(d, d) transformations. more-
over, m  o(d, d) and m t m = . thus if we solve for a set of backgrounds, m,f
and , satisfying the equations of motion they correspond to a vacuum conguration
of the string theory. the o(d, d) symmetry is known as the target space duality (or
t-duality) symmetry, it is a stringy symmetry and there is no analogue of winding
modes in ordinary eld theory. the symmetry holds good order by order in string
perturbation theory. therefore, predictions of t-duality can be tested within the
frame work of perturbation theory. we remark in passing that, if we had considered
an eective action in d dimensions with n abelian gauge elds, the reduced action
in d dimensions will be invariant under o(d, d + n) symmetry. this is of importance,
since in case of the heterotic string, the ten dimensional action with 16 abelian gauge
elds corresponding to the cartan subalgebra of the nonabelian gauge groups of the
theory, when reduced to lower dimensions with exhibit the symmetry o(d, d + n) we
mentioned.
thus if we have a set of background congurations it is possible to generate another
set of gauge inequivalent backgrounds by implementing suitable o(d, d) transforma-
tions. the new backgrounds will also satisfy the equations of motion and they will be
acceptable vacuum congurations. in fact the o(d, d) symmetry was discovered for

24

non-constant backgrounds in the context of cosmological solutions in string theory
[51, 52], when the backgrounds carried only time dependence. one could generate
new cosmological solutions through o(d, d) transformations [53, 54]. the applications
of o(d, d) transformations in the context of black holes was to generate new black
hole solutions was initiated by sen [55] and there is a vast literature in this subject
[19, 31].
next, we discuss s-duality in string theory. this symmetry relates a theory in the
weak coupling regime to a theory in the strong coupling domain. in some it is the
same theory which gets related to itself, like the type iib theory.
in some other
situations one theory gets related to another one: a familiar example is that het-
erotic string compactied on t 4 is related to type iia theory compactied on k3. a
simple example is the maxwell electrodynamics. the equations are invariant under
e  b and b  e. however, in the presence of sources, one has to be careful.
the usual maxwell equations have only sources carrying electric charges and then
the equations are not symmetric under the above duality transformations. thus it
is necessary to add sources carrying magnetic charges to maintain electric-magnetic
duality. this led dirac to formulate the theory of magnetic monopoles. as is well
known, the existence of magnetic monopole in the theory leads to the famous charge
quantization condition: e  g = 2n, where e is the electric charge and g is the mag-
netic charge. this relation has profound implications; if the theory of electrically
charged particles is described by a small coupling constant (indeed ne structure con-
stant  = 1
137 ), then the theory describing magnetic monopoles will have large value
for such charges corresponding to strong coupling constant.
in the case of gauge
theories with spontaneous symmetry breaking, magnetic monopoles appear as clas-
sical solutions of nonlinear eld equations [56, 57]. note that the electric charge in
such theories are obtained from the noether currents whereas, the magnetic charge
of t hooft-polyakov monopoles are of topological nature. the charges respect the
dirac quantization condition. furthermore, the massive gauge bosons (acquiring mass
through higgs mechanism) have masses proportional to the gauge coupling constant,
whereas the monopole masses are inversely proportional to the gauge coupling con-
stant (electric charge). consequently, if the gauge bosons are light in a ssb theory,
the monopoles are heavy; indeed the monopoles have the interpretation of being the
solitons of the theory. one of the most fundamental contributions to developments
in s-duality came from the work of montonen and olive [58]. according to them, we
might envisage a dual formulation of fundamental physics where the role of noether
charges and topological charges are interchanged. one can visualize that monopoles
will appear as elementary particles and the w-bosons will be solitonic counter parts.
in fact one could check their mass formula m2 = c(e2 + g2); where c is related to
vev of higgs in ssb theories. in fact w boson and photon satisfy this formula. if
a particle had been discovered with magnetic charge this relation could be veried.
since it is symmetric under the interchange of e and g and diracs rule tells us that e
and g are related, one could formulate the theory in the dual picture. however, the

25

monopole mass obtained in ssb theory is a classical one and it is subject to quantum
corrections. thus, montonen-olive idea could not be consistently checked in usual
eld theories. there are special types of supersymmetric eld theories where there is
no quantum correction to the mass and furthermore, the w-bosons and monopoles
belong to the same multiplet. in such cases there is the possibility of checking this
conjecture.
we recall that the yang-mills theory also admits the introduction of the  term in its
action. thus, gauge theories have two parameters, the yang-mills coupling constant
e and the  parameter. the latter couples to the eld strengths as follows:

e2
322 f a





f 
a ,

(3.29)

f a

where f a = 
. note that this term is a surface term and does not contribute
to classical equations of motion and presence of this term does not aect renormaliz-
ability in the perturbation theory. it was noted by witten [59] that in the presence of
monopoles, this term shifts the allowed values of the electric charge in the monopole
sector. thus we can have electrically charged, magnetically charged particles and a
third kind of particles carrying both the charges. the yang-mills lagrangian can be
written in the following form after taking into account the eect of the  term and
introducing a complex coupling constant  = 

2 + 4i
e2

l = 

1

32

im( [f 

a + i f 

a ][f a

 + i f a

])

(3.30)

(i)
following qualitative argument tells us about the strong-weak duality group.
when  goes over its period 2 physics is the same. thus, we expect that the theory
be invariant when    + 1. (ii) we also know that, under electric magnetic duality,
   1
 one can argue that, when  is arbitrary, the duality group is generated by
these transformations. thus, the duality group is identied to be sl(2, z). there-
fore, in a theory with sl(2, z) symmetry one could check the spectrum with charged
particles, monopoles and dyons. the complex coupling constant  is often referred to
as modular parameter or moduli. moreover, when we discuss strong-weak duality in
the context of string theory, dilaton and axion will be combined to dene the moduli
eld. as mentioned earlier, string theory does not admit any arbitrary parameters as
coupling constants. all the coupling constants appear as vev of some scalar elds,
i.e. moduli. therefore, very often, the term coupling constants and moduli are used
interchangeably in string theory.
as mentioned earlier, the mass formulas are protected from quantum corrections in
supersymmetric theory. moreover, some of the solitonic solutions in the supersym-
metric theories satisfy special properties: (i) they saturate the bps bound and (ii)
these solutions preserve a part of the supersymmetry of the original theory. these
attributes play a very important part in testing duality conjectures in eld theory
and in string theory.
in order to illustrate the basic point, let us consider a two

26

dimensional example due to witten and olive [60], where the eld content is a scalar
eld and majorana fermion. the lagrangian density is

l =

1
2

[()2 + i   v 2()  v () ]

(3.31)

the potential is arbitrary function of  and prime denotes derivative with respect
to . as was the case in worldsheet supersymmetry, we can work in terms of chiral
components of fermions and the two super charges are

q+ = z dx[(0 + 1)+  v ()]
q = z dx[(0  1) + v ()]
in light-cone variables q2
= p, with p = p0p1 and it turns out that {q+, q} =

0, in most of the case. however, careful analysis shows that the anticommutator, is
proportional to a surface integral

(3.33)

(3.32)

{q+, q} = 2z dx


x

h()

(3.34)

and h() = v (). this surface integral does not necessarily vanish when one
considers solitonic states. if we denote the r.h.s. of (3.34) by the operator t, then it
can be evaluated for the case at hand. now the algebra of charges are dierent from
usual case and one can write

p+ + p = t + (q+  q)2

p+ + p = t + (q+ + q)2

(3.35)

(3.36)

the r.h.s. of each equation above has a piece which is a complete square and we
have p+ + p  |t|. if we consider single particle of mass m and go to its rest frame
p = m; we arrive at
(3.37)
the bound will be equality when we have states, |si such that (q+ + q)|si =
(q+  q)|si = 0. the bound on m is the bogomolny bound. the state
0 or
which saturates it is called a bps state. this bound also can be derived in a lorentz
covariant manner. we note that, for the states saturating the bps bound, only
half of the supersymmetries are preserved.
in string theory or eld theories with
large number of supersymmetries, the algebra of the charges for a set of charges
{q},  = 1, ...n, can be brought to the form

m  |t|

{q, q} = 

27

(3.38)

this will be possible if there are no states which are annihilated by some of these
charges and in that case, we shall get supermultiplets as usual. however, just like the
soliton case considered earlier, if there are states which will be annihilated by some
charges then we shall have a situation where

for a, b = 1, ..m

{qa, qb} = ab,
{q, q} = 0, ,  = m + 1, ...n

(3.39)

(3.40)

o(6,22)

so we see that these states will be lower dimensional representations since m < n.
again, citing the example of two dimensional case, we can state the general result that
when there are soliton like states getting annihilated by some of the supercharges,
then the symmetric matrix {q, q} will have some zero eigen values. the charges
(analog of t) and masses get related in the process. this is true for monopoles in
4-dimensional theories. the string eective action is dened in 10 dimensions and
one can seek solutions for extended objects in space and there are bps states in this
regime too.
let us compactify the heterotic string eective action on t 6 to come to a four di-
mensional theory. as mentioned earlier, the t-duality group is o(6, 22) with scalars
o(6)o(22) , 28 gauge bosons, graviton g and antisym-
parameterizing the moduli
metric tensor b. the four dimensional eective action for the heterotic string,
following the prescriptions of [49], can be obtained in a straight forward manner. the
t-duality invariance is manifest when we are in the string frame metric with shifted
dilaton   1
2ln detg. however, when one considers the s-duality properties of the
theory, it is convenient to go over to the einstein frame metric,g through the con-
formal transformation, g = eg. in string theory, all the coupling constants are
related to the vev of the dilaton and therefore, in order to identify the parameters
of s-duality group, we have to choose the eld whose vev will coincide with the 
parameter. notice that the eld strength of antisymmetric tensor, h has only one
degree of freedom in four dimensions when we x all gauge freedoms. in fact, if we
take dual of this eld, it is a pseudoscalar particle and that is what we need, an axion.
the starting point is the four dimensional eective action [64] with einstein frame
spacetime metric

s(4) = zm

dx g(cid:26)r 

1
2

g + l2 + el3 + e2l4(cid:27)

with l2, l3, and l4 dened as follows
1
8

l2 =

tr(m1m) .

l3 = 

1
4f i

(m1)ijf j

28

(3.41)

(3.42)

(3.43)

l4 = 

1
12

hh 

(3.44)

here we closely follow the notation of [49] and [64]. the next step is to perform
a duality transformation, which replaces the eld b by a scalar eld . this is
achieved by rst forming the b equation of motion

and solving it by setting

(g e2h ) = 0

g e2h  = 

(3.45)

(3.46)

where  is the axion and  is a constant to be xed later.
dierential forms,

in the language of

or, using h = db  1

2ijai

f j,
db =

h = e2  d

1
2

ijai

f j + e2  d

the bianchi identity (d2b = 0) now turns into the  eld equation

1
2

ijf i

f j + d(e2  d) = 0

or, in terms of components, (choosing a convenient value for )

(e2g g) 

1
8

ijf i

f j

 = 0,

this is an equation of motion if we replace the l4 term in s(4) by
f  f(cid:19) ,

s = z dxg(cid:18)1

e2g +

1
4

2

where

f  f 

(3.47)

(3.48)

(3.49)

(3.50)

(3.51)

(3.52)

1

2g

f i

ijf j

 .

let us briey recapitulate the steps we have taken to modify the four dimensional
action in the einstein frame. the eld strength h appearing in l4 is traded for
the pseudoscalar axion, . the resulting action (3.51) contains not only the kinetic
energy term of the axion, but also the topological term which is like the  dependant
term of the yang-mills action if the vev of  is identied with that parameter.

let us now regroup the terms in the dual action in the following way:

s(4) = zm

dxg(r + l2) + sd + sf ,

(3.53)

29

1

1

where

(3.54)

sd = 

dxg (cid:18)ef 2 + f  f(cid:19)

dxgg(cid:18) + e2(cid:19)
2 zm
4 zm
sf = 
. note that s(4) contains the usual einstein-hilbert
(m1)ijf j
and f 2  ggf i
action and the part coming from kinetic energy term of the m-matrix. we have rear-
ranged the actions coming from dilaton kinetic energy, gauge eld part and the axionic
part (together with the topological term) to dene sd and sf so that dilaton and
axion are put together and the gauge eld kinetic energy along with the topological
term are clubbed together. this is very useful to study the s-duality properties of the
action. in order to describe the sl(2, r) symmetry of the dilaton and axion kinetic
terms, let us introduce a complex modular parameter (recall the case of yang-mills)

(3.55)

which has the nice property that under a linear fractional transformation

 =  + ie ,

 

a + b
c + d

the combination

g  
(im  )2 = g( + e2)

is invariant. it immediately follows that

sd = 

1

2 zm

dxg

g  

(im  )2

.

(3.56)

(3.57)

(3.58)

(3.59)

now we consider the gauge eld action , sf . notice that the sl(2, r) transfor-

mations give rise to an electric-magnetic duality rotation. let us dene

f = mf  i f .

then, using the identity f +m1f = 0, we can express sf as

1

sf = 

16i zm
the a equation of motion is

dxg(cid:18)f +m1f +

  fm1f(cid:19) .

and the bianchi identity is

(f +

  f) = 0

(f +

  f) = 0 .

30

(3.60)

(3.61)

(3.62)

(3.63)

to exhibit sl(2, r) symmetry it is necessary to have a transform at the same
time as  . the appropriate choice is to require that f transform as modular forms
as follows
(3.64)

this implies that

f +
  (c + d)f +

 , f  (c + d)f .

f +

  (a + b)f +
 ,

f  (a + b)f .

(3.65)

thus the equation of motion (3.62) and the bianchi identity (3.63) transform into
linear combinations of one another and are preserved.
in particular, the negative
of the unit matrix sends f  f. this result is acceptable if we identify the
symmetry as sl(2, r). note that sl(2, r) is not a symmetry of the action. the
transformation in (3.64) is a nonlocal transformation of a, and such transformations
can do strange things to the action. for example, the total derivative f f transforms
into an expression that is not a total derivative.
thus far we have focused the attention to dilaton-axion system and the gauge eld
part of the action. the explicit checks show that the rest of the equations of mo-
tion are invariant under s-duality transformation. while checking the invariance
of the einstein equation we must ensure that that the contribution of sf to the
energymomentum tensor is sl(2, r) invariant. after a short calculation one nds
that only terms of the structure ef +f survive, and these are invariant since
e  |c + d|2e. the symmetry of the equations motion is sl(2, r). notice
that the axion couples to the topological density term, product of f and its dual.
we can argue qualitatively that the part of the sl(2, r) group which gives rise to
the translation symmetry of the axion (vev of  is the  angle) should break down
to discrete group of translations due the instanton eects. a more careful analysis is
necessary [42] to show that sl(2, r) breaks to sl(2, z).
the low energy string eective action, in four dimensions, contains graviton, anti-
symmetric tensor, dilaton and nonabelian gauge bosons. furthermore, the poincare
dual of the three form eld strength is a pseudoscalar and this eld can be identied
as the axion. one can combine dilaton and axion to form a doublet of the s-duality
group sl(2, r). it was argued [61, 62] that s-duality is an exact symmetry of the
string theory. schwarz and sen [63] provided a general formulation of s-duality in
string theory. indeed the heterotic string compactied on t 6 has the eective action
of n = 4 supersymmetric theory. how one can test s-duality in this case. one of the
important results in this direction was rst derived by sen [96] when he showed that
there are certain dyonic states in the theory whose existence can be demonstrated
using s-duality transformations on heterotic string actions. these states precisely
coincide with the ones we expect from montonen-olive conjecture. the theory has
electrically charged states and magnetically charged states and each is 28-dimensional
vector for the heterotic string. due to nonrenormalization theorem of n = 4 super-
symmetric theory, the electric charges are not renormalized. moreover, the spectrum
of the magnetic charges are xed by the generalized dirac quantization condition; the

31

se =

1

2 z d10xg[r 

1
2

()2 

1
12

eh 2]

(3.66)

magnetic charges are not renormalized either. thus, spectrum of theses charges will
be same as in the tree level theory. indeed, the multimonopole moduli could be com-
puted for the heterotic string [96]. in fact, the study of nonperturbative aspects of
supersymmetric yang-mills theories took new directions through the works of seiberg
and witten [66] in sequel to sens work.
it is interesting to look for extended objects which appear as solution to equations
of motion of string eective action. simplest extended object is a string which is one
dimensional. let us denote the worldsheet coordinates of this string as 0 and 1
and the spacetime coordinates as {x}. this should appear as solution to string ef-
fective action. suppose, we consider a frame where (0, 1) lie along the spacetime
coordinates (x0, x1) respectively. we look for a spherically symmetric solution such
that the solution is static and it depends only on the magnitude of the transverse
8 where x2...x9 are denoted as yis.the eective action has
graviton, dilaton and antisymmetric tensor elds. in the einstein frame the action
has the form

distance, r = qy2

1 + ... + y2

the macroscopic string solution which was identied with the heterotic string [67] is
obtained for following background congurations

ds2 = f 3

4 (dt2 + (dx1)2) + f

1

4 dyidyi

b01 =

1
f

the rest of the components of b are set to zero and

f = 1 +

q
3r6

(3.67)

(3.68)

(3.69)

here q is the charge carried by the string and it is associated with antisymmetric
tensor eld. the eld equations one needs to satisfy are: einstein equation, dilaton
eld equation and axionic charge conservation which follow from eld equation of h.
if we look at eld equation carefully there is a delta-function singularity at r = 0 in
the laplace equation 2f . therefore, it was proposed [67]to resolve this problem by
introducing a source for the string which will be the -model action

s = t

2 z d2[ax ax g + abax bx b]

(3.70)

here of course the metric g is the string frame metric. this is the string solution
carrying electric charge and this charge can be obtained from the conservation law.
indeed, q = 2t /7 where 7 refers to the volume of s7.
in the supersymmetric
case, there are bps saturating solutions and here mass per unit length is equal to the
charge.
in four dimensions the dual of electromagnetic eld tensor is also a two form, thus if

32

we have point particles, the dual objects are point-like (t hooft-polyakov monopoles
look point like at large distances). however, if we have a string in ten dimensions it
couples to 3-form eld strength the dual of that eld strength is 7-form. therefore,
the solitonic object for the string is a 5-brane, extended in ve spatial dimensions.
in fact the p-brane solutions were found in sequel to the string solutions [68]. as in
case of monopole solution, we do not have magnetic source term while looking for
eld equations (w-bosons carry electric charge), the solitonic ve-branes solutions
are derived without adding a source term. moreover, if e2 is electric charge of the
string and g6 is magnetic charge of soliton, the dirac quantization condition is

e2g6 = 2n

(3.71)

one has to be careful in deriving strong-weak duality relation here. the coupling
constant is determined in terms of dilaton expectation value. the relations are e2 =
e0/2 and g6 = e0/6.
there are special type of extended objects, the dp-brane (d-branes), which carry
r-r charges [69]. the type ii theories admit gauge elds from the rr sector. the
corresponding eective contain these elds.
if one look for p-brane solutions with
these gauge elds: strings, membranes and so on, they have interesting properties.
these are hypersurfaces or spacetime defects on which the open strings can end. in d-
dimensions, if there is a dp-brane, there are neumann boundary conditions satised in
(p+1)-directions, these are the directions of the worldvolume coordinates of dp-brane
and we have dirichlet boundary conditions along the remaining transverse directions
that is (d  p  1) coordinates. written explicitly,

x  = 0, f or  = 0, ...p

x ( = 0, ) = a

0 , f or  = p + 1, ...9

(3.72)

(3.73)

a dp-brane will couple to (p + 2)-form rr eld strength; therefore, d0-brane is a
particle, d1-brane is a string and so on. the corresponding fermions satisfy boundary
conditions in accordance with the bosonic elds in order to maintain the worldsheet
supersymmetry. the bps saturated solutions, then preserve half of the supersym-
metry. from our earlier discussions, we note that type iia admits d0-brane and
d2-brane (their dual objects too) and iib string has d-string, d3-brane and d-
instantons, along with the duals. thus, we conclude that iia has even d-branes and
odd d-branes belong to iib theory. of course, we are discussing the 10 dimensional
case. the d-branes are dynamical objects and there are excitation of such extended
objects since open string ends are attached to them.
consider a situation when two d-branes are separated from each other. since open
string ends can get attached to this surface, they will be connected by open string/strings.
the farther apart the two branes, it will cost more energy to stretch the open string.
more interesting is the conguration when d-branes lie on top of each other. then
we can visualize an open string starting from a brane and ending on it, open string

33

starting from one brane and ending on another coincident brane. in this situation
we have massless states since there is no stretching of strings. open strings contain
massless vector state in their spectrum. one can incorporate nonabelian gauge sym-
metry for such a theory by introducing the chan-paton factors. we can imagine a
scenario where a quark belonging to representation i of u(n) is attached to one end
of the string and an antiquark in representation j attached to the other end. thus
the gauge eld will carry index i and j like usual yang-mills elds and these are
called chan-paton factors. this characteristic of open string turned out to be useful
when we consider coincident d-branes. therefore, if there are n coincident branes,
we get u(n) yang-mills action, in fact we get supersymmetric gauge theory on the
worldvolume of the brane.
let us discuss some of the implications of dualities in the context of the branes we
just introduced. the experience from monopole solution is that the charged particle
couples to the eld strength tensor and the soliton couples to the dual tensor in four
dimensions. in ten dimensions, the solitonic counter part of string is ve brane and
we saw that couplings are not really reciprocals of each other.
if we consider six
spacetime dimensions, then we note that dual of 3-form eld strength is also another
3-form tensor and string couples to this tensor. therefore, the conjecture is that in
six dimensions there is string/string duality. if there is a fundamental string the soli-
tonic counter part is a string too and their coupling constants satisfy the reciprocal
relation. for simplicity, consider a six dimensional reduced action, with only metric,
antisymmetric tensor eld and the dilaton [70].

i6 =

1

22 z d6xge[rg + ()2 

1
12

h 2]

(3.74)

where gm n is six dimensional metric in string frame and hn m p is the 3-form eld
strength associated with bm n and it is understood that h is dened up to chern-
simons terms. we can go over to einstein metric by the relation gm n = e/2gm n ; 
being the dilaton in six dimensions. let us consider the dual six dimensional action

i6 =

1

22 z d6xq ge [r g + ( )2 

1
12

h 2]

(3.75)

here  is the corresponding dilaton and h is the eld strength of the b, 2-form
potential of the dual theory. the two actions (3.74) and (3.75) are related if we
identify

 =   and

(3.76)
the two metric being identied to be equal. here  stands for hodge dual. note
that just as in case of gauge eld kinetic energy term in four dimensions is confor-
mally invariant, the h 2 term is also conformally invariant in six dimensions and it
is immaterial which metric we use while taking hodge dual. as noted earlier, the
fundamental string solution with action(3.74) can be obtained by adding a -model

h = e  h

34

source term with coupling of the g and b backgrounds. the solution is given by

ds2 = (1 

q2
r2 )[dt2 + (x1)2 + (1 

q2
r2 )2dr2 + r2d2
3]

with

e = 1 

q2
r2

e  h3 = 2q23

q2 =

2t
3

of course we have the bps saturated mass relation

m = t < e



2 >

(3.77)

(3.78)

(3.79)

(3.80)

(3.81)

therefore, the mass density gets heavier as string coupling proceeds towards strong
coupling domain. the source free action (3.74) also admits solitonic string which is
nonsingular and the solution is

q2
r2 )2dr2 + r2d2
ds2 = dt2 + (dx1)2 + (1 
q2
e = 1 
r2
h3 = 2q23

3

where q2 = q2 t
3

the mass density is

m = t < e



2 >

(3.82)

(3.83)

(3.84)

(3.85)

in the weak coupling regime this string is heavier as one expects of a solitonic string.
notice that the solitonic string diers from the fundamental string by the replacement
  , gm n  gm n , h  h = e  h,   . the noether charge and the
topological magnetic charge are respectively given by

e2 =

1

2 zs3 h3, and g2 =

1

2 zs3

h3

(3.86)

the dirac quantization rule for charges: e2g2 = 2n gets translated to relation be-
tween tensions. moreover, the fundamental string and dual string saturate bogo-
molnyi bound for mass densities and break half of the supersymmetry as expected.
these solutions have the interpretation of being limiting cases of more general so-
lutions. they can be viewed as extreme mass equals charge limit of two-parameter
black string solutions.

35

o(4,20)

1
gii
str

again the question arises where can we test the string/string duality ? it has been
conjectured that [71, 72, 73] heterotic string compactied on t 4 is s-dual to type iia
theory compactied on k3. when heterotic string is compactied on t 4, the theory
has charged states saturating bogomolnyi bound. on the iia side, elementary string
states are neutral since the gauge elds arise from rr sector. moreover, for type
iia, the analysis of the bogomolnyi formula tells us the charged states (under gauge
elds) have their masses as
, implying that these are solitonic states. the duality
between heterotic and type iia is understood in the following sense[74, 75]: in type
iia theory, there are nonsingular soliton solutions and these carry quantum num-
bers of fundamental heterotic string. the properties of those strings are consistent
with those of the heterotic string. on the other hand the hetetotic string admits
solitonic solutions carrying the quantum numbers of type iia string. moreover, we
know that the moduli of heterotic string compactied on t 4 parameterize the coset
o(4)o(20) . when type iia is compactied on k3, the moduli also turns out to be
exactly the same. therefore, there is a very good evidence for this heterotic - type
iia duality conjecture. another duality relation, that has been veried, is toroidal
compactication of iia and iib theory via t-duality. again the simplest one being
compactication on s1. if one theory is compactied on circle of radius r, it is equiv-
alent to the other theory compactied on circle of reciprocal radius [76], although in
ten dimensions these are two dierent theories. some of the important consequences
of s-duality can be examined in type iib theory.
it is conjectured that type iib
theory is self-dual and the eective action can be cast in a manifestly sl(2, z) in-
variant form. we shall study this aspect in the next section. the two heterotic
strings i.e. so(32) and e8  e8 when compactied on s1 are t-dual to each other
in the reciprocal radius sense that one theory compactied on a circle of radius r
is equivalent to the other which is compactied on a circle of radius 1
r . finally, we
comment that heterotic string with so(32) gauge group is s-dual to type i theory
with so(32) group. the heterotic string eective action, with so(32) gauge group
has the following form

shet = z d10xg[r 

1
8

()2 

1
4

e 

4 tr(f)2 

1
12

e 

2 h 2]

(3.87)

here f is the nonabelian eld strength and h = db. we work in the einstein
frame as it is the most convenient frame to study s-duality properties, since this
metric remains invariant under s-duality. this action is obtained after rescaling the
backgrounds and the slope parameters. the type i string has graviton and dilaton
coming from the closed string ns sectors and closed string rr sector gives the anti-
symmetric tensor. the gauge elds come from ns sector of the open string and they
have to be in the adjoint representation of so(32). again with appropriate scalings
the eective action can be brought to the following form

si = z d10g[ r 

1
8

( )2 

1
4

e



4 tr( f)2 

1
12


2 h 2]

e

(3.88)

36

here all the elds of type i theory are dened with bar to distinguish from those
of heterotic string theory and the metric is in einstein frame. now, the comparison
between the two actions shows that they will be identical if

 =  ,

g = g, h = h,

a = a

(3.89)

thus, if we compare the two actions, (3.87) and (3.88), we see that the two theories are
str = e. there
related to each other by strong-weak duality in 10-dimensions, since g2
are host of duality relations among various string theories in diverse dimensions; we
refer the interested reader to large number of review articles in this area.

4 m-theory and unied string dynamics

we have briey introduced some of the essential features of string theory and their
symmetry properties. there are ve perturbatively consistent string theories and one
of their most attractive attributes is that they describe quantum gravity which is per-
turbatively nite and unitary. the dualities are powerful symmetry properties which
provide important information about intimate connections between string theories.
we have seen that one string theory, in a spacetime dimension, is related to another
string theory either through t-duality or by the s-duality. when two theories are
s-dual to each other, we can study strong coupling regime of one theory by going over
to the weak, perturbative domain of its dual theory. therefore, the nonperturbative
aspects of some of the string theories could be investigated by these powerful tools.
however, we still have ve string theories. therefore, the natural goal is to search
for a theory which will provide a unied description of all the ve string theories.
the zero slope limits of the string theories yield all the known 10-dimensional su-
pergravity theories. however, there is the d = 11 supergravity theory consisting of
graviton and 3-form potential, endowed with total 128 bosonic degrees of freedom,
and the 128 fermionic degrees of freedom. it was shown several years ago [77] that
compactication of 11-dimensional theory on a circle gives rise to n = 2 supergravity
theory in 10-dimensions. it was not possible to establish any relation between the
11-dimensional theory and any string string theory for a long time. the connection
of n = 2, 10-dimensional supergravity with string theory is rather transparent since
the supergravity actions can be obtained in the zero slope limit of corresponding type
ii string theories. there was no string theory that could be related in some such
limit to 11-dimensional supergravity. therefore, if 11-dimensional supergravity were
to have any connection with one of the string theories, then only the nonperturbative
regime of a theory will show the inter-relation. moreover, when one views from the
11-dimensional perspective, the supergravity theory does not have any small parame-
ter, like e, in string theory, which can be chosen to take small value as an expansion
parameter.
the connection between type iia string theory and 11-dimensional supergravity were

37

recognised by witten [73] and townsend [78] following the developments in string du-
alities. the massless bosonic sector of the type iia theory, we might recall from our
discussions of section ii, consists of dilaton, , graviton, g and gauge eld, a,
antisymmetric tensor, c coming from the ns and ramond sectors respectively.
the eective action of type iia theory

siia =

1
22


10 z d10xg[e(r + ()2 
10 z f4  f4  a

1
42

1
12

h 2)  (

1
4

f 2 

1
48

f 4

2)]

(4.1)

we have suppressed the lorentz indices of the eld strengths and we shall dene
them now: r is the scalar curvature, h is the eld strength of b from the ns
sector, f is the eld strength of rr gauge potential a and in form notations,
4-form eld strength, f 4 = dc3 + a db; c3 being the 3-form potential coming from
the rr sector and b is the 2-form potential whose eld strength is h. last term
in (4.1) is the chern-simons term. and f4 = dc3 is the antisymmetric 4-form eld
strength of potential c3 a few remarks are in order at this point: the metric used
in action (4.1) is the string frame metric. note that the factor e multiplies only r
and h 2 piece; elds coming from the ns sector. the reason is that in the worldsheet
supersymmetric formulation of nsr type ii theories the r-r sector elds through
local worldsheet interactions (in ns sector the worldsheet elds couple to potentials),
couple via bilinears of spin elds (in fact to eld strengths). as a consequence, there
are cuts and the usual arguments that tree level term starts with 1
does not go
gstr
through. thus we see this mismatch of e between ns and rr elds in the eective
action. now, it is easy to see that this theory will admit d0-brane and d2-brane and
their duals will be d6-brane and d4-brane from rr sector and a string and its dual
ve brane from the ns sector.
let us consider the bosonic part of the eleven dimensional supergravity action

s11 =

1
22

11 z d11xq g[ r 

1
48

f 2
4 ] 

1
122

11 z c3  f4  f4

(4.2)

here the eld with tilde belong to bosonic components of 11-dimensional supergrav-
ity. let us compactify one of the spatial dimensions on s1, following the procedure
outlined in the last section. there will be a gauge eld and a scalar eld, when the
metric is expressed is decomposed in terms of the metric of the 10-dimensional theory.
the 3-form potential will decompose into a 3-form potential but with additional piece
according to the procedure of [48, 49] and a two form potential will appear as well.
it is most convenient to express the 11-dimensional metric in the following form

gm n = e 1

3 (cid:18) g + eaa

ea

ea

e (cid:19)

(4.3)

the dimensional reduction of (4.2) goes over exactly to the type iia action (4.1).
note that if we had not adopted this form of the decomposition of the 11-dimensional

38

metric with the over all factor of e 1
3  and the factors of e in various places inside the
matrix; but had compactied on a circle of radius, say, r; we would have obtained
a reduced action with 10-dimensional metric, the moduli r and the antisymmetric
tensor potentials (2-form and 3-form) with appropriately modied c-s terms. the
resulting action in ten dimensions would need some eld redenitions to match with
the type iia action. let us see how the radius of compactication r11 is related to
3 ))2 and by
type iia string coupling constant g(a)
denition e = (g(a)

str )2. therefore, we conclude that

s

. note from (4.3) that r2

11 = (e( 2

r11 = (g(a)
str )

2
3

(4.4)

therefore, in the perturbative regime of the type iia theory, the radius of compacti-
cation of the 11-dimensional theory is very small. when we want to go over to the
decompactication regime i.e.
large radius limit of 11-dimensional theory, we cant
realise that domain since it is the strong coupling phase of the type iia theory and
perturbation theory does not provide any clue for the existence of the 11th dimen-
sion in the ten dimensional theory. the correspondence established between type
iia theory and 11-dimensional theory is at the level of the eective action. the 11-
dimensional supergravity has a 3-form potential in the bosonic sector and the natural
extended object is a membrane. the 10-dimensional theory admits a string as a fun-
damental object and supergravity action is zero slope limit of the string theory. how
can one establish the relation between membrane and the string ? the idea of dou-
ble dimensional reduction provides an important clue. one can envisage a situation
where we start from a membrane in eleven dimensions and compactify 11th dimension
on a circle. then, according to the prescription of double dimensional reduction [79],
the membrane wraps around the compact direction so that the end result is the ten
dimensional string.
we have described in the previous section how one can establish connections among
the ve string theories various dimensions through duality transformations in dierent
spacetime dimensions; although there are ve distinct ten dimensional theories when
viewed in the perturbative frame work. the 11-dimensional theory is also recognised
to play an important role in string dynamics. it is believed that there is an underlying
fundamental theory, yet to be discovered, so that the manifestations of the theory in
its various phases are realized through the string theories. it is postulated that in
the low energy limit, we should derive the 11-dimensional supergravity action as an
eective theory. the unknown fundamental theory is named u-theory. since the 11-
dimensional theory naturally admits membrane as a fundamental extended solution,
it has been argued that the underlying fundamental theory is a theory of membranes.
the m-theory is taken to be the underlying theory. we shall illustrate, with a few
examples, that starting with an eleven dimensional theory with membrane, how one
can obtain a host of relations about the structure of branes in various string theories.
since the bps states do not get any quantum corrections, it is interesting to look for
bps states and then propose tests for the theory. when we compactify m-theory on

39

a circle, the momenta in that direction will be quantized and we shall get towers of
kk massive states. these states will fall into representations of the 11-dimensional
supergravity. in fact they are bps states. in the kk reduction, the charge of a state
(in the lower dimensions) is related to the momentum along the compact direction
(thus automatically quantized) and in some suitable units the charge is proportional
to m
, m being an integer. this is the charge associated with the gauge eld a as
r11
a result of s1 compactication (4.3). from the type iia point of view this charge
is that of gauge eld coming from rr sector and the whole tower should exist as
bps state. we know already that elementary string states are rr-charge neutral
and those massive towers belong to rr sector. we can identify the state with unit
charge, m = 1 as a d0-brane of type iia theory. the open string ends can get at-
tached to d0-brane and act as the collective coordinates to give excitations. one can
show that iia theory has those bps states belonging to the ultra-short multiplets
and these also correspond to the states counting done from m-theory side. therefore,
we notice that duality between type iia theory and m-theory is established for such
states. in case of m > 1, the test is not so simple. one of the properties of bps
states is that the binding energy for composite bps states is zero. that means, if
we have a single d0-brane, a bps state with m units of charge, we cant distinguish
it from collection of m bps particles each carrying unit charge. thus a test for the
general case is rather dicult.
the relation between m-theory and type ii theories can be established by exploiting
the duality relations. note that type iia and type iib theories are t-dual to each
other when one of the directions is compactied. since m-theory with one compact
direction, s1, is related to type iia, therefore, m-theory with two compact dimen-
sions, compactied on t 2, is expected to be intimately connected [80] to type iib
with one direction compactied to s1. we shall see that one needs to exploit the
sl(2, z) s-duality symmetry of type iib theory in this context [81]. the type iib
theory has graviton, 2-form antisymmetric potential, b(1)
 and dilaton,  in the ns
sector and 2-form potential, b(2)
 , axion,  and 4-form potential, d in the rr
sector; the eld strength of d-eld is self dual. for our purpose, it suces to drop
the d-eld from considerations presently. the action is

1

1
12

sstr =

2 z d10xg[e(r + ()2 
h (1)  h (2) 

this action is written in the string frame metric.
it is useful to go over to the
einstein frame by the conformal transformation. furthermore, to write the einstein
frame action in a manifestly sl(2, z) invariant form, let us dene

1
12
h (2)2

2h (1)2

1
6



()2

h (1)2

1
2

) 

1
12

]

(4.5)

m = (cid:18) 2 + e e

e (cid:19) , h = (cid:18) h (1)
h (2)(cid:19)

e

(4.6)

40

then the action,

se =

1

22 z d10x[rg +

1
4

tr(mm) 

1
12

htmh]

this action is invariant under the transformations

m  mt , h  (t )1h and g  g

(4.7)

(4.8)

if one looks for a string solution in this theory then the solutions will be of three
kinds: strings carrying ns charge, strings with rr charge and ones with both ns
and rr charge. the procedure adopted in [81] is as follows: rst look for a string
solution with ns charge such that asymptotic values of axion, 0 = 0 and that of
dilaton 0 = 0. in the language of complex moduli introduced earlier, asymptotic
value of 0 = i. moreover, one starts with h (2) = 0, since one is looking for a string
carrying ns charge only. next introduce a specic sl(2, z) transformation such that
the resulting string carries both types of charges; the relevant matrix is

 =

1
1 + q2

2 (cid:18) q1 q2
q1 (cid:19)

q2

qq2

(4.9)

although the string carries both types, ns and rr charges, still the modulus
preserves the asymptotic value, 0 = i. finally, introduce a general sl(2, z) trans-
formation so that 0 will take arbitrary value as a result of the duality transformation.

the matrix is  = (cid:18) e0/2 0e0/2

e0/2 (cid:19). as a consequence of the sl(2, z) transfor-

mation, not only we have strings which carry charges (q1, q2), but also the tensions of
the strings depend on these charges; after all these are bps strings. the formula for
the tension of string with (q1, q2) charges is

0

tq = [e0(q20  q1)2 + e0q2
2]

1

2 t

(4.10)

where t is the tension of the ns string one started with for which 0 = 0 = 0 i.e.
0 = i. since we consider sl(2, z) transformations, q1 and q2 should be integers. for
stable strings, (q1, q2) should be relatively prime; otherwise these string will decay
if we compactify this theory on s1, more interesting results
into multiple strings.
follow.the spectrum of the nine dimensional theory is governed by the mass formula

m 2

b = (

m
r

)2 + (2rtqn)2 + 4(nl + nr)

(4.11)

here we have explicitly kept the tension term showing that when the string winds n
times it stretches by its perimeter and energy is obtained by multiplying the tension
tq. the last term is sum of contributions from left and right oscillators. the level
matching condition tells us nr  nl = mn. the bps saturating multiplets have

41

either nl = 0 or nr = 0; ultrashort corresponds to both being zero. if we choose
nl = 0, then mass formula is (also level matching relation is used)

m 2

b = (2nrtq +

m
r

)2

(4.12)

we have a rich spectrum and these masses should remain protected from any quan-
tum corrections.
we can describe the same phenomena by compactifying the m-theory on t 2. there
is membrane in m-theory with tension t11 and if it wraps m times on a torus of area
a11, then the contribution to mass will be of the form ma11t11. but the area is
a11 = (2r11)22, 2 being the modular parameter of the torus and  = 1 + i2 the
area is computed using 11-dimensional metric. since we are considering compacti-
cation of the m-theory on t 2, the wave function of the two dimensional laplacian
(corresponding to two coordinates on the torus) must satisfy periodicity property
appropriate to the torus and the mass formula should be suitably generalised with
respect to mass formula for a string compactied on a circle.

m 2

11 = [m(2r11)22t11]2 +

1
r11

[l2
2 +

1
2

2 (l1  l21)2]

(4.13)

l1, l2 are integers which enter the mass formula as the contribution to the kk part
x  2
since the two dimensional laplacian 2
i
r11

y acting on the wave function

l1,l2(x, y) = exp{

(4.14)

[xl2 +

y(l1  l21)]}

1
2

it is easy to see the periodicity property of the wave function by dening z = (x +
iy)/2r11, since the invariance now translates to z  z + 1 and z  z +  in order to
compare the above mass formula, obtained from m-theory with t 2 compactication,
with the corresponding one (4.12) from type iib in 9-dimensions, we should recognize
that (4.14) is derived using 11-dimensional metric. therefore they could dier from
each other by a multiplicative constant: m11 = cmb. now the exact matching of the
mass formula implies that the the modular parameters of t 2, denoted as , should be
identical to the parameters of sl(2, z),  . thus the modular group appearing in t 2
compactication of m-theory , sl(2, z) is identical to the duality group, sl(2, z),
of type iib theory.the following relations should be satised for matching of (4.12)
and (4.14)

r2 = t t11a

11, and c 2 =

3
2

2r11e0/2t11

t

(4.15)

since type iia theory, in 9-dimensions, is related to iib theory by t-duality, we
can also get some insight into d0-branes in iia theory. the mass spectrum of these
(point) particles can viewed from two perspectives. one way is to identify the winding
modes of the family of type iib strings on the circle with the kk modes of the torus;
and the other way of looking is to identify kk modes of the circle with wrapping of

42

5

2

3 = 1

2 (t (b)

2

is determined from the dirac quantization relation in terms of t (m )

the membrane on the torus. again the mass formula matching relations can be used
to relate parameters on both sides.
there is also a ve brane, the soliton counter part of fundamental membrane, in the
m-theory and these are the only two extended objects in the 11-dimensional theory.
therefore, one expects that m-theory should be able to give description of ns branes
and dp-branes in the lower dimensional string theories. moreover, the membrane
tension of 11-dimensional theory, t (m )
, is the only parameter since the 5-brane ten-
sion, t (m )
. in
order to study the branes in 9-dimensional theory, we should see how dierent branes
arise from m-theory and from type iib theory. the simplest is the 2-brane. in case
of m-theory, the membrane remains a membrane; but type iib in 10-dimensions has
no membrane (due to the absence of even rr eld strength), therefore, the d3-brane
of ten dimensional iib theory wraps around s1 to produce a membrane. but the
type iib string tension also is related to t (m )
since membrane wraps around torus
to produce the string. so the simplest result is d3-brane tension and string ten-
sion of type iib are related: t (b)
)2; this result involves only iib theory
tensions derived through m-theory route. the 9-dimensional iib theory will have d3-
branes too. they will arise, from m-theory view point, as wrapping of the 5-brane
around t 2. there are 4-branes in 9-dimensional iib theory. since 10-dimensional
iib theory has sl(2, z) pair of strings, their solitonic partners 5-branes will come in
same multiplets too. these 5-branes, compactied on s1, will give the 4-branes in
9-dimensions. similarly, one can discuss type iia theory from both the perspectives
in ten dimensions. if we dene l = 2r11 as the perimeter of the compact circle, then
tension of iia string gets related to t (m )
since iia string, in 10-dimensions, will arise
a lt (m )
due to wrapping of membrane around the circle. the relation is t (a)
.
for type iia membrane we have t (a)
. the 4-brane in iia theory will
come from wrapping of m-theory 5-brane around the circle and the relation becomes
4 = g 5
t (a)
. then using relation be-
tween t (m )
, one can get
5
an expression: t (a)
5 = 1
the purpose of above examples was to illustrate how one can derive a large number
relations using the m-theory.
in lower spacetime dimensions, the theory provides
a rich basis to understand branes coming from various theories. we would like to
record one important fact for our future considerations. note that the formula (4.10)
of general (q1, q2) string is for a string carrying ns and rr charges. for a string with
only ns charge the (1, 0) the tension scales as t  g
b and for the one carrying only
unit rr charge it is t  g 1
b . in the string frame, after rescaling the metric, we nd
that a string with one unit of ns charge has tension of order 1 and the string with
one unit of rr charge has tension g1
b . therefore, the mass density also has same
dependence on coupling constant.
there are duality relations which relate compactied m-theory to other string theo-

together with the relation between t (a)
2 (t (a)

and we must also have t (a)

5 = g2

a t (m )

2 = g1

a t (a)

1 = g 2

3

a lt (m )

5

and t (m )

5

and t (m )

)2.

2

5

4

2

2

1
2

2

3

2

2

2

43

2

ries. one of the interesting cases is e8  e8 heterotic string in ten dimensions [84].
there is no other string theory which can be related to this one. so it is expected that
e8  e8 is connected to the 11-dimensional theory. but it cannot be s1 compactied
m-theory, because that compactied theory is type iia as we have seen. moreover,
11-dimensional theory as such is free from anomalies. however, if one considers com-
pactication on s1
of m-theory it gets related to e8  e8 ten dimensional theory.
z2
the orientation of s1 is reversed under z2 and it ips the sign of 3-form potential
c. as a consequence of this projection, we are left with the metric in ten dimension,
the dilaton and 2-form potential. the gauge boson and 3-form potential c are pro-
jected out. the surviving fermions are majorana-weyl gravitino and majorana-weyl
fermion. this is the supergravity in the bulk. actually, s1
is a line segment with xed
z2
points at the boundary. these are two copies of 10-dimensional at space. the states
from twisted sector should be localized on these planes. it was shown that half of the
anomalous variation is localized in one plane and the other half on the other plane.
the possible gauge groups that can cancel the anomaly are e8  e8 or u(1)496. it is
obvious the string theory to be identied is the e8  e8 heterotic string. there are
other duality conjectures [85, 86, 87] between m-theory and other string theories in
lower dimensions: m-theory on k3  heterotic/t ype i on t 3. compactication of
m-theory on t 5
is dual to type iib on k3. the lower dimensional compactications
z2
t 8
z2
there are attempts to construct gauge supersymmetric gauge theories by choosing
suitable combinations of intersecting branes and establish seiberg-witten dualities
from this m-theory point of view of susy yang-mills gauge theories. undoubtedly,
the dualities together with the proposal for m-theory has brought us nearer to the
goal of unied description of string theories. however, the underlying fundamental
theory is yet to be discovered although we have seen many facets of that theory.

are related to type i/ heterotic on t 7 and type iib on t 8
z2

respectively.

and t 9
z2

5 black holes and string theory

the physics of the black holes has many fascinating aspects. the classical black hole
is the nal stage of a collapsing heavy star. as the name suggests, matter falls into
it and nothing comes out; there is an event horizon. however, deeper investigations
have revealed, almost a quarter of a century ago, that there are strong similarities
between thermodynamics and black hole mechanics [88, 89]. if m is mass of the black
hole,

1

dm =

kda,

a  0

(5.1)

8g

here g is the newtons constant, a is the area of the event horizon and k is the
surface gravity. this is to be compared with thermodynamical relation,

de = t ds,

s  0

(5.2)

44

hawkings startling discovery [90] that black holes radiate with a black body spec-
trum of temperature t = hk
2 , when quantum eects are accounted for, raised several
important issues in black hole physics. one can also associate entropy with a black
hole

a

4gh

sbh =

(5.3)

the thermodynamical relations used to describe macroscopic phenomena can be
derived from statistical mechanics starting with microscopic fundamental laws of
physics. since h appears in the black hole entropy formula, it is expected that the
microscopic derivation of black hole entropy requires quantum gravity calculations.
moreover, entropy of a system, when interpreted from statistical mechanical point of
view, counts the total number of degrees of freed in the system. how do we count
the number of degrees of freedom in a black hole and obtain the expression for en-
tropy? there are more fundamental issues related to quantum mechanics when we
carefully examine the implications of hawking radiation. we can think of allowing
some matter to go into the black hole, prepare the initial state as a pure quantum
state to be the incident wave. however, the emitted hawking radiation has a black
body distribution and thus these are mixed states. therefore, the s-matrix that will
describe the above process will loose its unitarity property.
in the perturbative regime, string theory can provide reliable results for computations
of processes involving graviton. the resulting s-matrix elements respect the required
unitarity and analyticity properties. thus, it is pertinent to ask what string theory
has to oer in resolving the issues alluded to earlier. recently, one of the important
achievements of the string theory has been the microscopic derivation of the black hole
entropy, for a special class of black holes that arise in string theory. we shall, initially,
not set g = 1, to bring out a few salient points in discussions of stringy black holes
and some times we shall display presence of h in formulas. recall, that the newtons
constant is related to string coupling and tension as g  g2
str/t , in four spacetime
dimensions. if we have a massive string state, the gravitational eld is gms, where
ms is mass of a string state measured in units of t; also some times we shall denote
it as m. thus, the eld increases as string coupling increases. string states are given
my the mass formula m 2 = nt and it is well known that at a given mass there
are a lot of states and the degeneracy [92] grows exponentially with mass, i.e. em .
thus one might think that the excited states, if treated as black holes, will reproduce
the entropy formula; however, this simple argument in not adequate since black hole
entropy grows like m 2, whereas the naive argument will give sbh  m. there have
been attempts to explain this discrepancy saying that the mass that would appear in
microscopic derivation of sbh is not the same as the one appearing in bekenstein-
hawking formula and there might be renormalization eects to be accounted for [91].
the perturbative string states appear in innite levels and thus, for high enough mass,
the massive elementary string state will lie inside the schwarzschild radius associated
with it. consequently, they will require black hole descriptions. one of the ways

45

1

gstr

1

gstr

1
g2
str

; but the solitons for rr sector still have mass order

to derive black hole entropy microscopically is to consider such bps states, so that
when string coupling gets strong, the state is unchanged. in this approach [93], rst
step is to pick up appropriate bps state and compute the microscopic entropy. next,
compute the bekenstein-hawking entropy of the bps state, it is also an extremal
black hole, and verify whether the two ways of calculating entropy are in agreement.
this is the rst clue that string theory might explain black hole entropy in micro-
scopic way. however, the black holes constructed from the elementary string states
had some short comings while computing the entropy. the area of the event horizon,
for such black holes, tends to zero as one approaches the extremal limit; moreover,
the dilaton also diverges at the horizon in this limit. this problem was encountered
for string states in the ns sector.
the d-brane in rr sector can come as elementary states and there are corresponding
solitonic states contained in the full spectrum. we had argued in the context of type
iib sl(2, z) strings that in string frame metric, ns states have tensions of order 1,
whereas, d-strings had mass density of the order of
. for the solitons of ns sector
. in the
the mass goes as
weak coupling regime ns solitons and rr ones are heavy. we should account for the
gravitational elds they produce, which is gm. in view of above discussions, (i) ns
elementary states produce very low eld and (ii) rr states also produce low eld in
weak coupling limit; eld tends to 0 as gstr  0. we may argue that in this regime,
at spacetime is a good description of the geometry. since we are dealing with bps
states, as string coupling increases the mass remains unchanged, but the gravitational
eld keeps increasing and after some critical coupling, the spacetime is not at any
more; we must employ general theory of relativity. if these states describe black holes,
then we should be able to compute the degrees of freedoms associated with them. it
is possible to construct black hole conguration such that the area of the horizon in
not zero nor the dilaton diverges at the horizon, when we take the extremal limit.
for ve dimensional black holes, we need at least three charges to have nonzero area
for the horizon together with constant value for the dilaton at the horizon. in case of
the four dimensional black hole needs four charges in order to satisfy the requirement
of nonzero horizon area and nite value of dilaton (at the horizon).
the black holes which we shall consider now have some special characteristics. they
can be thought of as composites of many d-branes carrying ramond charges. we
have mentioned before that the bps states have the property that mass of composite
bps state is the sum of the masses of the constituents. one starts in the weak string
coupling phase with such d-branes and proceeds towards strong coupling domain
when gravity becomes strong. in weak coupling regime, the degeneracy of the level
can be estimated reliably and microscopic entropy can be computed. in the strong
coupling domain, the d-brane is inside the horizon and one can treat this like a black
hole and compute the ratio a
4g , which is independent of string coupling gstr since both
area and newtons constant grow like g2
let us discuss how the ve dimensional black hole conguration is constructed with

str.

46

d-branes [94]. we start with type iib theory in 10-dimensions. we know that it
will admit d1-string and d5-brane. we want to make the composite object heavy;
therefore, we put q5 number of d5-branes and q1 number of d1-strings together. let
us compactify this theory on t 5 such that the q5 number of d5-branes are wrapped
around t 5, the q1 d1-strings wrap along one of the directions of the torus. then
put some momentum along the direction in which the d-string wrapped; this mo-
mentum will be quantized in units of inverse radius of s1. the aim is to evaluate
the microscopic entropy by counting number of degrees of freedom for this system
and it involves some detail technical steps [95, 96, 97, 98]; but we shall outline only
essential points. we expect to have a u(q5) supersymmetric yang-mills theory on
the d5-brane worldvolume. this will be a gauge theory in 5 + 1 dimensions which is
derived by dimensional reduction of n = 1 supersymmetric yang-mills theory from
ten dimensions [95]. the d-string is inside this pack of d5-branes (q5 of them).
the d-string can be viewed as an instanton in this six dimensional spacetime, since
an instanton in 6-dimensional theory with no time dependence and extension in one
direction is a string. there are q1 such strings in the d5-brane conguration. their
low energy dynamics is described by two dimensional supersymmetric sigma model
in 4q1q5 dimensional hyper kahler manifold. every boson contributes factor 1 and
every fermion contributes 1
2 to the central charge as we noted in sec. ii. thus, total
central charge is

c = 6q1q5

(5.4)

since we are dealing with bps states, for these states l0 = 0 and the momentum
given along s1 is related to the dierence l0  l0.
if we take momentum to be
large i.e. ps =  n
r , n large; then using cardys result (relating degeneracy to central
charge), one gets

the black hole entropy computed from the microscopic view point is given by

d(q1, q5, n) = exp(2qq1q5n)

(5.5)

(5.6)

smicroscopic = 2qq1q5n

in order to derive the black hole entropy, sbh , from bekenstein-hawking formula,
we have to specify the metric, the charges and then compute the area of the event
horizon in the extremal limit.
there is way to visualize the physical processes that lead to microscopic [99] derivation
of the entropy formula. the d-string is inside d5-brane and the low level excitations
are the lowest lying modes of the open strings attached to this one. if we think of the
physical degrees of freedom, these are 8 transverse vectors and their super partners.
since these have to satisfy the dirichlet boundary condition, they are constrained
to move along the d-string. we are dealing with bps state, therefore, these move
only in one direction (say left). since the d-string is wrapped around one circle
of t 5, we choose x1, then length is winding number times the radius of the circle.
but the momenta of individual open strings moving on this unidirectional path on

47

the circle is quantized. moreover, sum of their momentum is constrained too by
the total momentum we have put on that direction. therefore, this is analogous
to solving statistical mechanics of a one dimensional system on a circle where total
energy (momenta are same as energy) is xed.
the next step is to dene the metric for the above conguration of the branes and the
obtain the harmonic functions that are necessary to satisfy the equations of motion
for the brane congurations [100, 101].

ds2 = h 1/2

1 h 1/2

1 h1

5 (cid:26)[h1
2 +    + dx2
5 (dx2

+h1

5 (k1dt2 + k(dx1  (k1  1)dt)2)

5) + dx2

9(cid:27)
6 +    + dx2

we specify the compact directions as follows:
the q5 number of d5-branes are
wrapped in x1, .....x5 directions, d-string is wrapped in x1 and the momentum is
along x1 too. since we toroidally compactify to ve dimensions xi, i = 1, ...5 are
periodic and the radius of compactication is ri along ith direction. and

(5.7)

(5.8)

(5.9)

(5.10)

(5.11)

(5.12)

(5.13)

e2 = h1

1 h5, b01 = h1

1  1

hijk =

1
2

ijkllh5,

i, j, k, l = 6, ......, 9

r2 = x2

6 +    + x2

9

the harmonic functions are equal to

h1 = 1 + c1

q1
r2 ,
q5
r2 ,

c1 =

gstr3

v

c5 = gstr

h5 = 1 + c5

k = 1 + ck

qk
r2 ,

ck =

str4
ng2
r2
1v

where v = r2r3r4r5, we displayed the  dependence to show how the dimension-
ality of the charges appear, but now on we set the slope to unity as usual. let us
briey note how the charges arise in this black hole. there is electric charge q1
coming from b01 which is a gauge eld now, after compactication of x1 coordinate.
the q5 charge is magnetic type originally attributed to d5-brane in 10-dimensions.
after compactication the poincare dual of that 3-form rr eld strength is two form
eld strength and it becomes an electric charge counting d-brane charges. of course,
the third charge comes from momentum given along x1 direction and is quantized.
when any one of these charges vanishes, the area of the event horizon vanishes too.
the dimensional reduction [49] over the periodic coordinates x1, ...., x5, yields the

48

5-dimensional eective action. the metric in the ve dimensional space takes the
following form

ds2 = 2/3dt2 + 1/3(dr2 + r22
3)

where

 = h1h5k = (1 + c1

q1
r2 )(1 + c5

q5
r2 )(1 + ck

qk
r2 )

(5.14)

(5.15)

this corresponds to an extremal charged black hole and the horizon is located at
r = 0. however, the area of the horizon is nonzero and it is proportional to the
product of the charges. the expression for the area is

a5 = (r21/3)3/2|r=0 = qc1q1c5q5ckqk(22) =

g2
str
r1v

(5.16)

the newtons constant in ve dimensions gets related to the ten dimensional newtons
constant after we compactify on t 5 and the relation is

g(5)

n =

g(10)

n

(2)5r1v

=

1
4

g2
str
r1v

therefore, the entropy is equal to

sbh =

a5
4g5

= 2qq1q5n

(5.17)

(5.18)

this expression exactly agrees with the expression for smicroscopic. a few comments
are in order to discuss the constraints on the parameters for the above relation to be
valid. the string eective action adopted to obtain the brane solutions is valid when
string loop corrections and  corrections are nonleading. the string loop correc-
tions are small when gstr  0 with the values of the charges held xed. the charges
if we want ignore  correction
correspond to characteristic scales of the system.
terms then the charges should be larger than string scale i.e. q1, q5 and n are much
larger than . if the compactication radii of the torii be taken as order of string
length scale, then we should have gstrq1, gstrq5, g2
strn >> 1. this tells us that
n >> q1  q5 >> 1.
the entropy of nonextremal black holes can be considered in a similar manner; how-
ever, we must keep several points in mind. first of all, the extremal black holes are
bps stated and they get no quantum corrections. therefore, whereas the microscopic
entropy is computed in the weak coupling phase, the bekenstein-hawking entropy is
obtained after we go over to the strong coupling domain so that the composite d-
brane conguration lies inside the horizon. in case of nonextremal black holes, we
have no theorem against quantum corrections and therefore, passage to strong cou-
pling limit is not so simple. it is argued, that a black hole which is slightly away
from extremality might allow smooth increase of the coupling constant as one starts
from weak coupling limit. this type of black holes conguration can be achieved by

49

allowing some low level right moving oscillators compared to the high left moving
levels (note that for extremal case nr = 0). we shall not discuss the properties of
these black hole in detail here.
the bps extremal black holes are stable and they have zero temperature; there-
fore, they will not emit hawking radiation. if we intend to understand the hawking
radiations from black holes in string theory, we have to look for those ones which
are excited states and can decay into lower energy state. the starting point is to
consider a nonextremal black hole. since there will be left and right movers, the
open string states will be going in opposite directions on the d-string. again, it is
a one dimensional problem where one can imagine that two oppositely moving open
string states collide to give a closed string state. if we were to calculate the s-matrix
element for such a process, we shall consider initial state, nal state and a suitable
interaction hamiltonian for our computational purpose.
in order to get the emis-
sion rate, one will take modulus square of this amplitude, average over initial states,
sum over nal states and divide by usual phase space factor. the state of the initial
nonextremal black hole is given by occupation numbers nl and nr and the amount
of momentum we give on the compact circle which are going in opposite directions.
the momenta are quantized as n
r in either direction and thus the closed string state
will carry momentum 2n
r . as we have seen there are 4q1q5 bosonic and fermionic
oscillators. the string theory calculation gives the amplitude for emission of a closed
string state from these initial state [100]. the sum over nal state and averaging over
initial states leads to a factor lr, where for example

r =

1

ni xi hi|nr|ii

(5.19)

where ni is the total number of initial states and nr is the number operator of right
movers. we might carry out the averaging over all possible initial states with a given
value of nr by adopting the statistical mechanical prescription. the problem actually
maps to the case of one dimensional gas and the microcanonical ensemble can be used
since we are holding nr xed; energy is held constant. the conguration of the black
hole is such that nl >> nr > 1. if k0 is the momentum of out going massless
closed string the nal calculation give the decay rate as

d  (area)

k0
tr

e
1  e ko

tr

d4k

(5.20)

a more careful calculation [102] reveals a surprising result that not only the form of
thermal distribution is recovered, but also the numerical coecients match with semi-
classical results of hawking. the result has been derived for four dimensional black
holes as well [103]. it is an interesting question to ask whether one can calculate the
absorption cross section of an extremal black hole for a closed string massless scalar
and then relate that cross section to the decay rate of a nonextremal black hole by

50

using the principle of detailed balance in quantum mechanics taking into account all
the subtelities. indeed explicit verication shows that such a check yields the correct
result [104].

6 m-theory and the m(atrix) model

1

gstr

our present understanding of string dynamics together with duality symmetries
strengthen the belief that there is a fundamental theory and the ve perturbatively
consistent theories are dierent phases of that underlying theory. however, we do
not know what this theory is except the conjecture that the low energy limit of this
theory is the 11-dimensional supergravity action. there are deep questions about
the structure of this theory. we shall call it the m-theory. we recall that strong
coupling limit of the type iia theory is identied with 11-dimensional supergravity.
when viewed from type iia perspective, the existence of d0-branes as nonpertur-
bative rr point like objects is quite important for our discussion. they are bps
states and their mass is of the order
and scaled by 10-dimensional length scale
ls. these being bps states, one could assume that there are threshold bound states
of many, say n, d0-branes which satisfy the properties of bound bps states. now
if we take the strong coupling limit, then it is found that the low energy spectrum
is same as the spectrum of the 11-dimensional supergravity. this is an important
evidence. furthermore, the 11-dimensional theory is known to admit membrane and
ve brane and we have argued how one can study properties of various brane con-
gurations in string theories after compactifying the m-theory. the m(atrix) model
[105, 32, 33] can describe perturbation expansions of various string theories. there
is a limit in which the theory provides connection with 11-dimensional supergravity
theory. however, one would like to seek answers to several questions from this the-
ory. for example, the general prescription for the compactication of the theory is
not known. similarly, the complete set of degrees of freedom of this theory is to be
obtained. the m(atrix) theory, nevertheless, provides insight into nonperturbative
denition of string theory and it also exhibits string dualities [106]. one can also go
over to various string theories by adopting dierent limiting prescriptions.
the model resorts to innite momentum frame (imf) technique boosted along a
compact direction. the momenta along compact direction is quantized; and one
starts with n units of these momenta and then n   limit is taken. since one
is working in the light-cone frame while constructing m(atrix) theory, the theory is
not manifestly lorentz invariance. thus lorentz invariance might be recovered in the
large n limit. in the m(atrix) model formulations one encounters parameters which
have the interpretation of being expectation values of scalars when viewed from the
string theory side. but in the m(atrix) model when we have imf formulation, these
constant modes have innite frequency and they are frozen into xed conguration.
the theory in its present formulation is not background independent. moreover, one
encounters problems while compactifying the theory on an arbitrary d-dimensional

51

torus. we may remind the reader that the m(atrix) theory provides a rich structure
to study various aspects of string theory from m-theory stand point.
the innite momentum frame (imf) technique played a very useful role in current
algebra [107].
in eld theoretic calculations it simplies perturbation theory cal-
culations [108, 109]. when we have to deal with a collection of particles, we can
dene imf to be a frame where the total momentum is taken to be very large. if we
designate particles by index i, j... then

pi = ip + pt i

(6.1)

where t stands for transverse and p  pt i = 0,p pt i = 0 and i  1. for a highly

boosted coordinate system we could have all i positive. particularly, for the case
at hand, we deal with massive particles and we can choose an appropriate frame to
satisfy our requirement. energy of any particle satises relativistic relation

ei = qp 2

i + m2

i = ip +

t i + m2
p 2
i
2ip

+ ..

(6.2)

it is understood that there are terms higher order in 1
p denoted by dots. the expres-
sion for energy is similar to that of a nonrelativistic particle in a lower dimension with
mass term taking a modied form. when we use a light-cone (lc) frame, a spatial
direction is identied and designated as longitudinal. the longitudinal momentum is
pli = ip and one denes pi = ei  pli = ei  i p . the mass shell condition
translates to p+ipi  p 2

i and we can rewrite this relation as

t i = m2

ei  ip =

t i + m2
p 2
i
pi+

(6.3)

in the limit of large p, we have ip large and therefore, ei  ip with pi+  2ip .
when m-theory is envisaged in imf, let us designate the momenta as p0, pi, i =
1, ..9 and p11. one compacties 11th direction with and this is also boosted, therefore
{pi} are collectively denoted as pt . thus for collection of the d0 particles

e  ptotal

11 = xi

2

pt i
2pi11

(6.4)

we note that there are 32 real supercharges in the theory. when one adopts imf
description, it is convenient to split them into two groups each having 16 of them.
the charges in every group transform as spinors of so(9). let us denote charges as
q,  = 1, ...16, and qa, a = 1, ..16. the algebra of these charges are

{q, q} = h, {qa, qb} = abp11

{q, qa} = i

api

52

(6.5)

(6.6)

here h is the hamiltonian operator, ps are the corresponding momentum operators
and i are 16 dimensional gamma matrices.
we have discussed earlier, how d0-brane has a natural interpretation from the 11-
dimensional theory with a compact coordinate and the rr charge is related to quan-
tized momenta along this direction. the relation between mass and charge is satised
since these are bps states. there exists a sector with n units of d0-brane charge,
carrying kaluza-klein momentum n
. if we hold n xed and take a limit r11  0,
r11
we go over to the weak coupling phase of string theory; however, in the passage to
this limit, the string scale is not held xed. the aim is to study the phenomena in
the 11-dimensional theory and thus l11 is to be kept xed. we recall that

r3

11 = g2

strl3
11

(6.7)

and the string length scale, l2
. thus as the compactication radius tends to
zero string scale diverges. we have also seen earlier, as the radius shrinks, the mass
of d0-brane tends to innity, when measured in 11-dimensional planck units in ten
dimensions. in other words the mass of d0-brane is

11
r11

s = l3

1
gsls

=

1
r11

(6.8)

and therefore, it is appropriate to identify them as the kk modes. thus, when we
consider mass of the these particles in 10-dimensions, in scales of eleven dimensional
theory, the particles become very heavy and a nonrelativistic description is quite
adequate. if we were to describe m-theory in terms of type iia zero branes, then we
have a scenario where m-theory is equivalent to n   limit of the nonrelativistic
quantum mechanics of n d0-branes which are in weak coupling phase of type iia
theory. furthermore, as witten has argued [95] the physics of n coincident d0-branes
is described by dimensionally reducing ten dimensional u(n) supersymmetric yang-
mills theory to 0 + 1 dimensions [110]. let us consider supersymmetric quantum
mechanics of a single d0 particle. the starting point is the action

z dttr(cid:18) 1

2gstr

(d0x i)2  it d0 +

1

4gstr

([x i, x j])2 + t i[x i, ](cid:19)

(6.9)

this is the action obtained from 10-dimensional super yang-mills theory reduced to
one dimension. here i = 1, ...9 stands for transverse directions and  are real spinors
with 16 components. since x i and  come from the gauge groups, they are in the
adjoint representations of u(n). since they carry only time dependence, these are
n  n matrices. d0 = t + [a0, ] is the covariant derivative and this can be converted
to ordinary derivative with the gauge choice a0 = 0. the mass of d0-brane is order
1
dt )2. note that the action
gstr
(6.9) contains parameters of type iia theory. it is convenient to scale x i = gstr
3 y i
which amounts to rescaling of the metric to that of 11-dimensional theory. moreover,

, thus the rst term in (6.9) can be written as r dt m

2 ( dxi

1

53

one scales the time variable as t = gstr
action is rewritten as

2

3  and denotes the  derivative by a dot. the

s = z d tr(cid:18) 1

2r11

( y i)2  it  +

r11
4

([y i, y j])2 + rt i[y i, ](cid:19)

(6.10)

if i = y i
r11
corresponding hamiltonian is given by

and  = it are conjugate momenta of y i and  respectively, the

h = r11tr(cid:18)1

2

2
i 

1
4

([y i, y j])2  t i[y i, ](cid:19)

(6.11)

and therefore, the energy is given by e = 
p11

n|i, which is equivalent to seeking a solutionh|i = r11

one can dene h  r11 h for convenience factoring out over all r11. notice also that
the potential energy term 1
4 r11tr([y i, y j])2 is non-negative. when r11  , we are
in decompactication phase of m-theory. thus, the nite energy states of h are those
for which the hamiltonian h has vanishing eigenvalues. one seeks those states for
which h|i = 
n |i where 
is nite. we know that, for collection of n number of d0-branes, the total momentum
p11 = n
. we have to identify  with
r11
1
2p 2
t if we recall (6.4). the n  n matrices x i can be interpreted as the location
of n d0-branes. when we consider the potential term in y i variables (6.10), we
notice that there are at directions when [y i, y j] = 0. here we deal with a quantum
mechanical system and y i have are the collective coordinates. in such situation as
mutually commuting y i, we can diagonalize y i = diag (yi
n is the
ith coordinate of the nth d0-brane. it is easy to see that there is invariance under
galilean translation, y i  y i + di1 and the galilean boost y i  y i + vit1 as is
expected of a nonrelativistic system, here 1 is the unit matrix. the boost will aect
the center of mass momentum; but neither the relative momenta nor interaction term
are aected by these transformations.
we can consider two clusters separated from one another. this is familiar in composite
model of hadrons where quarks are the basic constituents. in the parton picture, the
proton is made of large number of partons with very small binding energy and one
could describe photon-hadron deep inelastic scattering in imf [111]. in this case we
can think of congurations where the n  n matrices y i can be decomposed to block
diagonal form of say n blocks of n1 n1, n2 n2, ....nn nn such that pm nm = n.
this decomposition can be interpreted as if we have n separated clusters of d0-branes
where each of the clusters has n1, n2, ..nn number of particles. the distance between
two clusters can be dened as

1, yi

2...yi

n ). thus yi

where a and b are the two clusters. now we can visualize how the potential will
it comes from tr([y i, y j])2 and this goes like modulus squared of the o
arise.
diagonal block elements multiplied by the minimum of the r2
ab and an appropriate

1
na

tr ya 

1
nb

rab = (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(6.12)

tr yb(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

54

numerical constant. thus, if we consider well separated cluster of d particles, the o
diagonal elements are required to be small; otherwise, the potential will grow like r2
ab.
we should keep in mind that the system is supersymmetric and having a harmonic
oscillator type potential does not imply ground state energy is that of the oscillator.
the supersymmetric quantum mechanical system has a very rich structure. this
becomes transparent if we consider a single d0-brane, i.e. n = 1.

h =

r11
2

2
i 

r11
2

p 2

t =

pt
p11

(6.13)

when we look at this equation from 11-dimensional point of view, this corresponds to
the relation between energy and momentum of a massless particle in imf. when we
take into account the 16 component fermions,  we eventually get the supermultiplet
with 256 total degrees of freedom and this agrees with the massless degrees of freedom
of n = 1 supergravity in eleven dimensions. in fact the bosonic components are 128
equal to fermionic degrees of freedom. as is well known, there 44 components from
graviton and 84 from the antisymmetric tensor eld in 11-dimensions. when we have
n > 1, it is necessary to separate the center of mass motion and dene the relative
coordinates and the decomposition is as follows:

y i = y i

r + y i

cm1,

y i
cm =

1
n

tr y i

i = r i +

1
n

pcm i1, pcm i = tr i

(6.14)

(6.15)

and tr y i
terms

r = tr r i = 0. now the total hamiltonian will be written as a sum of two

h = hcm + hr

(6.16)

1
p11

(pcm i)2

(6.17)

with

hcm =

n = 1
p11

(pcm i)2 =

r11
2n
note the appearance of the factor r
as expected. we have dened the center
of mass coordinate, canonical momentum and the hamiltonian by taking trace over
u(n) matrices. therefore, the relative hamiltonian is a function of {y i
r , i r}.
thus hr is quite similar to the original hamiltonian; however, all the variables are
su(n) matrices, they are traceless since the trace part is separated out.
it has
been shown that the relative hamiltonian has zero energy bound states due to the
presence of supersymmetry [95, 112, 113]. the total energy is due to the center of
mass energy: e = ecm = 1
(pt cm)2. in this case one also gets the supergravity
2p11
multiple which has 256 states. therefore, for any n, we see that the spectrum contains
supergravitons. suppose we decompose y i to various blocks which describe clusters
of d-particles. in the simplest case, if the submatrices are exactly block diagonal so
that o diagonal elements are zero, then the total hamiltonian will be given by sum

55

x i = gstrx i,

1
2
i 6= 8, 9

(6.18)

(6.19)

of n separate hamiltonians without any interactions amongst them.
if we let the
o diagonal elements appear (give them small values), that will amount to switching
on interactions between the clusters. the physical picture is that we have several
clusters, each cluster will have its supergraviton in the spectrum. there could be
arbitrary number of them and therefore, we let n go to innity. thus the matrix
model contains the full fock space of supergravitons. the interaction among the
supergravitons is described due to the presence of o diagonal elements and one
should be able to describe various processes involving supergravitons in this picture.
in order to compute s-matrix element for scattering of two supergravitons when their
transverse velocities are small, we have to determine potential between them. one
starts by considering the classical congurations and the uctuations over them to
compute the eective action [114]. suppose we give transverse velocity v and dene
the impact parameter as b and expand the coordinates around their backgrounds as
follows:

x 9 =

1
2

b3 + gstrx 9 , x 8 =

vt3 + gstrx 8

here x i denotes the uctuations and 3 is the pauli matrix. when we have van-
ishing uctuation, the classical conguration is such that total transverse center of
mass momentum and position vanish. the 2  2 matrices are block diagonal which
describes two clusters of d0-branes and in this case we have n1 = n2 = 1. now the
separation between the two particles is given by rab = v2t2 + b2. the eective action
can be computed using the standard techniques and the order h term will contain
determinant of (basically) propagators when we restrict to one loop level.thus

sef f = s0 +z d vef f (r( ))  z d vef f (v2 2 + b2)

(6.20)

for large impact parameter, the long range part of the potential in the leading order
is given by [114]

vef f (r) = 

15
16

v4
r7 + higher orders

(6.21)

the result is striking in the sense that this form of the potential can be derived from
the supergravity action at the tree level i.e. considering graviton exchange. thus
starting from s simple m(atrix) model description, one could extract a result of 11-
dimensional supergravity.
the 11-dimensional supergravity admits supermembrane.
it is worthwhile to ask
how much the m(atrix) model can tell us about the underlying membrane theory.
the membrane is extended object in two spatial directions as the name suggests.
moreover, the dimension of spacetime in which the supermembrane can exist is quite
restricted [115, 25]. the reason for such constraints lies in the fact that the action
contains wess-zumino-witten term and the supersymmetry invariance of the full
action restricts the spacetime dimensions to 4,5,7 or 11. the membrane is described

56

by z (, ,  ), where ,  and  are the worldvolume coordinates. when one adopts a
hamiltonian formalism, a xed  -slice is chosen and thus the explicit  dependence in
z  does not appear and the derivatives with respect to worldvolume time are traded
for canonical momenta p. the light-cone gauge is a convenient description to see
the physical degrees of freedom and in this gauge the membrane hamiltonian takes
the following form [116]

hm =

1

2p11 z dd
(2)2p 2

i +

(2t2)2

4p11

z dd({z i(, ), z j(, )})2 + fermionic terms

(6.22)

where the brackets appearing is the second term are dened as

{a, b} = ab  ab

(6.23)

and t2 is the membrane tension. let us assume that the worldvolume of the mem-
brane can be written as r, where  has the topology of a torus. for this topology,
z i(, ) is a double periodic function and we can expand z i in double fourier series
with z i
mn as the fourier coecients. thus we have nine    matrices and same
would be the case if we had considered nine y is in the n   limit. in order to
establish relation with the membrane hamiltonian (6.22), we have show how the com-
mutator [y i, y j] goes over to the bracket {z i, z j}. for arbitrary nite n, introduce
two n  n matrices u and v , satisfying the properties
u n = v n = 1, and uv = e

(6.24)

n v u

2i

this can be realized if u and v have the following special form uj,j+1 = un,1 = 1 and
and all other matrix elements set to zero. a more abstract, t hooft,
vj,j = e
representation is

2i(j1)

n

u = eip, v = eiq,

[p, q] =

i

(6.25)

2
n

this is the canonical commutation relation between position and momentum when the
space is taken to be compact and discrete. it is worthwhile to point out that the above
commutation relation will not hold good for nite dimensional matrices. however,
acting on states with low wave number, the error on the r.h.s of the commutator
[p, q] is further down by power of n and therefore, 2
n is the leading term. thus
as n assumes higher and higher values, the error gets smaller and smaller. from
u n = v n = 1 we can conclude that p and q take eigenvalues m 2
n , where m takes
values 0,1,2...(n 1). moreover tru nv m = nn,0m,0, where 0 in both the kronecker
delta are to be understood as mod n. now we can expand any n  n matrix in terms
of fourier modes.

a =

n/2

xn,m=n/21

anmu nv m =

n/2

xn,m=n/21

anmeinpeimq

(6.26)

57

since commutator of p and q is order 1
n , in the n   limit, they will commute. the
eigenvalues of these two operators will ll the interval [0, 2] and 0 is to be identied
with 2 since we have toric geometry. the double fourier expansion (6.26) takes the
form

a(p, q) =

anmeinpeimq

(6.27)



xn,m=

and the fourier coecients with the double index are dened as

anm = z 2

0

z 2

0

dp
2

dq
2

a(p, q)einpeimq

(6.28)

also tr a = na00, when we take n   limit, tr a  n r 2
dq
2 a(p, q). one
can show with some algebra that the commutator of two matrices in the innite n
limit goes over to the {,}. finally bosonic part of the m(atrix) model lagrangian
goes over to a form (identify dp

r 2

dp
2

0

0

2 = d and dq

2 = d)
4n z dd(z i(, ), z j(, ))2

r

n

(6.29)

2r z dd( z i(, ))2 

lm 
r = p11, therefore conjugate momentum of z i is p11 z i. thus passage to the
note that n
hamiltonian (in light-cone gauge) gives the membrane hamiltonian (6.22). this is
indeed a remarkable result that a simple supersymmetric quantum mechanical system
encodes the dynamics of the supermembrane.
it is natural to ask whether one obtain a string starting from the m(atrix) model.
first, one compacties the theory to ten dimension. when the compactication
radius is small, the theory contains the fock space of the type iia string. as the
radius tends to zero the string becomes free [117] and correct leading order string
interactions could be reproduced. in order to carry out compactication, we replace
the matrices by innite dimensional operators. the compact coordinate is represented
as x a  i 
a inn  aa(). here a is a u(n) gauge potential. the rest of the
variables are taken to be matrix valued function of .
if we use this ansatz, the
resulting hamiltonian is that of maximally supersymmetric 1 + 1 dimensional yang-
mills theory. in the limit when radius goes to zero and n is taken to be innity, the
moduli space of this model coincides with the fock space of type iia theory.
indeed, the m(atrix) model has opened up new avenues to study dualities between
compactied model on torus and yang-mills theory on dual space. moreover, there
are applications of the m(atrix) model to study black holes we refer the interested
reader to the review on the subject [33]. another interesting development has been
to understand type iib theory and its dualities from a matrix model formulation.
in this approach one adopts procedure of eguchi and kawai to consider reduced 10-
dimensional super yang-mills theory and it is a theory of n  n matrices which even
carry no time dependence [118]. we refer the reader to the review article of makeenko
[119].

58

7 anti-de sitter space and boundary eld theory

correspondence

n , rather than in coupling constant, each order in 1

recently, attentions have been focused in constructing supersymmetric gauge theo-
ries by considering various congurations of branes in string theories as well as in
m-theory. when we have n coincident dp-branes, a supersymmetric u(n) gauge
theory lives in worldvolume of the branes. the 1
n expansion proposed by t hooft
[121] revealed several aspects of su(n) yang-mills theory. according to t hooft, one
should consider large n limit of the theory keeping g2
y m n xed, gy m being the gauge
coupling constant. then a feynman diagram is designated by the topological factor
n ,  being the euler characteristic of the feynman diagram. when we consider,
expansion in 1
n , contains diagrams
to all orders in coupling constant and the leading order corresponds to the planar dia-
grams. maldacena [120] has made remarkable conjecture regarding large n conformal
gauge theories. the proposal states that large n limit of a conformally invariant the-
ory in d dimensions is determined by supergravity theory on d+1 dimensional anti-de
sitter space times a compact space (for a sphere it is maximally supersymmetric).
the ads/cft connection has led to the generalization of the holography principle
in this context [123, 124] which was rst introduced in black hole physics [125, 126]
in order to understand the bekenstein entropy bound and the area law for black hole
entropy. thus the conjectures of maldacena led to reveal deeper connections between
string theory and superconformal gauge theories.
we have emphasized earlier that gravity is an integral part of string theory since gravi-
ton is a part of the spectrum. moreover, gauge elds also invariably appear in string
theories. let us recapitulate a few points in order to get a perspective of ads/cft
connections. we have seen that the heterotic strings, through their constructions,
contain nonabelian gauge groups and graviton in their massless spectrum. the type
ii theories have graviton, coming from ns sector, in their perturbative spectrum.
however, with the discovery of dp-branes, we know that supersymmetric gauge the-
ories can arise if we consider coincident dp-branes in type ii theories. type i string
theory admit nonabelian gauge eld since chan-paton factors can be attached to the
end points as was discussed earlier. furthermore, consistency of the theory requires
that we have to incorporate closed string sector in order to account for nonplanar loop
corrections; therefore there is gravity coming from the closed string spectrum. for
this theory, when we take   0 limit yang-mills theory appears automatically and
since consistency requires inclusion of closed string states, gravity also will appear
in the zero slope limit. in view of preceding remarks, one might conclude that, in
string theory, gravity and gauge theory invariably appear simultaneously. thus the
important question to answer is that how the string theory can describe the strong
interaction among quarks and gluons. the recent developments [120, 122, 123, 127]
have provided connections between string theory and gauge theories.
the conguration under consideration is n coincident dp-branes and open strings

59

can end on these hypersurfaces. when we look into the dynamics in the worldvol-
ume we have collection of these open strings and their excitations. moreover, the
worldvolume elds have their interactions and also there exists interaction with the
bulk. an interesting limit to consider is when dilaton remains at a xed value and the
slope parameter tends to zero value. then, at low energies, the gravity decouples; but
to keep the interactions in the worldvolume in tact, we should have gauge coupling
nite, for the u(n) gauge theory. in fact, if we ignore the center of mass part, then
we need to consider the su(n) gauge theory. it is necessary to go near the horizon,
r  0, to see the connection between ads and cft. in the near horizon limit, recall
eq.(5.11) and eq.(5.12), that the factor 1 appearing in the denition of the harmonic
function of the dp-brane can be neglected. to be specic let us rst consider the
metric in the case of n coincident branes.

ds2 = h 1

p

2

(r)dxdx + h

1
2

p dyidyi

(7.1)

where, {yi} are the transverse coordinates and r = yiyi. the indices , .... are for

tensors on the worldvolume. the dilaton and the (p + 1)-form potential, coming from
the rr sector, are given by

e(0) = hp(r)

(p3)

4

, and a = [hp(r)]1

and

hp(r) = 1 +

cpn
r7p , cp =

(2)7p
(7  p)8p

gstr

(7.2)

(7.3)

2

(q+1)

here we have suppressed the indices of the (p + 1)-form gauge potential and r =
2
and 0 is the asymptotic constant value of the dilaton. when we have n
[ (q+1)
coincident d-branes, the worldvolume action is the generalised born-infeld action
proposed by tseytline [128]

]

2

sbi =  (0)

p z dp+1estrqdet[g + 2f]

(7.4)

here g is the pullback of the metric gm n to the world volume and f is the gauge
eld strength on the brane. the tension of the brane is

(2)(1p)

2gstr

=

 0
p
gs

tp =

(7.5)

and gstr is the string coupling constant. the action (7.4) under the square root can
be expended and keeping the second order term in gauge eld strength one can write
the action in more familiar form

sgauge = 

1
4g2

y m z dp+1tr ff 

(7.6)

60

2

(p3)

y m = 2gstr(2)(p2)()

where tr is taken over the gauge group matrices and the gauge coupling constant is
identied as g2
. we know from the solutions discussed in
previous section (recall eq.(5.12) and eq.(5.13)) that, in the limit, when r  , the
metric is at. here one is looking for the behaviour of the solution in the r  0
limit and one chooses a brane for which the dilaton is constant at the horizon. if
we consider d3-branes, then we nd that not only the dilaton is independent of r,
but also the yang-mills coupling constant is dimensionless. as mentioned above, one
examines the conguration of n coincident branes in the following limit

r  0,   0, and u 

r


= xed

(7.7)

therefore, we can neglect 1 appearing in the harmonic function. and the d3-brane
metric goes over to

ds2
 

u 2

4ngstr

(dx3+1)2 +

4ngstr

u 2

du 2 +q4ngstrd5

2

(7.8)

the last term is the line element of ve sphere and the metric describes the manifold
ads  s5 the radius of ads is the same as that of s5 and the radius is given by
rads = (4ngstr)
2 since the yang-mills coupling constant satises the relation
g2
y m = 4gstr, the radius of the ads gets related to the yang-mills coupling constant
as

1

we know that the worldvolume theory of n coincident dp-branes is supersymmetric
yang-mills theory in p + 1 dimensions and therefore, in this case the n = 4 susy
gauge theory will appear. this is known to be a conformally invariant theory. from
the supergravity side, we could describe the theory even for large radius; but that will
amount to taking ng2
y m to large values. maldacenas conjecture states that strongly
coupled n = 4 super yang-mills theory is equivalent to 10-dimensional supergravity
compactied on ads5  s5. however, the consistency of the supergravity theory
requires string theory at a deeper level. thus supersymmetric four dimensional yang-
mills theory is equivalent to type iib theory compactied on ads5s5. the relations
among the parameters are

g2
y m 


n

= 4gstr, and r2

ads = 

(7.10)

let us very briey recall some essential features of the anti-de sitter space. the

einstein-hilbert action in the presence of cosmological constant term is

seh =

1

16gd z ddxq|g|[r + ]

(7.11)

61

r2
ads


= qng2

y m

(7.9)

we consider d-dimensional spacetime with minkowski metric. the eld equations
are

r 

1
2

1
2

gr =

g

(7.12)

taking the trace of this equation, we can determine curvature scalar r in terms of
, and then derive the relation

r =



2  d

g

(7.13)

in this case the ricci tensor is proportional to the metric and these are einstein
spaces. this is also maximally symmetric space [129] with the property that

r =

r

d(d  1)

(gg  gg)

(7.14)

the example of such space, with nonzero curvature, are de sitter, anti-de sitter and
d-spheres.
in this sign convention, ads space has positive cosmological constant.
the ads space is best described by an embedding. we start with d + 1 dimensional
pseudo-euclidean embedding space with coordinates {ya = y0, y1, ...yd1, yd} and
metric  = diag (+,,.....+) and the distance squared is

y2  (y0)2 + (yd)2 

(yn)2

d1

xn=1

(7.15)

note the appearance of two time coordinates from the form of the metric. the

length remains invariant under so(d  1, 2) global transformations

yn  yn = ln

mym

where ln

m is an so(d  1, 2) matrix. if we consider the locus of

y2 = b2 = constant

(7.16)

(7.17)

it is worth noting that the invariance group for theories
and that denes adsd.
dened on adsd is same as that of the d-dimensional at space that is d generators
corresponding to translations and 1
next, let us consider what is the conformal group in d-dimensional euclidean space
en. in this case the poincare group has altogether 1
2d(d + 1) generators (d trans-
lations and rest from lorentz group). then we have following extra generators:

2d(d  1), generators from lorentz rotations.

~x  ~x

(7.18)

this is dilation and  is a real number. furthermore, there is special conformal
transformation

(7.19)

x
x2 =

x
x2 + 

62

this transformation involves n parameters  the transformation (7.19) can be
rewritten as

x =

x + x2

1 + 2x + 2x2

(7.20)

thus we see that the total number of generators are: 1
2(d +
1)(d + 2). this is the same number of generators that adsd+1 space has. indeed, in
view of the recent developments, one can establish the connection that the isometry
group of adsd+1, so(2, d) acts on the boundary as the conformal group acting on
minkowski/euclidean space. we list below the generators of conformal group and
their algebra

2d(d + 1) + 1 + d = 1

[m, p] = i(gp  gp)

[m, m] = i(gm  gm + gm  gm],

[m, k] = i(gk  gk

[d, p] = ip
[d, k]  ik

[p, k] = 2i(g + m)

(7.21)

(7.22)

(7.23)

(7.24)

(7.25)

(7.26)

the generators of conformal transformation have the following representations, when
we choose cartesian coordinate system and consider transformation properties of a
real scalar eld: p = i, m = xp  xp, d = xp and k = x2p  2xd,
corresponding to translation, lorentz transformation, dilation and special conformal
transformations respectively.
let us discuss the evidences in support of maldacenas conjecture. when we consider
collections of d3-branes of the type iib theory we note that d3-branes couple to the
5-form eld strength and n units of this ux will pass through the ve sphere of the
ads5s5 manifold. the isometry group of s5 is so(6) and the ads5 is endowed with
isometry group so(4, 2) as we have just mentioned. the iib theory has fermions and
therefore, it is more relevant to consider the covering groups su(4) and su(2, 2) of
so(6) and s(4, 2) respectively. we also know that type iib theory has 32 majorana
supercharges. these supersymmetries are preserved by the background under con-
sideration. the invariance group is the super lie group su(2, 2|4) for this theory.
on the super yang-mills part, one has to examine how the above symmetry appears
on the boundary theory. we have mentioned how the conformal group, for the case
at hand, is to be identied as so(4, 2) or su(2, 2). it is well known that n = 4
super yang-mills theory is conformally invariant in four dimensions, since the theory
has vanishing -function [130], and thus the origin of the conformal group is well
understood. let us now focus our attention on the other symmetries present in type
iib theory. the ten dimensional super yang-mills has gauge bosons, aa
,  = 0, 1, ..9,
a being u(n) group index and thus there are 8 physical states corresponding to each
gauge eld. the superpartners are majorana weyl gauginos having matching num-
bers. the theory has 16 majorana supercharges in d = 10. when we consider the

63

 , qa

2 + 4i
g2
y m

4-dimensional action, dimensionally reduced from ten dimensions [48, 49] physical
degrees of freedom of each of the ten dimensional gauge eld decomposes into 2 (cor-
responding to physical degrees of freedom of gauge eld in d = 4) and six scalars,
a
i , i = 1, 2...6, a is group index suppressed from now on. the number of, gauginos
are given by the weyl spinors, a
 , a = 1, 2, 3, 4,  = 1, 2. one of these fermions,
together with the gauge eld can be grouped dene a vector supereld. the rest of
the three spinors can be grouped with the scalars (which appeared after dimensional
reduction) to dene 3 chiral superelds. the 16 supercharges can be grouped into
4 sets of complex majorana charges qa
 , a = 1, 2, 3, 4 and  = 1, 2 these two
supercharges transform as {4} and {4} of the r-symmetry group su(4). the scalars
i transform as {6} of the so(6), since we deal with the covering group su(4), the
scalars transform in the antisymmetric, rank 2 representation of the su(4). we see
that type iib theory has 32 supercharges, but the super yang-mills has only 16 of
them. we know from discussions in sec.iv that in the presence of the coincident
d3-branes, half of the supersymmetries are preserved. when we consider the super-
conformal algebra the rest also appear as the extension of the superconformal group
[131].
another important nonperturbative symmetry of type iib theory is the sl(2, z)
symmetry where dilaton and axion dene the moduli. in the yang-mills sector the
s-duality symmetry is robust and is known to be, again, sl(2, z). in this case, the
modular parameter  = 
the preceding discussions were focused to show that the symmetry properties of the
type iib theory and those of n = 4 super yang-mills are the same. it is important to
investigate which physical properties are common to both the theories. indeed, if the
two theories are equivalent, it should be possible to identify a physical eld  in the
bulk theory and nd the corresponding object on the boundary theory. then, one
of the tests will be to compute the correlators involving relevant objects in each of
the theories and check the consistencies. thus it is important to identify the physical
quantities (operators) in both the theories. in the case of the boundary theory, one
obvious criterion will be to choose gauge invariant operators while computing the
correlators. one could formally express the equivalence between the theories through
the relation among the generating functionals.

whereas in the former case it is  =  + ie.

esii [(j)] = z dae(sy m [a]+o[a]j

(7.27)

the l.h.s. of the above equation is to be identied as the generating function for
the supergravity theory (rather low energy limit of iib theory). the action sii
is determined in terms of the massless states of the supergravity and the kaluza-
klein towers and these are collectively denoted as (z, ). here the coordinates
zn  (x, r) and  taking values 0,1,2,3 are to be identied as the ads coordinates
and  is the coordinate on ve sphere. moreover, it is implied due to the presence
of j(x) that it also depends on the boundary data of the bulk elds. the r.h.s.
denes the generating function for n = 4 super yang-mills theory; however, one only

64

computes the correlation functions of gauge invariant composite operators denoted
by o(a) with couplings to j(x).
in this general setting [122, 123, 132], one will
be able to compute the correlation functions from both the theories and establish
the correspondence between the two theories. let us consider a simple example as
illustration for the case of minimally coupled scalar in the bulk theory which could
be identied with the dilaton. the action on the bulk for the dilaton on ads5  s5 is

s =

3b3

4g10 z d5xq|g|g

(7.28)

the factor 3b3 comes from the volume of s5, through implicit assumption that  has
no dependence on coordinates of ve sphere. the metric is g = b2
, is metric on
x2
0
ads5, now in the poincare coordinates. for large  >> 1, the classical supergravity
can be taken to be a good approximation (7.10). the dilaton equation of motion is
given by

(gg) = 0

(7.29)

of course, this equation can be solved by the standard greens function method. the
purpose is to determine the generating function with value of dilaton computed on
the boundary, call it 0 which is value of  as x0  0. thus we can write

(x0, ~x) = z d4~zk(x0, ~x, ~z)0(~z)

(7.30)

the vectors refer to four dimensional vectors on the boundary space and the greens
function is dened as,

k(x0, ~x, ~z) 

x4
0

[x2
0 + (~x  ~z)2]4

now, one can insert the solution for  into the action to determine it at the classical
value of dilaton

s =

3b8

4g10 z d4~x

x3
0

0|

(7.32)

 is the cut o for the lower limit of integration. once expression for  is inserted
into the action, then it is possible to take cut o to zero and everything is nite. the
action is given by

(7.31)

(7.33)

(7.34)

s  

3b8

4g10 z d4~xz d4~z

0(~x)0(~z)
(~x  ~z)8

then the generating function can be obtained by exponentiating this action. on the
super yang-mills side, since it is a conformal eld theory in four dimensions, the
quadratic of yang-mills eld strength has dimension 4 and product of two of the f 2
terms behave as

if we want to determine the dilaton correlation function on boundary, we compute

hf 2(~x)f 2(~z)i 

n 2

(~x  ~z)8

65

2zii(0)
0(~x)0(~z) 

(7.35)

n 2

(~x  ~z)8

sngstr are related.

now comparing (7.34) and (7.35) we nd that they are in agreement.
if one con-
siders, metric perturbation of the form g =  + h and then computes the two
point correlation of this perturbation on the brane taking the boundary limit; this
correlation is identical to the correlation of stress energy momentum tensors (product
of a pair of them; just as we took correlation of two f 2 terms while identifying the
dilaton two point functions).
y m and the length parameter b4 =
let us recall that the t hooft coupling   ng2
l4
s = 4l4
if we hold  xed and let n  , then the string
coupling tends to zero. therefore, string perturbation theory can give reliable result
in this limit. thus, one can get a full quantum theoretic description of the yang-
mills theory in the n   limit. instead of holding  xed, if we allow it to take
large values, then in the domain, where ads radius is kept constant, the relevant
limit is   0. we know that in the zero slope limit the string theory goes over to
supergravity theory. we saw the matching of ads/cft in this limit. but the conse-
quences of maldacena conjecture is very interesting in this regime, it tells us how the
superconformal gauge theory in the n   limit behaves in strong coupling domain.
of course, the example we have been considering is the one where the -function of
the theory vanishes identically and therefore, it is not a realistic theory if we want
to establish connection with supersymmetric gauge theories which have running cou-
pling constants leading to asymptotic freedom. there are attempts to construct eld
theories which will have broken susy and conformal invariance (for example classical
sqcd is scale invariant, but in the quantized theory scale invariance is broken). wit-
ten [133]has proposed that one should consider ads7  s4. the resulting boundary
theory corresponds to 6-dimensional theory whose action is yet to be explicitly con-
structed. then one compacties the theory on t 2 and require that fermions satisfy
anti-periodic boundary condition around a cycle of the two-torus. then the bound-
ary theory is a four dimensional one. conformal invariance and supersymmetry are
broken in this 4-dimensional theory and we have a pure gauge theory with large n.
there has been rapid developments in studying the interconnection between super-
gravity (rather type iib) theory on ads space and boundary gauge theory. sev-
eral important issues pertaining to string theory and gauge theories have been ad-
dressed in this context. we refer to some of the recent review articles in this subject
[134, 135, 136].

8 cosmology and string theory

the remarkable attribute of string theory is that it provides a unied description of
laws of nature. although, a connection with the phenomenological aspects of ele-
mentary particle physics is not rmly established so far, there are several indications

66

that we are persuing the right path. we have discussed, in action v, how string
theory has provided an adequate description of the physics of the black holes from a
microscopic point of view as is expected from a theory describing gravity.
it is natural to address questions intimately related to evolution of the universe and
its creation in the frame work of string theory. einsteins theory provides a very good
description of classical gravity and has been tested with precision measurements. the
principles of equivalence, cosmological principle and the big bang hypothesis are fun-
damental ingredients of the standard cosmological model [137]. the experimental
data have veried the predictions of the standard cosmological model to a great de-
gree of accuracy. however, in order to understand some of the salient features of
our universe such as its atness, isotropy and homogeinity, the horizon problem and
the large scale structure; the paradigm of ination has been accepted as an integral
part of the theory of the cosmos.
in simple words, our universe underwent rapid
superluminary expansion after the big bang so that we can understand some of the
cosmological observations alluded to above. indeed, considerable eorts have been
made, in recent times, to understand mechanisms of ination and to explore conse-
quences of various inationary models. it is necessary to introduce a scalar eld, in
generic inationary model, to explain the mechanism; however, the inaton eld is
introduced in an ad hoc manner.
we expect that string theory should provide answers to the questions related to the
evolution of our universe. in the cosmological scenario, in this approach, one con-
siders einstein and matter eld equations obtained from the string eective action,
(2.37), when the metric and background elds (corresponding to dimensionally re-
duced 4-dimensional action) depend only on the time coordinate; usually identied
with the cosmic time. in string theory, the scalar dilaton, appears naturally in the
massless spectrum of theory and it is tempting to identify this eld as the one respon-
sible for ination in early epochs [138]. it is well known that a dilatonic potential
cannot be generated in a superstring theory perturbatively. furthermore, the vev
of dilaton determines the newtons gravitational constant, gauge coupling constant,
yukawa couplings of the fermions amongst other parameters of string theory. in a
cosmological context, the dilaton acquires time dependence and it will roll with evolu-
tion of the universe. however, the dilaton must decouple at some appropriate time in
the history of the universe [139], otherwise, the nice (tested) predictions of late time
cosmology will be seriously aected due to the fact that a time dependent dilaton
controls masses and coupling constants. notice that, eventually, the dilaton potential
becomes important and the dilaton settle down at the bottom of the well. there
are important consequences for a massless dilaton:
it violates equivalence principle
[140]. moreover, the dilaton mass is bounded as m > 104 ev, in order to fulll the
observational constraints [141].
there is a novel approach to describe ination phenomena in string theory [142, 143],
known as the pre-big bang (pbb) proposal. since, considerable attention has been
focused to investigate the consequences of the pbb scenario, we shall discuss impor-

67

tant features of this proposal and refer the interested reader to some of the recent
reviews in the subject [144, 145, 146, 147, 159]. the target space duality, often called
t-duality, is a key ingredient leading to a new mechanism for ination in string cos-
mology. in this approach, one does not need potential for the dilaton for accelerated
expansion of the universe unlike the case of standard mechanism for ination. it is
the coupled dilaton and metric evolution equations which are responsible for ination.
it follows from the properties of these equations, as discussed below, that there are
two branches of solution, denoted as  and in each branch there are two sets of solu-
tions. one of the solutions in the (+)-branch is such that the corresponding hubble
parameter and the second derivative of the scale factor are positive. therefore, the
universe has accelerated expansion for this case. this branch gets related, by com-
bined operation of duality and time reversal to a solution in the ()-branch which
has the features of the frw metric in the sense that it is expanding but decelerating.
if there is a mechanism for a smooth transition from the afore mentioned (+)-branch
to the ()-branch, then following interesting scenario emerges. in the pre-big bang
scenario the time begins somewhere in the innite past, in contrast with the big bang
model in which we identify beginning of time with the big bang singularity. thus the
universe evolves from a low curvature regime proceeding towards strong coupling,
high curvature domain with accelerated expansion. then the universe emerges into
the frw like post big bang phase in which standard cosmological model applies.
of course, it is essential to understand the mechanism for transition from one phase
to another known as the problem of graceful exit. let us recall, very briey, how
t-duality and time reversal transformations relate dierent solutions of the cosmo-
logical evolution equations of string eective action.
the string eective action, in the cosmological scenario, is given by

s = 

1
2s

d1 z dtq|g|e(r + 2)

(8.1)

where s is the inverse of the string scale. the d + 1 dimensional metric has the form
ds2 = dt2  gijdxidxj, gij is the spatial part of the string frame metric since we can
always choose g00 = 1 and g0i = 0 in the cosmological context. we have omitted
the eld strength of the antisymmetric tensor eld. in the presence of graviton, anti-
symmetric tensor and dilaton the string eective action can be brought to manifestly
o(d, d) invariant form, d being the number of spatial dimensions [148]. as we have
mentioned above the duality symmetry of string theory plays a very important role in
relating the two epochs i.e. t > 0 and t < 0, in the evolution of the universe. let us
consider a homogeneous, isotropic universe so that we have only one scale factor a(t)
and the spatial metric is diagonal: gij = diag (a(t)2, a(t)2, a(t)2, ...). the resulting
eld equations take the following form:

2  + 2d h  2  2d h  dh 2  (dh)2 = 0

2  2d h  dh 2 + (dh)2 = 0

68

(8.2)

(8.3)

h 2 + dh 2  h   d h +

1
2

dh 2 

1
2

(dh)2 

1
2

2 +  + d h = 0

(8.4)

the rst of the above three equation comes from variation of the dilaton , the second
follows from the 0 0 component of the einsteins equation which is the hamiltonian
constraint on this occasion. here, h = a
a is the hubble parameter. the last equation,
in an expanded form, is the (i, i) component of the einsteins equation and the o-
diagonal space-space components are found to be trivially satised. if we stare at the
dilaton equation and the last equation, the (i, i) part, at the rst sight, we note that
both have second derivative of time for dilaton and it might be a formidable task to
solve the graviton dilaton equation. however, the last ve terms of the third equation
coincide with dilaton equation of motion and we are left with a simple equation

h  h   dh 2 = 0

(8.5)

notice that (8.3) is quadratic in  and therefore, the solution has two roots. moreover,
(8.5) is an evolution equation for the hubble parameter with a term involving .
thus h will have two equations corresponding to each root of . therefore, there are
altogether four branches when we inspect the solutions of coupled graviton-dilaton
equations. let us introduce the shifted dilaton

(t) = (t)  d ln a(t)

(8.6)

it is obvious from the evolution equations that if {a(t), (t)} satisfy the equations of
motion, then the new set {a(t)1,   2d ln a(t)} are also solutions to the equations
of motion; indeed, this is a part of the o(d, d) group and the shifted dilaton, , is
invariant under this t-duality. another property of the time evolution equations for
dilaton and that for the scale factor is that they are invariant under time inversion

t  t with h  h and    . let us consider a simple illustrative example

to demonstrate how one can generate solutions in the four branches. we begin with
a specic isotropic solution

a(t) = t1/d

(t) = ln t

(8.7)

for t > 0. we can generate new set of solutions by implementing duality and time
reversal transformations.
in fact we can get the four solutions, mentioned above,
starting from the (seed) solution of the previous equation. the solutions are

a(t) = t1/d,
a(t) = (t)1/d,

(t) = ln t

(t) = ln(t)

(8.8)

(8.9)

let us examine the characteristics of the four solutions in some detail. a+(t) corre-
sponds to decelerated expansion, whereas a(t) is identied for decelerated contrac-
tion. these two solutions lie in the positive t branch. in the negative time branch,

69

a+(t) and a(t) are identied to be accelerating, contraction, and accelerating ex-
pansion respectively. if a > 0 ( a < 0) the solution describes expansion (contraction).
similarly, a solution is called an accelerated one (decelerated) if a and a have same
sign (opposite sign). since the dilaton is the coupling constant in the theory, it is
important to extract time dependence of the dilaton in the four branches.

(t) = (

d  1) ln(t)

(8.10)

which can be obtained from denition of . note that a+(t) has the characteristics of
frw solution in the sense that it corresponds to expanding universe with decelera-
tion and the singularity lies in its past. on the other hand, a(t) is the one which is
expanding with an acceleration and the singularity is in its the future. furthermore,
these two solutions are related to each other under simultaneous duality and time
reversal transformations as we mentioned earlier. if one introduces a dilatonic poten-
tial, the full set of solutions continues to exhibit same characteristics: there are two
branches and each branch having two solutions. in view of remarks at the beginning
of the section, a dilatonic potential is very much desirable. according to the pbb
proposal, the universe initially is at, cold and is in the weak coupling regime and
therefore, the tree level string eective action is a good starting point. moreover,
we can trust the perturbative vacuum. subsequently, the universe evolves towards
curved, hot and strong coupling domain under going accelerated expansion. if the
universe could smoothly pass over to the frw like regime, then we would have not
only resolved the mechanism of ination, but also the initial singularity problem could
be circumvented. it is well known that a smooth transition from the (+)-branch to
the ()-branch is not possible if we consider the tree level string eective action due
to the no-go theorems [149, 150]. therefore, graceful exit is an important issue when
we envisage pre-big bang scenario. one of the possibilities is to appeal to quantum
string cosmology in order to resolve the graceful exit problem [151] and the other
approach is to consider the string eective action with higher derivative terms due to
string look and/or  corrections [152].
the examples, illustrating mechanisms for ination in the pre-big bang scenario, cor-
respond to spatially at, homogeneous solutions of the equations of motion. it is not
desirable to start with a homogeneous solution from the onset, if we want to solve
the homogeneity and atness problem in cosmology. therefore, a more appropriate
approach will be to consider generic initial condition in the vicinity of the pertur-
bative vacuum. one could consider a scenario where, long before the big bang, the
universe was inhomogeneous so that the elds (dilaton in this case) were spacetime
dependent and moreover, the time derivative and spatial gradients were comparable.
furthermore, if we want to follow the pbb approach, these derivatives were small,
to begin with, so that initially we are in the perturbative regime. if one looks at the
evolution, it is noted that certain patches develop where time derivatives dominate
over spatial gradients. if the kinetic energy of the dilaton contributes a good part to
the critical density, the dilaton driven ination sets in so that the patch gets blown up

70

and it becomes homogeneous, isotropic and spatially at. another important aspect
is to investigate situations when the spatial curvature is nonzero and examine how
various cosmological criteria are aected [153]. in view of above discussions, there
have been considerable activities to study the evolution of the universe taking into
account eects of spatial curvature, inhomogeneity and examine various aspects of
pre-big bang string cosmology.
recently, the principle of holography has attracted considerable attentions in cosmo-
logical context and especially in string cosmology. the bekenstein-hawking entropy
formula states that the entropy associated with a black hole is proportional to the
area of the horizon. according to holography principle, when we are dealing with a
system with gravity, the degrees of freedom of that system is bounded by the surface
area of the volume, v, in which the system resides. recently, fischler and susskind
[154] examined the issue of holography in the cosmological frame work. if we consider
the universe as a whole and explore the consequences of holography as applied to the
black holes, we encounter diculty in the following way. let us consider the frw
metric as an example. the entropy per unit comoving volume is constant as can be
inferred from the covariant conservation of stress energy momentum tensor. thus, if
we take a large enough value for the scale factor, the holographic bound s
a  1 will
be violated. it was proposed in [154] that one should consider the following situa-
tion while applying holography in the cosmological scenario. let us consider a four
dimensional spacetime manifold,m. suppose b is the two dimensional boundary of
a spatial region r. we dene the light surface l to be the one bounded by b and
generated by the past light rays from b towards the center of r. the cosmological
holography principle, expounded by fischler and susskind, states that the entropy
passing through l never exceeds the area of the bounding surface b. in the special
case of adiabatic evolution of the universe, the total entropy of the matter in the
horizon should be smaller than area of the horizon. the issue of holography, in cos-
mology, has been addressed in a general frame work recently [155]. moreover, the
consequences of the the principle has been studied in the cosmological context [156].
let us consider a pbb scenario in the einstein frame with graviton and dilaton [157].
the entropy per comoving volume remains constant when the universe undergoes
adiabatic expansion (or contraction) and the location of the horizon is determined
from the condition ds2 = 0. it follows from the covariant conservation of the stress
energy tensor that

g

dp
dt

=

d
dt

(g( + p))

(8.11)

where  and p are dened from the diagonal of t 
 in the cosmological context, g being
the determinant of the spatial part of the metric. it is easy to see that the comoving
entropy density remains unchanged with time through out pbb and is given by

sc =

( + p)g

t

71

(8.12)

where t is identied as the temperature of the uid. for the dilatonic matter  = p
and then

sc = const. (g)1/2

(8.13)

where the constant is related to the stefans constant of the dilaton. now, consider
a simple homogeneous pbb cosmological case where

and

ds2 = dt2 +x(

t
t0  1)2a(dxa)2

(x, t) = 0 

2r(1 x 2

a)ln(

t
t0  1)

here {a} are independent of x and they satisfy kasner condition

x a = 1, x 2

a = 2,

now the volume is given by

1
3  2  1

and x a

h is given by

v c
h = a(x a
h)

x a

h =

t0( t

t0  1)1a
(1  a)

(8.14)

(8.15)

(8.16)

(8.17)

(8.18)

the area of the surface bounding the volume enclosed by the horizon is given by

ah = {a(x a

h)(

t
t0  1)a}

2
3

(8.19)

having obtained the expressions for the volume factor and the area, we compute the
holographic ratio to be

s
a

=

1
2


l2
p

1
2

1
2

(1  2)
(1  a)

1
3

(8.20)

we have now introduced the stefans constant, , for dilaton explicitly and the planck
length makes its appearance in the above equation so that  is dimensionless. since
the exponents {a} appearing in the denition of the line element satisfy the two
constraints, the holographic ration s
a is function of only one exponent. therefore, by
eliminating two of the s we can write the ratio as an expression involving ,  and
one of the as, call it y.

s
a

=

1
2


l2
p

1
2

(1  2)

1
2

[(1  y )y 2 + (12)

2

1
3

]

(8.21)

72

the minimization and maximization of the denominator as a function of y will give
us an upper bound and lower bound on the holographic ratio, respectively as given
below,

s

ar 



and

s

ar 



1
2l2
p

1
2l2
p

1  2

[(11/3  32  (321)3/2

32

1  2

[(11/3  32 + (321)3/2

32

)/9]1/3

)/9]1/3

(8.22)

(8.23)

note the appearance of , the stefan constant for the dilaton, the holographic ratio
which could be determined in principle from string theory. it is quite interesting that
the ratio could be bounded from above as well as from below in this case.
the eld of string cosmology and especially pbb string cosmology is still developing
and there are important issues to be resolved. we would like to make a few comments
before closing this section. one would like to study phenomenological aspects of
pbb cosmology and compare and contrast the results of pbb scenario with standard
inationary models. a lot of work has been done in this direction and we refer the
reader to the review article for more detailed references. it might be worth while to
point out a few features of pbb cosmology. in the standard inationary scenario, the
universe goes through de sitter type phase where the curvature remains constant;
however, in the pbb ination the curvature changes with time. thus the quantum
uctuation of background elds are amplied in dierent modes with dierent spectra.
therefore, some of the distinct features of pbb cosmology could be experimentally
observed in gravitational wave detectors in future. similarly, the axion spectrum has
been computed in pbb [158] and if detected, it will be another test of this scenario.
there have been attempts to provide an understanding of galactic and intergalactic
magnetic elds from the point of string cosmology. since dilaton couples to the gauge
eld the mechanism for amplication of the magnetic eld is related to the growth of
the dilaton. it is quite possible that some of the predictions of pbb cosmology will
be tested by on going experiments and/or by the experiments planned in the near
future.

9 summary and conclusion

we have made some eorts to convey to the reader some of the interesting and impor-
tant developments in string theory through this article. it is not possible to include
all developments in the eld in diverse directions in an article of this nature. a global
perspective of string theory is contained in the article of john schwarz [160] in this
volume. we may recall that the research in string theory has stimulated progress in

73

other elds such as mathematics, quantum eld theory and statistical mechanics of
lower dimensional systems to mention a few areas. we have seen that string theory
has made very important contributions to our understanding of the physics of the
black holes. as we have mentioned, for a special class of black holes, the bekenstein-
hawking entropy formula could be derived from an underlying microscopic theory.
similarly, the nature of the hawking radiation from a stringy black hole, slightly away
from extremality, could derived from the theory.
we have noted that, there are intimate connections between the ve string theories.
some of them are inter related through dualities in ten dimensions and some are
related in lower dimensions. thus it is recognized that dualities have a special role in
our understanding of string dynamics. moreover, there are increasing evidence that
there is a unique, fundamental theory and the ve perturbatively consistent string
theories are various phases of the fundamental theory. it is argued that m-theory
might be that theory and the low energy eective action of m-theory is to be iden-
tied with the eleven dimensional supergravity theory. in this context, we discussed
the m(atrix) model proposal to show that the model captures many important fea-
tures of m-theory.
recently, the conjecture due to maldacena has attracted considerable attention since
it provides an important connection between supergravity on the bulk and the su-
persymmetric gauge theories living on the boundary. the connection between type
iib theory on ads5  s5 and n = 4 supersymmetric gauge theory on the boundary
has been at the center of attention. furthermore, there are interesting developments
in the study of theories on ads3 and corresponding two dimensional conformal eld
theories.
one of the most important achievements of string theories has been to address impor-
tant issues in quantum gravity and provide answers to some of the puzzles. however,
the theory is yet to provide a satisfactory answer to the cosmological constant prob-
lem. the cosmological constant is a parameter in physics which is measured to be
closest to zero. it plays a dual role. when we look at it from the point of view of
macroscopic physics, the smallness of the constant conveys to us that the universe
is very large and it is at. on the other hand, it is expected that, the cosmological
constant, like other parameters in nature, should be explained from a microscopic
theory and the short distance physics, i.e. quantum gravity, will explain the smallness
of the cosmological constant. therefore, one expects that string theory will be able to
resolve this outstanding problem [161, 162]. the author along with his collaborators
had made an attempt in this direction [163]. it is expected that string theory will
provide us clues to understand the creation of the universe and the evolution of the
universe in early epochs. indeed, string cosmology has attracted considerable atten-
tion is recent years; however, we have not included discussions on this topic in this
article due to limitations of space. indeed, string cosmology makes several predictions
which might be subjected to experimental tests in next few years [164].

74

acknowledgments

i would like to thank professors p. majumdar, s. panda, b. sathiapalan and j.
h. schwarz and a. sen for their suggestions and advice. i would like to thank the
yukawa institute for theoretical physics, professors t. maskawa, m. ninomiya and
r. sasaki for their very warm hospitality where most of this article was written.

references

1. g. veneziano, nuovo cimento, 57a,190(1968)

2. e. donini and s. scuito, ann. phys. 58, 388(1970).

3. d. b. fairlie and h. b. nielsen, nucl. phys. b20, 637(1970); c. s. hsue, b.

sakita and m. a. virasoro, phys. rev. d2, 2857(1970).

4. y. nambu, quarkmodel and factorization of veneziano amplitude, in symme-
tries and quark model, ed. r. chand (gordon and breach), 1970; h. b. nielsen,
an almost physical interpretation of the integrand of the n-point veneziano
amplitude, submitted to the 15th international conference on high energy
physics, (kiev); l. susskind, nuovo cim. 69a, 457(1970).

5. m. a. virasoro, phys. rev. 177, 177(1969).

6. j. shapiro, phys. lett. 33b, 361(1970).

7. j. scherk and j. h. schwarz, nucl. phys. b81, 118(1974).

8. m. b. green and j. h. schwarz, phys. lett. b149, 117(1984).

9. e. witten, phys. lett. b149, 35(1984).

10. d. j. gross, j. a. harvey, e. martinec and r. rohm, phys. rev. lett 54,

502(1985); nucl. phys. b256,253(1985); nucl. phys. b267,75(1986).

11. m. b. green, j. h. schwarz and e. witten, superstring theory, vol i and vol

ii, cambridge university press, 1987.

12. j. polchinski, string theory, vol i and vol ii, cambridge university press,

1998.

13. v. alessandrini, d. amati, m. le bellac and d. i. olive, phys. rep. 1c,

269(1971).

75

14. j. h. schwarz, phys. rep. 8c, 269(1973).

15. g. veneziano, phys. rep. 12c, 1(1974).

16. c. rebbi, phys. rep. 12c, 259(1974).

17. j. scherk, rev. mod. phys. 47, 123(1975).

18. j. h. schwarz, phys. rep. 89c, 223(1982).

19. int. j. mod. phys.a9, 3707(1994).

20. a. giveon, m. porrati and e. rabinovici, phys. rep. c244, 77(1994).

21. m. du, r. khuri, and j. lu, phys. rep. 259c, 213(1995).

22. s. chaudhury, c. johnson and j. polchinski, hep-th/9602052.

23. j. h. schwarz, nucl. phys. suppl. b55, 1(1997).

24. j. polchinski, rev. mod. phys. 68, 1245(1996).

25. m. j. du, hep-th/9611203.

26. p. k. townsend, hep-th/9612121.

27. m. douglas, hep-th/9610041.

28. p. k. townsend, gr-qc/9707012; hep-th/9712004.

29. c. vafa, hep-th/9702201.

30. e. kiritsis, hep-th/9708130.

31. d. youm, hep-th/9710046.

32. t. banks, hep-th/9710231.

33. d. bigatti and l. susskind, hep-th/9712072.

34. y. nambu, duality and hydrodynamics, lecture at the copenhagen sympo-
sium, 1970; t. goto, prog. th. phys. 46, 1560(1971); y. hara, prog. th.
phys. 46, 1549(1971).

35. a. m. polyakov, phys. lett. 103b,207(1981).

36. s. deser and b. zumino, phys. lett. 62b, 369(1976); l. brink, p. di vecchia
and p. howe, phys. lett. 65b, 471(1976); a. m. polyakov, phys. lett. 103b,
211(1981).

76

37. s. fubini, j. maharana, m. roncadelli and g. veneziano, nucl. phys. b316,

36(1989).

38. a. neveu and j. h. schwarz, phys. rev.bf d4,1109(171), nucl. phys. b31,

86(1971).

39. p. ramond, phys. rev.d3, 2415(1971).

40. f. gliozzi, j. scherk and d. olive, phys. lett. 65, 282(1976); nucl. phys.

b122,253(1977)

41. c. bachas, lectures on d-branes, hep-th/9806199.

42. a. sen, int. j. mod. phys. a9, 3707(1994).

43. s. fubini and g. veneziano, nuovo cimento, 67a, 29(1970).

44. l. alvarez gaume, d. z. freedman and s. mukhi, ann. phys. 134, 85(1981).

45. m. b. green, j. h. schwarz, l. brink, nucl. phys. b198, 474(1982); k.
kikkawa and m. yamazaki, phys. lett. 149b, 357(1984); n. sakai and i.
senda, prog. th. phys. 75, 692(1984); v. p. nair, a. shapere, a. strominger
and f. wilczek, nucl. phys. b287, 402(1987).

46. a. shapere and f. wilczek, nucl. phys. b320, 669(189); a. giveon, e. rabi-
novici and g. veneziano, nucl. phys. b322, 167(1989); a. giveon, n. malkin,
e. rabinovici,phys. lett. 220b, 551(1989)

47. k. s. narain, phys. lett. 169b, 41(1986)

48. j. scherk and j. h. schwarz, nucl. phys. b153, 61(1979).

49. j. maharana and j. h. schwarz, nucl. phys. b390, 3(1993).

50. s. f. hassan and a. sen, nucl. phys. b375, 103(1992).

51. g. veneziano, phys. lett. 265b, 287(1991).

52. k. meissner and g. veneziano, phys. lett. 267b, 33(1991).

53. k. meissner and g. veneziano, mod. phys. lett.a6, 3397(1991)

54. m. gasperini, j. maharana and g. veneziano, phys. lett. 272b, 277(1992);

phys. lett. 296b , 51(1993).

55. a. sen, phys. lett. 271b, 295(1991); phys. lett. 272b, 34(1992); phys. rev.

lett. 69 , 1006(1992).

56. g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b79,276(1974).

77

57. a. m. polyakov, jetp lett. 20, 194(1974).

58. c.montonen and d. olive, phys. lett. 72b, 117(1977).

59. e. witten, phys. lett. 86b, 283(1979).

60. e. witten and d. olive, phys. lett. 78b, 97(1978).

61. a. font, l. ibanez, d. lust and f. quevedo, phys. lett. b249, 35(1990). a.

shapere, s. trivedi and f. wilczek, mod. phys. lett. a6, 2677(1991).

62. s. j. rey, phys. rev. d43, 526(1991).

63. j. h. schwarz and a. sen, phys. lett. b312, 105(1993); nucl. phys. b411,

35(1994).

64. j. h. schwarz, dilaton-axion symmetry, talk at the international workshop on
string theory, quantum gravity and unication of fundamental interactions,
rome, september 1992; hep-th/9209125.

65. a. sen, phys. lett. 329b, 217(1994).

66. n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl. phys. b426, 19(1995).

67. a. dabholkar, g. gibbons, j. a. harvey and f. ruiz ruiz, nucl. phys. b340,

33(1990); a. dabholkar and j. a. harvey, phys. rev. lett. 63, 478(1989).

68. g. t. horowitz and a. strominger, nucl. phys. b360, 197(1991).

69. j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 , 4724 1996.

70. m. du, nucl. phys. b442, 47(1995).

71. c. hull and p .k. townsend, nucl. phys. b438, 109(1995).

72. m. du, nucl. phys. b442, 47(1995); m. du and r. khuri, nucl. phys. 411,

473(1994).

73. e. witten, nucl. phys. b443, 85(1995).

74. a. sen, nucl. phys.b450, 103(1995).

75. j. a. harvey and a. strominger, nucl. phys. 449, 535(1995)

76. m. dine, p. huet and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b322, 301(1989); j. dai, r. g.

leigh and j. polchinski, mod. phys. lett. a4, 2073(1989).

78

77. f. giani and m. pernici, phys. rev. d30, 325(1984); i. campbell and p. west,
nucl. phys. b243, 112(1984); m. huq and m. namazie, class. quant. grav.
2, 293(1985).

78. p. k. townsend, phys. lett. 350b, 184(1995).

79. m. j. du, p. s. howe, t. inami and k. s. stelle, phys. lett. 191b, 70(1987);

m. j. du and k. stelle, phys. lett. 253b, 113(1991).

80. j. h. schwarz, phys. lett. 367b, 97(1996).

81. j. h. schwarz, phys. lett. 360b, 13(1995). j. polchinski and e. witten, nucl.
phys. b 460, 525 (1996); j. polchinski, rev. mod. phys. 68, 1245(1996); m.
j. du, int. j. mod. phys. a 11, 5623 (1996).

82. c. hull and p. townsend, nucl. phys. b 438, 109 (1995).

83. e. witten, nucl. phys. b 443, 85 (1995).

84. p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460, 506(1996); nucl. phys. b475,

94(1996).

85. k. dasgupta and s. mukhi, nucl. phys. 465, 399(1996).

86. e. witten, nucl. phys. b463, 383(1996).

87. a. sen, mod. phys. lett. a11, 1339(1996).

88. j. bardeen, b. carter and s. w. hawking, comm. math. phys. 31, 161(1973).

89. j. beckenstein, lett. nuov. cimento 4, 737(1972); phys. rev. d7, 2333(1973);

phys. rev. d9, 3292(1974).

90. s. w. hawking, nature 248, 30(1974); commun. math. phys. 43, 199(1975).

91. l. susskind and j. uglam, phys. rev. d50, 2700(1994); j. russo and l.

susskind, nucl. phys. b437, 611(1997).

92. s. fubini and g. veneziano, nuovo cimento 64a, 811(1970)

93. a. sen, mod. phys. lett. a10, 2081(1995).

94. a. strominger and c. vafa, phys. lett. 379b, 99(1996).

95. e. witten, nucl. phys. b460, 335(1996).

96. a. sen, phys. rev. d54, 2964(1996); phys. rev. d53, 2874(1996).

97. c. vafa, nucl. phys. b463, 415(1996).

79

98. c. vafa, nucl. phys. b463, 435(1996).

99. s. r. das and s. d. mathur, hep-th/9601152.

100. c. g. callan and j. m. maldacena, nucl. phys. b472, 591(1996).

101. j. m. maldacena,black holes in string theory, hep-th/9607235; this princeton
university thesis has a comprehensive presentation of black hole entropy and
hawking radiation derived from string theory.

102. s. r. das and s. d. mathur, nucl. phys. 478, 561(1996); nucl. phys. b482,

153(1996).

103. s. gubser and i. klebanov, nucl. phys. b482, 173(1996); phys. rev. lett.

77, 4491(1996).

104. a. dhar, g. mandal and s. r. wadia, phys. lett. 388b, 51(1996).

105. t. banks, w. fischler, s. h. shenker and l. susskind, phys. rev. d55,

112(1997)

106. a. bilal, m(atrix) theory: a pedagogical introduction, hep-th/ 9710136.

107. s. fubini and g. furlan, physics, 1, 229(1965); s. l. adler, phys. rev. lett.

14, 1051(1965).

108. s. weinberg, phys. rev. 150, 1313(1966).

109. j. kogut and l. susskind, phys. rep. 8c, 75(1973).

110. u. h. danielsson, g. ferrari and b. sundborg, int. j. phys. a11, 5463(1996);

d. kabat and p. pouliot, phys. rev. lett. 77, 1004(1996).

111. r. p. feynman, photon hadron collisions, benjamin, 1973.

112. s. sethi and m. stern, commun. math. phys. 194, 675(1998)

113. m. porrati and a. rozenberg, nucl. phys. b515, 184(1998).

114. k. becker and m. becker, nucl. phys. b506, 48(1997).

115. a. achucarro, j. m. evans, p. k. townsend and d. l. wiltshire, phys. lett.

198b, 441(1987);

116. b. de wit, m. luscher and h. nicolai, nucl. phys. b305 [fs23], 545(1988).

117. t. banks and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b497, 41(1997); r. dijkgraaf, e. ver-

linde and h. verlinde, nucl. phys. b500, 43(1997).

80

118. n. ishibashi, h. kawai, y. kitazawa and a. tsuchiya, nucl. phys. b498,

467(1997)

119. y. makeenko, three introductory lectures in helisinki on matrix models of

superstrings, hep-th/9704075.

120. j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 231(1998).

121. g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b72, 461(1974).

122. s. s. gubser, i. klebanov and a. m. polyakov, phys. lett. 428b, 105(1998).

123. e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 253(1998).

124. e. witten and l. susskind, the holographic bound in anti-de sitter space,

hep-th/9805114.

125. c. r. stephens, g. t hooft and b. f. whiting, class. quant. grav. 11,

621(1994); g. t hooft gr-qc/9310026.

126. l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36, 6377(1995).

127. a. m. polyakov, nucl. phys. b68, 1 (1998); proc. suppl.

128. a. tseytline, nucl. phys. b501,41 (1997).

129. s. weinberg, gravitation and cosmology,

130. s. mandelstam, nucl. phys. b213, 149(1983).

131. r. haag, j. t. lopuszanski and m. sinius, nucl. phys. b88, 257(1975).

132. f. ferrara, c. fronsdal and a. zaaroni,nucl. phys. b532, 153(1998).

133. e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 505(1998).

134. j. l. petersen, introduction to the maldacena conjecture on ads/cft, hep-

th/9902131.

135. p. di vecchia, an introduction to ads/cft equivalence, hep-th/9903007.

136. m. b. green, interconnections between type ii superstrings, m theory and

n = 4 supersymmetric yang-mills, hep-th/9903124.

137. s. weinberg, gravitation and cosmology, john wiley and sons, new york

(1972);
e. kolb and m. turner, the early universe, addison-wesley, new york (1990).

81

138. j. ellis, k. enquist, d. v. nanopolous and m. quiros, nucl. phys. b277,
231(1986); k. maeda and m. d. pollack, phys. lett. b173, 251(1986); p.
binetruy and m. k. gaillard, phys. rev. d34, 3069(1986).

139. t. damour and a. m. polyakov, nucl. phys. b423, 532(1994).

140. r. brustein and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b329, 429(1994); g. veneziano, in
string gravity and physics at the planck scale, ed. n. sanchez and a. zichichi,
kluwer academic publisher, dordrecht, the netherlands, (1996).

141. t. r. taylor and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b213, 450(1988).

142. g. veneziano, phys. lett. b265, 287(1991)

143. m. gasperini and g. veneziano, astropart. phys. 1, 317(1993); mod. phys.

lett. a8, 3701(1993); phys. rev. d50, 2515(1994).

144. g. veneziano, string cosmology: concepts and consequences, hep-th/9512091
and references therein; g. veneziano, a simple/short introduction to pre-big-
bang physics/cosmology, hep-th/9802057.

145. r. brustein, string cosmology: an update, hep/th 9801008

146. j. d. barrow and k. e. kunze, string cosmology, gr-qc/9807040.

147. m. gasperini, elementary introduction to pre-big bang cosmology and to the

relic graviton background, hep-th/9907067; also see the home page
http://www.to.infn.it/ gasperin/

148. k. meissner and g. veneziano, mod. phys. lett. a6, 3397(1991).

149. r. brustein and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b329, 429(1994).

150. n. kaloper, r. madden and k. olive, nucl. phys. b452, 677(1995), r. easther,

k. maeda and d. wands, phys. rev. d53, 4247(1996).

151. m. gasperini, j. maharana and g. veneziano, nucl. phys. b472, 394(1996);
m. gasperini and g. veneziano, gen. rel. grav.28, 1301(1996); j. maharana,
s. mukherji and s. panda, mod. phys. lett. a12, 447(1997); m. cavagia and
c. ungarelli, class. quant. grav. 16, 1401(1999)

152. m. gasperini, m. maggiore and. g. veneziano, nucl. phys. b494, 315(1997);

r. brustein and r. madden, hep-th/9708046.

153. m. s. turner and. e. j. weinberg, phys. rev. d56, 4604(1997).

154. w. fischler and l. susskind, holography and cosmology, hep-th/9806039.

82

155. r. easther and d. a. lowe, holography, cosmology and second law of ther-
modynamics, hep-th/9902088, d. bak and s.-j. rey, cosmic holography, hep-
th/9902173, g. veneziano, pre-bangian origin of our entropy and time ar-
row, hep-th/9902126; r. brustein, the generalised second law of thermo-
dynamics in cosmology, gr-qc/9904061; n. kaloper and a. linde, cosmol-
ogy vs holography, hep-th/9904120; r. bousso, a covariant entropy con-
jecture, hep-th/9905177, holography in general spacetime, hep-th/9906022;
g. veneziano, entropy bound and cosmology, hep-th/9907012; r. brustein,
s. foa and r. sturani, generalized second law in string cosmology, hep-
th/9907032; r. dawid, holographic cosmology and its relevant degrees of
freedom, hep-th/9907155; r. tavakol and g. ellis, on holography and cos-
mology, hep-th/9908093.

156. s. kalyana rama and t. sarkar, phys. lett. b 450, 55(1999); s. kalyana

rama, phys. lett. b 457, 268(1999)

157. a. k. biswas, j. maharana and r. k. pradhan, the holography hypothesis

and pre-big bang cosmology, hep-th/9811051, phys. lett b in press.

158. e. j. copeland, r. easther and d. wands, phys. rev. d 56, 874(1997), e. j.
copeland, j. lidesey and d. wands, nucl. phys. b 506, 407(1997); a. buo-
nanno, k. a. meissner, c. ungarelli and g. veneziano, jhep01, 004(1998).

159. j. e. lidsey, d. wands and e. copeland, superstring cosmology, hep-th/9909061.

160. j. h. schwarz, in this volume.

161. e. witten, mod. phys. lett. a10, 2153(1995).

162. k. becker, m. becker and a. strominger, phys. rev. d51, 6603(1995).

163. s. kar, j. maharana and h. singh, phys. lett. b374, 43(1996).

164. g. veneziano, cern preprint, cern-th/98-43, hep-th/9802057.

83

