9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
9
2

 

 
 

1
v
3
3
2
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

discrete gauge elds

manoelito m de souza

universidade federal do esprito santo - departamento de fsica

29065.900 -vitoria-es-brasil

(december 20, 2013)

the use of proper time as a tool for causality implementation in eld theory is clar-
ied and extended to allow a manifestly covariant denition of discrete elds proper to
be applied in eld theory and quantum mechanics. it implies on a constraint between
a radiation eld and its sources, valid in principle for all fundamental interactions and
with a solid experimental conrmation for the electromagnetic one. some results of its
applications to an abelian classical theory (electrodynamics taken as a rst example),
and with the discrete eld being regarded as a classical representation of the eld quan-
tum (photon) are anticipated in order to illuminate the physical meaning and the origins
of gauge elds and of their symmetries and singularities. they are associated to a loss
of eld-source coherence.

pacs numbers: 03.50.de

11.30.cp

i. introduction

in this paper we introduce just one basic thing with respect to the usual formulation of eld theory:

we replace the lightcone by the lightcone generator, a straight line embedded in a (3 + 1) minkowski

spacetime, as the support (or domain) for the denition of radiation elds. everything else here is a

consequence of this single modication in the standard eld theory. just as a heuristic motivation, let

us consider an spherical electromagnetic signal emitted from a point p, for xing the idea. it propagates

on the p-light-cone as a wave, distributed over an ever expanding sphere centred at p. it is a travelling

spherical wave, an example of a eld a(x) dened with support on the lightcone. the eld intensity

decreases with the square of the distance from the origin and, consequently, we have problems with an

innite energy-momentum density if we trace back this wave to p, its starting point where, lets say, we

nd a point electron. according to quantum physics this continuity in the classical eld is just apparent

as this wave front is a collection of a, huge but nite, number of eld quanta. let us imagine the wave

front as a set of moving points, each one on a lightcone generator. in this new discrete approach to eld

theory the classical spherical wave front will be seen as just an eective representation of a collection

of point elds, to be properly dened below in a covariant way.

1

we call discrete eld a eld dened on such a restricted support for a distinction from the standard

extended one. we do it in a more generic way valid for massive and massless elds, and although we

actually apply it here just to the maxwells theory it can readily be extended to non-linear and to

non-abelian eld theories. this explains the generic reference to gauge elds in the title.

this approach came from a study of classical electromagnetic radiation on its limiting of zero distance

from its sources [1] where it was shown that although the potential eld has support on the lightcone

(which is the origin of most of its problems), its force eld (the maxwells stress tensor) has, eectively,

support on the lightcone generator and that this knowledge is sucient for solving old problems of

innite energy and causality violation [5,9]. the enormous simplication power of this discrete-eld

concept is exhibited in an application to the general theory of relativity [3]: the highly non-linear

eld equations are reduced, without any approximation, to the wave equation in a (3+1) minkowski

spacetime, and yet from its discrete solutions one can, in principle, retrieve any extended solution,

according to the property 12 in the list below.

this simple change of support has two immediate dynamical consequences. the rst one is expressed

as a constraint between the sources acceleration and the direction of propagation of the eld:

in

the instantaneous rest frame of the accelerated source, the eld is always emitted along a direction

orthogonal to its source acceleration. for the electromagnetic interaction, in particular, this constraint

has a solid experimental conrmation that validates its implementation as a basic physical input. but

since it was derived on very generic grounds without reference to any specic interaction it is expected

to be valid for all fundamental interactions. this relation, eq. (13) of section iii, is the paper most

important single result and the basic cause behind all the others.

the second consequence is that any discrete eld is associated to a continuity equation (as the eld

is restricted to be a ux on a line) which, with the above causal constraint, leads to an anticipated

satisfaction of certain restriction that are expressed either as conservation laws (of charge, energy,

momentum, etc) or as a covariant gauge condition, for example, that for a discrete eld is reduced to

an identity.

2

we nd the discrete solutions to the standard wave equation in (3 + 1) dimensions to show that,

besides satisfying the above mentioned causal constraint, they have the following rather extensive set

of remarkable properties:

1. the denition of a discrete eld is consistent with the wave equation in the sense that it is

sustained during the eld propagation;

2. they are nite, propagating and point-like elds as they are dierent of zero only at a single point

at a time. each discrete eld represents just a single point in phase space;

3. they are elds without singularity, in the sense of innity. they propagate without changing

their amplitudes;

4. there are no advanced discrete eld; they are all retarded elds and their interactions with their

sources are similar to processes of creation and annihilation of particles;

5. the homogeneous wave equation has only trivially constant solutions. the discrete eld is uni-

vocally determined by the state of motion of its source, so it has no gauge freedom. it is not a

gauge eld;

6. there is a one-to-one map, a correlation, between each discrete eld and its source at its retarded

time (its creation event);

7. an anti-symmetric force eld is a necessary consequence of causality and lorentz covariance;

8. they are transversal elds, they have no spurious (non physical) degrees of freedom. the lorentz

gauge condition for them is just an identity.

9. each discrete eld has well dened and everywhere conserved energy and momentum;

10. the wave equation has just one kind of discrete solution although they may have dierent contents

of energy and momentum;

11. although discrete in space they produce interference eects just like the extended eld;

3

12. the smearing of a discrete eld on the lightcone, with the neglect of the causal constraint, repro-

duces the standard extended eld. any extended eld can be seen as an average eective eld

from a linear combination of discrete elds;

13. the obtention of extended elds from the discrete ones, although being a mathematically well

dened operation, implies on a loss of information (the causal constraint) so that its inverse is, in

general, not possible unless the lost information be included back.

with respect to this list of properties there are two considerations that must be made. first, we can

conclude that the standard and the discrete elds do not share the same properties. studying the

passage from the discrete to the extended eld one can have a deeper understanding of the physical

meaning and origin of many of the properties and problems of the extended elds. most of them are

consequences of their lightcone support. the singularity, for example, is just a reex of the lightcone

vertex. the singularity and the divergent self-eld energy of the li`enard-wiechert solution of classical

electrodynamics are not consequences of a point electron but of their lightcone support [1]. the same

goes for the singularities in general relativity [3] and for the problems with the lorentz-dirac equation

[1]. the gauge symmetry of the standard eld is a consequence of the smearing process that erases

property 9, the correlation between a discrete eld and its source at its retarded time.

the second consideration is about the meaning of the very discrete eld. the properties listed above

show that it must be regarded as a physical entity by itself and not just a mathematical artifact. after

all, it carries conserved and well dened energy and momentum. it is an elementary unit eld that enters

in the constitution of any extended eld. for the electromagnetic eld, which is the case considered in

this paper, there is no alternative but to associate it, in some way to be made more precise in the future,

to the photon since this is the only observed electromagnetic elementary manifestation. we know of

course that this is not so simple, considering that a discrete eld does not completely corresponds to

our present image of the photon as a quantum or dual object. but the real point here, we believe, is

that although we have learned how to work with quantum objects, how to extract meaningful results

4

from their quantum theories we still do not know what they really are. on dealing with a discrete

electromagnetic eld we will pragmatically refer to it as the classical photon and leave any further

discussion about it for a future work.

the following analogy may be very elucidative of our viewpoint. the relationship between a discrete

eld and the standard extended eld is similar to the one between thermodynamics and statistical

mechanics. the meaning and the origins of thermodynamic variables (p, t, s, etc) are illuminated

by statistical mechanics from the knowledge of basic structural elements unknown to thermodynamics.

similarly, properties of an extended eld (its problems, symmetries and singularities) are better un-

derstood from its relation to its discrete eld. thermodynamics is an eective description in terms of

average valued properties of the more basic structures, the molecules, considered in statistical mechan-

ics; likewise, a eld theory (general relativity and quantum mechanics included) are retrieved from their

respective formulation in terms of discrete elds as eective average-valued descriptions. statistical

mechanics does not change the status of any of the four laws of thermodynamics, it just put them in

a deeper perspective. analogously, nothing changes in the validity and in the fundamental character

of the maxwells equations with the discrete elds and they are equally seen from a deeper perspec-

tive. although not being a fundamental theory thermodynamics is successfully used when this is more

convenient than using the known basic molecular structures. the same goes for the extended and the

discrete elds.

this paper is organized in the following way. in section ii we discuss some new and old problems

of eld theory with the objective of highlighting some questions to be fully appreciated after the intro-

duction of discrete elds. in section iii a new geometrical way, based on proper time, of implementing

relativistic causality is introduced. it extends the concept of local causality to make possible the def-

inition of discrete elds. its implications to the eld dynamics is exhibited in the eq. (13). discrete

eld are dened in section iv. in section v we nd and discuss the discrete greens functions, and

in section vi, how to retrieve from them the extended (standard) ones. the relationship between the

discrete and the extended eld formalisms is discussed in section vii. the photon as a discrete eld

5

is seen in section viii. in section ix we discuss the surging of singularity, gauge freedom and duality.

the section x deals with the angular dependence in the emission of discrete elds. the paper ends

with some nal comments and the conclusions, section xi.

ii. some old and new problems with fields

this paper is about radiation elds, their meaning, origins and properties. it is concerned with some

tting problems in their mathematical descriptions. some are old ones and have been discussed since

the early conceptions of eld theory but others seemingly have not yet been completely perceived as

such. they are closely related to the new discrete eld approach that is being presented here.

to a solution from an inhomogeneous equation one can always add any solution from the homoge-

neous. this leaves lose the connection between a eld and its source which requires the imposition of

boundary conditions to be xed. there is no problem with this as far as just mathematics is concerned,

but it is not so if it is applied to a radiation eld , for example. physically this cannot be satisfac-

tory because what is locally produced should not be aected by what will become of it at large. a

source should always react in the same way under a same stimulus regardless any boundary conditions;

it shouldnt know anything about them. so, the sources state of movement should be enough for

completely determining its eld. the well known fact that boundary conditions are required for that

constitutes a logical conict from the physical viewpoint, a paradox. this is a tting problem between

radiation and the mathematics used in its description.

while there is a clear mathematical distinction between solutions from an inhomogeneous equation

and from its homogeneous one, from a physicists viewpoint this is very annoying when these solutions

describe radiation elds because then there should not exist any non trivial dierence between them.

there is no radiation eld without a source1;

it does not spontaneously outgrow from the empty.

a radiation eld is a solution of an inhomogeneous equation at the moment of its generation only,

1this could be seen as just an assertion but it nds strong support with the discrete eld concept in section v

6

afterwards as it propagates away from its sources it becomes a solution of its homogeneous equation.

they are and must be, of course, the same solution. to have only a homogeneous solution, that is a

solution that never satises the inhomogeneous equation, means not having the complete information.

something is missing, for example, its birth certicate, i.e. the information of when and where it was

generated. a more appropriate mathematical description of radiation elds should not allow so much

distinction between solutions from the homogeneous and from the inhomogeneous equations, and such

a lose connection between a eld and its sources. after all, these mathematical distinctions do not

correspond to what is observed: there are not two classes of, lets say, photons associated respectively

to the homogeneous and to the inhomogeneous equations. it would be contradictory if a photon that

is not generated from a source interaction could, by pair creation, generate new sources.

these could be taken just as subtle details if there were not many others important, but apparently

unrelated, examples of conict between a physical eld and its adopted mathematical representation.

they are all consequences of the concept of eld as something non-localized, continuously extended

over space. presently, perhaps, the most important of such questions for the physicists be their diculty

on understanding the wave-particle duality of quantum mechanics. it is particularly interesting here for

exposing completely this kind of conict: the eld is welcomed for explaining the wave-like properties

of radiation and for allowing their extension to matter but it becomes an inconvenience when one

stumbles with unsurmountable problems for explaining the particle-like properties. the well known

problem here is of collapsing an extended wave function. the discrete eld carries both properties: the

wave-like property one, for being a eld, and the particle-like for being discrete. it is an embodiment

of the wave-particle duality and it allows a better understanding of the meaning of quantum mechanics

although we will have just a glance over these questions here.

no mention to old and well known problems with innities that plague both classical [5] and quantum

[7] eld theories; all consequences of extended elds. that a classical point electron2 has an innite

2a relativistic extended one would just bring in more problems [5,8]

7

energy stored on its self-eld, that it generates, when accelerated, radiation with an initially innite

density of energy, and that its equation of motion violates causality are all consequences [1] of the

concept of eld as an extended object. that a mensurable physical property at a certain moment

of time assumes an innite value points to an inadequacy of the mathematical formalism. it is true

that nowadays one is so used to the pragmatic eciency and success of the renormalization program

in quantum eld theory that many are not afraid anymore of innities. but innities are inherent

to a formalism based on elds with an innite number of degrees of freedom and they are always an

indication of an improper formalism.

gauge elds

it is well known that a constraint imposed on a eld may reduce the number of its independent

components but the origin and meaning of gauge freedom was not completely clear. this paper hopefully

will help on making it clearer. the questions we want to discuss here are pertinent to all gauge elds,

quantum or classical, abelian or non-abelian, but for obvious reasons of simplicity we will take the

maxwell theory as a case on studying.

the maxwells equations

f = 0,

f = j ,

(1)

(2)

contain all the accumulated knowledge about the electromagnetic eld f and its interactions with the

sources j. the homogeneous set of equations has

f =  a  a,

as a generic solution that turns the second set of equations into

a  .a = j ,

8

(3)

(4)

which is not solvable because the four equations cannot be disentangled. but only f , and not a, is

directly accessible to experimental detection, and f is an antisymmetric tensor. all this leads to the

notions of gauge elds and of gauge freedom in classical electrodynamics

so we can impose the gauge condition

n a  a + ,
f  f.

.a = 0,

(5)

(6)

which is, actually, an integrability condition for (4) as it is then reduced to four uncoupled equations

a = j.

(7)

the wave equation is indeed a basic and universal eld equation in physics. a well known generalization

of this simple standard approach is common to all gauge elds but there are some lingering questions. it

is apparent, for example, from (1) and (2) and it is also valid for their non abelian generalizations, that

gauge freedom and charge conservation would be consequences of the anti-symmetry of the interaction

eld; what is the reason that makes anti-symmetric all fundamental interaction elds? or, more than

that, what makes all of them be gauge elds? the non-abelian analogues of f , although not gauge

invariant and with a larger internal symmetry, are anti-symmetric in their lorentzian indices. in general

relativity the potential, but not the eld is described by a symmetric tensor.

it will be shown in

section vii that charge conservation is not a consequence of gauge freedom and that both, charge

conservation and gauge freedom, are not consequences of the eld anti-symmetry (although it certainly

would not be possible to have gauge freedom without introducing an anti-symmetry somewhere); this

anti-symmetry and charge conservation are necessary consequences of causality and lorentz covariance

only; gauge freedom, like the problem of lose connection between a eld and its source, comes from the

eld extended representation. these results come from a discrete-eld approach where the discussion

above about the integrability of maxwells equation could be presented in a reversed order: starting

from the wave equation (18) below, to obtain all the above equations (1,2,3,4,5,6, and 7) without any

9

further assumption. the eld described by equation (18) must be then more fundamental and dened

in a background endowed with more physical information than their respective ones in the standard

formalism as they dispense extra assumptions (eqs. 3 and 6) in order to rescue the original equations (1)

and (2). it must, however, be left clear that this is not in anyway a derivation of maxwells equations

from more fundamental principles as they, like the newtons equations, the schrodingers equation and

many others, represent new axioms. the physical content of eqs. (3) and (6) is already implicit in the

background necessary for dening the new discrete eld.

iii. local and extended causality

we recur to causality for dening the discrete eld in a consistent and manifestly covariant way. any

given pair of events on minkowski spacetime denes a four-vector x. if a x is connected to the

propagation of a free physical object (a signal, a particle, a eld, etc) it is constrained to satisfy

 2 = x2,

(8)

where  is a real-valued parameter. we use a metric  = diag(1, 1, 1,1).  is the invariant length or
norm of x. so, the constraint (8) just expresses that x cannot be spacelike. a physical object does

not propagate over a spacelike x. this is local causality. geometrically it is the denition of a three-

dimensional double hypercone; x is the four-vector separation between a generic event x  (~x, t) and
the hypercone vertex. see the figure 1.

t



p


x

fig. 1. the relation  2 = x2, a causality
constraint, is seen as a restriction of access to re-
gions of spacetime. it denes a three-dimension
hypercone which is the spacetime available to a
free physical object at the hypercone vertex. the
object is constrained to be on the hypercone.

the variation of proper time is dened through intervals associated to the propagation of a free eld

in the minkowski spacetime and not through its association to trajectories as it is usual. this subtlety

avoids a restriction to classical contexts and allows its application to quantum physics too.

10

the validity of eq. (8) is conditioned to its application to a free eld but this is not such a great

limitation as it seems to be at a rst look if we assume that at a fundamental level all interactions are

discrete. it describes the free evolution of an interacting eld between any two consecutive interaction

events.

local causality is usually implemented in special relativity through the use of lightcones by requiring

that massive and massless objects remain, respectively inside and outside, a lightcone. our way of

implementing the same relativistic causality is of using hypercones (not necessarily lightcones) even

for massive physical objects (the expression physical object is used here for not distinguishing between

particles and elds) as a constraint on their propagation. in spacetime a eld is dened on hypersurfaces:

hyperplanes for newtonian elds, for example, and hypercones for relativistic free elds. think of an

wave front, for example, and think of it as a continuous set of moving points, then each point of it is

on a worldline tangent to a generator of its instantaneous hypercone.

this conic hypersurface, in eld theory, is the support for the propagation of a free eld:

it can-

not be inside nor outside but only on the hypercone. the hypercone-aperture angle  is given by

tan  = |~x|

|t| , c = 1, or equivalently,  2 = (t)2(1  tan2 ). the speed of propagation determines the
hypercone aperture (rapidity). a change of the supporting hypercone corresponds to a change of speed

of propagation and is an indication of interaction. special relativity restricts  to the range 0    
4 ,
which corresponds to a restriction on  : 0  ||  |t|. the lightcone ( = 
4 , or || = 0) and
the t-axis in the object rest-frame ( = 0, or || = |t|) are the extremal cases. the lightcone for
objects with the speed of light and a parallel line to the time-axis for each point of an static eld or of

a massive object on its rest frame.

for dening a discrete eld we will need a more restrictive constraint:

 + f.x = 0,

(9)

where f is dened by f  = dx

d , a constant four-vector tangent to the hypercone; it is timelike (f 2 = 1)

if  6= 0, or lightlike (f 2 = 0) if  = 0.

11

it implies that

f = 


x .

(10)

the equation (9) denes a hyperplane tangent to the hypercone (8). together, eqs. (8) and (9) dene a

hypercone generator f , tangent to f . a xed four-vector f  at a point labels a bre in the spacetime,

a straight line tangent to f , the f -generator of the local hypercone (8).

extended causality is the imposition of both eqs. (8) and (9) to the propagation of a physical object.

geometrically, it is a requirement that the point object remains on the hypercone generator f . this

corresponds to a change in our perception of the spacetime causal structure; instead of seeing it as a

local foliation of hypercones (8) we see it as congruences of lines (eqs. 8 and 9 together); instead of

dealing with continuous and extended objects, like a eld for example, we treat them as sets of points.

causality and dynamics

in general eqs.

(8) and (9) are just two kinematical constraints on the eld propagation but the

constraint (9) has a very important dynamical content when x describes also the spacetime separation

between two physical objects like a source and its eld as we discuss now. x = x  z( ) for a eld
emitted by a point charge at z( ), which is taken, using (8), as parameterized by its  . there is a crux

dierence in (9) in the limiting of x tending to z( ) as there is then a singular change in the character

of f that is essential for understanding classical electrodynamics in this limit [1].

for a massless eld the restriction (9) is reduced to f.(x z( )) = 0 and this implies that the event x,
where the eld is being observed, and the charge retarded position z( ) must belong to a same straight

line f . it is not necessary to explicitly distinguish a generic  from a  at a retarded position, as the

situations considered in this note, from now on, will always refer to the last one.

more information can be extracted from this constraint as f.(x  z)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

f.v(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

= 1,

12

= 0 implies on

(11)

where v = (~v , v4) = dz

d . this relation may be seen as a covariant normalization of the time component

of f to 1 in the charge rest-frame at its retarded time,

f 4(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) f

~v =0

= | ~f|(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) f

~v =0

= 1.

(12)

with another derivation and with a = dv 

d we get from (11) the single most important equation of

this paper:

= 0,

a.f(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

(13)

a constraint between the direction f along which the signal is emitted (absorbed) and the instantaneous

change in the charge state of motion at the retarded (advanced) time. it implies that

a4 =

,

~a. ~f

f4 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

(14)

v4 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f
whereas a.v  0 leads to a4 = ~a.~v
the emission (absorption) time ~a and ~f are orthogonal vectors,

, and so we have that in the charge instantaneous rest frame at

= 0.

~a. ~f(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) f

~v =0

(15)

for the electromagnetic eld this is an old well known and experimentally conrmed fact but it takes the

whole apparatus of maxwells theory in order to be demonstrated [6]. the well-known [9] distribution

of emitted electromagnetic radiation from accelerated charges can readily be derived (section viii). its

experimental conrmation is a direct validation of extended causality. the constraint (13) has been

obtained here on very generic grounds of causality, without reference to any specic interaction, which

makes of it a universal relation, valid for all kinds of elds and sources. this is a most remarkable

point, that this same behaviour is predicted to hold for all fundamental (strong, weak, electromagnetic

and gravitational) interactions. it will be shown in the following that eq. (13) is the basic cause behind

other important results like conservation laws (of charge, momentum, energy, etc), for example.

13

iv. discrete fields

we turn now to the question of how to dene, in a consistent and manifestly covariant way, a eld

with support on a generic bre f , a (1 + 1)-manifold embedded on a (3 + 1)-minkowski spacetime.

according to einsteins special relativity to any physical object is associated a particular ow of time

given by its proper time. all elds are, in this way, tied to the proper time of their (massive or not)

point source, or better, to their birth event. there is nothing new or special on this: a massless eld,

for example, propagates on the lightcone and so its proper time do not change; its clock keeps marking

the time of its creation, the instantaneous proper-time of its source at the event of its emission. the

other extreme situation is of an static eld for which  = t at each point. we use this here as a way

of implementing causality [1,3,13]. with  being a known function of x, a solution of eq. (8),

 = 0 p(x)2,

(16)

to write a(x) for a eld is the same (or almost) as writing a(x,  (x)). the subtlety of including  (x)

is of encoding in the very eld the causal constraint (8) on its propagation. then to say, for example,

that  = 0 for a eld, is just an implicit way of requiring that it propagates on a lightcone. in order

to implement local causality for a given eld a(x), therefore, we just have to insert in it an explicit

dependence on  (x). for example, the replacement

a(x) = a(x  z,  (x)   (z))(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) (x)= (z)

describes a radiation eld on the lightcone propagating from an event z to an event x. we will write

just a(x) = a(x,  )(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) =0

case where

, for short. an static eld, following this line of thought, is just a particular

a(x) = a(x,  )(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) =t

which is, naturally, a frame dependent expression, in contradistinction to the previous one.

the lienard-wiechert solution [5,10] is a well known example of how a propagating eld depends on

the proper time of its source. this dependence, let us repeat, is just a form of causality implementa-

14

tion. the distinctive subtlety introduced here is of considering the  of each x associated to the

propagation of any physical object; one for each point source and one for each eld. the use of  is very

frequent in the literature (see [14] and the references therein), always followed by some qualication like

the invariant, the universal, the historic and so many others for time, and with various interpretations

and goals. here  is always the length of a x and is always introduced in association to this vision

of causality.

whereas the implementation of local causality requires a eld dened with support on hypercones,

for extended causality it is required a eld with support on a line f :

a(x) = a(x  z,  (x)   (z))(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)  +f.x=0

 2+x2=0

let af represent such a eld

=a(x,  )(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f
being a short notation for the double constraint (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) d +f.dx=0

af (x,  ) = a(x,  )(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)  +f.x=0

 2+x2=0

with (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

,

it would not make any sense

.

 2+x2=0

dening such a eld if this restriction (to a line) on its support could not be sustained during its time

evolution governed by the standard wave equation in (3 + 1)-dimensions. it is remarkable, as we will

see, that this makes a consistent eld denition.

the derivatives of af (x,  ), allowed by the constraint (9), are the directional derivatives along f, which

with the use of (10) we write as

a(x,  )f = (


x +


x




)af = (cid:16) 

x  f



(cid:17)af =af ,

(17)

with  replacing  for taking care of the constraint (9),  can be treated as a fth independent
coordinate, time-like and lorentz invariant. the constraint (8) and (13) are used only afterwards then.

we adopt this geometrical approach. it corresponds to embedding the physical spacetime in a (3 + 2)-

manifold, as discussed in [13]. with the notation introduced in (17) the wave equation (7) for a massless

af is rewritten as

af (x,  ) = j(x,  ),

15

(18)

or, explicitly

(   2f )af (x,  ) = j(x,  ),

as f 2 = 0. j is its source four-vector current.

it can be solved by an f-greens function,

af (x, x) = z d4ydy gf (x  y, x  y) j(y),

(19)

where the sub-indices specify the respective events x and y, and gf (x  y, x  y) being a solution of

 gf (x  y, x  y) = 4(x  y)(x  y).

this equation is solved [2] to give:

gf (x,  ) =

1
2

(b f .x)(b )( + f.x) =

1
2

(bf4t)(b )( + f.x),

(20)

(21)

where b = 1, and (x) is the heaviside function, (x  0) = 1 and (x < 0) = 0. it is clear from (21)
that gf (x,  ) describes a point signal propagating with the four-velocity f  on a straight line f . the

reduction of the eld support from a lightcone to a lightcone generator reduces the discrete eld to just

a point in the phase space.

v. the discrete greens function.

the properties of gf (x,  ) will be properly discussed in [2] but let us anticipate here the more relevant

ones.

the most obvious dierence between gf (x,  ) and the standard greens function

g(x,  ) = (t2  r2) =

1
r

[(r  t) + (r + t)],

(22)

is the absence of singularity. the discrete eld propagates without changing its amplitude. such a

so great dierence between two elds generated by a same source is closely associated to the distinct

16

topologies of their respective supports. a hypercone is not a complete manifold in contradistinction to

any of its generators.

gf (x,  ) does not depend on ~xt, where the subscript t stands for transversity with respect to ~f :

~f .~xt = 0.



xt

gf (x,  ) = 0.

(23)

the interaction propagated by gf is blind to ~xt. anything at the transversal dimensions are not

aected by and do not contribute to the interaction described by gf (x,  ). let us emphasise the

importance of this. we are working with a eld formalism dened on a (3+1)-spacetime but with

respect to its dynamics the spacetime is eectively reduced to a (1+1)-spacetime, without any breaking

of the explicit lorentz covariance. this may be relevant on several fronts like, for example, theory of

integrable systems, lightcone quantization, kaluza-klein like theories, quark connement, etc.

as a consequence of eq. (23) the eq. (18) may be replaced by

gf (x,  ) = (xl)(t)( ),

(24)

where the subscript l stands for longitudinal with respect to ~f . it means that we can just ignore ~xt,

omitting the 2(~xt) on the rhs of (24). ~xt are ignorable coordinates.

the eq. (23) supports our interpretation of af as a single physical point object; its propagation

does not depend on ~xt, or in other words, on anything outside f . distinct abelian elds emitted by

neighbouring point-sources do not see each other; each one of them can be treated as an independent

single entity.

since we left the derivation of (21) for the reference [2] it may be instructive to verify that it is indeed

a solution of (24). as

( + f.x) = 0,

(b ) =  (bf(b )) = f 2( ) = o,

17

(25)

(26)

and

(b f .x) =  (b f(b f .x)) = f 2( f .x) = o,

(27)

because f 2 = 0, we nd that

gf (x) = ( + f.x)(b ).(b f .x) = f. f ( )( f .x)( + f.x) =

= (f 2

4 + | ~f|2)( )(f4t  | ~f|xl)(f4t + | ~f|xl) = 2f 2

4 ( )(2f4t)(| ~f|xl) = ( )(t)(xl).

for f  = ( ~f , f 4), f is dened by f  = ( ~f , f 4); f and f are two opposing generators of a same
lightcone; they are associated, respectively, to the b = +1 and to the b = 1 solutions and, therefore,
to the processes of creation and annihilation of a discrete eld. see the figure 2.



adv



ret

f

f

x



z (   )

fig. 2. creation and annihilation of particles:
the f -li`enard-wiechert solutions as creation and
annihilation of particle-like elds. there are two
classical photons at the point x: one, created at
ret, has propagated to x on the lightcone gener-
ator f; the other one propagating on the lightcone
generator f from x towards the electron worldline
where it will be annihilated at adv.

observe in the figure 2 that there is no backwards propagation in time implying that there is no

advanced solution; the creation and the annihilation solutions are both retarded. for b = +1 or t > 0,

gf (x,  ) describes a point signal emitted by the electron at ret, and that has propagated to x along

the bre f, of the future lightcone of z(ret); for b = 1 or t < 0, gf (x,  ) describes a point signal that
is propagating along the bre f of the future lightcone of x towards the point z(adv) where it will be

absorbed (annihilated) by the electron. this is better visualized in the space diagram of the figure

18

3 that shows the instantaneous (t = const) picture of the two solutions moving from their respective

sources. the only dierence between the (b = +1) and the (b = 1) solutions is that j is the source
for the rst and the sink for the second. nothing else. observe the dierences from the interpretation

of the standard li`enard-wiechert solutions. there is no advanced, causality violating solution here. j

is the source of the f -solution and a sink for the f -solution. these two solutions correspond to creation

and annihilation of discrete elds, exactly like well known processes of creation and annihilation of

particles.

gauge freedom and solutions from the homogeneous equation

now we want to discuss the peculiar role of the boundary conditions and of the solutions from the

homogeneous wave equation for xing the discrete solution to (24). due to the lose link between the

standard eld a(x) and its source one can always add arbitrary solution from its homogeneous equation.

this is compatible with its gauge freedom and it is indeed necessary for attending some specic boundary

conditions. for af this is not so because the most general solution from its homogeneous equation [2]

is a generic function of  + f.x which is trivially constant in the sense of (25). so, the homogeneous

equation admits only trivially constant discrete solutions. it is easy to understand why it is so.

it

describes interactions between point objects for which boundary conditions have no meaning. for the

standard eld the inhomogeneous solution is the eld produced by the sources inside a given volume

v while homogeneous solutions are elds produced [9] by external sources, i.e. the ones outside v. for

a discrete eld af , v is the line segment in f between the two interaction points, and so any source

must be on the boundaries (extremities) of this line segment f but the charges there are the ones from

j and j , the sources for the solutions from the inhomogeneous equation. any other source beyond

these points do not contribute to this af although they may generate af s in others segment of f .

so, the solutions are necessarily the emitted and the absorbed-to-be solutions from the inhomogeneous

equation. there is no room left for any other source. see the figure 3.

19

j

x

-j

-f

f

fig. 3. the two solutions, respectively along f and f , spans the space of discrete solutions from the wave
equation. the homogeneous eq. cannot have more than trivially constant solutions. any other source on
f , outside the line segment between j and j , are just outside the domain of denition of af as a free eld
it is supposed to be, i.e. a eld immediately after its creation event up to the event immediately before its
annihilation.

so, eq. (21) represents the unique (creation and absorption) solutions from eq. (24). they form

a basis for the space of all discrete solutions from the wave equation. this excludes the physical

possibility of elds independent of sources, elds without sources, allowed in principle by this lose

connection between an extended eld and its source. the discrete eld, in contradistinction to the

standard one, is completely determined by its source. so. the discrete eld has no gauge freedom; it is

not a gauge eld. this is important for understanding the meaning and the origin of gauge freedom of

the extended eld, whose discussion will be left for the section ix.

vi. retrieving the standard greens function

here we prove the connection between g(x) and g(x,  )f . first we dene

g(x,  ) =

1

2 z d4f (f 2)g(x,  )f ,

where

and then we show that

d4f = df4 | ~f|2 d| ~f| d2f ,

(f 2) =

1
2| ~f|

{(f 4  | ~f|) + (f 4 + | ~f|)},

g(x) = g(x,  )f ( ).

20

(28)

(29)

(30)

the integration indicated in (28), according to (30), is over the future (f 4 > 0) and the past (f 4 < 0)

lightcones of x. so in order to avoid double counting we must take just one solution from (21), for

example b = +1, and without the normalization factor 1/2:

gf (x,  ) = (f4t)( )( + f.x).

we write f.x = f4t + r| ~f| cos f , where the angle f is dened by

~f .~x := r| ~f| cos f ,

(31)

(32)

for a xed ~x. then we have with (29) and (30), and after the integration on f4,

g(x,  ) =

( )

4 z | ~f|d| ~f|d2fn(t)(cid:0) + | ~f|(r cos f + t)(cid:1) + (t)(cid:0) + | ~f|(r cos f  t)(cid:1)o

(33)

and then

g(x,  ) = 

( )

2 z 1

1

d cos f{

(t)

(r cos f + t)|r cos f + t|

+

(t)

(r cos f  t)|r cos f  t|}.

the constraint (8), t2 =  2 + r2, implies that |t|  r. so,

|r cos f  t| =

t
|t|

(t  r cos f ),

and thus eq. (34) becomes

g(x,  ) = g(t, r,  ) = 

( )

2 z 1

1

d cos f

(t)

(t + r cos f )2 

t

|t|(cid:8)

(t)

(t  r cos f )2(cid:9) =

= ( )

[(t)  (t)]z 1

1

t
|t|



(t + r cos f )2 d cos f .

therefore, considering that

we have

t
|t|

[(t)  (t)] = 1,

g(x,  ) = g(t2  r2,  ) =

( )

2(t2  r2)

,

21

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)

which, with the use of (8) gives

g(t2  r2,  )(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) =0

= (cid:26) 0,
,

for |t|  r 6= 0;
for |t|  r = 0.

(38)

the rhs of eq. (37) represents a spherical signal propagating with the velocity of light but it has not

the correct dimension because it lacks the ( = t2  r2 = 0)-constraint:

( ) = (pt2  r2 ) = ||

r

[(t  r) + (t + r)],

which is considered only afterwards. the appropriate greens function is, therefore

g(r, t) = g(t2  r2,  )( ) =

1
2r

[(t  r) + (t + r)] = 2(t2  r2).

(39)

vii. retrieving the standard formalism

let us discuss the connections between the discrete eld af and a, the extended one. the eq. (28)

implies that

a(x,  ) =

1

2 z d4f (f 2)a(x,  )f .

(40)

af is not the intersection of a with the bre f and a(x,  ) does not represent a collection of all elements

a(x,  )f from all possible bres f s. a represents rather the smearing of af over the lightcone. for

the emitted (f 4 = | ~f|) eld in the source instantaneous rest frame at the emission time (f 4 = 1) the
equation (40) can be written as

a(x,  ) =

1

4 z d2f a(x,  )f ,

(41)

where the integral represents the sum over all directions of ~f on a lightcone. 4, we see, is a normalization

factor and (41) is a particular case of

a(x,  ) = rf

d2f a(x,  )f

d2f

rf

.

22

(42)

an integration over the f degrees of freedom in (18) reproduces, with the use of (40), the usual wave

equation of the standard formalism, as

z d2f f  af (x) = 0

because af (x) is an even function of f , as we can see from (21). the f -integration erases in the wave

equation the eects of the constraint (9) on the eld. so, the standard extended formalism is retrieved

from this discrete f -formalism with a(x) as the average of af (x), and (7) as the average of (18), in the

sense of (40).

physical interpretation.

the continuity of the extended eld a is just an approximation. an electromagnetic wave, for

example, is known to be made of a large number of photons, of which let us take af as a classical

representation. this represents a drastic change in the meaning of a(x). being, in this new context,

just an average eld representation of the exchanged photon it can produce good physical descriptions

only at the measure of a large number of photons. this is the interpretation behind the equation (40).

it does not make much dierence for most of the practical situations but it certainly fails for very low

intensity light involving few photons. imagine an extreme case of just one emitted photon, pictured

as the bre f in the figure 4, whereas a(x) is the dotted circle. this is a very elucidative gure as

it clearly shows that af cannot be seem as the intersection of a with the bre f and neither is the

eld a a collection of af s; it is obtained from the averaging (smearing) of each af over the lightcone

as dened by (40). all informations about f are irreversibly lost in this averaging process so that the

reverse operation is not possible: af cannot be obtained from a.

23

f

s

r

q

p

.

t

1

t

2

t

3

fig. 4. the relationship between the elds af
and a. the three doted circles represent, at three
instants of time, the eld a as an spherically sym-
metric signal emitted by a charge at the point p.
the straight line pqrs. . . is the bre f, a null di-
rection. the points q, r, and s are a classical
photon af at three instants of time. in the case
of a very low intensity light with just one photon
the eld a transmit a false idea of isotropy.

then a(x), represented by the dotted circle, gives a false picture of isotropy while the true physical

action (the photon) goes only along the f null direction. this is the origin of problems (innite self-

energy, the lorentz-dirac as an equation of motion, etc) of classical electrodynamics at short distances

[5,912], discussed, in this context, in [1,2].

physical and unphysical photons

there is more than just replacing (21) in (28) in order to get (22). for a real photon af the equation

(32) makes no sense because f is the photon four-vector velocity, it is co-linear to x,

f = 0. but

the integration on cos f in (33) is essential in order to get (22). we can understand (32) and (33) in

the following way: we have substituted the single physical photon af by a continuous and isotropic

distribution of ctitious photons af  that are characterized by not having f  co-linear to their direction

of propagation x (x and  are xed in both sides of equation (33)). these ctitious elds af  do not

satisfy the condition (13) and, consequently, as we will see in the following, they are not transversal

elds. so, in order to reproduce the coulomb eld, i.e. the 1

r -potential, of the usual formalism based on

extended eld we necessarily need to introduce the unphysical longitudinal elds. the coulomb contin-

uous eld a necessarily contains spurious, non-physical, gauge-violating discrete elds. for a quantum

eld this was known already by dirac and can be expected on the basis of some theorems of quantum

field theory [15]. these ctitious elds are the same trouble-maker ones that must be eliminated in a

covariant quantization [16] of the extended eld. the singularity presented by the average eld a(x),

as shown on its greens function (21), is a consequence of this averaging process (28) in its denition.

24

it comes from the lightcone support. this highlights the dierences between af (x,  ) and a(x) as also

between their correspondent formalisms.

the discrete and the lienard-wiechert solutions

assuming spherical symmetry around a single point charge, and neglecting the constraint (13), the

f -integration on each af over a lightcone produces the lienard-wiechert solutions. this does not

imply, however that af corresponds to the lienard-wiechert solutions because any standard solution

of maxwells equations obtained from any charge and current distributions, and satisfying a boundary

condition can, in principle, be obtained from a linear combination of af s in this averaging process.

the neglecting of the constraint (13) and, therefore of the lorentz condition, is a necessary condition

for generating the standard formalism from this f -integration.

one cannot do the same with the lienard-wiechert solutions; they cannot be used as a basis for the

space of solutions of maxwells equations. the idea of a discrete eld, an elementary unit of a eld,

cannot be extracted from them. that the lienard-wiechert solutions satisfy the lorentz condition is

a consequence of the structure of their source, j(x). see the eqs. (40) and the (43) and (45) below.

fields obeying other than the lorentz condition can also be derived from an appropriate f -integration

over af . even static elds can be generated as linear combinations of discrete elds. they are seen as a

certain limit of radiation elds. see the reference [3] for the generation of the static schwarzschild eld

of general relativity (the einsteins equations become linear and reduces to the wave equation when

applied to the discrete gravitational eld), as an explicit example. it should not be necessary to say

how this may be relevant to quantum gravity.

viii. photon as a discrete field

let us now apply this discrete formalism to the electromagnetic eld generated by a classical point

spinless electron. we will take as an initial input just that the eld is described by the wave equation

25

(18), i.e. we just acknowledge its massless character ignoring any information about the maxwell tensor

structure (in other words, we will ignore eq. 3) and, therefore, any eventual connection between gauge

symmetry and charge conservation: eq (18) just implies that3.

.af = .j

(43)

for the discrete eld, we will show now, everything else is already implicit in the spacetime structure,

is a consequence of extended causality and lorentz covariance. we could (wrongly) assume that the

lorentz condition

is a consequence of the continuity equation

.af = 0

.j = 0,

(44)

(45)

but that would be just apparently true. what we want to show is that (44) and (45) are both conse-

quences of being discrete eld relations. the essence of the discrete formalism is that elds, sources and

their interactions are discrete, point-like. the continuous image is just a macroscopic approximation.

in this formalism where  is treated as an independent fth parameter, a denition of a four-vector

current must carry an additional constraint expressing the causal relationship between two events y and

z. its four-vector current is given by

j (y, y = z) = ev (z)3(~y  ~z)(ty  tz),

(46)

where z(z), is the electron worldline parameterized by its proper-time z. in (46) y has to be equal

to z as a consequence of the dirac deltas and of eq. (8). for b = +1, that is, for the eld emitted by

j we have

3if we had (3), we would have (4) and would know that (7) is a consequence of (6) and, therefore, that the
continuity equation was already contained in the maxwells equations (1) and (2).

26

af (x, x) = 2ez d5ygf (x  y)v (y)3(~x  ~y)(tx  ty),

(47)

where the factor 2 accounts for a change of normalization with respect to (19) as we are now excluding

the annihilated photon (the integration over the future lightcone). then,

af (x, x) = ev (z)(tx  tz)(x  z)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)z=x+f.(xz)

,

which with  = 0, is reduced to

af (x, x = z) = ev (z)(tx  tz)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f.(xz)=0

(48)

(49)

it is justied naming it discrete eld because although being a eld it is not null at just one space

point at a given time. its dierentiability, in the sense of having space and time derivatives, is however

assured by its dependence on  , a known continuous spacetime function. it is indeed a new concept of

eld, a very peculiar one, discrete and dierentiable; it is just a nite point-like spacetime deformation

running through a null direction. it is this discreteness in a eld that allows the union of wave-like

and particle-like properties in a same physical object, that implies niteness and no spurious degree of

freedom.

thus, the eld af is given, essentially, by the charge times its four-velocity at its retarded time.

(t) and ( ) do not contribute [2] to af , except at x = z( ), as a further consequence of the eld
constraints. so, for  = 0 and t > 0 we write just

and

af = ev(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

 a

f =  (ev )(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

= efa(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

.

(50)

(51)

the lorentz gauge condition (44) and the continuity equation (45) are both consequences of (13),

i.e. of extended causality, and so they are automatically satised by the elds af of (48) and j of

(46), respectively. they are just two identities. this is a very important point and deserves further

27

elaboration. there is a causal link, a coherence, between a discrete eld and its source that leads

necessarily to (44) and (45). this link does not depend on the eld tensorial or spinorial nature. the

extended causality constraint on a eld leads to the constraint (13) between its direction of propagation

f and the change in the state of motion of its source (sink) at the emission (absorption) time. the same

goes for .j = 0, as a.v = 0 is just a particular case of (13) for f = v . there is a symmetry between
a discrete eld and its source that is partially hidden in classical electrodynamics by its oversimplied

source representation. the classical representation (46) for the electron current j corresponds to a

discrete-eld current density. if we consider a vector eld jv dened by

j

v = j(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)v

= z d4y j (x  y) = ev ( )(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)v

(52)

as describing the discrete current for this classical spinless electron the similarity between (50) and

(52) becomes explicit: both are discrete elds as they have hypercone generators for support, which

are tangent, respectively to f  and to v . we have charge conservation regardless the maxwell tensor

antisymmetry which supposedly we dont know yet. therefore charge conservation is also a consequence

of (extended) causality and not of gauge symmetry. although hiding the spinor character of the real

electron, the electron discrete-current jv still shows the clear connection between (45) and (13) because

the physical content of (13) is independent of the eld tensorial or spinorial nature.

the force eld anti-symmetry

af , given by (50), solution to (18) for a point charge e, is just an expression of the charge state of

motion at the emission time, a instantaneous copy of (52). state of motion or velocity is a relative or

frame dependent concept and this suits well with af being a potential; the force eld, as well known,

is associated to its gradient, that is, to the charge acceleration, which is an absolute concept.

we have started from eq. (18) assuming that we dont know anything about the force eld ff except

that it is massless and must somehow be associated to the gradient of af and, therefore, in the case of

af being a vector eld, to the irreducible components of a second-rank tensor

28

f 
f  a

f = ef a(cid:12)(cid:12)f ,

(53)

dened by two four-vectors, the acceleration a of its source at its emission time and f . therefore, ff

could in principle be a scalar or either a symmetric or an antisymmetric tensor. but a and f are not

independent as they are constrained by (13), which besides excluding the scalar component (the trace)

requires that ~a. ~f = 0, in the charge instantaneous rest-frame and this, as we show now, excludes the

symmetric component. in other words, ff is a function not of a but of at:

ff  ef at(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

= ef (a  f

~a. ~f
f 2
4

,

)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

(54)

. in this particular frame the direction of propagation of af is perpendicular to

as at := a  f ~a. ~f
the electron instantaneous acceleration; af is a transversal eld. but f f ~a. ~f
f 2
4

f 2
4

is not lorentz covariant

(neither at) and there should be no privileged frame; so it should not appear in the ff denition.

lorentz covariance requires an anti-symmetric tensor

f f

 := e(fa  fa)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

= af

   af
.

(55)

f f is given by the cross product of f and a, so it is a transversal eld. this leads to the maxwells

theory on a bre f embedded in the (3 + 1)-spacetime.

this result (55) cannot be obtained outside the extended causality context as the explicit dependence

on f is determinant. the constraint (13) says that ff cannot depend on a longitudinal (with respect

to ~f ) component of a. this, with lorentz covariance, is enough to assure the anti-symmetry of ff . for

the extended eld a this is not true: the lorentz condition (6) excludes the scalar component of f

but not the symmetric one. it takes further constraints like the requirement of a transversal eld, for

example. this argument is extendable to non abelian interactions too.

the f -electromagnetic eld

the electromagnetic eld of a classical photon af is thus given by

f (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f
f = f 4i
ei

= e(f 4ai  f ia4)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

= ef 4(ai  f i ~a. ~f
(f4)2 )(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

= ef 4ai

t(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

,

(56)

29

f (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f
f = ijkf jk
bi

= eijkf jak(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

= eijkf jak

t(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

.

(57)

~ef , ~a and ~f belong to a same plane, which is, by denition orthogonal to ~bf ;

~ef and ~bf do

not depend on ~al, only on ~at. ~ef is parallel to at. so there is no unphysical longitudinal photon i.e.

solution with longitudinal eld: ~ef , ~bf and ~f form a triad of orthogonal vectors: ~ef . ~bf = 0,

the fpoynting vector ~sf is dened by

~sf = ~ef  ~bf = e2f 4~at  ( ~f  ~a)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

= e2f 4(~at)2 ~f (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

= e2f 4a2 ~f (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

,

with a2 := aa and we have used (14) to write

(~at)2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

= (~a  ~f

~a. ~f
f4

)2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

= {~a2  (

~a. ~f
f4

)2}(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

= a2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

having ff we can derive its energy-momentum tensor as usual. it is given by



f = f 

f f 

f  +


4

f 
f f f



which after (55) and (13) is reduced to



f = e2f f a2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)f

.

(58)

(59)

(60)

(61)

f is nite and represents the energy-momentum of af , a classical photon, a point object changelessly

propagating along f .  
everywhere conserved. the larmor theorem can be obtained from (60) as an average ux in the sense

f = 0 is a consequence of (13); the energy-momentum content of af is

of (28), with the neglecting of (13). ff , but not af , always describes a classical photon. as af reects

the state of motion of its source, it does not necessarily means an interaction, a classical photon, which

requires a change in the source state of motion, an acceleration. if z(ret) is not a vertex, a(x) does

not describe a real classical photon; its maxwell tensor is null. f 

f  0. a photon is a sudden change
in the electron state of motion. if there is no change there is no photon and a(x) is just a pure gauge

eld.

30

i+1

v
i+1



ret

x

i

v
i

fig. 5. classical photon from a polygo-
nal-worldline electron. the dashed line is a null
line. the past lightcone of x picks just one event
on the electron worldline. af (x) is a real classical
photon if this event is a vertex, otherwise it is just
a pure gauge eld with f 

f = 0.

ix. gauge freedom, singularity and duality

af , regardless the ff antisymmetry, is completely determined by the state of motion of its source,

and does not allow any non-trivial gauge freedom.

it is not a gauge eld. extended causality, or

equivalently, the concept of a eld dened with support on a straight line, leads to this unique solution

(50) for the wave equation, a eld without any spurious degree of freedom. the lorentz gauge condition

for it, as a consequence of (13), becomes an identity, and one can understand why there is no symmetric

eld describing fundamental interactions. the important point here is that af of eq. (49) is not just

a solution from the wave equation for an emitted radiation. it is the only solution for a given point

source4. any accelerated charge emits this same eld af and any extended eld is a superposition of

af s. it is a universal eld, in the same sense of an elementary particle, like a photon or an electron, is.

4any linear combination of emitted (t > 0) and absorbed (t < 0) solutions is also a solution but they cannot
be interpreted as an elementary physical entity.

31

a remarkable point in the passage (40) from a discrete to an extended eld is the surging of gauge

symmetry; even the li`enard-wiechert solution, that satises (6), has a residual gauge freedom.

in

g, a and f all information implicit with f is lost with the f -integration. a generic solution a is

only indirectly linked to the state of motion of its sources; it can have many sources at once, even a

continuous one or no source at all (solutions from homogeneous equation). in other words, with the

f -integration the eld af becomes a, reduces the extended causality to just local causality, and acquires

gauge freedom. the coherence between af and its source at its emission time (expressed through f as

a one-to-one link between a eld-event and a source-event) is lost. with a(x) the bre f is replaced by

the lightcone and a point-charge event is linked to an innity of eld events.

another remarkable point is that af and gf have no singularity in contradistinction to their extended

counterparts. this is a consequence of their distinct supports, a straight line and a lightcone, respec-

tively. so, contrary to an old lore, the coulomb (as also [3] the schwarszchild) singularity is not a

consequence of a point-like source but just a reex of the lightcone vertex [13]. the eld singularity

appears with (40), the integration over the lightcone, as a consequence of the eld being dened as an

eective average. this is saying again that the innity in a is introduced with (41) and explains [1] the

violation of causality in the li`enard-wiechert advanced solution and the causality problems with the

lorentz-dirac equation.

a bridge to the quantum domain

most of the diculties of standard eld theories comes from their use of eld as an extended object,

that is, with an innite number of degrees of freedom. a discrete eld means a rescue from that. it

merges the ideas of eld and of discreteness as an answer to the wave-particle duality. there is not a

necessary contradiction or incompatibility between quantum physics and discrete elds. conceptually,

a discrete eld is just a mathematical point in phase space (that is why it has a nite number of degrees

of freedom) and this, on the other hand, implies that its determination is fundamentally restricted

to experimental uncertainties, which brings the connection to the (interpretation of the) heisenbergs

32

principle and to the eld representation of a free particle. both are fundamental points in the physical

interpretation of quantum theory. their close connections to the discrete-eld concept will be discussed

elsewhere. a particle, in contradistinction to a discrete eld, does not have wave properties (interference,

etc) and cannot be made compatible with quantum mechanics. in general a photo detector is sensitive

to the photon electric eld and it cannot distinguish the elds of two or more discrete elds separated

by a time interval smaller than its discriminating-time window (blind time-gap). it answers to the total

electric eld, say ~et = ~e1 + ~e2, and the amplitude of the total electric eld ~et will depend on the

phase dierence between ~e1 and ~e2, exactly like in the theory of standard elds. the point is that it

is dealing with a eld, a pointlike eld, but not a particle. in order to have interference we need elds,

not necessarily waves nor extended elds.

x. the photon angular distribution

the condition (13) restricts the possible direction of emission of a classical photon by an accelerated

charge: ~f is orthogonal to ~a in the charge instantaneous rest-frame. the photon is emitted in a plane

orthogonal to ~a. this is a maximally conceivable restriction as we are working with an (isotropic)

spinless, point-particle model for the electron moving in a continuously smooth worldline. a further

nal restriction must come only after considering the electron spin.

in a laboratory ~a is known only up to an experimental uncertainty ~a. see the figure 5.

it is

assumed here that we are dealing with an emitted classical photon, that is the case when a determines

33

f . in the inverse process of an absorbed classical photon, f determines a, of course.

f

o

+

f

o

f

o

-

fig. 6. ~a, the space part of the electron acceler-
ation, is known up to an experimental uncertainty
~a. then there corresponds an indetermination
 ~f , such that whichever be ~a, inside its range
[~a0~a, ~a0+~a], ~f , in its range [ ~f0 ~f , ~f0+ ~f ],
will be in the plane orthogonal to ~a. here ~a0 and ~f0
denote, respectively, the central or the most prob-
able value of ~a and ~f in their respective ranges.

+

a

o

a

o

-

a

o

then there corresponds, according to (15), an indetermination  ~f , such that whichever be ~a, inside

its interval [~a0  ~a, ~a0 + ~a], ~f , in its interval [ ~f0   ~f , ~f0 +  ~f ], will be in the plane orthogonal to
~a, and that

~a0. ~f + ~f0.~a = 0,

~a0. ~f0 = 0,

(62)

(63)

are satised. ~a0 and ~f0 denote the mean value of, respectively, ~a and ~f .

we need this for comparing the experimental data with the theory predictions. a and f in the theory

always correspond to a0 and f0 inside their respective intervals in the experimental data.

straight line motion

the photon polarization, according to (56) is determined by the charge instantaneous acceleration at

the (retarded) emission time. if the electron motion is such that ~v and ~a are collinear vectors, then

with a boost along ~v , see the figure 6, we have for the angle  between ~v and ~f :

tan  =

sin 

( + cos )

=

1


,

(64)

34

as  = /2, or

sin  = p1  2,

(65)

dtz | and  = (1  2) 1

where  = | d~z
cone about the ~v direction. the direction of photon emission coincides with the direction of maximum

2 . so, a ultra-relativistic electron emits a photon in a very narrow

emission in the standard formalism [9,17]. again, the photon polarization, as we see from (56), is along

the electron instantaneous acceleration, regardless the electron velocity. in the figure 5 ~f  and ~a are,

respectively, ~f and ~a on the electron instantaneous rest frame.


f'


a '

 
f, s



 
v a,

a)

b)

fig. 7. radiation from an elec-
tron in a straight-line motion.
a)the lorentz condition requires
that ~f  be orthogonal to the elec-
tron three-vector acceleration ~a
on its instantaneous rest frame:
~a. ~f  = 0. b)in the laboratory
frame the radiation is restricted
to a cone of aperture , with
d , c = 1.

~ = d~z

sin = p1   2,

circular motion

if the charge is in a circular motion then ~a.~v = 0, which from a.v = 0 implies also that a4 = 0 and

then, with (13), that ~a. ~f = 0. inverting (57) we nd that

~f =

~a  ~bf + e~a ~f .~a

e~a.~a

=

~a  ~bf
e~a.~a

.

(66)

then we conclude from (66) that ~f , for a charge in a circular motion, is orthogonal to the plane dened

by ~bf and ~a. but, in the absence of magnetic monopoles, ~bf is always orthogonal to ~v , its sources

velocity, and so we have that the eld synchrotron radiation is always emitted in the ~v -direction. again,

this agrees with the direction of maximum emission of the standard formalism [9,17].

35

xi. conclusions

this work throws some light on the meaning and origin of gauge elds, their symmetries and singular-

ities. if af is accepted as the fundamental eld and a as just an eective average then the antisymmetry

of f , the need of boundary conditions, the lose connection between a and its sources, their gauge free-

dom and singularity can all be better understood. in a theory of discrete elds and sources each discrete

eld af is causally linked to the event of its creation by its point source. this link (or correlation)

is represented by the null f -direction. af being completely determined by the state of motion of its

source has no gauge freedom. when af is integrated over f in order to get a, this one-to-one link is

lost and the eld a no more represents the state of motion of any particular point source as it is just

an average eld. the connection between the state of motion of a point source and a discrete solution

of the inhomogeneous equation becomes lose as now any solution from the homogeneous equation can

be added to it. af is not a gauge eld, a consequence of equation (13) while a(x) being a gauge eld

and its singularity are consequences of (40).

with respect to the physical interpretation of the discrete electromagnetic eld it would be a too

easy solution to regard it as a mere mathematical artifact without

the richness of this approach lies on its promising applications to a wider and unifying quantum

context. this picture replaces both particles and elds with a new kind of object: the discrete eld,

a particle-like eld that is neither particle nor the usual extended eld. af as a eld ts the wave

properties of light and ts also, for being discrete, the particle properties like in the compton and

in the photo-electric eects. the discrete eld, in this sense, is a representation of the wave-particle

duality of quantum mechanics.

there are of course many other questions still to be answered. our decision of applying the discrete

formalism to a classical theory implied on accepting to work with its structural limitations which are

mainly due to its emphasis on particles trajectories and on a scalar representation for the sources.

but even such a naive context has its merits others than just the simplicity. it is necessary now to

36

distinguish what is just a consequence of the simple description adopted for the eld sources from what

may require a real quantum treatment. how far can one go with such a classical scheme? where a

legitimate quantum input must necessarily be added? what is a legitimate quantum input? what does

it mean? these are just examples of valid questions that can be raised now.

[1] m. m. de souza, j. of phys. a: math. gen. 30 (1997)6565-6585.
[2] in preparation.
[3] m. m. de souza, robson n. silveira, class. & and quantum gravity, vol 16, 619(1999).
[4] m. m. de souza, classical fields and the quantum concept.hep-th/9610145.
[5] f. rorhlich, classical charged particles, reading, mass. (1965).
[6] see the reference [5] at page 112.
[7] n. nakanish, critical review of the theory of quantum electrodynamics in quantum electrodynamics,

t. kinoshita (ed), p.36, world scientic, singapure(1990).

[8] w. g. dixon, trans. roy. soc. lond. a. 277, 59(1974) and the references therein.
[9] d. jackson classical electrodynamics,2nd ed., chaps. 14 and 17, john wiley & sons, new york,

ny(1975).

[10] c. teitelboim; d. villaroel; ch.g.van weert, rev. del nuovo cim., vol 3, n.9,(1980).
[11] e.g.p.rowe, phys. rev. d, 12, 1576(1975); 18, 3639(1978); nuovo cim, b73, 226(1983).
[12] a. lozada, j. math. phys., 30,1713(1989).
[13] m. m. de souza, braz. j. of phys., vol 28, n. 3, 250(1999).
[14] fanchi, j. r., found. phys 23, 487(1993);gaioli, f. h., garcia-alvarez, e. t., int. j. phys, 36, 2391(1997).
[15] ferrari, r., picasso, l. e., strochi, f., commun. math. phys. 35, 25(1974); f., phys. rev d 17,
2010(1978);strochi, f., in field theory, quantization and statistical physics, e. tirapegui (ed), 227-236,
reidel, the netherlands, (1981).

[16] s. n. gupta, proc. phys. soc. a63, 681 (1950); k. bleuler, helv. phys. acta 23, 567 (1950).
[17] a.a. sokolov, i. m. ternov, radiation from relativistic electrons, a.i.p, new york, n. y, 1986.

37

