9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
0
2

 

 
 

1
v
2
6
1
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

grand unication using a generalized yang-mills

theory

m. chaves

escuela de fsica, universidad de costa rica

san jose, costa rica

e-mail: mchaves@cariari.ucr.ac.cr

and

h. morales

department of physics & astronomy

university of kentucky

lexington, kentucky 40506-0055

e-mail: hmorales@pa.uky.edu

november 8, 1999

abstract

generalized yang-mills theories have a covariant derivative that employs
both scalar and vector bosons. here we show how grand unied theories of
the electroweak and strong interactions can be constructed with them.
in
particular the su(5) gut can be obtained from su(6) with su(5)xu(1) as a
maximal subgroup. the choice of maximal subgroup also determines the chiral
structure of the theory. the resulting lagrangian has only two terms, and only
two irreducible representations are needed, one for fermions and another for
bosons.

1 introduction

the idea behind generalized yang-mills theories1-3 (gymts) is as follows: in the
usual yang-mills theory gauge invariance is assured through the demand that vector
gauge elds a transform as a  uau 1  (u)u 1. in a gymt scalar boson
elds are considered to be also acceptable as gauge elds, with a transformation law
similar to the one just shown. to be able to sum together scalar and vector bosons,
it is necessary to express all terms of the theory, both bosonic and fermionic, in the
spinorial representation. technical details on this procedure are left for next section.

1

as will be seen, a gauge invariant theory is obtained, which we call a gymt. in the
usual yang-mills theories gauge bosons are placed in the adjoint representation; in
gymts whatever higgs elds are needed are placed there, too. the total number
of bosons, vector plus scalar, has to equal the number of group generators, a rather
stringent requirement on their numbers. the fermions are placed in another irre-
ducible representation (irrep) of mixed chirality. the structure of the adjoint gauge
eld matrix is

(cid:18) vector bosons
scalar bosons vector bosons (cid:19) ,

scalar bosons

(1)

(2)

and that of the fermion eld matrix is:

(cid:18) left fermions

right fermions

right fermions

left fermions (cid:19) .

the possible dimensions of the blocks that make up the matrices are determined by
the maximal subgroups of the gauge group. if we assume it to be su(6), then there
are three possible maximal subgroups, su(3)  su(3)  u(1), su(4)  su(2)  u(1),
and su(5)  u(1). in this case, for example, the upper left blocks for both matrices
would be a square of side 3, 4, and 5, respectively.

the original inspiration for our work is an old idea due to fairlie and neeman,4 of
using su(2/1) as a unication group for the glashow-weinberg-salam (gws) model,
and putting the higgs elds in the adjoint along with the vector elds. however, in
spite of much eort by these and other authors, no success was achieved at the
time in these matters. the belief that the gauge group had to be graded1,2 lead to
insurmountable diculties.

it is possible to construct a grand unied theory (gut) of the strong and elec-
troweak forces using a gymt.3 the immediate benet of this procedure is simplicity.
there are only two terms in the lagrangian, whereas in the usual guts there are
several. as mentioned, only two irreps are needed, as compared with one or two for
the fermions, at least two for the higgs elds and one for the gauge vector elds, in
the case of a usual gut.

in high energy physics the word unication has a very precise meaning: one
selects a large lie group, which contains in a maximal subgroup other small lie
groups that represent the forces that are to be unied. then, through the process
of spontaneous symmetry breaking brought about by nonzero vacuum expectation
values of higgs elds, the smaller groups can be recovered and with them the low
energy phenomenology. in the case of gymt grand unication the same process is
occurring insofar as one must choose a large lie group so that it can contain the
smaller phenomenological groups, but, besides this process, there is another kind of
unication, brought about by putting together in one irrep vector and scalar bosons
(which in turns permits to put together in the same irrep left and right fermions).
to go from this second kind of unication to the smaller groups, it is necessary
to restrict the gauge group to its maximal subgroup in order to obtain a yang-mills
theory and be in a more familiar terrain, so to speak.

2

the generalized gauge transformation leaves invariant the lagrangian of the
theory. however, this does not mean that separate parts of the lagrangian are nec-
essarily kept invariant if they are transformed individually. as an example, consider
the fermion matrix (2), whose chiral structure is not left invariant by the most gen-
eral generalized gauge transformation. but the maximal subgroup does leave its
chiral structure invariant. in fact, the dierent maximal subgroups are the possible
yang-mills theories derivable from a particular gymt.

a very general generalized gauge transformation is not going to help us recover
low energy phenomenology, since it leads to expressions we are not accustomed to.
the procedure is to obtain the yang-mills theory from the gymt rst by restraining
the gauge group to a maximal subgroup; then, through the usual spontaneous sym-
metry breaking processes, obtain the small phenomenological groups. we shall come
back to this topic in last section, in relation to the example covered in this paper,
su(6), when the discussion is not so abstract.

2 gymts

the rst thing we have to do is learn how to write covariant derivatives in the spino-
rial representation. let s be an element of the spinor representation of the lorentz
group, so that, if  is a spinor, then it transforms as   s. then, due to the ho-
momorphism that exists between the vector and spinor representations of the lorentz
group, we have that a/  sa/s1 for a vector a that has been contracted with the
dirac matrices. it was this homomorphism that allowed dirac to write a spinorial
equation that included the vector electromagnetic eld. we have the following

theorem. let d =  + b, where b is some vector eld. then:

(b  b)(b  b) =

1
8

tr2d/ 2 

1
2

trd/ 4,

(3)

where the traces are to be taken over the dirac matrices.

we are not going to prove this theorem. instead, we remit the reader to ref. 1,
where the proof is done in detail. consider now a yang-mills theory that is invariant
under a lie group with n generators. the fermion or matter sector of the non-abelian
lagrangian has the form id/, where d is a covariant derivative chosen to maintain
gauge invariance, and  is a chiral fermion multiplet. this multiplet transforms as
  u, where u = u(x) is an element of the fundamental representation of the
group. the covariant derivative is d =  + a, where a = igaa
(x)t a is an
element of the lie algebra and g is a coupling constant. we are assuming here that
the matrices {t a}, a = 1, . . . , n, constitute a representation of the group generators.
gauge invariance of the matter term is assured if

or, what is the same,

a  uau 1  (u)u 1 ,

a/  ua/u 1  (/u)u 1.

3

(4)

(5)

to construct the gymt we generalize the transformation of the gauge eld as
follows: to every generator in the lie group we choose one gauge eld that can be
either vector or scalar. suppose there are n generators in the lie group; we choose
nv generators to be associated with an equal number of vector gauge elds and the
other ns to be associated with an equal number of scalar gauge elds. naturally
nv + ns = n. the choice has to be made so that the adjoint can be decomposed in
blocks made up solely of vector or scalar elds (with the exception of the elds along
the diagonal, that can be either), as shown in (1), with the block size given by the
dimension of the subgroups forming the maximal subgroup. we dene the generalized
covariant derivative d by taking each one of the generators and multiplying it by one
of its associated gauge elds and summing them together. the result is

d  / + a/ + 

(6)

where a/ = a = igaa
nv + 1, . . . , n.

t a, a = 1, . . . , nv , and  =  5 = g 5bt b, b =

we now dene the transformation for the gauge elds to be

a/ +   u(a/ + )u 1  (/u)u 1,

(7)

from which one can conclude that d  udu 1. the following lagrangian is built
based on the conditions that it contain only matter elds and covariant derivatives,
and possess both lorentz and gauge invariance:

ln a = id +

1

2g2ftr(cid:18) 1

tr2d 2 

trd 4(cid:19) ,

1
2

(8)

8

where the trace with the tilde is over the gauge (or lie group) matrices and the one
without it is over matrices of the spinorial representation of the lorentz group. (for
some fermion irreps a small modication is necessary. see section 5.)

although we have constructed this non-abelian lagrangian based only on the
conditions just mentioned, its expansion into component elds results in expressions
that are traditional in yang-mills theories. the expansion is done in detail in ref. 1,
and results in

ln a = i(/ + a/)  g i 5bt b +

1

+

g2ftr ( + [a, ])2 .

1

2g2ftr (a  a + [a, a])2

(9)

the reader will recognize familiar structures: the rst term on the right looks like the
usual matter term of a gauge theory, the second like a yukawa term, the third like the
kinetic energy of vector bosons in a yang-mills theory and the fourth like the gauge-
invariant kinetic energy of scalar bosons in the non-abelian adjoint representation.

4

3 a case study: the gws model

the gws model can be written1 as a gymt using the group u(3). it is necessary
to use this group and not su(3), as we shall see. referring to (9), notice that one
can infer, from the terms ia/ and 1
of the particles of a gymt are the same and can be calculated in the same ways
as if it were a conventional yang-mills theory. in particular, notice that a maximal
subgroup, that would only keep diagonal terms in (1), would have the same diagonal
generators (and thus the same quantum numbers), as the full group.

2g2ftr ([a, a])2 , that the quantum numbers

originally, in ref. 1, the authors calculated the quantum numbers directly from
the diagonal generators of the group, but in this paper we use, when possible,
group-theoretical techniques. we follow the conventions used in slanskys handbook
group theory for unied model building5 except that we shall write hypercharges as
subindices and not between parenthesis. in particular we use the relation q = t3+ 1
2y,
with a positive sign for the hypercharge term as in this reference and not as we have
done in previous papers, with a minus sign. the group theory results we use are for
the most part listed in slanskys table 58 on branching rules for maximal subgroups.
if we try to construct a gymt of the gws model using su(3), the bosons
are placed in the adjoint 8. this irrep has, under the maximal subgroup su(3) 
sui(2)  uy (1), the branching rule 8 = 10 + 23 + 23 + 30; that is, the 8 is the direct
sum of an isospin singlet with y = 0, a doublet with y = 3, and so on. the gauge
eld matrix g3, that appears in the covariant derivative d3 = / + g3 would, omitting
all numerical factors, look like

g3 =


b/ + a/3

a/+

a/


1

b/  a/3



2

1
2
2b/


 .

(10)

algebraically, to obtain the quantum number of a eld one must take the commutator
of the eld with the diagonal generator associated with that quantum number. thus
the hypercharges of the gauge elds in g3 are given by the coecients of the elds
in [8, g3], where 8  diag(1, 1, 2). for the case of 1 or 2 one gets y = 3.
alternatively, one can obtain this result directly and immediately from the branching
rule for the 8, since the higgs elds belong in the 23. the problem is that the gws
higgs eld has y = 1, not y = 3.

it is not possible to construct a gymt for the gws using su(3), but with
u(3) it is possible to do it. for in this group there is the additional generator
9  diag(1, 1, 1), and it is possible use it, along with 8, to form an alternative
representation with generators 10  diag(1, 1, 1) and 0  diag(1, 1, 2), which can
be expressed as two orthogonal linear combinations of 8 and 9. we dene 0 to be
the correct hypercharge generator, and with it the value y = 1 is obtained for the
hypercharge of the higgs. with this hypercharge we have a natural choice for the

5

fermions of the gws model:

 =


ec
r
c
r
ec
l


 .

(11)

this choice of hypercharge gives all the particles of the gws model with their correct
quantum numbers. we do not obtain the higgs potential energy density v () from
gymts.

it seems peculiar that one has to go to an unusual representation of u(3) to be
able to construct the gymt. the explanation for this peculiarity becomes evident
if one considers grand unied gymts. the group su(6) has the maximal subgroup
su(6)  su(3)  su(3)  u(1), which, in a way, seems the logical one to use since
it contains two su(3), one for the gws model and another for chromodynamics.
we actually attempted grand unication rst this way3 but we were forced to use
an unusual representation of the generators of su(6) to obtain the correct quantum
numbers of the particles of the standard model. we also overlooked, in part due to the
dicult algebra, that it is necessary to use a mixed eld for the hypercharge generator,
as we shall explain next section. here we shall use a dierent maximal subgroup,
su(6)  su(5)  u(1). with it is not necessary to go to a new representations to
get the correct quantum numbers for the vector bosons, higgs bosons, or fermions of
the standard model, and the relation between the su(5) gut and su(6) gymt
becomes wonderfully transparent.

4 the bosons of the su (6)  su (5)  u (1) gymt

gut

the gymt based on su(6) will use the adjoint 35 for the bosons and the 15 for
the fermions. this last irrep is the antisymmetric product of two 6s, the 6 being
the fundamental representation. to obtain the particle spectrum of the theory we
use the maximal subgroup su(5)  u(1). the branching rule for the 35 is 35 =
10 + 56 + 56 + 240. the 5 is the fundamental of su(5), and the 24 is the adjoint.
schematically, the gauge elds look like this:

g6 =(cid:18) 24 5

1 (cid:19) =(cid:18) g5 + 

5





5 (cid:19) .

(12)

here g5 transforms as the adjoint 24 of su(5); , the gws higgs eld, as the 5;  as
the 5; and  as the singlet, all according to the branching rule 35 = 10 +56 +56 +240.
these irreps of the branching of the 35 under su(6)  su(5)  u(1) take the place
of the irreps of the normal su(5) gut, with the dierence while the gut higgs in
su(5) transforms as another 24 here it does it as the singlet 10. while in the usual
gut theory each irrep is arbitrarily chosen, in gymts they are basically given by
the choice of the gauge group and its maximal subgroup.

6

the hypercharge generator for the su(5) gut is of the form diag(2, 2, 2, 3, 3),

so for our su(6) case

y  diag(2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 0),

(13)

and we assign to it the vector boson b/, in a way similar to the way it is done in
su(5) gut. (we shall see that actually one has to assign to it a mixture of b/ and ,
this last being a scalar we proceed to introduce.) from the structure of the maximal
subgroup su(5)  u(1) one knows that there is a generator

z  diag(1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 5).

(14)

we shall give the name ultracharge to the quantum number associated with the
z diagonal generator.
it is necessary to assign a scalar boson, we call , to this
generator, since we cannot assign a vector boson to it because in that case it should
have had already been observed, being massless. there is no problem assigning a
scalar eld, for, as can be seen in (9), the terms that would couple scalar bosons among
themselves are missing. these terms drop out from lagrangian (8) for algebraic
reasons. this scalar  has to be the same one that generates the large-scale guts
masses to the leptoquark bosons, since there are no more bosons available. it should
have a very large mass, since higgs bosons are usually assumed to have masses of the
order of their vacuum expectation values.

just as in a normal gut, phenomenology is obtained through the maximal sub-

group su(5)  sui(2)  suc(3)  uy (1). the branching of the adjoint is

24 = (1, 1)0 + (3, 1)0 + (2, 3)5 + (2, 3)5 + (1, 8)0,

(15)

where each irrep is given in the form (m, n)y , where m is in sui(2) and n in suc(3).
the bosons contained in g5 are the usual four vector bosons of the gws model, the
eight gluons, and the twelve leptoquark bosons. if we add to these the ve complex
higgs elds  and the scalar singlet  we obtain the 35 elds that make up the gymt
adjoint.

while this arrangement seems nicely precise, there is one serious diculty with
it. as can be seen from the branching rule for the 35, the ultracharge of all the
bosons is zero, so that, in particular, the leptoquarks do not acquire a very large
mass. we propose a simple solution to this problem that is reminiscent of the special
representation of the generators of the u(3) group that was necessary to introduce
to be able to express the gws model as a gymt. it consists in assigning to the
hypercharge generator a eld  that is the mixture of two elds that have already
been introduced:

 = b/ +  5.

(16)

there is no change in the eld assigned to the ultracharge generator; it is still the
. with this assignment the leptoquarks (and only them) couple to the , as can be
seen in (15) from the hypercharge assignments, so they obtain a very large mass.

7

in next section we study the fermion sector of the model. the reader may perhaps
nd it unlikely that the scheme we have introduced could work with fermions, rst,
because the mixed eld  would apparently imply the coupling of  to fermions,
giving them a mass on the scale of grand unication, and, second, that, while no
fermion must couple to the , some of them must necessarily couple to the  bosons
to reproduce the gws model. actually the fermion terms appear with a serendipitous
combination of chiralities that gives all the correct results.

5 the fermions of the su (6)  su (5)  u (1) gymt

gut

the fermions in the su(6) gymt gut are placed in the antisymmetric 15. the
branching rule for this irrep for the maximal subgroup su(5)u(1) is 15 = 54 +102,
where the subindex is the ultracharge. in turn the branchings of these two irreps are
5 = (1, 3)2 + (2, 1)3 and 10 = (2, 3)1 + (1, 3)4 + (1, 1)6 where, as before, the irreps
are expressed in the form (m, n)y , where m is in sui(2) and n in suc(3). these
two irreps also appear in normal su(5), and on the basis of the isospin, hypercharge,
and color quantum numbers their particle content is 5  (d1, d2, d3, ec, c)r and
10  (u1, d1, u2, d2, u3, d3, u1c, u2c, u3c, ec)l. the quark colors have been denoted 1, 2
and 3. it is possible to place these two irreps in a single one, using larger unication
groups, but then the two irreps should be 5 and 10, charge conjugating the 5, in order
to have the same chiralities. however, in a gymt gut just the opposite happens:
the two irreps must necessarily have dierent chiralities to be included in a larger
irrep, so that, denoting the chirality of the irrep by a subindex, the 5r and the 10l
are just what we need.

the fermion irreps t into the antisymmetric 15 in the following way:

 =(cid:18) 10l

5t
r

5r

0 (cid:19) .

(17)

this eld transforms as the antisymmetrized kronecker product of two fundamentals
of su(6), so that, if u is an element of the fundamental representation, then under a
group transformation   uu t and   u  u 1. furthermore, the adjoint is the
product of the fundamental times its conjugate, g6  ug6u 1, so that the correct
invariant fermion term in this gymt lagrangian would need a trace over the gauge
group:

ftr(cid:0) i(/ + g6)(cid:1) .

(18)

it is not necessary to prove that the 5 and 10 predict the correct fermion spectrum,
since they are the same irreps that are used in the usual su(5) gut. what we do
have to verify is that the mixed eld  causes no inconsistencies with the fermion
phenomenology of the standard model. expanding (18) into all its components, one
obtains three types of terms:

8

1. type rc/ r or lc/ l, where c is any one of the vector bosons of the stan-
dard model. (the denition of r is (
r 0)l, so it is a spinor with left chiral-
ity.) these terms represent the usual couplings of the standard model between
fermions and vector bosons, including leptoquarks.

2. type l r or r l,where  is the higgs that gives mass to the w  and

z 0, the carriers of the weak interaction.

3. type rr or ll, that are zero due to the opposite chiralities. as we said,

it was important that these terms cancelled.

fortunately, in each case the correct combination of chiral spinors has appeared. any
variation would have been phenomenologically unacceptable.

the couplings with the vector bosons are the same as those predicted by the
su(5) gut. there is a term present in the su(5) gut that is missing in this
su(6)  su(5)u(1) gymt. the su(5) gauge invariance allows two yukawa terms
that couple fermions 5r and the 10l with the higgs boson 5. the two invariants are
10l  5  5r and 10c
l  5  10l = 10l  5  10l. in this gymt there is only one
term that involves fermions and it is given in (18). the only su(6) gauge invariant
is 15  35  15, which contains only the rst of the su(5) invariants. fortunately all
the fermion kinetic energy terms are present in 10l  5  5r, so what is missing is
this gws higgs contribution to the mass of the right quark.

6 final comments

we have dened gymts, and shown that is possible to construct a satisfactory
gut with them. the group su(6) with the su(5)  u(1) maximal subgroup gives
results that are very simple to interpret. with su(5)  u(1) one obtains all the
correct quantum numbers of the particles of the standard model right away, without
having to perform rst a rotation in root space, as it is the case using other maximal
subgroups. furthermore, the relation between the su(5) gut and the su(6) gymt
becomes transparent. to put it bluntly, the rst is the block expansion, as dictated
by the maximal subgroup, of the matrices of the second. another important point
is that to the su(6) hypercharge generator a mixture of two elds must be assigned
to correctly obtain the standard model: the usual hypercharge vector and the gut
higgs. there are still 35 boson elds for the 35 su(6) irrep.

one advantage of this formulation of the standard model is that it only requires
two irreps, one for all the bosons and another for all the fermions. not only does the
gws higgs, but also the gut higgs, t in the su(6)s 35. the lagrangian of the
gymt has only two terms: the fermion kinetic energy and a term in powers of d.

notice that our motivation to restrict the symmetry to su(5)  u(1) is due to the
need to obtain a theory one is familiar with, in this case the underlying su(5) yang-
mills structure. then there are two additional spontaneous symmetry breakings, one
from su(5) to su(3)c sui(2)uy (1) and another from sui(2)uy (1) to uem (1),

9

but these are of the usual type, due to nonzero vacuum expectation values of higgs
elds.

we still do not know how to include in a natural way in the model the higgs
potential v (, ). what we have done is simply to assign a gws-scale vacuum ex-
pectation value to the colorless, chargeless, component of the higgs eld , and a
gut-scale to the higgs eld , which is a colorless and chargeless singlet. inciden-
tally, the right neutrino cannot be included in a gymt gut using su(6). to include
it would necessitate a larger group. as was mentioned at the end of last section, the
term that couples the gws higgs with the up quark in the su(5) gut seems to
be missing in this gymt, so that this quarks does not get mass generation from .
however the fermionic term that is present does contain the up quarks kinetic energy
term.

just as in yang-mills theories when the covariant derivative acts on a eld x
its gauge elds acquire certain coecients called the charges of each gauge eld
with respect to the eld x, in this generalization the same thing has to be done.
thus, when d acts on the leptonic triplet, its gauge elds are going to be multiplied
by constants qv and qs, with the result d = (/ + qv a/ + qs). from our
knowledge of the standard model we conclude that qv = 1 and that there are three
qs, one for each generation, with rather small values.

while it is the maximal subgroup that generates the phenomenology of a gut
gymt, there is an additional, powerful symmetry present: the gauge group itself,
su(6), in this case. the implications of this symmetry seem to us to be a worthwhile
subject of study for the future.

references
1. m. chaves and h. morales, mod. phys. lett. a13, 2021 (1998).
2. m. chaves, some mathematical considerations about generalized yang-mills
theories, in photon and poincare group, ed. v. v. dvoeglazov, (nova science
publishers, new york, 1998). this and the previous reference contain fairly complete
bibliographies.
3. m. chaves and h. morales, the standard model and the generalized covariant
derivative, in proceedings of the international workshop lorentz group, cpt, and
neutrinos, universidad autonoma de zacatecas, mexico, june 23-26, 1999, (world
scientic), to be published.
4. d. b. fairlie, phys. lett. b82, 97 (1979); y. neeman, phys. lett. b81, 190
(1979).
5. r. slansky, phys. rep. 79, 1 (1981).

10

