9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
2
2

 

 
 

1
v
8
6
1
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

eects related to spacetime foam in

particle physics

a.a. kirillov

institute for applied mathematics and cybernetzics,

603005 nizhnii novgorod, russia

abstract

it is found that the existence of spacetime foam leads to a situ-
ation in which the number of fundamental quantum bosonic elds is
a variable quantity. the general aspects of an exact theory that al-
lows for a variable number of elds are discussed, and the simplest
observable eects generated by the foam are estimated. it is shown
that in the absence of processes related to variations in the topology of
space, the concept of an eective eld can be reintroduced and stan-
dard eld theory can be restored. however, in the complete theory
the ground state is characterized by a nonvanishing particle number
density. from the eective-eld standpoint, such particles are dark.
it is assumed that they comprise dark matter of the universe. the
properties of this dark matter are discussed, and so is the possibility
of measuring the quantum uctuation in the eld potentials.

1 introduction

in gravitation theory it is assumed that spacetime is a smooth manifold at
scales much greater than the planck length, while at planck scale all geo-
metric properties disappear and spacetime itself acquires a foamlike structure
[1]. there are two basic indications of such behaviour of spacetime. the rst

e-mail: kirillov@unn.ac.ru

1

is related to the fact that at the planck scale the vacuum uctuations of
the metric and curvature are of the same order as the corresponding average
quantities. not only does this follow from simple estimates - rigorous calcu-
lations also support this idea. in particular, the fact that such uctuations
exist leads to the absence of a classical background space in the planck stage
of evolution of the early universe [2]. the second indication is the fact that at
small scales the topology of space also experiences quantum uctuations [1].
the study of possible observable eects related to changes in the topology
of space is attracting ever more attention.
in particular, to describe such
eects, hawking [3] used wormholes and virtual black holes. another work
worth noting is that of garay [4], who proposed a phenomenological method
to account for spacetime foam.

the absence of a background space at small scales is a serious problem
in quantum eld theory. the possibility of resolving this problem is usually
related to the development of nonperturbative methods [5], in which the
concept of background elds is not used. however, these theories also rely
on the presence of a coordinate basis space, whose topology is xed by the
statement of the problem and therefore is not a dynamic characteristic.

this paper elaborates on a possible way to set up a quantum eld theory
in the case in which the topology and structure of physical space may vary.
the main idea of this method was set forth in ref. [6] in order to describe
the quantum birth of the early universe.

the following observation forms the basis of the proposed method. on
the one hand, as noted earlier, variations in the topology of space can occur
at scales where the very concept of a smooth manifold breaks down, at least
due to the presence of vacuum uctuations. on the other hand, it is believed
that there is no other way to describe the given region but to extrapolate the
spatial relationships existing at larger scales to it. in other words, all possible
topologies of physical space should be described in terms of a consistent
coordinate basis space. we call this space simply a basis. since measurement
instruments, which are classical objects, play a fundamental role in quantum
theory [7], it is expected that the properties of the basis are determined
entirely by the measuring device.

if we specify the quantum state corresponding to a xed topology of
physical space and if the topology diers substantially from that of the ba-
sis, the image of physical space in terms of the basis coordinates cannot
be one-to-one. in the same way, when functions dened in physical space

2

and corresponding to dierent physical observables are mapped to the basis
space, they cease to be single-valued and become multivalued functions of
the coordinates. furthermore, the number of images of an arbitrary physi-
cal observable is an additional variable quantity, which generally speaking,
depends on the position in the basis space.

thus, we arrive at a situation in which the number of elds corresponding
to a physical observable is a variable quantity. in quantum theory this vari-
able is an operator whose eigenvalues characterize the topological structure
of space. the possible dependence of this quantity on spatial coordinates
means that the given quantity is a characteristic or measure of the number
density of the degrees of freedom of the eld.

a natural way to describe systems with a variable number of degrees
of freedom is to use second quantization. before we begin to describe the
method as applied to the problem in question, we make the following re-
mark. in the standard second-quantization method, the number of degrees
of freedom characterizes the number of particles or elementary excitations
(quanta) in the system. here it is assumed that the particles obey the iden-
tity principle or, as it is said, the indistinguishability principle.
it can be
expected that in measurements at small scales the dierent images of the
same physical observable also obey the identity principle1. indeed, the pos-
sibility of distinguishing between the dierent images of observables would
mean that physical space in itself has certain topology and structure, which
by assumption is impossible (at least in view of the presence of quantum
uctuations in the topology).

two types of statistics, bose and fermi, exist for particles, depending on
the symmetry of the wave function under particle permutations. accordingly,
we must also select the type of statistics when performing second quantization
of the degrees of freedom of the elds. since second quantization reects the
properties and topology of physical space, this selection must be unique for

1 thus, we assume the existence of a fundamental restriction on the degree of accuracy
for measurements of dierent eld observables. in quantum gravity this is well- known
restriction, which represents the existence of a minimal quantum uncertainty for metric
pl/l2, where lpl is the planck length and l is the characteristic size
of the type g  l2
of the region in which the measurement takes place. we note that such restrictions are
not something very unusuall in quantum mechanics. it suces to recall the impossibility
to detect a position of a relativistic particle with the accuracy exceeding the compton
length, which seems to be in a close analogy with the restriction pointed out above.

3

all types of elds and physical quantities. here it turns out that the only
acceptable choice is fermi-dirac statistics, since otherwise in dealing with
fermions we immediately confront a violation of the pauli principle.

at a fundamental level, the composition of matter is determined by a set
of elds and their sources. the sources are point particles, which in quantum
theory behave like fermions. the need to perform second quantization of
the sources arises already in relativistic theory and hence no changes in the
description of fermions emerge. a new interpretation is added, however. for
instance, pair production corresponds to a change in the structure of physical
space (it can be said that processes related to changes in the properties of
space proceed much more easily at isolated points than they do in entire
regions).

when elds are quantized, the idea of particles, the quanta of a eld, also
emerges. such particles, however, obey the bose-einstein statistics. here,
generally speaking, particle production is not associated with variations in
the topology of space. there is a certain similarity between this aspect
and the situation in solid state physics, where excitation of vibrations in a
crystal lattice (phonon production) is not associated with variations in the
true number of degrees of freedom.

thus, the variation mentioned above primarily involves bosonic elds.

2 general scheme of second quantization of

elds

we consider a set m, which in the future acts like a basis manifold, and
specify an arbitrary eld  on it. we also assume that there is a device that
can do complete measurements of the quantum states of the eld. a complete
measurement can always be expanded in a set of elementary measurements.
for instance, to make a complete measurement of a eld state we must
measure the eld amplitude at every point x  m, or equivalently measure
the number of particles (or amplitude) in each fourier mode. thus, the
device can be viewed as a set of elementary detectors.

let a be the set of possible readings of an elementary detector2. the
in a we select an

structure of a can be described in the following way.

2the set a can be called an elementary system of quantum numbers.

4

arbitrary system of coordinates . generally, there is a natural projection
operator p (p 2 = p ) that partitions the coordinates into two groups:  =
((i  p ) , p ) = (, ), where i denotes the identity operator. the rst
group, , refers to the manifold m and describes the position in space m 
at which the elementary measurement takes place (here and in what follows
m  denotes either space m or the mode space). the second group, , refers
to the eld  and describes the position in space v . the coordinate   v
denotes either the eld amplitude or the number of particles corresponding
to the eld. thus, the set a acquires the features of a ber space with basis
p (a)  m  and ber p 1 () = v . the result of a complete measurement
of eld  is a bration section, which is the map  : m   a. what is
important is that in the usual picture an arbitrary section intersects each
ber only once, i.e., the projection of the section coincides with the space
m  (p ()  m ), which implies that such sections can be represented by
functions  () on m  with values in v .
as noted above, the topology and geometric structure of the set a (and
thus of m ) reects the macroscopic properties of the measurement process.
on the other hand, the real physical space mph is assumed to have arbitrary
topology and structure3. furthermore, in a general quantum state, the prop-
erties of space m 
ph are, generally speaking, not xed. thus, a physical eld
ph  a. here
an arbitrary section can intersect each ber an arbitrary number of times.
furthermore, if the topology of space m 
ph changes, so does the number of

must be dened as an extended section of the form e : m 
intersections. thus, the number of images of eld e in space m  is variable.
an image of space m 
ph  m ) that can
ph = s j, so that on each
be represented as a union of distinct pieces, m 
piece j the eld is described by a given number of functions i (),   j
(i = 1, 2, . . . m, where m is an integer characterizing the number of images of
the space m 
ph in j). note that in general the dimensionality of the pieces
j can dier from the dimensionality of m .

ph is a subset in m  (p (e) = m 

thus, if the topology of physical space is an additional degree of free-
dom, the result of a complete measurement of the state of the eld will be
represented by a denite set of functions {j ()}, (j = (i, ) and   ).
3when speaking of the topology of the physical space, we mean either the topology
of the space mph itself, or the topology of the related space m 
ph, depending on the
quantities being measured. note, however, that the relationship between these two spaces
is nontrivial.

5

formally, such states can be classied in the following way.

we introduce a set of operators c + () and c (), the creation and an-
nihilation operators for an individual element of the set a. for the sake of
simplicity we assume that the measure of each individual point   a is nite
(as in the case in which the coordinates  take discrete values). we require
that these operators satisfy the anticommutation relations

nc () c + ()o = c () c + () + c + () c () =  .

(1)
we dene the vacuum state |0i by the relationship c ()|0i = 0 and build a
fock space f in which the basis consists of the vectors (n = 1, 2, . . .)

|1, 2, . . . , ni =

c + (i) |0i .

(2)

nyi=1

the vacuum state corresponds to complete absence of a eld and hence of
the observables associated with the eld. the state |i describes the eld 
with only one degree of freedom. this can be either a eld concentrated at
a single point or a eld containing only one mode, and the quantity   a
describes the intensity (the number of quanta) and the position of the eld
in m . states described by single-valued functions are constructed in the
following way:

| ()i = ym 

c + ( () , )|0i ,

(3)

where the direct product is taken over the entire space m  , and where we
have partitioned the coordinates  into two groups:  = (, ). generally,
such states do not belong to a fock space. furthermore, when the coordinates
  m  run through continuous values, this expression requires an extension
of its denition and hence can be interpreted only formally. however, when
the variations of the physical quantities in real processes involve only a nite
part of the set m , we can stay within a fock space.

tors

we now examine an arbitrary domain   m  and dene a set of opera-
(4)

c + ( () , ) ,

d+ ( () , ) = y

where the domain of the function  () is limited to the set . then the
states with an arbitrary number of elds can be written

|1, 2    , ni =

nyi=1

6

d+ (i () , i) |0i .

(5)

the interpretation of these states is obvious. suppose that all functions
i () are specied on a single set . then in the given domain a complete
measurement will show the presence of a set consisting of n dierent elds
1 (), 2 (), ..., n ().
it is convenient to introduce the number density
operator of the elds:

n () = xv

c + (, ) c (, ) .

(6)

then for    the states (5) represent the eigenstates of the operator n ()
with eigenvalues

n ()|1, 2    , ni = n|1, 2    , ni .

(7)

clearly, the states with a xed number of elds correspond to a xed topology
of the space m 
ph. then under certain conditions (the requirement that the
functions i () be smooth at cuts), instead of the set of functions i () we
can introduce a single-valued function  () and thus restore the structure of
the set m 
ph can be projected on the basis m 
by performing the necessary paste-up, so that the state vector of the eld
takes the form (5).

ph. conversely, each space m 

the space h formed by the vectors (5) and their superposition lays the
basis for building the hilbert space of the theory. an arbitrary operator

bo () related to the eld (and symmetrized in the number of elds) can be

expressed in the standard way in the terms of the set of basis operators c
and c + :

bo =x d+

i oijdj

(where i, j = (i () , ), and  is an arbitrary domain in m ), thus dening
the action of this operator in h. the specic way in which this hilbert space
is built is determined by the physical problem at hand.

3 scalar eld in the second - quantization

representation

in sec. 2 we discussed the general scheme of second quantization, irrespective
of the dynamics of the eld. we now turn to the example of a real scalar

7

eld  (the generalization to the case of arbitrary elds is obvious). for the
basis space we take ordinary at minkowski space.

one idea that is central to particle physics is the representation in which
quantum states of a eld are classied in terms of physical particles. since
quantum states of a eld can in general contain an arbitrary number of
identical modes, the denition of particles and their relation to eld operators
require certain modications. we nd it more convenient to operate with
discrete indices. to this end we require that the eld in question be located
in a cube with edge length l, and we introduce periodic boundary conditions.
as necessary, we can replace sums with integrals (as l   ) via the usual
prescription: p r (l/2)3 d3k.

we now examine the expansion of the eld operator  in plane waves,

 (x) =xk (cid:16)2kl3(cid:17)1/2(cid:16)akeikx + a+

k e ikx(cid:17) ,

(8)

where k = k2 + m2, and k = 2n/l, with n = (nx, ny, nz). the general
expression for the hamiltonian is

where h0 describes free particles,

h = h0 + v

h0 =xk

ka+

k ak + ek,

(9)

(10)

and the potential term v is responsible for the interaction, and can be
represented in the normal form:

v = xn,{m},{m}

v n
{m},{m}

(11)

v n

{m},{m} =

xk1,...kn

v n
{m},{m} (k1, . . . kn)

nyi=1(cid:16)a+
ki(cid:17)mi

(aki)m
i ,

(12)

here we assume that the sum with respect to the wave vectors ki contains
no terms with equal indices, i.e., ki 6= kj for any pair of indices i and j (the
sum is taken over distinct modes), and allow for the fact that for dierent
wave numbers the operators aki and a+

kj commute.

8

the quantity ek in (10) is the energy of the ground state of the kth mode.
in a at space without particles, the energy must be zero, so we assume that
ek = 0 throughout the present paper. however, as we show in the sections
that follow, the nontrivial nature of the topology of the space generally leads
to a value of ek that is nite. note that the dependence of the zero energy
on the topology of space is known as the casimir eect [8] and is assumed
to be an experimentally established fact [9].

when the number of modes is variable, the set of eld operatorsnak, a+
ko
is replaced by the somewhat expanded setnak (j) , a+
k (j)o, where j  [1, . . . nk],

and nk is the number of modes for a given wave number k. for a free eld
the energy is an additive quantity, which can be written

h0 =xk

nkxj=1

ka+

k (j) ak (j) .

(13)

since the modes are indistinguishable, the interaction operator has the obvi-
ous generalization

v n
{m},{m} =

xk1,...kn xj1,...jn,

v n
{m},{m} (k1, . . . kn)

nyi=1(cid:16)a+

ki (ji)(cid:17)mi

(aki (ji))m

i , (14)

where the indices ji run through the corresponding intervals ji  [1, . . . n (ki)].
it is convenient to introduce the notation

am,n (k) =

n (k)xj=1 (cid:16)a+

k (j)(cid:17)m

(ak (j))n .

(15)

then the expression for the eld hamiltonian takes the form

h =xk

ka1,1 (k)+ xn,{m},{m}

xk1,...kn

v{m},{m} (k1, . . . kn)

nyi=1

ami,m

i

(ki) , (16)

we can now express the main quantities in terms of the fundamental
operators c + () and c (). for the operators a and a+ it is convenient to
use the fock - bargmann representation, in which operators act in the space
of entire analytic functions with a scalar product of the type

(f, g) =z f  (a) g (a) eaa dada

2i

,

(17)

9

the action of these operators is dened as

a+f (a) = af (a) ; af (a) =

d
da f (a) .

(18)

then for the normal eld coordinates we can take the complex - valued quan-
tities a; thus, the set a consists of the pairs  = (a, k). for the fundamental
operators c + () and c () it is convenient to use the representation

c (a, k) =

c (n, k)

(a)n
n!

xn=0

, c + (a, k) =

c + (n, k)

an
n!

.

xn=0

then the anticommutation relations (1) become

(19)

(20)

nc (n, k) , c + (m, k)o = n,mk,k .

the physical meaning of the operators c (n, k) and c + (n, k) is that they
create and annihilate modes with a given number of particles.

now, to express the hamiltonian (16) in terms of c (n, k) and c + (n, k) it
suces to derive the corresponding expressions for the operators (15). in the
second - quantization representation, the expressions for the given operators
are dened to be

bam,n (k) =z eaa dada

2i

or, with allowance for (19),

c + (a, k) (a)m  d

da!n

c (a, k)

(21)

q(n + m1)! (n + m2)!

n!

xn=0

c + (n + m1, k) c (n + m2, k) .

(22)

bam1,m2 (k) =

an expression for the hamiltonian in terms of the operators c + () and c ()
can be obtained by simply substituting (22) into (16). for a free eld, the
eigenvalues of the hamiltonian take the form

ch0 =xk

k ba1,1 (k) =xn,k

nknn,k ,

(23)

where nn,k is the number of modes for xed values of the wave number k
and the number of particles n (nn,k = c + (n, k) c (n, k)).

10

thus, the eld state vector  is a function of the occupation numbers

 (nk,n, t), and its evolution is described by the schrodinger equation

consider the operator

it = h.

nk =

xn=0

c + (n, k) c (n, k) .

(24)

(25)

physically, this operator characterizes the total number of modes for a xed
wave number k. one can easily verify that for the hamiltonian (16), nk is a
constant of the motion,

[nk, h] = 0

(26)

and in this way hamiltonians like (16) preserve the topological structure of
the eld. in the course of evolution, the number of modes for each k does
not change.

we now turn to the problem of representing the particle creation and
annihilation operators in this formalism. since the individuality of the modes

is limited, operators of type (22) act like the set of operatorsnak (j) , a+

among the operators (22) are some that change the number of particles by
one:

k (j)o.

where

m (k) ,

m (k) = bam+1,m (k) ,
bm (k) = bam,m+1 (k) , b+
hbn, b(+)
m (k)i = kb(+)
hh0, b(+)
m (k)i = b(+)
bn =xk bnk =xn,k

nnn,k.

m (k) ,

(27)

(28)

(29)

then the ground state 0 of the eld can be dened as a vector satisfying
the relationships ( m = 0, 1, . . .)

bm (k) 0 = 0

(30)

and corresponding to the minimum energy for a xed mode distribution
nk. note that in contrast to standard theory, the ground state is generally

characterized by a nonvanishing particle number density bn0 = n00. using

the vector 0, we can build a fock space f whose basis consists of vectors
obtained by cyclic application of the operators b+

m (k) to 0.

11

4 eective eld

in the absence of processes related to changes in the topology of space and
for a mode distribution of the form nk = 1 (there is only one mode for
each wave number k), the standard eld theory is restored. furthermore,
there is a fairly general case in which the concept of an eective eld can be
introduced to restore the standard picture.

indeed, consider the case in which the interaction operator in (16) is
expressed solely in terms of the set of operators b0 (k) and b+
0 (k). them
instead of the complete fock space f we can limit ourselves to its subspace
f   f formed by the cyclic application of the operators b+
0 (k) to the eld
ground state 0. if the initial state vector  belongs to f , then as the system
evolves,  (t)  f  for all t (at least as long as the number of particles created
remains nite).

we dene the operators

ak = n 1/2

k

b0 (k) , a+

k = n 1/2

k

b+
0 (k) ,

(31)

where nk is the operator dened in (25), which, when restricted to the fock
space f , is an ordinary number function. for (20) and (22) we nd that the
commutation relations for ak and a+

k have the standard form

thus, if the basic observable objects are particles, it is possible to revert

hak, a+

ki = kk.

(32)

to the usual picture in which the particles are quanta of an eective eld e

of type (8). note that if the eld potentials  (x) are measurable quanti-
ties, then the true expression for the eld operators has the same form (8),
where instead of the operators ak and a+
0 (k) . the
expression for the eective-eld energy operator has the form (9), but the
ground-state energy in the kth mode, ek, must be assumed not to vanish.
the value of this energy can be found in the complete theory.

k we must put b0 (k) and b+

since the operators ak and a+

k reect only some of the information about
the state of the system, the auxiliary nature of the eective eld becomes
manifest. indeed, the only observables related to the eective eld are those
particles that outnumber the particles in the ground state. for the particle
number operator in f  we have

a+

k ak = bnk = bnk  nk,

12

(33)

where bnk is the operator dened in (29), and nk can be found by solving
bnk0 = nk0. thus, the properties of the ground state 0 remain beyond

the scope of the eective eld.

5 properties of the eld ground state

equations (20) and (22) imply that a true vacuum state has the property
that all eld modes (and hence all observables related to the eld) are absent.
a true vacuum state is one in which there are no particles and no zero-point
oscillations related to particles. this situation is similar to the situation in
solid state physics, where in the absence of a crystal there can be no phonons
and no zero-point lattice vibrations. since the properties of physical space
are determined by the properties of material elds, we conclude that in a
true vacuum state there can be no physical space. obviously, in reality such
a state cannot be achieved.

at rst glance the most common situation in particle theory is the one in
which physical space is ordinary at minkowski space, and nontrivial topol-
ogy is manifest at the planck scale (this is the conventional view; see refs.
[1] and [4]). but since operating at the planck scale requires using energies
unattainable with present-day accelerators, and also requires serious consid-
eration of quantum gravity eects, it would appear to be impossible to make
any sort of directly measurable predictions with this theory.

in reality, the situation may be somewhat dierent. first, the stability
of the minkowski space means that probably even at the planck scale the
topology of the space can be assumed to be simple (i.e., nk = 1 and as k 
kpl), at least as long as we do not consider processes in which real particles
with planck energies are produced (naturally, virtual processes cannot lead
to real changes in the topology of space).

second, recall that the universe has already passed the quantum stage,
in which real processes involving changes in spatial topology might occur.
after the quantum stage, processes with topology variations are suppresed,
and we can say that the topological structure of space has been tempered,
so that the structure of the space is preserved as the universe expands. thus,
we expect that at the present time the nontrivial topology of space is most
likely manifested on a cosmological scale.

in the foregoing theory, the structure of space is determined by the num-

13

ber density of the eld modes. these modes are in turn governed by fermi
statistics, i.e., they act like a fermi gas. to simplify matters, we examine
free elds, since consistent allowance for the interaction of eld warrants a
separate investigation. we assume that the eld-mode distribution was ther-
mal in the planck period of the evolution of the universe. as the universe
expands, the temperature drops and the gas becomes degenerate, with the
eld winding up in the ground state. thus, the eld ground state 0 can be
characterized by occupation numbers of the type

nk,n =  (k  nk) ,

(34)

where  (x) is the heaviside step function and k is the chemical potential.
note that when the expansion is adiabatic, we must put k = . when
the evolution of the universe includes an inationary period [10, 11], the
adiabaticity condition can be violated, which generally leads to additional
dependence of the chemical potential on the wave number. for the mode
spectral density we have

nk =

 (k  nk) = 1 +(cid:20) k
k(cid:21) ,

xn=0

(35)

where [x] denotes the integer part of the number x. equation (35) shows,
in particular, that at k > k we have nk = 1, i.e., the eld structure
corresponds to a at minkowski space, with the result that k < k is the
range of wave vectors in which nontrivial eld properties are expected to
show up.

it can easily be veried that from the eective-eld standpoint, the ground
state 0 is a vacuum state, i.e., ak0 = 0. on the other hand, the given state
can be characterized by a nonvanishing particle number density. indeed, for
any wave number we have

nk =

xn=0

n (k  nk) =

1

2(cid:18)1 +(cid:20) k

k(cid:21)(cid:19) (cid:20) k
k(cid:21)

with the result that the spectral density of the ground-state energy is

ek = knk =

k

2 (cid:18)1 +(cid:20) k

k(cid:21)(cid:19) (cid:20) k
k(cid:21) .

14

(36)

(37)

since the given particles correspond to the ground state of the eld, in
ordinary processes (which do not change the topology of space) the particles
in question are not manifested explicitly (but they enter into the renormaliza-
tion of the parameters of the observed particles indirectly; here, in contrast
to vacuum uctuations, the contribution of the particles is naturally nite).
we also note that although the particles are bosons, in the ground state they
behave like fermions.

one possible explicit manifestation of a residual particle number density
in the ground state is dark matter. observations have shown that dark matter
accounts for about 90% of visible matter in our universe, and the matter is
clearly not of baryonic origin (see, e.g., ref.
[12]). its existence is usually
related to the presence of various hypothetical particles (higgs particles,
axions, etc.), which for various reasons cease to interact with ordinary matter.
but if this mass is ascribed to the ground state, then rst it becomes obvious
that the matter is truly dark, and second that the minimum set incorporating
only the particles known at present is sucient.

to describe the properties of dark matter, we begin with massive bosons
(m 6= 0). for the sake of approximation, we ignore the possible dependence
of the parameter  on the wave number k. in this case, to avoid obtaining
too large a value for dark matter, we require that

2  m2 = z2  m2.

(38)

then the ground state contains only one particle per mode in the wave-
number range k2  z2, where nk = 2. in other words, massive bosons in the
ground state behave like an ordinary degenerate fermi gas, and we obtain
for the energy density and particle number density

 =

n =

1

l3 xn,k
l3 xn,k

1

nkn (k, n) =

g

nn (k, n) =

22  z3
g
62 z3,

4

+

m2

8 (cid:18)z  m2 ln(cid:18)z + 

m (cid:19)(cid:19)! ,(39)

(40)

where g is the number of polarization states.
expression leads to the well-known nonrelativistic relationship

in the limit z  m, this

 = nm +

3
2

p, p =

g

302

z5
m

,

(41)

15

where p is the gas pressure. the principal contribution to the ground-state
energy density is provided by the rest mass of the particle, i.e., in leading
order this contribution comes from dust. note, however, that the particle
pressure is nonzero, and it yields a small correction of order p/  z2/m2
 n2/3/m2.
we now study particles with zero rest mass (such as photons and gravi-
tons). for the ground-state energy density we have

 =

g
22

4
4

 (3) .

the number density of vacuum particles is

n =

g
22

3
3

 (2) ,

(42)

(43)

where

 (s) =

1
ns .

xn=1

the equation of state in this case is ultrarelativistic ( = 3p).

massless particles are especially intresting, since one can also measure
the intensity of quantum uctuations of the eld potentials, which for the
ground state (34) are

h (x)  (x + r)i =

1

(2)2

z0

dk
k

sin kr

kr

2 (k) ,

(44)

where

2 (k) = k2nk = k2(cid:18)1 +(cid:20) 

k(cid:21)(cid:19) .

thus, at long wavelengths k  , a substential increase in the level of
quantum uctuations should be observable in comparison with pure vacuum
noise ( = 0).

6 concluding remarks

we see then that the concept of spacetime foam introduced by wheeler
should lead to a number of observable eects in particle theory. the sim-
plest are the emergence of dark matter and an increase in the intensity of

16

quantum noise in the eld potentials.
in sec 5 we calculated such eects
under the assumption that the eld is in the ground state. however, the
results can easily be generalized to a situation in which the state of the elds
is characterized by nonzero temperature t . since processes associated with
changes in the topology of space are the rst to stop in the early stages of
the evolution of the universe, we expect that t   t (t is temperature of
the microwave background radiation). on the other hand, given the value of
 in eq. (42), we can obtain an upper bound   60t . thus, we expect
t  to be much less than , and the temperature corrections to the ground
state (34) to be small. note, however, that the nature of the uctuations
of the eld potentials in (44) can change substantially if the temperature is
nonzero [6].

in addition to the eects studied in this paper, there clearly remain many
phenomena that require additional investigation. for example, given the
existence of self-action, the ground state (34) can be transformed, which
can lead to the emergence of scalar higgs elds (by analogy with the well-
known cooper eect in superconductivity). such elds are needed, in turn,
to generate particle masses in grand unication theories. note that in elds
with self-action, a nonvanishing particle number density in the ground state
automatically leads to the emergence of massive excitations, although the
upper bound on masses that can be derived from cosmological constraints on
the value of  is many orders of magnitude less than the values observed in
particle theory.

another possibility is that when measuring the casimir force [8, 9], one
must expect an anomalous dependence on distance at scales exceeding the
value of 1/.

the author is grateful to d. turaev for useful discussions at all stages of
the research, and to m. rainer for invitation to potsdam university, where
a substantial portion of this research was done. this work was supported
by grants from russian fund for fundamental research (grant no. 98-02-
16273) and dfg (grant no. 436 rus 113/236/0(r)).

references

[1] j.a. wheeler, in: relativity, groups, and topology, b.s. and c.m.
dewitt (eds. ), gordan and breach, new york (1964); s.w. hawking,

17

nuclear phys., b114 349 (1978).

[2] a.a. kirillov, phys. lett. b 399, 201 (1997); a.a. kirillov and g.

montani, jetp lett. 66, 475 (1997).

[3] s.w. hawking, phys. rev. d37 904 (1988); nucl. phys. b335 155
(1990); s. gidings and a. strominger, nucl. phys. b 307 854 (1988);
g.v. lavrelashvili, v.a. rubakov and p.g. tinyakov, nucl. phys. b
299 757 (1988); s. coleman, nucl. phys. b 310 643 (1988); t. banks,
nucl. phys. b 309 493 (1988) .

[4] l.j. garay, phys rev. lett 80, 2508 (1998).

[5] k. wilson, phys. rev. d 10 2445 (1974); v. jones, ann. math. 126 59
(1987); e. witten, comm. math. phys. 121 351 (1989); c. rovelli and
l. smolin, nucl. phys. b 331 80 (1990).

[6] a.a. kirillov, gravit. cosmol. 2 (5) 123 (1996); astron. astrophys.

trans. 10, 95 (1996).

[7] l.d. landau and e.m. lifshitz, quantum mechanics: nonrelativistic

theory, 3rd ed., pergamon press, oxford (1977)

[8] h.b.g. casimir, proc. kon. nederl. akad. wet. 51, 793 (1948).

[9] m.j. sparnaay, physica. (amsterdam) 24, 751 (1958).

[10] a.a. starobinsky, phys. lett. 91b, 100 (1980); a.h. guth, phys. rev.

d23, 347 (1981); a.d. linde, phys. lett. b108, 389 (1982).

[11] a.d. linde, particle physics and inationary cosmology, harwood aca-

demic, new york (1990). .

[12] g.borner, the early universe: facts and fiction, springer-verlag, new

york (1992).

18

