9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
0
1

 

 
 

1
v
1
7
0
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

what good are

quantum field theory innities?

roman jackiw

center for theoretical physics

massachusetts institute of technology

cambridge, ma 021394307

mathematical physics 2000

imperial college press, london, uk

abstract

a lesson for the new millennium from quantum eld theory: not all
eld-theoretic innities are bad. some give rise to nite, symmetry-
breaking eects, whose consequences are observed in nature.

quantum eld theory is the most successful theoretical structure in physics,
with applications that range from the short distances of subatomic parti-
cles to the microscopic dimensions characterizing atomic, chemical, and con-
densed matter physics, and onto the astronomical distances where quantum
eld theory fuels ination  a speculative but completely physical analysis
of early universe cosmology. remarkably, no experimental observation has
contradicted the predictions that are made by appropriate eld theoretical
models for the relevant phenomena. when accurate calculation is feasible
and precision experiments are available, numerical agreement between the-
ory and experiment extends to many signicant places, as for example in the
ground-state energies of simple atoms like hydrogen and helium, or in the
magnetic moments of electrons and muons.

this work is supported in part by funds provided by the u.s. department of energy
(d.o.e.) under contract #de-fc02-94er40818. mit ctp# 2918 november 1999

1

2

r. jackiw

nevertheless, this gloriously successful invention of the human mind is
logically defective in that some well-posed questions cannot be answered
 a computation that should resolve the question can yield ambiguous or
meaningless answers. this happens because the available methods of cal-
culation encounter innities that either persist, leading to meaningless re-
sults, or cancel among themselves, leaving ambiguous, undetermined nite
parts. there is no reason to suppose that this defect should be attributed
to the method of (approximate) computation  it appears to be intrinsic to
interacting quantum eld theory when excitations are point particles and
interactions are local. (more specically, i am referring to ultraviolet inni-
ties, which arise because various integrals over intermediate energies diverge
at their high-energy end, which corresponds to short distances in position
space. there are also other innities, like diverging perturbative series or
infrared/large-distance singularities associated with long-range forces. but
these innities are less troublesome, because they are attributed to the ap-
proximation method and are not viewed as intrinsic defects of quantum eld
theory.)

for physically relevant models, but not including gravity theory, it has
been possible to isolate the innities by the renormalization procedure,
which hides them and also permits unambiguous calculation of quantities not
contaminated by the innities. within this framework denite numerical re-
sults have been obtained, which in principle explain all observed fundamental
processes. (failure to tame innities in quantum gravity has thus far been
irrelevant for practical purposes, because all presently observed manifesta-
tions of gravitational forces are described by the classical newton-einstein
theory.)

in spite of the great success of quantum eld theory, its innities notwith-
standing, there are many who remain unconvinced by the pragmatism of
renormalization. dirac and schwinger, who count among the creators of
quantum eld theory and renormalization theory, respectively, ultimately re-
jected their constructs because of the innities. but even those who accept
renormalization disagree about its ultimate ecacy at well-dening a theory.
some argue that sense can be made only of asymptotically free renormaliz-
able eld theories  in these theories the interaction strength decreases with
increasing energy. on the contrary, it is claimed that asymptotically nonfree
models, like electrodynamics and 4-theory, do not dene quantum theories,
even though they are renormalizable  it is said they do not exist. yet
electrodynamics is the most precisely veried quantum eld theory, while the

what good are quantum field theory innities?

3

4-model is a necessary component of the standard model for elementary
particle interactions, which thus far has met no experimental contradiction.
the ultraviolet innities appear as a consequence of space-time localiza-
tion of excitations and of their interactions. (sometimes it is claimed that
eld-theoretic innities arise from the unhappy union of quantum theory
with special relativity. but this does not describe all cases  later i shall
discuss a nonrelativistic, ultraviolet-divergent, and renormalizable eld the-
ory.) therefore choosing models with extended excitations and interactions
provides a way for avoiding ultraviolet innities. these days string theory
is a model with precisely such extended features, and all quantum eects
 including gravitational ones  are ultraviolet nite. this very desirable
state of aairs has persuaded many that fundamental physical theory in the
next millennium should be based on the string paradigm (generalized to en-
compass even more extended structures, like membranes and so on). this
will replace quantum eld theory, which although marred by its ultraviolet
innities has served us well in the twentieth century.

my goal in this essay is to argue that at least some of the divergences
of quantum eld theory must not be viewed as unmitigated defects. on
the contrary, they convey crucially important information about the phys-
ical situation, without which most of our theories would not be physically
acceptable. the stage where my unconventional considerations play a role is
that of symmetry, symmetry breaking, and conserved quantum numbers, so
next i have to review these ideas.

physicists are mostly agreed that ultimate laws of nature enjoy a high
degree of symmetry. presence of symmetry implies absence of complicated
and irrelevant structure, and our conviction that this is fundamentally true
reects an ancient aesthetic prejudice  physicists are happy in the belief that
nature in its fundamental workings is essentially simple. moreover, there are
practical consequences of the simplicity entailed by symmetry  it is easier
to understand the predictions of physical laws. for example, working out the
details of very-many-body motion is beyond the reach of actual calculations,
even with the help of computers. but taking into account the symmetries
that are present allows understanding at least some aspects of the motion,
and charting regularities within it.

symmetries bring with them conservation laws  an association that is
precisely formulated by noethers theorem. thus time-translation symmetry,
which states that physical laws do not change as time passes, ensures energy
conservation; space-translation symmetry, the statement that physical laws

4

r. jackiw

take the same form at dierent spatial locations, ensures momentum conser-
vation. for another example, we note that the quantal description makes
use of complex numbers. but physical quantities are real, so complex phases
can be changed at will, without aecting physical content. this invariance
against phase redenition, called gauge symmetry, leads to charge conserva-
tion. the above examples show that symmetries are linked to constants of
motion. identifying such constants on the one hand satises our urge to nd
regularity and permanence in natural phenomena, and on the other hand we
are provided with useful markers for ordering physical data.

moreover, a large degree of symmetry in the mathematical formulation
of physically successful quantum eld theory models is desireable not only
aesthetically but also practically. symmetry facilitates unraveling the conse-
quences of the complicated dynamical model; more importantly, the presence
of symmetry is required for a successful renormalization of the innities, so
that unambiguous answers can be extracted from the formalism.

however, in spite of our preference that descriptions of nature be en-
hanced by a large amount of symmetry and characterized by many conserva-
tion laws, we must recognize that actual physical phenomena rarely exhibit
overwhelming regularity. therefore, at the very same time that we construct
a physical theory with intrinsic symmetry, we must nd a way to break the
symmetry in physical consequences of the model. progress in physics can be
frequently seen as the resolution of this tension.

in classical physics, the principal mechanism for symmetry breaking, re-
alized already within newtonian mechanics, is through boundary and initial
conditions on dynamical equations of motion. for example, radially sym-
metric dynamics for planetary motion allows radially nonsymmetric, noncir-
cular orbits with appropriate initial conditions. but this mode of symmetry
breaking still permits symmetric congurations  circular orbits, which are
rotationally symmetric, are allowed. in quantum mechanics, which anyway
does not need initial conditions to make physical predictions, we must nd
mechanisms that prohibit symmetric congurations altogether.

in the simplest, most direct approach to symmetry breaking, we suppose
that in fact dynamical laws are not symmetric, but that the asymmetric
eects are small and can be ignored in rst approximation. familiar
examples are the breaking of rotational symmetry in atoms by an external
electromagnetic eld or of isospin symmetry by the small electromagnetic
interaction. however, this explicit breaking of symmetry is without funda-
mental interest for the exact and complete theory; we need more intrinsic

what good are quantum field theory innities?

5

mechanisms that work for theories that actually are symmetric.

a more subtle idea is spontaneous symmetry breaking, where the dynam-
ical laws are symmetric, but only asymmetric congurations are actually
realized (because the symmetric ones are energetically unstable). this mech-
anism, urged on particle physicists by heisenberg, anderson, nambu, and
goldstone, is readily illustrated by the potential energy prole possessing
left-right symmetry and depicted in the figure. the left-right symmetric
value at the origin is a point of unstable equilibrium; stable equilibrium
is attained at one of the two reection-unsymmetric points a. moreover,
in quantum eld theory, the energy barrier separating the two asymmetric
congurations is innite and no tunneling occurs between them. once the
system settles in one or the other location, left-right parity is absent. one
says that the symmetry of the equations of motion is spontaneously broken
by the stable solution.

energy density

left-right symmetric energy density. the symmetric point at 0 is ener-
getically unstable. stable congurations are at a. because eld theory
is dened in an innite volume, the nite energy density separating a
produces an innite energy barrier and tunneling is suppressed. the sys-
tem settles into state +a or a and left-right symmetry is spontaneously
broken.

while the predictions of a theory with spontaneously broken symme-
try no longer follow the patterns that one would nd if the symmetry were
present in the solutions, one important benet of the symmetry remains: the

6

r. jackiw

renormalization procedure is unaected. so the mechanism of spontaneous
symmetry breaking accomplishes the phenomenologically desired reduction
of formal symmetries without endangering renormalization, but it does not
reduce them enough. fortunately there exists a further, even more subtle
mode of symmetry breaking, with which we can further suppress symmetries,
thereby bringing our theories in accord with observed phenomena. here one
crucially relies on the various ultraviolet innities of local quantum eld the-
ory, for which the renormalization procedure (needed to make sense of the
theory) cannot be carried out in a manner consistent with the symmetry.
nevertheless the symmetry breaking eects are nite, even though they arise
from innities.

this mode of symmetry breaking is called anomalous or quantum me-
chanical, and in order to explain it, let me begin by recalling that the quan-
tum revolution did not erase our reliance on the earlier, classical physics.
indeed, when proposing a theory, we begin with classical concepts and con-
struct models according to the rules of classical, prequantum physics. we
know, however, such classical reasoning is not in accord with quantum re-
ality. therefore, the classical model is reanalyzed by the rules of quantum
physics (which comprise the true laws of nature), that is, the classical model
is quantized.

dierences between the physical pictures drawn by a classical description
and a quantum description are of course profound. to mention the most
dramatic, we recall that dynamical quantities are described in quantum me-
chanics by operators, which need not commute. nevertheless, one expects
that some universal concepts transcend the classical/quantal dichotomy, and
enjoy rather the same role in quantum physics as in classical physics.

for a long time it was believed that symmetries and conservation laws of
a theory are not aected by the transition from classical to quantum rules.
for example, if a model possesses translation and gauge invariance on the
classical level, and consequently energy/momentum and charge are conserved
classically, it was believed that after quantization the quantum model is still
translation and gauge invariant so that the energy/momentum and charge
operators are conserved within quantum mechanics, that is, they commute
with the quantum hamiltonian operator. but now we know that in general
this need not be so. upon quantization, some symmetries of classical physics
may disappear when the quantum theory is properly dened in the presence
of its innities. such tenuous symmetries are said to be anomalously broken;
although present classically, they are absent from the quantum version of the

what good are quantum field theory innities?

7

theory, unless the model is carefully arranged to avoid this eect.

the nomenclature is misleading. at its discovery, the phenomenon was
unexpected and dubbed anomalous. by now the surprise has worn o, and
the better name today is quantum mechanical symmetry breaking.

anomalously or quantum mechanically broken symmetries play several
and crucial roles in our present-day physical theories. in some instances they
save a model from possessing too much symmetry, which would not be in
accord with experiment. in other instances the desire to preserve a symmetry
in the quantum theory places strong constraints on model building and gives
experimentally veriable predictions; more about this later.[1]

now i shall describe two specic examples of the anomaly phenomenon.
consider rst massless fermions moving in the background of an electro-
magnetic eld. massive, spin- 1
2 fermions possess two spin states  up and
down  but massless fermions can exist with only one spin state (out of two),
called a helicity state, in which spin is projected along (or against) the direc-
tion of motion. so the massless fermions with which we are here concerned
carry only one helicity and these are an ingredient in present-day theories of
quarks and leptons. moreover, they also arise in condensed matter physics,
not because one is dealing with massless, single-helicity particles, but be-
cause a well-formulated approximation to various many-body hamiltonians
can result in a rst-order matrix equation that is identical to the equation
for single-helicity massless fermions, that is, a massless dirac-weyl equation
for a spinor .

if we view the spinor eld  as an ordinary mathematical function, we
recognize that it possesses a complex phase, which can be altered without
changing the physical content of the equation that  obeys. we expect
therefore that this instance of gauge invariance implies charge conservation.
however, in a quantum eld theory  is a quantized eld operator, and one
nds that in fact the charge operator q is not conserved; rather

dq
dt

=

i
h

[h, q]  zvolume

e  b

where e and b are the background electric and magnetic elds in which our
massless fermion is moving  gauge invariance is lost!

one way to understand this breaking of symmetry is to observe that our
model deals with massless fermions and conservation of charge for single-
helicity fermions makes sense only if there are no fermion masses. but quan-
tum eld theory is beset by its ultraviolet innities, which must be controlled

8

r. jackiw

in order to do a computation. this is accomplished by regularization and
renormalization, which introduces mass scales for the fermions, and we see
that the symmetry is anomalously broken by the ultraviolet innities of the
theory.

the phase-invariance of single-helicity fermions is called chiral (gauge)
symmetry, and chiral symmetry has many important roles in the standard
model, which involves many kinds of fermion elds, corresponding to the
various quarks and leptons. in those channels where a gauge vector meson
couples to the fermions, chiral symmetry must be maintained to ensure gauge
invariance. consequently, fermion content must be carefully adjusted so
that the anomaly disappears. this is achieved because the proportionality
constant in the above failed conservation law involves a sum over all the
qn, so if that quantity vanishes the anomaly is absent. in

fermion charges, pn

the standard model the sum indeed vanishes, separately for each of the three
fermion families. for a single family this works out as follows:

three quarks

three quarks

one charged lepton

qn = 2
3  2
qn =  1
3  1
qn = 1  1

one neutrino lepton

qn = 0  0

qn =

0

pn

in channels to which no gauge vector meson couples, there is no require-
ment that the anomaly vanish, and this is fortunate. a theoretical analysis
shows that chiral gauge invariance in the up-down quark channel prohibits
the two-photon decay of the neutral pion (which is composed of up and
down quarks). but the decay does occur with the invariant decay amplitude
of 0.025  0.001 gev1. before anomalous symmetry breaking was under-
stood, this decay could not be tted into the standard model, which seemed
to possess the decay-forbidding chiral symmetry. once it was realized that
the relevant chiral symmetry is anomalously broken, this obstacle to phe-
nomenological viability of the standard model was removed.
indeed since
the anomaly is completely known, the decay amplitude can be completely
calculated (in the approximation that the pion is massless) and one nds
0.025 gev1, in excellent agreement with experiment.

what good are quantum field theory innities?

9

we must conclude that nature knows about and makes use of the anomaly
mechanism. on the one hand fermions are arranged into gauge-anomalyfree
representations, and the requirement that anomalies disappear explains the
charges of elementary fermions. on the other hand the pion decays into two
photons because of an anomaly in an ungauged channel. it is therefore para-
doxical but true that in local quantum eld theory these phenomenologically
desirable results are facilitated by ultraviolet divergences, which give rise to
nite symmetry anomalies, derived from innities.

the observation that innities of quantum eld theory lead to anomalous
symmetry breaking allows comprehending a second example of quantum-
mechanical breaking of yet another symmetry  scale invariance. like the
space-time translations mentioned earlier, which lead to energy-momentum
conservation, scale transformations also act on space-time coordinates, but in
a dierent manner. they dilate the coordinates, thereby changing the units
of space and time measurements. such transformations will be symmetry
operations in models that possess no fundamental parameters with time or
space dimensionality, and therefore do not contain an absolute scale for units
of space and time. our quantum chromodynamical (qcd) model for quarks
is free of such dimensional parameters, and it would appear that this theory
is scale invariant  but nature certainly is not! the observed variety of
dierent objects with dierent sizes and masses exhibits many dierent and
inequivalent scales. thus if scale symmetry of the classical eld theory, which
underlies the quantum eld theory of qcd, were to survive quantization,
experiment would have grossly contradicted the model, which therefore would
have to be rejected. fortunately, scale symmetry is quantum mechanically
broken, owing to the scales that are introduced in the regularization and
renormalization of ultraviolet singularities. once again a quantum eld-
theoretic pathology has a physical eect, a benecial one  an unwanted
symmetry is anomalously broken, and removed from the theory.

a dierent perspective on the anomaly phenomenon comes from the path
integral formulation of quantum theory, where one integrates over classical
paths the phase exponential of the classical action:

quantum mechanics  z(measure on paths)

ei(classical action)/h .

when the classical action possess a symmetry, the quantum theory will re-
spect that symmetry if the measure on paths is unchanged by the relevant
transformation. in the known examples (chiral symmetry, scale symmetry)

10

r. jackiw

anomalies arise precisely because the measure fails to be invariant and this
failure is once again related to innities. the measure is an innite prod-
uct of measure elements for each point in the space-time where the quantum
(eld) theory is dened; regulating this innite product destroys its apparent
invariance.

yet another approach to chiral anomalies, which arise in (massless) fermion
theories, makes reference to the rst instance of regularization/renormalization,
used by dirac to remove the negative-energy solutions to his equation. re-
call that to dene a quantum eld theory of fermions, it is necessary to ll
the negative-energy sea and to renormalize the innite mass and charge of
the lled states to zero. in modern formulations this is achieved by normal
ordering, but for our purposes it is better to remain with the more explicit
procedure of subtracting the innities, that is, renormalizing them.

it can then be shown that in the presence of an external gauge eld,
the distinction between empty positive-energy states and lled negative-
energy states cannot be drawn in a gauge-invariant manner, for massless,
single-helicity fermions. within this framework, the chiral anomaly comes
from the gauge noninvariance of the innite negative-energy sea. since
anomalies have physical consequences, we must assign physical reality to
this innite negative-energy sea.

actually, in condensed matter physics, where a dirac-type equation gov-
erns electrons, owing to a linearization of dynamical equations near the fermi
surface, the negative-energy states do have physical reality. they correspond
to lled, bound states, while the positive energy states describe electrons in
the conduction band. consequently, chiral anomalies also have a role in
condensed matter physics, when the system is idealized so that the negative-
energy sea is taken to be innite.

in this condensed matter context another curious, physically realized,
and innity-driven phenomenon has been identied. when the charge of the
lled negative states is renormalized to zero, one is subtracting an innite
quantity, and rules have to be agreed upon so that no ambiguities arise
when innite quantities are manipulated. with this agreed-upon subtraction
procedure, the charge of the vacuum is zero, and lled states of positive
energy carry integer units of charge. into the system one can insert a soliton
 a localized structure that distinguishes between dierent domains of the
condensed matter. in the presence of such a soliton, one needs to recalculate
charges using the agreed-upon rules for handling innities and one nds,
surprisingly, a noninteger result, typically half-integer: the negative-energy

what good are quantum field theory innities?

11

sea is distorted by the soliton to yield a half-unit of charge. the existence of
fractionally charged states in the presence of solitons has been experimentally
identied in polyacetylene. we thus have another example of a physical eect
emerging from innities of quantum eld theory.[2]

let me conclude my qualitative discussion of anomalies with an explicit
example from quantum mechanics, whose wave functions provide a link be-
tween particle and eld-theoretic dynamics. my example also dispels any
suspicion that ultraviolet divergences and the consequent anomalies are tied
to the complexities of relativistic quantum eld theory. the nonrelativistic
example shows that locality is what matters.

recall rst the basic dynamical equation of quantum mechanics:

the
time independent schrodinger equation for a particle of mass m moving in a
potential v (r) with energy e:

(cid:16)2 +

2m

h2 v (r)(cid:17)(r) =

2m
h2 e(r) .

in its most important physical applications, this equation is taken in three
spatial dimensions and v (r) is proportional to 1/r for the coulomb force
relevant in atoms. here we want to take a dierent model with potential
that is proportional to the inverse square, so that the schrodinger equation
is presented as

(cid:16)2 +



r2(cid:17)(r) = k2(r) ,

k2 

2m
h2 e .

in this model, transforming the length scale is a symmetry: because the
laplacian scales as r2,  is dimensionless and in the above there is no in-
trinsic unit of length. a consequence of scale invariance is that the scattering
phase shifts and the s matrix, which in general depend on energy, that is,
on k, are energy independent in scale-invariant models. and indeed when
the above schrodinger equation is solved, one veries this prediction of the
symmetry by nding an energy-independent s matrix. thus scale invariance
is maintained in this example  there are no surprises.

let us now look to a similar model, but in two dimensions with a -

function potential, which localizes the interaction at a point:

(cid:16)2 + 2(r)(cid:17)(r) = k2(r) .

since in two dimensions the two-dimensional -function scales as 1/r2, the
above model also appears scale invariant;  is dimensionless. but in spite

12

r. jackiw

of the simplicity of the local contact interaction, the schrodinger equation
suers a short-distance, ultraviolet singularity at r=0, which must be renor-
malized. here is not the place for a detailed analysis, but the result is that
only the s-wave possesses a nonvanishing phase shift 0, which shows a log-
arithmic dependence on energy:

cot 0 =

2


ln kr +

1


r is a scale that arises in the renormalization, and scale symmetry is deci-
sively and quantum mechanically broken. the scattering is nontrivial solely
as a consequence of anomalously broken scale invariance. (it is easily veried
that the two-dimensional -function in classical theory, where there are no
anomalies and it is scale invariant, produces no scattering.) to make sense
of the above phase shift in the limit r  , one must renormalize the
bare coupling constant , allowing it to depend on r in just such a way that
cot 0 is r-independent (for large r). alternatively, one recognizes that the
s matrix e2i0 possesses a pole, corresponding to a bound state with energy

eb = 

h2
2mr2 e/ .

therefore one may reexpress 0 in terms of eb, rather than r. with this
substitution, dependence on  disappears (as it must since  is r-dependent)
and the dimensionless (innite) coupling constant , has been traded for a
dimensional and physical parameter eb:

cot 0 =

1


ln

e

|eb|

similar anomalous breaking of scale invariance occurs in relativistic eld
theory, and perhaps explains the appearance of a dimensional mass param-
eter in qcd as a replacement for the dimensionless, but renormalization
dependent, coupling constant.[3]

i believe that as the millennium draws to a close, and we look forward
eagerly to the new physics ideas that will ourish in the new era, one very
important lesson we should take from quantum eld theory is not to ban-
ish all its innities. apparently the mathematical language with which we
are describing nature cannot account for all natural phenomena in a clear
fashion. recourse must be made to contradictory formulations involving

what good are quantum field theory innities?

13

innities, which nevertheless lead to accurate descriptions of experimental
facts in nite terms. it will be most interesting to see how string theory and
its evolutions, which purportedly are completely nite and consistent, will
handle this issue, which has been successfully, if paradoxically, resolved in
quantum eld theory.

references

[1] anomalous symmetries in quantum eld theory are discussed by r.
jackiw in s. treiman, r. jackiw, b. zamino, and e. witten, current
algebra and anomalies (princeton university press/world scientic,
princeton, nj/singapore, 1985); by s. adler in lectures on elemen-
tary particles and quantum field theory, s. deser, m. grisaru, and
h. pendleton, eds. (mit press, cambridge, ma, 1970); and in a mono-
graph on the subject by r. bertlmann, anomalies in quantum field
theory (oxford university press, oxford, uk, 1996).

[2] for more details on fractional charge see r. jackiw and j.r. schrieer,
solitons with fermion number 1/2 in condensed matter and rela-
tivistic field theories, nucl phys b190, [fs3] 253 (1981); r. jackiw,
fractional fermions, comments, nucl part phys 13, 15 (1984).

[3] further discussion of this model and a pedagogical account of anomalies
is by b. holstein, anomalies for pedestrians, am j phys 61, 142
(1993).

