mit-ctp-2921
nsf-itp-99-137
hep-th/9911114

some remarks on the finitude of quiver theories

9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
6
1

 

 
 

1
v
4
1
1
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

yang-hui he
yhe@ctp.mit.edu1

center for theoretical physics,

massachusetts institute of technology

cambridge, ma 02139, u.s.a.

and

institute for theoretical physics,

ucsb, santa barbara, ca 93106, u.s.a.2

abstract

d-brane probes, hanany-witten setups and geometrical engineering stand
as a trichotomy of the currently fashionable techniques of constructing gauge
theories from string theory. meanwhile, asymptotic freedom, nitude and ir
freedom pose as a trichotomy of the beta-function behaviour in quantum eld
theories. parallel thereto is a trichotomy in set theory of nite, tame and
wild representation types. at the intersection of the above lies the theory of
quivers. we briey review some of the terminology standard to the physics
and to the mathematics. then we utilise certain results from graph theory
and axiomatic representation theory of path algebras to address physical issues
such as the implication of graph additivity to niteness of gauge theories, the
impossibility of constructing completely ir free string orbifold theories and the
unclassiability of n < 2 yang-mills theories in four dimensions.

1 research supported in part by the ctp and the lns of mit and the u.s. department of
energy under cooperative research agreement #de-fc02-94er40818, the itp of ucsb under nsf
grant phy94-07194, as well as the nsf graduate fellowship.

2 address until nov. 21st, 1999.

1 introduction

in a quantum eld theory (qft), it has been known since the 70s (q.v. e.g. [1]), that
the behaviour of physical quantities such as mass and coupling constant are sensitive
to the renormalisation and evolve according to momentum scale as dictated by the
so-called renormalisation ows.
in particular, the correlation (greens) functions,
which encode the physical information relevant to feymanns perturbative analysis
of the theory and hence unaected by such ows, obey the famous callan-symanzik
equations. these equations assert the existence two universal functions () and
() shifting according to the coupling and eld renormalisation in such a way so as
to compensate for the renormalisation scale.

a class of qfts has lately received much attention, particularly among the string
theorists. these are the so-named nite theories, characterised by the vanishing of
the -functions. these theories are extremely well-behaved and no divergences can
be associated with the coupling in the ultraviolet; they were thus once embraced
as the solution to ultraviolet innities of qfts. four-dimensional nite theories
are restricted to supersymmetric gauge theories (or super-yang-mills, syms), of
which divergence cancelation is a general feature, and have a wealth of interesting
structure. n = 4 sym theories have been shown to be nite to all orders (cf.
e.g. [7, 8]) whereas for n = 2, the adler-bardeen theorem guarantees that no higher
than 1-loop corrections exist for the -function [9]. finally, for the unextended n = 1
theories, the vanishing at 1-loop implies that for 2-loops [10].

when a conformal eld theory (cft) with vanishing -function also has the
anomalous dimensions vanishing, the theory is in fact a nite theory. this class of
theories is without divergence and scale  and here we enter the realm of string theory.
recently much attempts have been undertaken in the construction of such theories
as low-energy limits of the world-volume theories of d-brane probes on spacetime
singularities [13, 14, 15, 16, 18] or of brane setups of the hanany-witten type [2,
3, 4, 5]. the construction of these theories not only supplies an excellent check for
string theoretic techniques but also, vice versa, facilitate the incorporation of the
standard model into string unications. these nite (super-)conformal theories in
four dimensions still remain a topic of fervent pursuit.

almost exactly concurrent with these advances in physics was a host of activities in
mathematics. inspired by problems in linear representations of partially ordered sets
over a eld [32, 35, 36, 40, 41], elegant and graphical methods have been developed in
attacking standing problems in algebra and combinatorics such as the classication
of representation types and indecomposables of nite-dimensional algebras.

in 1972, p. gabriel introduced the concept of a kocher in [35]. this is what is

2

known to our standard parlance today as a quiver. what entailed was a plethora
of exciting and fruitful research in graph theory, axiomatic set theory, linear algebra
and category theory, among many other branches. in particular one result that has
spurned interest is the great limitation imposed on the shapes of the quivers once the
concept of nite representation type has been introduced.

it may at rst glance seem to the reader that these two disparate directions of re-
search in contemporary physics and mathematics may never share conjugal harmony.
however, following the works of [14, 15, 16] those amusing quiver diagrams have sur-
prisingly - or perhaps not too much so, considering how that illustrious eld of string
theory has of late brought such enlightenment upon physics from seemingly most
esoteric mathematics - taken a slight excursion from the reveries of the abstract, and
manifested themselves in sym theories emerging from d-branes probing orbifolds.
the gauge elds and matter content of the said theories are conveniently encoded
into quivers and further elaborations upon relations to beyond orbifold theories have
been suggested in [18, 19].

it is therefore natural, for one to pause and step back awhile, and regard the string
orbifold theory from the perspective of a mathematician, and the quivers, from that
of a physicist. however, due to his inexpertise in both, the author could call himself
neither. therefore we are compelled to peep at the two elds as outsiders, and from
afar attempt to make some observations on similarities, obtain some vague notions of
the beauty, and speculate upon some underlying principles. this is then the purpose
of this note: to perceive, with a distant and weak eye; to inform, with a remote and
feeble voice.

the organisation of the paper is as follows. though the main results are given in
4, we begin with some preliminaries from contemporary techniques in string theory
on constructing four dimensional super-yang-mills, focusing on what each interprets
nitude to mean: 2.1 on d-brane probes on orbifold singularities, 2.2 on hanany-
witten setups and 2.3 on geometrical engineering. then we move to the other
direction and give preliminaries in the mathematics, introducing quiver graphs and
path algebras in 3.1, classication of representation types in 3.2 and how the latter
imposes constraints on the former in 3.3. the physicist may thus liberally neglect 2
and the mathematician, 3. finally in 4 we shall see how those beautiful theorems
in graph theory and axiomatic set theory may be used to give surprising results in
constructing gauge theories from string theory.

3

nomenclature

unless the contrary is stated, we shall throughout this paper adhere to the convention
that k is a eld of characteristic zero (and hence innite), that q denotes a quiver
and kq, the path algebra over the eld k associated thereto, that rep(x) refers
to the representation of the object x, and that irrep() is the set of irreducible
representations of the group . moreover, san serif type setting will be reserved for

categories, calligraphic n is used to denote the number of supersymmetries and b,

to distinguish the ane lie algebras or dynkin graphs.

2 preliminaries from the physics

the callan-symanzik equation of a qft dictates the behaviour, under the renor-
malisation group ow, of the n-point correlator g(n)({(xi)}; m, ) for the quantum
elds (x), according to the renormalisation of the coupling  and momentum scale
m (see e.g. [1], whose conventions we shall adopt):

"m


m

+ ()

+ n()# g(n)({(xi)}; m, ) = 0.




the two universal dimensionless functions  and  are known respectively as the -
function and the anomalous dimension. they determine how the shifts   +
in the coupling constant and   (1 + ) in the wave function compensate for the
shift in the renormalisation scale m:

() := m


m

() := m


m

.

three behaviours are possible in the region of small : (1) () > 0; (2) () < 0;
and (3) () = 0. the rst has good ir behaviour and admits valid feynmann
perturbation at large-distance, and the second possesses good perturbative behaviour
at uv limits and are asymptotically free. the third possibility is where the coupling
constants do not ow at all and the renormalised coupling is always equal to the bare
coupling. the only possible divergences in these theories are associated with eld-
rescaling which cancel automatically in physical s-matrix computations.
it seems
that to arrive at these well-tamed theories, some supersymmetry (susy) is needed
so as to induce the cancelation of boson-fermion loop eects3. these theories are
known as the nite theories in qft.

3proposals for non-supersymmetric nite theories in four dimensions have been recently made in

[15, 16, 17, 20]; to their techniques we shall later turn briey.

4

of particular importance are the nite theories that arise from conformal eld
theories which generically have in addition to the vanishing -functions, also zero
anomalous dimensions. often this subclass belongs to a continuous manifold of scale
invariant theories and is characterised by the existence of exactly marginal opera-
tors and whence dimensionless coupling constants, the set of mappings among which
constitutes the duality group `a la mantonen-olive of n = 4 sym, a hotly pursued
topic.

a remarkable phenomenon is that if there is a choice of coupling constants such
that all -functions as well as the anomalous dimensions (which themselves do vanish
at leading order if the manifold of xed points include the free theory) vanish at
references in [3]). a host
rst order then the theory is nite to all orders (cf.
of nite theories arise as low energy eective theories of string theory.
it will be
under this light that our discussions proceed. there are three contemporary methods
of constructing (nite, super) gauge theories: (1) geometrical engineering; (2) d-
branes probing singularities and (3) hanany-witten brane setups. discussions on
the equivalence among and extensive reviews for them have been in wide circulation
(q.v. e.g. [29, 22]). therefore we shall not delve too far into their account; we shall
recollect from them what each interprets nitude to mean.

2.1 d-brane probes on orbifolds

when placing n d3-branes on a space-time orbifold singularity cm/, out of the par-
u(ni) gauge theory with irrep() :=

ent n = 4 su(n) sym one can fabricate a qi
{ri} and pi

ni dim ri = n [16]. the resulting susy in the four-dimensional world-
volume is n = 2 if the orbifold is c2/{  su(2)} as studied in [14], n = 1
if c3/{  su(3)} as in [18] and non-susy if c3/{  su(4)} as in [20]. the
subsequent matter elds are a4
fij with
i, j = 1, ..., n and ar

and a6

ij scalars ij

ij weyl fermions ij

fij=1,...,a4
ij

ij dened by

r  ri =mj

ar
ij rj

(2.1)

respectively for r = 4, 6. it is upon these matrices aij, which we call bifundamental
matter matrices that we shall dwell. they dictate how many matter elds transform
under the (ni, nj) of the product gauge group.
it was originally pointed out in
[14] that one can encode this information in quiver diagrams where one indexes
the vector multiplets (gauge) by nodes and hypermultiplets (matter) by links in a
(nite) graph so that the bifundamental matter matrix denes the (possibly oriented)
adjacency matrix for this graph. in other words, one draws amn number of arrows

5

from node m to n. therefore to each vertex i is associated a vector space vi and a
semisimple component su(ni) of the gauge group acting on vi. moreover an oriented
link from v1 to v2 represents a complex eld transforming under hom(v1, v2). we
shall see in section 3.1 what all this means.

when we take the dimension of both sides of (2.1), we obtain the matrix equation

dim(r)ri = ar

ij rj

(2.2)

where ri := dim ri. as discussed in [16, 18], the remaining susy must be in the
commutant of  in the su(4) r-symmetry of the parent n = 4 theory. in the case
of n = 2 this means that 4 = 1 + 1 + 2 and by susy, 6 = 1 + 1 + 2 + 2 where the
1 is the principal (trivial) irrep and 2, a two-dimensional irrep. therefore due to the
additivity and orthogonality of group characters, it was thus pointed out (cit. ibid.)
that one only needs to investigate the fermion matrix a4
ij, which is actually reduced
to 2ij + a2
ij. it was subsequently shown that
(2.2) necessitates the vanishing of the -function to one loop. summarising these
points, we state the condition for nitude from the orbifold perspective:

ij. similarly for n = 1, we have ij + a3

susy finitude
n = 2 2ri = a2
ijrj
n = 1 3ri = a3
ijrj
n = 0 4ri = a4
ijrj

(2.3)

in fact it was shown in [16, 27], that the 1-loop -function is proportional to dri ad
ijrj
for d = 4  n whereby the vanishing thereof signies nitude, exceeding zero signies
asymptotical freedom and ir free otherwise4. we shall call this expression dij  ad
ij
the discriminant function since its relation with respective to zero (once dotted
with the vector of labels) discriminates the behaviour of the qft. this point shall
arise once again in 4.

2.2 hanany-witten

in brane congurations of the hanany-witten type [2], d-branes are stretched be-
tween sets of ns-branes, the presence of which break the susy aorded by the 32
supercharges of the type ii theory. in particular, parallel sets of ns-branes break one-
half susy, giving rise to n = 2 in four dimensions [2] whereas rotated ns-branes
[6] or grids of ns-branes (the so-called brane box models) [3, 4, 5] break one further
half susy and gives n = 1 in four dimensions.

4as a cautionary note, these conditions are necessary but may not be sucient. in the cases of
n < 2, one needs to check the superpotential. however, throughout the paper we shall focus on the
necessity of these conditions.

6

the brane box models (bbm) (and possible extensions to brane cubes) provide
an intuitive and visual realisation of sym. they generically give rise to n = 1, with
n = 2 as a degenerate case. eectively, the d-branes placed in the boxes of ns-
branes furnish a geometrical way to encode the representation properties of the nite
group  discussed in 2.1. the bi-fundamentals, and hence the quiver diagram, are
constructed from oriented open strings connecting the d-branes according to the rule
given in [4]:

rj.

3  ri = mj n, e, sw

neighbours

this is of course (2.1) in a dierent guise and we clearly see the equivalence between
this and the orbifold methods of 2.1.

now in [2], for the classical setup of stretching a d-brane between two ns-branes,
the asymptotic bending of the ns-brane controls the evolution of the gauge cou-
pling (since the inverse of which is dictated by the distance between the ns-branes).
whence ns-branes bending towards each other gives an ir free theory (case (1) de-
ned above for the -functions), while bending away give an uv free (case (2)) theory.
no bending thus indicates the non-evolution of the -function and thus niteness; this
is obviously true for any brane congurations, intervals, boxes or cubes. we quote
[3] verbatim on this issue: given a brane conguration which has no bending, the
corresponding eld theory which is read o from the brane conguration by using the
rules of [4] is a nite theory.

discussions on bending have been treated in [11, 12] while works towards the
establishment of the complete correspondence between hanany-witten methods and
orbifold probes (to beyond the abelian case) are well under way [22]. under this light,
we would like to lend this opportunity to point out that the anomaly cancelation
equations (2-4) of [11] which discusses the implication of tadpole-cancelation to bbm
in excellent detail, are precisely in accordance with (2.1). in particular, what they
referred as the fourier transform to extract the rank matrix for the zzk  zzk bbm
is precisely the orthogonality relations for nite group characters (which in the case
of the abelian groups conveniently reduce to roots of unity and hence fourier series).
the generalisation of these equations for non-abelian groups should be immediate.
we see indeed that there is a close intimacy between the techniques of the current
subsection with 2.1; let us now move to a slightly dierent setting.

2.3 geometrical engineering

on compactifying type iia string theory on a non-compact calabi-yau threefold,
we can geometrically engineer [25, 26, 27] an n = 2 sym. more specically when

7

we compactify type iia on a k3 surface, locally modeled by an ale singularity, we
arrive at an n = 2 sym in 6 dimensions with gauge group ade depending on the
singularity about which d2-branes wrap in the zero-volume limit. however if we were
to further compactify on t 2, we would arrive at an n = 4 sym in 4 dimensions. in
order to kill the extraneous scalars we require a 2-fold without cycles, namely p1, or
the 2-sphere. therefore we are eectively compactifying our original 10 dimensional
theory on a (non-compact) calabi-yau threefold which is an ale (k3) bration over
p1, obtaining a pure n = 2 sym in 4 dimensions with coupling 1
g2 equaling to the
volume of the base p1.

to incorporate matter [26, 27] we let an an1 ale bre collide with an am1 one
to result in an am+n1 singularity; this corresponds to a higgsing of su(m + n) 
su(m)su(n), giving rise to a bi-fundamental matter (n, m). of course, by colliding
the a singular bres appropriately (i.e., in accordance with dynkin diagrams) this
above idea can easily be generalised to fabricate generic product su gauge groups.
thus as opposed to 2.1 where bi-fundamentals (and hence the quiver diagram) arise
from linear maps between irreducible modules of nite group representations, or 2.2
where they arise from open strings linking d-branes, in the context of geometrical
engineering, they originate from colliding bres of the calabi-yau.

the properties of the -function from this geometrical perspective were also in-
vestigated in [27]. the remarkable fact, using the perron-frobenius theorem, is that
the possible resulting sym is highly restricted. the essential classication is that if
the n = 2 - function vanishes (and hence a nite theory), then the quiver diagram

encoding the bi-fundamentals must be the ane dade dynkin diagrams and when

it is less than zero (and thus an asymptotically free theory), the quiver must be the
ordinary ade. we shall see later how one may graphically arrive at these results.

having thus reviewed the contemporary trichotomy of the methods of constructing
sym from string theory fashionable of late, with special emphasis on what the word
nitude means in each, we are obliged, as prompted by the desire to unify, to ask
ourselves whether we could study these techniques axiomatically. after all, the quiver
diagram does manifest under all these circumstances. and it is these quivers, as
viewed by a graph or representation theorist, that we discuss next.

3 preliminaries from the mathematics

we now formally study what a quiver is in a mathematical sense. there are various
approaches one could take, depending on whether ones interest lies in category theory
or in algebra. we shall commence with p. gabriels denition, which was the genesis

8

of the excitement which ensued. then we shall introduce the concept of path algebras
and representation types as well as a host of theorems that limit the shapes of quivers
depending on those type. as far as convention and nomenclature are concerned, 3.1
and 3.2 will largely follow [30, 31, 32].

3.1 quivers and path algebras

in his two monumental papers [35, 36], gabriel introduced the following concept:

definition 3.1 a quiver is a pair q = (q0, q1), where q0 is a set of vertices
and q1, a set of arrows such that each element   q1 has a beginning s() and an
end e() which are vertices, i.e., {s()  q0}  {e()  q0}.

in other words a quiver is a (generically) directed graph, possibly with multiple arrows
and loops. we shall often denote a member  of q1 by the beginning and ending
vertices, as in x  y.

1 i1 . . .

given such a graph, we can generalise q0,1 by dening a path of length m to
m im) with j  q1 and
be the formal composition  = 12 . . . m := (i0
ij  q0 such that i0 = s(1) and it = s(t1) = e(t) for t = 1, ..., m. this is to
say that we follow the arrows and trace through m nodes. subsequently we let qm
be the set of all paths of length m and for the identity dene, for each node x, a
trivial path of length zero, ex, starting and ending at x. this allows us to associate
q0  {ex}xq0 and (i  j)  ei = ej. now qm is dened for all non-negative m,
whereby giving a gradation in q.

objects5 may be assigned to the nodes and edges of the quiver so as to make its

conception more concrete. this is done so in two closely-related ways:

1. by the representation of a quiver, rep(q), we mean to associate to each
vertex x  q0 of q, a vector space vx and to each arrow x  y, a linear
transformation between the corresponding vector spaces vx  vy.

2. given a eld k and a quiver q, a path algebra kq is an algebra which as a

vector space over k has its basis prescribed by the paths in q.

{vxq0, (x  y)  q1}, the associated kq module is lx

there is a 1-1 correspondence between kq-modules and rep(q). given rep(q) =
vx whose basis is the set of
paths qm. conversely, given a kq-module v , we dene vx = exv and the arrows to
be prescribed by the basis element u such that u  eyu = uex whereby making u a
map from vx to vy.

5we could take this word literally and indeed we shall later briey dene the objects in a quiver

category.

9

2

1





()



()

figure 1: two examples of quivers with nodes and edges labeled.

on an algebraic level, due to the gradation of the quiver q by qm, the path

algebra is furnished by

kq :=mm

kqm with kqm := mqm

k

(3.4)

as a k-algebra, the addition and multiplication axioms of kq are as follows: given
(a +b)

a and b =

pqn; a k

a as two elements in kq, a+b =p

ab with  being the joining of paths (if the endpoint of one is

a =

pqm; ak
and a  b = p,

the beginning of another, otherwise it is dened to be 0).

this correspondence between path algebras and quiver representations gives us the
exibility of freely translating between the two, an advantage we shall later graciously
take. as illustrative examples of concepts thus far introduced, we have drawn two
quivers in figure 1. in example (i), q0 = {1, 2}, q1 = {, } and qm>1 = {}. the
path algebra is then the so-called kronecker algebra:

kq = e1k  e2k  k  k =

k k2
0

k  .

on the other hand, for example (ii), qm{0,1,2,...} = {m} and the path algebra
mk = k[], the innite dimensional free algebra of polynomials of one

becomes lm

variable over k.

in general, kq is nitely generated if there exists a nite number of vertices and
arrows in q and kq is nite-dimensional if there does not exist any oriented cycles
in q.

to specify the quiver even further one could introduce labeling schemes for the
nodes and edges; to do so we need a slight excursion to clarify some standard termi-
nology from graph theory.

definition 3.2 the following are common categorisations of graphs:

 a labeled graph is a graph which has, for each of its edge (i

 j), a pair of

positive integers (a

ij, a

ji) associated thereto;

10

 a valued graph is a labeled graph for which there exists a positive integer fi

for each node i, such that a

ijfj = a

jifi for each arrow6.

 a modulation of a valued graph consists of an assignment of a eld ki to each

node i, and a ki-kj bi-module m 

ij to each arrow (i

 j) satisfying

(a) m 
ij
(b) dimki(m 

= homki(m 
ij, ki) = homkj (m 
ij) = a
ij.

ij, kj);

 a modulated quiver is a valued graph with a modulation (and orientation).

we shall further adopt the convention that we omit the label to edges if it is (1, 1).
we note that of course according to this labeling, the matrices aij are almost what
we call adjacency matrices. in the case of unoriented single-valence edges between
say nodes i and j, the adjacency matrix has aij = aji = 1, precisely the label (1, 1).
however, directed edges, as in figure 2 and figure 3, are slightly more involved. this
is exemplied by    which has the label (2, 1) whereas the conventional adjacency
matrix would have the entries aij = 2 and aji = 0. such a labeling scheme is of
course so as to be consistent with the entries of the dynkin-cartan matrices of the
semi-simple lie algebras. to this subtlety we shall later turn.

the canonical examples of labeled (some of them are valued) graphs are what
are known as the dynkin and euclidean graphs. the dynkin graphs are further
subdivided into the nite and the innite; the former are simply the dynkin-coxeter
diagrams well-known in lie algebras while the latter are analogues thereof but with
innite number of labeled nodes (note that the nodes are not labeled so as to make
them valued graphs; we shall shortly see what those numbers signify.) the euclidean
graphs are the so-called ane coxeter-dynkin diagrams (of the ane extensions of
the semi-simple lie algebras) but with their multiple edges dierentiated by oriented
labeling schemes. these diagrams are shown in figure 2 and figure 3.

how are these the canonical examples? we shall see the reason in 3.3 why
they are ubiquitous and atomic, constituting, when certain niteness conditions are
imposed, the only elemental quivers. before doing so however, we need some facts
from representation theory of algebras; upon these we dwell next.

3.2 representation type of algebras

henceforth we restrict ourselves to innite elds, as some of the upcoming denitions
make no sense over nite elds. this is of no loss of generality because in physics

6 thus a labeled graph without any cycles is always a valued graph since we have enough degrees
of freedom to solve for a consistent set of fi whereas cycles would introduce extra constraints. (of
course there is no implicit summation assumed in the equation.)

11

(n nodes)

a n

bn

c n

dn

a8

b8

c8

1

1

1

2

1

2

3

1

2

means

(2,1)

means 

(3,1)

e6

e7

e8

f4

g2

(i) the finite dynkin diagrams

d8

8

a8

1

1

2

2

1

1

1

(ii) the infinite dynkin diagrams

figure 2: the finite and innite dynkin diagrams as labeled quivers. the nite
cases are the well-known dynkin-coxeter graphs in lie algebras (from chapter 4 of
[30]).

12

means

(2,1)

means 

(3,1)

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

1

1

1

1

2

1

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

1

2

2

2

2

^
a n

^
bn

^
c n

^
dn

bcn

bd n

cd n

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

^
a11

(1,4)

2

1

^
a12

(2,2)

1

1

1

2

1

2

3

1

2

2

1

2

3

4

3

2

1

3

2

4

6

5

4

3

2

1

1

2

3

2

1

1

2

3

2

1

^
e6

^
e7

^
e8

^
f41

^
f42

^
g21

1

2

1

^
g22

1

2

3

the euclidean diagrams

figure 3: the euclidean diagrams as labeled quivers; we recognise that this list
contains the so-called ane dynkin diagrams (from chapter 4 of [30]).

13

we are usually concerned with the eld c. when given an algebra, we know its
quintessential properties once we determine its decomposables (or equivalently the
irreducibles of the associated module). therefore classifying the behaviour of the
indecomposables is the main goal of classifying representation types of the algebras.
the essential idea is that an algebra is of nite type if there are only nitely many
indecomposables; otherwise it is of innite type. of the innite type, there is one
well-behaved subcategory, namely the algebras of tame representation type, which
has its indecomposables of each dimension coming in nitely many one-parameter
families with only nitely many exceptions. tameness in some sense still suggests
classiability of the innite indecomposables. on the other hand, an algebra of wild
type includes the free algebra on two variables, k[x, y ], (the path algebra of figure 1
(ii), but with two self-adjoining arrows), which indicates representations of arbitrary
nite dimensional algebras, and hence unclassiability7.

we formalise the above discussion into the following denitions:

definition 3.3 let k be an innite eld and a, a nite dimensional algebra.

 a is of nite representation type if there are only nitely many isomorphism

classes of indecomposable a-modules, otherwise it is of innite type;

 a is of tame representation type if it is of innite type and for any dimen-
sion n, there is a nite set of a-k[x]-bimodules8 mi which obey the following:

1. mi are free as right k[x]-modules;

2. for some i and some indecomposable k[x]-module m, all but a nitely
many indecomposable a-modules of dimension n can be written as mi k[x]
m.

if the mi may be chosen independently of n, then we say a is of domestic
representation type.

 a is of wild representation type if it is of innite representation type and
there is a nitely generated a-k[x, y ]-bimodule m which is free as a right
k[x, y ]-module such that the functor mk[x,y ] from nite-dimensional k[x, y ]-
modules to nite-dimensional a-modules preserves indecomposability and iso-
morphism classes.

we are naturally led to question ourselves whether the above list is exhaustive. this is
indeed so: what is remarkable is the so-called trichotomy theorem which says that all

7 for precise statements of the unclassiability of modules of two-variable free algebras as turing-

machine undecidability, cf. e.g. thm 4.4.3 of [30] and [42].

8 therefore for the polynomial ring k[x], the indeterminate x furnishes the parameter for the
one-parameter family mentioned in the rst paragraph of this subsection. indeed the indecomposable
k[x]-modules are classied by powers of irreducible polynomials over k.

14

nite dimensional algebras must fall into one and only one of the above classication
of types9:

theorem 3.1 (trichotomy theorem) for k algebraically closed, every nite di-
mensional algebra a is of nite, tame or wild representation types, which are mutually
exclusive.

to this pigeon-hole we may readily apply our path algebras of 3.1. of course
such denitions of representation types can be generalised to additive categories with
unique decomposition property. here by an additive category b we mean one with
nite direct sums and an abelian structure on b(x, y ), the set of morphisms from
object x to y in b such that the composition map b(y, z)  b(x, y )  b(x, z)
is bilinear for x, y, z objects in b. indeed, that (a) each object in b can be nitely
decomposed via the direct sum into indecomposable objects and that (b) the ring
of endomorphisms between objects has a unique maximal ideal guarantees that b
possesses unique decomposability as an additive category [32].

the category rep(q), what [37] calls the quiver category, has as its objects
the pairs (v, ) with linear spaces v associated to the nodes and linear mappings ,
to the arrows. the morphisms of the category are mappings  : (v, )  (v , )
compatible with  by e(l)l = 
ls(l). in the sense of the correspondence between
representation of quivers and path algebras as discussed in 3.1, the category rep(q)
of nite dimensional representations of q, as an additive category, is equivalent to
mod(kq), the category of nite dimensional (right) modules of the path algebra kq
associated to q. this equivalence

rep(q) = mod(kq)

is the axiomatic statement of the correspondence and justies why we can hereafter
translate freely between the concept of representation types of quivers and associated
path algebras.

3.3 restrictions on the shapes of quivers

now we return to our quivers and in particular combine 3.1 and 3.2 to address the
problem of how the representation types of the path algebra restricts the shapes of
the quivers. before doing so let us rst justify, as advertised in 3.1, why figure 2
and figure 3 are canonical. we rst need a preparatory denition: we say a labeled
graph t1 is smaller than t2 if there is an injective morphism of graphs  : t1  t2

9for a discussion on this theorem and how similar structures arises for nite groups, cf. e.g.

[30, 32] and references therein.

15

 j) in t1, aij  a(i)(j) (and t1 is said to be strictly
such that for each edge (i
smaller if  can not be chosen to be an isomorphism). with this concept, we can see
that the dynkin and euclidean graphs are indeed our archetypal examples of labeled
graphs due to the following theorem:

theorem 3.2 [30, 31] any connected labeled graph t is one and only one of the
following:

1. t is dynkin (nite or innite);

2. there exists a euclidean graph smaller than t .

this is a truly remarkable fact which dictates that the atomic constituents of all
labeled graphs are those arising from semi-simple (ordinary and ane) lie algebras.
the omni-presence of such meta-patterns is still largely mysterious (see e.g. [19, 28]
for discussions on this point).

let us see another manifestation of the elementarity of the dynkin and euclidean

graphs. again, we need some rudimentary notions.

definition 3.4 the cartan matrix for a labeled graph t with labels (aij, aji)

for the edges is the matrix10 cij := 2ij p

a
ij

we can symmetrise the cartan matrix for valued graphs as cij = cijfj with {fj} the
valuation of the nodes of the labeled graph. with the cartan matrix at hand, let us
introduce an important function on labeled graphs:

definition 3.5 a subadditive function n(x) on a labeled graph t is a func-
n(i)cij  0  j. a subadditive function

tion taking nodes x  t to n  q+ such thatpi

is additive if the equality holds.

it turns out that imposing the existence such a function highly restricts the possible
shape of the graph; in fact we are again led back to our canonical constituents. this
is dictated by the following

theorem 3.3 (happel-preiser-ringel [30]) let t be a labeled graph and n(x) a
subadditive function thereupon, then the following holds:

1. t is either (nite or innite) dynkin or euclidean;

2. if n(x) is not additive, then t is nite dynkin or a;

3. if n(x) is additive, then t is innite dynkin or euclidean;

10this denition is inspired by, but should be confused with, cartan matrices for semisimple lie
algebras; to the latter we shall refer as dynkin-cartan matrices. also, in the denition we have
summed over edges  adjoining i and j so as to accommodate multiple edges between the two nodes
each with non-trivial labels.

16

4. if n(x) is unbounded then t = a

we shall see in the next section what this notion of graph additivity [30, 28] signies
for super-yang-mills theories. for now, let us turn to the theorema egregium of
gabriel that denitively restricts the shape of the quiver diagram once the nitude
of the representation type of the corresponding path algebra is imposed.

theorem 3.4 (gabriel [35, 36, 32]) a nite quiver q (and hence its associated
path algebra over an innite eld) is of nite representation type if and only if it
is a disjoint union of dynkin graphs of type an, dn and e678, i.e., the ordinary
simply-laced ade coxeter-dynkin diagrams.

in the language of categories [37], where a proof of the theorem may be obtained using
coxeter functors in the quiver category, the above proposes that the quiver is (unions
of) ade if and only if there are a nite number of non-isomorphic indecomposable
objects in the category rep(q).

once again appears the graphs of figure 2, and in fact only the single-valence
ones: that ubiquitous ade meta-pattern! we recall from discussions in 3.1 that
only for the simply-laced (and thus simply-valanced quivers) cases, viz. ade and
ij precisely prescribe the adjacency matrices. to what type of

dade, do the labels a
path algebras then, one may ask, do the ane dade euclidean graphs correspond?

the answer is given by nazarova as an extension to gabriels theorem.

theorem 3.5 (nazarova [39, 32]) let q be a connected quiver without oriented
cycles and let k be an algebraically closed eld, then kq is of tame (in fact domestic)
representation type if and only if q is the one of the euclidean graphs of type an, dn
and e678, i.e., the ane ade coxeter-dynkin diagrams.

can we push further? what about the remaining quivers of in our canonical list?
indeed, with the introduction of modulation on the quivers, as introduced in 3.1,
the results can be further relaxed to include more graphs, in fact all the dynkin and
euclidean graphs:

theorem 3.6 (tits, bernstein-gelfand-ponomarev, dlab-ringel, nazarova-ringel
[37, 41, 38, 30]) let q be a connected modulated quiver, then

1. if q is of nite representation type then q is dynkin;

2. if q is of tame representation type, then q is euclidean.

this is then our dualism, on the one level of having nite graphs encoding a (classi-
ability) innite algebra and on another level having the two canonical constituents
of all labeled graphs being partitioned by nitude versus innitude11.

11this is much in the spirit of that wise adage, cette opposition nouvelle, le ni et linni, ou
mieux linni dans le ni, remplace le dualisme de letre et du paratre: ce qui parat, en eet, cest

17

4 quivers in string theory and yang-mills in graph

theory

we are now equipped with a small arsenal of facts; it is now our duty to expound
upon them. therefrom we shall witness how axiomatic studies of graphs and repre-
sentations may shed light on current developments in string theory.

let us begin then, upon examining condition (2.3) and denition 3.5, with the

following

observation 4.1 the condition for nitude of n = 2 orbifold sym theory is
equivalent to the introduction of an additive function on the corresponding quiver as
a labeled graph.

2ni =pj

this condition that for the label ni to each node i and adjacency matrix aij,
aijnj is a very interesting constraint to which we shall return shortly. what

we shall use now is part 3 of theorem 3.3 in conjunction with the above observation
to deduce

corollary 4.1 all nite n = 2 super-yang-mills theories with bi-fundamental
matter have their quivers as (nite disjoint unions) of the single-valence (i.e., (1, 1)-
labeled edges) cases of the euclidean (figure 3) or innite dynkin (figure 2) graphs.

a few points to remark. this is slightly a more extended list than that given in

contemporary interest because they, in addition to being geometrically constructable
(cf. 2.3), are also obtainable from the string orbifold technique12 (cf. 2.1) since

[27] which is comprised solely of the dade quivers. these latter cases are the ones of
after all the nite discrete subgroups of su(2) fall into an dade classication due to

mckays correspondence [33, 13, 18]. in addition to the above well-behaved cases,
we also have the innite simply-laced dynkin graphs: a, d and a
. the usage of
the perron-frobenius theorem in [27] restricts ones attention to nite matrices. the
allowance for innite graphs of course implies an innitude of nodes and hence innite
products for the gauge group. one needs not exclude these possibilities as after all in
the study of d-brane probes, maldacenas large n limit has been argued in [15, 16, 3]
to be required for conformality and niteness. in this limit of an innite stack of d-
branes, innite gauge groups may well arise. in the hanany-witten picture, a
 for
example would correspond to an innite array of ns5-branes, and a, a semi-innite

seulement un aspect de lobjet et lobjet est tout entier dans cet aspect et tout entier hors de lui
[43].

12 and in the cases of a and d also from hanany-witten setups [21, 22].

18

array with enough d-branes on the other side to ensure the overall non-bending and
parallelism of the ns. such cases had been considered in [6].

another comment is on what had been advertised earlier in 3.1 regarding the
adjacency matrices. theorem 3.3 does not exclude graphs with multiple-valanced
oriented labels. this issue does not arise in n = 2 which has only single-valanced and
unoriented quivers. however, going beyond to n = 1, 0, requires generically oriented
and multiply-valanced quivers (i.e., non-symmetric, non-binary matter matrices) [18,
20]; or, it is conceivable that certain theories not arising from orbifold procedures may
also possess these generic traits. under this light we question ourselves how one may
identify the bi-fundamental matter matrices not with strict adjacency matrices of
graphs but with the graph-label matrices a
ij of 3.1 so as to accommodate multiple,
chiral bi-fundamentals (i.e. multi-valence, directed graphs). in other words, could
corollary 4.1 actually be relaxed to incorporate all of the euclidean and innite dynkin
graphs as dictated by theorem 3.3? thoughts on this direction, viz., how to realise
hanany-witten brane congurations for non-simply-laced groups have been engaged
but still waits further clarication [23].

let us now turn to gabriels famous theorem 3.4 and see its implications in string
theory and vice versa what information the latter provides for graph theory. first we
make a companion statement to observation 4.1:

observation 4.2 the condition for asymptotically free ( < 0) n = 2 sym
theory with bi-fundamentals is equivalent to imposing a subadditive (but not additive)
function of the corresponding quiver.

this may thus promptly be utilised together with part 2 of theorem 3.3 to con-
clude that the only such theories are ones with ade quiver, or, allowing innite
gauge groups, a as well (and indeed all nite dynkin quivers once, as mentioned
above, non-simply-laced groups have been resolved). this is once again a slightly
extended version of the results in [27].

let us digress, before trudging on, a moment to consider what is means to encode
sym with quivers. now we recall that for the quiver q, the assignment of objects and
morphisms to the category rep(q), or vector spaces and linear maps to nodes q0 and
edges q1 in q, or bases to the path algebra kq, are all equivalent procedures. from
the physics perspective, these assignments are precisely what we do when we associate
vector multiplets to nodes and hypermultiplets to arrows as in the orbifold technique,
or ns-branes to nodes and oriented open strings between d-branes to arrows as in the
hanany-witten congurations, or singularities in calabi-yau to nodes and colliding
bres to arrows as in geometrical engineering. in other words the three methods, 3.1,
2.1 and 2.3, of constructing gauge theories in four dimensions currently in vogue

19

are dierent representations of rep(q) and are hence axiomatically equivalent as far
as quiver theories are concerned.

bearing this in mind, and in conjunction with observations 4.1 and 4.2, as well
as theorem 3.4 together with its generalisations, and in particular theorem 3.6, we
make the following

corollary 4.2 to an asymptotically free n = 2 sym with bi-fundamentals
is associated a nite path algebra and to a nite one, a tame path algebra. the
association is in the sense that these sym theories (or some theory categorically
equivalent thereto) prescribe representations of the only quivers of such representation
types.

what is even more remarkable perhaps is that due to the trichotomy theorem,
the path algebra associated to all other quivers must be of wild representation type.
what this means, as we recall the unclassiability of algebras of wild representations,
is that these quivers are unclassiable. in particular, if we assume that sym with
n = 0, 1 and arbitrary bi-fundamental matter content can be constructed (either
from orbifold techniques, hanany-witten, or geometrical engineering), then these
theories can not be classied, in the strict sense that they are turing undecidable
and there does not exist, in any nite language, a nite scheme by which they could
be listed. since the set of sym with bi-fundamentals is a proper subset of all sym,
the like applies to general sym. what this signies is that however ardently we may
continue to provide more examples of say nite n = 1, 0 sym, the list can never be
nished nor be described, unlike the n = 2 case where the above discussions exhaust
their classication. we summarise this amusing if not depressing fact as follows:

corollary 4.3 the generic n = 1, 0 sym in four dimensions are unclassi-
able in the sense of being turing undecidable.

we emphasise again that by unclassiable here we mean not completely classiable
because we have given a subcategory (the theories with bi-fundamentals) which is
unclassiable. also, we rest upon the assumption that for any bi-fundamental matter
content an sym could be constructed. works in the direction of classifying all possible
gauge invariant operators in an n = 1 susy lagrangian have been pursued [24].
our claim is much milder as no further constraints than the possible nave matter
content are imposed; we simply state that the complete generic problem of classifying
the n < 2 matter content is untractable.
in [24], the problem has been reduced
to manipulating a certain cohomological algebra; it would be interesting to see for
example, whether such brst techniques may be utilised in the classication of certain
categories of graphs.

20

such an innitude of gauge theories need not worry us as there certainly is no
shortage of say, calabi-yau threefolds which may be used to geometrically engineer
them. this unclassiability is rather in the spirit of that of, for example, four-
manifolds.
indeed, though we may never exhaust the list, we are not precluded
from giving large exemplary subclasses which are themselves classiable, e.g., those
prescribed by the orbifold theories. determining these theories amounts to the clas-
sication of the nite discrete subgroups of su(n).

we recall from corollary 4.1 that n = 2 is given by the ane and innite coxeter-

dynkin graphs of which the orbifold theories provide the dade cases. what remarks

could one make for n = 0, 1, i.e., su(3, 4) mckay quivers [18, 20]? let us rst see
n = 2 from the graph-theoretic perspective, which will induce a relationship between
additivity (theorem 3.3) and gabriel-nazarova (theorems 3.4 and extensions). the
crucial step in tits proof of gabriels theorem is the introduction of the quadratic
form on a graph [37, 45]:

definition 4.6 for a labeled quiver q = (q0, q1), one denes the (symmetric
bilinear) quadratic form b(x) on the set x of the labels as follows:

b(x) := xiq0

x2

i  xq1

xs()xe().

the subsequent work was then to show that nitude of representation is equivalent to
the positive-denity of b(x), and in fact, as in nazarovas extension, that tameness
is equivalent to positive-semi-denity. in other words, nite or tame representation
type can be translated, in this context, to a diophantine inequality which dictates
the nodes and connectivity of the quiver (incidentally the very same inequality which
dictates the shapes of the coxeter-dynkin diagrams or the vertices and faces of the
platonic solids in ir3):

b(x)  0  dade, ade

b(x) > 0  ade.

now we note that b(x) can be written as 1
2xt  c  x where (c)ij is de facto the
cartan matrix for graphs as dened in 3.3. the classication problem thus, because
c := 2i a, becomes that of classifying graphs whose adjacency matrix a has maximal
eigenvalue 2, or what mckay calls c2-graphs in [33]. this issue was addressed in [46]
cijxj 

and indeed the dade graphs emerge. furthermore the additivity conditionpj
0  i clearly implies the constraint pij

cijxixj  0 (since all labels are positive) and

thereby the like on the quadratic form. hence we see how to arrive at the vital step
in gabriel-nazarova through graph subadditivity.

the above discussions relied upon the specialty of the number 2.

indeed one
could translate between the graph quadratic form b(x) and the graph cartan matrix

21

precisely because the latter is dened by 2i  a. from a physical perspective this is
precisely the discriminant function for n = 2 orbifold sym (i.e. d = 2) as discussed

at the end of 2.1. this is why dade arises in all these contexts. we are naturally

led to question ourselves, what about general13 d? this compels us to consider a
generalised cartan matrix for graphs (cf. denition in 3.3), given by cij :=
dij  aij, our discriminant function of 2.1. indeed such a matrix was considered
in [34] for general mckay quivers. as a side remarks, due to such an extension,
theorem 3.3 must likewise be adjusted to accommodate more graphs; a recent paper
[44] shows an example, the so-dubbed semi-ane dynkin diagrams, where a new
class of labeled graphs with additivity with respect to the extended cij emerge.

returning to the generalised cartan matrix, in [34], the mckay matrices aij were
obtained, for an arbitrary nite group g, by tensoring a faithful d-dimensional rep-
resentation with the set of irreps: rd  ri = jaijrj. what was noticed was that the
scalar product dened with respect to the matrix dij  aij (precisely our generalised
cartan) was positive semi-denite in the vector space v = {xi} of labels. in other
cijxixj  0. we briey transcribe his proof in the appendix. what this

words, pij

means for us is that is the following

corollary 4.4 string orbifold theories can not produce a completely ir free
(i.e., with respect to all semisimple components of the gauge group) qft (i.e., type
(1),  > 0).

to see this suppose there existed such a theory. then  > 0, implying for our
cijxj < 0  i for some nite group. this would then im-

cijxixj < 0, violating the positive semidenity

discriminant function thatpj
ply, since all labels are positive, thatpij

condition that it should always be nonnegative for any nite group according to [34].
therefore by reductio ad absurdum, we conclude corollary 4.4.

on a more general setting, if we were to consider using the generalised cartan
matrix dij  aij to dene a generalised subadditive function (as opposed to merely
d = 2), could we perhaps have an extended classication scheme? to our knowledge
this is so far an unsolved problem for indeed take the subset of these graphs with
aijnj, these are known as d-regular graphs (the only

all labels being 1 and dni = pj
2-regular one is the ba-series) and these are already unclassied for d > 2. we await

input from mathematicians on this point.

13 in the arena of orbifold sym, d = 1, 2, 3, but in a broader settings, as in generalisation of

mckays correspondence, d could be any natural number.

22

5 concluding remarks and prospects

the approach of this writing has been bilateral. on the one hand, we have briey
reviewed the three contemporary techniques of obtaining four dimensional gauge the-
ories from string theory, namely hanany-witten, d-brane probes and geometrical
engineering. in particular, we focus on what nitude signies for these theories and
how interests in quiver diagrams arises. subsequently, we approach from the mathe-
matical direction and have taken a promenade in the eld of axiomatic representation
theory of algebras associated to quivers. the common ground rests upon the language
of graph theory, some results from which we have used to address certain issues in
string theory.

from the expression of the one-loop -function, we have dened a discriminant
function f := dij  ad
ij for the quiver with adjacency matrix aij which encodes
the bi-fundamental matter content of the gauge theory. the nullity (resp. negativ-
ity/positivity) of this function gives a necessary condition for the nitude (resp. ir
freedom/asymptotic freedom) of the associated gauge theory. we recognise this func-
tion to be precisely the generalised cartan matrix of a (not necessarily nite) graph
and the nullity (resp. negativity) thereof, the additivity (resp. strict subadditivity) of
the graph. in the case of d = 2, such graphs are completely classied: innite dynkin
or euclidean if f = 0 and nite dynkin or a if f < 0. in physical terms, this means
that these are the only n = 2 theories with bi-fundamental matter (corollary 4.1
and observation 4.2). this slightly generalises the results of [27] by the inclusion of
innite graphs, i.e., theories with innite product gauge groups. from the mathe-
matics alone, also included are the non-simply-laced diagrams, however we still await
progress in the physics to clarify how these gauge theories may be fabricated.

for d > 2, the mathematical problem of their classication is so far unsolved.
a subclass of these, namely the orbifold theories coming from discrete subgroups
of su(n) have been addressed upto n = 4 [14, 18, 20]. a general remark we can
make about these theories is that, due to a theorem of steinberg, d-brane probes on
orbifolds can never produce a completely ir free qft (corollary 4.4).

from a more axiomatic stand, we have also investigated possible nite quivers
that may arise. in particular we have reviewed the correspondence between a quiver
and its associated path algebra. using the trichotomy theorem of representation
theory, that all nite dimensional algebras over an algebraically closed eld are of
either nite, tame or wild type, we have seen that all quivers are respectively either
in physical terms, this means that asymptotically
free and nite n = 2 sym in four dimensions respectively exhaust the only quiver
theories of respectively nite and tame type (corollary 4.2). what these particular

ade, dade or unclassiable.

23

path algebras mean in a physical context however, is yet to be ascertained. for the
last type, we have drawn a melancholy note that all other theories, and in particular,
n < 2 in four dimensions, are in general turing unclassiable (corollary 4.3).

much work remains to be accomplished.

it is the main purpose of this note,
through the eyes of a neophyte, to inform readers in each of two hitherto disparate
elds of gauge theories and axiomatic representations, of certain results from the
other. it is hoped that future activity may be prompted.

acknowledgements

ad catharinae sanctae alexandriae et ad majorem dei gloriam...
i extend my sincere gratitude to a. hanany for countless valuable suggestions and
comments on the paper. also i would like to acknowledge b. feng for extolling the
virtues of branes, l. ng, those of n-regular graphs and j. s. song, those of geomet-
rical engineering, as well as the tireless discussions these my friends and collegues
have aorded me. moreover, i am indebted to k. skenderis for helpful discussions
and his bringing [24] to my attention, n. moeller for reference [43] and n. tkachuk
for oering to translate the extensive list of russian documents in which are buried
priceless jewels. furthermore, i am thankful to the organisers of the modular invari-
ants, operator algebras and quotient singularities workshop and the mathematics
research institute of the university of warwick at conventry, u. k. for providing
the friendly atmosphere wherein much fruitful discussions concerning the unication
through ade were engaged.

indeed, i am much obliged to m. warden for charming inspirations, the ctp and

the nsf for their gracious patronage as well as the itp for her warm hospitality.

appendix

we here transcribe steinbergs proof of the semi-denity of the scalar product with
respect to the generalised cartan matrix, in the vector space v = {xi  zz+} of labels
[34]. our starting point is (2.1), which we re-write here as

rd  ri =mj

aijrj

first we note that, if i is the dual representation to i, then aij = aji by taking the
conjugates (dual) of both sides of (2.1). whence we have

lemma 5.1 for di = dim ri, ddi =pj

aijdj =pj

ajidj.

24

the rst equality is obtained directly by taking the dimension of both sides of (2.1) as
in (2.2). to see the second we have ddi = ddi (as dual representations have the same
aijdj, and then by the dual property aij = aji

dimension) which is thus equal to pj
above becomes pj
2xij

ajidj =pj
(dij  aij)xixj = 2(dxi

ajidj. qed.

now consider the following for the scalar product:

x2

i xij

aijxixj)

cijxixj = 2xij
= 2(xi
= 2xi
= xi6=j
= xi<j

(d  aii)x2

aijxixj)

i xi6=j

1
2

(

1

dixj

aijdj +

1

dixj

ajidj  aii)x2

i xi6=j

aijxixj) (by lemma 5.1)

(aij + aji)

(aij + aji)

(aij + aji)(

dj
di

x2
i +

di
dj

x2
j  2xixj)

dj
di

x2

i  2aijxixj =xi<j

(djxi  dixj)2

didj

 0

from which we conclude

proposition 5.1 (steinberg) in the vector space of positive labels, the scalar

product is positive semi-denite, i.e., pij

cijxixj  0.

references

[1] m. peskin and d. schroder, an introduction to quantum field theory,

addison-wesley 1995.

[2] a. hanany and e. witten, type iib superstrings, bps monopoles, and three-

dimensional gauge dynamics, hep-th/9611230.

[3] amihay hanany, matthew j. strassler and angel m. uranga, finite theories
and marginal operators on the brane, hep-th/9803086, jhep 9806 (1998) 011.

[4] a. hanany and a. zaaroni, on the realisation of chiral four-dimensional

gauge theories using branes, hep-th/9801134.

[5] a. hanany and a. uranga, brane boxes and branes on singularities, hep-

th/9805139.

[6] j. erlich, a. hanany, and a. naqvi, marginal deformations from branes, hep-

th/9902118.

25

[7] p. west, finite four dimensional supersymmetric theories, in problems in

unication and supergravity, aip conference proceedings, no. 116.

[8] s. ferrara and b. zumino, nucl. phys. b79 (1974) 413.

[9] m. grisaru and w. siegel, nucl. phys. b201 (1982) 292.

p. howe, k. stelle and p. west, santa barbara preprint nsf-itp-83-09.

[10] p. west, phys. lett. b137 (1984) 371.

a. parkes and p. west, phy. lett. b138 (1984) 99.
x.-d. jiang and x.-j. zhou, phys. lett. b216 (1989) 160.

[11] r. leigh and m. rozali, brane boxes, anomalies, bending and tadpoles, hep-

th/9807082.

[12] l. randall, y. shirman, and r. von unge, brane boxes: bending and beta

functions, hep-th/9806092.

[13] m. douglas and b. greene, metrics on d-brane orbifolds, hep-th/9707214.

m. douglas, b. greene, and d. morrison, orbifold resolution by d-branes,
hep-th/9704151.

[14] m. douglas and g. moore, d-branes, quivers, and ale instantons, hep-

th/9603167;
cliord v. johnson, robert c. myers, aspects of type iib theory on ale
spaces, phys.rev. d55 (1997) 6382-6393.hep-th/9610140.

[15] s. kachru and e. silverstein, 4d conformal field theories and strings on

orbifolds, hep-th/9802183.

[16] a. lawrence, n. nekrasov and c. vafa, on conformal field theories in four

dimensions, hep-th/9803015.

[17] p. frampton, and c. vafa, conformal approach to particle phenomenology,

hep-th/9903226.

[18] a. hanany and y.-h. he, non-abelian finite gauge theories,

hep-th/9811183.

[19] y.-h. he and j. s. song, of mckay correspondence, non-linear sigma-model

and conformal field theory, hep-th/9903056.

[20] a. hanany and y.-h. he, a monograph on the classication of the discrete

subgroups of su(4), hep-th/9905212.

26

[21] a. kapustin, dn quivers from branes, hep-th/9806238.

[22] b. feng, a. hanany, and y.-h. he, the zk  dk brane box model, hep-

th/9906031.
t. muto, brane congurations for three-dimensional nonabelian orbifolds,
hep-th/9905230.
b. feng, a. hanany, and y.-h. he, z-d brane box models and non-chiral
dihedral quivers, hep-th/9909125.

[23] personal correspondences with bo feng and amihay hanany.

[24] personal correspondences with kostas skenderis.

g. barnich, f. brandt, m. henneaux, local brst cohomology in einstein
yangmills theory, hep-th/9505173.
f. brandt, local brst cohomology in minimal d=4, n=1 supergravity, hep-
th/9609192.
g. barnich, m. henneaux, t. hurth, k. skenderis, cohomological analysis of
gauged-xed gauge theories, hep-th/9910201.

[25] s. katz, a. klemm and c. vafa, geometric engineering of quantum field

theories, hep-th/9609239.

[26] s.katz and c. vafa, matter from geometry, hep-th/9606086.

[27] s. katz, p. mayr and c. vafa, mirror symmetry and exact solution of 4d n=2

gauge theories i, hep-th/9706110.

[28] t. gannon, monstrous moonshine and the classication of cft,

math/9906167.

[29] s. elitzur, a. giveon, d. kutasov, e. rabinovici, and a. schwimmer, brane

dynamics and n=1 supersymmetric gauge theory, hep-th/9704104.
a. karch, d. lust, d. smith, equivalence of geometric engineering and hanany-
witten via fractional branes, hep-th/9803232.

[30] d. benson, representations and cohomology, cambridge studies in advanced

mathematics 30, cup 1991.

[31] d. benson, modular representation theory: new trends and methods, lec-

ture notes in mathematics 1081, springer-verlag 1984.

27

[32] d. simson, linear representations of partially ordered sets and vector space
categories, algebra, logic and applications series, vol 4., gordon and breach
sci. pub. (1992)

[33] j. mckay, graphs, singularities, and finite groups, proc. symp. pure math.

37, 183-186 (1980).

[34] r. steinberg, finite subgroups of su2, dynkin diagrams and ane coxeter

elements, pacic j. of math. 118, no. 2, 1985.

[35] p. gabriel, unzerlegbare darstellugen i, manuscripta math. 6 (1972) 71-103.

[36] p. gabriel, indecomposable representations ii, symposia mathematica, vol. xi
(convegno di algebra commutativa, indam, rome, 1971), pp81-104. academic
press, london, 1973.

[37] i. n. bernstein, i. m. gelfand, v. a. ponomarev, coxeter functors and

gabriels theorem, russian math. surveys, 28, (1973) ii.

[38] l. a. nazarova and a. v. roiter, polyquivers and dynkin schemes, functional

anal. appl. 7 (1973/4) p252-253.

[39] l. a. nazarova, s. a. ovsienko, and a. v. roiter, polyquivers of finite type

(russian) trudy mat. inst. steklov. 148 (1978), pp190-194, 277;
l. nazarova,  polyquivers of innite type (russian) trudy mat. inst. steklov.
148 (1978), pp175-189, 275;
l. nazarova, s. ovsienko, and a. roiter, polyquivers of a finite type (russian)
akad. nauk ukrain. ssr inst. mat. preprint no. 23 (1977), pp17-23l
l. nazarova, representations of polyquivers of tame type (russian) zap.
naucn. sem. leningrad. otdel. mat. inst. steklov. (lomi) 71 (1977), pp181-206,
286.

[40] i. m. gelfand and v. a. ponomarev, quadruples of subspaces of a finite-

dimensional vector space, soviet math. dokl. vol 12 (1971) no. 2;
i. m. gelfand and v. a. ponomarev, problems of linear algebra and classi-
cation of quadruples of subspaces in a finite-dimensional vector space, in
colloquia mathematica societatis janos bolyai, no. 5: hilbert space operators
and operator algebras, ed. bela sz.-nagy north-holland pub. comp. (1972);
c. m. ringel and k. w. roggenkamp, indecomposable representations of or-
ders and dynkin diagrams, c. r. math. rep. acad. sci. canada, vol 1, no. 2
(1979).

28

[41] v. dlab and c. ringel, on algebras of finite representation type, j. of

algebra, vol 33, (1975) pp306-394.

[42] w. baur, decidability and undecidability of theories of abelian groups with

predicates for subgroups, compositio math. 31 (9175) pp23-30.
a. i. kokorin and v. i. martyanov, universal extended theories, algebra,
irkutsk (1963) pp107-114.

[43] j.-p. sartre, letre et le neant, essai dontologie phenonenologique.

[44] j. mckay,

semi-ane coxeter-dynkin graphs and g  su2(c),

math/9907089.

[45] p. donovan and m. freislich, the representation theory of finite graphs and

associated algebras, carleton mathematical lecture notes no. 5, oct 1973.

[46] j. smith, some properties of the spectrum of a graph, proc. of 1969 calgary

conference on combinatorial structures and their applications, 1970, pp403406

29

