runhetc-99-42
hep-th/9911147

9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
8
1

 

 
 

1
v
7
4
1
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

a brief review of little string theories

ofer aharony

department of physics and astronomy
rutgers university
piscataway, nj 088550849, usa

abstract.

this is a brief review of the current state of knowledge on little string theories,
which are non-gravitational theories having several string-like properties. we focus
on the six dimensional maximally supersymmetric little string theories and describe
their denition, some of their simple properties, the motivations for studying them,
the dlcq and holographic constructions of these theories and their behaviour at nite
energy density. (contribution to the proceedings of strings 99 in potsdam, germany.)

1. introduction

one of the most surprising results which came out of the developments in string theory
in the last few years is the existence of consistent non-gravitational theories in ve
and six space-time dimensions, even though no consistent lagrangians are known for
interacting theories in these dimensions. generally these theories have been discovered
by considering some limit of string theory congurations involving 5-branes and/or
singularities. the higher dimensional non-gravitational theories may be divided into
two classes. one class, which generally arises from a low-energy limit of string theory
(or m theory), includes superconformal eld theories in ve and six dimensions. these
theories seem to be standard local eld theories, even though they have no good
lagrangian description (they are sometimes called tensionless string theories since
many of them have bps-saturated strings on their moduli space whose tensions go to
zero at the conformal point). we will not discuss these theories here. the other class
of theories, which was given the name little string theories (lsts) by [1], is generally
obtained by taking the string coupling to zero in some conguration of ns 5-branes
and/or singularities which is not well-described by perturbation theory, and which in fact
remains non-trivial (but decoupled from gravity) even after taking the string coupling
to zero. the string scale ms remains constant in this limit and plays an important role
in the dynamics of these theories; they appear to be non-local theories with some string
theory-like properties. in this contribution i will try to summarize all that is currently
 supersymmetry plays an essential role in proving the existence of these theories, it is not clear if
non-supersymmetric theories also exist above four dimensions or not.

a brief review of little string theories

2

known about the simplest theories of this type, which are six dimensional theories with
16 supercharges arising as the gs  0 limit of ns 5-branes in type iia or type iib string
theory. there are many interesting results on lower dimensional lsts, lsts with less
supersymmetry and compactications of lsts, that i will not have room to review here.
the transparencies and audio for this talk are available at [2].

1.1. denition and simple properties of little string theories

the simplest denition of six dimensional lsts with 16 supercharges comes from looking
at k parallel and overlapping ns 5-branes in type iia or type iib string theory, with
k > 1, and taking the string coupling gs  0 [3] (see also [4, 5]). the gravitational
interactions go to zero in this limit, but the couplings of the elds associated with the ns
5-branes remain non-trivial even after taking gs to zero; this can be seen, for instance,
by analyzing the low-energy theory (as described below). the string scale ms is kept
nite in the limit, and it is the only parameter of the lsts (except for the discrete
parameter k); in particular, there is no continuous dimensionless coupling parameter
in these theories, so unlike conventional string theories they have no obvious weakly
coupled limits which can serve as the starting point for a perturbative expansion. the
ns 5-branes break half of the supersymmetry of type ii string theories, and thus there
are no forces between them and we can indeed put k of them on top of each other. in
six dimensions (like in ten or two dimensions) supersymmetry is generally chiral, and
the dimensional reduction of type ii string theory to six dimensions has n = (2, 2)
supersymmetry.
in the type iia case the ns 5-branes preserve a chiral half of the
supersymmetry so the resulting lst has n = (2, 0) supersymmetry, while in the type
iib case it has n = (1, 1) supersymmetry.

we can obtain equivalent denitions of the lsts by using various duality
symmetries. using the duality between type iia string theory and m theory we see
that the (2, 0) lst can also be derived from k 5-branes in m theory, with a transverse
circle of radius r, in the limit r  0, mp   with rm 3
s kept constant. using
s-duality in type iib we see that the (1, 1) lst can be derived from the gs   limit
of k d5-branes in type iib string theory.

p = m 2

additional denitions arise from recalling that k ns 5-branes with a transverse
circle are t-dual to an ak1 singularity with a compact circle [6], and noting that the
existence of such a circle does not aect the decoupled theory on the ns 5-branes (it
aects only the bulk modes which decouple when gs  0). thus, by using this t-duality,
we conclude that the (2, 0) lsts arise also as the gs  0 limit of type iib string theory
on an ak1 singularity, and the (1, 1) lsts arise also as the gs  0 limit of type iia
string theory on an ak1 singularity. the last denition suggests a generalization to
the gs  0 limit of dn and en type singularities, which also correspond to lsts with
 there is a subtlety here involving the degree of freedom corresponding to the center of mass position
of the ns 5-branes which is not evident in the t-dual picture, generally we can ignore this degree of
freedom since it is free and decoupled.

a brief review of little string theories

3

16 supercharges; we will not discuss these theories in detail here, but let us note that
the full classication of lsts in six dimensions with 16 supercharges includes theories
with (2, 0) and (1, 1) supersymmetry of type g (where g = ak, dk or ek) for any
simply-laced lie algebra g.

some simple properties of the lsts with 16 supercharges follow from the above

denitions :

(i) low-energy behaviour : for the (2, 0) lsts it follows from the m theory denition
that the low-energy behaviour (well below the characteristic scale ms) is given by
the low-energy theory on k m5-branes, which is an n = (2, 0) superconformal
theory (see, e.g., [7]). for the (1, 1) lsts it follows from the denition using
d5-branes in type iib string theory that the low-energy behaviour is given by an
n = (1, 1) u(k) gauge theory whose gauge coupling is g2
s . for large k,
t hooft scaling suggests that the perturbative gauge theory (which is free at low
energies) breaks down at an energy squared scale of order 1/g2

y m = 1/m 2

y m k = m 2

s /k.

(ii) the moduli space metric of theories with 16 supercharges cannot receive any
quantum corrections. for the (1, 1) lsts the type iib constructions show that
it is r4k/sk, corresponding to the transverse positions of the k identical 5-branes.
for the (2, 0) lsts the m theory construction shows that it is (r4s 1)k/sk, where
the radius of the s 1 is m 2
s (recall that the canonical dimension of a scalar eld in
six dimensions is two). the low-energy theory at generic points in the moduli space
involves k tensor multiplets in the (2, 0) case and k vector multiplets in the (1, 1)
case.

(iii) type iia string theory on a circle of radius r is t-dual to type iib string theory on
a circle of radius 1/m 2
s r, and an ns 5-brane wrapped on the circle is transformed
under this duality to an ns 5-brane wrapped on the dual circle. thus, t-duality
commutes with the limit dening the lsts, and the (2, 0) ak1 lst compactied
on a circle of radius r is dual to the type (1, 1) ak1 lst compactied on a circle of
s r. similarly, the lsts compactied on t d have an o(d, d, z) t-duality
radius 1/m 2
symmetry. note that this shows that t-duality can exist even in non-gravitational
theories. the existence of such a t-duality symmetry is the rst indication we see
that the lsts are non-local; in particular, after toroidal compactication, they do
not have a unique energy-momentum tensor (the same theory can be coupled to
dierent gravitational backgrounds).

(iv) all lsts have bps-saturated strings of tension t = m 2

s (at the origin of moduli
space; in some cases there are more bps-saturated strings away from the origin).
these may be viewed as marginally bound states of fundamental strings with the
ns 5-branes. at the origin of moduli space, the (2, 0) lst has no other bps states,
while in the (1, 1) lst the low-energy gluons (and their superpartners) are massless
bps particles. after compactication there are many additional bps states which
we will not discuss here (see, e.g., [3]).

a brief review of little string theories

4

1.2. motivations

at rst sight there is no reason to be interested in little string theories, since they are
neither directly relevant for studying quantum eld theories (being non-local theories)
nor for studying quantum gravity (being non-gravitational theories). however, the very
fact that these theories are, in some sense, intermediate between local eld theories
and standard string theories means that they may be able to teach us about both.
for example, the fact that lsts have some string theory-like properties, like t-duality
and a hagedorn spectrum (to be discussed below), means that such properties can
appear also in non-gravitational theories, and it may be easier to understand them in
that context. the existence of non-gravitational lorentz-invariant theories which are
intrinsically non-local is very interesting in itself, and it would be nice to know how to
dene these theories and what is the proper way to think about them.
some more concrete motivations for studying these theories are :

(i) the original construction of lsts was motivated by the fact that they (or rather
their compactication on t 5) arise as the discrete light-cone quantization (dlcq)
of m theory on t 5 [4] with k units of longitudinal momentum.

(ii) compactications of the lsts lead to many interesting local and non-local eld
theories. for example, the low-energy limit of the lsts on t 2 gives four dimensional
n = 4 sym theories, and the compactication of lsts on other manifolds gives
theories related to qcd [8].

(iii) as we will see in the next section, the lsts are a rare example of a theory whose
discrete light-cone quantization (dlcq) is simple, and we can use it as a toy model
to learn about dlcq.

(iv) as we will see in section 3, linear dilaton backgrounds of string theory seem to
be holographically dual to lsts, and thus studying lsts can teach us about
holography in linear dilaton backgrounds (and perhaps give us clues about how
to dene holography in general backgrounds).

2. dlcq constructions

the denitions of lsts given above have not been useful so far for making any explicit
computations in these theories, so one would like to have more direct denitions of
the lsts. the rst such denition was found using discrete light-cone quantization
(dlcq), which is a quantization of the theory compactied on a light-like circle of
radius r with n units of momentum around the compact circle. in the large n limit
the momentum around the circle becomes eectively continuous, and it is believed that
all six dimensional results may be reproduced. the advantage of dlcq comes from the
fact that negative-momentum modes decouple in the light-cone frame, so the dynamics
involves just the positive-momentum modes (for example it can only involve a nite
number of particles). to derive a dlcq theory we need to exactly integrate out the
zero modes of elds (carrying no momentum in the compact direction), which is usually

a brief review of little string theories

5

complicated. however, there is a small class of theories where one can derive the exact
dlcq theory, since they have enough supersymmetry to determine the lagrangian after
integrating out the zero modes, and the six dimensional lsts fall into this class.

the dlcq of lsts may be derived either by following seibergs prescription of
regarding the dlcq as the limit of a compactication on a small space-like circle [9],
or by starting from m(atrix) theory, which is the dlcq of string theory or m theory,
in congurations with 5-branes or singularities, and taking the limit dening the lsts.
all the derivations lead to the same result and they are detailed in the literature (and
reviewed in [10]), we will present here only the result.

the dlcq of the ak1 (2, 0) lst with n units of momentum is [11, 12] the 1 + 1
dimensional n = (4, 4) supersymmetric sigma model on the 4nk-dimensional moduli
space of n instantons in su(k) (on r4), compactied on a circle of radius  = 1/rm 2
s .
equivalently (by the adhm construction), it is the conformal theory describing the
low-energy limit of the higgs branch of the n = (4, 4) u(n) sqcd theory with an
adjoint hypermultiplet and k hypermultiplets in the fundamental representation. the
moduli space of instantons is singular, but the sigma model on it seems to make sense.
the spectrum of chiral operators of the (2, 0) lst may be computed in this description
(a similar computation in the 0 + 1 dimensional sigma model on the moduli space of
instantons was performed in [13]).

for the ak1 (1, 1) lsts it turns out to be complicated to write down the usual
dlcq, but simple to write down a dlcq with a wilson line of the low-energy u(k)
gauge group around the light-like circle [14, 15, 10].
in the large n limit the eect
of the wilson line is expected to disappear. the dlcq with the wilson line is the
conformal theory which arises as the low-energy limit of the coulomb branch of the
1 + 1 dimensional n = (4, 4) u(n)k gauge theory with bifundamental hypermultiplets
for adjacent groups (when we arrange the k gauge groups in a circle, as in a quiver
diagram). again, the conformal theory is compactied on a circle of radius  = 1/m 2
s r.
removing the wilson line corresponds to taking some of the gauge couplings to innity
before taking the low-energy limit.

the dlcq gives us an explicit non-perturbative denition of the little string
theories, enabling us in principle to compute all their states and correlation functions.
unfortunately, in practice such computations are extremely dicult; the conformal
theories involved are very complicated even before we take the large n limit, and we have
to take this limit to obtain results about the lsts in six dimensions. thus, no dynamical
computations have been made so far using the dlcq, but only identications of some
operators and states (see, e.g., [13, 10]). as usual in dlcq, it is quite complicated to
study other points on the moduli space of the lsts or compactications, both of which
lead to quite dierent dlcq theories. for example, the dlcq of the (2, 0) ak1 theory
at a generic point on its moduli space is given by the deformation of the higgs branch
scft described above by generic masses for the k hypermultiplets in the fundamental
representation (which is a relevant deformation of the higgs branch scft).

a brief review of little string theories

6

3. holographic constructions

the second useful construction of lsts is a holographic dual along the lines of the
ads/cft correspondence; unlike the previous construction this one cannot serve
as a denition of the lsts since we have no non-perturbative denition of the
string/m theory backgrounds that are involved, but it seems to be more useful in
computing correlation functions in the lsts (at least at low energies). the ads/cft
correspondence [16, 18, 17, 19] states that local conformal eld theories are often dual
to string/m theory compactications including ads spaces, and it was generalized to
some other classes of local eld theories as well (though these are often dual to spaces
with regions of high curvature). however, there is no reason for general backgrounds of
string/m theory (or any other theory of quantum gravity) to be holographically dual to
a local eld theory, and it seems likely that the theory which is holographically dual to
quantum gravity in minkowski space is highly non-local. lsts provide the rst example
of holography for a non-local non-gravitational theory, and it turns out that generally
lst-like theories are holographically dual to backgrounds which asymptote to string
theory in a linear dilaton background [20].

as in the ads/cft correspondence, the space which is holographically dual to
lsts may be derived by starting from the string theory background corresponding to
ns 5-branes and taking the limit of gs  0 (where gs is the asymptotic string coupling)
which denes the lsts [20, 21, 22]. for (2, 0) lsts the correct procedure is actually
to start from the background corresponding to m5-branes with a transverse circle, as
described above, since a background of ns 5-branes in string theory does not correspond
to a conguration which is localized in the s 1 coordinates of the moduli space. starting
with such a background and taking the appropriate limit leads to the space

p ds2 = h1/3dx2
l2

6 + h 2/3(dx2

11 + du 2 + u 2d2

3),

(3.1)

6 is the metric on r6, d2

3 is the metric on s 3, x11 is compactied on a circle

where dx2
with radius m 2
s ,

h =


x
j=

k

(u 2 + (x11  2jm 2

s )2)3/2 ,

(3.2)

and there are also k units of 4-form ux on s 3  s 1. m theory compactied on this
space is holographically dual to the ak1 (2, 0) lst.

the space (3.1) is quite complicated, but it simplies in the asymptotic regions
of space. for small u and x11 the space (3.1) becomes just ads7  s 4, which is
holographically dual to the (2, 0) scfts, as expected since these scfts are the low-
energy limit of the (2, 0) lsts. for large u the physical radius of the x11 circle becomes
very small and it is more appropriate to view the background as a type iia string theory
compactication. dening a new variable  by l2
simply

su = ke/kls, the string metric is

ds2

string = dx2

6 + d2 + kl2

sd2
3,

(3.3)

a brief review of little string theories

with a linear dilaton in the  direction,

gs() = e/kls,

7

(3.4)

and k units of 3-form ux on the s 3. note that for large k the curvatures are small
everywhere, so supergravity is a good approximation at low energies. even though the
behaviour of this space near the boundary is very dierent from that of ads space, it
seems that the same principles apply also in this case; for example, as in ads/cft,
correlation functions in the lsts are identied with the response of string/m theory
on the background (3.1) to turning on boundary values for non-normalizable modes of
the elds. in the space (3.1) some of these modes are just the incoming and outgoing
waves in the  direction, so that some correlation functions of the lst correspond to
the s-matrix for scattering in the  direction.

similarly, the type (1, 1) lsts are holographically dual to the near-horizon limit
of type iib ns 5-branes; unfortunately this background becomes singular for small u
(there is no analog of the m theory region in (3.1)) so this description is less useful
for computations of correlation functions, but it can still be used for identifying the
operators and some states of these lsts as described below.

the holographic description of the lsts is useful for :

(i) as in the ads/cft correspondence, some correlation functions may be computed
using supergravity.
in this case the supergravity approximation is valid for the
(2, 0) lsts at large k and at energies well below the string scale ms, where stringy
corrections in the background (3.3) become important. the computation of the
2-point function of the energy-momentum tensor in the lsts was described in [23],
and it is possible to compute also other correlation functions (though the actual
computations are quite complicated).
in particular, supergravity gives an exact
description of the analog of the t hooft limit for the (2, 0) lsts, in which ms and
k are taken to innity with the scale m 2
s /k (which in the (1, 1) case is the inverse
t hooft gauge coupling) kept constant.

(ii) a big dierence between the background (3.1) and backgrounds which are dual to
other eld theories is that near the boundary of (3.1) the string coupling goes to
zero and the curvatures are small, so one can compute the spectrum of elds exactly
(and not just for large k as in other cases). the full spectrum of chiral elds in the
lsts was computed in this way in [20], and turned out to be exactly the same for
all values of k (in the ak1 case) as the spectrum of chiral elds in the eld theories
which arise as the low-energy limit of the lsts.

(iii) the holographic description can be used to reliably compute some of the states in
the lsts, which are states propagating in the weakly coupled region of (3.1). for
example, one has the states in the supergraviton multiplet propagating with some
momentum in the  direction, and these look like a continuum of states from the
six dimensional point of view (the mass shell condition relates the 6-dimensional
momentum to the -momentum but it does not determine its magnitude). it turns
out that for the states in the supergravity multiplet this continuum of states starts

a brief review of little string theories

8

at a scale of order m 2  m 2
s /k, while other string states in the weak coupling
region also give rise to continuous spectra in the lst, starting at higher values of
m 2. the implications of the existence of this continuum are not clear. the same
continuum of states can also be seen in the dlcq formalism [10], where it is related
to the continuum of states found in sigma models on orbifold singularities with zero
theta angle.

(iv) the holographic description can be used to analyze the behaviour at nite

temperature and energy density, as discussed in the next section.

4. behaviour at nite energy density

we have already seen some indications that lsts are not local eld theories, but the
strongest indication for this seems to come from analyzing the equation of state of the
lsts at nite temperature or energy density. for local eld theories the high-energy
behaviour of the density of states is always an exponential of a power of the energy
density which is less than one, while for the lsts we will see that it is exponential in
the energy density.

the most reliable way to compute the equation of state of the lsts is to use their
holographic description. holographic dualities relate nite temperature states of non-
gravitational theories to black hole congurations, with the hawking temperature of
the black hole equated with the eld theory temperature, and the eld theory energy
equated with the mass of the black hole. the entropy of such black holes can be
computed by the usual bekenstein-hawking formula which relates it to their area. in
the case of lsts the appropriate black holes (at large enough energy densities) are the
near-horizon limits of near-extremal ns5-branes and this computation was rst done in
this context in [24]. the result is

e = ths; th  ms/6k,

(4.1)

and it is reliable when the curvatures in the black hole background are small (requiring
k  1) and when the string coupling at the black hole horizon is small (recall that
the string coupling becomes weaker and weaker as one goes towards the boundary),
requiring that the energy density   e/v satises   km 6
s . thus, we nd that for
large k and large energy densities the equation of state is hagedorn-like, corresponding
to a limiting temperature in the theory of th  ms/6k; above some energy density

which is smaller than km 6
no longer increases the temperature, which remains t = th.

s the specic heat diverges and increasing the energy density

this behaviour is similar to the behaviour of single-string states in free string theory,
where th  ms; however, in string theory it is believed (at least in some cases) that
at the temperature th there is a phase transition to a dierent phase where a state
becoming massless at t = th condenses [25], while in the lsts there is no evidence
for any states becoming massless at t = th , so it seems that th is really a limiting
temperature (and the canonical ensemble cannot be dened beyond this temperature).

a brief review of little string theories

9

it would be nice to reproduce the behaviour (4.1) also in the dlcq description of
the lsts, but this seems rather dicult. the behaviour (4.1) is, in fact, reproduced
by a naive counting of the density of states in the dlcq description [26], but the
relevant states are really only those whose energy scales as 1/n in the large n limit,
and identifying all these states is much more dicult. some states whose energy scales
as 1/n were identied in [10], and they correspond to a density of states in space-time

which is exponential but with a smaller exponent corresponding to th  ms/12; it

would be interesting to identify in the dlcq the other states which give rise to (4.1).
it is not clear how to interpret the exponential behaviour of the equation of state in
the lsts. the fact that the density of states depends only on the energy and not on the
volume suggests that generic high-energy states are single-object congurations, perhaps
similar to long, space-lling strings. it is not yet known at which energy density the
behaviour (4.1) begins, and what is the equation of state in the regime  < m 6
s (which
is relevant, in particular, for the t hooft limit of the lsts described above).

general arguments (with some assumptions about the behaviour of generic
operators in the lsts) suggest that the behaviour (4.1) implies the non-existence of
correlation functions of operators at separations smaller than t 1
h . presumably, there
are no local operators in these theories, but only operators smeared on distance scales
of at least t 1
h . computations in the holographic formulation give correlation functions
of operators (which are naively local) in momentum space, but it seems that the fourier
transform of the results to position space does not exist for small separations [27],
consistent with this non-locality. note that the scale of non-locality suggested by these
arguments is dierent (by a factor of order k) from the scale of non-locality suggested
by the t-duality symmetry.

5. future directions

much progress has been made in the last few years in understanding little string
theories, but many open questions remain. some interesting open questions are :

(i) the behaviour of lsts at high energies is clearly not governed by a eld theoretical
xed point, and it is interesting to understand what the high-energy behaviour
is. there are some indications that the theory becomes weakly coupled at high
energies, such as the fact that in the holographic description the string coupling
vanishes near the boundary, and that the string coupling is small everywhere in the
holographic dual of the theory at high energy densities. it would be interesting to
understand if there is some sense in which the theory becomes weakly coupled at
high energies (perhaps as in asymptotically free eld theories) and if there is any
simple description of the high-energy limit.

(ii) the behaviour at intermediate energy scales, such as those governed by the t hooft

limit (where we take large k and look at energies of order e  ms/k), is still

not clear. in principle correlation functions at these scales may be computed from
supergravity, but so far it is not known if their behaviour (and the behaviour of the

a brief review of little string theories

10

equation of state in this regime) is more like a eld theory (and, if so, which eld
theory ?) or more like a string theory.

(iii) we have not had a chance to discuss here lsts in lower dimensions or with less
it would be interesting to try to classify these theories and to
supersymmetry.
see if they are similar to the six dimensional lsts described above or not.
it
is also interesting to analyze compactications of the lsts, which give rise to
many interesting theories. unlike local eld theories, the behaviour of non-local
eld theories upon compactication is not determined by the behaviour of the
uncompactied theory, so it should be studied independently and may reveal new
results. in particular, the large k behaviour of the t 5 compactication of the lsts
is related to m(atrix) theory on t 5, and it would be interesting to understand it
further and to identify the states whose energy scales as 1/k in the large k limit.

it has recently been suggested [28, 29, 30] that the holographic description of lsts
becomes weakly coupled if one looks at particular congurations which are far out on
the lst moduli space. for example, congurations in the (1, 1) theory where the low-
energy u(k) gauge theory is broken at a scale mw were argued to have a perturbation
expansion in ms/mw , which can be used to reliably compute correlation functions in
these theories (far out on the moduli space) at energies well below mw (but potentially
above the scales ms and ms/k).
if perturbation theory is indeed reliable in these
congurations it would be very interesting to use them for various computations, and
to see what they can teach us about the lsts.

acknowledgments

i would like to thank t. banks, m. berkooz, s. kachru, d. kutasov, n. seiberg and
e. silverstein for enjoyable collaboration and discussions on the results presented here.
this research is supported in part by doe grant de-fg02-96er40559.

references

[1] a. losev, g. moore and s.l. shatashvili, nucl. phys. b522 (1998) 105, hep-th/9707250.
[2] http://strings99.aei-potsdam.mpg.de/cgi-bin/viewit.cgi?speaker=aharony.
[3] n. seiberg, phys. lett. b408 (1997) 98, hep-th/9705221.
[4] m. berkooz, m. rozali and n. seiberg, phys. lett. b408 (1997) 105, hep-th/9704089.
[5] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde and h. verlinde, nucl. phys. b486 (1997) 77, hep-th/9603126; nucl.

phys. b486 (1997) 89, hep-th/9604055.

[6] h. ooguri and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 55, hep-th/9511164.
[7] n. seiberg, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 67 (1998) 158, hep-th/9705117.
[8] e. witten, nucl. phys. b507 (1997) 658, hep-th/9706109.
[9] n. seiberg, phys. rev. lett. 79 (1997) 3577, hep-th/9710009.
[10] o. aharony and m. berkooz, jhep 10 (1999) 030, hep-th/9909101.
[11] o. aharony, m. berkooz, s. kachru, n. seiberg and e. silverstein, adv. theor. math. phys. 1

(1998) 148, hep-th/9707079.

[12] e. witten, jhep 07 (1997) 003, hep-th/9707093.

a brief review of little string theories

11

[13] o. aharony, m. berkooz and n. seiberg, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 119, hep-th/9712117.
[14] s. sethi, nucl. phys. b523 (1998) 158, hep-th/9710005.
[15] o.j. ganor and s. sethi, jhep 01 (1998) 007, hep-th/9712071.
[16] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200.
[17] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 253, hep-th/9802150.
[18] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.m. polyakov, phys. lett. b428 (1998) 105, hep-th/9802109.
[19] o. aharony, s.s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri and y. oz, hep-th/9905111, to appear in

phys. rep.

[20] o. aharony, m. berkooz, d. kutasov and n. seiberg, jhep 10 (1998) 004, hep-th/9808149.
[21] n. itzhaki, j.m. maldacena, j. sonnenschein and s. yankielowicz, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 046004,

hep-th/9802042.

[22] h.j. boonstra, k. skenderis and p.k. townsend, jhep 01 (1999) 003, hep-th/9807137.
[23] s. minwalla and n. seiberg, jhep 06 (1999) 007, hep-th/9904142.
[24] j.m. maldacena and a. strominger, jhep 12 (1997) 008, hep-th/9710014.
[25] j.j. atick and e. witten, nucl. phys. b310 (1988) 291.
[26] o. aharony and t. banks, jhep 03 (1999) 016, hep-th/9812237.
[27] a.w. peet and j. polchinski, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 065011, hep-th/9809022.
[28] a. giveon, d. kutasov and o. pelc, jhep 10 (1999) 035, hep-th/9907178.
[29] a. giveon and d. kutasov, jhep 10 (1999) 034, hep-th/9909110.
[30] a. giveon and d. kutasov, hep-th/9911039.

