preprint typeset in jhep style. - paper version

hep-th/9911067
runhetc-99-34

m theory and cosmology

tom banks

department of physics and astronomy
rutgers university, piscataway, nj 08855-0849
e-mail: banks@physics.rutgers.edu

abstract: this is a series of lectures on m-theory for cosmologists. after summarizing
some of the main properties of m-theory and its dualities i show how it can be used to
address various fundamental and phenomenological issues in cosmology.

keywords: string duality, superstring vacua.

9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
0
1

 

 
 

1
v
7
6
0
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

contents

1.

introduction

2. m-theory, branes, moduli and all that

2.1 the story of m

3. eleven dimensional supergravity

4. forms, branes and bps states

4.1 dierential forms and topologically nontrivial cycles
4.2 susy algebras and bps states

5. branes and compactication

5.1 a tale of two tori
5.2 an heterotic interlude
5.3 enhanced gauge symmetries
5.4 conclusions

6. quantum cosmology

6.1 semiclassical cosmology and quantum gravity
6.2 extreme moduli
6.3 the moduli space of m-theory on rectangular tori
6.4 the 2/5 transformation
6.5 the boundaries of moduli space
6.6 covering the moduli space
6.7 moduli spaces with less susy
6.8 chaotically avoiding susy
6.9 against ination
6.10 conclusions

7. moduli and ination

introduction

7.1
7.2 moduli as inatons?
7.3 radius stabilization
7.4 susy breaking
7.5 the eects of a dynamical radius

1

2

6
6

15

18
18
21

22
22
29
31
34

34
34
42
44
45
46
49
52
54
56
60

60
60
61
68
72
76

7.6 generalizing horava-witten
7.7 conclusions

77
78

1. introduction

this is a series of lectures on superstring/m-theory for cosmologists. it is denitely not
a technical introduction to m-theory and almost all technical details will be omitted.
a secondary aim of these lectures (or rather the lecture notes  for there will probably
not be many professional string theorists at the actual sessions) is to proselytize for a
certain point of view about m-theory, which is not the conventional wisdom. a crude
statement of this point of view is that many of the key questions of m-theory can
be asked only in the cosmological context, in particular the central phenomenological
question of vacuum selection. i also believe that some of the fundamental structure
of m-theory, and the relation between quantum mechanics and spacetime geometry is
obscured when one tries to study only poincare invariant vacuum states of the theory,
and ignore cosmological questions. the latter ideas are very speculative however, and
i will not discuss them here.

the classic justication of string theorists for studying states of m-theory with
d  4 poincare invariance, in a world which is evidently cosmological, is that the uni-
verse we observe is locally approaching a poincare invariant vacuum. many of the
properties of the world should be well approximated by those of a poincare invariant
state. it is a philosophy rooted in particle physics, and we shall see that it has been
quite successful in m-theory as well. one of the key features of such states is that
they can have superselection sectors (a special case of which is the phenomenon of
spontaneous breaking of global symmetries). there can be dierent poincare invariant
states in the same theory which do not communicate with each other in the following
sense: certain nite energy excitations of poincare invariant vacua can be classied as
asymptotic states of a number of species of particles. states with any nite number
of particles dier from the vacuum only in a local vicinity of the particles asymptotic
trajectories (this is more or less the cluster property). we can construct the scattering
matrix for particle excitations of a given vacuum state and it is unitary. no initial mul-
tiparticle excitation of a given vacuum ever scatters to produce excitations of another 1.
in supersymmetric (susy) theories it is quite common to have superselection sectors

1i have taken pains here not to use arguments from local eld theory, which can be only approximate

in m-theory.

2

that are not related by a symmetry. a single theory can produce many dierent kinds
of physics, which means that it does not make denite predictions.

in the early days of string theory, when the vast vacuum degeneracy of string
perturbation theory was discovered, it was hoped that nonperturbative eects would
either lift the degeneracy or show us that many of the apparent classical ground states
were inconsistent (as e.g. an su(2) gauge theory with an odd number of isospin one half
fermions is inconsistent). from the earliest times there were arguments that this was
unlikely to be true for those highly supersymmetric ground states which least resemble
the real world. recent discoveries in string duality and m-theory make it virtually
impossible to believe that these archaic hopes will be realized.

from the very beginning i have argued (mostly in private) that the resolution of
this degeneracy would only come from the study of cosmology2. that is, the physics
that determines the correct poincare invariant vacuum took place in the very early
history of the universe. to understand it one will have to understand initial conditions,
and not just stability criteria for possible endpoints of cosmological evolution. not too
much progress has been made along these lines, but there are not many people thinking
about the problem (i myself have probably devoted a total of no more than two years
since 1984 to this issue.). nonetheless, i hope to convince you that it is a promising
area of study.

associated with the vacuum degeneracy, there are massless excitations. i do not
have an argument for this which does not depend on an eective eld theory approx-
imation. in eective eld theory, the vacuum degeneracy is parametrized by the zero
modes of a collection of scalar elds (which we will call the moduli elds or simply
the moduli3) with no potential. fields like this spell trouble for phenomenology. it is
dicult to nd arguments that they couple signicantly more weakly than gravity (see
however [19]), and there is no reason for them to couple universally. thus, they should
aect the orbits of the planets and eotvos-dicke experiments.

on the other hand, we know that susy is broken in the real world, and then there
is no reason for scalar elds to remain massless. this however does not eliminate all of
the problems and opportunities associated with the moduli. first of all, one can argue
that the potential for the moduli vanishes in many dierent, phenomenologically unac-

2the earliest conversation of this type that i remember was with dan friedan and took place in

1986 or 1987.

3the term moduli space is used by mathematicians to describe multiparameter families of solutions
to some mathematical equations or conditions. thus one speaks of the moduli space of riemann
surfaces of genus g or the moduli space of solutions to the x equation. physicists have adopted
this language to describe spaces of degenerate ground states of certain supersymmetric theories. we
will be making a further abuse of the terminology in our discussion of cosmology.

3

ceptable, extreme regions of moduli space, where supersymmetry is restored. examples
of such regions are weakly coupled susy string compactications and regions where
the world has more than four large dimensions. a quite general argument [55] shows
that one cannot nd a stable minimum of the system by any systematic expansion in
the small parameters which characterize those extreme regions. either one must accept
the possibility of dierent orders in an asymptotic expansion being equally important
in a region where the expansion parameter is small, or one is led to expect that the
moduli vary with time on cosmological time scales. the latter option typically leads
to unacceptable time variation of the constants of nature. of course, it might also
provide interesting models of the fashionable quintessence [9], if these diculties can
be overcome.

even if one nds a stable minimum for the modular potential there are still di-
culties. these are a consequence of additional assumptions about the nature of susy
breaking. it is usually assumed that susy has something to do with the solution of
the gauge hierarchy problem of the standard model. if so, the masses of superpartners
of quarks should not be more than a few tev and one can show that this implies that
the fundamental scale of susy breaking cannot be larger than about 1011 gev. one
then nds that the moduli typically have masses and lifetimes which are such that the
universe is matter dominated at the time nucleosynthesis should have been occurring.
this is the cosmological moduli problem. there have been several solutions proposed
for it, which are discussed below. on the other hand, there has been much recent in-
terest in models with very low scales of susy breaking. these include gauge mediated
models and models with tev scale planck/string mass and large extra dimensions4
here the cosmological moduli problem is more severe, though a recent paper claims
that it can be solved by thermal ination [18].

another potential problem with moduli was pointed out by [54]. since the susy
breaking scale is smaller by orders of magnitude than the natural scale of the vacuum
energy during ination (in most models) one must nd an explanation of the discrep-
ancy. a favored one has been that the true vacuum lies fairly deep in an extreme region
of moduli space, typically the region of weak string coupling. the universe then be-
gins its history at an energy density many orders of magnitude larger than the barrier
which separates the true vacuum from the region of extremely weak coupling where
time dependent fundamental parameters and unwanted massless particles destroy any
possibility of describing the world we see. why doesnt it overshoot the true vacuum
and end up in the weak coupling regime? we will discuss a cosmology at the end of

4the latter are often discussed without reference to susy, since the hierarchy problem is solved
by the low planck scale. however, if they are to be embedded into m-theory they must have susy,
broken at the tev scale.

4

these lectures that resolves this problem.

not all the news is bad. one of the things i hope to convince you of in these lectures
is that m-theory moduli are the most natural candidates in the world for inaton elds.
the suggestion that moduli are inatons was rst made in [24]. the word natural is used
here more or less in its technical eld theoretic sense; that large dimensionless constants
in an eective lagrangian require some sort of dynamical explanation. for moduli, in
order to get n e-foldings of slow roll ination one needs dimensionless parameters of
order 1/n in the lagrangian. another interesting point is that with moduli as inatons,
the scale of the vacuum energy that is required to explain the amplitude of primordial
density uctuations is the same as the most favored value of the unication scale for
couplings and close to the scale determining the dimension ve operator that gives rise
to neutrino masses. these numbers t best into an m-theory picture similar in gross
detail to that rst proposed by witten [44] in the context of the horava-witten [43]
description of strongly coupled heterotic strings. in such scenarios, 1016 gev is the
fundamental length scale and the elds of the standard model live on a domain wall in
an eleven dimensional space with 7 compact dimensions of volume  104 fundamental
units. the four dimensional planck scale is an artifact of the large volume. the susy
breaking vacuum energy responsible for ination must also come from eects conned
to a (perhaps dierent) domain wall.

to summarize, m-theory has a number of features which require cosmological ex-
planations and a number of potentially interesting implications for cosmologists. the
two subdisciplines have very dierent cultures, but they ought to see more of each
other. the plan of these lectures is as follows. i will rst introduce the elements of
string duality and m-theory, starting from the viewpoint of 11d sugra, which in-
volves the smallest number of new concepts for cosmologists. the key ideas will be
the introduction of the basic half susy preserving branes of 11d sugra and the
demonstration of how various string theories arise as limits of compactied versions of
the theory. we will see that the geometry and even the topology of space as seen by
low energy observers can change drastically in the course of making smooth changes of
parameters. another key concept is that of the moduli space of vacua which preserve a
certain amount of susy, and the various kinds of nonrenormalization theorems which
allow one to make exact statements about the properties of these spaces.

from this we will turn to a discussion of the fundamentals of quantum cosmology.
this discussion will be incomplete since the material is still under development. we will
review the problem of time in quantum cosmology and a standard resolution of it based
on naive semiclassical quantization of the wheeler-dewitt equation. we will argue that
m-theory promises to put this argument on a more reliable basis, and in particular that
the peculiar lorentzian metric on the space of elds, which is the basis for the success

5

of the wheeler-dewitt approach to the problem of time, can be derived directly from
the duality group of m-theory (at least in those highly supersymmetric situations where
the group is known). this leads naturally into a discussion of whether cosmological
singularities can be mapped to nonsingular situations via duality transformations (it
turns out that some can and some cant and that the distinction between them denes
a natural arrow of time). we also present a weak anthropic argument which attempts
to answer the question of why the world we see is not a highly supersymmetric stable
vacuum state of m-theory. finally, as an amusement for acionados of heterodoxy, we
present some suggestions for m-theoretic resolutions of certain cosmological conundra
without the aid of ination.

the remainder of the lectures will be devoted to more or less standard inationary
models based on moduli and will examine in detail the properties of these models
adumbrated above. compared to much of the ination literature, these sections will
be long on general properties and short on specic models which can be compared to
the data. m-theory purports to be a fundamental theory of the universe, rather than
a phenomenological model. inaton potentials are objects to be calculated from rst
principles rather than postulated in order to t the data. there is nothing wrong with
phenomenological models of ination, but they are not the real province of m-theory
cosmology. unfortunately, our understanding of the nonperturbative properties of m-
theory in the regime where the supersymmetry algebra is suciently small to allow
for a potential on the moduli space (the alert reader may have already noted that the
preceding phrase contains an oxymoron) is too limited to allow us to build reliable
models of the potential. thus, if we are honest, we must content ourselves with general
observations and the denition of a set of goals.

2. m-theory, branes, moduli and all that

2.1 the story of m

once upon a time there were six string theories. well, actually there were ve (because
one, the type ia theory, was an ugly duckling without enough lorentz invariance) and
actually there were an innite number, or rather continuous families . . .. whats going
on here? the basic point is the following: what string theorists called a string theory
in the old days was a set of rules for doing perturbation theory. what was perhaps mis-
leading to many people is that these rules were usually given in terms of a lagrangian,
more generally a superconformally invariant 1 + 1 dimensional quantum eld theory,
(with some extra properties). we are used to think of lagrangians as dening theories.
the better way to think of the world sheet lagrangians of string theory is by imagining

6

a quantum eld theory with many classical vacua. around each vacuum state we can
construct a loop expansion. the quadratic terms in the expansion around a vacuum
state dene a bunch of dierential operators, whose greens functions are the building
blocks of the perturbation expansion. using schwingers proper time techniques we can
describe these greens functions in terms of an auxiliary quantum mechanics, and if
we wish we can describe this quantum mechanics in terms of a feynman path integral
with a lagrangian. the world sheet path integrals of string theory are the analogs
of these proper time path integrals. one of the beautiful properties of string theory
is that, unlike eld theory, the lagrangian formulation of the propagator completely
determines the perturbation expansion. to compute an n particle scattering amplitude
in tree level string theory one does the path integral on a riemann surface with no
handles and (for theories whose perturbation expansion contains only closed strings)
n boundaries. the boundary conditions on the boundaries are required to be super-
conformally invariant and carry xed spacetime momentum. the lagrangian itself
is superconformally invariant, and the allowed boundary conditions are generated by
acting on a particular boundary condition which denes the ground state of the single
string with a set of vertex operators which represent small perturbations of the action
which preserve superconformal invariance5. a given vertex operator creates a state
of the string which propagates as a particle with given mass and quantum numbers.
the higher orders in perturbation theory just correspond to computing the same path
integral on riemann surfaces of higher genus. one sums over all riemann surfaces, or
in some cases only over oriented ones.

the conditions of superconformal invariance have many solutions. classically (in
the sense of two dimensional classical eld theory  this should not be confused with
tree level string theory which corresponds to summing all orders in the semiclassical
expansion of the world sheet eld theory, on riemann surfaces with no handles), for
the particular case of type ii string theories, the bosonic terms in the most general
superconformal lagrangian have the form

l = (g(x) + ib(x))x x + h.c. + (x)

(2.1)

where the derivatives are taken with respect to complex coordinates on a euclidean
world sheet. g is symmetric and b is antisymmetric.  is the euler density of the
world sheet, a closed two form (for more on forms, closed and otherwise, see below)
whose integral is the euler character. quantum mechanically, there are restrictions
on the functions, g, b, and . to lowest order in the world sheet loop expansion the

5actually the situation is a bit more complicated, and to do it justice one must use the brst

formalism. for our purposes we can ignore this technicality.

7

condition of superconformal invariance coincides with the equations of motion coming
from a spacetime lagrangian

lst = ge2[r + 4()2 + (db)2]

(2.2)

this fact, combined with the fact that vertex operators are allowed perturbations of
these equations, shows us that string theory is a theory of gravity. one cannot choose
the background metric arbitrarily; it must satisfy an equation of motion.

in classifying consistent solutions of all these rules, string theorists found a num-
ber of discrete choices depending on the number of fermionic generators in the world
sheet superconformal group and on the types of riemann surfaces allowed. this led to
the ve dierent types of string theory. once these discrete choices were made, there
still seemed to be a multiparameter innity of choices. however, it was soon under-
stood that the continuous innity corresponded to expanding the same basic theory
around dierent solutions of its classical equations of motion (approximately the equa-
tions generated by (2.2)). this was a little surprising, because one of the rules for the
perturbation expansion was that there be some number of at poincare invariant di-
mensions (i explained in the introduction why string theorists insisted on this). so each
of these solutions was a static classical vacuum state. why are there so many vacua?
the answer is spacetime susy. indeed almost every known perturbatively stable vac-
uum state of string theory is supersymmetric6. it is well known that spacetime susy
often leads to nonrenormalization theorems which prevent the existence of potentials
for scalar elds. the strongest theorems of this type come when there is enough susy
to guarantee that the scalars are in supermultiplets with gauge or gravitational elds,
but there are other examples. as noted in the introduction, we will call the space of
classical vacua the moduli space. it should be noted that the moduli space is not con-
nected (e.g. the branches with dierent amounts of susy are generally disconnected
from each other), nor is it a manifold. the reason for the latter property is that of-
ten,new massless states can appear on submanifolds of the moduli space. often these
include scalars, which, as long as the original moduli are restricted to the submanifold,
have no potential. one can then dene a new branch of moduli space on which the orig-
inal moduli are restricted to the submanifold, but the new massless scalar elds have
expectation values. thus the moduli space has several disconnected components, each
of which is a bunch of manifolds of dierent dimension, glued together along singular
submanifolds.

thus, circa 1994-95 we had ve discrete classes of string theory, type iia,b ;
heterotica,b (a refers to the e8  e8 heterotic string theory and b to the so(32)
6there are no known exceptions. recently however [8] some constructions which appear to be
stable at least through two loops have been found. this is the reason for the word almost in the text.

8

version) and type ib. the type ib theory has the same symmetries in spacetime as
the hetb theory although the world sheet theories are completely dierent. in type ib
the gauge quantum numbers are carried on the ends of open strings (like avor quantum
numbers on qcd strings) and nonorientable world sheets appear in the perturbation
expansion. the heterotic theory has only closed strings, orientable world sheets and
gauge quantum numbers carried by the body of the string. there is also a type ia
theory which has a similar relation to heta. this theory does not have ten dimensional
lorentz invariance because it has two 8 + 1 dimensional domain walls at the ends of a
nite or innite 9 + 1 dimensional interval. it has so(16) so(16) gauge symmetry
carried by the ends of open strings which can only propagate on the domain walls.

the labels a and b refer to theories which are dierent in 10 (the maximal di-
mension for perturbative strings) dimensions but are actually equivalent to each other
when compactied on a circle. the equivalence is due to a stringy symmetry called t
duality. the momentum of a string on a circle is the integral of the time derivative of
its coordinate; i.e. the time derivative of the center of mass position.

p =z dt.

(2.3)

strings on a circle carry another quantum number called winding number, which is
dened by

w =z d.

(2.4)

(2.5)

the euclidean world sheet lagrangian for the string coordinate  is

lws = (t)2 + ()2

instead of  we can introduce a new coordinate by the two dimensional analog of an
electromagnetic duality transformation

a = abb .

(2.6)

it turns out that when one performs this transformation one automatically takes a
type a theory to a type b theory.

we learn two things from this: first, there are only half as many dierent string
theories as we thought, and second, to see that theories are the same we may have to
compactify them. decompactication loses important degrees of freedom (in this case
string winding modes, which go o to innite energy) which are necessary to see the
equivalence. there are no more such equivalences which can be seen in perturbation
theory, but we might begin to suspect that there are further equivalences which might

9

only appear nonperturbatively. how can we hope to realize this possibility in a theory
which is formulated only as a perturbation series?

the key to answering this question is the notion of susy preserving or bps states.

to explain what these are, let me introduce the susy algebra

{ qa, qb} = 

abp

(2.7)

actually, this is only the simplest susy algebra one can have in a given dimension.
we will see more complicated ones in a moment. if we look at particle representations
of the susy algebra, then p is either a timelike or a lightlike vector. in the timelike
case, the matrix on the right hand side of (2.7) is nondegenerate, while in the lightlike
case it is degenerate  half of the states in the representation are annihilated by it. this
means that in the lightlike case half of the susy generators annihilate every state in
the representation. thus massless supermultiplets are smaller than massive ones. this
means, that in general in a supersymmetric theory, small changes in the parameters
will not give mass to massless particles. in order to do so one must have a number
of massless multiplets which t together to form a larger massive multiplet (the super
higgs mechanism) in order for states to be lifted. if this is not the case for some values
of the parameters, then small changes cannot make it so and the massless particles
remain. of course, we did not really need susy to come to this conclusion for massless
particles of high enough spin. in that case it is already true that the lorentz group
representations of massless and massive particles are of dierent multiplicity.

the new feature really comes if we compactify the theory in a way which preserves
all the susy generators. this can be done by compactifying on a torus with appropriate
boundary conditions. the susy algebra remains the same, but now some of the
components of the momentum are discrete. also, the lorentz group is broken to the
lorentz group of the noncompact dimensions, so the spinor representation breaks up
into some number of copies of the lower dimensional spinor. the algebra now looks like

{ qi

abpij + abz ij.

a, qj

b} = 

(2.8)

spinor and vector indices now run over their lower dimensional values, and i, j label
the dierent copies of the lower dimensional spinor in the higher dimensional one.
the generators z ij are scalars under the lower dimension lorentz group. they are
combinations of the toroidal momenta and are examples of what are called central
charges.

now consider a state carrying nonzero values of the central charge in such a way that
the higher dimensional momentum is lightlike. it represents a massive kaluza-klein
mode of the massless particle in the higher dimension. in a nonsupersymmetric theory

10

the masses of kaluza klein modes of higher dimensional massless elds are renormalized
by quantum corrections. but in a theory with the extended susy algebra (2.8) we can
ask whether the representation is annihilated by half the supercharges (other fractions
are possible as well).
if it is, we get a computation of the particles nonzero mass
in terms of its central charges. this mass cannot change as parameters of the theory
are varied in such a way as to preserve extended susy, or rather the formula for
its variation with parameters may be read directly from the susy algebra. we will
see below that it is possible to realize the central charges z ij of the extended lower
dimensional susy algebra in other ways. instead of representing kk momenta in a
toroidal compactication, they might arise as winding numbers of extended objects,
called branes, around the compact manifold. the italicized conclusion will be valid for
these states as well.

the argument for the statement in italics above, is again based on the smaller
dimension of the representation. to see it more explicitly, work in the frame where the
spatial momentum is zero, and take the expectation value of the anticommutator in
states of a single particle with mass m (actually we mean a whole susy multiplet of
particles). then (2.8) reads

mij + 0z ij = < [qi

a, qj

b]+ >  0.

(2.9)

the last inequality follows because we are taking the expectation value of a positive
operator. it says that the mass is bounded from below by the square root of the sum of
the squares of the eigenvalues of the matrix z, which are also called the central charges.
equality is achieved only when the expectation value vanishes, which, since the
susy charges are hermitian, means that some of the charges annihilate every state in
the representation. these special representations of the algebra have smaller dimension
and cannot change into a generic representation, which satises the strict inequality,
as parameters are continuously varied.

thus, in theories with extended susy, certain masses can be calculated exactly
from the susy algebra. these special states are called bogolmony prasad sommereld
or bps states, since these authors rst encountered this phenomenon in their classical
studies of solitons [10]. the connection to susy, which makes the classical calculations
into exact quantum statements, was noticed by olive and witten [12].

notice that although we motivated this argument in terms of kaluza-klein states,
it depends mathematically only on the structure of the extended susy algebra. thus if
we can obtain this algebra in another way, we will still have bps states. an alternative
origin for central charges and bps states comes from wrapped branes of a higher
dimensional theory.

11

to understand this notion, note that, strictly from the point of view of lorentz

invariance, the susy algebra could contain terms like

{qa, qb} = 

abp + 1...p

ab

z1...p

(2.10)

the multiple indices are antisymmetrized. the famous haag-lopusanski-sohnius [11]
generalization of the coleman mandula theorem, tells us that this pth rank antisym-
metric tensor charge, must vanish on all nite energy particle states. on the other
hand, the purely spatial components of it have precisely the right lorentz properties to
count the number of innite energy p-branes, or p-dimensional domain walls, oriented
in a given hyperplane. we will have more to say about these brane charges when we
talk about branes and gauge theories below.

now suppose we have compactied p or more dimensions, and the resulting compact
space has a topologically nontrivial p-dimensional submanifold, or p-cycle. to see what
we mean, consider the two torus

b

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              

                              


aa

figure 1: a two torus with nontrivial cycles labelled.

it has two dierent kinds of nontrivial 1 cycle, labelled a and b in the gure. the whole
torus is a nontrivial two cycle. the word nontrivial cycle or just cycle implies that the
submanifold cannot be contracted to a point because it wraps around a hole in the
manifold. if we wrap a p-brane around the p-cycle, we get a nite energy particle
state. the tensor charge with all indices pointing in the compact directions is a scalar
charge in the remaining noncompact directions and is allowed to appear as a central
charge in an extended susy algebra. often, the corresponding particles have the bps
property.

with this background, we can get on with the story of m. practitioners of string du-
ality realized that bps states gave them a powerful handle on nonperturbative physics.

12

for example, consider a weakly coupled string theory and a solitonic state, whose mass
in string units is proportional to gr
7. if it is a bps state then as the coupling becomes
s
innitely strong, it becomes innitely lighter than the string scale (if not for the bps
property, we could not trust the weak coupling formula at strong coupling). in all the
cases which have been studied one can, by thinking about the lightest bps states in
the strong coupling limit, realize that they are just the elementary states of another
weakly coupled theory.
in most cases, this is another string theory, but there is a
famous exception.

if one considers type iia string theory in ten dimensions, it contains a single u(1)
gauge eld. none of the perturbative states are charged under this eld; they have
only magnetic moment couplings.
if one considers hypothetical bps states charged
under this u(1), then it is easy to show that their spectrum in the strong coupling
limit is precisely that of the supergravity multiplet in 11 dimensions. thus one is led
to conjecture [35] that the strong coupling limit of type iia string theory has eleven
at dimensions and a low energy limit described by sugra.

none of this was much of a surprise to the sugraistas [27].

it had long been
known that the low energy limit of iia string theory was a ten dimensional sugra
theory which was the dimensional reduction of 11d sugra, with the string coupling
appearing as the ratio of the three halfs power of the radius of the reducing circle to
the eleven dimensional planck mass. the sugraistas even had a correct explanation
of where the strings come from. as we will see 11d sugra couples naturally to a
membrane, the m2 brane. if we wrap one leg of the m2 brane around the circle whose
radius is being shrunk to zero we get a string whose tension is going to zero in planck
units.

string theorists get a c for closed mindedness for ignoring the message of the
sugraistas for so long. behind their resistance lay the feeling that because both
11d sugra and the world volume theory of membranes are nonrenormalizable, one
could not trust conclusions drawn on the basis of these theories.
it was only with
the advent of an unambiguous, string theoretic construction of the kk gravitons of
11d sugra as bound states of d0 branes [28] [29] that the last bastions of resistance
fell. what one should have realized from the beginning was that conclusions about
bps states, based as they are only on the symmetry structure of the theory, can be
extrapolated from eective theories far beyond the limited range of validity these low
energy approximations.

the picture as we understand it today8 is illustrated by the famous modular

7in string theory both r = 1, 2 are realized. r = 2 corresponds to a conventional soliton, arising as
a solution of the classical equations of motion. r = 1 corresponds to dirichlet brane or d brane states.
8or rather a cartoon of it, for moduli space is much more complicated than a two dimensional

13

deerskin.

m - theory

type iia

type iib

so(32) heterotic

e   x e    heterotic

8

8

figure 2: a cartoon of the moduli space of m-theory.

type i

there is a single theory, which we now call m-theory9 which has a large moduli space.
all of the known perturbative string theories, and 11d sugra are limits of this theory
in certain extreme regions, or boundaries, of moduli space (the cusps in the picture).
there is another class of limits, called f-theory, which are not amenable to complete
analysis, but about which many nontrivial statements can be made. an example of an
f-theory region is the strongly coupled heterotic string compactied on a two torus.

one of the lessons of duality is that no one of these regions is a priori better
than any other. each of them tells a partial story about m-theory, and we learn a
lot by trying to patch these stories together. however, the 11d sugra limit has
a distinct advantage when one is trying to explain m-theory to non-string theorists,
particularly if they have a good background in gr. in this limit, most of the arguments
are completely geometrical and can be understood on the basis of classical eld theory
and the classical lagrangians for various extended objects. for this reason, i will begin
in the next section with a discussion of the 11d sugra lagrangian10.

deerskin.

9or at least some of us do. some people reserve the name m-theory for the region of moduli space
where 11d sugra is a good approximation. i consider that a waste of a good name since we can call
this the 11d sugra region.

10at least its purely bosonic part. fermions, like virtue in the world of politics, are entities often

talked about, but rarely seen, in discussions of susy theories.

14

3. eleven dimensional supergravity

in eleven dimensions, the graviton has 44 spin states transforming in the symmetric
traceless tensor representation of the transverse (transverse to the gravitons lightlike
momentum) so(9) rotation group. the gravitino is a tensor- spinor of this group,
satisfying the constraint i
b = 0 which leaves 128 components. the remaining 84 =
987
321 bosonic states in the sugra multiplet transform as a third rank antisymmetric
tensor.

abi

the covariant lagrangian for the bosonic elds in the multiplet is

m 9

p{g[

1
2

r +

1
48

g11 . . . g44g1...4g1...4]

2
3456

the supersymmetry transformation of the gravitino is

1...11c1...3g4...7g8...11}
(3.1)



 = d +

2
288

(

  

)g.

(3.2)

the existence of a three form gauge potential, suggests that the theory may contain

a membrane, which couples to the three form via

q2z c

x
a

x
b

x
c dadbdc

(3.3)

where the a are coordinates on the membrane world volume. the dual of the four form
11,
eld strength g is a seven form g7, whose source, dened by dg7( dg4) = j6
is a six form current. this is a current of ve dimensional objects, which we will call
m5 branes.

the low energy sugra approximation to m-theory gives us evidence that both m2
and m5 branes exist, since there are soliton solutions of the sugra equations of motion
with the requisite properties. this would not be a terribly convincing argument, since
the scale of variation of the elds of these objects is (what else?) the eleven dimensional
planck scale, and sugra is only an eective eld theory. however, these solitons have
the bps property. that is, we can nd them by insisting that half of the gravitino
susy variations vanish. this leads to rst order equations, which are much easier
to solve than the full second order equations, but give a subclass of solutions of the
latter. since these solutions are constructed so that half of the susy variations vanish,
their poisson brackets with half the susy generators (in a canonical formulation of
11d sugra) vanish. this is the classical approximation to the statement that the

11the large number of spacetime dimensions lead me to resort to dierential form notation even for

an audience of cosmologists.

15

quantum states represented by these soliton solutions are annihilated by half of the
susy generators.

the solutions are

ds2 = (1 +

k
r6 )2/3(dt2 + d2 + d2) + (1 +

k
r6 )1/3dx2

8

a = (1 +

k
r6 )

l9
p t2
3 7

k 

ds2 = (1 +

t5
r3 )1/3(dt2 + dx2

5) + (1 +

t5
r3 )2/3dy2

5

g1...4 = 3 t5 1...4

y
r5

(3.4)

(3.5)

(3.6)

(3.7)

(3.8)

for the two brane and ve brane respectively.

in each of these equations, r denotes the transverse distance from the brane. these
solutions contain arbitrary parameters t2 and t5 which control the strength of the
coupling of these objects to the three form gauge potential and to gravity. however,
an elementary argument leads to a determination of these parameters. compactify the
theory on a seven torus and wrap the m2 brane around two of the dimensions of this
torus and the m5 brane around the other ve. the integral of the three form over the
two torus on which the membrane is wrapped give us an ordinary maxwell (1 form)
potential. it is easy to see that the wrapped membrane is a charged particle with charge
q2 with respect to this maxwell eld (the membrane coupling of (3.3) dimensionally
reduces to the standard maxwelll coupling to a charged particle). it is a little harder to
see that the wrapped m5 brane is a magnetic monopole for this eld. thus, the dirac
quantization condition implies

2q2q5  z

(3.9)

this is a quick and dirty proof of the nepomechie-teitelboim [30] generalization of
the dirac quantization condition to p-form gauge elds. this condition determines the
tension of the minimally charged m2 and m5 branes to be:

t5 =

1
2

t 2
2

t2 = l3
p

(3.10)

(3.11)

given the existence of these innite at branes, we can also study small uctuations
of them which describe (slightly) curved branes moving in spacetime. the most useful

16

way to do this is to introduce a world volume eld theory which contains the relevant
uctuations. among the variables of such a theory should be a set of scalar elds which
describe small uctuations of the brane in directions transverse to itself. it turns out
that these world volume theories are, in the present case, completely determined by
susy.

let us begin with the m2 brane. the susys that preserve the brane satisfy
3 . . . 10 q = q12. there are 16 solutions to this equation, which transform as 8 spinors
under the so(2, 1) lorentz group of the brane world volume. each two component
world volume spinor transforms in the eight dimensional spinor representation of the
transverse so(8) rotation group. from the point of view of the world volume eld
theory, the latter is an internal symmetry. we expect the world volume theory to
contain 8 scalar elds, representing the transverse uctuations of the membrane. a
susy lagrangian containing these elds is given by

lm 2 = axiaxi + j aaj

where a are three world volume dirac matrices. the susy generators are:

qj

 =z d2i

jk[0xik

 + a

k

 axi]

(3.12)

(3.13)

using the canonical commutation relations for the world volume elds it is straightfor-
ward to verify that these satisfy the susy algebra. here we have used i to represent
the eight dimensional dirac matrices, despite the possibility of confusion with the eleven
dimensional matrices of the paragraphs above and below.13

the world volume theory of the m5 brane is more interesting. the susys pre-
served satisfy 6 . . . 10 q = q (using the same argument as in the footnote above).
the world volume lorentz group so(5, 1) has two dierent chiralities of spinor repre-
sentation, and (ultimately because the product of all eleven dimensional dirac matrices
is 1) this condition says that all the susy generators have the same chirality. there
are sixteen real solutions of these constraints which can be arranged as two complex 4
representations of the world volume lorentz group. under the transverse so(5) rota-
tion group, they transform as four copies of the fundamental pseudoreal spinor. this
kind of susy is called (2, 0) susy in six dimensions.

12to see this, note that the condition specifying which charges annihilate the membrane state must
be linear (the sum of two such charges is another) and invariant under both the transverse rotation
and world volume lorentz groups. this is the only such condition since the product of all the 11d
dirac matrices is 1.

13we have also passed over in silence the two dierent types of eight dimensional spinor which appear

in these equations. experts will understand and amateurs would only be confused by this detail.

17

the coordinates of transverse uctuations are ve scalar world volume elds, which
transform as the vector of so(5). there is a unique susy representation which in-
cludes these elds. their superpartners are two fermions in the 4 representation of the
lorentz group, and a second rank antisymmetric tensor gauge eld, b whose eld
strength satises the self duality condition h = h. indeed, in a physical
light cone gauge, bab (the a,b indices indicate the four transverse dimensions in the
lightcone frame inside the world volume) has 6 components and the self duality cuts
this down to 3. combined with the ve scalars this makes eight bosonic degrees of
freedom which balance the eight degrees of freedom of a weyl fermion. the self dual
antisymmetric tensor eld is chiral and its eld equations cannot be derived from a
covariant lagrangian (without a lot of extra complications and gauge symmetries). as
we will see, this is the origin of the world sheet chirality of the heterotic string.

4. forms, branes and bps states

4.1 dierential forms and topologically nontrivial cycles

before proceeding with our discussion of compactication of 11d sugra, and its
relation to string theory, i want to insert a short remedial course on the mathematics
of dierential forms. we have already used this above, and will use it extensively in
the sequel. dierential n forms or totally antisymmetric covariant tensor elds, were
invented by mathematicians as objects which can be integrated over n dimensional
submanifolds of a manifold of dimension d. the basic idea is that at each point, such
a form picks out n linearly independent tangent vectors to the manifold and assigns a
volume to the corresponding region on the submanifold. if t
i are the tangent vectors,
then 1...nt1

n is the volume element.

1 . . . tn

mathematicians introduced grassmann variables dx as placeholders for the n
independent tangent vectors thus, an n form becomes 1...ndx1 . . . dxn, which is
a commuting or anticommuting element of the grassman algebra according to whether
in this way, the set of all forms of rank 0  d is turned into
n is even or odd.
an algebra. a derivative operator d is dened on this algebra by d = dx 
x . this
denition is independent of the metric or ane connection on the manifold. note that
d2 = 0. forms satisfying d = 0 are called closed. trivial solutions of the form  = d
are called exact, and the set of equivalence classes of non exact closed forms (modulo
addition of an exact form) is called the cohomology of the manifold.

if a submanifold is parametrized as a mapping x() from some n dimensional
parameter space into the manifold, then the integral of a form over the submanifold is

18

given by

zm

 =z da1 . . . dan x1

a1

. . .

xn
an

1...n(x())

(4.1)

if  is an n 1 form and s an n dimensional submanifold with boundary s, then
the generalized stokes theorem says that rs d = rs . in particular, the integral of

an exact form over a submanifold without boundary, vanishes.

most n dimensional submanifolds without boundary, are themselves boundaries of
n + 1 dimensional submanifolds. however, in topologically nontrivial situations there
can be exceptions, called nontrivial n- cycles. you can see this in the example of the a
or b cycle in fig. 1. generally there are many such nontrivial cycles if there are any,
but they often dier by trivial cycles (think of two dierent circles which go around
the circumference of the torus). again, the n cycle is considered to be the equivalence
class of nontrivial submanifolds modulo trivial ones.

one of the most important theorems in mathematics is the de rham theorem,
which states that there is a one to one correspondence between the cohomology of a
manifold and the independent nontrivial closed cycles. that is, one can choose a basis

i in the space of closed modulo exact n forms such that rcj i = ij. here cj are the

independent nontrivial n cycles.

so much for pure mathematics. the reason that all of this math is interesting
in m-theory is that the theory contains dynamical extended objects called p-branes,
and the theory of dierential forms allows us to understand the most important low
energy dynamical properties of these objects as a beautiful generalization of maxwells
electrodynamics. in addition this leads us to a new and deep mechanism for generating
nonabelian gauge groups, which is connected to the theory of singularities of smooth
manifolds. this in turn allows us to obtain an understanding of certain spacetime
singularities in terms of wilsons ideas about singularities of the free energy at second
order phase transitions. it was long known that the free energy of statistical systems
at second order phase transitions had singularities as a function of the temperature
and other thermodynamic variables. wilson realized that these singularities could be
understood using the equivalence between statistical mechanics and euclidean quantum
eld theory. at values of the parameters corresponding to phase transitions, massless
particles appear in the eld theory and the singularities of the free energy are attributed
to infrared divergences coming from integrating over the uctuations of these particles.
in classical geometry, singularities of manifolds can be classied by asking which
nontrivial cycles shrink to zero as parameters are varied in such a way that a smooth
manifold becomes singular.
in m-theory there are states described by bps branes
wrapped around these nontrivial cycles, which become massless when the cycles shrink
to zero. the singularities in classical geometry are then understood to be a reection

19

of the quantum uctuations of these massless particles. that is, singular quantities
in classical geometry can be calculated in terms of feynman diagrams with loops of
the massless states that m-theory predicts at these special points in moduli space
(only these states contribute to the infrared divergence). the quantum theory itself is
nonsingular at these points, but its description in terms of classical geometry breaks
down because there are light degrees of freedom (the wrapped branes) other than the
gravitational eld. branes and singularities are at the heart of string duality.

let us begin the discussion of branes by recalling the lagrangian for the coupling

of the electromagnetic eld to a charged particle. it is

z dta(x(t))

dx
dt

=zc

a1,

(4.2)

where in the second equality we have used the notation of forms. if the particle path
is closed, this action is invariant under gauge transformations a1  a1 + d0. if we
add to the action the simplest gauge invariant functional of the a1 eld r da1  da1
14,
we obtain maxwells theory of the coupling of charged particles to electromagnetism.
there is an obvious generalization of all of this to the coupling of a p + 1 form

potential to a p-brane. the interaction is given by

zcp+1

ap+1

(4.3)

where the integral is over the world volume of the p-brane. by the generalized stokes
theorem, this enjoys a gauge invariance ap+1  ap+1+dp. by virtue of the fundamen-
tal equation d2 = 0, dap+1 is a gauge invariant object and we can write an immediate
generalization of maxwells action,

z dnx  f  f.

(4.4)

once we have normalized a by writing the free maxwell lagrangian, we are left
with a free coecient in the coupling of the brane to the gauge eld. in the electro-
magnetic case, we know that this coecient, the electric charge, is in fact quantized if
we introduce magnetic monopoles and quantum mechanics, an observation rst made
by dirac.

the analogous observation for general p-branes was made by nepomechie and teit-
elboim [30]. a p-brane couples to a rank p + 2 eld strength. in d spacetime dimensions
we can introduce, given a metric, a dual eld strength

14here the * denotes the hodge dual, but for the purposes of this lecture we can just think of this

f1...dp2 = 1...df dp1...d

(4.5)

as a shorthand for maxwells action.

20

where we have raised indices with the metric tensor. one thus sees that the natural
dual object to a p-brane is a d  p  4 brane.

the easiest way to see the dirac-nepomechie-teitelboim condition is to compactify
the system on a torus of dimension d  4. we wrap the p-brane around p-cycles of this
torus and its dual around the remaining d  p  4. the integral, rt p ap+1 denes

a one form or maxwell eld in the uncompactied four dimensional spacetime, and
the p-brane is an electrically charged particle. it is easy to convince oneself that the
wrapped dual brane is a monopole. thus we obtain a quantization condition relating
the couplings of the two dual branes to the p + 1 form gauge potential. nepomechie
and teitelboim show that there are no further consistency conditions.

4.2 susy algebras and bps states

now let us recall what we learned in the previous section about bps states. i will repeat
that material briey here, but readers who feel they have absorbed it adequately can
skip the rst few paragraphs. we pointed out above that many susy theories have
classes of massive states whose masses are protected from renormalization in the same
way that those of massless particles of spin greater than or equal to one half are. these
are called bogolmony-prasad-sommereld or bps states. the easiest to understand are
the kaluza klein states of toroidal compactication, but there is a vast generalization
of this idea. the theorem of haag lopuzanski and sohnius (a generalization of the
coleman-mandula theorem) [11] shows that the ordinary susy algebra is the most
general algebra compatible with an s matrix for particle states. purely algebraically
though, the right hand side of the susy algebra could have contained higher rank
antisymmetric tensor charges (the general representation appearing in the product of
two spinors).

our discussion of branes and gauge elds provides us with a natural source of such
charges, as well as showing us the loophole in the hls theorem. indeed, following our
analogy with maxwell electrodynamics, it is easy to see that an innite, at, static
p-brane carries a conserved rank p-antisymmetric tensor charge as a consequence of
the equations of motion of the p + 1 form gauge eld it couples to. the fact that
these branes are innite extended objects and carry innite energy is the loophole in
the theorem. it referred only to nite energy particle states. all of the tensor charges
vanish on nite energy states.

however, when we compactify a theory, we can imagine wrapping one of these
p-branes around a nontrivial p-cycle in the compact manifold. the resulting state
propagates as a particle in the noncompact dimensions. it has nite energy, propor-
tional to the volume of the cycle it was wrapped around. its tensor charge becomes
a scalar in the noncompact dimensions and is called a central charge of an extended

21

(i.e.
larger than the minimal algebra in the noncompact dimensions) susy algebra.
thus the central charges in extended susy algebras in low dimensions may come from
wrapped brane charges as well as kk momenta.

perhaps the most remarkable fact about this statement is that as the volume shrinks
to zero, the mass of the wrapped bps state does as well. if the volume of the rele-
vant p-cycle parametrizes a continuous set of supersymmetric vacuum states, then this
conclusion is exact and can be believed in all regimes of coupling even though it was
derived by crude semiclassical reasoning.
indeed, even if we dont know the theory
we are trying to construct, we can still believe in the existence of massless wrapped
brane states as long as we posit that the susy algebra is a symmetry. we will make
extensive use of this argument in the sequel.

5. branes and compactication

5.1 a tale of two tori

we are now in a position to study many of the important dualities of m-theory, at least
at a cursory level. we will not have time to delve here into the many computations
and cross checks which have convinced most string theorists that all of these dualities
are exact. many of the duality statements remain conjectures supported by a lot of
circumstantial evidence. obviously, they cannot be proven until a full nonperturbative
form of m-theory is discovered. however, an important subclass of the dualities can
actually be proven in a discrete light cone quantization (dlcq) of m-theory known
as matrix theory [31]. it applies to compactications of m-theory with at least 16
unbroken susys and at least 6 noncompact minkowski spacetime dimensions.
in
dlcq, one gives up lorentz invariance by compactifying a lightlike direction on a
circle. one then gets an exact description of m-theory in terms of an auxiliary quantum
eld theory living on a ctitious internal space. all of the duality symmetries relevant
to this class of compactications (the only ones we will talk about in these lectures) can
be derived as properties of the auxiliary eld theory. this includes statements (such
as rotation invariance of the type iib theory constructed by compactifying m-theory
on a two torus) for which there was no other evidence prior to the advent of matrix
theory.

we begin by compactifying m-theory on a circle of radius r10. when r10 is much
larger than the eleven dimensional planck length lp there is a good description of the
low energy physics of the system in terms of 11d sugra compactied on a circle. the
sugra lagrangian incorporates all of the low energy states of the system and gives a
good approximation to their low energy scattering amplitudes.

22

as r10 drops below lp , this description breaks down. an 11d low energy physicist
might guess that the low energy states of the system are just the zero modes (on the
circle) of the sugra elds. this gives 10d type iia sugra, which has the following
elds: g, , b, c rr
 . these can be identied as the ten dimensional metric (in
string conformal frame), the dilaton eld which describes local variations of the radius
of the eleventh dimensional circle, a two form gauge potential which is given by the
integral of the 11d three form around the circle, the three form itself, and a kaluza-
klein one form gauge eld. the eective planck mass, m 10
p ,of this ten dimensional
theory is given by

, c rr

(m 10

p )9
p )8  r10(m 11

(5.1)

thus, when r10 is small, the eective 10d sugra description breaks down at a much
lower energy scale than the 11d planck mass.

in fact, the existence of bps m2 brane states tells us that there is an even lower
energy scale in the problem. consider a conguration of an m2 brane wrapped on the
circle:

x(t, , ) = x(t, );  = 0 . . . 9

x10(t, , ) = r10

(5.2)

(5.3)

the main part of the action of an m2 brane is the volume of the world surface swept
out by the brane, multiplied by the brane tension, which is of order l3
p . for wrapped
congurations, this reduces to the ten dimensional area swept out by the string x(t, )
in units of the string tension l2
p . this gives an energy scale for string
p which is much smaller than the ten dimensional planck

s  r10l3

oscillations ms  r10m 11

mass.

thus, we are led to expect that m-theory on a small circle is dominated at energies
below the eleven dimensional planck scale by low tension string states. at the energy
scale set by the string length gravitational couplings are weak. this can be seen by
rewriting the dimensionally reduced action in terms of the string length. the coecient
of the einstein action becomes (lp /r10)3l8
s, indicating that at the energy scale dened
by the string tension, gravitational couplings are determined by a small dimensionless
parameter, g2
s = e2() = (r10/lp )3. in fact, using the technology of matrix theory,
[32] one can show that in the small gs limit, m-theory becomes a theory of free strings.
there is in fact a unique consistent ten dimensional theory of free strings with
the supersymmetry algebra of 11d sugra compactied on a circle (the so called iia
algebra). it is the type iia superstring. in fact, one can directly derive the full green-
schwartz action for the superstring by considering the supermembrane action of [33]
restricted to the wrapped m2 brane congurations above. however, this derivation is

23

entirely classical, while the existence of the string and its action actually follow purely
from susy and are therefore exact quantum mechanical results.

this, the rst of many dualities, exhibits the general strategy of the duality pro-
gram. starting from a limiting version of m-theory valid only in a certain domain of
moduli space and/or energy scale we exhibit some heavy bps state whose mass can
be extrapolated into regimes where the original version of the theory breaks down, and
goes to zero there. we then nd that the eective theory of these new light states is
another version of the theory. for the most part, we nd only weakly coupled string
limits and limits where 11d sugra is a valid approximation. this is exactly true if we
restrict attention to vacuum states with three or more noncompact space dimensions
and 32 supercharges. with less susy there are limiting regimes (many of which are
called by the generic name f-theory) where we do not have a systematic expansion
parameter, though many exact results can be derived.

if we try to repeat this exercise on a two torus something really interesting happens.
the new regime corresponds to taking the area of the torus to zero with the rest of
its geometry xed. as is well known, up to an overall scale, the geometry of a two
torus is determined by a parallelogram in the complex plane with one side going from
zero to one along the real axis. this parallelogram describes the periodic boundary
conditions which dene the torus. it is completely xed by its other side, which is a
complex number  in the upper half plane.  is called the complex structure of the
torus. in fact, dierent  s can describe the same torus. the sl(2, z) group generated
by    + 1 and   1/ maps all complex numbers which dene the same torus
onto each other.

in the zero area limit, we can dene a whole set of low tension strings, by choosing
a closed path of nontrivial topology on the torus, and studying m2 branes wrapped
on this path. the inequivalent nontrivial paths on the torus are characterized by two
fundamental cycles, called a and b in figure 1. a general path consists of going p-times
around a and q times around b. it turns out that the (p, q) strings with relatively prime
integers are stable and can be viewed as bound states of the (1, 0) and (0, 1) strings.
when the integers are not relatively prime the state is not bound. this picture is
derived from the bps formula [34] for the string tension, which follows from a classical
calculation in 11d sugra and is promoted to an exact theorem by invoking susy.
the proof that the states with integers having a common divisor are not bound is more
complicated [29].

something even more interesting occurs when we consider m2 branes which wrap

the whole torus. a state with an m times wrapped brane has energy

 mal3

p 

m
rb

24

(5.4)

in the limit that the area goes to zero. it turns out [29] that the m wrapped states
are stable against the energetically allowed decay into m singly wrapped states. so in
the area goes to zero limit we get a new continuum. any other state in the theory
can bind with these wrapped membranes at little cost in energy. the result is that the
states are labelled by a new continuous quantum number in addition to their momenta
in the eight noncompact dimensions. even more remarkable (the only extant proof of
this requires matrix theory [6]) is that the new continuum is related to the old one by
an so(9, 1) lorentz symmetry [6]. thus, in m-theory 11  2 = 10.

since the origin of the new lorentz group is obscure, we have to resort to matrix
theory again to nd out which kind of ten dimensional susy the theory has15.
it
turns out that both of the ten dimensional weyl spinors have the same chirality, and
we are in the iib theory.

there is of course a weakly coupled string theory with this susy algebra; the
type iib green schwarz superstring. in fact, the sugra limit of this theory has an
sl(2, r) symmetry which one can argue is broken to sl(2, z) by instanton eects.
it acts in the expected way on  . furthermore there are actually two dierent two
form gauge potentials, which form an sl(2, z) doublet. thus we expect to nd two
dierent kind of strings, the f(undamental) string and the d(irichlet) string. the latter
is a soliton, whose tension goes to innity in the weak coupling limit. consulting the
eleven dimensional picture we realize that the weak coupling limit should be identied
with the im   limit in which one of the cycles of the torus is much smaller than
the other. the f(d) string is then identied with the m2 brane wrapped around the
shorter (longer) cycle.

this trick of dimensional reduction by 2  1 dimensions is interesting because it
gets around old theorems which stated that kaluza klein reduction cannot produce
chirality. it can be generalized in the following interesting way. certain higher dimen-
sional manifolds can be viewed as elliptic brations. that is, they consist of an m
dimensional base manifold with coordinates z and a family of two tori  (z) (the area
also varies with z), making altogether an m + 2 dimensional manifold. now one varies
parameters in such a way that the area of the two tori all shrink to zero. naively this
would give a dimensional reduction by two dimensions. however, given enough susy
one can again verify that an extra noncompact dimension appears in the limit so that
the result is dimensional reduction by one. the name given to this general procedure

15actually, a consideration of the eld content of the low energy theory is enough. in particular
the fact that variations of the complex structure  over the noncompact dimensions should appear as
a complex scalar eld, is enough to tell us that we are in the iib theory. the ten dimensional type
iia theory has only a single real massless scalar. matrix theory is only necessary to prove that the
statement is consistent at all energies.

25

is f-theory [13]. it is very useful for describing strong coupling limits of the heterotic
string.

if we try to pull the shrinking torus trick in 3 dimensions we run into a disappoint-
ment. the new low tension state which appears is a membrane obtained by wrapping
the m5 brane around the torus. the eective low energy theory is then m-theory again
with a new planck length dened in terms of the light membrane tension. indeed it
can be shown [35] [5] that for three or more noncompact dimensions the only limiting
theories one can obtain without breaking any susy are the type ii string theories and
11d sugra. we will actually prove this theorem below in our discussion of extreme
limits of the moduli space.

for my last example of a duality i will study the moduli space of m-theory com-
pactications which break half of the 11d susy. this is achieved by compactifying on
four dimensional spaces called k3 manifolds. we will have to understand a little bit
about the geometry of such manifolds, but i promise to keep it simple. the equation
for the susy variation of the gravitino is

 = d

(5.5)

this must vanish for certain values of the susy parameters  in order to leave some
susy unbroken. a consistency condition for this vanishing is

rab

ab = 0

(5.6)

where rab
 is the curvature tensor in an orthonormal frame and ab are the spin matrices
in the dirac spinor representation. we will always be dealing with strictly euclidean
n dimensional manifolds so these are generators of o(n).

in two and three dimensions, the spinor has only two components and the genera-
tors are the pauli matrices. the only solution of (5.6) is to set the curvature equal to
zero, but then we do not break any susy. we can do better with four compact dimen-
sions. the group so(4) = su(2)  su(2) has two dierent two dimensional spinors
(familiar to particle physicists after an analytic continuation as left and right handed
weyl spinors), transforming as (1, 2) and (2, 1) under the two su(2) subgroups. thus,
if the curvature lies in one of these two subgroups and we choose  to be a singlet of
that subgroup, then the consistency condition is satised.

the stated condition on the curvature tensor is

rab

 = abcdrcd


(5.7)

it is easy to see, using one of the standard identities for the riemann tensor, that this
implies that the ricci tensor, ra
eb, vanishes. thus, insisting that half the

 = rab

26

susy is preserved implies that the manifold satises the vacuum einstein equations
(euclidean) or is, as we say, ricci at.

there is one more immediate consequence of the susy equations which i want
to note. just like the spinor representation, the second rank antisymmetric tensor
representation of so(4) breaks up into a direct sum of (1, 3) and (3, 1). thus, there
will be, on a manifold which preserves half the susy, three independent covariantly
constant (and therefore closed and nowhere vanishing) two forms, a
. modulo some
technical questions which we will ignore, this implies that the manifold is hyperkahler.
compact, four dimensional hyperkahler manifolds are called k3 manifolds (this is part
of an elaborate joke having to do with the famous himalayan peak k2).

noone has ever seen a k3 metric, but mathematicians are adept at dealing with
objects they cant write down explicitly. we will only need a tiny bit of the vast
mathematical literature on these spaces. in particular, i want to remind you of the
famous de rham theorem, which relates topologically nontrivial submanifolds in a space
to the cohomology of dierential forms. remember that a dierential form is just a
totally antisymmetric tensor multiplied by grassmann variables that mathematicians
call dierentials

the operator

 = 1...pdx1 . . . dxp

d =


x dx

(5.8)

(5.9)

maps p-forms into p + 1-forms and satises d2 = 0. this denes what mathematicians
call a cohomology problem. namely, one wants to characterize all solutions of d = 0,
modulo trivial solutions of the type  = d (such trivial solutions are called exact
forms) where  is a well dened p  1-form. this is a generalization of nding things
with zero curl which cannot be written as gradients. a well known physics example is
a constant magnetic eld on the surface of a sphere or a torus. the set of closed but
not exact p-forms is called the cohomology at dimension p.

the importance of p-forms stems from the fact that their integrals over p-dimensional
submanifolds are completely dened by the dierential topology of the manifold. no
metrical concepts are needed to dene these integrals.

another important concept is that of a nontrivial p-cycle on a manifold. basically
this is a p-dimensional submanifold which cannot be shrunk to a point because of the
topology of the manifold. the simplest examples are the a and b 1-cycles on the torus of
figure 1. actually, it is an equivalence class of submanifolds because any curve which
circles around the a cycle and then does any kind of topologically trivial thing on the
rest of the torus is equivalent to the a cycle. de rhams theorem tells us that there is a
one to one correspondence between p-cycles and p-forms, as we have mentioned above.

27

after that brief reminder, we can turn to the question of what the cohomology
of k3 manifolds is. since it is a topological question we can answer it by examining
an example. every 4-manifold has cohomology at dimension 0 (the constant function)
and dimension 4 (the volume form, abcdea
4). the simplest k3 manifold is the
physicists k3, the singular orbifold t 4/z2. this is dened by taking a rectilinear
torus with axes 2ri and identifying points related by xi  xi + 2niri. this has 16
xed points in the fundamental domain : xi = ri(1  1)/4. the space is at except
at the xed points but has curvature singularities there. it can be veried that the
holonomies around the xed points are in a single su(2) subgroup of o(4) so the space
is a k3.

3ed

1eb

2ec

it is easy to see that the nontrivial one cycles on the torus all become trivial on the
orbifold (the corresponding one forms are odd under the orbifold transformation and
are projected out). the torus has six obvious 2 cycles, which are the six dierent t 2s
in the t 4. in addition, when one studies this singular manifold as a limit of smooth
k3s by the methods of algebraic geometry (realizing the manifold as the solution set of
polynomial equations) one nds that each of the xed points is actually a two sphere of
zero area. thus there are twenty two non-trivial two cycles on a k3 manifold. by the de
rham theorem, there are twenty two linearly independent elements of the cohomology
at dimension two of k3.

one can introduce a bilinear form on two forms in a four manifold. the product

of two two cycles is a four form, which can be integrated over the manifold. dene:

remember that r  is the usual euclidean maxwell action for a two form eld

strength is thus positive denite. the form i is thus negative on antiselfdual ten-
sors and positive on self dual ones. we have already established that there are three
independent antiselfdual covariantly constant (and therefore closed but not exact) two
forms.
it can be shown that the rest of the cohomology consists of self dual two
forms, so that i has signature (19, 3). a basis can be chosen in which it has the form
i = 1  1  1  e8  e8, where 1 is the familiar pauli matrix and e8 is the cartan
matrix of the lie group e8 (the matrix of scalar products of simple roots).

this is very suggestive. the heterotic string compactied on a three torus, has
nineteen left moving and three right moving currents (the sixteen e8e8 gauge currents
and linear combinations of the momentum and winding number currents on the torus).
indeed, narain [16] introduced the same scalar product, where left movers have opposite
signature to right movers, in his study of heterotic compactications on tori. at this
point, readers who are not familiar with the heterotic string will undoubtedly benet
from . . ..

28

iij =z ij

(5.10)

5.2 an heterotic interlude

the bosonic string lives in 26 bosonic dimensions, while the superstring lives in
10. this discrepancy his two sources, both of which have to do with the dierence
between the world sheet gauge groups of the two theories. the bosonic string has only
worldsheet dieomorphism invariance and the 26 is required to cancel the anomaly in
this symmetry against a corresponding anomaly coming from fadeev-popov ghosts.
type ii superstrings have worldsheet supergravity16. on the one hand, this requires
the embedding coordinates x  to have superpartners  which also contribute to the
anomaly. on the other hand, since the world sheet gauge group is larger, there are
more ghosts. the net result of these two eects is to reduce to 10 the maximal number
of minkowski dimensions in which the type ii strings can propagate. smaller numbers
of x  can be achieved by compactication.

in two dimensions, the smallest susy algebra is called (1, 0) and has a single right
moving spinor supercharge. there is a corresponding chiral worldsheet supergravity.
type ii strings have the vector like completion of this, (1, 1) susy, which consists of
one left moving and one right moving supercharge. the heterotic string is dened as
a perturbative string theory with only (1, 0) worldsheet susy. its maximal number of
minkowski dimensions is 10.

in ten minkowski dimensional target space, the world sheet eld theory of any
string theory is a collection of free massless elds each of which can be separated into
its left and right moving components. the ten dimensional heterotic string has 10 right
moving x s and their superpartners, and 26 left moving x s. in order to eliminate an
extra continuum from the 16 extra bosonic dimensions, we can compactify them on a
torus. this simply means that we eliminate all states which are not periodic functions
in these 16 coordinates.

the restriction to toroidal compactication in fact follows from a deeper principle.
the construction outlined so far was a consistent gauge xed quantum theory with
innitesimal (1, 0) superdieomorphism invariance in two dimensions. we have seen
above that perturbative string theory requires us to evaluate the world sheet path
integral on riemann surfaces of arbitrary genus. for genus one and higher, there
are disconnected pieces of the dieomorphism group and we must require invariance
under those as well. this is called the constraint of modular invariance. it turns out
that this restriction is satised i we choose the sixteen dimensional torus to be the
cartan torus of one of the groups e8  e8 or so(32). the operators (  )x i17,
with i = 1 . . . 16, are then the current algebra for the u(1)16 cartan subgroup. the

16not to be confused with spacetime supergravity, which is another beast entirely.
17 and  are worldsheet coordinates and the x i satisfy ( + )x i = 0.

29

currents corresponding to raising and lowering operators of the group have the form of
exponentials eirix i where ri are the roots of the algebra.

if we further compactify the heterotic string on a d-torus, we get d pairs of u(1)
currents (which, for generic radii of the toru are not completed to a nonabelian group)
from (  )x a. half of these are purely left moving and the other half purely
right moving. the vectorlike combinations are simply the kaluza klein symmetries
expected when compactifying gr on a torus. the axial combinations couple to the
winding number of strings around the d torus. perturbative string theory always has a

two form gauge eld b, which couples to the string world sheet as rworldsheet b. when

integrated around the d 1-cycles of the torus, it gives rise to d one forms which couple
to string winding number. in addition to this gain in the rank of the symmetry group,
a generic toroidal compactication will lose the nonabelian parts of the group. this is
because we can have wilson lines around the cycles of the torus. thus, at a generic
point on the moduli space of toroidal compactications of the heterotic string, the
gauge group is u(1)16+d  u(1)d, where we have separated the contributions coming
from left and right moving currents.

thus, one way of viewing toroidally compactied heterotic string theory is to say
that it consists of the modes of 16 + d left moving and d right moving scalar elds,
where the zero modes of these elds live on independent tori (there are also fermionic
partners and elds representing the noncompact dimensions, but we do not need to
discuss them here). a given compactication can then be specied by talking about the
allowed values of the dimensionless momenta around the torus, a discrete set of numbers
(lr
n ). one must insist that the vertex operators with any allowed momenta are all
relatively local on the world sheet in order that the expressions for tree level string
amplitudes make sense18. furthermore one must impose a condition called modular
invariance to guarantee that one loop amplitudes make sense. these conditions turn
out to be equivalent [16] to the restriction

m, ll

(ll)2  (lr)2  2z

(5.11)

combined with the requirement that the lattice of all possible momenta be self dual19.
such lattices turn out to be unique up to an o(16 + d, d) rotation. it can be shown
that the parameters of these rotations are equivalent to choices of background wilson

18left moving or right moving elds are not local operators. the vertex operators are exponentials
of these elds and are generally not local either. but certain discrete subsets of these vertex operators
are relatively local.

19the dual of a lattice with a scalar product dened on it is the set of all vectors which have integer

scalar product with the vectors of the original lattice.

30

lines, constant andtisymmetric tensor elds on the d torus and the choice of the at
metric on the torus.

thus, heterotic string theory compactied on a d-torus with generic wilson lines.
has a natural o(16+d, d, z) invariant scalar product dened on the space of worldsheet
currents. the fact that the same sort of scalar product arises as the intersection matrix
of cohomology classes of k3 manifolds is the rst hint that the two systems are related.

5.3 enhanced gauge symmetries

one of the reasons type ii strings did not receive much attention after the discovery of
the heterotic string was that they did not appear to have the capability of producing
gauge groups and representations like those of the standard model. the same was
true of 11d sugra. however, the suggestive connection with heterotic strings leads
one to suspect that a mechanism for producing nonabelian gauge symmetries has been
overlooked. the theory of singularities of k3 manifolds was worked out by kodaira
and others in the 1950s. it turns out that one can characterize singular k3 manifolds
in terms of topologically nontrivial cycles which shrink to zero size. the singularity is
determined by the intersection matrix i restricted to the shrinking cycles. it turns out
that in almost all cases, the resulting matrix was the cartan matrix of some nonabelian
lie group.
in the purely mathematical study of four manifolds, there is no way to
understand where the lie group is.

however, viewed from the point of view of m-theory compactication on k3, a
nonabelian group jumps into view. indeed, imagine bps m2 branes wrapped around
the shrinking cycles of the singularity. these will be massless particles in the un-
compactied seven dimensional spacetime. since we have 16 susys in the eective
seven dimensional theory these must include massless vector elds, since the smallest
representation of this susy algebra is the vector multiplet. furthermore, even away
from the singularity, we have 22 u(1) vector multiplets. indeed one can write three
form potentials in 11d sugra of the form adxdxdx = ai
(x)dx i, where i
are the 22 independent harmonic two forms on k3, and x are the seven noncompact
coordinates. the ai
 are gauge potentials in a product of u(1) algebras which will be
the cartan subalgebra of the nonabelian group that appears at the singularity. since
membranes are charged under the three form, we see, using the de rham connection
between forms and cycles, that the new massless vector bosons are charged under the
cartan subalgebra, i.e. we have a nonabelian gauge theory.

one further point of general interest. as is obvious from the t 4/z2 orbifold exam-
ple, the singularities that give rise to nonabelian gauge groups live on manifolds of nite
codimension (or branes) in the compact space. if the volume of the compact space is
large, this will lead to a large ratio between the gauge and gravitational couplings in the

31

noncompact eective eld theory. we will discuss the phenomenological implications
of this observation in the context of the horava witten scenario below.

the emergence of nonabelian gauge theory from singularities is one of the most
beautiful results of the m-theory revolution.
it combines wilsons observation that
singularities in the free energy functional at second order phase transitions could be
correlated with the appearance of massless states, with the mysterious occurrence of
lie groups in singularity theory, uniting physics and mathematics in a most satisfying
fashion. one can go much further along these lines. when studying singularities of
calabi-yau manifolds of dimension three or four one encounters cases which cannot
be explained in terms of gauge theory, but which do have an explanation in terms of
nontrivial xed points of the renormalization group. the interplay between susy,
singularity theory, and the theory of the renormalization group in these examples, is a
stunning illustration of the power of m-theory [17].

so far, we have seen how enhanced gauge symmetries arise from m-theory on k3
but have not yet delivered on our promise to make a connection with the heterotic
string. we have seen in toroidal examples that the key to string duality is the existence
of light bps states when cycles of a manifold shrink to zero. the limit of m-theory on
k3 which gives rise to weakly coupled heterotic string theory (on a torus, t 3) is the
limit where the k3 volume shrinks to zero in planck units. the m5 brane wrapped
around the k3 gives rise to a low tension string in this limit [14]. recall that the world
volume of the vebrane carries an antisymmetric tensor gauge eld with self dual 3
form eld strength, h = h, which satises dh = 0. for congurations of the ve
brane wrapped on k3 one can study congurations of h of the form h = jii, where
ji is a world volume one form which depends only on the two coordinates of the world
volume which are not wrapped on k3, and i is one of the 22 harmonic forms on k3.
in order to satisfy h = h, ji must satisfy ji = i  ji, where i = i  i (recall that 19
of the forms on k3 have i = 1, while for the other three it is negative). dh = 0 implies
dji = 0. in more familiar notation, the string formed from the m5 brane wrapped on
k3 will have 19 left moving (ja = ab) and 3 right moving conserved currents. this
is precisely the bosonic eld content of the (bosonic form of) the heterotic string on
a three torus. the evident susy of the wrapped brane conguration guarantees the
existence of the appropriate world sheet fermions.

the heterotic string was discovered as a solution to the consistency conditions of
perturbative string theory. though it was obviously the perturbative string most closely
connected to real physics, no one ever claimed that it was beautiful. the derivation of
its properties from the interplay between the k3 manifold and the m5 brane of 11d
sugra can make such an aesthetic claim. it is another triumph of string duality.

this construction automatically gives rise to the heterotic string compactied on a

32

three torus. note that again the geometry of k3 disappears from the ken of low energy
observers and is replaced by a space of a dierent dimension and topology. following
aspinwall [15] we can try to recover the ten dimensional heterotic string from the k3
picture. the mathematics is somewhat complex but in the end one recovers the picture
of horava and witten [43] (if one is careful to keep the full e8  e8 gauge symmetry
manifest at all times). that is, one nds 11d sugra compactied on an interval,
with e8 gauge groups living on each of two 10 dimensional boundaries20. the heterotic
string coupling is related to the size of the interval, l, by gs = (l/lp )3/2.

the horava-witten description of the strongly coupled heterotic string in ten
dimensions was originally motivated by considerations of anomaly cancellation and
matching onto various weakly coupled string limits. it is somewhat more satisfying to
realize it as a singular limit of compactication of m-theory on a k3 manifold.

witten [44] has pointed out that the strong coupling limit of this picture can resolve
one of the phenomenological problems of weakly coupled heterotic string theory. among
the few rm predictions of heterotic perturbation theory is the equality between the
gauge coupling unication scale m and the four dimensional planck scale mp . in reality
these dier by a factor of 100. careful consideration of threshold corrections brings this
discrepancy to a factor of 20, but one may still nd it disturbing. witten points out
that in the picture of 11d sugra on an interval it is easy to remove this discrepancy.
indeed, if we compactify the system to four dimensions on a calabi-yau 3-fold of
21, then the four dimensional gauge couplings are given approximately by
volume v6
p  (lv6/l8
1/g2
p ).
tuning l and the volume to the experimental numbers (and taking into account various
numerical factors, gives a linear size for the 3-fold of order 2lp and l  70lp . the
unication scale m is of order l1
p .

p ), while the four dimensional planck mass is given by m2

g  (v6/l6

i want to emphasize three features of this proposal. first, the four dimensional
planck mass is not a fundamental scale of the theory. rather, it is the unication scale,
identied with the eleven dimensional planck scale, which plays this role. secondly,
since we have seen that gauge groups generically arise on branes in m-theory, wittens
proposal may be only one out of many possibilities for resolving the discrepancy between
the unication and planck scales. a possible advantage of a more exible scenario
might be the elimination of all large dimensionless numbers from fundamental physics,
in particular the factor of 70 in wittens scenario. if the codimension of the space on

20as one takes the limit corresponding to innite three torus, one is forced to k3 manifolds with

two e8 singularities.

21actually, due to details which we will not enter into, the calabi-yau volume varies along the
interval. the parameter v6 is its value at the end of the interval where the standard model gauge
couplings live.

33

which the standard model lives is large, then the factor of order 100 which is attributed
to the volume of this space in planck units, might just be 26. finally, let us note that
in this brane scenario, the bulk physics enjoys a larger degree of susy (twice as much)
than the branes. this will be useful in our discussion of inationary cosmology below,
and may also help to solve the susy avor problem [45] [46].

5.4 conclusions

in this brief summary of m-theory and its duality symmetries, we have seen that
classical geometry can undergo monumental contortions while the theory itself remains
smooth. when there are enough noncompact dimensions and enough supersymmetry,
there are exact moduli spaces of degenerate vacua which interpolate between regions
which have very dierent classical geometric interpretations by passing through regions
where no geometrical interpretation is possible (for the compact part of the space). the
most striking example is perhaps the k3 compactication, where the 80 geometrical
parameters describing k3 manifolds are interpreted in an appropriate region of the
parameter space as the geometry, and background gauge and antisymmetric tensor
elds, of a three torus with heterotic strings living on it. the clear moral of the story
is that geometry is in the eye of the (low energy) beholder, and must actually be a
low energy approximation to some other concept, which we do not as yet understand.
equally important for our further discussion is that the modular parameters inter-
polate smoothly between dierent geometrical regions and exist even in regions which
can not be described by geometrical concepts. in dierent regimes of moduli space,
the moduli can be viewed as zero modes of dierent low energy elds living on dier-
ent background geometries. but, although their interpretation can change, the moduli
remain intact, and (with enough susy), their low energy dynamics is completely de-
termined. in subsequent sections we argue that they are the appropriate variables for
discussing the evolution of the universe.

6. quantum cosmology

6.1 semiclassical cosmology and quantum gravity

in todays lecture we will leave behind our brief survey of m-theory and duality and
proceed to cosmological questions. we will begin by discussing some fundamental
issues in quantum cosmology and proceed to a somewhat more practical application of
m-theory to inationary models. none of this work will lead to the kind of detailed
model building and comparison with observation that is the bread and butter of most
astroparticle physics. in my opinion, the current theoretical understanding of m-theory

34

does not warrant the construction of such detailed models. detailled inationary model
building requires, among other things, knowledge of the inaton potential. in an m-
theory context this means that we have to have control over susy breaking terms in
the low energy eective action. even the advances of the last few years have not helped
us to make signicant progress in understanding susy breaking.

my aim in these lectures will be to address general questions like what the inaton
is likely to be, the relation between the energy scales of ination and susy breaking,
the connection between various scales and pure numbers encountered in cosmology with
the fundamental parameters, and so on. we will see that a rather amusing picture can
be built up on this basis, which is quite dierent from most conventional cosmological
models. i will concentrate here primarily on my own work (and that of my collabora-
tors) rather than trying to give a survey of all possible approaches to cosmology within
m-theory. prof. veneziano will be giving a detailed exposition of one of the other
major approaches, so between the two of us you will get some idea of what is possible.

the discussion will be divided into two parts, one more fundamental and the
other more practical. the aim of the rst part will be to pose the problem of how
the conventional equations of cosmology may eventually be derived from a fully quan-
tum mechanical system. we will also begin to address the question of why m-theory
does not choose one of its highly supersymmetric vacua for the description of the world
around us. we end this exposition by introducing a heterodox antiinationary cosmol-
ogy. the practical section will concentrate on issues related to moduli and susy
breaking. we will see that cosmological considerations suggest a vacuum structure sim-
ilar to that proposed by horava and witten, and put further constraints on the form
of susy breaking. one also obtains an explanation of the size of the uctuations in
the microwave background in terms of the fundamental ratio between the unication
and planck scales. we will conclude with an inationary cosmology very dierent from
most of those in the literature. among its virtues is the possibility of supporting a qcd
axion with decay constant as large as the fundamental scale. indeed, the assumption
that such an axion exists gives an explanation of the temperature of matter radiation
equality in terms of the fundamental parameters of the theory.

we will begin our discussion of fundamental cosmology by recalling the treatment
of quantum cosmology in gr. one of the more bizarre consequences of an attempt to
marry gr to qm is the infamous problem of time. a generally covariant theory
is constructed for the precise purpose of not having a distinguished global notion of
time. in classical mechanics this is very nice, but quantum mechanically it turns the
conventional hamiltonian framework on its head. the problem can be seen in simple

35

systems with time reparametrization invariance, that is, actions of the form

z dtel(q, q/e)

(6.1)

where q represents a collection of variables which transform as scalars under time
reparametrization, and e is an einbein (i.e.
edt is time reparametrization invariant).
we can use the symmetry to set e equal to a constant (gauge xing), but the e equation
of motion then says that the canonical hamiltonian of the q vanishes.

h = q

l
 q  l = 0.

(6.2)

in simple covariant systems like chern-simons gauge theory, one can solve this
hamiltonian constraint and quantize the system in the sense that the classical observ-
ables are realized as operators in a hilbert space. however, the notion of time evolution
is still somewhat elusive. more generally, in realistic systems where the constraints are
not explicitly soluble, one recovers time evolution by nding classical variables. for
example, if spacetime has a boundary, with asymptotically at or asymptotically anti
desitter boundary conditions, then one can use one of the symmetry generators of the
classical geometry at innity as a time evolution operator.

in cosmology one generally does not have the luxury of a set of variables whose
quantum uctuations are frozen by the boundary conditions. the notion of time evolu-
tion is tied to a semiclassical approximation for a particular set of variables. dierent
cosmological evolutions may not be described by the same semiclassical variables. one
of the challenges of this framework is to nd a generic justication for the semiclassical
approximation. to see how the idea works, one quantizes the g00 einstein equation
by writing it in hamiltonian form and naively turning the canonical momenta into
dierential operators (at the level of sophistication of this analysis, it does not make
sense to worry about ordering ambiguities). this gives the wheeler-dewitt equation,
a second order pde which is supposed to pick out the physical states of the system
inside a space of functionals of the elds on a xed time slice. the challenge is to put
a positive metric hilbert inner product on the space of physical states and identify a
one parameter group of unitary operators that can be called time evolution.

it is well known that, viewed as a conventional eld theory, the conformal factor of
the gravitational eld has negative kinetic energy. in quantization of gr in perturba-
tion theory around any classical solution of the eld equations, the negative modes are
seen to be gauge artifacts and a positive denite hamiltonian is found for gravitons.

in general closed cosmologies, the analogous statement is the following: the wheeler
dewitt constraint completely eliminates all negative modes from the physical hilbert

36

space. it is convenient to think of gr in synchronous gauge, where the g0i components
of the metric vanish and g00 = 1. such a gauge is built by choosing a spacelike
hypersurface and following timelike geodesics orthogonal to this hypersurface to dene
the evolution into the future.
it can then be shown that all of the negative modes
represent the freedom to change the choice of the initial hypersurface (the many ngered
time of gr). the wheeler-dewitt equation is then the constraint which says that
physics must be independent of this choice. it is often convenient to solve the contraint
in stages. namely, among all spacelike surfaces in a given spacetime geometry, there are
one parameter families related to each other by propagation along orthogonal timelike
geodesics. the choice of such a family eliminates all but one of the negative modes,
the last one being related to the choice of which surface in the family is called the
initial surface. that is, it is related to the time as measured by observers following
the timelike geodesics which dene the family22. it can be chosen to be any monotonic
function along these trajectories, and it is often convenient to choose the volume of the
spatial metric.

the upshot of all this, is that once a family of hypersurfaces is chosen, one still has
a single component of the wheeler-dewitt constraint which has not yet been imposed.
classically this is the familiar friedmann equation relating the expansion rate to the
energy density. a naive quantization of this equation gives a hyperbolic pde on a space
with signature (1, n). a form of this equation suciently general for our purposes is

[hgab(m)ab + gab(q, m)ab +

1
h

v (m) + u(q, m)] = 0

(6.3)

we have separated the variables into classical (ma) and quantum (qa) and introduced a
formal parameter h to organize the wkb like approximation for the classical variables.
the metric g is hyperbolic with one negative direction, while the metric g has euclidean
signature. the analysis we are presenting goes back to [37]. up to terms of order h, it
is easy to see that the solution of this equation has the form

where

(m, q) = eis(m)/ha(m)(m, q)

gabasbs + v = 0

gab(asba + aabs = 0)

igabasb + h = 0

(6.4)

(6.5)

(6.6)

(6.7)

22this discussion is purely classical, but mirrors the less intuitive mathematical operations which

one carries out in semiclassical quantization of the wd equation.

37

h  gabab + u

(6.8)

the rst of these equations has a hamiltonian-jacobi form. it can be solved by nding
classical motions ma(t) = gabas(m). s is then the action of the classical solution,
and (6.5) is satised if the solution has zero energy. the existence of real zero energy
solutions (and thus real s) depends on the fact that gab has nonpositive signature.

using the classical solution ma(t), we recognize that (6.7) can be written as a

conventional schrodinger equation:

i


t

= h

(6.9)

positivity of the hamiltonian (6.8) requires that gab have euclidean signature. note
that since h depends on the ms, the hamiltonian will in general be time dependent.
furthermore, the quantum uctuations of the classical variables m will have a sensible
hamiltonian only if the metric gab has only a single negative eigenvalue. thus, we see
that within the naive approach to quantization of einsteins equations, the existence
of a hilbert space interpretation of the physical states, with a positive denite scalar
product and a unitary time evolution with a sensible hamiltonian operator, is closely
tied to the fact that einsteins equations coupled to matter with positive kinetic energy
have a hyperbolic metric with exactly one negative eigenvalue (after gauge xing).

one may wonder whether these observations will survive in a more realistic theory
of quantum gravity. we know that einsteins action is only a low energy eective
description of m-theory. even those heretics who refuse to admit that m-theory is the
unique sensible theory of quantum gravity23 are unlikely to insist that quantization of
this famously nonrenormalizable eld theory by the crude procedure described above is
the nal word on the subject of quantum gravity. i would like to present some evidence
that in m-theory the (1, n) signature of the metric on the space of classical variables is
indeed guaranteed by rather robust properties of the theory.

before doing so i want to point out how m-theory addresses the question of the
existence of semiclassical variables ma. there are actually two desiderata for the choice
of such variables: we want the semiclassical approximation for these variables to be valid
during most of cosmic history24. secondly, given the notion of energy implied by the

23one hopes that the world has not come to a state in which one has to emphasize that a sentence

like this is a joke, but let me record that fact in this footnote just to be on the safe side.

24as borges pointed out long ago [7] it is almost impossible to avoid self referential paradoxes
when trying to conceptualize a system in which the notion of time is an illusion or an approximation.
according to the paragraphs above, cosmic history and its implied notion of time only exist because
of the classical nature of the ma. rather than attempting the impossible task of being logically and
linguistically precise, i will make the common assumption that any sensible physicist who has followed
my discussion understands exactly what i mean by these imprecise phrases.

38

classical solution for the ma, one often wants to be able to make a born oppenheimer
approximation in which the ma are slow variables or collective coordinates. note that
the classical nature of the ma is crucial, while the born-oppenheimer approximation is
not. without classical variables we would have no notion of time evolution. the born-
oppenheimer approximation allows us to discuss the evolution of the classical variables
in terms of an eective action in which other degrees of freedom are ignored. this is
particularly useful below the planck energy, since we have no idea how to describe the
full set of degrees of freedom of the theory in the planck regime, but are comfortable
with a quantum eld theory description below that. nonetheless, we will argue below
that the classical variables might still provide a useful notion of time evolution during
the planck era, as long as the variable which we identify as the spatial volume of
classical geometry below the planck scale, is large. it is important for any such pre-
planckian endeavor that m-theory gives an unambiguous meaning to (at least highly
supersymmetric) moduli spaces even in regimes not describable by low energy einstein
equations. in a regime of super-planckian energy and large volume, one would have to
know something about the dynamics and the state of all the degrees of freedom in the
system to understand how they eect the evolution of the classical variables.

as suggested in the last paragraph, both classicality and slow evolution can be
understood in m-theory if we identify the ma as moduli, though with a slightly dierent
denition of that word than the usual parameters describing continuous families of
supersymmetric vacua with d  4 asymptotically at dimensions.
in a theory of
quantum gravity, susy can only be dened nonperturbatively if we insist on studying
states with certain a priori boundary conditions. the susy charges, just like the
hamiltonian, are dened as generators of certain asymptotic symmetries of the whole
class of metrics satisfying the boundary conditions. however, if we restrict attention
to the classical sugra equations, then we can dene what we mean by solutions
which preserve a certain amount of supersymmetry. since the hamiltonian appears in
the susy algebra, they will all be static solutions. to nd them, we simply require
that certain susy variations of all the elds vanish at the solution. typically, we
nd a moduli space of continuously connected solutions preserving a particular susy
subalgebra. the parameters ma are coordinates on this space. in particular, for 11d
sugra, each solution will be a static, compact ten geometry, and the volume of the
compact space, v will be one of the moduli.

now consider classical motions in which the ma become functions of time. the
eective action derived by plugging such time dependent moduli into the sugra
action has the form

s = gab(m) ma mbe1(t)

(6.10)

39

where e is an einbein which imposes time reparametrization invariance. g is a hyper-
bolic metric with signature (1, n). in fact, it is easy to see that the only modulus with
negative kinetic energy is the volume v . this is because our choice of parametrization
of the spacetime metric has implicitly chosen a family of spacelike hypersurfaces in
these spacetimes (those of constant t). the constraint equation coming from varying e
can be written

v
v

(

)2 = gab ma mb

(6.11)

and is just the friedman equation for a robertson walker cosmology. the hatted
quantities stand for the moduli space of susy solutions with volume 1.

it is easy to prove (and well known to those who have studied cosmologies with
minimally coupled massless scalar elds) that the eld equations of this system give,
for the volume variable, exactly the equations of a robertson-walker universe with
equation of state p = . the energy density  then scales like 1/v 2. the m vari-
ables satisfy the equations of geodesic motion in the metric g, under the inuence of
cosmological friction. this is equivalent to free geodesic motion in the reparametrized
time s dened by ds/dt = v  1
2 . the volume is always monotonically decreasing or
increasing in these solutions. the derivation of these facts is an enjoyable exercise in
classical mechanics which i urge the students to do.

finally i want to note that under the transformation v  cv , the action scales as
s  cs. thus, plancks constant h can be absorbed in v , and the system is classical at
large v . i want to emphasize that the actual spacetime geometries described by these
evolution equations can be quite complex. that is, the ma might parametrize a set of
calabi-yau manifolds. however the simple properties of the evolution on this moduli
space described above are unaected by the complexity of the underlying manifolds.

the point of all of these classical sugra manipulations is that, given enough
susy, there are nonrenormalization theorems which protect this structure in regimes
where the classical sugra approximation is invalid. for example, if there are 16
or more susys preserved, then one can prove that there is no renormalization of the
terms with  2 derivatives in the eective lagrangian for the moduli, to all orders in the
expansion around classical sugra. furthermore, these are the cases where sugra
is dual to type ii (32 susys) or heterotic (16 susys) string theories, compactied
on tori. the weak coupling string expansions are in some sense expanding around the
opposite limit from the sugra expansion (extremely small volumes, in lp units, of
compact submanifolds rather than extremely large ones). to all orders in the weak
coupling string expansions one can establish that the moduli space exists (i.e. that
no potential term is generated in the eective lagrangian for the moduli) and that its

40

topological and metrical structure is the same as that given by 11d sugra25.

there is thus ample evidence that there is some exact sense in which the con-
guration space of m-theory contains regions which map precisely on to the classical
moduli spaces of sugra solutions preserving at least 16 susys. for 8 susys, the
situation is a bit more complicated. the well understood regions of moduli space here
correspond to 11d sugra (or type ii strings) compactied on a manifold which is
the product of a calabi-yau 3-fold and a torus, or heterotic strings compactied on k3
manifolds times a torus. calabi-yau 3-folds come in dierent topological classes, but
there is a conjecture that all of these regions are on one continuously connected moduli
space once quantum mechanics is taken into account. this statement depends on the
fact that the strong nonrenormalization theorems described above are not valid. the
metric on moduli space is modied by higher order corrections. however, one can still
prove a nonrenormalization theorem for the potential on moduli space (namely that it
is identically zero) so that the moduli space still exists as an exact concept.

this is all that is needed to establish that the moduli are good candidates to be
the semiclassical, born-oppenheimer variables that are necessary for the derivation of
a cosmology from a generally covariant quantum system.
indeed, the absence of a
potential on moduli space means that the classical moduli can execute arbitrarily slow
motions with arbitrarily low energy. thus, in regimes where the classical motion has
energy density small compared to the fundamental scale of m-theory, they are good
born-oppenheimer variables. furthermore, the v rescaling symmetry of the action
shows that whenever v is large the moduli will behave classically.
indeed this will
even be true in regions where the born-oppenheimer approximation breaks down, that
is regions where the energy density is of the order of or larger than the planck scale,
but the volume is large. in such a regime, a description of the evolution in terms of
classical moduli coupled to a stochastic bath of high energy degrees of freedom might be
appropriate. the mystery will be to understand the equation of state of the stochastic
bath.

the necessity of coupling the moduli to another, stochastic set of degrees of freedom
appears also very late in the history of the universe. the modular energy density scales
to zero much faster than either matter or radiation. thus if there is any mechanism
which generates matter or radiation, they will quickly dominate the energy density
of the universe.
in [25] it was shown that when the moduli can be treated as the
homogeneous modes of quantum elds, there is an ecient mechanism for converting

25if one is willing to decompactify three of the toroidal directions and view the remaining moduli
as zero modes of elds in 3 + 1 dimensional minkowski space, then one can prove these statements
from susy without recourse to any expansion. it is likely that these proofs can be adapted to the
completely compactied situation, but this has not yet been done.

41

modular energy into radiation. thus, at late times, one must study the motion of the
moduli coupled to a stochastic bath of radiation and/or matter.

to summarize, the existence of a set of approximately classical, low energy collective
coordinates which take values in a space of hyperbolic signature (1, n) seems to be a
very robust property of m-theory. these would seem to be just what we need for a
derivation of cosmology from the theory. from the point of view of someone who is
deeply attached to the real world, the only problem with this analysis is that the
universes it describes become highly supersymmetric in the large volume limit. we will
defer the discussion of moduli in the context of broken susy to section 7.

6.2 extreme moduli

in this subsection i will present some results about the beginning and end of cosmic
evolution in the highly supersymmetric situations i have just described. one motivation
for this is to provide a controlled model for more realistic cosmologies. another is to
try to address the question with which we began these lectures, of why the universe
as described by m-theory does not end up in a highly supersymmetric state. finally,
we will discover some very interesting results about duality and singularities which are
closely related to the hyperbolic structure of moduli space and the question of the arrow
of time.

we will discuss only the case of maximally susy moduli spaces, which are obtained
by compactifying m-theory on a ten torus. the parameters are a at metric on the
torus, and the expectation value of the three form potential, a on three cycles of the
torus. most of these are compact angle variables. among the metric variables, only
the radii ri of a rectilinear torus are noncompact, while the three form expectation
values are all angle variables because of the dirac-nepomechie-teitelboim quantization
condition [30] (their conjugate momenta are quantized). thus, intuitively, we can
restrict our discussion of the possible extreme regions of moduli space to the radii
of a rectilinear torus. this argument can be made mathematically precise using the
description of the moduli space as a homogeneous space. we will call the restricted
rectilinear moduli space, the kasner moduli space.

the metrics which describe motion on the kasner moduli space have the form

ds2 = dt2 + r2

i (t)(dxi)2

(6.12)

where the xi have period 2. inserting this ansatz into the action, we nd that the
solution of the equations of 11d sugra for individual radii are

ri(t) = lp(t/t0)pi

(6.13)

42

x p2

i =x pi = 1

(6.14)

where

note that the equation (6.14) implies that at least one of the pi is negative. we have
restricted attention to the case where the volume expands as time goes to innity. we
will see below that, although the equations are time reversal invariant, all of these
solutions visit two very dierent regions of moduli space at the two endpoints of their
evolution. one of the regions has a simple semiclassical description, while the other does
not. this introduces a natural arrow of time into the system  the future is identied
as the regime where the semiclassical approximation becomes better and better.

it is well known that all of these solutions are singular at both innite and zero
time. some of the radii shrink to zero at both ends of the evolution. note that if we
add a matter or radiation energy density to the system then it dominates the system
in the innite volume limit and changes the solutions for the geometry there. however,
near the singularity at vanishing volume both matter and radiation become negligible
(despite the fact that their densities are becoming innite) and the solutions retain
their kasner form.

all of this is true in 11d sugra. in m-theory we know that many regions of moduli
space which are apparently singular in 11d sugra can be reinterpreted as living in
large spaces described by weakly coupled type ii string theory or a dual version of
11d sugra. the vacuum einstein equations are of course invariant under these u-
duality transformations. so one is lead to believe that many apparent singularities of
the kasner universes are perfectly innocuous.

note however that phenomenological matter and radiation densities which one
might add to the equations are not invariant under duality. the energy density truly
becomes singular as the volume goes to zero. how then are we to understand the
meaning of the duality symmetry? the resolution is as follows. we know that when
radii go to zero, the eective eld theory description of the universe in 11d sugra
becomes singular due to the appearance of new low frequency states. we also know
that the singularity in the energy densities of matter and radiation implies that scat-
tering cross sections are becoming large. thus, it seems inevitable that phase space
considerations will favor the rapid annihilation of the existing energy densities into the
new light degrees of freedom. this would be enhanced for kaluza-klein like modes,
whose individual energies are becoming large near the singularity.

thus, near a singularity with a dual interpretation, the contents of the universe will
be rapidly converted into new light modes, which have a completely dierent view of
what the geometry of space is. the most eective description of the new situation is in
terms of the transformed moduli and the new light degrees of freedom. the latter can

43

be described in terms of elds in the reinterpreted geometry. we want to emphasize
strongly the fact that the moduli do not change in this transformation, but are merely
reinterpreted. this squares with our notion that they are exact concepts in m-theory.
by contrast, the elds whose zero modes they appear to be in a particular semiclassical
regime, do not always make sense. the momentum modes of one interpretation are
brane winding modes in another and there is no approximate way in which we can
consider both sets of local elds at the same time. fortunately, there is also no regime
in which both kinds of modes are at low energy simultaneously, so in every regime
where the time dependence is slow enough to make a low energy approximation, we
can use local eld theory.

this mechanism for resolving cosmological singularities leads naturally to the ques-
tion of precisely which noncompact regions of moduli space can be mapped into what
we will call the safe domain in which the theory can be interpreted as either 11d
sugra or type ii string theory with radii large in the appropriate units.

6.3 the moduli space of m-theory on rectangular tori

in this section, we will study the structure of the moduli space of m-theory compactied
on various tori t k with k  10. we are especially interested in noncompact regions of
this space which might represent either singularities or large universes. as explained
above, the three-form potential am n p will be set to zero and the circumferences of the
cycles of the torus will be expressed as the exponentials

ri
lp

= spi,

i = 1, 2, . . . , k.

(6.15)

the remaining coordinates x0 (time) and xk+1 . . . x10 are considered to be innite
and we never dualize them.
it is important to distinguish the variable s here from
the time in the kasner solution. here we are just parametrizing possible asymptotic
domains in the moduli space, whereas the kasner solution is to be used as a metric
valid for all values of the parameter t. we will see that it interpolates between two
very dierent asymptotic domains.

the radii are encoded in the logarithms pi. we will study limits of the moduli
space in various directions which correspond to keeping pi xed and sending s  
(the change to s  0 is equivalent to pi  pi so we do not need to study it separately).
in terms of this parametrization of the extreme regions of moduli space, we can see that
a kasner solution with parameters pi will visit the regime of moduli space characterized
by pi as t   and the regime pi as t  0.

44

6.4 the 2/5 transformation

m-theory has dualities which allow us to identify the vacua with dierent pis. a
subgroup of this duality group is the sk which permutes the pis. without loss of
generality, we can assume that p1  p2  . . .  p10. we will assume this in most of the
text. the full group that leaves invariant rectilinear tori with vanishing three form is
the weyl group of the noncompact ek group of sugra. we will denote it by gk. we
will give an elementary derivation of the properties of this group for the convenience
of the reader. gk is generated by the permutations of the cycles on the torus, and one
other transformation which acts as follows:

(p1, p2, . . . , pk) 7 (p1 

2s
3

, p2 

2s
3

, p3 

2s
3

, p4 +

s
3

, . . . , pk +

s
3

).

(6.16)

where s = (p1 + p2 + p3). before explaining why this transformation is a symmetry of
m-theory, let us point out several of its properties (6.16).

 the total sum s =pk

i=1 pi changes to s 7 s + (k  9)s/3. so for k < 9, the sum
increases if s < 0, for k = 9 the total sum is an invariant and for k > 9 the sum
decreases for s < 0.

 if we consider all pis to be integers which are equal modulo 3, this property will
hold also after the 2/5 transformation. the reason is that, due to the assumptions,
s is a multiple of three and the coecients 2/3 and +1/3 dier by an integer.
 as a result, from any initial integer pis we get pis which are multiples of 1/3
which means that all the matrix elements of matrices in the 2/5 transformation
are integer multiples of 1/3.

 the order of p1, p2, p3 is not changed (the dierence p1  p2 remains constant,
for instance). similarly, the order of p4, p5, . . . , pk is unchanged. however the
ordering between p1...3 and p4...k can change in general. by convention, we will
follow each 2/5 transformation by a permutation which places the pis in ascending
order.

 the bilinear quantity i = (9  k)p(p2

is left invariant by gk.

i ) + (p pi)2 = (10  k)p(p2

i ) + 2pi<j pipj

the fact that 2/5 transformation is a symmetry of m-theory can be proved as
follows. let us interpret l1 as the m-theoretical circle of a type iia string theory.
then the simplest duality which gives us a theory of the same kind (iia) is the double
t-duality. let us perform it on the circles l2 and l3. the claim is that if we combine

45

this double t-duality with a permutation of l2 and l3 and interpret the new l1 as the
m-theoretical circle again, we get precisely (6.16).

another illuminating way to view the transformation 2/5 transformation is to com-
pactify m-theory on a three torus. the original m2-brane and the m5-brane wrapped
on the three torus are both bps membranes in eight dimensions. the tension of the
original m2-brane is of order l3
p , while that of the membrane which comes from the
wrapped m5 is v l6
p where v is the volume of the three torus. when the three torus
is large and the 11d sugra approximation is valid, the wrapped m5-brane is much
heavier than the m2-brane, while in the small volume limit, the opposite is true. we
have seen previously that in limits where classical geometrical descriptions are break-
ing down, one can nd a new classical description by following those bps states which
become lightest in the limit. this suggests that we try to dene l3
and
l6
v = l3
p and try to imagine a duality transformation in m-theory which takes a
p
compactication on a small three torus to a compactication on a large one, with cor-
responding redenition of the planck scale. aharony [38] has given arguments that
such a duality transformation exists, and it can be demonstrated rigorously in matrix
theory. in the limit in which one of the cycles of the t 3 is small, so that a type ii string
description becomes appropriate, it is just the double t-duality of the previous para-
graph. the fact that this transformation plus permutations generates gk was proven
by the authors of [39] for k  9. i leave it to the reader to verify that the eect of this
transformation on the variables pi is precisely that described above.

p = v l6
p

in the following subsection we will use this group of duality transformations to prove
that extreme regions of the moduli space fall into a number of distinct categories. one
is such that some kind of semiclassical description of the physics is valid, and breaks
up into regions that are described by 11d sugra or weakly coupled type iia or
iib string theory. the other is completely mysterious and has no known semiclassical
description. each kasner solution visits both of these regions at the extreme ends of
its trajectory. it is thus reasonable to identify the past with the unknown region and
the future with the semiclassical regime.

the derivations below are based primarily on elementary algebra and the denition
of the duality transformations given above. however, many cosmologists may want to
skip the technical details.

6.5 the boundaries of moduli space

there are three types of boundaries of the toroidal moduli space which are amenable
to detailed analysis. the rst is the limit in which eleven-dimensional supergravity
becomes valid. we will denote this limit as 11d. the other two limits are weakly
coupled type iia and type iib theories in 10 dimensions. we will call the domain

46

of asymptotic moduli space which can be mapped into one of these limits, the safe
domain.

 for the limit 11d, all the radii must be greater than lp. note that for t  
it means that all the radii are much greater than lp. in terms of the pis, this is
the inequality pi > 0.

 for type iia, the dimensionless coupling constant giia

s must be smaller than 1
(much smaller for t  ) and all the remaining radii must be greater than ls
(much greater for t  ).

 for type iib, the dimensionless coupling constant giib

s must be smaller than 1
(much smaller for t  ) and all the remaining radii must be greater than ls
(much greater for t  ), including the extra radius whose momentum arises
as the number of wrapped m2-branes on the small t 2 in the dual 11d sugra
picture.

if we assume the canonical ordering of the radii, i.e. p1  p2  p3  . . .  pk, we

can simplify these requirements as follows:

 11d: 0 < p1
 iia: p1 < 0 < p1 + 2p2
 iib: p1 + 2p2 < 0 < p1 + 2p3

to derive this, we have used the familiar relations:

l1
lp

= (giia

s

ls(cid:19)2
)2/3 =(cid:18)lp

=(cid:18)l1

ls(cid:19)2/3

(6.17)

for the 11d/iia duality (l1 is the m-theoretical circle) and similar relations for the
11d/iib case (l1 < l2 are the parameters of the t 2 and liib is the circumference of
the extra circle):

l1
l2
1

giib
s

= giib

s

,

1 =

l1l2
s
l3
s

=

giib
s l2l2
s

l3
s

=

liibl1l2

,

(cid:18)lp
ls(cid:19)4

=

l1l2
l2
p

=

lp
liib

= (giib

s

l3
s

)1/3(cid:18) ls

liib(cid:19)4/3

(6.18)

(6.19)

note that the regions dened by the inequalities above cannot overlap, since the
regions are dened by m, m c  a, ac  b where ac means the complement of a set.

47

furthermore, assuming pi < pi+1 it is easy to show that p1 +2p3 < 0 implies p1+2p2 < 0
and p1 + 2p2 < 0 implies 3p1 < 0 or p1 < 0.

this means that (neglecting the boundaries where the inequalities are saturated)
the region outside 11d iia iib is dened simply by p1 + 2p3 < 0. the latter charac-
terization of the safe domain of moduli space will simplify our discussion considerably.
the invariance of the bilinear form dened above gives an important constraint on
the action of gk on the moduli space. for k = 10 it is easy to see that, considering
the pi to be the coordinates of a ten vector, it denes a lorentzian metric on this ten
dimensional space. thus the group g10 is a discrete subgroup of o(1, 9). the direction
in this space corresponding to the sum of the pi is timelike, while the hyperplane on
which this sum vanishes is spacelike. we can obtain the group g9 from the group g10
by taking p10 to innity and considering only transformations which leave it invariant.
obviously then, g9 is a discrete subgroup of the transverse galilean group of the innite
momentum frame. for k  8 on the other hand, the bilinear form is positive denite
and gk is contained in o(k). since the latter group is compact, and there is a basis
in which the gk matrices are all integers divided by 3, we conclude that in these cases
gk is a nite group. in a moment we will show that g9 and a fortiori g10 are innite.
finally we note that the 2/5 transformation is a spatial reection in o(1, 9). indeed
it squares to 1 so its determinant is 1. on the other hand, if we take all but three
coordinates very large, then the 2/5 transformation of those coordinates is very close
to the spatial reection through the plane p1 + p2 + p3 = 0, so it is a reection of a
single spatial coordinate.

m-theory
in 11 dim.

2
                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                


p  > p

permuted
  region

1

2

p

1

p

iia

strings

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                


iib strings

figure 3: the structure of the moduli space for t 2.

48

we now prove that g9 is innite. start with the rst vector of pis given below and
iterate (6.16) on the three smallest radii (a strategy which we will use all the time) and
sort pis after each step, so that their index reects their order on the real line. we get

(1,1,1, 1,1,1, 1,1,1)
(2,2,2, 2,2,2, +1, +1, +1)
(4,4,4, 1,1,1, +2, +2, +2)
(5,5,5, 2,2,2, +4, +4, +4)

...

(3  (2  3n), 3  (1), 3  (3n  4))
(3  (1  3n), 3  (2), 3  (3n  2))

(6.20)

so the entries grow (linearly) to innity.

6.6 covering the moduli space

we will show that there is a useful strategy which can be used to transform any point
{pi} into the safe domain in the case of t k, k < 9. the strategy is to perform iteratively
2/5 transformations on the three smallest radii.

assuming that {pi} is outside the safe domain, i.e. p1 + 2p3 < 0 (pis are sorted
so that pi  pi+1), it is easy to see that p1 + p2 + p3 < 0 (because p2  p3). as we
said below the equation (6.16), the 2/5 transformation on p1, p2, p3 always increases the
total sum p pi for p1 + p2 + p3 < 0. but this sum cannot increase indenitely because

the group gk is nite for k < 9. therefore the iteration proccess must terminate at
some point. the only way this can happen is that the assumption p1 + 2p3 < 0 no
longer holds, which means that we are in the safe domain. this completes the proof
for k < 9.

for k = 9 the proof is more dicult. the group g9 is innite and furthermore,

the sum of all pis does not change. in fact the conservation of p pi is the reason that
only points with p pi > 0 can be dualized to the safe domain. the reason is that if
p1 + 2p3  0, also 3p1 + 6p3  0 and consequently
p1+p2+p3+p4+p5+p6+p7+p8+p9  p1+p1+p1+p3+p3+p3+p3+p3+p3  0. (6.21)
this inequality is saturated only if all pis are equal to each other. if their sum vanishes,
each pi must then vanish. but we cannot obtain a zero vector from a nonzero vector

also clear that we cannot reach the safe domain.

by 2/5 transformations because they are nonsingular. if the sum p pi is negative, it is
i=1 pi > 0, then we can map the region of moduli space with t   to
the safe domain. we will prove it for rational pis only. this assumption compensates

however, ifp9

49

for the fact that the order of g9 is innite. assuming pis rational is however sucient
because we will see that a nite product of 2/5 transformations brings us to the safe
domain. but a composition of a nite number of 2/5 transformations is a continuous
map from r9 to r9 so there must be at least a ray part of a neighborhood which can
be also dualized to the safe domain. because q9 is dense in r9, our argument proves
the result for general values of pi.

from now on we assume that the pis are rational numbers. everything is scale
invariant so we may multiply them by a common denominator to make integers. in
fact, we choose them to be integer multiples of three since in that case we will have
integer pis even after 2/5 transformations. the numbers pi are now integers equal
modulo 3 and their sum is positive. we will dene a critical quantity

c =

1...9xi<j
(pi  pj)2.

(6.22)

this is a priori an integer greater than or equal to zero which is invariant under per-
mutations. what happens to c if we make a 2/5 transformation on the radii p1, p2, p3?
the dierences p1  p2, p1  p3, p2  p3 do not change and this holds for p4  p5,
. . . p8  p9, too. the only contributions to (6.22) which are changed are from 3 6 = 18
mixed terms like (p1  p4)2. using (6.16),

(p1  p4) 7 (p1 

2s
3

)  (p4 +

s
3

) = (p1  p4)  s

(6.23)

so its square

(p1  p4)2 7 [(p1  p4)  s]2 = (p1  p4)2  2s(p1  p4) + s2

(6.24)

changes by 2s(p1  p4) + s2. summing over all 18 terms we get (s = p1 + p2 + p3)
pi)  s! = 6s
c = 2s[6(p1 + p2 + p3) 3(p4 + . . . + p9)] + 18s2 = 6s2 + 6 (
9xi=1
but this quantity is strictly negative because p pi is positive and s < 0 (we dene the
safe domain with boundaries, p1 + 2p3  0).

this means that c dened in (6.22) decreases after each 2/5 transformation on the
three smallest radii. since it is a non-negative integer, it cannot decrease indenitely.
thus the assumption p1 + 2p3 < 0 becomes invalid after a nite number of steps and
we reach the safe domain.

9xi=1

pi.

(6.25)

now let us turn to the fully compactied case. as we pointed out, the bilinear

form i  2pi<j pipj denes a lorentzian signature metric on the vector space whose

50

components are the pi. the 2/5 transformation is a spatial reection and therefore the
group g10 consists of orthochronous lorentz transformations. now consider a vector
in the safe domain. we can write it as

(2,2 + a1, 1 + a2, . . . , 1 + a9)s,

s  r+

(6.26)

where the ai are positive.
it is easy to see that i is positive on this conguration.
this means that only the inside of the light cone can be mapped into the safe domain.

furthermore, since p pi is positive in the safe domain and the transformations are

orthochronous, only the interior of the future light cone in moduli space can be mapped
into the safe domain.

we would now like to show that the entire interior of the forward light cone can be
so mapped. we use the same strategy of rational coordinates dense in r10. if we start
outside the safe domain, the sum of the rst three pi is negative. we again pursue the
strategy of doing a 2/5 transformation on the rst three coordinates and then reordering
and iterating. for the case of g9 the sum of the coordinates was an invariant, but here
it decreases under the 2/5 transformation of the three smallest coordinates, if their

sum is negative. butp pi is (starting from rational values and rescaling to get integers

congruent modulo three as before) a positive integer and must remain so after g10
operations. thus, after a nite number of iterations, the assumption that the sum of
the three smallest coordinates is negative must fail, and we are in the safe domain. in
fact, we generically enter the safe domain before this point. the complement of the safe
domain always has negative sum of the rst three coordinates, but there are elements
in the safe domain where this sum is negative.

it is quite remarkable that the bilinear form i is proportional to the wheeler-

de witt hamiltonian for the kasner solutions:

i

t2 = xi

dli/dt

li !2

xi   dli/dt
li !2

=

2

t2 xi<j

pipj.

(6.27)

the solutions themselves thus lie precisely on the future light cone in moduli space.
each solution has two asymptotic regions (t  0, in (6.12)), one of which is in the
past light cone and the other in the future light cone of moduli space. the structure
of the modular group thus suggests a natural arrow of time for cosmological evolution.
the future may be dened as the direction in which the solution approaches the safe
domain of moduli space. all of the kasner solutions then, have a true singularity in
their past, which cannot be removed by duality transformations.

actually, since the kasner solutions are on the light cone, which is the boundary
of the safe domain, we must add a small homogeneous energy density to the system

51

in order to make this statement correct. the condition that we can map into the safe
domain is then the statement that this additional energy density is positive. note that
in the safe domain, and if the equation of state of this matter satises (but does not
saturate) the holographic bound of [36], this energy density dominates the late time
evolution of the universe, while near the singularity, it becomes negligible compared
to the kasner degrees of freedom. the assumption of a homogeneous negative energy
density is manifestly incompatible with einsteins equations in a compact at universe
so we see that the spacelike domain of moduli space corresponds to a physical situation
which cannot occur in the safe domain.

the backward lightcone of the asymptotic moduli space is, as we have said, visited

by all of the classical solutions of the theory.

to summarize: the u-duality group g10 divides the asymptotic domains of moduli
space into three regions, corresponding to the spacelike and future and past timelike
regimes of a lorentzian manifold. only the future lightcone can be understood in
terms of weakly coupled sugra or string theory. the group theory provides an exact
m-theoretic meaning for the wheeler-de witt hamiltonian for moduli. classical solu-
tions of the low energy eective equations of motion with positive energy density for
matter distributions lie in the timelike region of moduli space and interpolate between
the past and future light cones. we nd it remarkable that the purely group theoret-
ical considerations of this section seem to capture so much of the physics of toroidal
cosmologies.

6.7 moduli spaces with less susy

we would like to generalize the above considerations to situations which preserve less
susy. this enterprise immediately raises some questions, the rst of which is what we
mean by susy. cosmologies with compact spatial sections have no global symmetries
in the standard sense since there is no asymptotic region in which one can dene the
generators. we will dene a cosmology with a certain amount of susy by rst looking
for euclidean ten manifolds and three form eld congurations which are solutions
of the equations of 11d sugra and have a certain number of killing spinors. the
rst approximation to cosmology will be to study motion on a moduli space of such
solutions. the motivation for this is that at least in the semiclassical approximation we
are guaranteed to nd arbitrarily slow motions of the moduli. in fact, in many cases,
susy nonrenormalization theorems guarantee that the semiclassical approximation
becomes valid for slow motions because the low energy eective lagrangian of the
moduli is to a large extent determined by susy. there are however a number of pitfalls
inherent in our approach. we know that for some susy algebras, the moduli space of
compactications to four or six dimensions is not a manifold. new moduli can appear

52

at singular points in moduli space and a new branch of the space, attached to the old
one at the singular point, must be added. there may be cosmologies which traverse
from one branch to the other in the course of their evolution. if that occurs, there will
be a point at which the moduli space approximation breaks down. furthermore, there
are many examples of susy vacua of m-theory which have not yet been continuously
connected on to the 11d limit, even through a series of conifold transitions such as
those described above [41]. in particular, it has been suggested that there might be
a completely isolated vacuum state of m-theory [42]. thus it might not be possible
to imagine that all cosmological solutions which preserve a given amount of susy are
continuously connected to the 11d sugra regime.

despite these potential problems, we think it is worthwhile to begin a study of
compact, susy preserving, ten manifolds. here we will only study examples where the
three form eld vanishes. the well known local condition for a killing spinor, d = 0,
has as a condition for local integrability the vanishing curvature condition

rab

ab = 0

(6.28)

thus, locally the curvature must lie in a subalgebra of the lie algebra of spin(10)
which annihilates a spinor. the global condition is that the holonomy around any
closed path must lie in a subgroup which preserves a spinor. since we are dealing with
11d sugra, we always have both the 16 and 16 representations of spin(10) so susys
come in pairs.

for maximal susy the curvature must vanish identically and the space must be
a torus. the next possibility is to preserve half the spinors and this is achieved by
manifolds of the form k3t 7 or orbifolds of them by freely acting discrete symmetries.
we now jump to the case of 4 susys. to nd examples, it is convenient to consider

the decompositions spin(10)  spin(k)  spin(10  k).

the 16 is then a tensor product of two lower dimensional spinors. for k = 2, the
holonomy must be contained in su(4)  spin(8) in order to preserve a spinor, and
it then preserves two (four once the complex conjugate representation is taken into
account). the corresponding manifolds are products of calabi-yau fourfolds with two
tori, perhaps identied by the action of a freely acting discrete group. this moduli
space is closely related to that of f-theory compactications to four dimensions with
minimal four dimensional susy. the three spatial dimensions are then compactied
on a torus. for k = 3 the holonomy must be in g2  spin(7). the manifolds are,
up to discrete identications, products of joyce manifolds and three tori. for k = 4
the holonomy is in su(2)  su(3). the manifolds are free orbifolds of products of
calabi-yau threefolds and k3 manifolds. this moduli space is that of the heterotic

53

string compactied on a three torus and calabi-yau three-fold. the case k = 5 does
not lead to any more examples with precisely 4 susys.

it is possible that m-theory contains u-duality transformations which map us be-
tween these classes. for example, there are at least some examples of f-theory com-
pactications to four dimensional minkowski space which are dual to heterotic com-
pactications on threefolds. after further compactication on three tori we expect to
nd a map between the k = 2 and k = 4 moduli spaces.

it is clear that the metric on the full moduli space still has lorentzian signature in
the sugra approximation. in some of these cases of lower susy, we expect the metric
to be corrected in the quantum theory. however, we do not expect these corrections
to alter the signature of the metric. to see this note that each of the cases we have
described has a two torus factor. if we decompactify the two torus, we expect a low
energy eld theoretic description as three dimensional gravity coupled to scalar elds
and we can perform a weyl transformation so that the coecient of the einstein action
is constant. the scalar elds must have positive kinetic energy and the einstein term
must have its conventional sign if the theory is to be unitary. thus, the decompactied
moduli space has a positive metric. in further compactifying on the two torus, the only
new moduli are those contained in gravity, and the metric on the full moduli space has
lorentzian signature.

note that as in the case of maximal susy, the region of the moduli space with
large ten volume and all other moduli held xed, is in the future light cone of any nite
point in the moduli space. thus we suspect that much of the general structure that
we uncovered in the toroidal moduli space, will survive in these less supersymmetric
settings.

the most serious obstacle to this generalization appears in the case of 4 (or fewer)
supercharges. in that case, general arguments do not forbid the appearance of a po-
tential in the lagrangian for the moduli. furthermore, at generic points in the moduli
space one would expect the energy density associated with that potential to be of or-
der the fundamental scales in the theory. in such a situation, it is dicult to justify
the born-oppenheimer separation between moduli and high energy degrees of freedom.
typical motions of the moduli on their potential have frequencies of the same order as
those of the ultraviolet degrees of freedom. in section 7 we will try to present a solution
to this conundrum.

6.8 chaotically avoiding susy

the considerations of this section also allow us to achieve some insight into the problem
of why m-theory has not chosen to set in one of its stable highly supersymmetric vacua
in the world we observe. the discussion which follows is completely rigorous on the

54

branches of moduli space with 16 or more susys. it is probably valid for 8 susys as
well, for in that case the moduli space exists although its topology and metric are not
determined by classical considerations. nonetheless, all known extreme regions of the
moduli space have the properties we will use below.

the key point is that our analysis of extreme regions of moduli space showed a
monotonic ow from the unsafe to the safe regions. we have neglected extreme regimes
corresponding to partial decompactication, and also the motion of the other moduli,
and of the non modular degrees of freedom which surely dominate the energy density in
regimes where the universe has expanded a lot. in fact, inclusion of these other degrees
of freedom reinforces the conclusion that the universe will always end up in the safe
domain.

horne and moore [63] have shown that motion on the full moduli space (as opposed
to its kasner subspace) is chaotic. furthermore, the euclidean metric on the subspace
of moduli with unit spatial volume has nite volume in the metric on moduli space,
which means that the extreme regions of this space (which correspond to partial de-
compactications) have vanishingly small measure. the chaotic nature of the motion,
as well as the fact that the moduli are, at least at late times, coupled to a stochastic
radiation bath, imply that the generic cosmological solution will in fact sample regions
of the moduli space in proportion to the measure dened by the kinetic energy of the
moduli. in particular, partial decompactications, which are of of measure zero on the
moduli space, will not be generic nal states of the cosmological evolution.

we conclude that the generic cosmological solution in these supersymmetric regions
of the moduli space will asymptote to a ten or eleven dimensional universe lled with
radiation. all of low energy physics is weakly coupled, there are no nite energy
scales apart from the planck or string scales, and there are no apparent candidates
for long lived nonrelativistic particles26. it seems safe to conclude that none of these
model universes could ever contain galaxies. thus, if we are willing to entertain the
very weak form of the anthropic principle which claims that galaxies are necessary for
intelligent life, we can nd an explanation of why we do not live in a universe with 8
or more susys.

i do not claim to nd this a completely satisfactory resolution of the question. on
the one hand, i maintain that this sort of use of anthropic reasoning is scientically
valid. that is, we appear, in m-theory, to be faced with a model of physics which
predicts the possibility of alternate universes which do not resemble what we observe. i
have tried to give an honest account of what happens to a generic universe of this sort
(within the class with maximal susy) and found that it lacks what would appear to

26i do not see any source for a population of large and therefore long lived black holes.

55

be a very weak requirement for the existence of life. i did not have to speculate about
unknown results in extra universal biology to come to this conclusion. on the other
hand, one might wish for a sharper distinction between our own universe and these
unobservable ones. wouldnt it be nicer if they all suered some sort of satisfyingly
nal cosmic catastrophe and sank back into the ultraviolet muck of creation?27. or
perhaps one could, with a more comprehensive knowledge of m-theory, argue that
generic cosmological solutions of the whole theory do not end up in the maximally
susy regions.

one direction in which to search for such an argument has to do with ination.
i have purposely avoided mentioning that cosmologies which remain on the moduli
spaces with 8 or more susys cannot inate. the obvious retort to such a remark
is that ination could have occurred somewhere else in conguration space, and the
system could then have rolled down to the moduli space. one cannot investigate the
probability of such a motion without a much more thorough understanding of m-theory
than we now possess. so the galactothropic explanation of the absence of susy ground
states is the best we can do at the moment. perhaps it will be the best we can ever do.

6.9 against ination

to an audience of astroparticle physicists the suggestion that ination might not be
a necessary feature of our explanation of the universe is akin to heresy.
i therefore
thought it would be amusing to insert some speculations here about alternative ways
to solve the cosmological conundra which led to the invention of ination. those of my
readers who actually attended these lectures will not that i did not actually present
this material. let me assure you that it was only for lack of time, and not because i
was afraid of being mauled by an angry crowd of true believers.

to begin our trek down the path of heterodoxy let me attack the common wisdom
about the horizon problem. this is the observation that in conventional big bang
cosmology, the horizon at early times is much smaller than the backward extrapolation
of our current horizon. thus, regions of the universe that we can observe today were out
of causal contact. how one then asks can their contents be in thermal equilibrium at
a uniform temperature? i would like to contend that the m theorists answer might be
very easily. local eld theory is only an approximation to m-theory. at suciently
high energies it is clear that locality breaks down in some way. the typical high
energy state in perturbative string theory is an extremely long single string. beyond
the perturbative approximation, large branes of other dimensions may be relevant.

27we will see something of the sort happening to another class of undesirable universes in the next

section.

56

although brane interactions are local on the brane (e.g. strings split and join at points
in spacetime) this does not seem to be an argument which forces one to conclude that
the correct state of the string is unlikely to be a typical member of the ensemble of
strings with given energy (as one argues for a quantum eld theory in a big bang
cosmology when one says that the elds in causally disconnected regions have not had
a chance to thermalize). if the system is in thermal equilibrium at very high energy,
and if the expansion is slow enough, then it will remain at equilibrium at lower energies.
another argument against naive locality at the fundamental scale (which might be
much lower than 1019 gev) has to do with black holes. once the typical energy and
impact parameter in particle collisions are such that black hole formation is common,
the spacetime geometry is distorted in a way which modies the naive causality argu-
ments. if we believe that black hole evaporation is a unitary process, then standard
causality arguments are only valid outside black hole horizons (i am assuming that
if the universe is closed, then its radius is much larger than the relevant black hole
horizons). all states associated with a given black hole are in thermal equilibrium with
each other, and black holes will tend to coalesce, bringing more and more of the system
into equilibrium.

the claim then is that the horizon problem is not a problem (i am being deliberately
provocative here  i dont know whether i believe these arguments). rather, the
principle of thermodynamic equilibrium i.e. that systems tend to be in typical states
consistent with their energy content is more fundamental than the causality principle
applied to a simple averaged classical geometry and a model of its matter content as
localized particles interacting via local eld theory.

similar remarks apply to the monopole problem, at least in those regions of moduli
space where there is no grand unied group below the fundamental scale. monopoles
then belong to the high energy theory, and the conventional eld theoretic estimates
(again based on causality) of their abundance are incorrect.

one can make an even more convincing attack on the arguments for the atness
problem. this puzzle is based on the model of a homogeneous isotropic universe. this
should properly be regarded as a phenomenological model rather than a fundamental
starting point for cosmology. indeed although descriptions of inationary cosmology
usually start from standard robertson-walker ideology, they in fact reject that ideology.
homogeneity and isotropy arise as late time xed point behavior. however, if one is
going to start from more general initial conditions, one can get rid of the atness
problem in a simpler way.
indeed, i have argued above that a more fundamentally
motivated approach to cosmology might start from geometries (and congurations of
other elds) on a moduli space of static classical solutions of the sugra equations.
it is a generic feature of such models, that unless the energy density is allowed to

57

be negative, the universe evolves monotonically toward large volume. thus spatial
curvatures (and many of the calabi-yau manifolds on these moduli spaces are curved)
are generally evolving towards zero without any ne tuning. the general cosmological
solution for motion on a moduli space of geometries, coupled to positive energy density
matter evolves toward zero spatial curvature if we are only willing to wait long enough.
the only real issue left among the conventional cosmological puzzles is the entropy
problem.

to explain this in more detail let us consider a simple example of the kind of model
we are discussing. consider the moduli space of solutions of weakly coupled heterotic
string theory compactied on a three torus large compared to the string scale, times
a calabi-yau threefold. let us agree to ignore the phenomenological problems with
the dilaton which make this regime problematic as a model of the real world. the
friedmann equation for this model has the form

m2

p ( a/a)2 = m4

p [b/a6 + d/a4 + e/mp a3 + ].

(6.29)

a is the scale factor of the three torus, and b, d, e and  represent the contributions to
the energy density of the moduli, radiation, nonrelativistic matter, and a cosmological
constant, all measured in planck units. we choose conventions such that a = 1 is the
present scale factor. the volume of the torus is a3v0, where v0 is the volume today.
observation tells us that the periods of the three torus are of the same order as, or
larger than our horizon volume, whose size is 1060 planck units. we neglect processes
which convert one form of energy density into another and do not attempt to explain
why all of the constants d, e and  are within an order of magnitude or so of each other.
the moduli of the torus are the ratios of its periods, the angles between the dierent
toroidal directions, wilson lines for the heterotic gauge elds and wilson two surfaces
for the antisymmetric tensor potential of heterotic string theory. these evolve as a
nonlinear sigma model of goldstone type. the analysis of [25] implies that motion on
this space stops early in the history of the universe, its kinetic energy being converted
into a gas of momentum modes of the corresponding elds, which contributes to the
constant d. the torus then expands indenitely with xed shape. thus, if we wait long
enough, all remnant of the niteness of space is wiped out, without ne tuning of initial
conditions. in cases where the moduli space in question is a family of curved calabi-
yau spaces, the same analysis applies and the spatial curvature is erased without any
ne tuning.

the real diculty for this solution of the atness problem is simply that if we wait
long enough for spatial niteness and curvature to be stretched away, there may not
be enough matter and radiation in our model to account for the universe we observe.
this is what is commonly referred to as the entropy problem in the literature of

58

inationary cosmology. the models we are discussing show that it is logically separate
from the atness problem, which is rather specic to homogeneous isotropic models,
where the spatial geometry at each instant is not a static solution of the einstein
equations. in these models, generic initial values for curvature would have long ago
led to a curvature dominated regime of expansion and substantially modied much of
cosmic history. in models based on moduli, generic initial conditions would not have
changed the expansion rate very much at late times and would probably not show up in
local physics. their discrepancy with observation would simply come from the absence
of evidence for global structure or anisotropy in the background geometry.

another way to phrase the entropy problem is the discrepancy between the uni-
verses energy content and its size at the moment of the big bang. if one follows
the conventional robertson-walker cosmology back to the planck energy density, then
the linear size of our horizon volume at that time is 1027 planck units. the size of any
closed universe would have to be larger than this. i do not have any explanation of
this large pure number in the present context. in inationary cosmology it is solved by
creating the matter and radiation after a period of inationary expansion.

at the level of the semiclassical analysis we have done, there does not seem to be any
strong objection to such initial conditions. we have emphasized that the semiclassical
treatment of the moduli requires only that the volume of the universe be large. at
energies above the planck scale, there will be new terms in the equations of motion
of the moduli representing their interaction with the full set of high energy degrees of
freedom of m-theory. but in principle one could imagine following the evolution back
to a planck size for the whole universe before the semiclassical approximation breaks
down. the statement of the entropy problem at that time would be that the energy
density was many orders of magnitude higher than the planck scale.
is there some
principle which prevents this?

it would be nice to nd one, because one would like to have a clean reason for
rejecting alternatives to ination. alternatively, it would be interesting to nd an
explanation of this large number, and to take the anti-inationary cosmology more
seriously. in the latter event one would be required to come up with an explanation
for the uctuations in the cosmic microwave background at least as convincing as that
provided by inationary models.

what should the serious cosmologist take away from this discussion? i hardly hope
or wish to convince anyone to abandon the inationary paradigm. however, i think
it is salutary to recognize that many of the theoretical arguments which one thinks
of as the basic raison detre of inationary cosmology, are on rather shaky ground in
the light of current theory. the clear cut triumphs of ination are reduced to two:
the explanations of the entropy of the current universe and of the uctuations in the

59

microwave background.

in the next section, we will abandon this heresy and pursue a more orthodox path.

6.10 conclusions

we argued that the supersymmetric moduli of m-theory were the natural semiclassical
variables which provide the clock for cosmology. our argument was based on the
naive wheeler-dewitt quantization of gravity but we presented some evidence that the
general structures assumed in that quantization were more robust than their derivation
from a low energy eective theory would have led us to believe. we showed that duality
transformations resolve some but not all cosmological singularities, and provided a rst
draft of an argument for the absence of highly supersymmetric vacuum states of m-
theory in the list of natural phenomena in the real world. we also briey explored a
heterodox, noninationary, approach to cosmology which resolves some but not all of
the problems that ination was invented to solve.

7. moduli and ination

7.1 introduction

in this lecture we will nally start to discuss more realistic sectors of m theoretic
cosmology. as i have warned you several times, this area is still under development and
there is no justication for trying to build detailed models which can be compared to
observation. indeed, towards the end of my presentation i will describe my own favorite
scenario for cosmology in m-theory. it turns out that its viability depends heavily on
numerical factors of order one which cannot be reliably calculated at present. such
factors in fundamental quantities have a tendency to get raised to high powers in a
cosmological context (e.g. the widths of unstable states depend on the cube of their
masses and the square of their couplings. these in turn might be estimated by formulae
which depend on high powers of some fundamental scale. mistakes of order one can thus
be amplied.). also, experience with weakly coupled string theory shows that order
of magnitude estimates can miss factors like 162. our fundamental contention about
m-theory is that neither the true vacuum state nor the point where ination takes place
are likely to sit in one of the weakly coupled or large radius regimes where systematic
calculations can be done. thus, we are unlikely to be able to extract detailed numbers
from m-theory until we learn a lot more about the nonperturbative formulation of the
theory. in this situation it seems wisest to try to investigate very general problems,
and that is what we will try to do. i will deviate from this formula only towards the
end of my lectures, in order to present the amusing scenario that i favor.

60

7.2 moduli as inatons?

in view of our discussion in the previous section, one might have thought that the
appropriate title for this section was cosmology on the moduli space with 4 susys.
at rst sight, the phrase in quotes does not appear to make any sense. m-theory has no
global internal symmetries  all of its symmetries are residual gauge symmetries which
leave some class of congurations invariant28. with only 4 susys, supersymmetry
alone permits a superpotential on the space of chiral superelds. the full eective
potential is the sum of a term coming from the so-called d-terms of continuous gauge
groups, and a term coming from the superpotential29. the d-terms are positive, and
the moduli space of elds on which they vanish can be parametrized in terms of gauge
invariant composite elds. the superpotential can be viewed as a function on this space.
the only symmetries which act on the composites are discrete gauge symmetries30. in
most cases, a discrete symmetry cannot imply the vanishing of a function on an entire
submanifold (we will explore the exception below).

the apparent implication of this is that the phrase moduli space of m-theory com-
pactications with 4 susys has no apparent meaning. there is no moduli space in the
true sense of the word (with the exception noted in the last parenthesis). nonetheless,
the authors of [24] proposed and [25] and others explored the idea, that moduli of such
compactications were the natural inaton candidates in string/m-theory. note that
inatons, by their nature, must have a potential so the idea of moduli as inatons is
truly oxymoronic.

however, i hope to demonstrate for you that this idea is not at all idiotic, and that it
has many attractive features. the original proposals were based on string perturbation
theory. here the idea of a moduli space of quadrisusic31 compactications makes perfect

28as usual, there are two arguments for this, one based on sugra, the other on perturbative string
theory. their agreement is taken as evidence that the statement is exact. the sugra argument is
simply that all symmetries of sugra are dieomorphisms, thus gauge symmetries. global symmetries
arise only as dieomorphisms which leave invariant the asymptotic behavior of the noncompact portion
of space. all other symmetries are gauged. in perturbative string theory an internal symmetry would
arise as a symmetry of the superconformal eld theory describing the internal space. one can show,
[40], that a continuous global symmetry implies the existence of a kac-moody current algebra in
the superconformal eld theory (basically just noethers theorem plus conformal invariance  up to
technicalities). the kac-moody currents can be used to construct vertex operators for massless gauge
bosons.

29see keith olives lectures at this school for a concise introduction to four dimensional susy,

chiral superelds, superpotentials, d terms, etc..

30the only dierence between gauged and nongauged discrete symmetries from a practical point of

view is the absence of stable domain walls for gauged discrete symmetries.

31a recently rediscovered ancient latin word meaning: having four supersymmetries.

61

mathematical sense. at string tree level, a vacuum state is characterized as a conformal
eld theory with certain extra properties. there is an exact theorem which guarantees
the existence of continuous families of solutions to this constraint. the most famous
among them are those which correspond to compactication of the heterotic string on
a cy 3-fold with the standard embedding of the spin connection of the manifold in
the gauge group. here the theorem follows from the fact that the same conformal eld
theories can be used to compactify type ii string theories to four dimensions, preserving
8 spacetime susys. the extra spacetime susy guarantees the existence of moduli.
the heterotic and type ii theories compactied on these backgrounds dier at the
one loop level and beyond, and the heterotic theory has only 4 susys. nonetheless,
to all orders in the loop expansion, no superpotential is generated on the tree level
indeed, the heterotic coupling, like a generic
moduli space in the heterotic theory.
gauge coupling, can be viewed as the real part of a chiral supereld s = 8
+ i, whose
g2
s
imaginary part is an axionlike eld called the model independent string axion. this
eld arises by a duality transformation on a second rank antisymmetric tensor gauge
eld. as a consequence, to all orders in perturbation theory there is a continuous
shift symmetry s  s + ia. this symmetry, combined with holomorphy, forbids any
perturbative correction to the superpotential.

the idea behind most previous work on the subject was that the real world cor-
responds to a point in moduli space where the perturbative estimates of the superpo-
tential were correct. the string coupling was supposed to correspond more or less to
the perturbative gauge couplings we see in nature, or to be related to them by simple
group theoretical factors. the superpotential on the perturbative moduli space was
then much smaller than the fundamental scales of the theory, and it made sense to
think about an approximate moduli space.

this set of ideas had a number of related diculties. the rst was the dine seiberg
problem [55]. these authors made the simple observation that for most functions, the
leading asymptotic formula in some extreme region (here the weak coupling region) is
monotonic and does not have minima32. there have been two mechanisms proposed
for stabilizing m-theory in the weak string coupling regime, which go under the names
of kahler stabilization [48] and racetrack models [4]. both imply that, although the
couplings are weak, many quantities cannot be calculated in a systematic expansion.

a related cosmological problem with the weak coupling regime was pointed out by
brustein and steinhardt [54]. there is a distinct possibility that the universe would

32exceptions to this are somewhat pathological. the leading asymptotic behavior could contain
a factor sin(1/g2) which has an innite number of more and more closely spaced minima as one
approaches the weak coupling regime.

62

overshoot a weak coupling minimum and evolve into the regime of extreme weak
coupling where m-theory is in violent disagreement with observation.

when combined with wittens analysis [44] of the possible resolution of the discrep-
ancy in the weak coupling prediction of the ratio between the unication and planck
scales, these observations compel one to consider the possibility that weakly coupled
string theory is not a good description of nature. a somewhat better starting point is
the 11d sugra analysis begun in [43] the analyses of [44] and [45] indicate that

 in the regime of moduli determined by the t to the unied coupling strength
and the four dimensional planck mass, the volume of the calabi-yau manifold on
the brane where the standard model lives is not really in the regime where the
sugra expansion can be trusted. however, the small size of the four dimensional
eective coupling, combined with holomorphy, is enough to guarantee the usual
tree level unication relations between standard model couplings. this gives rise
to a situation similar to that hypothesized in the kahler stabilization mechanism,
where holomorphic quantities can be calculated reliably but the kahler potentials
of chiral elds are unknown.

 wittens hypothesis that the coupling of the gauge elds on the second brane is
strong, and gives rise to a gaugino condensate whose magnitude is of order the
unication scale (which is also the fundamental 11d planck scale) induces too
high a scale of susy breaking on the standard model brane. we will discuss a
resolution of this problem below.

 in the analysis of [45] the susy breaking f term comes from the modulus which
parametrizes the radius of the single large dimension transverse to the horava-
witten ninebranes. to leading order in the sugra expansion this leads to
no-scale susy breaking with vanishing cosmological constant, and also gives rise
to degenerate squarks33.

 the radial mode is not stabilized in this approximation and we have a sort of
dine-seiberg problem within the sugra approximation. it is unclear how many
of the good features of the model will survive the resolution of this problem. it
is clear that the vanishing cosmological constant will not.

33the degeneracy in mass of the squarks is a desirable phenomenological feature. to the extent
that it is valid it eliminates unwanted avor changing neutral currents which threaten the viability of
generic susy models. this success of the scenario is mitigated by the failure to stabilize the radial
mode. the terms necessary to stabilize the radius come from corrections to its kahler potential.
similar corrections could ruin the degeneracy of squarks.

63

in short, this scenario is better than perturbative string theory, but not without
its own aws. on the other hand, the observation that gauge theories arise on branes
of nite codimension is generic in m-theory and leads one to expect that wittens
explanation of the planck and unication scales is a correct one.

at rst sight, the above conclusions would seem to rule out the idea of modular
ination. if we are in the strong coupling regime and there is no reason for the super-
potential to be small then what is our excuse for separating the moduli out from all the
other variables of m-theory? what does the word moduli mean in the strong coupling
regime with only four susys? worse, one of the points of [25] was that within the
context of modular ination, the energy scale during ination is predicted to be near
the unication scale. in wittens scenario, this scale is identied with the fundamental
scale of quantum gravity and it seems unreasonable to use any sort of eective eld
theory description to describe this situation.

in fact, i claim that the horava-witten scenario and wittens use of it to explain
the ratio between mp (the four dimensional planck scale  2  1018 gev) and m (the
unication scale  2 1016 gev) may resolve all of these problems. the key is that the
higher dimensional theory has more susy than the eective theory below the kk scale.
the higher dimensional susy is broken by the branes, but if the bulk volume is large
then this breaking can be ignored for some purposes. in particular, we can identify
the moduli space as that of the higher dimensional theory. thus, in such scenarios,
a clearcut notion of approximate moduli survives at all energy scales, as long as we
remain in a regime where the compact volume is large. we will call these approximate
moduli the inamoduli to distinguish them from certain elds we will discuss below,
which get their potential only from lower energy physics.

note that this is all compatible with the existence of a superpotential of order m 3
for the inamoduli, and indeed this order of magnitude is reasonable for elds which
parametrize properties of the bulk higher dimensional theory only if there is enhanced
susy in the bulk. otherwise we would have expected the eective superpotential of
the moduli to contain a factor of the volume of the internal space. on the other hand,
if the superpotential comes only from the vicinity of the branes, it has, by dimensional
analysis, the form

w = m 3w(a)

(7.1)

where a are dimensionless parameters characterizing the internal geometry. on the
other hand, the kinetic term for these zero modes, just like the einstein term for the
zero modes of the gravitational eld, is proportional to the volume v7 of the internal
manifold, and has the form

m 9v7ggab()ab.

(7.2)

64

8gn

p = 1

note that m 9v7 = m2
is, as the notation indicates, the same coecient which
multiplies the einstein action. furthermore, although the volume v7 is itself a modulus,
when we pass to the einstein conformal frame in which v7 is replaced by its vacuum
value, the kinetic term of the moduli is rescaled in precisely the same manner as the
gravitational action. it is then natural to dene canonical scalar elds by a = mp a.
their action has the form

z g[gab(/mp )ab 

m 6
m2
p

v(/mp )].

(7.3)

now let us examine the implications of a lagrangian of this form for inationary

cosmology. the slow roll equations of motion derived from this action are

and lead to the equation

3hda/dt = 

m 6
m2
p

gab v
b .

dv/dt =

m 3
pv

3m2

avgabbv.

(7.4)

(7.5)

where a refers to the derivative with respect to the dimensionless variable a. we
have also used the slow roll expression for h in terms of the potential. from 7.5 we
immediately derive an expression for the number of e-foldings

ne = 3z

v

avgabbv

cvdc.

(7.6)

where the integral is over the trajectory in moduli space that the system follows during
the time interval when the slow roll approximation is valid. we see that in order to
obtain a large number of e-foldings we need a potential which is at in the sense that
|v|/v  1/ne. the phenomenologically necessary ne  60 can be achieved with only
a mild ne tuning of dimensionless coecients. correspondingly, the conditions on
the potential which ensure the validity of the slow roll approximation are order one
conditions on the derivatives of the potential and do not contain any exponentially
small dimensionless numbers.

an additional feature of modular dynamics, which provides extra frictional damp-
ing of the motion of the moduli, was discovered in [25]. if we completely ignore the po-
tential on moduli space, it is still an interacting nonlinear system. in [25] the equations
for small uctuations of the modular eld theory around a solution of the equations of
motion (without potential) for the zero modes, was studied, and an unstable mode was
found. this was interpreted as an ecient mechanism for converting kinetic energy of
the zero modes into energy of a gas of nonzero modes. it was estimated that the zero

65

modes were eectively brought to a halt by this mechanism in less than a lyapuno
time of the chaotic motion on moduli space. in the inationary context, this mecha-
nism will act as a source of friction which should make ination much more probable.
in particular, it is an avenue in which the large dimension of the moduli space (which
can be a number of order 102) could eect ination, by providing a large number of
degrees of freedom for ecient frictional damping of the zero mode motion. this is a
topic which has not been investigated and deserves much more thorough study.

the fact that actions of the form (7.3) give rise to ination with minimal ne
tuning, and that such actions naturally arise for moduli in string theory was pointed
out in [25]. the general point that moduli might provide the at potentialled, weakly
coupled elds necessary to ination was rst made in [24]. here we note that in brane
scenarios, it is the bulk inamoduli which play this role. there may also be moduli
associated with branes, but they will have a natural scale m and have a quite dierent
role to play.

another pleasant surprise awaits us when we plug the potential from (7.3) into
the standard formula for the amplitude of the primordial energy density uctuations
generated by ination. up to numbers of order one we nd


  n(m/mp )3  105

(7.7)

where the numerical value comes from the measured cosmic microwave background
uctuations, and n  50. this gives m  (2/10)1/3  2  1016 gev, which, given the
crudeness of the calculation, is the unication scale. to put this in the most dramatic
manner possible, we can say that a brane scenario of the horava-witten type, given
the unication scale as input, predicts the correct amplitude for inationary density
uctuations. furthermore, the whole scenario only makes sense because of the same
large volume factor that underlies wittens explanation of the ratio between the planck
and unication scales. this is necessary at a conceptual level to understand why it is
sensible to think about a modulus with a super potential of order the fundamental
scale, and at a phenomenological level to understand the magnitude of the density
uctuations.

a detailed calculation of the uctuation spectrum as opposed to its absolute normal-
ization requires more knowledge of the potential v than we possess. a crucial question
(posed during my lecture by andre linde) is how natural the phenomenologically nec-
essary at spectrum is in this context.
i leave it as an exercise for the enterprising
student.

although it has no connection with our discussion here i cannot resist pointing
out the other piece of evidence for a scale of the same order as m. any theory of

66

the type we are discussing would be expected to contain corrections to the standard
model lagrangian of the form (in supereld notation) 1
m llh 2, which gives rise to
neutrino masses. it is a matter of public record [58] now that such masses exist, with
an estimated value for m between .6 and 1.8  1015 gev. although this is an order
of magnitude shy of the unication scale i believe the uncertainties in coecients of
order one in dimensional analysis could easily make up the dierence. if not, we will
have the interesting problem of explaining the existence of two close but not identical
energy scales in fundamental physics. [61].

we also want to note that this scenario for ination does not suer from the
runaway problem pointed out by brustein and steinhardt [54]. these authors noted
that the inationary vacuum energy is much larger than the susy breaking scale.
furthermore, the minimum of the eective potential was assumed close to the region of
weak string coupling. there was then a distinct possibility that the inaton eld would
overshoot the small barrier separating it from the extreme weak coupling regime where
string theory is incompatible with experiment. in the present scenario, the coupling is
not assumed to be weak (nor the volume extremely large). furthermore the inationary
potential has nothing to do with susy breaking. there is no runaway problem at all.
the authors of the papers in [25] agonized over the discrepancy between the uni-
cation scale and the scale of susy breaking. in fact, they discussed and discarded
what i now believe is the obvious solution of this problem, because of problems specic
to weakly coupled string theory34. the obvious way to avoid susy breaking at the
scale m, is to insist that the superpotential (7.1) has a susy minimum. in fact, the
existence of such minima is generic , requiring only the solution of n complex equations
for n unknowns. however, in general, the superpotential will not vanish at such a
minimum but instead will give rise to a negative cosmological constant.

it was pointed out in [26] that in postinationary cosmology, the universes attempt
to access such a susy minimum of the eective potential leads to a very welcome cos-
mological disaster. the key point is that ination has completely eliminated the spatial
curvature terms from the cosmological equations, so that the friedmann equation reads

m2

p ( a/a)2 = gab

ma mb + v

(7.8)

this does not have static solutions with ma resting at a minimum of v with negative
value. what happens instead is that a generic solution of the cosmological equations35

34namely the fact that superpotentials are exponentials of exponentials of the canonically normalized

dilaton eld.

35there are very special solutions in which the universe is static and the scalar elds oscillate in the
potential with exactly zero energy, and i once thought that these were relevant to the cosmological
constant problem. however, they are unstable to small perturbations.

67

reaches a point where a = 0 and then begins to recollapse to innite energy density.
this happens on a microscopic time scale. thus inationary cosmology eliminates
generic susy preserving minima of the eective potential from the list of late time
attractors of the cosmological equations.

the stable postinationary attractors of a supersymmetric cosmology are points
in inamoduli space with vanishing superpotential and susy order parameters. these
can be characterized in terms of a symmetry. namely, any complex r symmetry forces
the superpotential to vanish, and if there are no elds of r charge 2 then the susy
order parameter vanishes as well. the r symmetry must of course be discrete, since
we are discussing m-theory36. if in addition, there do exist elds of r charge 0, then
there will be an entire submanifold on which the superpotential vanishes and susy
is preserved. our future considerations will concentrate on this submanifold, which
from now on we call the true moduli space, since it is the oft advertised exception to
our statement that quadrisusic backgrounds had no moduli space. it is the locus of
restoration of a discrete r symmetry with the above properties. we should expect the
true moduli space to have more than one connected component, each characterized by
a dierent r symmetry.

7.3 radius stabilization

every silver lining has its cloud. the discussion above treated the four dimensional
planck scale as a xed parameter. in fact, in the horava-witten scenario, it is deter-
mined by the radius of the fth dimension, which is one of the moduli. in fact it is one
of the bulk moduli and might be expected to vary during ination.

p ln(t + t ).

at rst glance, the situation appears to be much worse than that. in the limit
of large r, the lagrangian of the eld r is highly constrained by extended susy.
in this limit the kahler potential of the supereld t which contains r is xed to
be 3m2
in the analysis of [44] [45], the superpotential was supposed
to be generated only by gaugino condensation on the hidden brane, separated by a
distance r from the brane where the standard model lives. this is a function only of a
particular linear combination s, where s is the supereld which controls the coupling
of the hidden sector gauge group. the superpotential can also depend on the other
moduli, e.g. the complex structure moduli of the calabi-yau threefold, as well as the
vector bundle moduli in the hidden gauge group. although this superpotential is not
explicitly calculable, it will generically have a supersymmetric point with s xed to
be small (the hidden gauge theory is strongly coupled) and the complex structure and
hidden sector gauge bundle moduli xed. unless there are points of enhanced discrete

36this is an example of the nonexistence of continuous global symmetries.

68

r symmetry, as described above, the superpotential will be nonvanishing at the susy
point and of order m 3.

the fact that the superpotential is of order m 3 means that it cannot really be
considered to have originated in some low energy eective theory, but comes from
physics at the fundamental m-theory scale. the possibility of superpotentials generated
at short distance was not appreciated in [44] and [45], nor as far as i can tell in any
of the papers on m-theory phenomenology which have appeared since that time.
i
do not see any good argument for omitting such terms in the low energy lagrangian.
however, there is a symmetry argument that such a superpotential will be of the

form pn>0 wn(s, c)enkmp t /m 2, where k is a number of order one. the factors in the

exponent will be explained below. here c is a collection of superelds representing the
complex structure moduli, as well as vector bundle moduli for the gauge congurations
on each wall37. the imaginary part of t comes from a pure gauge mode of the bulk
graviphoton, which is chosen to vanish on the hidden sector wall. the gauge symmetry
becomes a shift symmetry for imt . one may expect this symmetry to be broken by
eects involving membrane instantons stretched between the walls, and by vebranes
(which, in the walls, are gauge theory instantons). as a consequence, a discrete remnant
of the shift symmetry remains, and this is what constrains the superpotential in the
manner described above.

thus, in the large r limit, one expects the kahler potential of the eld t to be
given by its asymptotic form, and the superpotential to be independent of t . as a
consequence, even if we assume the inamoduli are slowly rolling at some point away
from the minimum of their potential, the dynamics of the universe will be strongly
inuenced by the motion of t . it is easy to see that the real part of t is, in einstein
frame, related to a canonically normalized scalar eld with an exponential potential.
the slope in the exponent is outside the range in which (power law) inationary solu-
tions of the equations of motion exist. other sources of friction for t must be found if
ination is to take place.

there are several obvious sources for such extra friction. the rst is the imaginary
part of t , which, in the large r approximation, behaves like a goldstone eld. unfor-
tunately, this means that the energy density associated with this eld, and the extra
friction associated with it, scales away like 1/a6. while i have not done a proper nu-
merical study of this system it seems unlikely that it will have long periods of ination
for generic initial conditions38.

37here and henceforth we restrict attention to cy threefolds with only a single kahler modulus and

disregard the possibility of inserting m5 branes in the bulk between the two walls.

38remember that unlike the case of the other moduli elds, there are no unknown parameters in

the asymptotic lagrangian for t .

69

two other sources of extra friction are the excitation of nonconstant modes of the
t eld, and kaluza-klein particle production. in [25] it was argued that the rst of
these mechanisms is very ecient at stopping the chaotic motion on moduli space with
no potential. as noted above, there is an instability which converts modular zero mode
kinetic energy into a gas of nonzero modes within less than a lyapuno time of the
chaotic motion on moduli space. it seems quite plausible that in the presence of an
exponential potential one would then have inationary solutions. kaluza-klein particle
production is also to be expected in the presence of a rapidly moving t eld, because
the real part of t directly inuences the masses of these particles.

obviously, more work is needed to see whether these mechanisms can really salvage
the inationary scenario of the previous section. even if they do, one mystery still
remains. although some combination of these eects can explain why t is slowly
varying during ination, there is no explanation of why it is close to its vacuum value.
since the four dimensional planck mass (and through it our successful prediction of the
magnitude of energy density uctuations) depends exponentially on the canonically
normalized eld constructed from the real part of t , it is extremely important to
explain this coincidence.

another possibility for rescuing ination comes from the recognition that the radial
modulus has a dine seiberg instability. that is to say, although we would like to be
doing a systematic asymptotic expansion in r, we know that we will never nd a stable
minimum for t in this approximation. thus we should admit that near the vacuum
value for t , the large radius expansion for (at least) the eective potential of this eld
has broken down. let us recall that we dened t in terms of the deviation of the
radius from its vacuum value [45]. thus, rm  (mp t /m 2). on physical grounds, we
expect corrections to the asymptotic form of the lagrangian to be functions of rm. in
the case of the t dependence of the superpotential discussed above, this guess can be
veried by analytic continuation from the region of weakly coupled string theory [45].
the potential for t during ination has two terms. the rst, coming from the f
terms of the other moduli was discussed above, and is all that exists in the extreme
asymptotic limit. in that limit, it gives an exponential potential with slope of order
1/mp for the canonically normalized eld  mp ln re (t /mp ). the second term has
the form:

v  ek/m2

p [k t t |kt /mp|2  3]|w/mp|2,

(7.9)

where k is the kahler potential of t . the implication of the previous paragraph is that
there is a region of t /mp of order one, where k is very dierent from its asymptotic
form, and varying rather rapidly as a function of this variable. now consider initial
conditions where rm starts out close to one and growing. the t eld will then have

70

to cross a regime in which the rapidly varying piece of the potential is signicant
before it can access the asymptotic regime. if the other moduli are slowly rolling, it is
clear that it will instead be rapidly driven very close to the minimum of its potential.
unfortunately, i have no argument that this is the same as its vev.

indeed, we will see in the next section that the minimum of the low energy potential
for t is the same as that of (7.9). there is no obvious reason to expect the rst term
of the potential (proportional to the f terms of other chiral elds) to be negligible
compared to (7.9). thus, although this mechanism saves ination, it is not clear that
it preserves our explanation of the size of primordial uctuations.

our discussion of the end of ination is also modied. once the contribution of t
is taken into account, the cosmological constant (at the end of ination, but neglecting
low energy gauge dynamics) is given by the value of (7.9) at its minimum, with the
other moduli set at susy preserving values. points with nonvanishing superpotential
will now have susy spontaneously broken by the f term of the t eld. if we insist that
the low energy cosmological constant vanishes exactly (in the scenario with discrete r
symmetry broken by low energy dynamics), then these points will also have vanishing
cosmological constant and will be attractors of the postinationary cosmological equa-
tions. this is unfortunate, because these points have gravitino masses of order m 3/m2
p
and are ruled out by phenomenonology. it would have been pleasant to nd that they
were also disfavored by cosmological evolution. in the next section we will see that we
can still recover acceptable phenomenology at points of enhanced r symmetry (broken
only by low energy dynamics).

there is a (weakly anthropic) way of understanding why points in moduli space
with r symmetry broken at high energies could be ruled out by cosmology as well as
phenomenology, if we accept that there is a nonvanishing cosmological constant in the
world we observe. then the ratio of cosmological constants between the r asymmetric
worlds and our own is  (m/)6, where  is the scale of low energy r symmetry
breaking. if one insists on a low energy susy breaking scale of order a tev  is xed
at about 1013 gev (see below). this gives the r asymmetric worlds a de sitter horizon
size of about a light year. there is certainly no galaxy formation in such a universe,
and it does not take a degree in exobiology to conclude that no life is possible there.
there is no plausible initial (post primary ination) matter distribution which leads
to any appreciable late time matter inside a horizon volume, unless it is collapsed into
black holes.

finally, one should note that at small values of t (values of rm of order 1) there
might be a susy minimum of the potential for t . this regime is hard to discuss
because eective eld theory does not apply to it and the notion of eective potentials,
approximate moduli, and classical spacetime are all suspect. however, even if one

71

assumed that such a minimum existed, one would nd that one could not access it
after ination and it would be irrelevant to macroscopic physics.

i have divided the discussion of ination on moduli space into two parts, initially
ignoring the problem of the radial modulus, because i suspect that it may be possible
to nd other scenarios in which this problem is completely absent. i will make a similar
division of the discussion of susy breaking below.

7.4 susy breaking

before proceeding to the discussion of susy breaking on the true moduli space, we
should introduce the nal characters in our story, the boundary or brane moduli. in
calabi-yau compactication of weakly coupled string theory, there are moduli which
correspond to the parameters of the e8  e8 gauge eld conguration on the manifold
(these are called vector bundle moduli in the string compactication literature). in a
brane scenario these moduli should be thought of as living on the branes where the
gauge elds live. in the strong coupling regime, these elds will have a superpotential of
the form m 3w (b/m) and it is not clear that they should be called moduli at all. some
of them may be invariant under the discrete complex r symmetry, and thus belong to
the true moduli space. in perturbative string theory, some vector bundle moduli have
components b which couple to gauge elds like axions : bf f . the decay constants of
these axions are of order m because, since they live on the brane, no other scale can
enter their kinetic terms.

in our later considerations, we will have need of a eld with a decay constant of
order m and a very small potential energy. the vector bundle moduli on the standard
model wall have the rst of these properties. in perturbative string theory these elds
have peccei-quinn symmetries which are broken only by world sheet instantons.
it
is then plausible that in the horava-witten regime the dominant breaking of these
symmetries comes from nonperturbative qcd. the potential energy of one of the gauge
bundle axions would be much smaller than any fundamental scale, and would have the
form 4
qcdu(a/m). we will consider the possibility that there are other moduli of this
type, with a variety of scales replacing qcd.

in addition to these moduli elds, any brane scenario will contain a variety of gauge
elds and matter elds in nontrivial representations of the gauge group. the moduli will
interact with these elds via the moduli dependence of bare gauge and yukawa coupling
parameters in the eective theory as well as thru a variety of irrelevant operators. if
the gauge couplings are asymptotically free and do not run to infrared xed points at
low energy, this description of the physics only makes sense if the bare gauge couplings
are suciently small that the scale at which the eective coupling becomes large is
substantially below the scale m. otherwise it is not consistent to include the gauge

72

degrees of freedom in the low energy eective theory. the weakness of bare couplings in
these scenarios is not evident a priori, as it would be in a purely perturbative approach.
the underlying physics is assumed to be strongly coupled. witten [44] has shown how
the small unied coupling of the standard model can be explained in terms of a product
of a large number of factors of order one in a geometry of large dimensions. we will
assume that similar numerical factors explain the strength of the gauge interactions
that lead to susy breaking.

the main role of the gauge interactions is not to break susy, but rather the discrete
r symmetry. if we x the moduli and treat the gauge theory as a at space quantum
eld theory, then susy remains unbroken even though a nonperturbative superpoten-
tial is generated. the scale of this superpotential is determined via a standard renor-
malization group analysis in terms of the bare gauge coupling function f (/mp , /m),
where we have indicated dependence on both bulk and boundary moduli. for simplicity
we assume that f is a large constant f0 plus a smaller, moduli dependent, term. the
conclusions are not aected by this assumption. the scale  of the nonperturbative
superpotential is then determined by f0. it takes the form

w1 = 3w1(/mp , /m)

(7.10)

we have eliminated all (composite) superelds related to the gauge interactions from
this expression by solving their f and d atness conditions for xed values of the
moduli. the possibility of doing this is equivalent to the statement that the gauge
theory does not itself break susy. we assume that w1 does not vanish at any minimum
of the eective potential. this is the statement of spontaneous r symmetry breaking.
as a consequence, susy minima of the potential have negative cosmological constant
of order at least 6/m2
p and are not attractors of the cosmological equations. thus,
cosmologically, r symmetry breaking forces the moduli to choose a minimum with
spontaneously broken susy39.

phenomenology puts an upper bound on the value of  because it contributes
. a standard

directly to squark masses. the nonvanishing f terms are of order 3
mp
argument shows that squark masses will be of order 3
, about the same as the gravitino.
m2
p
assuming this is about a tev we nd   1013 gev. an attractive feature of this
scenario is that the positive and negative terms in the sugra potential are naturally
of the same order of magnitude. although we have no real understanding of why
the cosmological constant is so small, this fact of nature is an indication of a relation
between the scales of r symmetry breaking and of susy breaking. in models in which

39the tunneling amplitudes of such nonsupersymmetric vacua into supersymmetric ads vacua are

incredibly tiny and might be identically zero, as discussed in [26].

73

the susy breaking f term originates as a bulk modulus the correct order of magnitude
relation between these scales arises automatically.

as we now recall, a deciency of this scenario for susy breaking is that it leads
to the cosmological moduli problem. the scalar elds in the bulk moduli multiplets
acquire masses from the susy violating potential of order mm  3/m2
p which is
the same order of magnitude as the gravitino and squark masses, i.e. a tev. they
have only nonrenormalizable couplings to ordinary matter, scaled by mp . thus, their
nominal reheat temperature,qm3
m /mp is of order  3 102 mev, and the universe is
matter dominated at the time that nucleosynthesis is supposed to be taking place. the
thermal ination scenario [56] can solve this problem, and we will now review another
solution [49].

suppose that the coecient in the order of magnitude relation between the moduli
mass and the fundamental parameters is mm = 5  3/m2
p , while the squark mass is
actually mq = 3/4m2
p = 1 tev. then the reheat temperature for the bulk moduli
is multiplied by a factor of 203/2  102 and is just above 1 mev. thus, an innocent
looking insertion of factors of order one can cause the moduli to decay just in time to
light the furnace in which the primordial elements are forged.

one still has to account for baryogenesis. adopting a mechanism suggested long
ago by holman, ramond and ross [59] we aver that this can come from the decay of the
moduli themselves. all of their interactions are of order the fundamental scale of m-
theory, so there is no reason for them to preserve accidental symmetries like baryon and
lepton number. it is quite reasonable that they also violate cp, though the status of cp
in m-theory is somewhat more obscure. the decay itself is an out of equilibrium process,
so all of the sakharov criteria for baryogenesis are fullled. however, we must also take
note of the theorem of weinberg [60], according to which baryon number violating terms
in the hamiltonian must act twice in order to generate an asymmetry. in the decay of
moduli, the rst action of the hamiltonian comes at no cost in amplitude, because the
modulus must decay somehow and there is no reason for its baryon number violating
decays to be signicantly smaller than those which conserve baryon number. however
the second baryon number violating interaction should not be highly suppressed if we
want to generate a reasonable baryon asymmetry. indeed, a 10 tev, gravitationally
coupled, particle which produces a baryon asymmetry of order one in its decay, also
produces of order (10 tev/3 mev) or  3106 photons. thus a large suppression of the
average baryon number per decay would give too small a baryon asymmetry. a way out
of this diculty is to admit renormalizable baryon number violating operators in the
supersymmetric standard model. discrete symmetries such as a z2 lepton parity [57]
can adequately suppress all unobserved baryon and lepton number violating processes
in the laboratory, while allowing such operators with coecients as large as 5  103.

74

this might be large enough to produce the observed baryon asymmetry.

an unfortunate casualty of this mechanism is the lightest susy particle. the
lsp is no longer stable in the scenario described above and we have to look elsewhere
for a dark matter candidate. however, there are natural candidates for dark matter.
imagine a boundary modulus whose potential energy is substantially smaller than the
the estimate 3/m 2 coming from (7.10). we will call this the dark modulus, because it
will be our dark matter candidate. it has a potential of the form u = 4u(d/m). (in
[49], where this scenario was rst proposed, the candidate was a qcd axion eld. this
model works, but the mechanism is much more general and does not require energy
densities as small as those of the axion.).

now, briey review cosmic history. first we have ination generated by bulk moduli
elds which are not on the true moduli space (which we have called inamoduli). this
period ends after of order 100 e-foldings, and the universe is heated by inamoduli
decay to a temperature of order 109 gev. the primordial plasma quickly redshifts
away. furthermore, as soon as the inamoduli potential energy density falls to 6/m2
p ,
the universe becomes dominated by the coherent oscillations of the true bulk moduli.
the dark modulus remains frozen at some generic point on its potential until the hubble
parameter falls to the mass scale of this eld. at this point the energy density of the
universe is of order   m2
p 4/m 2 which is of order (mp /m)2  104 times larger than
the energy density of the dark modulus. the important point now is that this ratio
is preserved by further cosmic evolution until the true bulk moduli decay. after that
time, the dark energy density grows linearly with the inverse temperature relative to
radiation, and matter radiation equality occurs at 104 mev. this is close enough to
the true value for the observable universe that the factors of order one which we have
neglected throughout might account for the dierence.  must satisfy two constraints
in order for this scenario to work: the dark moduli must remain frozen until the true
bulk moduli begin to oscillate, and the dark modulus must have a lifetime at least
as long as the age of the universe. the second constraint is by far the stronger, and
leads to  < 3  106 gev. axions satisfy this constraint by a large margin. note that
this scenario completely removes the conventional cosmological constraint on the axion
decay constant. axions will be very weakly coupled and will escape all of the usual
schemes for detecting them.

another possible mechanism for baryogenesis in this scenario is that of aeck and
dine [2]40. indeed the authors of [3] have investigated a scenario with a 10 tev modulus
and aeck dine baryogenesis and found that it can account for all cosmological data.

40this was suggested to me by a student at the school. i thank m.dine for detailed discussions of

it and for pointing out the reference below.

75

in this scenario the dark matter can either be an lsp, or if we have strong r parity
violating interactions, the dark modulus (or a combination).

all in all, this seems to be the simplest solution of the cosmological moduli problem,
and has the added virtue of allowing an invisible axion solution of the strong cp
problem. i am also fond of the way in which the version of this scenario with a dark
modulus predicts the correct (within an order of magnitude) temperature for matter
radiation equality in terms of fundamental parameters.

for completeness, we should also discuss the possibility that susy breaking itself
is caused by gauge interactions which are weakly coupled at the fundamental scale.
this is required if we assume, with dine [47] [42] [41], that moduli are xed at some
enhanced symmetry point. scenarios of this sort are attractive because they allow
us to use the idea of gauge mediation [50] to solve the susy avor problem. gauge
interactions generate superpotentials of the form 3
2wg2(c2/m2), where
the c s are composite superelds and the mi the nonperturbative low energy scales
generated by asymptotic freedom. here, in order to cancel the cosmological constant,
we must introduce an r breaking gauge theory with scale (m1), which preserves susy
and a susy breaking gauge theory, with scale related by m6
2. this is the
price one must pay for giving up the idea that true bulk moduli are the instigators of
susy breaking. the ratio of scales between susy and r breaking no longer comes
out naturally, but must be put in by hand. in compensation there is no cosmological
moduli problem in this picture, since all moduli are assumed to be frozen by the initial
superpotential.

1wg1(c1/m1)+3

1 = m2

p m4

7.5 the eects of a dynamical radius

we now have to include the dynamics of the radial modulus t . the r symmetry
violating superpotential has an expansion41

w =

xn=0

3wn(m/mp )ent /mp

(7.11)

at large radius the exponential terms are negligible. we then have no scale susy
breaking even if all other bulk moduli have susy minima42. one can then hope, as in
[45], that the radius is stabilized by higher order terms in the kahler potential. this

41it is important that, as a consequence of our assumption of an r symmetry under which t is
neutral, all terms in this expansion are proportional to the r breaking scale 3. this means that we
cannot invoke mechanisms like that of [1] to explain the stabilization of the radius.

42however, once we take into account the susy violating potential coming from the f term of t ,
there is no reason to assume that the other elds sit at their susy minima. the minimum of the
potential might be achieved with f terms for all the elds.

76

would give a susy breaking scale close to 3/m2
that of the previous section.

p . the resulting scenario is similar to

there is a much more substantial dierence in the case where (what we previously
called) the true moduli space is a point. t still plays the role of a true modulus, and
we again get no-scale susy breaking when the low energy theory violates r symmetry
without breaking susy. we can, if we wish, also add a low energy susy breaking
sector, but to leading order in r this leads to a large positive cosmological constant43.
this is true no matter what we choose for the relative scales of low energy susy
breaking and r symmetry breaking (as long as we try to be consistent with the lower
bound on superpartner masses). thus, once the radius is allowed to be dynamical there
do not seem to be consistent scenarios with gauge mediated susy breaking.

7.6 generalizing horava-witten

as we have noted, the moduli space of 11 dimensional sugra compactications which
preserve n = 1 susy in four minkowski dimensions splits into three components.
these are joyce sevenfolds, f theory limits of compactication on calabi-yau fourfolds,
and heterotic limits of compactication on k3  cy3. these may be continuously
connected when short distance physics is properly taken into account.
in addition,
there may be many branches of moduli space which join onto these through generalized
extremal transitions. the moduli space is thus highly complex.

the cosmological arguments of these lectures indicate that the phenomenologi-
cally relevant compactications may belong to a highly constrained submanifold of this
complicated space. namely, they should preserve eight supercharges in the bulk. the
breaking to n = 1 should occur only on branes. sugra compactications preserving
eight susys are much more constrained. the holonomy must be contained in su(3)
which implies that the manifold is the product of a calabi-yau threefold times a torus,
modded out by a discrete group . in order to obtain a smooth manifold with eight
susys,  should act freely and the holonomy around the new cycles created by  iden-
tication should be in su(3). clearly, a way to obtain horava-witten like scenarios
is to allow xed manifolds of , on which an additional susy is broken. the original
scenario of horava and witten was a cy3  s1 compactication in which  is a z2
reection on the s1. the xed planes carry e8 gauge groups, and one must also choose

43it should be noted that a large positive cosmological constant is not a disaster only for our ability
to t the data. the size of the event horizon for a de sitter space with energy density of scale
1 mev is about a light second in linear size, and for the scale of susy breaking it is smaller by a
factor of 1012. in a theory with multiple late time attractors it is not hard to explain why we are not
there to observe such a universe.

77

an appropriate gauge bundle. a further generalization allows ve branes wrapped on
two cycles of cy3 to live between the planes.

it seems likely that more complicated choices of  might lead to a wider class of
scenarios. the problem of classifying scenarios of this type seems quite manageable44.
the moduli space of compactications of m-theory on cy3 times a torus has a rea-
sonably complicated structure, replete with extremal transitions. nonetheless, it is
considerably simpler than the fourfold or joyce manifold problem, and we know much
more about its structure. thus, if cosmology really points us in the direction of gener-
alized horava-witten compactications, we have made real progress in the search for
the true vacuum of m-theory.

7.7 conclusions

wittens explanation of the discrepancy between the planck and unication scales in
the context of horava-witten compactications, poses a challenge for inationary cos-
mology and particularly for the notion that moduli are inatons. in fact, the enhanced
bulk susy of these compactications gives us a clean denition of modular inatons.
the scenario then makes an order of magnitude prediction of the amplitude of primor-
dial density uctuations in terms of the unication scale. the major problem with
this inationary scenario comes from stabilization of the radius of the horava-witten
orbifold. in leading order in the large radius approximation, radial dynamics appears
to destroy ination. we pointed out several sources of friction for the radius eld,
which could restore inationary solutions, but there is more work to be done here and
a mystery remains. assuming the radion is slowly rolling during ination, why is it
near its vacuum value?

an alternative, which seems more compelling, is to recognize that the dine seiberg
problem for the radial eld probably requires us to contemplate the breakdown of the
large radius expansion for its kahler potential near the true vev of this eld. we
argued that this meant that the kahler potential was rapidly varying (as a function
of t /mp ) near the low energy vev and that this implied that the radius would not
be an inaton but instead would rapidly be driven to the minimum of its potential
during ination. it is not clear whether the inationary minimum is close enough to
the vev to salvage our explanation of the size of density uctuations. this depends
on properties of the kahler potential which are, at the moment, incalculable.

in the context of this large class of inationary scenaria, arguments rst discussed
in [26] then focus attention on the true moduli space of m-theory, a locus of enhanced
discrete r symmetry. such a space almost certainly exists [52]. it is the attractor of

44preliminary results on the classication problem have been obtained by l.motl.

78

postinationary cosmological evolution. the further evolution of the universe then de-
pends on whether this space contains bulk moduli. in the attractive scenario in which it
does, the initial hot big bang generated by ination, is soon dominated by the energy
density stored in coherent oscillations of true bulk moduli. by making optimistic but
plausible assumptions about coecients of order one in order of magnitude estimates,
one obtains a reheat temperature above that required by nucleosynthesis. the decay
of true bulk moduli, rather than that of the inaton, generates the hot big bang of
classical cosmology. the baryon asymmetry might also be generated in these decays,
and this is possible if the susy standard model contains renormalizable baryon number
violating interactions (compatible with laboratory tests of baryon and lepton number
conservation). as a consequence of this, there is no lsp dark matter candidate. in-
stead, boundary moduli with a suppressed potential energy act as a natural source of
dark matter. indeed, the ratio between the planck and unication scales appears again
in this scenario, this time in explaining the temperature at which matter and radiation
make equal contributions to the energy density of the universe. this estimate comes
out an order of magnitude too high, but given the crudity of the calculation it seems
quite plausible that this mechanism could be compatible with observation. the dark
modulus which appears in this scenario could be a qcd axion with decay constant of
order the unication scale. our unconventional origin for the hot big bang completely
removes the cosmological upper bound on this decay constant. such a particle would
be undetectable in presently proposed axion searches.

an alternative is to postulate the aeck-dine mechanism as the source of the
baryon asymmetry in this late decaying modulus scheme. dark matter could then be
an lsp, a unication scale qcd axion, or some combination of the two.

if a cosmology like that outlined here turns out to be correct, one might be tempted
to revise einsteins famous estimate of the moral qualities of a hypothetical creator.
the current standard model of cosmology was constructed in the sixties. since then
there has been much speculation about cosmology at times earlier than that at which
the primordial elements were synthesized. most of it has been based on an eminently
reasonable extrapolation of the hot big bang to energy densities orders of magnitude
higher. if the present scenario is correct, no such extrapolation is possible, and the
conditions in the universe in the rst fraction of the first three minutes were con-
siderably dierent from those at any subsequent time. there was a prior big bang
after ination, whose remnants may be forever hidden from us. the dark matter which
dominates our universe is so weakly coupled to ordinary matter that its detection is far
beyond the reach of currently planned experiments. the qcd and electroweak phase
transitions never occurred.

the only dramatic prediction of this scenario for currently planned experiments

79

is the occurrence of renormalizable baryon number violation in the low energy susy
world45. the details of the baryogenesis scenario envisaged here should be worked
out more carefully, and combined with laboratory constraints, to nail down precisely
which kind of operators are allowed. the scenario is thus easily falsiable, but even
the discovery of renormalizable baryon number violating interactions among susy
particles will not be a conrmation of our cosmology. similarly, any evidence for the
existence of more or less conventional wimp dark matter will be a strong indication
that the present speculations are incorrect, but the failure to discover wimps will not
prove that they are correct.

instead one will have to rely on the slow accumulation of evidence against alterna-
tives: ruling out vanishing up quark mass and spontaneous cp violation as solutions
to the strong cp problem, the failure of conventional axion and wimp searches, the
discovery of renormalizable b violation. these will be steps on the road to proving
that this cosmology is correct, but the end of that road is not in sight.

we have travelled a long road, from the exotic reaches of m-theory to what i hope
have been glimpses of more practical applications of modular physics to cosmology. i
hope i have convinced you that the moduli of m-theory are likely to play a crucial role
in any inationary cosmological model and that many of the phenomenological and
fundamental problems of m-theory are likely to be resolved in a cosmological context.
perhaps the somewhat unorthodox cosmological scenaria presented here will also prove
to be more than just a theorists toys, and will play some role in the future of cosmology.

acknowledgments

i would like to thank sean carroll, michael dine, andrei linde, markus luty, raman
sundrum, paul steinhardt, neal turok, willy fischler, and the students at the les
houches school for insightful comments on and questions about the material presented
here.
i would like to thank the organizers, pierre binetruy, richard schaeer, and
joe silk for giving me the opportunity to present these ideas and for organizing a
terric school. this work was supported in part by the doe under grant de-fg02-
96er40559.

references

[1] m. luty, r. sundrum, [hep-th/9910202].

[2] i. aeck, m. dine, nucl. phys. b 249 (1985) 341.

45in the version of the scenario with aeck dine baryogenesis, even this signature might be absent.

80

[3] t. moroi, m. yamaguchi, t. yanagida, phys. lett. b 342 (1995) 105, [hep-ph/9409367].

[4] l. dixon, v. kaplunosky, m. peskin, unpublished; n.v. krasnikov, phys. lett. b 193

(1997) 37.

[5] t. banks, w. fischler,

019,
[hep-th/9811194]; t. banks, l. motl, j. high energy phys. 9905 (1999) 015,
[hep-th/9904008].

j. high energy phys. 9901 (1999)

l. motl,

[6] t. banks, n. seiberg, op. cit.; s. sethi, l. susskind phys. lett. b 400 (1997) 265

[hep-th/9702101].

[7] j.l. borges, a new refutation of time, in labyrinths, new directions, 1962.

[8] s. kachru, e. silverstein, j. high energy phys. 9901 (1999) 004 [hep-th/9810129];
s. kachru, j. kumar, e. silverstein, phys. rev. d 59 (1999) 106004 [hep-th/9807076].

f. rosati,

e. di pietro,

[9] a. de

la macorra, g. piccinelli,

[hep-ph/9909459];

[hep-th/9907207]; j.e. kim,

[astro-ph/9906174]; f. perrotta, c,

n. bartolo, m. pietroni,
[hep-ph/9908521];
[hep-ph/9908518];
j. demaret,
[gr-qc/9908071]; l. amendola,
[astro-ph/9908023]; r. de ritis, a.a. marino,
c. rubano, p, scudellaro,
[hep-ph/9907528]; f. rosati,
[hep-ph/9906427]; c. ma, r.r. caldwell, p. bode, l. wang, astrophys. j. 521:l1-
[astro-ph/9906066]; m.c. bento,
l4,1999,
o. bertolami,
[hep-ph/9905346]; p. brax,
j. martin, [astro-ph/9905040]; d.e. rosenberg, [astro-ph/9904320]; t. chiba, phys.
rev. d 60 (1999) 083508,
[hep-ph/9902292]; l. wang,
[astro-ph/9901388]; j.e. kim, j. high
r.r. caldwell, j.p. ostriker, p.j. steinhardt,
energy phys. 9905 (1999) 022,
[hep-ph/9811509]; p. binetruy, phys. rev. d 60
(1999) 063502, [hep-ph/9810553]; i. zlatev, l. wang, p.j. steinhardt, phys. rev. lett.
82 (1999) 896,
[astro-ph/9807002]; s.m. carroll, phys. rev. lett. 81 (1998) 3067,
[astro-ph/9806099];

[gr-qc/9905075]; a. masiero, f. rosati,

[gr-qc/9903094]; k. choi,

[10] m.k. prasad, c. sommereld, phys. rev. lett. 35 (1975) 760; e.b. bogomolny, sov. j.

nucl. phys. 24 (1996) 449.

[11] r. haag, j.t. lopuszanski, m. sohnius, nucl. phys. b 88 (1975) 257.

[12] d. olive, e. witten, phys. lett. b 78 (1978) 97.

[13] c. vafa nucl. phys. b 469 (1996) 403.

[14] j. harvey, a. strominger, nucl. phys. b 449 (1995) 535, [hep-th/9504047]; s. cherkis,

j.h. schwarz, phys. lett. b 403 (1997) 225, [hep-th/9703062].

[15] p.s. aspinwall, adv. theor. math. phys. 1 (1998) 127, [hep-th/9707014].

81

[16] k.s. narain, phys. lett. b 169 (1986) 41.

[17] d.r. morrison, n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b 483 (1997) 229,

[hep-th/9609070];

m.r. douglas, s. katz, c. vafa, nucl. phys. b 497 (1997) 155, [hep-th/9609071].

[18] t. asaka, m. kawasaki, [hep-th/9905467].

[19] t. damour, a. polyakov, nucl. phys. b 423 (1994) 532, [hep-th/9401069].

[20] g. veneziano, scale factor duality for classical and quantum strings, phys. lett. b

265 (1991) 287-294.

[21] a.a. tseytlin, c. vafa, elements of string cosmology, nucl. phys. b 372 (1992) 443-

466, hep-th/9109048.

[22] m. gasperini, g. veneziano, pre  big bang in string cosmology, astropart. phys.1

(1993) 317-339.

[23] a. buonanno, t. damour, g. veneziano, prebig bang bubbles from the gravitational
instability of generic string vacua, hep-th/9806230 and references therein; see also

http://www.to.infn.it/egasperin/.

[24] p. binetruy, m.k. gaillard, candidates for the inaton field in superstring models,

phys. rev. d 34 (1986) 3069-3083.

[25] t. banks, m. berkooz, s.h. shenker, g. moore, p.j. steinhardt, modular cosmology,,

phys. rev. d 52 (1995) 3548-3562, hep-th/9503114.

[26] t. banks, m. berkooz, p.j. steinhardt, the cosmological moduli problem, supersym-
metry breaking, and stability in postinationary cosmology, phys. rev. d 52 (1995)
705-716, hep-th/9501053.

[27] m.j. du, talk given at the 4th quantum gravity seminar, moscow, may 25-
29, 1987 and at the string workshop, cambridge, eng., jul 1987. published in
class.quant.grav.5:189,1988 also in moscow quantum grav.1987:0325 ; m.j. du,
p.s. howe, t. inami, k.s. stelle, phys. lett. b 191 (1987) 70; m.j. du nucl. phys.
b 442 (1995) 47, [hep-th/9501030]; m.j. du, presented at superstring workshop,
trieste, italy, jul 12-14, 1989. published in nucl. phys. b 335 (1990) 610; c.m. hull,
p.k. townsend, nucl. phys. b 438 (1995) 109,
[hep-th/9410167]; e. bergshoe,
e. sezgin, p.k. townsend, annals phys. 185 (1988) 330; phys. lett. b 189 (1987) 75.

[28] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724 [hep-th/9510017].

[29] e. witten, nucl. phys. b 460 (1996) 335, [hep-th/9510135].

82

[30] r. nepomechie, phys. rev. d 31 (1985) 1921; c. teitelboim, phys. lett. b 167 (1986)

69.

[31] t. banks, w. fischler, s. shenker, l. susskind, phys. rev. d 55 (1997) 5112,

[hep-th/9610043].

[32] t. banks, w. fischler, s. shenker, l. susskind, op. cit.; l. motl,

[hep-th/9701025];
t. banks, n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b 497 (1997) 41, [hep-th/9702187]; r. dijkgraaf,
e. verlinde, h. verlinde, nucl. phys. b 500 (1997) 43, [hep-th/9703030].

[33] e. bergshoe, e. sezgin, p.k. townsend, annals phys. 185 (1988) 330; phys. lett. b

189 (1987) 75.

[34] p. aspinwall, nucl. phys. 46 (proc. suppl.) (1996) 30 [hep-th/9508154]; j. schwarz,

phys. lett. b 367 (1996) 97, [hep-th/9510086].

[35] e. witten, string theory dynamics in various dimensions, nucl. phys. b 443 (1995)

85-126, hep-th/9503124.

[36] w. fischler, l. susskind, holography and cosmology, hep-th/9806039.

[37] v.a. rubakov, quantum mechanics in the tunneling universe, phys. lett. b 148
(1984) 280-286; t. banks, w. fischler, l. susskind, quantum cosmology in (2 + 1)-
dimensions and (3 + 1)-dimensions, nucl. phys. b 262 (1985) 159; t. banks, tcp,
quantum gravity, the cosmological constant and all that. . . , nucl. phys. b 249
(1985) 332.

[38] o. aharony, string theory dualities from m-theory, nucl. phys. b 476 (1996) 470-

483, hep-th/9604103.

[39] s. elitzur, a. giveon, d. kutasov, e. rabinovici, algebraic aspects of matrix theory

on t d, nucl. phys. b 509 (1998) 122-144, hep-th/9707217.

[40] t. banks, l. dixon, d. friedan, e. martinec, nucl. phys. b 299 (1988) 613.

[41] a. dabholkar, j.a. harvey, string islands, hep-th/9809122.

[42] m. dine, e. silverstein, new m-theory backgrounds with frozen moduli,

hep-th/9712166.

[43] p. horava, e. witten, heterotic and type i string dynamics from eleven dimensions,

nucl. phys. b 460 (1996) 506-524, hep-th/9510209.

[44] e. witten, strong coupling expansion of calabi-yau compactication, nucl. phys.

b 471 (1996) 135-158, hep-th/9602070.

83

[45] t. banks, m. dine, couplings and scales in strongly coupled heterotic string theory,

nucl. phys. b 479 (1996) 173-196, hep-th/9605136.

[46] l. randall, r. sundrum, [hep-th/9810155].

[47] m. dine, seeking the ground state of string theory, invited talk at 13th nishinomiya-
yukawa memorial symposium on dynamics of fields and strings, nishinomiya, japan,
12-13 november, 1998. hep-th/9903212; m. dine, y. nir, y. shadmi, enhanced sym-
metries and the ground state of string theory, phys. lett. b 444 (1998) 103
[hep-th/9806124].

[48] t. banks, m. dine,  coping with strongly coupled string theory, phys. rev. d 50

(1994) 7454 [hep-th/9406132].

[49] t. banks, m. dine, cosmology of string theoretic axions, nucl. phys. b 505 (1997)

445 [hep-th/9608197].

[50] m. dine, w. fischler, a phenomenological model of particle physics based on super-
symmetry, phys. lett. b 10 (1982) 227: m. dine, a. nelson, dynamical supersym-
metry breaking at low energies , phys. rev. d 48 (1993) 1277 [hep-ph/9303230].

[51] g.d. coughlan, w. fischler, e.w. kolb, s. raby, g.g. ross, cosmological problems for
; t. banks, d. kaplan, a. nelson,
the polonyi potential, phys. lett. b 59 (1983)
cosmological implications of dynamical supersymmetry breaking , phys. rev. d
49 (1994) 779 [hep-ph/9308292].

[52] t. banks, m. dine, quantum moduli spaces of n=1 string theories, phys. rev. d 53

(1996) 5790 [hep-th/9508071].

[53] e. witten, nonperturbative superpotentials in string theory, nucl. phys. b 474

(1996) 343 [hep-th/9604030].

[54] r. brustein, p.j. steinhardt, challenges for superstring cosmology, phys. lett. b 302

(1993) 196 [hep-th/9212049].

[55] m. dine, n. seiberg, is the superstring weakly coupled?, phys. lett. b 162 (1985)

299.

[56] d. lyth, e. stewart, thermal ination and the moduli problem, phys. rev. d 53

(1996) 1784 [hep-ph/9510204].

[57] l. ibanez, g.g. ross, discrete gauge symmetry anomalies, phys. lett. b 260 (1991)

291; g. eyal, y. nirlepton parity in supersymmetric models, hep-ph/9904473.

84

[58] t. kajita (for the super-kamiokande and kamiokande collaboration), atmospheric
neutrino results from super kamiokande and kamiokande: evidence for neutrino (mu)
oscillations, talk given at the 18th international conference on neutrino physics and
astrophysics, takayama, japan, 4-9 june 1998, hep-ex/9810001.

[59] r. holman, p. ramond, g.g. ross, phys. lett. b 137 (1984) 343.

[60] s. weinberg, cosmological production of baryons, phys. rev. lett. 42 (1979) 850.

[61] k. babu, j.c. pati, f. wilczek, fermion masses, neutrino oscillations, and proton de-

cay in the light of superkamiokande, hep-ph/9812538

[62] l. dixon, v. kaplunosky, m. peskin, unpublished; n.v. krasnikov, phys. lett. b 193

(1987) 37.

[63] j. horne, g. moore, chaotic coupling constants, nucl. phys. b 432 (1994) 109

[hep-th/9403058].

[64] m. kawasaki, n. sugiyama, modern physics letters a12, 1275, (1997), hep-ph/9607273;
s. dimopoulos, g.f. giudice, a. pomarol,
37
[hep-ph/9607225]; t. asaka, m. kawasaki, m. yamaguchi, phys. lett. b 451 (1999)
317 [hep-ph/9810334] (and references cited therein).

phys. lett. b 389

(1996)

85

