iassns-hep-99/89
yctp-p27-99
hep-th/9911029
november, 1999

0
0
0
2

 

y
a
m
2
1

 

 
 

3
v
9
2
0
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

anomaly mediation in supergravity theories

jonathan a. bagger,a takeo moroi,b and erich poppitzc

a department of physics and astronomy, the johns hopkins university

baltimore, md 21218, usa

b school of natural sciences, institute for advanced study

princeton, nj 08540, usa

c physics department, yale university

new haven, ct 06520-8120, usa

abstract

we consider the eects of anomalies on the supersymmetry-breaking parameters
in supergravity theories. we construct a supersymmetric expression for the anomaly-
induced terms in the 1pi eective action; we use this result to compute the complete
one-loop formula for the anomaly-induced gaugino mass. the mass receives contri-
butions from the super-weyl, kahler, and sigma-model anomalies of the supergravity
theory. we point out that the anomaly-mediated gaugino mass can be aected by
local counterterms that cancel the super-weyl-kahler anomaly. this implies that the
gaugino mass cannot be predicted unless the full high-energy theory is known.

1 introduction and summary

supersymmetry at the electroweak scale is an appealing possibility for physics beyond the
standard model. not only does it render the ratio of the electroweak scale to the planck
scale, mw /mp  1017, stable against quadratically divergent radiative corrections, but it
can also explain the size of the hierarchy if supersymmetry is broken by some nonperturbative
mechanism.

it is, therefore, an urgent and open problem to nd a viable and testable method for dy-
namically breaking supersymmetry and generating weak-scale masses for the superpartners
of the known elementary particles. the problem has two aspects, which are not necessarily
distinct. first, one has to dynamically break supersymmetry, and second, one has to com-
municate the supersymmetry breaking to the visible-sector particles. the main ideas for
this are supergravity and gauge mediation.

in this paper we will consider supergravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking. in such
theories, the communication of supersymmetry breaking to the scalar elds is almost au-
tomatic. for a generic kahler potential, once supersymmetry is broken in a hidden sector,
visible-sector scalars gain mass as a consequence of the tree-level supergravity equations of
motion. the scale of the mass, m0, is set by dimensional analysis: m0  m 2
susy/mp  m3/2,
where msusy is the scale of supersymmetry breaking and m3/2 is the gravitino mass. if msusy
is of order an intermediate scale, msusy  1010 gev, the soft scalar masses are of order mw .
gaugino masses, as well as a-terms, are more dicult to obtain because they break a
u(1)r symmetry. the simplest way to generate these terms is to include an eective gauge-
singlet chiral supereld in the low-energy eective lagrangian. the problem is that such
singlets are not necessarily present in generic models of supersymmetry breaking. moreover,
fundamental singlets can cause cosmological diculties, or destabilize the gauge hierarchy
through quadratically divergent radiative corrections.
it is important, therefore, to fully
investigate alternative mechanisms for generating gaugino masses.

it was recently pointed out by randall and sundrum [1], and giudice, luty, murayama,
and rattazzi [2], that once supersymmetry is broken in the hidden sector of a theory, gaugino
masses and a-terms are generated at one loop from anomaly-related graphs. this is an
important result because it shows that these terms are automatically present, even in theories
without gauge singlets. the simplest way to understand their result is to consider the one-
loop renormalization of the visible-sector gauge couplings,#1 #2

1

4 z d2 1 

g2b0
162 log

2! w w + h.c. ,

(1)

#1in this paper, we omit the index for the adjoint representation for the gauge multiplets. for non-abelian
mnf (a)mn, where (a) is the

gauge groups, w w and fmnf mn should be understood as w (a)w (a)
index of the adjoint representation. we use the conventions of ref. [3].

and f (a)



#2 for simplicity, we do not include gauge kinetic functions. in general, gauge kinetic functions can occur
at the tree or loop level. if present, they can give non-anomalous contributions to gaugino masses. we are
interested in anomaly-induced gaugino masses, so we do not consider them here.

1

where b0 is the rst coecient of the beta function and  is the ultraviolet cuto. as pointed
out in refs. [1, 2], the leading supersymmetry-breaking eect can be found, in the absence
of planck-scale hidden-sector expectation values, by replacing the ultraviolet cuto in (1)
with a supersymmetry-breaking spurion supereld,

this leads, after substitution in (1), to the following anomaly-induced gaugino mass,

   exp(m3/2 2) .

m1/2 = 

g2b0
162 m3/2 .

(2)

(3)

one-loop a-terms are induced in a similar way. this mechanism for generating gaugino
masses gives rise to an exciting new phenomenology [4].

in what follows we will take a closer look at the physics that underlies anomaly medi-
ation, in the full supergravity context. our starting point will be the general supergravity
lagrangian. the classical symmetries of this lagrangian are super-weyl-kahler invariance
(or, in components, simply kahler invariance), as well as various global symmetries that
act as sigma-model isometries. these symmetries induce anomalous chiral rotations on the
fermions. we shall see that anomaly mediation results from quantum anomalies in these
classical symmetries.

in section 2 we will elaborate on these points, and present the terms in the 1pi eective
action that are induced by the chiral anomalies associated with the super-weyl-kahler and
sigma-model symmetries. these nonlocal terms are entirely determined by bose symmetry,
unitarity, analyticity, and gauge invariance. they are, therefore, independent of the choice
of regulator#3 [5]. by demanding local supersymmetry, we will nd the unique superspace
extension of these nonlocal anomaly-induced terms [6].

in section 3 we will discuss the conditions under which these nonlocal terms are present
in the eective action. we will argue that they are indeed present in the case of interest.
we will then derive the general formula for the one-loop anomaly-induced contribution to
the gaugino mass, valid for hidden-sector models with arbitrary expectation values,

m1/2 = 

g2

162 (cid:20) (3tg  tr) m3/2 + (tg  tr) kif i +

2 tr
dr

(log det k|r

),i f i(cid:21) .

(4)

in this expression, 3tg  tr is the beta function, b0, where tg is the dynkin index of the
adjoint representation, normalized to n for su(n), and tr is the dynkin index associated
with the representation r of dimension dr, normalized to 1/2 for the su(n) fundamental.
a sum over all matter representations is understood. the second and third terms in this
expression involve the kahler potential, k, and the expectation values of the auxiliary

#3a 1pi argument for the regulator independence of anomaly mediation, based on local supersymmetry,

was also given in ref. [2].

2

elds, f i, evaluated in the einstein frame. this result for m1/2 generalizes the one given in
refs. [1, 2], and reduces to it when all expectation values are much less than mp.

in section 4 we will see that anomaly-induced gaugino masses can be modied by con-
tributions from planck-scale physics. in general, we expect such contributions because su-
pergravity is a nonrenormalizable, eective eld theory, valid for energies much less than
mp. in string theory, for example, the heavy string modes can induce anomalous green-
schwarz-like terms in the eective action. we shall see that these terms can contribute to
the gaugino masses. this illustrates that the gaugino masses can be signicantly modied
 or canceled altogether  by high energy contributions that are outside the realm of the
eective supergravity theory.

2 anomalies in matter-coupled supergravity

in this section, we will dene the classical symmetries of matter-coupled supergravity: super-
weyl-kahler invariance and sigma-model isometries. we will compute their quantum anoma-
lies and write down, following cardoso and ovrut [6], the terms they induce in the 1pi
eective action. we will restrict our attention to the mixed super-weyl-kahler gauge and
sigma-model gauge anomalies because they are the anomalies that are relevant for gaugino
masses.

the super-weyl-kahler and sigma-model symmetries of classical supergravity lagrangian
can be given a full superspace description (see [3]). however, for the case at hand, it is
perhaps simpler to study them through their action on the fermions in the supergravity
lagrangian. to this end, let us consider the kinetic terms for the fermions:

lkin = ikij  j a(cid:20)(cid:26)a +
ba(cid:19)  ,

ia(cid:18)a 

i
2

i
6

ba 

1
6

(kjaaj  kj aaj)(cid:27) i + i

jkaajk(cid:21)

(5)

where ai and i are the scalar and fermionic components of i-th chiral supereld, the  are
the gauginos, and ba is the auxiliary vector eld in the supergravity multiplet. furthermore,
let us dene ki  k/ai, and kij  and i
jk to be the kahler metric and kahler connection,
respectively,

kij  =

2k

aiaj ,

kj 

ik =

kij 
ak

.

(6)

we choose to write eq. (5) without eliminating the auxiliary eld ba because we wish to
preserve o-shell supersymmetry. we assume that the gauge elds couple in the usual
manner.

the fermion kinetic terms (5) contain connections for three local symmetries. the rst
is a u(1)r symmetry that is part of the superconformal group: it acts on the gauginos, the

3

matter fermions, and the supergravity auxiliary eld as follows,

  ei/2 
  ei/6 
ba  ba + a .

(7)

the connection ba shifts under the u(1)r symmetry because it is the gauge eld of supercon-
formal supergravity. (recall that the action and auxiliary eld structure of n = 1 einstein
supergravity can be obtained by gauge xing the superconformal supergravity action; see
e.g. [7].) from these transformations we see that the chiral anomaly associated with the
superconformal symmetry is proportional to b0 = 3tg  tr.

the second symmetry is a local u(1)k symmetry that acts on the matter fermions but

not the gauginos. it is compensated by a shift of the kahler connection:

i(kmaam  kmaam)  i(kmaam  kmaam) + a .

  ei/6 

(8)

the chiral anomaly of this symmetry is proportional to tr. note that the u(1)r  u(1)k
symmetry of the fermion kinetic terms is explicitly broken by other terms in the supergravity
action. the unbroken symmetry is super-weyl-kahler symmetry, which in component form
is usually called kahler invariance [3]. this, however, does not aect the nonlocal anomaly
terms that are induced in the 1pi eective action.

the third connection entering the fermion kinetic terms is the sigma-model connection,
jk  k ijkk, where k i is the inverse kahler metric. it acts as a u(n) connection
i
on the matter fermions, where n is the number of chiral multiplets in the theory. however,
only the u(1) subgroup contributes to the gaugino masses. therefore, in what follows, we
restrict our attention to this u(1), and write

i
jkaaj = d1

r i

k

jaaj +    = d1

r i

k (log det k|r

),jaaj +    ,

(9)

 is the
where the dots denote the non-singlet part of the sigma-model connection, and k|r
kahler metric restricted to the representation r. in eq. (9), a sum over all matter represen-
tations r is understood, and the sum over  is restricted to the appropriate representations.
the super-weyl, kahler and sigma model symmetries are all anomalous. the connections
ba, kmaam  kmaam, and i
jkaaj can be viewed as background gauge elds coupled to
anomalous currents. consider, for example, the connection ba. the gauge triangle diagram
gives rise to a nonlocal term in the 1pi eective action, whose form is determined by bose
symmetry, unitarity, analyticity, and gauge invariance [5]:

l =

g2
962 (3tg  tr)

aba

fmn f mn .

(10)

in this expression, fmn and f mn are the eld strength and the dual eld strength associated
with a set of dynamical gauge elds, and ba is the background gauge eld that couples to

4

the anomalous u(1)r current. under a background gauge transformation, ba  ba + a,
l has a local variation that expresses the u(1)r anomaly. similar terms appear for the
other two currents.

note that the anomaly (10) depends on the quadratic casimirs tg and tr. these
casimirs include only those fermions that are eectively massless at the momenta of interest.
if a fermion propagating in the loop has a dirac mass m, it decouples from the anomaly for
external momenta q2  m2. (the situation for masses generated by spontaneous symmetry
breaking will be discussed in section 4.)

in a supersymmetric theory, the above anomalies can be lifted to superspace [3]. following

cardoso and ovrut [6], the result is as follows

l = 

g2

2562 z d2 2e w w
(cid:20)4(tr  3tg) r+ 

1
3

1 (cid:16) d2  8r(cid:17)

tr
dr

tr d2k +

d2 log det k|r

(cid:21) + h.c.

(11)

the rst term, which contains the r+ supereld, arises from the u(1)r anomaly.
it is
proportional to the beta function, b0 = 3tg  tr. the second and third terms express the
u(1)k anomaly and the u(1) piece of the sigma-model anomaly. together they have the
appropriate local variations to produce the quantum anomalies associated with the super-
weyl-kahler and u(1) sigma-model symmetries [6].

the anomaly for each connection can be obtained by a background supereld calculation
of the two-point gauge supereld greens function, with a single insertion of the appropriate
background eld (the superspace curvature r for the rst term, and k or log det k  for the
last two terms). therefore this result should be interpreted as the leading contribution in a
background-eld expansion. in particular, the inverse laplacian should be evaluated in at
spacetime.

to see that the superspace expression (11) does indeed reproduce the correct component
anomaly terms, one must expand in components. consider, for example, the u(1)r term.
the component expansion of the supereld r+ contains the following terms [3],

r+ = 

1

6 (cid:20)m  +    + 2(cid:18)

1
2

r + iem

a dmba +   (cid:19)(cid:21) ,

(12)

where r is the einstein curvature scalar. if we substitute (12) into the rst term in (11),
and take the 2 component of w w and the lowest component of ( d2  8r)r+, we recover
the same nonlocal u(1)r anomaly as in (10).

the superspace expression (11) also contains the supersymmetric partners of the u(1)r

anomaly. in particular, it contains the nonlocal term

l =

g2
1922 (3tg  tr)

r

fmnf mn .

(13)

this term arises from a one loop graph with one graviton and two gauge boson vertices.
under a conformal rescaling of the metric, gmn  exp(2)gmn, the curvature scalar shifts as

5

r  r + 6  + o(2). we see that the nonlocal term (13) also expresses the conformal
anomaly of the theory.

in the following section, we will compute the full anomaly-mediated gaugino mass term.
before we do that, however, we rst discuss the conditions under which eq. (11) is valid.
we start by noting that our derivation required two essential ingredients:

(i) a nonlocal anomaly term of the type given in (10).

(ii) local supersymmetry of the 1pi action.

the rst item is obvious.

if there are no anomalies, there are no anomaly-mediated
contributions to gaugino masses. for visible-sector gaugino masses, the associated anomaly
diagrams contain visible-sector fermions in the loop. the anomaly receives contributions
from all fermions whose mass is less than the weak scale, mw .

the second item says that the superspace expression only holds when the superpartners
of the loop fermions are active at the scale of interest. for gaugino masses, the loop contains
visible-sector particles. since all visible-sector superparticles have weak-scale masses, the
eective theory is essentially supersymmetric. this implies that the expression (11) can
indeed be used to extract gaugino masses.

a more rened analysis conrms this intuition. consider the case of a visible sector in
which there are scalar mass terms present at the tree level, but no tree-level fermion masses.
since the fermions are massless, triangle diagrams induce anomalies in the anomalous cur-
rents.

is the cardoso-ovrut result valid for this case? eq. (11) depends on graphs that con-
tain just one background-eld insertion in the gauge two-point function. since the scalar
mass terms arise from such insertions, one should, in fact, sum over all hidden-sector inser-
tions. these insertions have important eects. for example, they can change the conformal
anomaly, eq. (13). if the scalars have mass, their contribution must decouple at momenta
below their mass. the decoupling of the scalars is not described by the cardoso-ovrut term
because the extra insertions are not included.

fortunately, the scalar mass insertions have no eect on the diagrams that give rise to
gaugino masses. one way to see this is to note that gaugino masses arise as a result of
loops with pauli-villars regulator elds. therefore the anomaly-induced gaugino masses are
present whether or not the visible-sector scalar elds have tree-level masses.

by way of contrast, consider now the case of the hidden-sector loops that contribute to
the hidden-sector gauge two-point function. naively, one might think that these loops would
generate visible-sector scalar masses through the cardoso-ovrut term. however, they do not
because conditions (i) and (ii) both fail in the hidden sector. in particular, hidden-sector
fermions are generally not massless, so the terms of the form (10) are not present at scales
below msusy. second, even if there are hidden-sector massless fermions, their superpartners
are heavy, typically of order msusy. therefore the cardoso-ovrut term cannot be used to
infer one-loop anomaly-induced masses for the visible-sector supersymmetric scalars.

6

3 anomaly-induced gaugino masses

in the previous section, we found that the super-weyl-kahler and sigma-model anomalies
generate nonlocal terms in the 1pi eective action. the terms are induced by vector-eld
two-point diagrams that contain one additional insertion of a supergravity or hidden-sector
background eld. in this section we will see that they give rise to gaugino masses when the
background elds obtain supersymmetry-breaking expectation values.

the anomaly-induced contribution to the gaugino mass can be easily computed from

(11). one rst extracts the 2 components of the terms multiplying w w. this gives

g2

162 (cid:20)m 

3

(3tg  tr) +

2
3

tr kif i 

2tr
dr

(log det k|r

),if i(cid:21) .

(14)

in this expression, the expectation values of the auxiliary elds m and f i are evaluated in
the general supergravity frame, in which the einstein term is of the form exp(k/3)r.

to make contact with the usual supergravity lagrangian (see e.g. [3]), one must transform
to the einstein frame, in which the einstein term takes its canonical form. the frame
transformation is accomplished by a weyl rescaling of the metric and a redenition of the
fermionic and auxiliary elds. the relevant transformations are as follows [3],

ec

m = e2 e
c
 = e3 

m

m  = e2 (m    f  iki)
f i = e2 f  i ,

(15)

where the primed quantities are in the einstein frame and  = k/12. note that the eld m
transforms inhomogeneously, while the f i transforms homogeneously.

using these results, it is not hard to write the anomaly-induced gaugino mass in the
usual einstein frame. one rst redenes the auxiliary elds as in (15) and then one drops
the primes. this gives the complete one-loop anomaly-induced contribution to the gaugino
mass,

m1/2 = 

g2

162 (cid:20)(3tg  tr) m3/2 + (tg  tr) kif i +

2tr

dr (cid:16)log det k|r

f i(cid:21) .

(cid:17)i

(16)

in this expression, we have substituted the einstein-frame expectation value of m,

m  = 3ek/2 p   3m3/2 ,

(17)

where p is the superpotential. we also require the eld f i to be evaluated in the einstein
frame, where

f i = ek/2 k ij 

(p 

j  + kj p ) .

(18)

7

let us now consider several limits of (16). the rst is when there are no planck-scale
expectation values in the hidden sector. in that case, it is easy to check that eq. (16) reduces
to the result given in ref. [1, 2],

m1/2 = 

g2
162 (3tg  tr) m3/2 ,

(19)

with b0 = 3tg  tr.

the second limit is when the kahler potential is of the sequestered-sector form [1],

k = 3 log(cid:20) 

1
3

q+q + f (h +, h)(cid:21) .

(20)

here q and h denote observable and hidden-sector chiral superelds, respectively, and f is
a real function with hf i = 1. this kahler potential has the property that it generates no
tree-level soft scalar masses for the visible-sector elds. it also obeys the relation

1
dr

log det k|r

 =

1
3

k

(21)

for vanishing expectation values of the observable elds. (recall that the derivatives in k 
are taken with respect to visible elds, and the metric is projected on the representation r
of dimension dr of the relevant gauge group.) this implies that the contributions from the
kahler and sigma-model connections cancel, leaving [8]:

m1/2 = 

g2

162 (3tg  tr) (cid:18)m3/2 +

1
3

kif i(cid:19) .

(22)

in the absence of planck-scale expectation values, this reduces to the result given in refs. [1,
2].

to highlight the importance of the rst term in (16), it is useful to consider a third

example, that of a no-scale model, with kahler potential

k = 3 log(cid:18)t + t + 

1
3

q+q 

1
3

h +h(cid:19) .

(23)

this kahler potential is of the sequestered-sector type (if we treat the modulus t as a hidden-
sector eld), so the gaugino mass is given by eq. (22). if the supersymmetry breaking is
dominated by the f component of the modulus t , and the cosmological constant is canceled
by adding a constant to the superpotential, it is easy to see that kt f t = 3m3/2. we see
that the anomaly-induced gaugino mass vanishes in this model.

let us now compare our results with previous work on supergravity anomalies [9, 10].
these papers contain a nonlocal anomaly-induced term that is similar to our expression
(11), except for the fact that the rst term is missing, and the second term is proportional to
(tg  tr) d2k. the expression in these papers has the correct anomalous variation under

8

super-weyl-kahler transformations, but it does not transform correctly under super-weyl or
kahler alone. this can be traced to the missing r+ term in their expression for the anomaly.
the expressions in these papers completely miss the super-weyl contribution to the gaugino
mass, proportional to (3tg  tr)m3/2. (this point was also made in [11].) note that in
the no-scale model considered above, the r+ contribution precisely cancels the terms that
involve the kahler potential.

the nonlocal terms induced by the super-weyl anomaly are important for a dierent
reason as well. as will be shown in [12], the transformation to the einstein frame is actually
a super-weyl eld redenition. this redenition gives rise to an anomalous jacobian in the
einstein-frame lagrangian. the jacobian can be obtained by a shift in (11). the jacobian
ensures that supersymmetry transformations are not anomalous in the einstein frame. the
issues of frame dependence and the super-weyl anomaly will be discussed in a separate
publication [12].

4 counterterms from high energies

in this section we will discuss high-energy contributions to the eective lagrangian and their
possible eects on anomaly-mediated gaugino masses. these contributions can be generated
by heavy modes that are not included in the low-energy supergravity theory.

we rst consider contributions that are induced by physics below the planck scale [8].
consider, for example, a theory that contains a visible-sector chiral multiplet with a mass of
order m, where m is much larger than the scale of the eective eld theory. let us assume
that the multiplet gets its mass from symmetry breaking, through a superpotential term of
the form

where q is in a real representation of the gauge group. in this expression,  is a spurion
supereld with expectation value hi = 0 + f 2. let us include this multiplet in the
low-energy theory, and then decouple it by taking 0  m. the decoupling is easily done

using a eld redenition, q  q/q/0, which rotates away the supersymmetry-breaking

expectation value, f 2. (this is similar to the dhoker-farhi method for integrating out a
heavy top quark [13]. see also [8, 14].) the eld redenition is, of course, anomalous; its
jacobian can be computed from the log det k|r

 part of (11):

l =

g2

322 tr z d2 2e log(/0) w w + h.c.

as m  , the jacobian induces an additional contribution to the gaugino mass,

m1/2 =

g2
162 tr

f
m

.

9

(25)

(26)

l = z d2 e  q2 + h.c. ,

(24)

this example shows that anomaly-induced gaugino masses can depend on physics beyond
the weak scale. in fact, they can also depend on physics beyond the planck scale. to see
this, consider the case of superstring theory, which reduces to supergravity for energies
below the planck scale. if we restrict ourselves to the low-energy supergravity theory, there
is no reason for the super-weyl-kahler transformations to be anomaly-free. (the low-energy
supergravity theory is well dened whether or not the transformations are anomalous.) in
string theory, however, it is sometimes necessary to cancel the anomalies.

the low-energy supergravity that arises from superstring compactication typically de-
pends on the size and shape of the extra compact space-time dimensions. in supergravity
theory, this information is encoded in the moduli, which are most easily described in terms
of sigma models. these sigma models can have various nonlinear symmetries, such as target
space duality, which are reections of exact quantum symmetries of the underlying string
theory. these nonlinear symmetries can act on the supergravity theory as super-weyl-kahler
transformations, in which case the relevant super-weyl-kahler anomalies must be canceled.
as a simple example, consider the su(1, 1)/u(1) supersymmetric sigma model, which
describes the moduli dynamics in certain toroidal superstring compactications (see e.g.
[15]). the kahler potential for the (complex) modulus t is given by

k =  log(cid:16)t + t +(cid:17) ,

(27)

in the usual units with mp = 1. (we neglect matter-eld contributions to k.) target-space
duality acts on t through an sl(2, r)/z2 transformation. under t  1/t , for example,
the kahler potential changes as follows,

k(1/t, 1/t +) = k(t, t +) + log t + log t + .

(28)

this induces a super-weyl-kahler transformation in the low-energy supergravity theory.
now, if duality is an exact quantum symmetry, the corresponding super-weyl-kahler anomaly
must be canceled by other terms in the low-energy eective action. these terms are local
because they arise from integrating out high-energy modes; their variation under the super-
weyl-kahler transformation precisely cancels the anomaly.

the question for us here is whether the anomaly-canceling counterterms contribute to the
gaugino masses. in general, they do, by an amount that depends on unknown high energy
physics. consider, for example, the following term:#4

l =

g2

162 (tg  tr) z d2 2e log (it ) w w + h.c. ,

(29)

where (it ) is the dedekind eta function. this term shifts under t  1/t , and cancels the
super-weyl-kahler anomaly arising from (28).#5 if t has a planck-scale expectation value,

#4 the log (it ) can be viewed as a contribution to a gauge kinetic function f (t ).
#5the coecient in l can be dierent when visible-sector matter elds are included.

10

ht i = t0 + f 2, eq. (29) gives the following contribution to the gaugino mass

m1/2 = 

g2
96

(tg  tr) e2(it0) f ,

(30)

where e2(it ) is the second eisenstein series.

other anomaly-canceling terms are also possible. a second example is provided by the

green-schwarz term from [9],

l =

g2

322 (tg  tr) z d2 2e (cid:16) d2  8r(cid:17) k(t +, t ) (  l) + h.c.

(31)

here k is the kahler potential,  is the chern-simons supereld, and l is a linear multiplet
that is required for gauge invariance (for details we refer the reader to [9]). this term shifts
the gaugino mass by

(32)

which is clearly not the same as (30).

m1/2 =

g2
162 (tg  tr) kt f ,

these examples show that the gaugino masses predicted by anomaly meditation are
aected by unknown high-energy physics. on the one hand, this makes it dicult to ex-
perimentally test the ideas behind anomaly mediation. on the other, the dependence on
string-scale physics opens a window to physics at the highest energies. it is an interesting
and important problem to study the anomaly-canceling terms in various string vacua.

a nal example that illustrates the dependence on high energy physics is the ambiguous
separation of the kahler potential and the superpotential in the bare lagrangian. at
the tree level, the following two superspace lagrangians give rise to the same component
lagrangians:

l0 = z d2 2e (cid:20) 3
0 = z d2 2e (cid:20) 3

l

8 (cid:16) d2  8r(cid:17) exp(k/3) + p(cid:21) +    ,
8 (cid:16) d2  8r(cid:17) exp[(k + log p + log p +)/3] + 1(cid:21) +    .

(33)

(34)

in these expressions, we have suppressed the gauge-eld-dependent terms. at tree-level,
eqs. (33) and (34) are related by a super-weyl transformation. beyond tree-level, the equiv-
alence does not persist because of the super-weyl-kahler anomaly. the one-loop eective
actions derived from these lagrangians are related as follows

l = l  " g2

322 (tg  tr) z d2 2e log p w w + h.c.# .

(35)

this relation is easily derived by writing r = r  d2 log p +/24 in (11) and then redening
the kahler potential, k  = k + log p + log p +.

11

our formula, given in eq. (16), was derived using the lagrangian (33). if we had used

the lagrangian (34), we would have found the gaugino mass shifted by#6

m1/2 = 

g2
162 (tg  tr)

pif i

p

.

(36)

the lagrangian l can be made quantum mechanically equivalent to l by adding an
anomaly-canceling counterterm to the bare lagrangian l
0. such a counterterm is not nec-
essary for the consistency of the low energy theory, nor is the choice of counterterm unique.
nevertheless, if we add the following counterterm to l
0,

l =

g2

322 (tg  tr) z d2 2e log p w w + h.c. ,

(37)

then l + l is equivalent to l, and the gaugino mass reduces to (16).

5 conclusions

in this paper we have seen that one-loop anomaly-induced gaugino masses have a natural
interpretation in terms of the supersymmetrized weyl, kahler and sigma-model anomalies
of matter-coupled supergravity. following cardoso and ovrut, we presented the superspace
expression for the nonlocal 1pi terms induced by these anomalies. we then found an expres-
sion for the visible-sector gaugino mass in terms of the gravitino mass and the hidden-sector
auxiliary elds f i. our expression holds for arbitrary expectation values.
it reduces to
previous results when the hidden-sector expectation values are much smaller than mp, and
in the sequestered-sector scenario of randall and sundrum [1].

in the last section of the paper, we pointed out that the phenomenology of the anomaly-
induced gaugino masses is complicated by possible anomaly-canceling terms in the eective
lagrangian. these terms can arise from massive string modes, or from heavy supermulti-
plets whose masses stem from symmetry breaking. the string-induced terms are present if
some exact symmetry of string theory acts by a kahler transformation on the low-energy
supergravity theory. their form depends on the details of string theory at the planck scale.
we also pointed out that the two forms of the supergravity action  one where the su-
perpotential p is present, and the other where the superpotential is absorbed in the kahler
potential k  are, in fact, quantum-mechanically inequivalent.
in this paper we took as
fundamental the action with the explicit superpotential. this action has a geometrical in-
terpretation, in the sense that the superpotential is a section of a holomorphic line bundle
over the kahler manifold [17]. more formal aspects of supergravity anomalies will be inves-
tigated in ref. [12].

#6in the sequestered-sector scenario [1], this ambiguity does not arise. in this scenario, there is no direct
coupling between hidden- and observable-sector elds in the bare lagrangian. therefore, one should start
with the lagrangian given in eq. (33), and not eq. (34), since the kahler potential for l
0 does not satisfy
the condition (20). for more on anomaly mediation in the ve-dimensional supergravity framework, see [16].

12

finally, let us close by connecting our derivation of the anomaly-induced mass to the
discussion presented in the introduction. there, we stated that the gaugino mass follows
from the logarithmically-divergent term in the 1pi eective action,

1

4 z d2  1 

g2b0
162 log

2! w w + h.c.

(38)

where b0 = 3tg  tr. this expression assumes that all hidden-sector expectation values
are much smaller than the planck scale, and that spacetime is at and minkowski. if we
interpret the cuto as a supersymmetry-breaking spurion,   (1 + 2m3/2), eq. (38) gives
rise to the nonvanishing gaugino mass (3).

suppose now that we choose another cuto, perhaps one that preserves supersymmetry.
how then can we nd the anomaly-induced gaugino mass? the answer is to write (38) in a
weak supergravity background. in particular, we take the background to be superconformally
a e++, where  is a -dependent but x-independent conformal factor.
at, with em
e4, which is the relevant part of the covariant,
we replace the at-space laplacian by
chiral, curved-space laplacian in the superconformal background [18]. this gives

a = m

1

4 z d2  1 
4 z d2  1 

1

=

g2b0

162 " log  2
e4!#! w w + h.c.
162 " log  2! + 4#! w w + h.c.

g2b0

in the superconformal background, r =  d2+/4 +   , so this becomes
r+#! w w + h.c.

162 " log  2! 

4 z d2  1 

g2b0

1

d2

(39)

(40)

plus higher-order terms. the term proportional to r+ is nothing but the weyl anomaly
term from (11).

we would like to thank jan louis, lisa randall, riccardo rattazzi, raman sundrum
and fabio zwirner for discussions. the work of j.b. is supported by the u.s. national
science foundation, grants nsf-phy-9404057 and nsf-phy-9970781. he would like to
thank the institute for advanced study and the monell foundation for their support during
the early stages of this project. the work of t.m. is supported by u.s. national science
foundation under grant nsf-phy-9513835, and by the marvin l. goldberger membership.
e.p. is supported by the department of energy, contract doe de-fg0292er-40704. we
would like to express our appreciation to the aspen center for physics, where part of this
work was done.

references

[1] l. randall and r. sundrum, hep-th/9810155.

13

[2] g. giudice, m. luty, h. murayama and r. rattazzi, jhep 9812 (1998) 027.

[3] j. wess and j. bagger, supersymmetry and supergravity, (princeton university press,

1992).

[4] j. feng, t. moroi, l. randall, m. strassler and s. su, phys. rev. lett. 83 (1999) 1731;

t. gherghetta, g.f. giudice and j.d. wells, hep-ph/9904378;
j.l. feng and t. moroi, hep-ph/9907319.

[5] a. dolgov and v. zakharov, nucl. phys. b27 (1971) 525;

y. frishman, a. schwimmer, t. banks and s. yankielowicz, nucl. phys. b177 (1981)
157;
s. coleman and b. grossman, nucl. phys. b203 (1982) 205.

[6] g. lopez-cardoso and b. ovrut, nucl. phys. b418 (1994) 535. see also i.l. buchbinder

and s.m. kuzenko, phys. lett. b202 (1988) 233.

[7] p. van nieuwenhuizen, phys. rept. 68 (1981) 189.

[8] a. pomarol and r. rattazzi, jhep 9905 (1999) 013.

[9] j.-p. derendinger, s. ferrara, c. kounnas and f. zwirner, nucl. phys. b372 (1992)

145.

[10] l. ibanez and d. lust, nucl. phys. b382 (1992) 305;

v. kaplunovsky and j. louis, phys. lett. b306 (1993) 269.

[11] m.k. gaillard, b. nelson and y. wu, phys. lett. b459 (1999) 549.

[12] j. bagger, t. moroi and e. poppitz, hep-th/0003282.

[13] e. dhoker and e. farhi, nucl. phys. b248 (1984) 59.

[14] e. katz, y. shadmi and y. shirman, hep-ph/9906296.

[15] j. polchinski, string theory, vol. 2, (cambridge university press, 1998).

[16] m. luty and r. sundrum, hep-th/9910202.

[17] e. witten and j. bagger, phys. lett. b115 (1982) 202.

[18] s.j. gates, m. grisaru, m. rocek and w. siegel, superspace: or one thousand and

one lessons in supersymmetry, (benjamin/cummings, 1983).

14

