a small but nonzero cosmological constant 

y. jack ng(a),(b) and h. van dam(b)

(a) center for theoretical physics, laboratory for nuclear science and department of physics,

massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, ma 02139

(b) institute of field physics, department of physics and astronomy,

university of north carolina, chapel hill, nc 27599-3255

abstract

recent astrophysical observations seem to indicate that the cosmological

constant is small but nonzero and positive. the old cosmological constant

problem asks why it is so small; we must now ask, in addition, why it is

nonzero (and is in the range found by recent observations), and why it is

positive.

in this essay, we try to kill these three metaphorical birds with

one stone. that stone is the unimodular theory of gravity, which is the

ordinary theory of gravity, except for the way the cosmological constant arises

in the theory. we argue that the cosmological constant becomes dynamical,

and eventually, in terms of the cosmic scale factor r(t), it takes the form

(t) = (t0)(r(t0)/r(t))2, but not before the epoch corresponding to the

redshift parameter z  1.

0
0
0
2

 

n
u
j
 

0
3

 
 

3
v
2
0
1
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

this essay received an honorable mention in the annual essay competition of the gravity

research foundation for the year 2000

1

until recent years, there used to be only one well-known problem [1] with the cosmological

constant, viz., why it is so small  some 120 orders of magnitude smaller than what we

naively think it should be.

if it is that small, it must be zero, so some of us thought.

now we know better. the recent astrophysical observations indicate that, quite likely, the

cosmological constant is not zero, though small, and positive, giving rise to cosmic repulsion.

[2] we must now ask these additional questions: why is the cosmological constant not

zero? why does it have the observed magnitude, contributing to the energy density of the

observable universe about twice as much as matter?

in this essay, we will attempt to present a qualitative solution to these three problems

of the cosmological constant. we will do so in the framework of unimodular gravity [37]

which, as we will show, is nothing but the ordinary theory of gravity  except for one

curious twist which has to do with the way the cosmological constant arises in the theory.

first let us reiterate the cosmological constant problems and put them in a form that

will be useful later in the essay. from the einstein-hilbert action of gravity, we know that

the cosmological constant  has units of the reciprocal of length squared. until recent

years, all galactic observations had failed to detect any spacetime distortions that one can

attribute to a nonzero cosmological constant out to the farthest distance, about 1028 cm.,

in the observable universe. denote the 4-volume of the observable universe by v , then

the empirical observations give the bound  < v 1/2. but theoretical expectations would
predict a much larger value:   l2
p with lp  1033cm being the planck length. this vast
discrepancy by 122 orders of magnitude constitutes the old cosmological constant problem:

why is  so small? recent observations [8] (supernovae 1a, cosmic microwave background,

cluster density and evolution etc) are consistent with a geometrically at universe and they

indicate that the cosmological constant contributes about 70% of the energy density; hence

  +

1
v

,

(1)

the cosmological constant is non-zero (and positive) after all.

two observations are now in order. first, it is not surprising that  is non-zero since

2

setting  = 0 does not enhance the existing symmetry of the gravitation theory. second, the

(old) cosmological constant problem is insensitive to the non-renormalizability of quantized

general relativity as the problem occurs well below the planck scale (even the relatively small

vacuum energy density in qcd yields a discrepancy of about 42 orders of magnitude). thus

it seems reasonable that one can adequately address the cosmological constant problems in

the framework of a gravity theory whose classical limit resembles general relativity. in the

following, we consider the unimodular theory of gravity.

unimodular gravity is actually very well motivated on physical grounds. following

wigner [9] for a proper quantum description of the massless spin-two graviton, the mediator

in gravitational interactions, we naturally arrive at the concept of gauge transformations.

[3] without loss of generality, we can choose the gravitons two polarization tensors to be

traceless (and symmetric). but since the trace of the polarization states is preserved by all

the transformations, it is natural to demand that the graviton states be described by trace-

less symmetric tensor elds. the strong eld generalization of the traceless tensor eld is a

metric tensor g that has unit determinant: detg  g = 1, hence the name unimodular
gravity.

at rst sight, the unimodular constraint has greatly changed the gravitational eld equa-

tion, since now only the traceless combinations appear:

r  1/4gr = 8g(t   1/4gt 
 ),

(2)

where t  is the conserved matter stress tensor. but in conjunction with the bianchi identity
for the covariant derivative of the einstein tensor, the eld equation yields d(r8gt 
0. thus (r  8gt 

 ) =
 ) is a constant. denoting that constant of integration by 4, we nd

r  1/2gr = g  8gt ,

(3)

the familiar einsteins equation. the only dierence from the ordinary theory is in the way 

arises in the theory  it is an (arbitrary) integration constant, unrelated to any parameter in

the original action. there are two other dierences [3] that are worth mentioning. (1) unlike

3

the ordinary theory, the lagrangian for unimodular gravity can be expressed as a polynomial

of the metric eld. (2) conformal transformations g = c 2g 

 in the unimodular theory of

gravity are very simple, the unimodular constraint xes the conformal factor c to be 1.

since  arises as an arbitrary constant of integration, it has no preferred value classically.

in the corresponding quantum theory, we expect the state vector of the universe to be

given by a superposition of states with dierent values of  and the quantum vacuum

functional to receive contributions from all dierent values of . for the quantum theory,

it is advantageous to start with a generalized version of the classical unimodular theory

given above, that is generally covariant while preserving locality. we will use the version of

unimodular gravity given by the henneaux and teitelboim action [6]

sunimod = 

1

16g z [g(r + 2)  2t ](d3x)dt.

(4)

one of its equations of motion is g = t , the generalized unimodular condition, with
g given in terms of the auxiliary eld t . note that, in this theory,  plays the role of
momentum conjugate to the coordinate r d3xt0 which can be identied, with the aid

of the generalized unimodular condition, as the spacetime volume v [10]. hence  and v

are conjugate to each other.

we are ready to argue why the observed cosmological constant is so small. the argument

[4] makes crucial use of quantum mechanics. consider the vacuum functional for unimodular
gravity given by path integrations over t , g, the matter elds (represented by ), and :

zm inkowski = z d()z d[]d[g]z d[t ]exp {i[sunimod + sm (, g)]} ,

(5)

where sm stands for the contribution from matter elds (and d() denotes the measure
of the  integration). the integration over t  yields (), which implies that  is
spacetime-independent (beting its role as the cosmological constant). a wick rotation

now allows us to study the euclidean vacuum functional z. the integrations over g and

 give exp[s(g, )] where g and  are the background elds which minimize the
eective action s. a curvature expansion for s yields a lagrangian whose rst two terms

4

are the einstein-hilbert terms g(r + 2), where  now denotes the fully renormalized

cosmological constant. we can make a change of variable from the original (bare)  to the

renormalized . let us assume that for the present cosmic era,  is essentially in the ground

state, then it is reasonable to neglect the eects of . to continue, we follow baum [11] and

hawking [12] to evaluate s(g, 0). for negative , s is positive; for positive , one nds
s(g, 0) = 3/g, so that

z = z d()exp(3/g).

(6)

the essential singularity of the integrand at  = 0+ means that the overwhelmingly most

probable conguration is the one with  = 0, and this in turn implies that the observed

cosmological constant in the present era is essentially zero.

there is one serious shortcoming in the above argument involving the wick rotation

to euclidean space. it is well-known that the euclidean formulation of quantum gravity is

plagued by the conformal factor problem, due to divergent path-integrals. in our defense, we

want to point out that we have used the eective action in the euclidean formulation at its

stationary point only. we should also recall that the conformal factor problem is arguably

rather benign in the original version of unimodular gravity (as pointed out above), so perhaps

it is not that serious even in the generalized version that we have just employed. there is

another cause for concern. since part of the above argument bears some resemblance to

colemans wormhole approach [13], one may worry that some of the objections to colemans

argument (on top of the conformal factor problem) may also apply here. fortunately, it

appears that they do not. [14] in any case, to the extent that our argument is valid, we have

understood why the observed cosmological constant is so small and why, if the cosmological

constant is not exactly zero, it is positive.

in the above argument, we have assumed that for the present cosmic era, the matter

elds are in their ground states so that their eects on the eective action can be neglected;

and the end result is that the observed  is zero. plausible as this assumption is, it is not

entirely correct. so, we do expect a non-vanishing (but small) cosmological constant for the

5

present era, and  goes to zero only asymptotically as the universe expands. regrettably,

we have not been able to calculate the small but not-entirely-negligible eects of the matter

elds on the eective action. we will adopt the attitude that the above result is valid to the

lowest order of approximation for which  is zero. we will now borrow an argument due to

sorkin [7] to make an order of magnitude estimate of the cosmological constant (to the next

leading order). [15]

there are two ingredients to sorkins argument. first, from unimodular gravity he

takes the idea that  is in some sense conjugate to the spacetime volume v . hence their

uctuations obey a heisenberg-type quantum uncertainty principle,

v  1,

(7)

where we have used the natural units (h = 1, g = 1). the second ingredient to sorkins

argument does not seem to be directly related to the unimodular theory of gravity.

it

is drawn from the causal-set theory [16], which stipulates that continous geometries in

classical gravity should be replaced by causal-sets, the discrete substratum of spacetime.

the uctuation in the number of elements n making up the set is of the poisson type, i.e.,

n  n . for a causal set, the spacetime volume v becomes n. it follows that

v  n 

n 

v .

(8)

putting eqs. (7) and (8) together yields a minimum uncertainty in  of   v 1/2. [17]
but we have already argued that  vanishes to the lowest order of approximation and that

it is positive if it is not zero. so we conclude that  uctuates about zero with a magnitude

of v 1/2 and it is positive:

 +

1
v

,

(9)

which, lo and behold, is eq. (1)! the cosmological constant is small, but non-zero and

positive, and has the correct order of magnitude as observed. in other words,  contributes

to the energy of the universe an amount on the order of the critical density. as a side

6

remark, we note that if we now appeal to the inationary universe scenario, we may also

understand why matter contributes a comparable amount. [18]

we emphasize that  is of the form given by eq. (9) only after the matter elds have,

more or less, settled down to the ground state. to be more precise about the epoch when

 starts taking on that form, we consider the friedmann-robertson-walker cosmologies. in

that case, eq. (9) becomes [19]

r(t) !2
(t) = (t0) r(t0)

.

(10)

for the at case which our universe appears to approximate, the expansion rate in the

post-radiation-dominated era is given by [20]

r!2
0   r

1
h 2

= (1  3)w3 + 3w2,

(11)

where  is the fractional energy density in the present era due to the cosmological constant

(eq. (10)), 0 < w  r0/r = 1 + z < , and h0 is the current hubble parameter. a cosmic
bounce occurs whenever the right-hand side has a zero for a real positive w. the root is

given by w = 3/(3  1), which, for the observed value [8] of  = 7/10, equals 21/11.
it follows that the absence of a bounce in the past restricts the allowed redshift parameter

to z  10/11. we conclude that the cosmological constant is of the form given by eq. (10)
only after the cosmic epoch corresponding to z < 1 (the formation of clusters of galaxies).

eventually  dominates the cosmic evolution, driving the universe to expand at the rate

given by r  t.

in summary, we have proposed that one can understand, in the framework of the unimod-

ular theory of gravity, why the cosmological constant is so small but non-zero and positive,

and is in the range found by recent astrophysical observations. this theory is well motivated,

its original form being based on the quantum description of helicity-two particles. it leads

to a theory of gravity in which the cosmological constant is freed to become dynamical at

the quantum level, and its form is given by eq. (10) for z < 1. to work out the form of the

dynamical cosmological constant for the earler epochs will be the next challenge.

7

this essay is based mainly on the talk given by one of us (yjn) in the 1999 desy

theory workshop on s from the universe. we thank h. nielsen for encouraging us to

write it up. yjn thanks w. buchmuller for the hospitality extended to him at desy. he

also thanks w. buchmuller, n. dragon, h. nielsen, and especially r. d. sorkin and p. h.

frampton for useful discussions. the work was supported in part by the u.s. department

of energy under #df-fc02-94er40818 and #de-fg05-85er-40219, and by the bahnson

fund of the university of north carolina at chapel hill. yjn was on leave at mit where

this essay was written. he thanks the faculty at the center for theoretical physics for their

hospitality.

8

references

[1] for a review of the problem, see s. weinberg, rev. mod. phys. 61, 1 (1989), y. j. ng,

int. j. mod. phys. d1, 145 (1992), and s. m. carroll, w. h. press, and e. l. turner,

ann. rev. astron. & astrophys. 30, 499 (1992). note that, very likely, there was a large

early cosmological constant driving cosmic ination. but here we want to explain why

the eective cosmological constant is small now, not why it was always small.

[2] we will not discuss other ideas and mechanisms (like quintessence) that claim to explain

the astrophysical data.

[3] j. j. van der bij, h. van dam, and y. j. ng, physica a116, 307 (1982).

[4] y. j. ng and h. van dam, phys. rev. lett. 65, 1972 (1990).

[5] a. einstein, in the principle of relativity, ed. a. sommerfeld (dover, new york, 1952);

j. l. anderson and d. finkelstein, am. j. phys. 39, 901 (1971); j. rayski, gen. relativ.

gravit. 11, 19 (1979); s. weinberg, unpublished (1983); f. wilczek, phys. rep. 104,

111 (1984); a. zee, in proceedings of the twentieth annual orbis scientiae on high

energy physics, 1985, eds. s. l. mintz and a. perlmutter (plenum, new york, 1985);

w. buchmuller and n. dragon, phys. lett. b207, 292 (1988); w. g. unruh and r. m.

wald, phys. rev. 40, 2598 (1989); j. d. brown and j. w. york, jr., phys. rev. d40,

3312 (1989); r. d. sorkin, int. j. th. phys. 33, 523 (1994); a. n. petrov, mod. phys.

lett. a6, 2107 (1991); izawa k.-i., prog. theor. phys. 93, 615 (1995).

[6] m. henneaux and c. teitelboim, phys. lett. b222, 195 (1989).

[7] r. d. sorkin, in relativity and gravitation: classical and quantum, eds. j. c. dolivo

et al. (world scientic, singapore, 1991); int. j. th. phys. 36, 2759 (1997).

[8] for a review of the recent data, see n. a. bahcall, j. p. ostriker, s. perlmutter, and p.

j. steinhardt, science 284, 1481 (1999), and references therein.

[9] e. p. wigner, ann. math. 40, 149 (1939).

9

[10] we have taken the additive constant term to be v = 0 at t = 0.

[11] e. baum, phys. lett. b133, 185 (1984).

[12] s. w. hawking, phys. lett. b134, 403 (1984).

[13] s. coleman, nucl. phys. b310, 643 (1988).

[14] since we have a simple (instead of colemans double) exponential in the integrand for

the vacuum functional in eq. (6) in the text, polchinskis argument (j. polchinski, phys.

lett. b219, 251 (1989)) against the wormhole approach is not applicable here. also,

dus argument (m. du, phys. lett. b226, 36 (1989)) against the baum-hawking

approach is not applicable here because our argument does not involve the step that

du (correctly) nds objectionable.

[15] sorkins formulation and interpretation of the unimodular theory diers somewhat from

ours. see sorkin in ref. [5]. here we merely make use of some of his ideas.

[16] for an introduction to the causal-set theory, see, e.g., ref. [7].

[17] note that the uctuations in the renormalized  are given entirely by those in the

bare , since only the bare , as the conjugate to v , undergoes this kind of quantum

uctuations. this result is consistent with sorkins prediction (see ref. [7]). on the

other hand, we should point out that the dynamics of the causal-set theory is not yet

fully understood; so the last part of the argument may not be on solid ground.

[18] thus we may have ameliorated the cosmic coincidence problem of why both matter

and the cosmological constant contribute comparable amounts to the energy density of

the universe in the present era.

[19]  of this form was proposed by w. chen and y. s. wu, phys. rev. d41, 695 (1990),

based on other reasons.

[20] j. l. crooks, j. o. dunn, p. h. frampton, and y. j. ng, astro-ph/0005406.

10

