hep-th/9911116
mri-phy/p991133

9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
6
1

 

 
 

1
v
6
1
1
1
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

universality of the tachyon potential

ashoke sen 1

mehta research institute of mathematics

and mathematical physics

chhatnag road, jhoosi, allahabad 211019, india

abstract

using string eld theory, we argue that the tachyon potential on a d-brane anti-
d-brane system in type ii string theory in arbitrary background has a universal form,
independent of the boundary conformal eld theory describing the brane. this implies
that if at the minimum of the tachyon potential the total energy of the brane antibrane
system vanishes in a particular background, then it vanishes in any other background.
similar result holds for the tachyon potential of the non-bps d-branes of type ii string
theory, and the d-branes of bosonic string theory.

1e-mail: asen@thwgs.cern.ch, sen@mri.ernet.in

1

contents

1 introduction and summary

2 tachyon potential from open string eld theory on the d-branes

3 fate of the u(1) gauge eld under tachyon condensation

4 tachyon potential in closed bosonic string theory

2

5

13

18

1

introduction and summary

it has been argued on various general grounds that the condensation of the tachyon living
on a conguration of coincident d-brane anti-d-brane pair produces a conguration which

is indistinguishible from the vacuum where there are no branes[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. this requires
that the sum of the tensions of the brane and the antibrane is exactly cancelled by the
(negative) value of the tachyon potential at the minimum of the potential. there is

however no direct evidence of this phenomenon, since there is no explicit knowledge of the
tachyon potential, except that it has a maximum at the origin corresponding to negative
mass2 of the tachyon. the diculty in studying the tachyon potential can be traced to
the fact that the zero momentum tachyon is far o-shell, and hence is outside the scope

of study of rst quantized string theory which deals with only on-shell s-matrix elements.
in this paper we shall study some general properties of the tachyon potential using
open string eld theory,  a formalism particularly suited for the study of o-shell string
theory[6, 7]. in particular we show that the tachyon potential on the brane antibrane sys-
tem is universal, independent of the particular boundary conformal eld theory describing

the d-brane, except for an overall multiplicative factor which is proportional to the tension
of the brane-antibrane pair before tachyon condensation. thus for example, the potential

will be the same for at d-branes, d-branes wrapped on various cycles of internal compact
manifold, or d-branes in the presence of background metric and anti-symmetric tensor

elds. a similar result holds for the tachyon potential on a single d-brane of bosonic
string theory, or a single unstable non-bps d-brane of type ii string theory[8, 9, 10, 5].
although this does not prove the conjecture that at the minimum of the potential the

tension of the brane antibrane system is exactly cancelled by the tachyon potential, this

2

shows that if the conjecture is valid for d-brane anti-d-brane system in one background,
then it is also valid for d-brane anti-d-brane system in any other background.

let us now be more specic about the analysis and the result of the paper. section 2 of
the paper is devoted to the analysis of the tachyon potential using open string eld theory.
as already mentioned, we shall be interested in a conguration containing a single d-brane

in bosonic string theory, or a d-brane anti-d-brane pair or a single non-bps d-brane in
type ii string theory. some of the tangential directions of the d-brane(s) may be wrapped

on some non-trivial cycles of an internal space. in general such a system of d-branes is
described by a non-trivial boundary conformal eld theory. in order to give a uniform

treatment of all systems of this kind, we shall assume that all directions tangential to
the d-brane are compact; this can be easily achieved by compactifying the non-compact

directions tangential to the brane on a torus of large radii. thus the resulting conguration
can be viewed as a particle like object in the remaining non-compact directions, which
we shall take to be a minkowski space2 of dimension (n + 1). if we denote the space-like
non-compact directions by x i (1  i  n), and the time direction by x 0, then the total
world-sheet theory will contain a set of free elds x 0, x 1, . . . x n with neumann boundary
condition on x 0 and dirichlet boundary condition on x 1, . . . x n, together with a non-
trivial boundary conformal eld theory (bcft) of central charge (25  n) describing the
dynamics of the coordinates in the compact direction. the main objective of the paper
will be to show that the tachyon potential is independent of this bcft.

for simplicity we shall focus our attention on d-branes of bosonic string theory during

most of the paper; so let us explain our results rst in this context. we shall show that
tachyon potential has the form:3

v (t ) = mf (t ) ,

(1.1)

where f (t ) is a universal function of the tachyon eld t independent of the bcft
describing the d-brane, and m is the mass of the d-brane at t = 0, which can depend
on the bcft under consideration.4 during this analysis we shall also arrive at a precise

2this restriction is due to a technical reason. we shall identify the mass of the d-brane as the
2 ( x i)2 term in the action, and for this purpose we need some directions in which the

coecient of the 1
space-time is an ordinary minkowski space-time.

3throughout this paper all masses and energies will be measured in the closed string metric.
4in the convention that we shall choose, the mass of the d-brane is also independent of the bcft.
however it depends on the open string coupling constant, whose relation to the closed string coupling
constant may depend on the details of the bcft.

3

denition of the tachyonic mode(s) and the tachyon potential. we choose the additive
constant in v (t ) such that it vanishes at t = 0. thus the total energy of the d-brane

for a given value of t will be given by

m + v (t ) = m{1 + f (t )} .

(1.2)

according to the conjecture of [11, 12], at some extremum t0 of the tachyon potential the
negative contribution of the tachyon potential exactly cancels the mass of the d-brane.
thus according to this conjecture

1 + f (t0) = 0 .

(1.3)

although our analysis does not provide a proof of this relation, the universality of the
function f (t ) shows that if the relation holds for any of the d-branes of the bosonic

string theory (say the d0-brane of the bosonic string theory in 26 dimensional minkowski
space), then it must hold for all d-branes in all possible compactications of bosonic

string theory.

an exactly similar result holds for the brane antibrane system of type ii string theory.

in this case m denotes the total mass of the brane-antibrane system under consideration.
the function f (t ) diers from the corresponding function in the bosonic string theory,

but it is again universal in the sense that it does not depend on the details of the bcft
describing the brane antibrane system. the conjecture of ref.[1, 2] again requires {1 +
f (t )} to vanish at an extremum t0 of f (t ). this time, however, supersymmetry of the
background space-time requires that t0 satisfying eq.(1.3) represents a global minimum
of the potential.

finally the result also holds for the non-bps d-brane of type ii string theory, with

m now representing the mass of the non-bps d-brane.

according to the conjecture of [1, 2, 10, 11], at t = t0 the d-brane of bosonic string
theory, the brane antibrane system of type ii string theory, or the non-bps d-brane of

type ii string theory, is indistinguishible from the vacuum where there is no d-brane.
since the tachyon is neutral under the center of mass u(1) gauge eld living on the
brane (brane antibrane system), a vev of the tachyon eld does not break this u(1)

gauge symmetry. on the other hand the vacuum without any d-brane does not contain
such a u(1) gauge eld. this poses a puzzle[13, 4, 14]. in section 3 we show that the

results of section 2 points to a possible way out of this puzzle. using the universality

4

of the tachyon potential, and the fact that (1 + f (t0)) vanishes at t0, we argue that
at t = t0, the eective action involving the center of mass u(1) gauge eld does not
contain any term without derivative of the gauge eld strength. in particular it implies
that the standard gauge kinetic term is absent. we conjecture that the eective action
at t = t0 is altogether independent of the gauge eld, so that the gauge eld behaves
as an auxiliary eld. this would explain the absence of a dynamical u(1) gauge eld at
t = t0. its equations of motion forces all states carrying the u(1) charge to disappear
from the spectrum.5

finally in section 4 we discuss generalization of our results to closed bosonic string

theory. we show that arguments similar to the one given in section 2 can be used to
establish the universality of the tachyon potential in any compactication of the bosonic

string theory. however, since there is no compelling reason to believe that there is a stable
minimum of this potential, the signicance of this result is not entirely clear.

although our analysis establishes the universality of the tachyon potential, it does

not tell us what this universal function is. some properties of the tachyon potential on
the brane antibrane system have been analyzed previously in refs.[16, 17, 18]. attempts

at deriving the explicit form of the tachyon potential using open string eld theory have
been made earlier in refs.[19]. similar analysis for closed string tachyons were carried

out in refs.[20, 21]. some aspects of the universality of the tachyon potential have been
addressed earlier in ref.[22].

2 tachyon potential from open string eld theory on

the d-branes

we shall use wittens open string eld theory[6, 7] to analyse the tachyon potential, but
any other formulation of covariant open string eld theory will also suce[23]. although
the original version of this theory was formulated for open strings in at space-time with

neumann boundary conditions in all directions, it can be easily generalized to describe
open strings living on a d-brane. we use the language of [24], as reformulated in [25] for

describing string eld theory in arbitrary background eld. we shall begin our discussion
with open strings living on a d-brane in bosonic string theory; and later generalise it to

brane-antibrane system or non-bps d-branes in superstring theories.

5the argument given in this section is an expanded version of the analysis already presented in [15].

5

as mentioned in the introduction, we compactify all the spatial directions tangential to
the d-brane. thus we are dealing with the dynamics of a particle with innite number of

degrees of freedom, described by a (0+1) dimensional string eld theory. since string eld
theory corresponds to second quantized string theory, a point in the classical conguration
space of string eld theory corresponds to a specic quantum state of the rst quantized

theory. as was shown in [6], in order to describe a gauge invariant string eld theory
we must include the full hilbert space of states of the rst quantized open string theory

including the b and c ghost elds, subject to the condition that the state must carry ghost
number 1. here we are using the convention that b carries ghost number 1, c carries
ghost number 1, and the sl(2,r) invariant vacuum |0i carries ghost number 0. we shall
denote by h the subspace of the full hilbert space carrying ghost number 1. let |i be
an arbitrary state in h, and (x) be the local eld (vertex operator) in the conformal
eld theory which creates this state |i out of the sl(2,r) invariant vacuum:

|i = (0)|0i .

(2.1)

since we are dealing with open string theory, (x) lives on the boundary of the world
sheet. we shall choose the convention that the world-sheet is the upper half plane, and

its boundary is the real axis labelled by x.

the open string eld theory action, which is a map from h to the space of real

numbers, is given by

s = 

1
g2
o

(cid:18)1
2h|qb|i +

1

3hf1  (0)f2  (0)f3  (0)i(cid:19) .

(2.2)

here go is a constant denoting the open string coupling constant, qb is the brst charge
constructed out of the ghost oscillators and the matter stress tensor, and h i denotes
correlation functions in the combined matter and ghost conformal eld theory. the overall
 sign in front of the action is a reection of the fact that we are using minkowski metric
with signature ( + + . . . +). f1, f2 and f3 are three conformal transformations given by,

f1(z) = ei/3(cid:20)(cid:18)1  iz

1 + iz(cid:19)2/3

 1(cid:21)(cid:30)(cid:20)(cid:18)1  iz

1 + iz(cid:19)2/3

+ ei/3(cid:21),

f2(z) = f (f1(z)),

f3(z) = f (f2(z)) ,

where f is an sl(2,r) transformation

f (u) = 

1

1 + u

.

6

(2.3)

(2.4)

fi  (0) denotes the conformal transform of (0) by fi. thus for example if  denotes a
i(0))h(f (0)). for non-primary elds there
dimension h primary eld, then fi  (0) = (f 
will be extra terms involving higher derivatives of fi. the inner product appearing in the
rst term of the action is dened as

h|i = hi  (0)(0)i

(2.5)

where i denotes the sl(2,r) transformation i(z) = (1/z). we shall choose the conven-
tion where  = 1, and the sl(2,r) invariant vacuum |0i is normalized as

h0|c1c0c1|0i = l ,

(2.6)

l being the (innite) length of the time interval over which the action is evaluated.
(for the purpose of normalization we shall pretend that the time direction is compact
with radius l/2.) cn are the modes of the ghost eld c(z) dened through the relation

c(z) = p cnzn+1. in general we normalize the fock vacuum |k0i  exp (ik0x 0(0))|0i

with x 0 momentum k0 as

0i = 2(k0 + k
with the understanding that (0) is dened to be l/2.

hk0|c1c0c1|k

0) ,

(2.7)

the equations of motion of string eld theory are obtained by demanding that the
variation of s with respect to |i vanishes. we can get the component form of the
equations by decomposing |i in a complete set of basis states in h, and setting to zero
the variation of s with respect to each coecient in this expansion.

the zero momentum tachyonic state of open string theory can be identied as

c1|0i ,

(2.8)

it is however clear that due to the
created by the vertex operator c(0) acting on |0i.
cubic coupling in the string eld theory action (2.2), once we switch on tachyon vacuum

expectation value (vev), various other elds must also be switched on in order to satisfy
the string eld theory equations of motion. however, not all the elds need to be switched
on. suppose we can decompose h into two subspaces h1 and h2 such that s is always
quadratic or higher order in the components of |i along the basis vectors of h2. if we
now take |i to lie solely in h1, then all the equations of motion obtained by varying s

7

with respect to the components of |i along h2 are automatically satised. thus we can
obtain a consistent truncation of the theory by restricting |i to h1 and evaluating s for
this |i. a solution of the equations of motion obtained by varying the truncated action
with respect to comoponents of |i along h1 can automatically be regarded as a solution
of the equations of motion of the full string eld theory.

we shall now describe such a decomposition of h. we include in h1 all states of
ghost number 1, obtained from the sl(2,r) invariant vacuum by the action of the ghost
oscillators bn and cn, and the virasoro generators of the entire matter conformal eld
theory. in the language of vertex operators this will amount to including those vertex

operators which can be obtained as products of (derivatives of) b(x), c(x), and the matter
stress tensor t (matter)(x). h2 will contain all states of ghost number 1 carrying non-zero
k0, and also all states with k0 = 0 which are obtained by the action of bn, cn and the
matter virasoro generators on primary states of dimension > 0 of the matter conformal
eld theory. since the brst operator qb is constructed from the ghost oscillators and
matter virasoro generators, the kinetic term of the action (2.2) does not mix a state in
h1 with a state in h2. a conformal transformation takes a state in h1 (h2) to a state in
h1 (h2), and furthermore, the three point correlation function of two vertex operators in
h1 and a vertex operator in h2 vanishes. thus restricting the string eld conguration
to h1 will give a consistent truncation of the string eld theory.

since the zero momentum tachyon state described by eq.(2.8) belongs to h1, we see
that switching on this tachyonic mode does not take us outside the subspace h1.
in
particular the tachyonic ground state will correspond to a state |0i with no component
along h2, and satisfying the equations of motion derived from the truncated action.
since integrating out all the modes in h1 other than c1|0i may not lead to a meaningful
approximation,6 we denote by the single symbol t the set of all the modes of h1, and
by es(t ) the truncated string eld theory action, with the string eld conguration |i
restricted to h1. since h1 involves only those states which carry zero x 0 momentum, the
inner product as well the three point function appearing in eq.(2.2) will contain a (0)
term, representing the innite contribution from the time integral of a time independent

lagrangian. thus the lagrangian el(t ) for this conguration can be identied as the action
es(t ) with this volume factor l = 2(0) removed. once el has been constructed this
way, the tachyonic potential v (t ) can be identied with el(t ).
6indeed, the true ground state may not have any component along c1|0i.

8

computation of v (t ) only involves correlation functions involving the ghost elds and
the matter energy momentum tensor with central charge 26. these correlation functions

are completely universal. in particular, they are insensitive to all the details of the internal
bcft. as a result, v (t ) has a universal form for all internal bcft except for the overall
multiplicative factor g2
in front of the action (2.2). thus the tachyon potential has the
form:

o

v (t ) =

h(t ) ,

(2.9)

1
g2
o

where h(t ) is some universal function independent of the choice of the internal bcft.

is related to g2

we shall now show that at t = 0 the mass of the d-brane described by the action (2.2)
o . to see this let us consider the kinetic term in (2.2) involving the mode
r dk0i(k0)c1i
1|k0i. here i
n denotes the oscillator of the free world-sheet scalar eld
x i, and |k0i denotes the state exp(ik0x 0(0))|0i. only the c0lmatter
term of the brst
charge qb contributes to the k0 dependent part of the kinetic term involving this mode,
and the result is given by

0

2

(go)2z dk0(k0)2i(k0)i(k0) ,

1
2

(2.10)

in the  = 1 unit. if i(t)  r dk0eik0ti(k0) denotes the fourier transform of i(k0),

then the above action can be rewritten as

(go)2z dttiti ,

1
2

(2.11)

where t denotes the time variable conjugate to k0. up to an overall normalization factor, i
has the interpretation of the location of the d-brane in the xi direction. this normalization
factor may be determined as follows. instead of taking a single d-brane, let us take a pair
of identical d-branes, separated by a distance bi along the x i direction. then each state
in the open string hilbert space carries a 2  2 chan paton factor, and states with o
diagonal chan paton factors, representing open strings stretched between the two branes,
are forced to carry an amount of winding charge bi along x i. if we now move one of the
branes by an amount y i along x i, the change in the (mass)2 of the open string with chan

paton factors (cid:18) 0 1

0 0(cid:19) and (cid:18) 0

1

0

0(cid:19) should be given by:

1
(2)2{(~b + ~y )2  ~b2} =

1
22

~b  ~y + o(~y 2) .

(2.12)

9

in the above equation we have used the fact that with our choice of units, the string tension
is equal to (1/2). on the other hand, since i denotes the mode which translates the
brane, moving one of the branes along x i will correspond to switching on a constant i.
this is represented by a string eld background

ic1i

1|0i (cid:18) 1

0

0

0(cid:19) .

(2.13)

we can now explicitly use the string eld theory action (2.2) to calculate the change of

the (mass)2 of states with chan paton factors (cid:18) 0 1

0 0(cid:19) and (cid:18) 0 0

1 0(cid:19) due to the presence

of this background string eld. the result is

1
2

~b  ~ + o( ~2) .

comparing eqs.(2.12) and (2.14) we get

i =

y i
2

.

(2.14)

(2.15)

once we have determined the relative normalization between i and y i, we can return to
the system containing a single brane.7 substituting eq.(2.15) into eq.(2.11), we get,

(go)2(22)1z dtty ity i .

1
2

(2.16)

this contribution to the d-brane world-volume action can be interpreted as due to the

kinetic energy associated with the collective motion of the d-brane in the non-compact
transverse directions. this allows us to identify the d-brane mass as

thus eq.(2.9) can be rewritten as

m = (22)1(go)2 .

v (t ) = mf (t ) .

(2.17)

(2.18)

where f (t )  22h(t ) is another universal function. this proves eq.(1.1) for the tachyon
potential on a single bosonic d-brane.

7this can be done, for example, by moving the other brane innite distance away by taking the limit

|~b|  .

10

let us now consider the case of tachyon condensation on a brane-antibrane pair in
type ii string theory. since the analysis is very similar to the case discussed above, we

shall only point out the essential dierences. open string eld theory with cubic action
has been constructed in [7]. the string eld contains two separate components, one from
the neveu-schwarz (ns) sector and the other from the ramond (r) sector; but for the

study of tachyon potential we can set to zero the r sector elds. a generic ns sector
string eld conguration is a state in the hilbert space h of the form (0)|0i, where |0i
denotes the sl(2,r) invariant vacuum, and (x) is the product of e(x) with an arbitrary
operator o(x) of ghost number 1, made from products of (derivatives of) b, c, the bosonic
ghost elds , , and matter operators. the ghost charge is dened such that b and 
carry ghost number 1 and c and  carry ghost number 1.  denotes the scalar eld
obtained by bosonizing the    system[26]. in the left hand side of the normalization
condition (2.6) we now need to include an additional factor of e2(0) besides the c1c0c1
factor. there is a further subtlety due to the fact that h contains four sectors labelled
by the 2  2 chan paton (cp) factor. we shall take the identity matrix i and three
pauli matrices i to be the four independent cp factors. states in the cp sector i and
3 satisfy the conventional gso projection rules according to which |0i is even, and e,
,  are odd. states in the cp sector 1 and 2 satisfy the opposite gso projection
rules according to which |0i is odd. the tachyon eld is complex, but we shall restrict
to congurations with real tachyon background. the zero momentum tachyon eld then
corresponds to the state created by the vertex operator c(0)e(0)  1 on |0i.

the string eld theory action has a form very similar to (2.2), with the dierence that
the cubic interaction vertex also contains an insertion of the picture changing operator[26]

in the correlation function. since this operator involves only ghost elds and the super-
stress tensor of the matter elds, it is independent of the choice of bcft describing the

brane antibrane pair and will not aect our argument. as in the case of bosonic open
string eld theory, we can obtain a consistent truncation of the string eld theory action
by restricting |i to states for which the corresponding vertex operator (x) is built
from products of (derivatives of) the ghost elds, and the matter super stress tensor.
this includes the energy momentum tensor t (matter)(x) and the supercurrent g(matter)(x).
furthermore since (1)2 is the identity matrix i, we can restrict ourselves to states with
cp factors i and 1 only, with the usual gso projection on the states with cp factor i,
and opposite gso projection on the states with cp factor 1. the resulting truncated

11

action is again universal, and in particular insensitive to the details of the internal bcft.
this shows that the tachyon potential has the form (2.9) for some universal function h(t ).

(this of course is dierent from the universal function which appears in bosonic string
theory.) furthermore the mass of the d-brane is still given by an equation similar to
(2.17). thus v (t ) has the form given in eq.(2.18).

one of the crucial assumptions in our argument is that the bcft describing the
d-brane anti-d-brane system has a factorized form so that the conformal eld theory

describing the open strings is identical in each of the four cp sectors (except for opposite
gso projections in sectors 1 and 2). in particular, e(0)c(0)|0i1 must be an allowed
state in the theory. formally this can be achieved if the antibrane is always dened to
be the conguration obtained from the brane by the operation of (1)fl, where (1)fl
denotes the transformation which changes the sign of all the r-r and r-ns sector closed
string states. in the language of boundary states this means that the antibrane is dened
to have the same boundary state as the brane, except that the sign of all the rr states

is reversed. however we should keep in mind that it is certainly possible to construct
brane-antibrane system which does not fall into this category. a simple example would

be brane-antibrane pair separated by a distance b in a direction transverse to the brane.
in this case the states in the cp sector 1 and 2 are forced to carry non-zero string
winding charge proportional to b, and hence the string eld conguration describing a
zero momentum tachyon background is no longer of the form c(0)e(0)|0i  1. instead
it corresponds to a state built from a non-trivial primary state of the bcft. thus our

argument for the universility of the tachyon potential is no longer valid in this case. a
similar situation arises, for example, if either the brane or the antibrane (but not both)

carries a wilson line or a magnetic eld tangential to its world volume.

a very similar argument can be given for the universality of the tachyon potential on a

non-bps d-brane of type ii string theory. in fact, since the non-bps d-brane of type iib
(iia) string theory can be regarded as the result of modding out a brane-antibrane pair
of type iia (iib) string theory by (1)fl[10], the universality of the tachyon potential on
a brane-antibrane system of type ii string theory automatically implies the universality
of the tachyon potential on a non-bps d-brane of type ii string theory.

the analysis of this section indicates that it should be possible to describe the string
eld conguration corresponding to t = t0 as a universal state in h1. this state should
represent a solution of the classical equations of motion of string eld theory, and should

12

have the property that when we analyze small uctuations of string eld around this
solution, the spectrum should not contain any physical states. (this is necessary if we
are to interprete the conguration t = t0 as the vacuum without any brane.) we should
caution the reader however that our arguments are quite formal, since a priori there is
no reason to expect that the t = t0 conguration can be represented as a normalizable
state in h1. nevertheless, formal solutions of string eld theory equations of motion have
provided valuable insight in the past[27, 28]. in fact, ref.[28] does contain examples of

such formal solutions which do not have any physical excitations. finding a (formal)
solution of the string eld theory equations of motion which satises eq.(1.3), and hence

represents the vacuum state, remains an open problem.

we end this section by noting that the result of this section has been implicitly used in

ref.[4] in classifying d-branes via k-theory. universality of the tachyon potential, together
with eq.(1.3), shows that a brane and an antibrane can always annihilate via tachyon
condensation as long as their boundary states dier from each other just by a change

of sign of the ramond-ramond states. this requires that they carry the same gauge
bundle, i.e. that only gauge elds with cp factor i are excited. such brane-antibrane

annihilation forms a crucial ingredient in establishing one to one correspondence between
stable d-branes and elements of the k-group.

3 fate of the u(1) gauge eld under tachyon conden-

sation

in this section we shall use the results of the previous section to discuss the fate of the
u(1) gauge eld on the d-brane under tachyon condensation. the salient points of this

analysis were already given in [15].

let us begin with the bosonic d-brane. there is a u(1) gauge eld living on the d-
brane. the tachyon is neutral under the gauge group; hence our intuitions from quantum

eld theory will tell us that the gauge elds will remain massless even when the tachyon
condenses. on the other hand if t = t0 corresponds to the vacuum without any d-
branes, as has been conjectured, then clearly there cannot be a u(1) gauge eld living on
the brane after tachyon condensation. how do we resolve this apparent contradiction? a

related question is as follows. if we consider a pair of d-branes (not necessarily of the
same kind) separated by a distance, then there is an open string state with one end on

13

each brane. if we now let the tachyon on one of the branes condense, then what happens
to this open string state? if the t = t0 conguration really represents the vacuum, then
there cannot be an open string ending at the original location of the brane after tachyon
condensation.

the resolution that we propose is as follows. we conjecture that at t = t0 the action
of the u(1) gauge eld on the d-brane world volume is independent of the gauge eld.
in fact, we conjecture that the action is independent of all the massless elds living on

the d-brane world volume. thus the gauge eld is no longer dynamical, but acts as
an auxiliary eld which forces the corresponding u(1) current to vanish identically. in

particular this means that open strings with one end on this brane and another end on
some other brane, being charged under the u(1), is no longer a physical state. physically

this can be explained by saying that since eectively the u(1) gauge coupling becomes
innite, any state charged under this u(1) becomes innitely massive and hence decouples
from the spectrum.8

although we have no general proof of this statement, we shall now show that our
analysis of the previous section can be used to lend support to this conjecture. for this,

let us start with a d-p-brane of the bosonic string theory, and compactify all directions
tangential to the brane on a torus t p of large radii. let ~y denote the directions tangential
to the brane, {a(~y)} denote an arbitrary time independent conguration of all massless
elds living on the brane world-volume, and t denote the tachyonic mode(s) discussed
in the last section. we denote by l({a(~y)}, t ) the eective lagrangian of the brane
obtained by integrating out all other modes. note that t correspond to mode(s) carrying
zero momentum along the world-volume direction, whereas the massless elds {a(~y)}
are allowed arbitrary dependence on the world-volume coordinates. all other modes have
been integrated out. this would typically give an eective lagrangian which is non-local

on the d-brane world-volume, but this will not aect our discussion.

at this point we need to make some further remark about the choice of the coordinate
t in the conguration space. let {cl
a (~y)} denote some particular classical solution of
the equations of motion at t = 0. we assume that for every such classical solution there
is a bcft describing open string propagation in this background {cl
a }. in that case,
we can formulate string eld theory around this new background and dene a tachyonic
mode around this background using the prescription of the last section. we shall choose

8this interpretation makes contact with the conjecture of ref.[14] that this u(1) gauge eld is conned.

14

t

t=t0

a{

(y)}

figure 1: this diagram schematically illustrates the choice of coordinate system in the
conguration space. the horizontal axis denotes the set of all time independent congura-
tions of massless elds, and the vertical axis denotes the tachyonic mode(s) t . the black
dots on the horizontal axis are the classical solutions of the equations of motion involving
massless elds only. the vertical line originating from a black dot represents the eect
of switching on the tachyonic mode(s) of the string eld theory formulated around the
bcft associated with the particular black dot.

the coordinate t appearing in l({a(~y)}, t ) in such a way that around every classical
solution, keeping {a(~y)} xed at {cl
a (~y)} and changing t corresponds to switching on
the tachyonic mode(s) of the string eld theory formulated in the background {cl
a (~y)}.
this has been schematically illustrated in fig.1. in principle there could be obstruction

to such a choice of coordinates; we shall assume that there is no such obstruction.

since a(~y) = 0 denotes a trivial classical solution representing the original d-brane,

we have, according to eq.(1.1)

l(a = 0, t ) = m0f (t ) ,

(3.1)

where m0 denotes the mass of the brane for a = 0. we have chosen the additive constant
in l such that l vanishes at a(~y) = 0, t = 0.9 let cl
a denote a non-trivial classical
9this is natural from the point of view of string eld theory formulated in the background bcft
corresponding to a = 0, t = 0. on the other hand, from the point of view of the eective action, it
is often more natural to choose this additive constant in such a way that l(a = 0, t = 0) is equal to

15

solution of the equations of motion representing a new bcft, and m denote the mass
of the d-brane described by this new bcft.10 according to the result of the previous
section, the eective lagrangian of t , formulated around the new background, should be
given by mf (t ). this gives,

l(cl

a , t ) = mf (t ) + k ,

(3.2)

where k is an additive constant. the origin of this constant may be understood as follows.
in dening eective lagrangian l, we have xed the additive constant in the action in such
a way that the lagrangian vanishes when all the elds are set to zero. in this convention,
if {cl
a } denotes a time independent classical solution of the equations of motion reecting
a new bcft, then the value of the lagrangian of the original string eld theory, evaluated
at a = cl
a , will reect the dierence between the potential energies of the initial and the
nal congurations. on the other hand the eective lagrangian obtained by integrating
out the degress of freedom of the string eld theory action formulated directly around the

new bcft will have zero value when all the elds in this new string eld theory action
are set to zero. thus the two eective lagrangians must dier by an additive constant k.

it is xed by demanding that

l(cl

a , t = 0)  l(a = 0, t = 0) = (m  m0) .

since f (0) = 0, this gives, using eqs.(3.1) and (3.2)

k = m0  m .

hence

using eqs.(3.5) and (1.3) we see that,

l(cl

a , t ) = m(1 + f (t )) + m0 .

l(cl

a , t0) = m0 .

(3.3)

(3.4)

(3.5)

(3.6)

m0,  the negative of the mass of the original d-brane. this is what is done, for example, in writing
the action in the born-infeld form.
10if we consider a new bcft with the open string coupling constant xed, then the mass of the d-
brane does not depend on the bcft. but it is more natural to keep the closed string coupling constant
(dilaton) xed as we change the open string background. since the relationship between the closed and
the open string coupling constant does depend on the bcft[31], the d-brane in the new background can
have a dierent mass.

16

in other words the lagrangian at t = t0 has the same value m0 for all {cl
a (~y)} which
correspond to solutions of the equations of motion at t = 0. although this does not prove
that l(a, t0) is independent of a (and hence in particular of the u(1) gauge elds) for
all a, it certainly lends support to this conjecture.

in the specic context of the u(1) gauge eld, note that if fmn denote the components
of the u(1) gauge eld strength on the d-brane, then since constant fmn is a solution of
the equations of motion and describes a bcft, the lagrangian at t = t0 is independent
of fmn at least for constant fmn. thus at t = t0, l can at most contain terms involving
derivatives of fmn. this establishes that l(fmn, t0) does not contain the standard gauge
kinetic term since it vanishes for constant fmn, and hence even if l is not completely
independent of fmn at t = t0, it does not represent a standard gauge theory.

the fact that l(fmn, t0) does not depend on fmn for constant fmn can also be seen via
a t-duality transformation, starting with the assumption that at fmn = 0 the mass of the
brane, l+m0, vanishes at the extremum t0 of the tachyon potential. for this let x1 and
x2 denote two of the directions tangential to the d-brane which have been compactied.
for fmn = 0, an r  (1/r) duality transformation along the x2 direction converts
this d-brane to a d-brane with dirichlet boundary condition along the x2 direction, and
neumann boundary condition along the x1 direction. since the mass of the brane does
not change under t-duality, the mass of the t-dualized brane, and hence also its tension,
vanishes at the extremum t0 of the tachyon potential. now if we switch on the constant
eld strength f12 in the original d-brane, it corresponds to putting dirichlet boundary
condition on some linear combination of x1 and x2 in the t-dual description. thus we
eectively change the orientation of the brane in the t-dual description. but if the tension

of this d-brane vanishes at some extremum of the tachyon potential, it continues to vanish
even if we change the orientation of the brane, and hence the total mass of the brane still
vanishes. but this is equal to the mass of the original brane at constant f12 and t = t0,
i.e. to l(f12, t0) + m0. thus we see that l(f12, t0) = m0, i.e. it is independent of f12.
this analysis can be easily generalized to the case of the brane-antibrane system and
the non-bps d-brane of type ii string theories. in carrying out this analysis one should
keep in mind that for the brane-antibrane system, the u(1) which must be switched on is

the diagonal combination of the two u(1)s on the brane and the antibrane (corresponding
to cp sector i) so that the new bcft satises the conditions for validity of our analysis.

it is only for this u(1) that we conjecture that the action is independent of the gauge eld

17

at the minimum of the tachyon potential. the other u(1) gauge symmetry is broken due
to higgs mechanism in the presence of a non-vanishing vev of the tachyon eld.

4 tachyon potential in closed bosonic string theory

we can repeat our analysis for the tachyon of closed bosonic string theory in arbitrary
conformal eld theory background. in this case a string eld conguration is represented
by an arbitrary state |i in the closed string hilbert space carrying ghost number 2, and
satisfying the condition

(b0  b0)|i = 0,

(l0  l0)|i = 0 .

(4.1)

there is an action similar to (2.2) for the closed string eld theory, with the dierence

that the action is non-polynomial[29, 30], involving quartic and higher order vertices.
however, each of these vertices are constructed from conformal eld theory correlation

functions in a manner analogous to (2.2). thus we can nd a consistent truncation of the
theory by restricting the string eld conguration to a subspace h1 built from |0i by the
action of the ghost oscillators and the matter virasoro generators.

the zero momentum tachyon corresponds to the state c1c1|0i, and hence is an element
of h1. thus starting from the truncated action and integrating out the other elds we
can recover the tachyon potential.11 this is insensitive to the details of the conformal
eld theory on which the bosonic string theory is based, and thus is universal. however,

unlike in the case of open string tachyons, in this case there is no compelling reason to
believe that there exists a non-trivial classical solution of the string eld theory equations

of motion in this truncated theory; hence the physical signicance of the tachyon potential
obtained this way is not entirely obvious.

acknowledgement: i wish to thank a. dabholkar and b. zwiebach for useful dis-

cussions.

references

11in this case the zero momentum massless dilaton, corresponding to the state (c1c1  c1c1)|0i also
belongs to the set h1 and cannot be integrated out. thus by this procedure we shall get the potential
involving the tachyon and the zero momentum dilaton.

18

[1] a. sen, stable non-bps bound states of bps d-branes, jhep 08, 010 (1998)

hep-th/9805019.

[2] a. sen, tachyon condensation on the brane antibrane system, jhep 08, 012 (1998)

hep-th/9805170.

[3] a. sen, so(32) spinors of type i and other solitons on brane-antibrane pair, jhep

09, 023 (1998) hep-th/9808141.

[4] e. witten, d-branes and k-theory, jhep 12, 019 (1998) hep-th/9810188.

[5] p. horava, type iia d-branes, k-theory, and matrix theory, adv. theor. math.

phys. 2, 1373 (1999) hep-th/9812135.

[6] e. witten, noncommutative geometry and string field theory, nucl. phys.

b268, 253 (1986).

[7] e. witten, interacting field theory of open superstrings, nucl. phys. b276, 291

(1986).

[8] o. bergman and m.r. gaberdiel, stable non-bps d-particles, phys. lett. b441,

133 (1998) hep-th/9806155.

[9] a. sen, type i d-particle and its interactions, jhep 10, 021 (1998) hep-

th/9809111.

[10] a. sen, bps d-branes on non-supersymmetric cycles, jhep 12, 021 (1998) hep-

th/9812031.

[11] a. sen, descent relations among bosonic d-branes, hep-th/9902105.

[12] a. recknagel and v. schomerus, boundary deformation theory and moduli spaces

of d-branes, nucl. phys. b545, 233 (1999) hep-th/9811237;

c.g. callan, i.r. klebanov, a.w. ludwig and j.m. maldacena, exact solution of
a boundary conformal eld theory, nucl. phys. b422, 417 (1994) hep-th/9402113;

j. polchinski and l. thorlacius, free fermion representation of a boundary confor-
mal eld theory, phys. rev. d50, 622 (1994) hep-th/9404008.

[13] m. srednicki, iib or not iib, jhep 08, 005 (1998) hep-th/9807138.

19

[14] p. yi, membranes from ve-branes and fundamental strings from dp branes, nucl.

phys. b550, 214 (1999) hep-th/9901159.

[15] a. sen, supersymmetric world-volume action for non-bps d-branes, jhep 10,

008 (1999) hep-th/9909062.

[16] m.b. green, pointlike states for type 2b superstrings, phys. lett. b329, 435 (1994)

hep-th/9403040.

[17] t. banks and l. susskind, brane - antibrane forces, hep-th/9511194.

[18] i. pesando, on the eective potential of the dp dp-bar system in type ii theories,

mod. phys. lett. a14, 1545 (1999) hep-th/9902181.

[19] v.a. kostelecky and s. samuel, the static tachyon potential in the open bosonic

string theory, phys. lett. b207, 169 (1988); on a nonperturbative vacuum for
the open bosonic string, nucl. phys. b336, 263 (1990).

[20] v.a. kostelecky and s. samuel, collective physics in the closed bosonic string,

phys. rev. d42, 1289 (1990).

[21] a. belopolsky and b. zwiebach, o-shell closed string amplitudes: towards a com-
putation of the tachyon potential, nucl. phys. b442, 494 (1995) hep-th/9409015.

[22] t. banks, the tachyon potential in string theory, nucl. phys. b361, 166 (1991).

[23] b. zwiebach, oriented open-closed string theory revisited, annals phys. 267, 193

(1998) hep-th/9705241.

[24] a. leclair, m.e. peskin and c.r. preitschopf, string field theory on the confor-

mal plane. 1. kinematical principles, nucl. phys. b317, 411 (1989); string field
theory on the conformal plane. 2. generalized gluing, nucl. phys. b317, 464
(1989).

[25] a. sen, open string field theory in nontrivial background field: gauge invari-
ant action, nucl. phys. b334, 350 (1990); open string field theory in arbi-

trary background field. 2. feynman rules and four point amplitudes, nucl. phys.
b334, 395 (1990); open string field theory in nontrivial background field. 3. n

point amplitude, nucl. phys. b335, 435 (1990).

20

[26] d. friedan, e. martinec and s. shenker, covariant quantization of superstrings,

phys. lett. 160b, 55 (1985).

[27] g.t. horowitz, j. lykken, r. rohm and a. strominger, a purely cubic action for

string field theory, phys. rev. lett. 57, 283 (1986).

[28] g.t. horowitz, j. morrow-jones, s.p. martin and r.p. woodard, new exact solu-
tions for the purely cubic bosonic string field theory, phys. rev. lett. 60, 261
(1988).

[29] m. saadi and b. zwiebach, closed string field theory from polyhedra, ann.

phys. 192, 213 (1989).

[30] b. zwiebach, closed string eld theory: an introduction, hep-th/9305026.

[31] n. seiberg and e. witten, string theory and noncommutative geometry, jhep

09, 032 (1999) hep-th/9908142.

21

