9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
6
1

 

 
 

1
v
2
4
1
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

confining phase of three dimensional

supersymmetric quantum electrodynamics

iassns-hep-99/115

matthew j. strassler

school of natural sciences

institute for advanced study

olden lane

princeton, nj 08540, usa

e-mail: strasslr@ias.edu

abelian theories in three dimensions can have linearly conning phases as a result of
monopole-instantons, as shown, for su (2) yang-mills theory broken to its abelian
subgroup, by polyakov. in this article the generalization of this phase for n = 2 su-
persymmetric abelian theories is identied, using a dual description. topologically
stable bps-saturated and unsaturated particle and string solitons play essential
roles. a plasma of chiral monopoles of charge 1 and -1 (along with their antichiral
conjugates) are required for a stable conning vacuum. n = 2 su (2) yang-mills
theory broken to u (1) lacks this phase because its chiral monopoles all have the
same charge, leading to a runaway instability. the possibility of analogous con-
ning phases of string theory, and a dual eld theoretic model thereof, are briey
discussed.

1 introduction

yuri golfand was one of the rst to construct supersymmetric versions of
abelian gauge theories.1,2 the three dimensional version of supersymmetric
quantum electrodynamics (sqed) turns out to be a very rich dynamical sys-
tem whose non-perturbative properties have recently received much atten-
tion 3,4,5,6,7 and are still being explored. it seems tting that the presenta-
tion of the linearly conning regime of this theory, generalizing the work of
polyakov in the non-supersymmetric context,8 be part of this volume.

duality has long been a powerful tool in studying conning gauge theories.
t hooft, mandelstam and others discovered weakly coupled eld theories with
solitonic ux tubes that behave somewhat similarly to the tubes of chromoelec-
tric ux which occur in qcd. in three dimensions, where charged particles are
naively conned by a logarithmically growing potential, it is still interesting to
nd phases with the potential grows linearly. in pure su (2) yang-mills theory
broken to its abelian subgroup, polyakov showed, using the duality of gauge
elds and compact scalar elds in three dimensions, that t hooft-polyakov
monopoles acting as dynamical instantons in three dimensions lead to linear
connement.8

1

the supersymmetric generalization of polyakovs result does not give a
conning phase. as aeck, harvey and witten showed,9 the monopole in-
stantons in n = 1 and n = 2 supersymmetric su (2) yang-mills theories
cause the theory to develop an unstable potential. the resulting instability
drives the scale of the su (2)-to-u (1) breaking o to innity, where the theory
is gaussian. no linearly conning phase has been found for these theories.

three dimensional gauge theories also have conformal xed points, where
naive logarithmic connement is lost and charged sources have a 1/r potential.
with a large number of charged matter elds, it can be shown using large nf
techniques that many gauge theories have this property. such xed points are
found in many supersymmetric examples even when the number of charged
matter elds is small. for n = 4 supersymmetry, all abelian gauge theories
are believed to have conformal xed points at the origin of moduli space.4 this
extends to a very wide class of n = 2 theories as well, including the theory
central to this paper, which contains a photon, an electron, a positron, and
their n = 2 superpartners. the discovery of a new dual description at these
xed points,4 one which is distinct from the gauge eld/scalar duality used by
polyakov, permits new insights into these gauge theories.

in this letter it will be shown that n = 2 sqed has a conning phase,
in analogy to other abelian non-supersymmetric examples. the mechanism is
again that of polyakov. it will be explained below why this mechanism does
not work in the n = 2 su (2) yang-mills theories: a stable conning phase in
a supersymmetric theory requires monopoles with charges 1 and -1, along with
their antimonopoles, but in su (2) one obtains only monopoles with charge 1
and antimonopoles of charge -1, and a stable phase is not obtained. it is also
noted that string theory may well have phases in which two-form ux does not
propagate freely and strings are linearly conned by domain walls of two-form
ux. string duals of such phases would be interesting to explore.

2 preliminaries: the pure u (1) gauge theory

let us begin with a trivial analysis of the theory without matter. consider
n = 2 supersymmetric u (1) gauge theory,a consisting of a single u (1) vector
multiplet v , which contains a photon, a photino, and a scalar . the eld
strength f  is contained in the gauge invariant multiplet  = d dv.

the lagrangian of the theory is l =r d4 1

4g2 2.

athe supereld language used here is that of n = 1 supersymmetry in four dimensions, of
which three-dimensional n = 2 is the dimensional reduction.

2

2.1 the logarithmically conning phase

classically the theory has a moduli space of vacua given by hi. quantum
mechanically things are more interesting, because we may replace the gauge
eld a by its electromagnetic dual, a scalar  periodic under    + 2. we
may dene a chiral supereld t whose lowest component is /g2 + i ; then
the full moduli space is the cylinder dened by hti, with a trivial metric, or
equivalently the plane dened by heti.
more explicitly, given any eective action sef f for , we may introduce t
as follows. the path integral over v can be replaced with a path integral over
 only if a lagrange multiplier, a chiral supereld t , is added to implement

the bianchi identity via the terms 10 l = r d2t d2 + c.c.. integrating by

parts, we have

z d dt exp(cid:18)isef f () +

i

4 z d3xd4 (t + t )(cid:19) .

(1)

by integrating out , we obtain an eective action for t . for the free u (1)

theory, this eective action is trivial: l = r d4 (g2/82)t t . generally,

however, the eld t , although gauge invariant, is non-local. however, et may
be a local gauge invariant operator.b if one inserts et (x) into the above path
integral, the bianchi identity is violated by a delta function, df = 2(x);
thus et represents a pointlike instanton in the form of a dirac magnetic
monopole. (the normalization is chosen so that the dirac quantization con-
dition is satised.) we therefore identify et and et with chiral operators
m, m of monopole charge 1,1, and their complex conjugates with the con-
jugate antichiral operators m , m  of charge 1, 1.
since the eld t takes expectation values on a cylinder, the fundamental
group 1 of the moduli space is non-zero and there exists the possibility of
particle-like vortex solitons, or more precisely, of solutions to the equations of
motion which have winding number. the conguration ht (r, , t)i  iq, q
an integer, realizes this possibility. unfortunately, it is singular at the origin.
since g2 = rftr, this singular soliton is nothing but the electric eld out-
side of a point electric charge of charge q. unless electrically charged elds are
actually added to the theory, this solution plays no dynamical role. in three
dimensions, the energy in the isotropic electric eld around a point charge is
logarithmically divergent; strictly speaking we should consider only congura-
tions with total charge zero. this is the logarithmic connement of qed3.

bthis has not actually been proven, although mirror symmetry 4,5 implies it must be true.7

3

 -  - 

 -  - 

 - 
 - 
 - 
+ + ++ + + + +

 - 

+ + + + + + ++

 - 

 -  - 

 - 

 -  - 

 -   - 

figure 1: the magnetic eld around a wire of current is shielded by a magnetic plasma, and
conned into narrow walls.

2.2 the linearly conning phase

we may make things more interesting by modifying the theory through the

terms l =r d2 w (t ) + c.c. with w = h(ept /2 + ept /2), making it a sine-
gordon model. if the radius of the u (1) gauge group is 2, then p must be an
integer. for a trivial kahler potential, this generates a scalar potential v (t ) =
|p sinh pt
2 |2, which has p supersymmetric vacua, located at hti = 2in/p, n an
integer. (note that the positions of these vacua do not change for a non-trivial
but non-singular kahler potential; the potential v (t ) will remain periodic in
t  t + 2i/p.) this implies the existence of domain walls separating regions
in dierent vacua. consider a conguration with vacuum n1 at x  0 and
vacuum n2 at x  0. there is a non-singular solution t (x, y, t) = t (x) which
interpolates between these two vacua, giving a domain wall  a string in two
spatial dimensions  in the y plane. since x = fty, the string carries electric
ux: it is a linearly conning electric ux tube. the total ux in the tube is

p , and the width of the tube is proportional to 1/ph.

equivalently, note that the existence of w (t ) 6= 0 changes the equations
so that a constant electric eld fxt(x, y, t) = e is no longer a solution; the
equations of motion reduce in this case to

r dxfty =  = 2

s(fxt)
f xt + y = 0 ;

df
d

= 0

(2)

the second of which implies  is everywhere at a minimum of f , while the rst
implies  must vary linearly with y, inconsistent with the second if f depends
on  . the electric eld between two parallel line charges will therefore not be
uniform, but will instead break up into strings of electric ux.

of course, polyakov explained long ago why the above modication of the
action causes linear connement.8 the action of this theory contains the terms
1
2  df + f ( )]. let us work in euclidean space for a moment. the
bianchi identity has become df = 2f ( ). thus, at any  which is not a local

2 r d3x [ 1

4

 = 3/2

 = 0

e

 = 

 = /2

figure 2: the electric eld e around an electric charge, represented by arrows, is conned
into walls where  varies; between the walls  is found in one of its minima. this gure
applies for p = 4.

minimum or maximum of f ( ), there is a local density of magnetic monopoles
in the vacuum. this means that the vacuum is a magnetic plasma. an at-
tempt to force a nontrivial electric eld fxt through the minkowski vacuum
by introducing an electric source corresponds in the euclidean description to
trying to force a magnetic eld through a magnetic plasma by introducing a
wire carrying electric current. such a eld will of course be screened by mag-
netic charge separation (corresponding to df /d taking positive and negative
values in various places) taking place in a region of order the debye length
d (inversely proportional to the monopole charge times the square root of

the density, d  1/(ph) in our example.) this immediately leads to linear

connement of the electric currents; see fig. 1. in broken three-dimensional
non-supersymmetric su (2) yang-mills theory 8 the monopole plasma is gen-
erated dynamically, but the low-energy eective u (1) gauge theory is similar
to the one considered here.

polyakov showed 8 that wilson loops acquire an area law when f ( ) is non-
zero and periodic; this is done by considering the area-dependent eects far
from the edge of the loop.c by considering the edge eects near the boundary
of the loop, the analysis can straightforwardly be extended to show that for
f ( ) = 0 wilson loops show logarithmic behavior when the kinetic term for

cthe presentation contains many typographical errors; note particularly that eq. (5.23) is
the correct solution but neither (5.22) nor (5.24) is correct as written.

5

 = 0

 = 

figure 3: a conguration with two heavy particles of charge 1 and two of charge -1; arrows
represent the conned electric eld.

f  is f 2/g2. similar computations can be used to show that the wilson loop
has the required behavior in the conformal phase of sqed with nf matter
elds, where the eective action for f is f 21/2f plus corrections which are
small in the large nf limit.

in this modied theory, the presence of a static point charge cannot lead
to a conguration with ht (r, , t)i  i, since  has p preferred values. instead,
the point charge, around which  must wind once, will distribute that winding
as in fig. 2, by hopping from one vacuum to another until  has shifted by
2. the electric eld  of the source, instead of being isotropic, is now
conned in the ux-carrying domain walls. amusing congurations such as
that in fig. 3 can be constructed; note that similar congurations are lacking
in qcd only because of the presence of light quarks.

a natural question is whether these domain walls are bps saturated.
first, consider the question of whether non-trivial bps bounds exist. in anal-
ogy to kink solitons in two dimensions 11 and domain-wall solitons in four
dimensions,12 bps bounds for domain-wall (stringlike) solitons in three dimen-
sions can occur when the expectation value of the superpotential is dierent
in the two vacua which the domain wall separates. interestingly, because the
superpotential chosen above depends on the vacuum of choice only up to a
sign w (t = i n
p ) = ()n2h, walls separating vacua with n1  n2 odd have
a bps bound while those with n1  n2 even have no bps bound, as in the
two-dimensional version of the same model.11 this observation suggests that
multiple strings with n1  n2 = 1 will bind together to make strings carrying
larger amounts of ux (whose energy cannot be calculated.) the physics be-
hind this behavior is not obvious; in particular it is not clear why the strings in

6

~

< qq >

< m >

~

< m >

figure 4: the moduli space for n = 2 sqed.

this conning abelian theory are so dierent from the domain walls in super-
symmetric qcd in four dimensions,12,13,14 which have a bps bound between
any two vacua. this also prevents the junction of multiple strings from being
bps saturated, in contrast to the case of qcd domain wall junctions 15,16.

bounds having been established for n1  n2 odd, the next question is
whether such solitons exist. the bps-saturated kink solitons for the sine-
gordon model in two-dimensions have been constructed,18 and can be directly
lifted to this three-dimensional model.

3 the abelian theory with matter

3.1 n = 2 supersymmetric qed
consider now n = 2 supersymmetric qed, consisting of a single u (1) vector
multiplet v and chiral multiplets q, q of charge 1,1. the vector multiplet
in three dimensions contains a real scalar  in addition to the photon and
photino. the lagrangian of the theory is

lsqed =z d4

1

4g2 2 (cid:16)qe2v q  qe2v q(cid:17) (cid:20)z d2 w (q, q) + c.c.(cid:21)(3)

initially we take the superpotential of the theory w to be zero.

the gauge invariant operators of the theory include q q, but the theory
also has the gauge-invariant operators m and m which are sources of magnetic
ux.5,7 the theory with matter has an abelian higgs phase hq qi 6= 0, in which
the gauge eld is massive and the ux which emanates from m and m is
trapped in magnetic ux vortices, solitons which behave like particles in three

7

dimensions. we therefore identify m and m as vortex-creation operators.5,7
the moduli space of the theory consists of the higgs branch, where hq qi 6=
0 and the gauge group is broken, and the coulomb branch, which classically
consists of expectation values for the real eld . quantum mechanically,
the coulomb branch corresponds to expectation values for  and  , or more
precisely for t . for zero superpotential, the coulomb branch splits into two
pieces,5 one on which m has an expectation value, the other on which m is
nonzero. at the origin these three branches touch and there is a conformal
eld theory.5,6 the moduli space is shown in fig. 4.

3.2 the xyz model

consider the theory of three chiral superelds x, y, z and superpotential
w = yxy z. the superpotential has dimension 2, while the elds and y
have engineering dimension 1
2 . there is a u (1) r-symmetry under which w
has charge 2 and the elds have charge 2/3.

the classical scalar potential for the scalar elds, v = |(dw/dx)|2 +
|(dw/dy )|2 + |(dw/dz)|2, takes the form |y z|2 + |zx|2 + |xy |2.
it has
solutions x 6= 0, y = z = 0 and permutations thereof. classically, then, the
theory has a space of vacua consisting of three complex planes, each with one of
the three elds as its coordinate, which touch at the point x = y = z = 0. at
this special point the r-symmetry and permutation symmetry are unbroken,
and the only scale in the problem is y. it is believed that the theory ows
to a conformal eld theory in the infrared. the r-charges and permutation
symmetry x the dimensions of x, y, z to be 2/3. one way to understand
this intuitively is to note that, in the superpotential, if y were transmuted
by quantum dynamics to become a dimensionless coupling, then xy z would
have dimension 2. the moduli space is shown in fig. 5.

the xyz model and sqed are surprisingly in the same universality class.5
for this to be true the theories must have the same spectrum of gauge invariant
operators and the same moduli space, and indeed they do: the chiral operators
x, y, z map to the chiral operators m, m , q q. the permutation symmetry
which is a classical feature of the xyz model is a quantum eect of the sqed
conformal eld theory.

3.3 the exact dual of n = 2 sqed
an exact dual for n = 4 sqed, valid at all energies, has been constructed,7
and this dual can easily be extended to n = 2 sqed. in particular, it involves
coupling a pair of photon multiplets v1, v2 with an o-diagonal chern-simons

8

< z >

< y >

< x >

figure 5: the moduli space of the xyz model.

metry which rotates the phases of x and y ; thus the kinetic terms become

term r d4 v12 (also known as a bf term) and using v1 to gauge the sym-
r d4 (x ev1x +y ev1y ). this description is strongly coupled at high ener-
gies (as expected, since sqed is weakly coupled there) and becomes the xyz
model at very low energies, plus irrelevant operators. the leading irrelevant
operator is (x x  y y )2. the addition of this and other non-singular opera-
tors to the kahler potential does not change the phase of the theory, not does
it change the topological issues which determine the existence of soliton solu-
tions. for this reason we may use the xyz model, whose low-energy kahler
potential is unknown in any case, for the investigations below, rather than the
more complicated exact dual description.

the one subtlety which should be noted is that x p is a gauge invariant
operator in the xyz model, while in the exact dual of sqed it is not. strictly
speaking the operator x in the latter must be supplemented with a wilson
line c(), where  is a curve which extends from the insertion of x to a point
at innity. let us replace v2 with the constrained eld 2 and the lagrange
multiplier t2 which couples to it by (t2 + t 
2 )2. in the presence of the v12
interaction, the eld t2 now shifts under the gauge invariance of v1, and the
wilson line c() for v1 along  can be replaced by et2 . consequently the
operator [et2x], and any half-integer power of it, is local and gauge invariant
and can be added to the superpotential. this operator reduces to x when the
gauge elds are integrated out.

9

4 the conformal phase

let us consider some perturbations of these theories. the rst few of these are
well-studied and serve as tests of the conjectured infrared equivalence of these
theories. the later ones have not previously been explored in the literature. we
begin for completeness with the conformal phase, found at the origin of moduli
space. this section lies somewhat outside the main ow of the paper and can
be skipped. the following sections address the phases of central interest.

w xy z = yxy z + t(x 3 + y 3 + z 3), w sqed = t(m 3 + m 3 + q3 q3)

using well known techniques 17 it is straightforward to show that this
perturbation is exactly marginal at the origin of moduli space.19 specically,
within the space of physical couplings h, t (which must be distinguished from
the holomorphic couplings appearing in the superpotential above, which do not
run) there is a one-complex-dimensional subspace where the theory remains
conformally invariant. from the sqed point of view, the naively-irrelevant
tenth-order scalar potential for the charged matter balances the appearance
of a plasma of charge-3 magnetic instantons to maintain conformal invariance.
whether this behavior has a simple physical interpretation is not known.

w xy z = yxy z + tz 3, w sqed = tq3 q3

this marginal perturbation is marginally irrelevant. to see this, consider

the beta functions for the theory w = yxy z + tz 3.

y = y[

1
2

+ x (h, t) +

1
2

z(y, t)] ; t = t[

1
2

+

3
2

z(y, t)]

(4)

i have used the symmetry between x, y here to write y = x . note the
following facts. first, there exists some y  y for which w = yxy z is
conformal; in short, y = y, t = 0, x = z =  = 1/3. second, x (y, t),
z(y, t) are functions of two variables, and the conditions in eq. (4) represent
two linearly independent conditions on two variables, whose solutions will be
isolated. the xed point y = y, t = 0 is therefore isolated, and thus the
perturbation is not exactly marginal. to see that it is irrelevant, note that the
solutions to the condition x = z form one or more lines in coupling space.
one of these lines, by symmetry, is at t = 0 for any value of y. any other lines
will generally lie at some distance from this one. for y = 0, t 6= 0, z > 0 by
unitarity while x is noninteracting, so z  x is positive. it must therefore
be that for all y and small t, z  x > 0. in conclusion, for y = y, t = ,
t > 0, and so the perturbation is irrelevant.

10



figure 6: the moduli space of sqed with massive matter. the eld around a massive
charged eld involves the winding of  around the small circle at the center of the space.

w xy z = yxy z + mz 2, w sqed = mq qq q

integrating out z leaves a low-energy eective superpotential w xy z =
 y2
4m xy xy . this interaction, which gives a sixth-order scalar potential, is
marginally irrelevant in three dimensions. consequently, the above perturba-
tion drives the xyz theory to a free theory of x and y . the same perturbation
pushes the n = 2 sqed theory to n = 4 sqed,19 which is known to ow to
a cft that can be written as a free theory of its vortex solitons.

5 the logarithmically conning phase: non-bps solitons

w xy z = xy z + mz, w sqed = mq q

a mass for q and q must leave the theory with a moduli space topologi-
cally equivalent to that of a free u (1) gauge theory, which has only a coulomb
branch with the topology of a cylinder.d although the metric cannot be com-
puted exactly, as would be the case in n = 4 sqed, it can be computed using
perturbation theory for large ||, while for small  it can be constrained using
perturbation theory and our knowledge of the theory with m = 0. the radius
of the cylinder asymptotically approaches the gauge coupling. the charged
matter reduces the eective value of the gauge coupling at small ||, and thus
the cylinder has smaller radius, as shown in fig. 6; note its consistency with
fig. 4.

because there are no longer any light charged elds in the theory to screen
electric charge, the particles q and q should be visible as localized massive
objects with long range elds. actually this is not quite true; their electric
charge means that they are still logarithmically conned, so they cannot be

dhenceforth we set y = 1 for simplicity, since it plays no role in the following discussion.

11

figure 7: the moduli space of the xyz model with superpotential w = xy z + mz; vortex
solitons wind around its center.

seen separately from one another.e however, if we consider a pair of heavy
particles of opposite charge, separated by a distance l, the energy associated
with their electric elds may be much less than the energy associated with their
cores; and so there are states in the theory with energy of order 2m+log l  2m
which have their energy concentrated in two lumps of size m1 separated by
distance l. can such states be found in the xyz theory?

the answer is yes, and they take the form of logarithmically conned states
of bps-unsaturated solitons. the moduli space of the theory is xy = m, a
hyperbola, shown in fig. 7. since 1 of the moduli space is non-zero, there
are vortex solitons in which the elds x, y wind opposite to one another at
spatial innity. the kinetic terms for x, y ensure the energy of one of these
solitons is logarithmically divergent, but a soliton-antisoliton pair would have
nite energy of order twice a core energy plus a long-distance logarithm. more
importantly, and in contrast to the pure u (1) theory discussed earlier, the core
energy is nite; the xyz model has solitons because the point at the center
of the soliton can have x = 0, y = 0 while maintaining nite energy density.
note that the winding around the hyperbola will be energetically favored to

occur for |x| = |y | = p|m|, the region of maximum symmetry, since the

spatial variation of the elds at innity, and the associated stress energy, can
be minimized there.

to conrm that the above vortex solitons are the elds q and q, we should
check that they are charged under the same elds. the winding of the phase of
x which denes the soliton corresponds in sqed to the winding of the phase
of m  et , and thus the dual photon  shifts by 2 while winding around
the soliton. since  is related by electric-magnetic duality to ftr, the radial
component of the electric eld, the soliton emits the sqed electric eld with

eof course we could avoid the problem of the logarithmic divergences by weakly breaking the
gauge symmetry of the u (1) theory; this method of regulating the theory will be discussed
below.

12

total charge 1. this indeed corresponds to the properties of the eld q. the
soliton winding the other way is either q or q; to distinguish them one must
examine the fermion zero modes of the solitons more carefully, which although
interesting lies outside the scope of the present paper.

it is straightforward to verify that these solitons are meaningful, despite
their logarithmic divergences, because the infrared logarithm may be eas-
ily regulated.f there are several options. the easiest is to consider cou-
pling the vector eld v of sqed to a second vector eld v , using an o-

diagonal chern-simons (bf) termr d4 (k/2) v  and adding a kinetic term
r d4 (1/4g2) 2. this gives a mass kg2 to the vector elds, and means that
the logarithmic potential conning q and q now falls o exponentially. the
state created by q alone now has nite energy. in the k   limit the vector
elds decouple, the theory is free and q has mass m. in fact, in this limit the
theory has n = 4 supersymmetry and the particle q is bps saturated. for
small k its mass diverges as | log k|. the state created by q(x) q(0) has mass
of order | log k| or log g2|x|, whichever is smaller.
the mirror description of this same process requires the exact duality
for sqed described in sec. 3.3. the nite coupling g in the original theory
corresponds7 to coupling the xyz model to topologically massive vector bosons
v1, v2 with mass of order g2. the eld v couples to v2 through a bf term with
coupling k, and it therefore mixes with v1, which couples to v2 through a bf
term with coupling 1. the mass matrix for the vectors v1, v has a vanishing
eigenvalue, so one linear combination is massive and the other, call it v0, is
massless. the elds x, y couple to the massless (massive) vector multiplet
with a coupling proportional to k (1), and the massless vector eliminates the
logarithmic divergence in the soliton energy through the replacement of x
with ( +a0)x. for k =  this modied xyz theory is simply n = 4 sqed
with a fayet-iliopolous term, which is well-known to be free with massive
bps vortices. for nite k the solitons are not bps saturated but still have
nite mass; only for k = 0, when the massless vector multiplet v0 completely
decouples from x, y , is the soliton mass divergent. meanwhile, for small k
and large separation |x|, the mass of the soliton-antisoliton state is of order
log g2|x|, where g2 is the mass of the topologically massive vector multiplet; it
is nite in the k  0 limit. this matches with the sqed description above.

6 the conning phases: bps and non-bps strings

f the remainder of this section may be skipped;
completeness.

it is presented only for technical

13

 = 0

 = 

figure 8: in the conning phase with p = 2, particles with charge 1 and -1 are conned by
two strings carrying the minimal quantum of ux (which most likely bind into a single one
with twice the ux.)

w xy z = xy z + mz + h(x + y ), w sqed = mq q + h(m + m )

the presence of linear terms in x and y implies that we will now have
multiple isolated vacua, each with a mass gap. this means there will be regions
in dierent vacua separated by domain walls, as we discussed earlier for pure
u (1) gauge theory. the vacuum equations are

xy + m = 0 ; y z + h = 0 ; xz + h = 0

which have two solutions

x = y = im ; z = i

h
m

(5)

(6)

these two isolated vacua are two points on the circle |x| = |y | = |m|.
imei, y () = imei. with h 6= 0, only two points of the moduli space

if h were zero, then, as described above, a vortex soliton with logarithmically
divergent energy could have been constructed with asympotic behavior x() =

remain, so it is no longer possible to have a soliton of this type. but we may
ask, what if we had such a soliton for h = 0, and then adiabatically turned
on a non-zero value for h? the winding of the soliton cannot be unwound
without large energy cost. instead, the system will minimize the energy by
ensuring that the phases of x, y do all of their winding in two narrow domain
walls, sitting in one or the other zero-energy vacuum in the regions between
the walls, as in fig. 2. these domain walls, in isolation (without solitons at
the end) are bps saturated.

in short, the vortex soliton will retain its core, but will nd itself at the
meeting point of two solitonic ux-carrying domain walls. a soliton-antisoliton
pair will now be connected by two strings. this is shown in fig. 8. however,

14

although we normally expect a pair of identical bps-saturated solitons to have
zero potential energy, a pair of domain wall solitons of this type is not bps
saturated, because in fact they are not the same: they connect dierent vacua.
consequently, there is no bps bound for the pair of walls shown in fig. 8 (even
in the limit that their endpoints are taken to innity), and it is likely the pair
of strings in the gure attract one another and bind to form a single non-bps
string soliton.

w xy z = xy z + mz + h(x p/2 + y p/2),
w sqed = mq q + h(m p/2 + m p/2)

here we generalize the previous discussion. the vacuum equations are

xy + m = 0 ; y z + hx (p/2)1 = 0 ; xz + hy (p/2)1 = 0

(7)

which has p solutions

x = imein/p ; y = imein/p ; z = (1)n(im)(p/2)2h ,

(8)

where n = 1, . . . , 2p. there are thus p isolated vacua on the circle |x| =
|y | = |m|. in analogy to the case just discussed, this implies that a vortex
of winding number 1 is the meeting place of p ux-carrying domain walls.

the physics of this case is straightforward. in (7), monopoles of charge
p/2 and density h have been introduced. since the debye length in the plasma
is inversely proportional to p, dimensional analysis shows that the width of a
solitonic tube and the amount of ux it can carry decrease linearly with p. to
conne an object of integer electric charge then requires p such strings.

w xy z = xy z + mz + hx p/2 + hy p/2,
w sqed = mq q + hm p/2 + h m p/2

the explicit breaking of the symmetry between x and y moves the 2p
vacua. it is easiest to solve for the vacua by converting the above superpotential
back to the previous one by rescaling x  ax, y  y /a where a = (h/h)1/p.
the resulting solutions are

x = i  h

h!1/p

h(cid:19)1/p mein/p ;

mein/p ; y = i(cid:18) h
z = (1)n(im)(p/2)2phh ,

15

where n = 1, . . . , 2p. notice that in the limit h  0, h 6= 0 the vacua move to
|y | = , x = 0.
this limit, for p = 2, resembles the result of aeck, harvey and wit-
ten 9 for n = 2 su (2) yang-mills theory. in turn this suggests why linear
connement does not occur in that case. in linearly conning sqed we have
monopoles m and m of charge 1,1 and antimonopoles m  and m  of charge
1, 1. if they are both introduced with equal weight as in eq. (7), then the
theory has the symmetry t  t , implying vacua will be symmetric around
 = 0. reducing the eect of charge 1 monopoles m relative to those with
charge 1, which can be done using the eld rescaling given above, shifts the
symmetry to t  t + log(h/h)2/p, essentially acting as a shift of .
in
the limit of innite rescaling, stable supersymmetric vacua have no natural
location other than  = . since in n = 2 su (2) yang-mills we nd only
charge 1 t hooft-polyakov monopoles m and charge 1 antimonopoles m ,
the theory only has a vacuum for innite hi.

7 a comment on string theory

i conclude with some limited remarks concerning the lifting of this physics to
string theory.

strings are sources for an abelian two-form gauge eld b , and it is
an interesting question whether string theory permits its electric ux to be
conned. in the context of the present paper, this is most easily discussed in
four dimensions, where the two form is dual to a scalar  (the dimensional
reduction of the six-form which couples to neveu-schwarz ve-branes.)
in
analogy to the discussion above, one needs to nd physics which can generate
a (stable) potential which depends non-trivially on  . the presence of such a
potential will indicate that the vacuum has become a plasma of instantons with
magnetic charge under b . for example, in four dimensions such instantons
would be given by euclidean neveu-schwarz ve-branes wrapped on the six
compact dimensions.

it is easy to construct a four-dimensional eld theory model with such
behavior. the theory of a free string is given by considering the solitons of
the abelian higgs model, with gauge eld a and complex higgs eld  and
a potential v () = (  v2)2. the phase of   let us call it a  winds
around the string.g in fact the low-energy theory well below the scale v can be

gfree bps strings can be dened in a suitable limit 20 of the pure n = 2 supersymmetric
yang-mills theory studied by seiberg and witten.21 in the theory with dynamical scale ,
the presence of an n = 2 breaking parameter  leads to connement of electric ux into
tubes. these tubes become n = 2 bps saturated strings in the limit   0,   
with  xed; the parameter  becomes an n = 2-preserving fayet-iliopoulos parameter.

16

written as the gauge eld a coupled to a with the lagrangian (a + a)2.
shifting this phase as a  a + (x) is a gauge symmetry.
we may then add a dynamical two-form eld b with a dual scalar  ,
which couples to the magnetic ux in the string soliton via the interaction
b f. since  shifts under the gauge symmetry of a, in analogy to the
discussion in sec. 3.3, we can dene a gauge invariant operator  +a, which has
a global (not gauged) shift symmetry and is periodic under shifts by 2. the
winding of this gauge-invariant operator around a string soliton corresponds
to the gauge-invariant b electric ux h 0 (here h = db), whose infrared-
divergent energy causes logarithmic connement of strings. now, if a non-
trivial periodic potential for  + a is somehow added to the theory, then this
global shift symmetry is broken. (for example, the global shift symmetry of
 + a can be broken through an anomaly by instantons in some other gauge
group.) consequently, as in eq. (2), h 0 ux is conned, and the string
solitons are linearly conned by axionic domain walls, as in fig. 2.

can a construction along these lines be carried out in a consistent string
theory? even if the shift symmetry of  is broken, can the runaway behavior of
three-dimensional supersymmetric yang-mills 9 be avoided? it would be very
interesting if a stable conning phase could be found, especially since string
dualities would lead to a whole class of such phases in which connement of
various d branes by other (bps-unsaturated) branes would occur.

acknowledgments

i thank a. kapustin, k. intriligator, v.p. nair, n. seiberg and m. shifman
for conversations. the work reported here was supported in part by national
science foundation grant nsf phy-9513835 and by the w.m. keck founda-
tion.

references

1. yu.a. golfand and e.p. likhtman, jetp lett. 13, 323 (1971) [reprinted
in supersymmetry, ed. s. ferrara, (north-holland/world scientic, am-
sterdam  singapore, 1987), vol. 1, page 7].

2. j.-l. gervais and b. sakita, nucl. phys. b34, 632 (1971).
3. n. seiberg and e. witten, hep-th/9607163.
4. k. intriligator and n. seiberg, phys. lett. b387, (1996) 513, hep-

th/9607207.

the tension of the strings is . note that, in this context, the phase of the theory with
tensionless strings consists merely of a photon coupled to massless uncondensed monopoles
at innite   a free eld theory.

17

5. o. aharony, a. hanany, k. intriligator, n. seiberg and m.j. strassler,

nucl. phys. b499, (1997) 67, hep-th/9703110.

6. j. de boer, k. hori, y. oz and z. yin, nucl. phys. b502, (1997) 107,

hep-th/9702154.

7. a. kapustin and m.j. strassler, jhep 04, (1999) 021, hep-th/9902033.
8. a.m. polyakov, nucl. phys. b120, (1977) 429.
9. i. aeck, j.a. harvey and e. witten, nucl. phys. b206, (1982) 413.
10. u. lindstrom and m. rocek, nucl. phys. b222 (1983) 285.
11. e. witten and d. olive, phys. lett. 78b, (1978) 97.
12. g. dvali and m. shifman, phys. lett. b396, (1997) 64, hep-th/9612128.
13. a. kovner, m. shifman and a. smilga, phys. rev. d56, (1997) 7978,

hep-th/9706089.

14. e. witten, nucl. phys. b507, (1997) 658, hep-th/9706109.
15. g.w. gibbons and p.k. townsend, phys. rev. lett. 83 (1999) 1727

hep-th/9905196.

16. s.m. carroll, s. hellerman and m. trodden, hep-th/9905217.
17. r.g. leigh and m.j. strassler, nucl. phys. b447, (1995) 95, hep-

th/9503121.

18. see for example p. fendley and k. intriligator, nucl. phys. b380 (1992)

265 hep-th/9202011.

19. m.j. strassler, hep-th/9810223.
20. a. hanany, m. j. strassler and a. zaaroni, nucl. phys. b513 (1998)

87, hep-th/9707244.

21. n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl. phys. b426, (1994) 19, hep-th/9407087.

18

