iassns-hep-99/111

0
0
0
2

 
r
p
a
7
2

 

 
 

2
v
4
4
0
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

on the universality class of little string

theories

anton kapustin

school of natural sciences, institute for advanced study

olden lane, princeton, nj 08540

abstract

we propose that little string theories in six dimensions are quasilocal quan-
tum eld theories. such eld theories obey a modication of wightman axioms
which allows wightman functions (i.e. vacuum expectation values of products of
fundamental elds) to grow exponentially in momentum space. wightman func-
tions of quasilocal elds in x-space violate microlocality at short distances. with
additional assumptions about the ultraviolet behavior of quasilocal elds, one can
dene approximately local observables associated to big enough compact regions.
the minimum size of such a region can be interpreted as the minimum distance
which observables can probe. we argue that for little string theories this distance
is of order n /ms.

email: kapustin@ias.edu

1 introduction

poincare-invariant theories in six dimensions have been much studied in the last few years.
one of the reasons is that they describe 5 + 1-dimensional branes which play an important
role is string dualities. in particular, the superconformal (2, 0) theory describing several
coincident m5-branes has attracted a lot of attention. another reason is that the very
existence of consistent nontrivial poincare-invariant theories in six dimensions came as a
surprise.

a standard strategy to construct a nontrivial eld theory is to take a free conformal
theory and perturb it by a relevant or marginally relevant operator other than the mass
term. this method works well in dimension four or lower, but it is easy to see that in
higher dimensions free conformal theories do not have interesting relevant or marginally
relevant deformations. hence until a few years ago it was believed that nontrivial quantum
eld theories do not exist in dimensions higher than four.

(2, 0) and (1, 0) superconformal eld theories describing various vebranes provided
rst examples to the contrary [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. subsequently other related scfts in six
dimensions have been discovered [6, 7]. a common feature of all these constructions is
that they require taking a certain limit in string theory or m-theory in which gravity
and other bulk modes decouple from the vebranes. in the simplest case, one takes n
coincident type iia vebranes or e8  e8 heterotic vebranes and considers the limit
gs  0, ms  . here gs is the string coupling at spatial innity, and ms = 1/ is
the string scale. if gravity and the rest of the bulk modes decouple, while the degrees of
freedom living on the brane remain interacting, one expects that that the brane degrees of
freedom are described in this limit by a nontrivial poincare-invariant theory. in all known
cases the argument for decoupling is indirect, and the structure of the poincare-invariant
theory is poorly understood.

nevertheless, whenever one can argue decoupling in the limit gs  0, ms  , it is be-
lieved that the poincare-invariant theory is a local qft; moreover, it is a (super)conformal
qft, since ms, the only scale in string theory, is taken to innity.

for reasons mentioned above, these superconformal qfts can not be obtained by
perturbing a free eld theory with a local operator and therefore are not associated to
any lagrangian. but there are nonlocal theories in 5 + 1 dimensions which ow to our
scfts in the infrared: the so-called little string theories (lsts). little string theories
rst appeared in [8] where it was suggested that they describe m-theory compactied on
t 5. the precise denition of lsts as decoupled theories on vebranes goes as follows [9].
one starts with n coincident type iia or heterotic vebranes, as above, but now takes
the limit gs  0 while keeping ms nite. suppose this limit denes a poincare-invariant

1

theory in 5 + 1 dimensions. its infrared limit is equivalent to the limit ms  , therefore
by denition this theory ows to the scft of interest. the dicult part is arguing that
the decoupling really occurs.

all known nontrivial (2, 0) and (1, 0) superconformal theories in six dimension arise as
the infrared limit of little string theories. in each case the parent little string theory
has the same amount of supersymmetry, but does not have conformal or superconformal
symmetry. starting from a slightly dierent brane conguration, one can also construct
little string theories in six dimensions with (1, 1) supersymmetry [9]. according to
nahms classication of superconformal algebras [10], such a theory cannot ow to a
nontrivial superconformal theory in the infrared. instead, at low energies (1, 1) theories
reduce to n = 2 d = 6 super-yang-mills theories which are infrared-free.

the name little string theory has the following origin. since we did not send ms
to innity when taking the decoupling limit, it is natural to expect that the theory retains
some stringy features. and indeed, one can argue that little string theories inherit from
string theory such properties as t-duality [9] and hagedorn density of states [11].

the property of t-duality in particular seems to imply that little string theories are
not local quantum eld theories (despite being poincare-invariant). intuition tells us that a
quantum eld theory always knows on which pseudo-riemannian manifold it lives, while
t-duality means that a little string theory on a torus of volume v is indistinguishable
from a little string theory on a torus of volume 1/v . (we make this argument more
precise in section ii.)

since a common lore says that the local quantum eld theory framework is the only way
to reconcile quantum mechanics, poincare-invariance, and macrocausality (see e.g. [12]),
we seem to be facing a puzzle. as we explain below, the lore is incorrect if one is willing to
sacrice the notion of a strictly local observable. we will see that there is a way to modify
the axioms of quantum eld theory so that it is impossible to construct observables whose
support is a compact set.
in these theories local observables emerge only at distances
much larger than a certain scale .

nonlocal quantum eld theories of this sort will be called quasilocal, since they violate
causality only at distances shorter than . we conjecture that lsts are quasilocal quantum
eld theories with  being of order n /ms. here n is the number of vebranes.

quasilocal eld theory is quite an old subject (see [13] for a review). it was extensively
studied in 60s and 70s in attempts to deal with nonrenormalizable eld theories. the
main observation of the present paper is that the known properties of lsts seem to t
perfectly into the framework of quasilocal eld theory.

the link between quasilocal eld theories and lsts is best seen from the holographic
point of view [14, 15]. holographic approach makes it clear that little string theories

2

have properties very similar to those of local qfts. in particular, they have operators
(p) which depend on the 6-momentum p whose correlators (= wightman functions) enjoy
most of the usual properties. the only peculiarity of lsts is that these correlators seem to
grow exponentially in momentum space [15, 16] (in local qfts wightman functions grow
at most as a power). a related fact is the exponential growth of the density of states in
lsts [11]. the importance of the exponential growth has been stressed by aharony and
banks [11]. these authors pointed out that exponential growth means that truly local
observables in lsts do not exist. rather, if the wightman functions grow as exp(p),
the minimal size the observables can probe is of order . aharony and banks suggested
that the exponential growth of wightman functions in momentum space is the dening
property of lsts.

in this paper we elaborate on the point made in [11] and clarify the extent to which
observables in lsts can be localized. we will see that the exponential growth of greens
functions in momentum space is characteristic of a quasilocal eld theory. its x-space coun-
terpart is the fact that quasilocal elds are very singular (but well-dened) distributions.
the corresponding test functions are real-analytic and cannot have compact support.

to appreciate the relation between the growth of distributions in momentum space
and the properties of test functions in x-space, the following one-dimensional example is
helpful. suppose we want to regard the functions f(p) = eap of one real variable p as
distributions on a suitable space of test functions. (here a is a positive real number). it
is clear that the space of test functions must include only functions which decay faster
than e|a|p at innity. for example, one could take the space of smooth functions which
are bounded by a multiple of e(|a|+)p for some positive . what is the x-space analogue
of this condition? the formal fourier transform of f(p) is

f(x) =

(ia)n

n!

(n)(x).



xn=0

formally, the value of this distribution on a test function f (x) is

f(f ) =

(ia)n

n!

f (n)(0).



xn=0

(1)

(2)

for the distribution to be well-dened, this sum must converge. this means that the
derivatives of f must not grow too fast. in fact, if the series (2) is convergent, then the
taylor expansion for f (x) around the point x = 0 is convergent for |x| < a. similarly, if we
consider momentum-space distributions of the form eibpap and require that their fourier

3

transform be well-dened, we will nd that the taylor expansion for f (x) must converge
for |x  b| < a. hence, if b is allowed to be arbitrary, then the test functions in x-space
must be real-analytic. moreover, they can be continued analytically o the real axis to a
strip of width a.

the above arguments can be extended to the general d-dimensional case. we will
see that if distributions grow exponentially in momentum space, the test functions in
x-space must be real-analytic. an operator smeared with such a test function is not
a local observable. furthermore, the microlocality condition does not make any sense
for such elds.
indeed, it says that if f and g are test functions whose supports are
causally disconnected, then (f ) and (g) commute (or anticommute). this condition is
empty for quasilocal theories, since there are no test functions whose supports are causally
disconnected!

one can nevertheless formulate a version of the microlocality axiom which does make
sense. to formulate this axiom, we rst need to dene approximately local (al) observ-
ables. the basic idea is to consider a sequence of test functions {f} which get more and
more concentrated on a certain compact set m. (the precise denition of what concen-
trated means will be given later.) then we say that observables (f) are approximately
local, and m is their quasisupport. thus quasisupport is an attribute of a sequence of
observables rather than of a single observable. the quasilocality axiom says that al
observables whose quasisupports are space-like separated approximately commute (or an-
ticommute). this means that if m and n are space-like separated, and (f) and (g)
are sequences of al observables with quasisupports m and n, respectively, then

[(f), (g)]  0 or [(f), (g)]+ as   .

(3)

the quasilocality axiom ensures locality in the large. nonlocal qfts which satisfy this
axiom are called quasilocal. our proposal is that lsts are quasilocal eld theories.

the outline of the paper is as follows. in section ii we summarize the known properties
of little string theories and argue that they cannot be local qfts. in section iii we
explain how the axioms of local quantum eld theory should be modied in order to
incorporate wightman functions which grow exponentially in momentum space and why
this leads to violations of locality at short distances.
in section iv we discuss how to
dene approximately local observables in nonlocal theories. it turns out that nontrivial
observables approximately localized on a compact set m can be dened for a special class
of such theories, and only if m is big enough. the precise denition of big enough sets
depends on the reference frame. the minimal size of the support of an observable sets the
smallest distance which observables in a quasilocal theory can probe. we argue that for

4

little string theories this distance is of order n/ms. in section v we suggest directions
for future work.

2 properties of little string theories

let us summarize what is known about lsts in general.

1. lsts are quantum-mechanical theories. this means that a state in lst is a ray in a
hilbert space v , and observables are self-adjoint linear operators on v . even in ordinary
quantum eld theory many important observables (energy, for example) are unbounded
operators which are only dened on a dense subset of v . presumably the same is true
about observables in lsts.

2. lsts are poincare-invariant, i.e. there is a unitary representation of the poincare
group acting on v . in particular, there is a hamiltonian (the generator of time transla-
tions) which is an unbounded self-adjoint operator on a dense subset of v . furthermore,
this operator has nonnegative spectrum. for all known lsts this holds because they are
supersymmetric.

3. among observables of lsts there are operators r(p) labeled by an irreducible
nite-dimensional representation r of spin(1, 5) and the momentum p  r1,5 [14].
these operators can be thought of as functions on r1,5 valued in the tensor product
end(v )  r. they are covariant with respect to the poincare group, i.e. for any element
(a, ), a  r1,5,   so(1, 5), of the poincare group we have

u(a, )r(p)u(a, )1 = eipar()(1p).

(4)

4. the hilbert space v has a distinguished state  (vacuum) which is poincare-

invariant. vacuum expectation values

(, r1(p) . . . rn(pn))  6(p1 + . . . + pn) wn(p1  p2, . . . , pn1  pn)

(5)

appear to grow exponentially for large momenta. for example, the 2-point function seems
to be growing as [15, 16]

w2(p)  exp(cid:18) cmsp
n (cid:19) ,

(6)

where n is the number of 5-branes, and c is a numerical constant of order 1. (the authors
of [16] chose to remove this exponential growth by making a multiplicative renormaliza-
tion of operators in momentum space. however, it appears that the growth is common
to all correlators and is related to the growth of the density of states, see property 7.

5

multiplicative renormalization of elds is not sucient to make higher-order correlators
polynomially bounded, except in the case of a gaussian theory.)

strictly speaking, eq. (6) has been established only for large n and for momenta in

the range ms/n  p  ms. however, it is plausible that this growth continues for
p  ms (see property 7 below).

5. operators in lsts obey the usual spin-statistics relation.
6. in the infrared lsts ow to local quantum eld theories.
7. the density of states of an lst grows exponentially at large energies [11]. equiva-

lently, the entropy per unit volume of the microcanonical ensemble is

n
ms

s 

(7)

if the energy density  is large,   m 6
only for temperatures t < ms/n.

s . consequently, the canonical ensemble is dened

8. an lst on a manifold of the form r1,5n  t n where t n is an n-dimensional torus
with a at metric is equivalent to a (in general dierent) lst with the same ms on a
manifold r1,5n  t n [9]. here t n is the dual torus. this means that dierent little
string theories are related by t-dualities when compactied on tori. for example, the
lst of parallel type iia 5-branes is mapped by a t-duality to the lst of parallel type
iia or iib 5-branes, depending on whether n is even or odd.

9. some further properties of lsts are discussed in [17, 18, 19].
property 8 is particularly striking. ones rst reaction is that a local quantum eld
theory cannot have a t-duality, and that only a string theory of some kind would t the
bill.

the former claim can be argued as follows. a local quantum eld theory has local
observables associated to compact sets. according to the microlocality axiom, these ob-
servables commute at space-like separations. thus by looking at the structure of the
algebra of observables one can reconstruct unambiguously the causal structure of space-
time, i.e. the position of light-cones. in other words, one can reconstruct the conformal
structure of space-time. since in general a at torus and its dual are not conformally
equivalent, a local quantum eld theory cannot have t-duality.

the claim that only a string theory can enjoy t-duality also sounds plausible. however
since the only string theory we know of is critical string theory, and there is no agreement
on how to dene string theory in general, this claim is almost devoid of content. we
will argue below that little string theories are a kind of quasilocal eld theories which
do not have truly local observables.

6

3 little string theories as quasilocal field theories

3.1 the space of test functions

in local quantum eld theory elds are operator-valued distributions [20]. this means
that although the value of a eld at a point is not a well-dened observable, the eld
smeared with a test function f  s is well-dened. usually s is taken to be the space of
innitely dierentiable functions which decay at innity faster than any negative power
(the schwartz space). the corresponding distributions (i.e. continuous linear functionals
in the standard topology on s) are called tempered distributions. thus in local quantum
eld theory local elds are operator-valued tempered distributions.
the choice of the space of test functions seems like a technicality, but in fact it has
important physical consequences. for example, since the fourier transform of a function
f  s is again an element of s [21], tempered distributions can grow at most as a poly-
nomial in momentum space. this implies that the correlators of local operators can grow
at most as a power of momentum. if we want to accommodate operators whose matrix
elements grow faster than a polynomial, one has to work with more singular distributions,
which are dened on a smaller space of test functions.

in view of properties 4 and 7, it seems very likely that wightman functions (i.e. vacuum
expectation values) of operators r(p) in little string theories grow exponentially with
momenta. more precisely, by positivity of energy the function wn(q1, . . . , qn1) vanishes
when any of its arguments is outside the forward light-cone v+, but inside v n1
it appears
to be bounded by a multiple of

+

exp (+(|q1| + . . .|qn1|)),

(8)

where |q| = pq2, and  is of order n/ms. clearly, such functions are not tempered

distributions.1 our rst task is to nd the right space of test functions which could be
used to smear wn.

a necessary requirement on the test functions is that they be innitely dierentiable
and decayed exponentially fast (in momentum space). the former requirement is necessary
if we want the product of the eld operator r(x) and a polynomial of x to be well-dened.
the latter requirement comes from the exponential growth of the wightman functions in
momentum space. we also want the space of test functions to be lorenz-invariant. finally,
the space of test functions should to be suciently nice. as a minimum, we want it to
be a complete countably normed space in which the nuclear theorem holds, see e.g. [20].

1it is tempting to call them ill-tempered distributions, but probably the name distributions of expo-

nential growth is more suitable.

7

a convenient class of spaces of test functions was dened by a. jae [22]. given a
function g(t), t  r, such that g(t2) is entire 2 and positive, jae denes a space sg which
consists of all functions on rd which are innitely-dierentiable and for which all the norms

||f (p)||n = sup
p;|m|n

g(n||p||2)|dmf (p)|, n = 1, 2, . . . ,

(9)

are nite. here m = (m1, . . . , md) is a polyindex, |m| = pi mi, and ||p|| is an arbitrary
euclidean norm on rd. loosely speaking, the niteness of the norms (9) means that a test
functions and all its derivatives decay at innity faster than 1/g(n||p||2) for any positive
n. despite appearances, sg does not depend on the choice of the euclidean norm, but it
does depend on the rate of growth of g(t2) at innity. if we dene convergence on sg using
the family of norms (9), it becomes a complete countably normed space. it is easy to see
that sg is lorenz-invariant. in addition, if g satises

g(n||p||2)
g(n||p||2)

is an integrable function for all n and suciently large n,

(10)

the nuclear theorem holds [21].

let us denote the fourier transform of sg by sg. we think of sg as the space of test
functions in momentum space, so sg is the space of test-functions in x-space. the spaces
sg can be used to dene quantum eld theories whose ultraviolet behavior is more singular
than that of wightman qfts. their localizability properties depend on the rate of growth
of g at innity.

a. jae showed [22] that if the function g satises

z 

0

log g(t2)
1 + t2 dt < ,

(11)

then the fourier transform of sg contains many functions with compact support, so that
the microlocality axiom can be formulated in the usual manner. qfts based on the space
sg with g satisfying (11) are called strictly localizable [22]. such qfts have properties
which are not very dierent from the properties of wightman qfts.

conversely, if g does not satisfy (11), there are no functions with compact support
among the test functions in x-space (except identical zero). for little string theories we
want to take

g(t) = e

t.

(12)

2by an entire function on rm we mean a real-analytic function whose taylor series has an innite
radius of convergence. an entire function can be analytically continued to a holomorphic function on cm.

8

this choice of g is dictated by the exponential growth of the wightman functions
(8).
with this choice of g the test functions in momentum space decrease faster than any linear
exponential, thus ensuring that the value of the wightman functional is well-dened on
any n-tuple

(f1, . . . , fn), f1, . . . , fn  sg.

since the condition (11) is violated, the test functions in x-space cannot have compact
support. in fact, one can show that the test functions in x-space are entire. an entire
function which vanishes in an open set is identically zero; in particular the support of any
nontrivial entire function is the whole rd.

3.2 analytic properties of wightman functions in lsts

in this section we discuss the analyticity properties of wightman functions in lsts, assum-
ing that lsts are quantum eld theories based on the jae space sg with g(t) = exp(t).
our motivation is the following. recall that in local qfts wightman functions obey
certain symmetry properties as a consequence of microlocality, and conversely microlocal-
ity follows from these symmetry properties [20, 23]. one possible way to ensure locality
of lsts in the large is to impose a similar symmetry requirement on their wightman
functions. however, before we do this, we need to understand at which points the values of
wightman functions are well-dened. after all, wightman functions are really distribu-
tions, and pretty singular ones at that. luckily, this problem was studied in detail in the
literature on nonlocal eld theories. below we summarize some of this work following [24].
in a local quantum eld theory the microlocality axiom implies the permutation sym-

metry of wightman functions,

wn(x1, . . . , xi, xi+1, . . . , xn) = wn(x1, . . . , xi+1, xi, . . . , xn),

(13)

for (xi  xi+1)2 < 0. (to simplify our discussion, we will restrict ourselves to bosonic elds
here.) since wightman functions are not really functions, their values at points are not
well-dened in general, and the meaning of eq. (13) must be claried.

one way to interpret eq. (13) is to smear it with a product of test functions

f1(x1) . . . fn(xn)

such that the supports of fi and fi+1 are space-like separated. however this approach
does not extend to qfts with entire test functions. a more sophisticated interpretation
of eq. (13) makes use of the fact that at certain special points the values of wightman

9

functionals are well-dened. recall that wightman functionals can be regarded as bound-
ary values of certain holomorphic functions [20]. in other words, one can dene analytic
continuation of the n-point wightman functional to complex values of its arguments, and
this continuation is a holomorphic function in a certain open set tn  cdn. tn is called
the forward tube and is given by

tn =(cid:8)x + iy(cid:12)(cid:12)x, y  rdn; i(y)  v+, i = 1, . . . , n  1(cid:9) .

(14)

here v+ is the forward light-cone in rd, and for any point (x1, . . . , xn)  rdn we denote
i(x) = xixi+1, i = 1, . . . , n1. the real points are on the boundary of tn. the possibility
of analytic continuation is a consequence positivity of energy in local quantum eld
theory, see [20] for details. (really, analytic continuation is simply the laplace transform
of momentum space wightman functions which is well-dened because momentum space
wightman functions vanish outside the forward light-cone.)
if we apply complexied
lorenz transformations to the forward tube tn, we get the so-called extended forward
tube t ext
n . by lorenz-invariance, the analytic continuations of wightman functionals
are holomorphic in the extended forward tube [20]. now it is crucial that t ext
includes
real points (usually called jost points). jost points form an open set which we will call
the jost domain. wightman functionals can be regarded as ordinary functions at all jost
points. when both

n

and

(x1, . . . , xi, xi+1, . . . , xn)

(x1, . . . , xi+1, xi, . . . , xn)

belong to the jost domain, eq. (13) admits a straightforward interpretation.

which real points belong to the jost domain? the answer it simple for a 2-point
function: (x1, x2) is a jost point if and only if (x1  x2)2 < 0. thus the 2-point wightman
function is analytic for space-like separated points. eq. (13) simply says that w2 is a
symmetric function of its arguments when its arguments are space-like separated. the
situation for the n-point functions is similar, except that the shape of the jost domain
is somewhat more complicated [20]: it is not sucient to require that all vectors xi  xj
be space-like, one should also require that every point in the convex hull of the points
i(x) = xi  xi+1, i = 0, . . . , n  1 be space-like. this condition is also a necessary one for
(x1, . . . , xn) to belong to the jost domain.
one can prove (see e.g. [23]) that the permutation symmetry of wightman functionals
in the jost domain is equivalent to microlocality, if the wightman functionals are assumed
to be tempered.

10

after this brief review of the analytic properties of wightman functions in a local qft,
let us return to qfts based on the space sg with g(t) = exp(t). the analytic properties
of wightman functions in these theories were described in [24]. for a given wightman
function one can dene the analogue of the forward tube un as the region in cdn where the
laplace transform of the momentum-space wightman function is well-dened. it turns
out that this domain is given by

x  rdn; y [

v n

 ()) .

(15)

here  is a positive real number,   rd is a unit time-like vector, and v n
in rdn given by

 () is a domain

un =(x + iy(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
 () =n(x1, . . . , xn)  rdn(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

v n

(16)

(17)

i(x)   p(i(x)  )2  i(x)2 > ,io .

the meaning of the above equation is easiest to see in the frame where  = (1,~0). then
v n
 () becomes

v n

 () =n(x1, . . . , xn)  rdn(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

i0(x)  |~i(x)| > ,io .

it is easy to see that for  > 0 the domain un is a proper subset of tn, and in the limit
  0 the two domains coincide.
the parameter  can be dierent for dierent wightman functions and characterizes
the nonlocality of a given wightman function. for  > 0 the closure of un does not include
real points, unlike in a local qft. thus wightman functions in x-space are not boundary
values of holomorphic functions, in general.

n

as before, lorenz invariance implies that the wightman functions are analytic in the
domain u ext
obtained by applying complexied lorenz transformations to un. the jost
domain is dened as the set of real points of u ext
n .
it is of interest to determine the precise shape of the jost domain in the nonlocal case.
this has been done in [24]. it is rather obvious that for  > 0 the nonlocal jost domain
is a proper subset of the local jost domain. for n = 2 the nonlocal jost domain is
given by

for n > 2 a natural guess for what a nonlocal jost domain is the following. let j 
n
be the set of all points x  rnd such that the convex hull of 1(x), . . . , n1(x) belongs

(x1  x2)2 < 2.

(18)

11

to the hyperboloid  2 < 2. for   0 j 
n reduces to the local jost domain, and is a
natural candidate to be the nonlocal jost domain. this guess is incorrect. the actual
shape of the nonlocal jost domain is rather more complicated, see [24] for details. for
our purposes it is sucient to know that the nonlocal jost domain is a proper subset
of j 
n does not contain any light-like separated points, the
same is true about the nonlocal jost domain. this means that in nonlocal eld theories
wightman functions may have singularities outside the light-cone. we will see some
examples of this below.

n [24]. since the closure of j 

in view of the above, there is an obvious reformulation of the microlocality axiom
which also makes sense for nonlocal eld theories based on the space sg. we simply
require (anti)symmetry of wightman functions in their nonlocal jost domains. we will
call this symmetry requirement weak quasilocality (strong quasilocality will be discussed
in the next section). nonlocal eld theories whose wightman functions satisfy the weak
quasilocality axiom will be called weakly quasilocal.

in a general weakly quasilocal eld theory  can grow without bound as the order of
the wightman function increases. then the theory is nonlocal at all scales, if one studies
a suciently complicated wightman function. in little string theories the exponential
growth of wightman functions is caused by the exponential growth of the density of states.
thus it is natural to suspect that in lsts  is bounded from above by a quantity of order
n/ms. in other words, lsts are probably more local than a generic weakly quasilocal
eld theory. in section iv we will argue that lsts satisfy a stronger condition (strong
quasilocality) which implies weak quasilocality, boundedness of , as well as the existence
of approximately local observables.

3.3 a sample 2-point function

let us illustrate the preceding discussion with a simple example of a 2-point function of a
real scalar eld. poincare-invariance and positivity of energy imply that the most general
2-point function in momentum space has the form

w2(p) = (p0)(p2)(p2),

(19)

where the function  is positive and measurable. (t) is the density of states times some
formfactor.
in a local qft  cannot grow faster than a polynomial, but in a weakly
quasilocal qft we only require that (t) be bounded by exp(t) for some . in particular,
we know that in lsts the density of states grows like exp(e) with  of order n /ms. if
the formfactor does not decrease exponentially, the function (t) will grow like exp(t).
computation in [16, 15] seem to support this conjecture.

12

as mentioned above, the jost domain for a 2-point function is

(x1  x2)2 < 2.

(20)

the weak quasilocality condition is satised automatically, because w2(x) is a function of
x2 by lorenz invariance.

given that the wightman functional is a symmetric function of its arguments in the
region (20) essentially by virtue of lorenz invariance, one may ask how it can fail to be
symmetric for all space-like points. the answer is very simple.
in a quasilocal theory
the wightman function may have poles in the region 2  (x1  x2)2 < 0. thus one
needs a prescription how to treat these poles. the correct prescription involves factors
like sign(t1  t2), where t1, t2 are the time-like components of x1, x2. such factors are
lorenz-invariant, but not symmetric under the exchange of x1 and x2.
to illustrate this point, let us consider the following simple example in d = 4 borrowed

from [24]. set

the fourier integral

 = et/t.

w2(z) =z d4peipz w2(p)

converges in the region (im z)2 > 2. in this region we get

w2(z) =

1

22(z2 + 2)(2
z2 +

1

z2 + 2

log

 + 2 + z2
  2 + z2) .

(21)

(22)

(23)

if we formally continue w2(z) to real values of z, we nd a pole at z2 = 2 and a branch
point at z2 = 0. the branch point at z2 = 0 is usually present in a local quantum eld
theory as well, but the pole at space-like z is possible only in a nonlocal theory. because
of this pole, the integral

zim z=0

d4z w2(z)f (z)

(24)

is not well-dened. to derive the right prescription, we recall that f (z) is an entire
function, and replace the integral above by

zim z=

d4z w2(z)f (z).

13

(25)

if 2 > 2, the integral is well-dened. deforming the integration contour back to the real
subspace, we nd the prescription for treating the pole in eq. (23):

1

z2 + 2  lim
0

1

z2 + 2 + iz

(26)

the latter distribution is lorenz-invariant, but not invariant under z  z.
there is a well-known theorem (the theorem about global nature of local commutativ-
ity, see e.g. [23]) which, roughly speaking, says that if the elds (anti)commute for large
enough space-like separations, then they (anti)commute for all space-like separations. this
statement, when rephrased in terms of wightman functions, is clearly invalid in the above
example. the theorem about the global nature of local commutativity does apply be-
cause one of the assumptions in its proof is that the wightman functions are tempered
distributions.

4 approximately local observables in lsts

4.1 general idea

in the previous section we saw that operators in little string theories should be smeared
with entire test functions. since a nontrivial entire function cannot vanish in an open set,
the corresponding observables are highly nonlocal. on the other hand, at low energies
lsts ow to local quantum eld theories (property 6). thus the theories should be
approximately local at distances larger than n /ms. as explained in the introduction,
the microlocality axiom is empty if only analytic test functions are allowed, so we need to
nd some replacement for it which would ensure the locality of lsts in the large.

the weak quasilocality postulate discussed in the previous section ensures that wight-
man functions are symmetric functions of their arguments when the arguments are far
apart and space-like separated. however, in order to be able to claim that a nonlocal
theory ows to a local theory in the infrared, one needs more than this. a local theory
has local observables associated to compact sets. if a nonlocal theory is approximately
local in the infrared, there should be a way to dene approximately local (al) observables
associated to compact sets which are large in some sense. furthermore, one should re-
quire that al observables approximately commute (or anticommute) when their supports
are space-like.

in the case of little string theories, we know for a fact that they ow to local quan-
tum eld theories in the infrared, so understanding approximately local observables is of
paramount importance.

14

the problem of dening al observables in nonlocal eld theories was previously ad-
dressed in [25, 26, 13]. the present section is our interpretation of [13]. we assume that
the reader is reasonably comfortable with the notion of a topological vector space. readers
with low tolerance for math may skip this section on rst reading; such readers should be
warned that the discussion below touches on some important physics of lsts.

to dene observables approximately localized on a closed set m  rd, it is natural to
consider a sequence of test functions {f} which converges to zero in the open set rd\m in
some sense. then observables (f) should be regarded as approximately localized in m,
the approximation getting better as  increases. to dene convergence in an open set,
we need a topology  (o) on the space of test functions for each open set o  rd. the
meaning of  (o) is the following: two test functions are close in the topology  (o) if
and only if they are close everywhere in o. we then say that a sequence of test functions
is localized on a closed set m if it is convergent to zero in the topology  (rd\m). we will
also say that m is a quasisupport of the sequence {f}.
the main problem is how to choose the topologies  (o). a natural restriction on the
choice of topologies is that if o1  o2, then  (o1) should be weaker than  (o2). in other
words, if two functions are close on o2, they should be close on o1. another natural
restriction is to require that  (rn) be the same as the original topology on the space of
test functions. indeed, a sequence {f} converging to zero in the topology  (rn) should
be regarded as approximating a function which is identically zero. then it is natural to
require that (f) converge to zero. thus all elds must be continuous functionals in
the topology  (rn). the original topology on sg has this property by denition, and in
general there is no other natural topology with this property.

what is the original topology on sg? one way is to dene it is to use the family of
norms (9) to dene convergence on sg and then apply fourier transform. we are going
to use an equivalent denition [21, 13] which makes use of the fact that all functions in
sg can be analytically continued to cd. the topology on sg can be specied by saying
which sequences of functions converge to zero. we declare that a sequence {f} converges
to zero in the topology  (rn), if it converges to zero uniformly in all sets of the form

one can check that with this choice of topology sg becomes a complete countably normed
montel space [21].

va =(cid:8)x + iy(cid:12)(cid:12)x, y  rd,||im y||  a(cid:9) ,

a > 0.

(27)

if we do not assume anything about the quasilocal theory in question, then the only
natural choice for  (o) seems to be the topology of uniform convergence in all sets of the
form
(28)

a > 0.

va(o) =(cid:8)x + iy(cid:12)(cid:12)x  o, y  rd,||im y||  a(cid:9) ,

15

this family of topologies satises both of the above requirements.

however, despite appearances, this choice of  (o) does not really allow to dene non-
indeed, consider a compact set m, and
trivial observables associated to compact sets.
a sequence of functions converging to zero in the topology  (rd\m). according to our
denition, we say that such a sequence of functions is localized on m. however, it turns
out that any such sequence actually converges uniformly to zero everywhere! (the proof
of this fact is very simple and is left as an exercise for the reader. see also [13], section
1.8, where a similar statement is proven.) this means that if m is any compact closed set,
 (rd\m) coincides with  (rd). consequently, this family of topologies does not allow to
tell apart dierent compact sets of rd, or even to tell apart a compact set from the empty
set.

the lesson here is that entire test functions are too smooth to allow a sensible denition

of quasisupport.

4.2 further constraints on the ultraviolet behavior of elds

to do better than this, we need to impose some additional constraints on the high-energy
behavior of elds. to motivate these constraints, we rst dene a new space of test
functions s
 consists of all
innitely dierentiable functions on rd all of whose derivatives decay faster than

, where  is a unit time-like vector and  > 0 is a number. s

exp(||p||).

(29)

here ||p||2
space s
choice of topology s

 = 2(p  )2  p2 is a euclidean norm on rd associated with the vector . the
 was rst introduced by shilov [27] and studied in detail in [21]. with a natural
 becomes a complete countably normed montel space, just like sg.
 . thus for any xed , we have an innite decreasing

obviously, if  > , then s

sequence of spaces

  s
s1
  s2

  s3

  . . .

sg = \=1,2,...

16

it is easy to see that our basic space of momentum-space test functions sg is the intersection
of all these spaces:

s
.

(31)

moreover, one can check that the standard topology on sg is the direct limit of the standard
topologies on s
.

(30)

the fourier transform of s

 consists of func-
tions which decay faster than any polynomial at innity and can be continued analytically
into a strip

. according to [21], s

 will be denoted s

(cid:8)x + iy|x, y  rd,||im y|| < (cid:9) .

the crucial dierence between s
 and sg is that in the latter case all test functions are
entire, while in the former case they can only be continued into a strip of width  o the
real slice rd  cd.
standard topology on s

our basic space of test functions sg is the direct limit of spaces s

 is the topology of uniform convergence in all sets of the form

,  = 1, 2, . . .. the

(32)

0 < a < .

(33)

v 

a =(cid:8)x + iy(cid:12)(cid:12)x, y  rd,||im y||  a(cid:9) ,

the space s

 is not lorenz-invariant and so cannot be used as the basic space of test
functions in a qft. nevertheless these spaces play an important role in qfts based on
the space sg. namely, one can show that any matrix element of (x) is a distribution on
s
 for some  and  [24, 21]. in general,  depends on the states between which (x) is
sandwiched.

in order to dene approximately local observables, we will require that all elds be
 for some xed  and . then by lorenz-

well-dened operator-valued distributions on s
invariance all elds are well-dened distributions on s

 for all .

4.3 denition and properties of approximately local observables

with this additional requirement it becomes possible to dene al observables associated
to all compact sets of size bigger than . more precisely, for any unit time-like vector  we
can dene a family of topologies (o) which satises all the requirements stated above.
thus possible denitions of localization are labeled by . it is tempting to interpret 
as the 4-velocity of a reference frame. then we have a dierent notion of approximate
localization for dierent frames.

it is clear what the denition of topologies (o) should be. we simply take (o) to

be the topology of uniform convergence on all sets of the form

v 

a (o) =(cid:8)x + iy(cid:12)(cid:12)x  o, y  rd,||im y||  a,(cid:9) ,

it is easy to see that both requirements on the family  (o) stated above are satised.
we need to check now that this new family of topologies allows to tell apart dierent
compact sets in rd. this problem was addressed in [13]. these authors showed that the

0 < a < .

(34)

17

family (o) can tell apart a compact set m from the empty set only if m is big enough.
for example, let m be a ball

(35)

ba =(cid:8)x(cid:12)(cid:12)x  rd,||x||  a(cid:9) .

if a < , then it turns out that any sequence of functions localized on m converges
uniformly to zero everywhere on rd. in other words, for a <   (rd\m) coincides with
 (rd), and there are no nontrivial observables localized on m [13]. on the other hand,
if a  , then the topologies  (rd\m) and  (rd) are dierent, and there are nontrivial
observables approximately localized on m [26, 13].
one can give a criterion which determines if the compact set m is big enough. the
key mathematical input is the notion of the domain of holomorphy [28]. we say that
an open set  in cd is a domain of holomorphy if there exists a function f which is
holomorphic in  and cannot be analytically continued to a bigger open set. for any
open set x we dene its domain of holomorphy x as the smallest domain of holomorphy
containing x.
if x is itself a domain of holomorphy, then x = x, otherwise x is
strictly larger than x. now let m be a compact set in rd and let us set

x =(cid:8)x + iy(cid:12)(cid:12)x  rd\m,||im y|| < (cid:9) .

it may well happen that x is the whole strip (32). in this case m is too small, in the
sense that the topologies  (rd\m) and  (rd) are equivalent. on the other hand, if x
does not contain the whole strip (32), then convergence in the topology  (rd\m) does
not imply convergence in the topology  (rd), and nontrivial observables associated to m
exist [26, 13].

(36)

4.4 the strong quasilocality axiom

we have now dened the notion of al observables (dierent for dierent reference frames).
as discussed in section i, if a theory is approximately local at long distances, al observ-
ables must approximately commute if their quasisupports are space-like separated. more
precisely, let m and n be two closed sets which are space-like separated, and let {f} and
{g} be sequences of test functions (from the space s
) whose quasisupports are m and
n respectively. then the strong quasilocality axiom states that

[(f), (g)]  0 or [(f), (g)]+  0 as   .

(37)

nonlocal qfts satisfying this axiom will be called strongly quasilocal, or simply quasilo-
cal.

18

our conjecture about the universality class of lsts can now be stated very concisely.
we propose that lsts are strongly quasilocal qfts in six dimensions, with  of order
n/ms.

it is shown in [13] that strong quasilocality implies weak quasilocality. furthermore, it
can be shown that weakly quasilocal qfts obey the cpt and spin-statistics theorems [24].
this agrees with what we know about lsts.

with additional assumptions, such as the existence of a mass gap, one can also dene
a unitary s-matrix in quasilocal qfts and prove froissart-type bounds on the cross-
sections [29, 13]. however, lsts do not have a mass gap, and consequently the s-matrix
is not well-dened in these theories.

4.5 an example of a quasilocal qft

let us give a simple example of a qft which satises the strong quasilocality axiom. let
(m, x) be a one-parameter family of scalar elds satisfying the commutation relation

[(m, x), (m, x)] = (m  m)m(x  x),

(38)

where m(x  x) is the commutator function of a free scalar eld of mass m. in other
words, for any m the eld (m, x) is a free scalar eld of mass m, and these elds commute
for dierent ms. we dene

(x) =z 

0

dmp(m2)(m, x),

(39)

where (t) is given by eq. (21). let  be the common vacuum for all (m, x). we dene
the hilbert space of our theory as a completion of the space spanned by the vectors

(f1)(f2) . . . (fn),

(40)

where fi are suitable test functions (see below), and n runs over all nonnegative integers.
obviously, the eld (x) is gaussian: all its n-point function are expressible as products
of its 2-point function w2(xx) using wicks theorem. w2(xx) is given by the formulas
(23),(25) and is a distribution on sg with g(t) = exp(t). thus we can take sg with
g(t) = exp(t) as our space of test functions.

this gaussian quasilocal theory is reminiscent of the toy model discussed in appendix
c of [16]. the toy model is a scalar eld in 1 + 1 dimensions whose mass undergoes a
jump at x = 0 but is otherwise free. this theory can be reinterpreted as a holographic
dual of a certain quantum-mechanical boundary theory living at x = 0. the boundary

19

theory has a single operator o(t) whose 2-point function grows exponentially in the energy
representation, and whose higher-order connected correlators vanish. our gaussian qft
can be regarded as a higher-dimensional version of this boundary theory.

the commutator

[(x), (y)] = w2(x  y)  w2(y  x)

(41)

in our theory does not vanish outside the light-cone, as explained in subsection 3.3. instead
it has a contribution proportional to

(cid:0)(x  y)2 + 2(cid:1) sign(x0  y0).

it is easy to see that the 2-point momentum-space wightman function (19) is well-
dened as a distribution on s
 for any . since the theory is gaussian, this immediately
implies that the same is true for all higher-point functions. hence the theory satises the
strong quasilocality condition.

for an example of an interacting weakly quasilocal qft, see [30].

5 discussion

hopefully, by relating little string theories to quasilocal quantum eld theories, we have
claried the nature of the former, especially the degree to which observables in little
string theories can be localized. we argued that there are no strictly local observables
in lsts, but there are observables which can be approximately localized (with arbitrary
accuracy) to regions whose size is bigger than n/ms. thus lsts have a fundamen-
tal length scale which sets a limit on the resolution which can be achieved by measuring
physical observables. somewhat unexpectedly, the notion of localization depends on the
reference frame: observer in dierent reference frames have dierent procedures for mea-
suring approximately local observables. this is achieved by introducing a dierent space
of test functions for each reference frame.

we also suggested that lsts obey the strong quasilocality axiom which ensures that
the theory is approximately local at large distances. this axiom is a surrogate for the
usual microlocality axiom and preserves most of the usual consequences of microlocality
(cpt invariance and the spin-statistics relation) [24, 13].

on general grounds, it appears very natural that little string theories do not have
truly local observables. after all, interacting critical string eld theory also appears to
violate locality [31, 32]. what is surprising (at least to the author) is that this nonlocality
can be accommodated simply by choosing a space of test functions dierent from the usual
schwartz space s.

20

we saw that many known properties of little string theories t into the framework

of quasilocal eld theory with   n /ms. one important feature which we have not

explained is t-duality. t-duality is related to the behavior of little string theory at
distances of order 1/ms. presumably, only very special quasilocal eld theories enjoy this
property. at any rate, the fact that observables in quasilocal eld theories cannot be
localized to distances shorter than the fundamental scale suggests that t-duality is not
impossible for eld theories in this class.

in this paper we have focused on the kinematics of lsts, but of course one would
like to understand their dynamics as well. since the usual denition of lsts based on
decoupling in critical string theory is very implicit, this is a hard problem. some progress
in this direction has been made in [17, 18, 19]. our hope is that the ultraviolet behavior
of lsts is simple enough. if this is the case, lsts may provide some insight into (2, 0)
and (1, 0) superconformal eld theories to which they ow in the infrared.

if our proposal is correct, then (1, 1) lsts realize the old idea that a nonrenormalizable
quantum eld theory may arise as the infrared limit of a quasilocal eld theory. (this
was the primary motivation for the study of quasilocal theories in 60s and 70s.) indeed,
consider a maximally supersymmetric super-yang-mills theory in six dimensions with a
simply-laced gauge group. such a theory is nonrenormalizable, and there seems to be no
local quantum eld theory which ows to it in the infrared. however, it emerges as the
infrared limit of a certain quasilocal eld theory, namely an lst with (1, 1) susy [9].

a more speculative proposal is to try to use quasilocal eld theories to model nonlo-
cality arising in critical string theory. in particular, we have in mind applications to the
hawking information loss paradox. one popular viewpoint is that information escapes
from the black hole with hawking radiation, even though this apparently violates causal-
ity. one might suspect that large causality violations are related to a huge lorenz boost
of the stationary observer at innity relative to the stationary observer at the stretched
horizon. the boost may magnify nonlocal eects inherent in string theory (see [32] and
references therein). there are some concrete calculations in string eld theory supporting
this scenario [31, 32].
if this scenario is correct, then stringy eects can be large even
when all curvature invariants are small. perhaps quasilocal eld theories on a curved
background could provide a useful eective description of such situations. it is certainly
suggestive that in quasilocal theories the notion of an approximately local observable only
makes sense relative to a particular reference frame.

i would like to thank ofer aharony, korkut bardakci, and
acknowledgements:
nati seiberg for useful comments. this work was supported by a doe grant de-fg02-
90er4054442.

21

references

[1] e. witten, some comments on string dynamics, hep-th/9507121; five-branes and

m theory on an orbifold, nucl. phys. b463, 383 (1996), hep-th/9512219.

[2] a. strominger, open p-branes, phys. lett. b383, 44 (1996), hep-th/9512059.

[3] o.j. ganor and a. hanany, small e8 instantons and tensionless noncritical strings,

nucl. phys. b474, 122 (1996), hep-th/9602120.

[4] n. seiberg and e. witten, comments on string dynamics in six-dimensions, nucl.

phys. b471, 121 (1996), hep-th/9603003.

[5] m.j. du, h. lu, and c.n. pope, heterotic phase transitions and singularities of

the gauge dyonic string, phys. lett. b378, 101 (1996), hep-th/9603037.

[6] k. intriligator, rg xed points in six dimensions via branes at orbifold singularities,

nucl. phys. b496, 177 (1997), hep-th/9702038.

[7] j.d. blum and k. intriligator, new phases of string theory and 6d rg xed points
via branes at orbifold singularities, nucl. phys. b506, 199 (1997), hep-th/9705044.

[8] m. berkooz, m. rozali, and n. seiberg, matrix description of m theory on t 4 and

t 5, phys. lett. b408, 105 (1997), hep-th/9704089.

[9] n. seiberg, new theories in six-dimensions and matrix description of m theory on

t 5 and t 5/z2, phys. lett. b408, 98 (1997), hep-th/9705221.

[10] w. nahm, supersymmetries and their representations, nucl. phys. b135, 149

(1978).

[11] o. aharony and t. banks, note on the quantum mechanics of m theory, jhep

03, 016 (1999), hep-th/9812237.

[12] s. weinberg, the quantum theory of elds. vol. 1: foundations, cambridge, uk:

university press (1995).

[13] v.ya. fainberg and m.a. soloviev, how can local properties be described in eld

theories without strict locality? ann. phys. 113, 421 (1978).

[14] o. aharony, m. berkooz, d. kutasov, and n. seiberg, linear dilatons, ns ve-branes

and holography, jhep 10, 004 (1998), hep-th/9808149.

22

[15] a.w. peet and j. polchinski, uv/ir relations in ads dynamics, phys. rev. d59,

065011 (1999), hep-th/9809022.

[16] s. minwalla and n. seiberg, comments on the iia ns5-brane, jhep 06, 007

(1999), hep-th/9904142.

[17] o. aharony and m. berkooz, ir dynamics of d = 2, n = (4, 4) gauge theories and

dlcq of little string theories, jhep 10, 030 (1999); hep-th/9909101.

[18] a. giveon, d. kutasov, and o. pelc, holography for non-critical superstrings,

jhep 10, 035 (1999); hep-th/9907178.

[19] a. giveon and d. kutasov, little string theory in a double scaling limit, jhep
10, 034 (1999), hep-th/9909110; comments on double scaled little string theory,
hep-th/9911039.

[20] r.f. streater and a.s. wightman, pct, spin and statistics, and all that, red-

wood city, usa: addison-wesley (1989).

[21] i.m. gelfand and g.e. shilov, generalized functions, vol. 2, new york/london:

academic press (1968).

[22] a. jae, high energy behavior in quantum eld theory. i. strictly localizable

fields, phys. rev. 158, 1454 (1967).

[23] n.n. bogolyubov, a.a. logunov, and i.t. todorov, introduction to axiomatic

quantum field theory, reading, usa: benjamin (1975).

[24] m.z. iofa and v.ya. fainberg, wightman formulation for nonlocalizable eld theories

i, zh. eksp. teor. fiz. 56, 1644 (1969) [sov. phys. jetp 29, 880 (1969)].

[25] m.a. soloviev, on the class of distributions compatible with locality, theor. math.

phys. 7, 183 (1971); locality and lattice theory, ibid. 20, 299 (1974).

[26] v.ya. fainberg and m.a. soloviev, causality, locality, and holomorphically convex

hulls, comm. math. phys. 57, 149 (1977).

[27] g.e. shilov, dokl. akad. nauk sssr 102, 893 (1955).

[28] l. hormander, an introduction to complex analysis in several variables, amster-

dam: north-holland (1990).

23

[29] m.z. iofa and v.ya. fainberg, wightman formulation for nonlocalizable eld theories

ii. theory of asymptotic elds and particles, theor. math. phys. 1, 187 (1969).

[30] g.v. emov, nonlocal quantum eld theory of the scalar eld, comm. math. phys.

5, 42 (1967).

[31] d.a. lowe, l. susskind, and j. uglum, information spreading in interacting string

eld theory, phys. lett. b327, 226 (1994), hep-th/9402136.

[32] d.a. lowe, j. polchinski, l. susskind, l. thorlacius, and j. uglum, black hole

complementarity versus locality, phys. rev. d52, 6997 (1995), hep-th/9506138.

24

