pupt-1899
itfa-99-40

9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
2

 

 
 

1
v
8
1
0
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

rg-flow, gravity, and the cosmological constant

erik verlinde1 and herman verlindea2

physics department, princeton university, princeton, nj 08544

ainstitute for theoretical physics, university of amsterdam, 1018 xe amsterdam

abstract

we study the low energy eective action s of gravity, induced by integrating out gauge
and matter elds, in a general class of rs-type string compactication scenarios with ex-
ponential warp factors. our method combines dimensional reduction with the holographic
map between between 5-d supergravity and 4-d large n eld theory. using the classical
supergravity approximation, we derive a ow equation of the eective action s that con-
trols its behavior under scale transformations. we nd that as a result each extremum of s
automatically describes a complete rg trajectory of classical solutions. this implies that,
provided the cosmological constant is canceled in the high energy theory, classical at space
backgrounds naturally remain stable under the rg-ow. the mechanism responsible for
this stability is that the non-zero vacuum energy generated by possible phase transitions, is
absorbed by a dynamical adjustment of the contraction rate of the warp factor.

1erikv@feynman.princeton.edu
2verlinde@feynman.princeton.edu

1. introduction

in this paper we will study the low energy eective action s of four-dimensional gravity,
as obtained by integrating out all quantum uctuations of gauge and matter elds in a

general curved background metric bg. after choosing a particular rg scale  we can write

s as a sum

s = se + ,

se =

(1)

1

 z qbg(cid:16) 2u + br(cid:17).

of a local einstein action and a remaining non-local eective action , induced by the
matter and gauge uctuations at energy scales smaller than . besides on the metric, s also
depends on a number of parameters i, representing the various masses, expectation values
and coupling constants of this gauge and matter theory. the seemingly inevitable presence
of the potential term u leads to the well-known problem of the cosmological constant. while
one can think of various possible mechanisms or symmetries that could ensure the absence of
this term in the high energy theory, for example (extended) supersymmetry, there is no real
explanation known for why we do not observe the vacuum energy contributions produced by
the various phase transitions that take place at lower energies [1].

in the following we will attempt to shed some new light on this problem. our approach
is directly motivated by the duality between 4-d large n gauge theory and 5-d supergravity
[2], as well as by recent ideas that have appeared in the study of warped string compact-
ication scenarios of the type proposed in [3] [4]. the starting point of our discussion is
the holographic formulation of the renormalization group equations in which the rg scale
is treated as a physical extra dimension [5] [6] [7].

in [7] it is shown that the standard rg ow of the eective action in 4-d large n eld
theories can be rewritten as a classical hamilton-jacobi evolution equation of the 5-d super-
gravity action. in the following we will study this same idea in the context of warped string
compactications, which can be viewed as generalizations of the holographic duality to 4-d
boundary theories with dynamical gravity [4]. we nd that the 5-d evolution equations
indeed provide a natural extension of the 4-d einstein equations and the standard rg equa-
tions. this extension seems conservative, in the sense that most of the modications relative
to the conventional theories seem negligible at low energies. the most interesting property
of our equations, however, is that they appear to be completely self-consistent for any value
of the cosmological constant, which in eect decouples from the rg-induced vacuum energy
of the matter uctuations. from the higher dimensional viewpoint, this decoupling arises
due to a dynamical adjustment of the contraction rate of the warp factor, which automat-
ically compensates for any variations in the vacuum energy produced by the matter. as a
result our equations are such that, assuming that  is cancelled in high energy theory, it will
naturally remain zero under the rg-ow.

all our actual calculations will be within the context of classical 5-d supergravity, and
thus within the large n and large coupling limit of the 4-d eld theory. we have tried,
however, to formulate our results in such a form that they represent a rather natural and
conservative extension of the standard rg framework. we believe therefore that a number
of our conclusions will remain valid also when these limits are relaxed. preliminary results

1

in this direction indeed indicate that there should exist natural extensions of our formalism
to other coupling regimes, as well as to nite n. here, however, we will restrict ourselves to
the simplest and most well-controlled case.

although the motivation and formulation is based on relatively recent insights, several
key elements of our proposed scenario have appeared in earlier studies. for example, the idea
that the cosmological constant may be cancelled by regarding our 4-d world as embedded in
a curved higher dimensional space was already suggested earlier in [8]. also the actual low
energy mechanism that will be responsible for the cancellation of the vacuum energy term
is closely related to earlier proposals for dealing with the cosmological constant. a lucid
exposition of these attempts is given in the excellent review of weinberg [1]. the idea of
using the ads/cft correspondence in this context was also suggested independently by c.
schmidhuber [9].

this paper is organized as follows. to set the stage, we start with a very brief sketch of
the main idea behind our approach, and give a short description of warped compactication
scenarios from the point of view of the ads5/cf t4 duality. in the next few sections we
then show how, along the lines of [7], the radial evolution equations of the 5-d supergravity
action can be reformulated as an rg ow equation for the 4-d eective action. we also
describe how, as a natural by-product of this analysis, the 4-dimensional einstein equations
arise as a low energy reduction of the 5-d equations. we then address the consequences of
the rg-ow symmetry of the action for the cosmological constant problem, and show that
it implies that classical at space backgrounds, once they are stable in the uv, also remain
stable under the rg-ow. in the last section we draw some conclusions and leave some open
questions. finally, in appendix a and b we present the form of the evolution equations
for constant elds, and compute the value of the 4-d newtons constant for general warped
compactications, generalizing the rs-result [3].

2. motivation: rg scale as extra dimension

the central element in the holographic correspondence between 5-d supergravity and 4-d
gauge theory is the identication of the extra 5-th coordinate, denoted by r, with an rg
parameter of the 4-d world [2]. this reinterpretation nds its origin in the following warped
form of the 5-d metric

ds2

5 = dr2 + a2(r)bg dxdx.

(2)

here bg represents the background metric as seen by the gauge theory. the prefactor a2
typically has an exponential dependence on r, growing innitely large near the asymptotic
boundary at r   and innitesimally small at the other end. the 4-d perspective on
5-d physics at some xed scale thus depends on the radial location, in such a way that shifts
in r have the eect of rescalings inside the 4-d world.

in the combined strong coupling and large n limit of the gauge theory, the metric (2)
solves the classical 5-d supergravity equations of motion, as specied via suitable boundary
conditions in the asymptotic region r. in the eld theory, these boundary conditions

2

amount to choosing specic initial data for the rg ow, as determined by the uv values
of the various couplings i. the couplings will then propagate in the r-direction as scalar
elds of the dual supergravity. the 5-d geometry will thus in general deviate from its
most symmetric form; it may for example contain domain wall structures or even naked
singularities representing specic rg ow trajectories towards non-trivial conformal or non-
conformal ir quantum eld theories [6].

if we take all i independent of x, and g = a2(r)bg with bg some constant curvature

metric with br = k, the lagrangian of the 5-d gravity and scalar eld theory reduces to

l = 12a2 a2 + ka2 + a4(cid:16)1

2

i + v ()(cid:17).
2

(3)

with v () some potential on the space of scalar elds. here we are allowed to take k
independent of r, since any possible r-dependence of k can be absorbed in that of the scale
factor a. moreover, according to the holographic postulate, this choice is necessary to ensure
that a is identied with the proper rg energy-scale (as measured relative to the scale set
by the size of the 4-d space-time).

the above lagrangian describes the classical mechanics of a 4+1-d inationary cosmology,
where the radial direction, instead of the physical time direction, is used as the time variable.
this evolution can be quite non-trivial, and critically depends on the shape of the potential
v () that drives the radial motion of the scalar elds. however, there is always a conserved
quantity due to the invariance under r translations. moreover, this conserved energy must
be set equal to zero by means of the hamilton constraint of the 5-d gravity, which we may
write somewhat suggestively as

k = 12 a2 + a2(cid:16)1

2

i  v ()(cid:17).
2

(4)

this relation is preserved under the time-evolution derived from (3), so the right-hand side
also represents a conserved quantity under the radial evolution. since r represents the
holographic rg parameter, this tells us that the average curvature k of the 4-d space-time is
in fact an rg invariant! this somewhat surprising fact is an immediate consequence of the
holographic dictionary, which dictates that any change in the curvature of the 4-d slice as a
function of r needs to be interpreted as a pure rg rescaling with constant average curvature
k, rather than as a physical rg dependence of k.

the above rg-stability of k indeed sounds counter-intuitive, since normally one would
expect that any rg evolution will be accompanied with a non-zero increase in vacuum
energy, which in the presence of 4-d gravity would curl up the 4-d space-time.
in the
standard ads/cft set-up, however, gravity is decoupled from the boundary theory. from
this perspective it is therefore not surprising that the vacuum energy generated by the
holographic rg does not directly backreact on the 4-d geometry. however, this is not the
complete story. from looking at the explicit terms on the right-hand side of (4), we can in
fact identify a specic dynamical mechanism that is responsible for this stability, namely that

3

any increase in the vacuum energy produced by the rg ow of the elds i automatically
gets compensated by a corresponding increase of the contraction rate of the warp factor3

in the remainder of this paper, we will explore to what extend this idea can be used
to shed new light on the cosmological constant problem. for this, the two main questions
that need to be addressed are (i) can the holographic correspondence be carried over to
a situation with dynamical 4-d gravity, and if so (ii) what are the specic modications,
relative to the standard rules of 4-d eective eld theory, that arise from this 5-d perspective
on 4-d gravity and the renormalization group? we start with the rst question.

3. warped compactication

in the standard ads/cft set-up, the boundary theory does not contain from 4-d gravity
since the ads-space is taken to be non-compact. hence 5-dimensional graviton modes that
extend all the way to the uv boundary r   are not normalizable. however, as rst
pointed out by randall and sundrum [3], this situation changes as soon as one introduces
a physical brane-like structure (a planck brane) that in eect removes this innite uv
region, thereby truncating the r-region to a semi-innite range. in this case there will exist
normalizable uctuations of the 5-d metric ds2 that propagate and couple as 4-d graviton
modes to the boundary eld theory [3]. these graviton modes correspond to uctuations

of the 5-d metric that preserve the warped form (2), but with bg replaced by a general

uctuating 4-metric. the resulting strength of the 4-d gravity force as a function of the 5-th
coordinate r is in complete accordance with the holographic identication of the warp factor
a with the rg scale4 [4].

this mechanism for including a dynamical graviton naturally arises in a general class of
string compactications based on type iib orientifolds and/or f-theory [4]. in this case the
6-d internal manifold k6 can carry via its topology an eective d3-brane charge, which may
be compensated by an appropriate number of explicit d3-brane insertions [11]. these d3-
branes wrap the 4-d uncompactied world, and are localized as point-like objects inside the
k6. upon taking into account gravitational backreaction, this typically leads to a warped
space-time geometry of the form

ds2 = a2(r)bgdxdx + hmn(r)drmdrn.

(5)

here rm and hmn denote the coordinates and metric on k6.

the most extreme type of warped compactication arises when a relatively large number
n of d3-branes coalesce inside a small sub-region inside the k6 manifold [4]. in this case,
we may visualize the total ten-dimensional target space 10 as obtained by gluing together

3a similar mechanism was also implicit in the paper by rubakon abd shoposhnikov [8], and

independently suggested within the present context by c. schmidhuber [9].

4an early suggestion that the rs-scenario [3] might be given a holographic interpretation was

made by j. maldacena [10].

4

two parts

10 = uv ir,

(6)

where ir describes the near-horizon geometry close to the location of the n d3-branes, and
uv the remaining part of the target space. in the near horizon region ir, it is natural to
use the warp factor a2 to isolate one of the r directions to be like the extra 5-th coordinate
r in (2). by choosing the remaining 5 coordinates ym judiciously, the metric (5) can then be
recast in the form

ds2 = dr2 + a2(r)bgdxdx +bhmn(r, y)dymdyn.

(7)

in this way, we have represented the total 10-d geometry as a r-trajectory of 9-d geometries,

where each 9-geometry is the product of 4-d space-time with metric bg and an internal
5-manifold k5 described by bhmn. the near-horizon region ir thus typically looks like

ir = m5  k5,

(8)

where m5 is a negatively curved 5-d space with metric of the warped form (2). the 5-d
space m5 has a boundary m5 = r4 located at a nite radial distance r = r0, being the place
ir gets glued onto uv. the warp-factor a in this region typically traverses a large range
of values, approaching zero near the d3-branes while attaining a nite maximum value at
the boundary r = r0. the second submanifold uv looks like the original k6 with a six-ball
b6 with boundary b6 = k5 cut out

uv = r4  (k6 b6).

(9)

both submanifolds have the same boundary, equal to r4  k5, so that we can indeed glue
them together into one single geodesically complete ten-dimensional manifold 10.

the low energy eective eld theory of this type of compactications is a 4-dimensional
gauge theory with rank equal to n, the number of d3-branes. by construction, we may
identify this eld theory with the holographic dual to the iib string theory, or supergravity
if n is large enough, in the near-horizon region ir. an important dierence with the
standard ads/cft set-up, however, is that at high energies the 4-d theory is augmented to
a full-edged compactied string theory. so in particular it also contains a dynamical 4-d
graviton, that behaves exactly as the bound state graviton in the rs world-brane scenario
[3]. notice, however, that in our case all elds are smooth continuous functions of r, so that,
in contrast with the rs set-up, there is no sharply localized brane at any nite value of the
warp factor.

5



10



ir



uv

r = r

0



uv

r = r1

 ir

fig. 1 the total warped compactication manifold 10 can be split up into two submanifolds
uv and ir, separated by cutting along a radial location r = r0 close to where the near-
horizon tube opens up, or at some location r = r1 farther inside the tube. the corresponding
split of the supergravity action s has a holographic interpretation of dividing the 4-d eective
action into a high and low energy contribution suv and sir, separated by a cut-o scale set
by r0 or r1, respectively. the process of moving the r location from r0 to r1 corresponds to
performing an rg transformation in the eld theory.

4. splitting the eective action

we would now like to use this holographic perspective to get new insight into the struc-
ture of the low energy eective action s of 4-d gravity. to this end we will need to combine
the standard techniques of dimensional and low energy reduction with elements of the holo-
graphic map between 5-d and 4-d physics. besides on the 4-d metric, s also depends on
various couplings i; all are allowed to vary locally with space and time, so that s encodes
information about expectation values of local gauge invariant operators oi as well as of the
stress-energy tensor t of the matter theory. in addition, the metric and couplings i now
also represent true dynamical degrees of freedom, whose low energy equations of motion are
prescribed by s.

now imagine that we can divide up the total low energy eective action s into a high

and low energy contribution, separated by some given rg scale r0, as

s(, g) = suv(, g) + sir(, g).

(10)

here suv represents the uv part of the eective action, obtained from the original high
energy action prescribed by the specic string compactication, by integrating out all degrees

6

of freedom with energy larger than the ir cut-o scale set by r0, and sir is the remaining
contribution to s from all lower energy degrees of freedom. suv therefore in essence describes
the einstein action of 4-dimensional gravity, coupled to the scalar elds i. the values of
the couplings in suv, such as the newton and cosmological constant, are determined by
their initial values as derived from the kaluza-klein reduction, corrected by the eects of
quantum uctuations down to the given cut-o scale. sir, on the other hand, can best be
thought of as the non-local quantum eective action of the gauge and matter system with
uv cut-o set by r0.

although the above split can be considered in a general context, it is instructive to view
it as the holographic projection inside the boundary theory of the geometric split (6) of
the space-time manifold in the warped string compactication scenario discussed above. so
let us for now assume that the 4-d eld theory has a suciently strong coupling and large
enough gauge group, so that the dual supergravity system on the warped compactication
manifold (5) is well approximated by its classical eld equations. in this case we can apply the
standard ads/cft dictionary, and identify the 5-d scalar elds i at given radial position
r with the matter couplings at the corresponding scale. in particular we can identify the
low-energy contribution sir with the part of the classical supergravity action coming the
integral over the near-horizon region ir

sir(, g) = zirlsugra.

(11)

here the integrand is evaluated on a global classical solution, with given boundary values
(, g) and satisfying appropriate asymptotic conditions near the d3-branes. according to
the standard ads/cft dictionary, this non-local action sir indeed encodes the information
of the gauge theory correlators, dened with a nite uv cut-o.

now if we in addition assume that the boundary elds vary suciently slowly along the
non-compact space-time directions, and that the k6 is large enough compared to the string
and planck scale, then we can similarly represent the high-energy action suv by the integral
over the remaining subspace uv

suv(, g) = zuvlsugra.

(12)

again, this integral is to be evaluated for an everywhere regular, classical solution with
boundary values (, g). we can think of this action suv as obtained from a somewhat
modied kaluza-klein dimensional reduction of the 10-d supergravity action over the sub-
manifold k6 b6. as will become more evident later, the fact that in contrast to the usual
kk reduction, the integral runs over an internal manifold with boundary is a reection of
the rg-dependence of the elds on the ir cut-o of suv.

indeed, since the coordinate location r0 separating uv and ir is an adjustable param-
eter, we are free to consider the evolution of suv and sir under variations of this location r0.
in principle we can move r0 over the whole accessible range of scales. the precise relation

7

between such shifts and actual physical rg scale transformations is dictated by the shape
of 4-d part of the 5-d metric (2)

the holographic interpretation of this 4-metric g is that it measures distances in units of

g = a2(r)bg.

(13)

the rg scale, whereas bg is dened relative to some xed length unit such as the fundamental

string length. hence, once we know the shape of the warp factor a as a function of r, we have
a well prescribed relation between r-shifts and 4-d rg-scale transformations, since both are
now directly linked with constant weyl-rescalings of g. unless explicitly stated otherwise,
g will from now on denote this rg scale dependent metric.

another lesson we learn from the dual supergravity description is that, in case the cou-
plings i vary locally with space and time, we should anticipate that g may change under
the r ow in other ways than just simple rescalings. general classical trajectories in 5-d
supergravity may describe parameter families of 4-d elds that, as r varies, can change their
local shape. via holography, this means that the 4-d eld conguration acquires a non-trivial
dependence on the rg scale at which one is looking. hence rather than xed rg-independent
4-d eld congurations, we are thus lead to consider the notion of rg-trajectories of 4-d
backgrounds.

finally, it is natural to ask whether our denition of the integrals in (11) and (12) in fact
needs to be supplemented with a specic prescription for adding a boundary term or not.
obviously, such a boundary term would automatically cancel in the total sum action s, and
should not aect the physics. our use of the division (10) is to set-up a hamilton-jacobi
formulation of the radial evolution equations of the 5-d supergravity.
in this context, it
seems most natural to add no boundary term at all.

5. radial evolution of the eective action

classical trajectories are selected by requiring that the eld congurations (, g) on the
boundary in between uv and ir must solve the equation of motion of the total action s,

s
g = 0,

s
i = 0.

(14)

the geometrical meaning of these equations is that they ensure that the uv part of the rg
trajectory ending at (, g) joins smoothly onto the ir part of the trajectory. to see this, it
is useful to think about r as a time direction, and recall the standard result in classical eld
theory that for actions quadratic in time derivatives, there is a linear relation between the
eld velocities and the variational derivatives of the classical action evaluated at r. explicitly,
in the regime where we can trust the 5-d supergravity, the ow velocities g
+ coming

+ and i

8

from the uv are obtained from suv via5

1

g
g

1

suv
g =

1
2

( g  g

g)+

suv
i = i,+.

(15)

(16)

there exists an identical relation, but with reversed sign, between sir and the ow velocities
 and i
g
 coming from the ir. using that s = suv + sir, it is easy to see that the
continuity condition on the elds and their r-derivatives implies that (, g) must extremize
the low energy action s. though seemingly self-evident, this will turn out to be a useful
observation. in contrast, for instance, it is not necessary for classical eld congurations to
extremize the high or low energy eective actions suv or sir.

it will be of importance for the following that each classical eld conguration lies on
one unique rg trajectory.
in the 4-d eld theory context, this is because the rg ow
is prescribed via a rst order dierential equation, expressing g and i as certain given
functions of g and i. hence once we know the initial position, the ow equation uniquely
species the trajectory. in the supergravity, on the other hand, this uniqueness is less self-
evident, since its equation of motion are second order dierential equations in r. still the
same result holds. the reason is that we are interested in globally well-dened classical
trajectories. eqn (12) in principle gives suv as a unique functional of the elds, since the
sub-space uv has no other boundaries except at the junction with ir at r0. hence one
does not have the freedom to arbitrarily choose both the values and velocities of the elds at
its boundary. rather, it is reasonable to assume that the classical conguration inside uv
is uniquely determined by just the boundary values of the elds.

the 5-d classical supergravity equation of motion, that prescribes the radial evolution of

all quantities, can be most conveniently cast in the form of a hamilton constraint

where

1

4(cid:16) g g  g
(cid:17) +
 g

1
2

 2
i + l(, g) = 0

l(, g) = 

1
2

(i)2 + r + v ()

(17)

(18)

denotes the 4-d part of the 5-d local lagrangian density. upon inserting the relation (15) and
the similar relation for sir, this constraint (17) takes the form of two functional identities for
suv and sir, which are the familiar hamilton-jacobi constraints of the canonical formalism
of gravity. introducing the notation

{ s , s } 

1

g(cid:16) 1

3(cid:16)g s

g(cid:17)2

 (cid:16) s

g(cid:17)2



1

2 (cid:16) s

i(cid:17)2(cid:17)

(19)

5throughout this paper we work in the 5-d einstein frame, using the 5-d planck length as length
unit. in addition we choose the temporal gauge grr = 1 and gr = 0. finally, we assume that the
metric on the space of couplings i is at, so that we can choose it to be ij .

9

we can write these two equations as

{suv, suv} = g l = {sir, sir} .

(20)

note that the bracket { s , s } denes a local density, depending on the point x at which
the variational derivatives in (19) are taken. thus the hamilton-jacobi equations (20) are
local constraints. it is further important to note that they are not conditions on the value
of the uv and ir actions suv and sir but rather functional identities that constrain their
functional form.

6. rg ow in terms of beta functions

let us imagine that we know the high energy action suv down to some given scale r.
we can then use the rst of the hamilton-jacobi equations (20) to integrate further down
towards lower scales, by systematically adding the innitesimal contributions to suv from
each integration step. this procedure is of course inspired by the wilsonian approach to the
renormalization group. to make this rg interpretation more transparent, we express the
uv-ow velocities as

i
+ =  i

g
+ = 2g +  

(21)

(22)

where  is dened to be traceless: 
 = 0. once we know the explicit form of suv we
can use eqn (15) to determine the function  and the beta-functions  and i as given
functionals of the elds. the factor  represents the ow rate of the conformal factor of
the metric, and appears as a common prefactor to ensure that the functions  and i
describe the adjustment of the metric and couplings induced by variations of the physical
scale dened by g.

it is perhaps helpful to notice the obvious similarity between eqns (21)-(22) and the
standard kinematic relations in special relativity between the 4-velocity x, as measured
with respect to the proper time, and the usual 3-velocities i = dxi/dt dened relative to
the coordinate time t = x0. in this analogy, the extra coordinate r plays the role of the proper
time, whereas the scale factor a is the analog of t. the analogy goes quite a bit further,
since using the denition (21)-(22), we can now rewrite the hamilton-jacobi constraint for
suv as the following identity for the beta-functions

2(cid:16)1 

1
48

 2
 

1
24

 2

i (cid:17) =

1
12l,

(23)

which we recognize as the analog of the familiar relation 2(1   2) = 1 of special relativ-
ity. from this viewpoint it is quite tempting to speculate that for sensible rg ows, the
lagrangian l on the right-hand side will always be positive, in which case the beta-functions

10

will have a maximum norm squared. indeed, there are various indications that the standard
rg-equations of 4-d qft follow from the 5-d evolution equations via the direct analog of
the non-relatistic limit i << 1, see also [7].

from combining the two equations (20) we can in addition derive the following non-linear

ow equation for the total low energy eective action s

(cid:16) 2g 

g +  

g + i 

i (cid:17) s = { s , s }.

(24)

the physical content of this relation is quite meaningful. the left-hand side takes the form of
a standard rg operation, except that it contains functional derivatives, so that it represents
a local rather than global scale variation. from the perspective of the 4-d eld theory, the
right-hand side can be thought of as an anomalous quantum correction; indeed, as shown
in [7], it contains among others the standard weyl anomaly term. notice, however, that this
right-hand side contribution vanishes for on-shell eld congurations that extremize s.

eqn (24) tells us that s is invariant under innitesimal local eld variations of the form

1

s

i(cid:17)
i = (cid:16) i +
g = (cid:16) (2g + ) +

g

1

g(cid:16) s
g 

1
3

gg s

g(cid:17)(cid:17)

(25)

(26)

with  some innitesimal but otherwise arbitrarily varying function of x. this invariance
in eect trivializes the dynamics of one local eld degree of freedom. when we restrict
to the space of classical solutions of s the right-hand sides of (25) and (26) reduce to the
pure rg ow relations dened in (21)-(22), which shows that the latter transformation
act as a symmetry within the space of extrema to s, i.e. within the space of stable eld
congurations. this fact will play a central role in the following.

one can notice a close resemblance between eqns (24) and (25) and the polchinski equa-
tions for the exact renormalization group [12], that describe the rg-scale dependence
of a wilsonian action of the elds (, g) on the cut-o length of their propagators. this
similarity perhaps looks surprising since in our case the rg ow is supposed to be gener-
ated by integrating out the dual gauge and matter loops, instead of gravitational degrees
of freedom. however, once we realize that  and g are in fact closed string modes and
the gauge and matter particles open string modes, it becomes clear that the explanation of
this correspondence should follow from the dual equivalence between open string loops and
closed string propagators. indeed, a polchinski-type uv cut-o that regulates the proper
length of a closed string propagator amounts in the dual channel to an ir cut-o on the
maximal proper length of the open string loop. it seems that this closed/open string duality
lies at the heart of the holographic interplay between gravity  5-dimensional as well as
4-dimensional  and the rg-ow induced by gauge and matter loops. this perspective on
the open string rg ow, as well as its relation with the bv formulation of closed string eld
theory, will be worked out in more detail in a future publication [13].

11

7. 4-d einstein equations

in the following we will study the consequences of these 5-d evolution equations for the
case that all elds are approximately space-time independent. in this regime we may truncate
the action suv to the leading order terms in its derivative expansion, and keep essentially
only the einstein part of the action

suv(, g) = zqbg(cid:16)u(, a) + (, a)br 

1
2

imij (, a)j(cid:17)  se(, g)

(27)

here on the right-hand side we have reintroduced the physical metric bg dened by ex-

tracting the overall rg scale a from g, as in eqn (13). u represents the vacuum energy
contribution from all quantum uctuations with energies above the scale set by a, and 
the inverse newton constant at this scale. mij denotes some metric on the space of scalar
elds. the explicit a-dependence in (27) reects the presence of a fundamental length scale
in the problem, given by the string scale. in the holographic parametrization this scale is
located at some given value of the conformal factor, which we may set at a = 1. so if 
denotes the rg energy scale, a represents the ratio

a =


ms

.

(28)

from now on we will replace suv in our notation by se, to indicate that it represents the
gravitational part of the action.

indeed, we can use holography to identify the remaining part of the action sir with the

quantum eective action of the low energy gauge and matter theory

sir(, g) = (,bg, a),

(29)

with couplings i, in the background geometry dened by bg, and with a given ir cut-o

scale set by a. in other words, instead of using the 5-d supergravity description all the way
down into the ir region, we imagine that we can use the ir 4-d eld theory to specify the
dependence of  on the scale, metric and couplings.6 variations of  with respect to the
latter two amount to insertions of the stress-energy tensor and operators oi, respectively.
so in particular

1

g

 
g = h t i,

6the suggestion here is that it might be possible in certain cases to match the eld theoretic quan-
tities (beta-functions and expectation values) locally with the corresponding supergravity quantities
in a region where both sides are still under some control. one could imagine that in this way the
two dual description can be patched together into one global description of a specic rg ow,
in which the supergravity provides an accurate description of the uv region and the 4-dimensional
qft of the ir regime.

1

g

 
i = h oii.

(30)

12

from now on we will denote the low energy action sir by .

via these new identications (27) and (29), the geometric split s = suv + sir thus
amounts to a division of the total eective action into a gravity and a matter contribution

s(, g) = se(, g) + (, g).

(31)

correspondingly, the on-shell congurations that extremize s are identied with solutions
to the einstein equations combined with the i equations of motion

1
2

u bg +  (br

1

2 brbg) = h t i + t 

,



m

i +

u
i +



i br = h oi i,

(32)

(33)

where t 
 denotes the stress-energy tensor of the -elds. although these look like quite
generic equations of motion, we know there must be a ow symmetry (21)-(22) that acts
on its space of classical solutions. this symmetry can be used to show that e.g the trace
of the rst equation, the equation of motion of the scale factor, can in fact be derived by
combining the other equations. in addition, using the form (27) for suv, one can show that
(to leading order in the low energy expansion) this ow equation attains the exact form of the
callan-symanzik equations for (the correlation functions derived from) the eective action
, including the correction term due the weyl anomaly. we will not review this calculation
here, but refer to [7].

8. rg dependence of the vacuum energy

the set of ow equations (21) through (24) can be used to deduce the classical rg
trajectories of all relevant quantities as a function of the scale factor of the metric. to test
the physics of these equations, we start with the simplest situation: in at space and with
constant elds. to achieve this, we temporarily take the decoupling or decompactication
limit in which the ads-radius is sent to innity. in this limit the 4-d inverse newton constant

 is innite, so that we can consistently choose bg to be at.

so the only quantities we need to keep track of are the cosmological term u in se and
the low energy eective action . in addition to their explicit dependence on the scale a,
both quantities also acquire an extra implicit a-dependence, induced by radial rg-ow. for
constant elds, the only non-zero beta-functions are those of the couplings i

a

di
da

= i.

13

(34)

to extract the total scale dependence of both u and , we again use the hamilton-jacobi
equations

(cid:16)a
(cid:16)a





a  i 
a  i 

i(cid:17)u(, a) = 2a4 v ()
i(cid:17) (, a) = 2z qbg a4 v ()

(35)

(36)

the second of these equations is valid only on-shell. it tells us about the response of the
low energy matter theory under a small renormalization group step. we see that besides the
rg adjustment (34) of the couplings, theres also an additional vacuum energy contribution,
represented by the potential term on the right-hand side. as seen from the rst eqn (35),
however, the same contribution that is subtracted from , is added in the same rg step to
the potential term u. this suggests that u accumulates the vacuum energy contribution
of all quantum uctuations higher than the ir cut-o scale a. notice that this cancellation
between the vacuum energy contributions in the rg step is of course nothing particularly
deep, since by denition se and  each represent complementary uv and ir parts of the
total eective action s. indeed, as shown earlier, s is on-shell invariant under (34).

now let us take a rst look at the cosmological constant  from this perspective.  is
the total vacuum energy contained in u and  added together. naively one might have
expected that it will coincide with the infra-red limit of the vacuum energy contained in
u, since it would seem reasonable to assume that, when we send the rg scale  to zero,
the contribution from  will vanish. it turns out, however, that this naive expectation is
incorrect.

it is clear from their respective denitions, that the total action s and the high energy
part se have rather dierent dynamical roles. extrema of s have an immediate physical
signicance as classically stable eld congurations, whereas se generally has non-zero vari-
ations that give us the rg ow velocities. so the two actions can coincide in the far infra-red
only if all couplings  including the rg-dependent metric g  would become static quan-
tities under the rg ow. it is not dicult to convince oneself, however, that our evolution
equations in general predict that the couplings will continue to ow in the infra-red, and
that as a result the ir contributions to the vacuum energy will remain substantial, even
after the cut-o energy scale has been sent to zero. we thus conclude that theres an im-
portant numerical and physical distinction between the cosmological constant and the total
rg accumulated vacuum energy contained in u.

9. the cosmological constant

let us now return to the situation with dynamical 4-d gravity, but still assume that all

elds are x independent. we thus require that the metric bg has a constant curvature br.
assuming that br is small, we may expand the total action s to leading order as (the general

14

case with br arbitrary is treated in appendix a)

s(,bg, a) = zqbg(cid:16)f (, a) + g(, a) br(cid:17).

(37)

here g denotes the 4-d inverse newton constant. the cosmological term f contains in
addition to the rg-dependent vacuum energy u also contributions coming from the ow ve-
locities of the couplings as well as from the holographic contraction rate of the warp factor.
as we have just shown (and see also section 2 and appendix a), these extra contributions
naturally adjust themselves to cancel the rg-variations in u. indeed, as we will see mo-
mentarily, f is (on-shell) rg-invariant. as before, a parametrizes the dependence of both
f and g on the fundamental string scale.

the equations of motion of i and a read

f
i +

g

i br = 0,
a br = 0.

g

a

f
a

+ a

in addition, the ow invariance (24) of s reduces to

(cid:16)a
(cid:16)a



a  i 
a  i 

i(cid:17)f = { f, f },
i(cid:17)g = 2{ g, f }



(38)

(39)

(40)

(41)

where the bracket notation is dened in eqn (a.6). the consequences of this ow invariance
are three-fold. first, it shows that not all equations in (38)-(39) are independent; e.g. once
we have solved the i equations of motion, the second equation for the scale factor a is
automatically satised. a second consequence is that, once we have found some extremum
(0, a0) of s at some given scale, we automatically obtain a whole one-dimensional trajectory
of critical points traced out by the rg ow

a

di
da

= i ,

i(a0) = i
0.

(42)

thirdly, all points on this trajectory have the same value for the cosmological constant

br = , as well as for f and g. hence in particular, if the special solution in the uv

happens to have zero cosmological constant , then the ow symmetry will automatically
imply the existence of stable at space solutions that extend all the way down into the far
ir.

we should mention that actions with a very similar ow symmetry have been the sub-
ject of active research in the past, precisely because they appear to oer a promising route

15

towards eliminating the cosmological constant problem. these attempts were mostly aban-
doned, however, because there is also an important objection against this idea. this counter
argument is most clearly explained in section vi in weinbergs review article [1]. the main
objection, as formulated in [1], is based on the argument that by general covariance, the
cosmological term must necessarily be of the form

z qbg a4 w ()

(43)

since a cosmological term of this form is a monotonic function in a, it has no critical points
whatsoever (except for the somewhat singular value a = 0), unless by chance or ne-tuning w
happens to be zero. thus our argument above leading to the existence of an rg trajectory
(42) of critical points breaks down in this case. this is the reason why the presence of a
vacuum energy term is usually associated with an obstruction to nding a at space solution
to the einstein equation.

there are a number of important new ingredients in our set-up, however, that enable us to
evade this no-go theorem. first, it is quite clear that, because of the fact that a represents
the rg scale, the cosmological term f (, a) in s can have a more general dependence on
a than (43). this makes a crucial qualitative dierence, since it opens the possibility that
non-trivial critical points of f for which a 
af = 0 can exist. moreover, as we have argued,
there are good physical reasons to expect that the higher order dependence of f on a is
precisely such that is allows for the existence of a whole line of critical points, describing a
complete rg trajectory of solutions to (38).

another important dierence, relative to previous proposals in this direction, is that we
identify this ow symmetry of s with the action of the renormalization group. hence the
fact that the equation of motion of s does not select a specic value for the scale factor a is
not some unwanted instability of the system, but rather an essential ingredient needed for
this identication. indeed, it would be odd if the choice of rg scale would be determined
dynamically, rather than by hand.

finally, it is important to notice that our results thus far do not point to any prefered
value for . our main result, rather, is that we have given a new formulation of the rg and
einstein equations which is internally consistent with any value for , and thus including the
value  = 0. given the fundamental clash between the rg intuition and the observational
evidence of a small cosmological constant, we consider this a useful step forward.

10. flat space stability

the central open question therefore, is whether it is possible to choose natural initial
conditions in the far uv for which  = 0. rather than attempting to give a conclusive
answer this question, let us make some general remarks. imagine we start with some stable
supersymmetric compactication of 10-dimensional string theory. eventually, this theory
should want to break supersymmetry at lower scales. one could imagine two ways in which

16

this may happen: either the planckian theory already contains soft non-supersymmetric
terms, or there could be some dynamical mechanism that breaks supersymmetry via non-
linear dynamics at some lower scale. in the rst type of scenario, it seems quite clear that the
planckian theory in eect already contains a non-zero cosmological term. the rg-stability
of  will not help much in this case. in the dynamical scenario, on the other hand, it seems
that this stability may become a very eective mechanism for keeping  small. roughly, the
large separation between the string and the supersymmetry breaking scale now translates
via holography into a physical separation between the non-supersymmetric dynamics and
the planck brane, that is, the place where the ads-type geometry connects onto the
compactication manifold k6  r4. the idea is that when this planck brane is locally
embedded in a true supersymmetric environment, it is protected from directly feeling the
vacuum energy produced away from it in the bulk region. hence in this case, it seems
well possible that the 5-d supergravity equations allow solutions for which the 4-d world is
(almost) at.

to illustrate this point, consider as a basic  though rather special  example [14] the
situation where the rg ow of the low energy theory is described by a non-supersymmetric
domain wall separating two 5-d constant curvature regions, with dierent bulk cosmological
constant v+ and v. we imagine that for the eld theory this means that its rg ow
connects a supersymmetric ultra-violet xed point to a non-supersymmetric infra-red xed
point eld theory. hence v = v () where + and  denote the couplings of the uv and
ir xed point, respectively. eective eld theory tells us that this transition will produce
a non-zero vacuum energy. the holographic manifestation of this vacuum energy is the
intrinsic tension of the domain wall, which can be deduced by considering its contribution
to the supergravity action s. for a at domain wall, extended over a range of scales from
a+ to a, this becomes

with u = u(, a). the tension of the wall is obtained by taking the variation with
respect the scale factor

z qbg t = =

1

4 z qbg (a+

u+
a+  a

u
a

).

(45)

the right-hand side is precisely the dierence between the external forces acting on the
domain wall from the right and left, respectively, arising from its embedding in the bulk
regions with curvature v+ and v. since by assumption iu = 0, the at space hamilton-
jacobi equation on each side reduces to

a
4

u
a

= a4

q3v.

by comparing with (45), this reproduces the special relation

t = a4

+q3v  a4

q3v

17

(46)

(47)

s = z qbg (u+  u)

(44)

between the tension and the bulk potential needed for the stability of the at domain wall
[3] [14]. notice that this stability does not require any ne-tuning; instead the balance of
force condition is automatically implied by the 5-d supergravity equations.7 evidently, the
vacuum energy of the rg-transition in the boundary eld theory, or tension in the domain
wall, does not necessarily lead to a 4-d curvature.

to complete this example, we would also need to consider the region near the planck
brane. here one could argue that ne-tuning is needed. however, since this is the high
energy region, we are allowed to use supersymmetry. there are many examples of con-
sistent supersymmetric warped string compactications that produce a at 4-dimensional
space-time. this shows that also for the planck brane, the 10-d supergravity equations 
combined with high energy supersymmetry  will automatically produce the required rela-
tion between the external force and internal tension to ensure stability. the point here is
that the curvature of the 4-d geometry is determined by the local behavior of the elds in the
planck region. hence the at space stability will not be perturbed by the low energy super-
symmetry breaking, provided the non-supersymmetric domain wall solution at lower scales
is well enough localized so that it has a negligible eect on the supersymmetric solution near
the planck brane.

11. discussion

in this paper we have presented a new angle on the cosmological constant problem, based
on a combination of two main ideas: (i) the holographic correspondence between 4-d qft
and 5-d supergravity, and (ii) that via warped string compactications of the rs-type this
duality can be extended to 4-d eld theories with gravity. our results show that in this
type of scenario, there exists a natural dynamical adjustment mechanism that prevents the
cosmological constant from being generated along the rg ow, once it has been cancelled
in the uv. this result appears to contradict the standard, and seemingly well-founded,
intuition about how  should behave. on the other hand, it is clear that any new proposal
for dealing with this problem must involve a restriction on the applicability of the standard
rules of 4-d eective eld theory, as well as a suciently radical yet conservative modication
of these rules.

the main dierence between our set-up and the standard rule book is that the low
energy equations of motion of 4-d gravity can now be derived only after solving the rg-ow
equations induced by integrating out the matter. just like in the rs-scenario, the massless
4-d gravity uctuations correspond to zero-mode variations of the 5-geometry that look
like ds2
depends critically on the stress-energy distribution, and therefore knows about the various
phase transitions that occur at all lower energy scales. this fact is clearly illustrated e.g. in

5 = dr2 + a(r)2bg(x). the detailed warped shape of this rs graviton wave function

7our reasoning here is in fact slightly circular, since to demonstrate the relation (47), we rst
needed to assume that a at domain wall solution indeed exists. the point thats being made here,
however, is that it does not require any ne-tuning of any couplings in the potential v to ensure
stability of its possible domain wall solutions.

18

the computation of the 4-d newton constant outlined in appendix b, as well as in section 2.
our study shows that, by being able to adjust its form, the 4-d graviton is in eect able to
make itself insensitive to the vacuum energy distribution spread out inside the 5-d warped
geometry.

in spite of this new way of formulating gravitational dynamics, our set-up still seems
consistent with most established rules of eective qft. in particular, as outlined in section
8, we can identify a quantity u that behaves just like the vacuum energy induced by the
matter uctuations. however, this potential u is not equal to the cosmological term in the
einstein equations, also not in the far infra-red; it diers from it by terms arising from non-
zero ow velocities of the couplings as well as from the contraction rate of the warp factor.
these extra contributions naturally adjust themselves to cancel the rg-induced variations
of the vacuum energy contained in u.

all our equations were derived using the 5-d supergravity approximation.

its indeed
been one of our implicit assumptions that the rank of the high energy gauge group and gauge
coupling are large enough to be in the right regime, at least initially. however, soon after the
non-trivial rg behavior sets in, the 5-d solution will almost inevitably enter a strongly curved
region in which the warp factor will approach zero within a nite proper distance. this
behavior typically produces a naked singularity, near which our approximations certainly
break down. still we have reasons to hope that our main result, the rg stability of , will
continue to hold in this regime as well. one specic source of hope is that our equations
are suggestive of a low energy approximation of the fundamental bv symmetry structure
of closed string eld theory. via the dual correspondence between (planar) open string
diagrams and closed string (tree) diagrams, one can indeed establish a direct interpretation
of this bv symmetry as expressing an rg invariance of the eective action, induced by
integrating out the open strings. our suggestion is that this closed-open string duality may
provide a fundamental explanation (that also extends to the weak coupling regime of the
gauge theory) of much of the structure that we have found here [13].

the holographic interpretation of the warped geometry diers on a number of fundamen-
tal points with that of the original rs world-brane scenario [3]. in our approach, all physics
taking place somewhere inside the 5-d bulk region is identied with physics happening in-
side our 4-d world. conversely, 4-d phenomena that occur at dierent scales in our world,
are represented as spatially separated in the extra direction. this means that there is no
sharply localized world-brane anywhere within the warped space-time. in addition, there is
no very clear distinction between kaluza-klein modes and other localized excitations of the
4-d eld theory. it is therefore a subtle, but very interesting, question which possible new
experimental signals one can typically associate with scenarios of this type.

finally, a relatively serious short-coming of our discussion thus far is that we have only
mentioned 5-d holography and not yet its 4-dimensional amplication, which should play an
at least equally important role. it is indeed clear that 4-d holography will put even stronger
restrictions on the validity of 4-d eective eld theory than what weve discussed so far. still,
the incorporation of (at the moment somewhat better established) ideas from 5-d holography
looks like a useful, albeit incomplete, step in the right direction.

19

acknowledgements

this work is supported by nsf-grant 98-02484, a pionier fellowship of nwo, and the
packard foundation. we would like to thank christof schmidhuber for useful discussions
and collaboration in the early stages of this work. we also acknowledge helpful discussions
with t. banks, m. berkooz, j. de boer, s. dimopoulos, s. gubser, s. kachru, i. klebanov,
a. polyakov, l. randall, e. silverstein, r. sundrum, and k. skenderis.

appendix a: radial dynamics for constant elds

in this appendix we summarize the hamilton-jacobi equations for the case of constant
elds. eqns (3) and (4) are good starting points for analyzing the dynamics of a and i;
here however we will instead choose the set-up of sections 3 and 4, so that the analogy with
the renormalization group equations remains somewhat more transparent. so let us again
introduce the actions suv = se and sir = , and a total action s = se + . each of these
actions now represent functions of just the couplings i, the scale a and k:

se = se(, a; k),

s = s(, a; k).

(a.1)

the hamilton-jacobi constraints now reduce to the following equations for the functions se
and s

{ se, se } = a8 v + a6k,

and

(cid:16)a

here we used the notations



a  i 

i(cid:17) s = { s, s }.

 =

1

24 a3

se
a

,

 i =

1
a4

se
i

{ s, s } 

1

48(cid:16)a

s

a(cid:17)2



1

2 (cid:16) s
i(cid:17)2

.

note that (a.2) is equivalent to

 2(cid:16)1 

1
24

 2

i(cid:17) =

1

12 (cid:16)v +

k

a2(cid:17).

(a.2)

(a.3)

(a.4)

(a.5)

(a.6)

(a.7)

the relation (a.2) denes a non-linear dierential equation from which, with given initial
conditions near the planck region a = a0, one can uniquely determine se  and thus also for

20

 and beta-functions i  as functions of , a and k. the detailed form of these functions of
course critically depends on the form of the 5-d potential term v as well as on the specic
choice of asymptotic conditions in the uv and ir. once we know these functions, however,
we can then use (a.3) to determine the function s at all scales from a given initial condition.
then nally, after we have determined s, we can distinguish the space of stable classical
solutions (, a), by imposing the equations of motion

s
i (, a; k) = 0

a

s
a

(, a; k) = 0

(a.8)

by virtue of eqn (a.3), the space of solutions to these equations of motion consists of one-
dimensional trajectories, generated by di/da = i, where all solutions along this ow have
the same value for the cosmological constant k.

appendix b: 4-d newton constant

in this second appendix we analyze the behavior of the newton constant  in se under
the rg-ow. this leads to an instructive comparison of our equations with those of the
randall-sundrum scenario. we use the same notation as in appendix a.

let us assume that we have obtained the  and  as a function of a. newtons constant

can then be obtained as follows. first consider the quantity

(, a) =

se
k

(, a; k = 0)

(b.1)

which, recalling that k = br represents the average curvature, can be seen to represent the

coupling in front of the 4-d einstein term in suv at the scale set by a. using the equations
(a.4) and (a.7) we derive that  satises the ow relation

 (cid:16)a


a

+ i 

i(cid:17) = a2.

(b.2)

this equation determines the a-dependence  in terms of that of . eqn (b.2) can then be
explicitly integrated to

(a) = (a0) + z a0

a

a da
(a)

.

(b.3)

the value of the integration constant (a0) is determined by the specic string compacti-
cation that describes the planck scale physics.

it is useful to compare the above result (b.3) with the formula for the 4-d newton
constant in the randall-sundrum compactication scenario [3]. in the set-up of [3], the 4-d
newton constant is expressed via a similar integral as (b.3) with (a0) = 0 and with (a) =

21

const. the location a0 in their case corresponds to the location of the planck brane that
cuts o the asymptotic ads-region. the above expression, however, also applies to more
general ways of cutting o the ads-space by means of the warped string compactications
described in section 2. in this case, a0 could be chosen to represent the place where the
ads-space is glued into the compactication geometry r4  k 6. the integration constant
(a0) will then be a nite number, determined by the 10-d newton constant 10 and the
volume of the k6 with the six-ball b6 removed, via

(a0) =

v 
6
10

v 
6 = vol(k6b6).

(b.4)

this relation directly follows from the expression (12) for suv. notice that the total a0-
dependence exactly cancels in the formula for (a), since small shifts in the endpoint of
the a-integration are compensated by small shifts in radius of the six-ball b6 inside k6.
this cancellation in ensured by the relation between the 5-d and 10-d newton constant
1/5 = v5/10 with v5 = vol(k5).

the true 4-d newton constant , as seen at long distances, is the ir xed point value of

1/. hence

1


=

v 
6
10

+ z a0

0

a da
(a)

.

(b.5)

this is a nite result, because (a) will always remain non-zero, and usually will even grow
very large, in the ir region a  0. it thus seems very plausible that (b.5) indeed expresses
the physical newton constant of the low energy action s.

references

[1] s. weinberg, the cosmological constant problem, rev.mod.phys.61 (1989), 1-23.

[2] j. maldacena, the large n limit of supercomformal eld theories and supergravity, adv.

theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200;
s. gubser, i. klebanov and a. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from non-critical
string theory, phys.lett.b428 (1998) 105, hep-th/9802109;
e. witten, anti-de sitter space and holography, adv.theor.math.phys.2 (1998) 253,
hep-th/9802150;
l. susskind and e. witten, the holographic bound in anti-de sitter space, hep-
th/9805114.

[3] l. randall and r. sundrum, a large mass hierarchy from a small extra dimension,

hep-ph/9905221; an alternative to compactication, hep-th/9906064;
m. gogberashvili, hierarchy problem in the shell-universe model hep-ph/9812296.

[4] h. verlinde, holography and compactication, hep-th/9906182.

22

[5] e.t. akhmedov, a remark on the ads/cft correspondence and the renormalization

group flow, phys. lett. b442 (1998) 152, hep-th/9806217.
e. alvarez and c. gomez geometric holography, the renormalization group and the
c-theorem, nucl. phys. b541 (1999) 441, hep-th/9807226.
v. balasubramanian, p. krauss, space-time and the holographic renormalization
group, phys.rev.lett 83 (1999) 3605, hep-th/9903190.

[6] l. girardello, m. petrini, m. porrati, a. zaaroni, novel local cft and exact results
on perturbations of n=4 super yang mills from ads dynamics, hep-th/9810126, and
the supergravity dual of n = 1 super yang-mills theory, hep-th/9909047;
d. z. freedman, s. s. gubser, k. pilch, n. p. warner, renormalization group flows
from holographysupersymmetry and a c-theorem, hep-th/9906194;
m. porrati, a. starinets, rg fixed points in supergravity duals of 4-d field theory
and asymptotically ads spaces, phys.lett. b454 (1999) 77, hep-th/9903241.

[7] j. de boer, e. verlinde, and h. verlinde, on the holographic renormalization group,

hep-th/9912012

[8] v.a. rubakov, m.e. shaposhnikov, extra space-time dimensions: towards a solution
of the cosmological constant phys.lett. 125b (1985) 372. do we live inside a domain
wall? phys. lett. 125b (1983) 139.

[9] c. schmidhuber, private communication.

[10] j. maldacena, remark at ias seminar, may 1999.

[11] see in particular k. dasgupta, g. rajesh and s. sethi, m theory, orientifolds and

g-flux, hep-th/9908088 and references therein.

[12] j. polchinski, renormalization and eective lagrangians,nucl. phys, b231 (1984) 269.

[13] j. khouri and h. verlinde, planar diagrams and closed string field theory, in prepa-

ration.

[14] k. behrndt, m. cvetic, supersymmetric domain-wall world from d=5 simple gauged

supergravity, hep-th/9909058;
k. skenderis, p. townsend, gravitational stability and renormalization-group flow
hep-th/9909070;
u. ellwanger, constraints on a brane-world from the vanishing of the cosmological
constant, hep-th/9909103;
o. dewolfe, d.z. freedman, s.s. gubser, a. karch, modeling the fth dimension with
scalars and gravity, hep-th/9909134.

23

