cern-th/99-391
t99/140
hep-th/9912103

the supermoduli space of matrix string

theory

ph. brax1

theoretical physics division, cern

ch-1211 geneva 232

abstract

we study matrix string scattering amplitudes and matrix string instantons on
a marked riemann surface in the limit of a vanishing string coupling constant.
we give an explicit parameterization of the moduli space of such instantons.
we also give a description of the set of fermionic supermoduli. the integration
over the supermoduli leads to the inclusion of picture changing operators at the
interaction points. finally we investigate the large n limit of the measure on the
instanton moduli space and show its convergence to the weil-petersson measure
on the moduli space of marked riemann surfaces.

9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
3
1

 

 
 

1
v
3
0
1
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1email: philippe.brax@cern.ch
2 on leave of absence from service de physique theorique, cea-saclay f-91191 gif/yvette

cedex, france

1 introduction

matrix string theory[1]3 is a concrete proposal for a non-perturbative denition
of type iia superstring theory[2]. the basic building blocks of this model are
bosonic and fermionic matrices in the adjoint representation of u(n). the link
with string theory in the light cone gauge is provided by the analysis of the moduli
space of vacua showing that one retrieves the light cone green-schwarz action in
the small string coupling limit. due to the matrix nature of the model, one gets
n copies of the green-schwarz action.

it has soon been realized that string interactions[1, 3] can also be incorporated
in the matrix context.
in particular one nds that the string interactions are
represented by mandelstam diagrams[4] where the propagation of strings along
straight lines ends up at an interaction point where two strings join up. this
picture emerges in the study of the spectral cover of the cylinder, i.e. the n sheets
formed by the eigenvalues of the scalar eld x = x1 + ix2. the description of
the role of the spectral cover in the string interactions has been rst given in [3]
and rened in [5, 6]. in the latter it has been shown that the light-cone elds
describing the green-schwarz action in the small string coupling limit live on the
world sheet formed by the spectral cover. the upshot being that in the small
string coupling limit the matrix string theory reduces to the light-cone green-
schwarz theory on the spectral cover supplemented with a residual u(1) theory.
these properties have been deduced from the analysis of the matrix string
instantons[7]. the yang-mills action describing matrix string theory admits
instantonic solutions which correspond to the euclidean version of bps con-
gurations. these instantons are solutions of a hitchin system of dierential
equations[8, 9, 10]. the mandelstam diagram representing the string interaction
corresponds to the spectral cover of the hitchin system. this provides a direct
link between the yang-mills and string points of view.

one would like to obtain an explicit description of the matrix string instanton
moduli space m. an argument based on an index theorem[11] shows that the
moduli space has complex dimension (2gs  3 + p) where gs is the genus of the
spectral cover s and p is the number of external states involved in a scattering
amplitude. moreover the authors of [11] argue that there are 2gs further discrete
coordinates specifying the scattering amplitudes in matrix string theory. this
identies the moduli space of instantons with a discrete slice of the moduli space
of marked riemann surfaces .

a complete identication of the scattering amplitudes in type iia superstring
theory and matrix string theory requires the equality between the measures on
the moduli spaces. due to the discretization in matrix theory this can only be
valid in the large n limit.

3dvv in the following.

1

recently it has been argued that matrix string on the torus has a discrete
moduli space whose large n limit is exactly the toroidal moduli space of string
theory[12]. this strongly suggests that the large n limit has to be taken in order
to retrieve the string measure on the moduli space of riemann surfaces.

in superstring theory in the light cone frame one includes an operator at
the interaction points whose role is to guarantee the ten dimensional lorentz
invariance. an argument given in dvv suggests that the interaction points of
strings in matrix theory should be decorated with the insertion of an operator
playing the same role as the picture changing operators in the rns version of
string theory[13]. it is known in string theory that these operators appear as the
result of the integration over the super-moduli[14]. one of the aims of this paper
is to deal with this issue.

in this work we study the explicit solutions to the instanton equation on an
arbitrary marked riemann surface. this is equivalent to nding a family of at
bundles over a marked riemann surface together with a reality restriction on
the solutions.
in section ii we dene a (2gs  3 + p) family of solutions, the
moduli space of instantons. geometrically these instantons are in one to one
correspondence with the family of spectral covers characterized by the zero set
of a meromorphic one form with poles at the marked points. this provides an
embedding of the instanton moduli space into the moduli space of marked rie-
mann surfaces. in section iii we give a stringy description of this moduli space
of instantons in terms of the string scattering diagram associated to the spectral
cover. the zeros of the meromorphic one-form on the spectral cover are identi-
ed with the interaction points[15, 16] of the string diagram. this construction
provides the backbone to the dynamics of the string interactions. the kinemat-
ics, i.e. the momenta, are given by the discrete wilson lines that one can allow
along non-trivial cycles of the spectral cover when constructing at bundles. this
completes the identication of the moduli space of instantons as a discrete slice
of the moduli space of marked riemann surfaces. in the formal large n limit
the two moduli spaces coincide. in section iv we review the calculation of the
scattering amplitude and the lifting of elds to the spectral cover. in section v we
study the issue of the fermionic super-moduli and show that they are intimately
linked with fermionic ghost zero modes associated to the interaction points of the
string diagram. we perform the integration over the supermoduli and retrieve
the dvv prescription where a picture changing operator is included at each in-
teraction point. we also mention the ambiguities resulting in the integration
over the super-moduli. finally we consider the large n limit of the scattering
amplitude showing that the measure on the moduli space of instantons converges
weakly to the weil-petersson measure on the moduli space of marked riemann
surfaces. this shows that the scattering amplitudes in matrix string theory and
string theory coincide in the small coupling limit.

2

2 instantons on marked riemann surfaces

in this section we study the small string coupling regime of matrix string theory.
matrix string theory is obtained by dimensional reduction of the ten dimensional
u(n) super yang-mills theory on a cylinder. the ten dimensional super yang-
mills theory is endowed with a gauge eld a and a space-time fermion . upon
reduction to two dimensions the gauge eld splits into a two dimensional gauge
eld and eight bosonic coordinates. the two dimensional action of matrix string
theory is given by the dimensional reduction

1
2g2 f 2

+

g2
2

1

s = 

2 z d dtr[(dx i)2it d+

[x i, x j]2it i[x i, ]].
(1)
the elds are n  n hermitean matrices. the index i runs from 1 to 8 and the
sixteen fermions split into the 8s and 8c spinorial representations of so(8). the
string coupling constant of the type iia string theory is gs such that g2
s = g2
where g is the yang-mills coupling constant. the coordinate  lives between 0
and 2. all the elds are world sheet scalars subject to a periodicity condition
in the  direction. the fermions are periodic due to the original space-time
supersymmetry. in the following we will mostly be interested in the euclidean
version of this action obtained after a wick rotation on the cylinder.

the path integral dening correlation functions in the matrix model is dom-
inated by instanton congurations in the small string coupling limit gs  0. a
semi-classical evaluation of the path integral is then available leading to a link
with the string scattering amplitudes[1, 3, 6]. the classical instantons are eu-
clidean versions of bps solitons preserving half of the supersymmetries which are
derived from the dimensional reduction of the sym ten dimensional supersymme-
try transformations. imposing that the vanishing of the spinors  is consistent
with half of the supersymmetry requires that the gauge eld and the scalars
satisfy the hitchin system [8, 9, 10]

fw w + ig2[x, x] = 0
d wx = 0

(2)

where w = 1
2(  i), x = x 1 + ix 2 and aw = a0 + ia1. the covariant
derivative acts in the adjoint representation of the gauge group u(n). the
solutions to these equations have been extensively studied[5, 7]. in particular it
is known that the gauge conguration is almost at fw w  0 away from the core of
the instantons- a neighbourhood of a nite set of points- where the intrinsically
non-commutative nature of the instantons is apparent. moreover it is in the
core that supersymmetry is broken by the instantons. in the large ym coupling

3

limit g   the size of the core of the instantons vanishes leaving an almost
everywhere at gauge conguration.
in the following we shall be interested in recovering the type iia string per-
turbation results from matrix string theory. to do so we will concentrate on the
at part of the instantons away from their core. in the very small string coupling
limit these eld congurations are dened on the whole cylinder where a few
points have been singled out. these points will happen to be branched points
where the gauge conguration is ill-dened. it is only by going to an appropriate
cover -the spectral cover- that the gauge conguration becomes well-dened. of
course by only considering the at congurations we have neglected most of the
non-abelian nature of matrix string instantons which is essential to go beyond
type iia string perturbation theory.

we shall consider the simplied atness equations

fw w = 0, d wx = 0

supplemented with the constraint

[x, x] = 0.

(3)

(4)

the solutions to these equations correspond to the very small string coupling limit
of the solutions of (2). they will be shown to be sucient to describe the nature
of string interactions. another remarkable property of the instantons (3) is that
they are no longer bps congurations. they preserve all the supersymmetries
of matrix string theory. in particular the semi-classical expansion around these
instantons will not lead to fermionic zero modes due to the breaking of some of
the supersymmetries.

it is convenient to dene the form x characterized locally by the dierential
x = x(w)dw. the second dierential equation in (3) for x is then cast into the
form

dax = 0

(5)
where da is the covariant derivative acting on forms. the equations (3) can be
analysed thanks to their conformal invariance. this allows to map the cylinder
to the sphere with two marked points. the conformal invariance of the equations
(3) allows to extend their validity to an arbitrary riemann surface  of genus h
with v marked points.

the connection a = azdz + azdz with values in the lie algebra of the gauge
group u(n) is at on the riemann surface  with coordinates z. the eld x(z)
denes a section of the complex vector bundle adjp where p is the principal
vector bundle on  with bres gl(n). finally the real condition [x, x] = 0
imposes strong restrictions on x and a.

let us summarize the results obtained in the rest of this section. the con-
struction of a at u(n) vector bundle with a section x of adjp will be carried

4

out in two stages. notice the decomposition u(n) = (su(n) u(1))/zn where
zn is the centre of the gauge group acting diagonally on the two factors su(n)
and u(1). first we shall construct the su(n)  u(1) instantons. the explicit
solutions (a, x) will be parameterized by a moduli space m of nite dimension.
once this continuous problem has been solved the eect of modding out by the
centre zn will be taken into account. as usual in orbifold constructions this will
necessitate to introduce dierent twisted sectors. they spring from the fact that
the gauge group is not simply connected 1(u(n)) = zn .

the equations (3) have a complex gauge symmetry where the gauge group
g = u(n) is complexied, i.e. the form a = azdz + azdz takes values in the lie
algebra of gc = gl(n, c). it is easy to verify that the dierential equations (3)
are invariant under the complex gauge transformations with g  gc

az  gazg1  i( g)g1

(6)

where x  adj(g)x. this allows to dene a decomposition of the set of solutions
of (3) into complex gauge orbits. we shall show that the bundle adjp always
admits a holomorphic structure, a holomorphic connection and a holomorphic
section x0 whose complex gauge orbit possesses an instantonic conguration, i.e.
a at unitary connection a with a section satisfying dax = 0, [x, x] = 0. the
resulting at unitary connection a is single-valued on the riemann surface .

let us rst consider the case with no marked points and give an explicit
description of the instantons. the complex vector bundle adjp on the riemann
surface  can be endowed with a covariant derivative d = d+d where d sends
(p, q)-forms to (p + 1, q)-forms (respectively d sends (p, q) forms to (p, q + 1)
forms). as (d)2 = 0 - there are no (2, 0) forms on a riemann surface- one
can always nd a complex structure[17] such that d = . let us now consider
a holomorphic one form x0 which is also a section of adjp for this choice of
complex structure, i.e. dx0  x0 = 0. the holomorphic sections x0 
h 0(, k  adjp ), where k is the canonical bundle, are conveniently obtained
by using the schottky representation [18] of the riemann surface . consider
a 2h dimensional basis for the homology cycles ai, bi, i = 1 . . . h of . choose
a small cylinder ci bording the cycles ai on each of the h handles. opening up
the handles by removing the cylinder ci creates 2h open discs on the surface
. the open surface  is the riemann sphere with 2h open discs and v marked
points. the discs are such that the circles on their boundaries are associated by
pairs (a
i ) corresponding to the two boundaries of the removed cylinders ci.
denote by i the homography sending the circle a+
i . the form x0 on the
circles a+
is related by this homography and by the connecting matrices
hi

i onto a

i , a+

i and a
i

x0(i(x))|a

i

= adj(hi)x0(x)|a+

i

.

(7)

5

due to these boundary conditions on the open discs the holomorphic dierential
x0 is given in terms of poincare series.

let us dene the following poincare series[18, 21]

k(x0)dz = x

adj(h 1

 )d ln

(z)  k(x0)
(z)  x0

(8)

where  is the schottky group. i.e. the formal product of the h homology cycles
bi. to each element  one associates h as the product of the corresponding
matrices hi. the point x0 is an arbitrary point on the riemann sphere. the
holomorphic dierentials are of the form

x0 =

h

xk=1

k(x0)mkdz

(9)

where mk is a matrix with values in the lie algebra of the complexied gauge
group. holomorphy is guaranteed once the residue of x0 at x0 vanishes, this
requires

h

xk=1

(adj(h 1

k )  1)mk = 0

(10)

the construction of the holomorphic section x0 allows to dene the instantons.

the matrix valued one form x0 can be diagonalized

where xd is diagonal and the matrices h satisfy

x0 = hxdh1

h(i(x))|a

i

= hih(x)|a+

i

(11)

(12)

where the hi are complex invertible matrices associated to the b cycles joining
two identied circles. notice that the matrix h is holomorphic and allows to
dene a holomorphic connection one form  =  + 

on the bundle adjp . the complex matrix h can be factorized

 = i(h)h1,  = 0

h = hu

(13)

(14)

where h  gc/g and u  g. let us now perform the complex gauge transfor-
mation parameterized by h1. this leads to the following section

x = uxdu 1

(15)

6

and the gauge connection

az = i(u)u 1, az = i( u)u 1.

(16)

indeed
it is easy to see that the pair (x, a) forms a matrix string instanton.
the connection a is both unitary and at while the section x satises dax = 0
and the reality condition [x, x] = 0. we have thus found that matrix string
instantons are characterized by holomorphic sections of adjp .

one can also perform a multivalued gauge transformation by u 1 which sends
x into the diagonal matrix xd. notice that the corresponding gauge eld vanishes
altogether. as the eigenvalues of x forming the diagonal matrix xd are solutions
of an algebraic equation of degree n we can identify the instantons with a bred
space over the set of n-sheeted coverings of the riemann surface [19]. moreover
the instanton is simply related to the diagonal matrix xd with the is along the
diagonal. the characteristic polynomial of xd can be expanded

n

yi=1

(  i) = n + a1n 1 + . . . an

(17)

where the coecients ai are single-valued on . one can reconstruct a matrix
x0 with this characteristic polynomial[3]

x0 =

a1 a2
0
1
1
0
0
. . .




. . . an
0
. . .
0
. . .
1
0

.




(18)

having obtained such a matrix one can use the relations (15) and (16) to dene
the matrix string instanton.

the analytic structure of u is worth emphasizing. the eigenvalues of x0 are
z dependent, they collide at branch points bi. some eigenvalues collide at such a
point, the monodromy of the matrix u corresponds to the permutation gi of the
coincident eigenvalues

u  ugi

(19)

the matrix u is multivalued on . nevertheless the gauge connection (16) is
single-valued implying that the u(n) instantons are well-dened on .

one way of uniformizing the behaviour of u is to dene the spectral cover
s of the riemann surface . consider the set of solutions of the characteristic
polynomial of x

this denes the spectral cover of the multivalued instantons on . the spectral
cover is a n-covering of the riemann surface  ramied at the points bi where

det(  x) = 0

(20)

7

some of the eigenvalues coincide. more precisely the n eigenvalues i dene the
inverse image of the projection  : s   sending   z(). the n sheets
are dened by solving the equation z() = z. on each of the n sheets there
are holes corresponding to the inverse images of the circles ai
. each sheet is
in correspondence with a sphere with h holes and branch points connecting the
dierent sheets. the branch points on the spectral cover are points where dz/d
vanishes.

the matrix u is extended to the spectral cover s by considering that uij
connects the ith and jth sheets. the permutation matrix gi is the monodromy
matrix around the branch point bi corresponding to the shuing of the dierent
sheets of the covering. the genus of the spectral cover is given by

gs = 1 + n 2(h  1).

(21)

this can be derived using the riemann-hurwitz formula for generic branched
points of order two.

the same analysis can be performed when marked points at xi are added. the
one form x is now required to satisfy a boundary condition in a neighbourhood
of each marked point. one looks for solutions with a simple pole at each marked
point. one needs to introduce another poincare series

[x, x0]dz = x

adj(h 1

 )d ln

(z)  x
(z)  x0

.

the holomorphic solution becomes

x0 =

h

xi=1

wi(x0)midz +

v

xi=1

[xi, x0]pidz

and the residue condition

h

(adj(h 1

i

xi=1

)  1)mi +

v

xi=1

pi = 0.

(22)

(23)

(24)

the matrix string instantons are obtained by diagonalization of x0. the
gauge connection is also single-valued on . one can similarly dene the spectral
cover s which uniformizes the behaviour of the matrix u. its genus is

gs = 1 + n 2(h  1) + v

n(n  1)

2

.

(25)

the marked points are lifted to p = vn points on the spectral cover.

the genus formula is a consequence of the riemann-hurwitz relation for an
n-sheeted cover with n(n1)(2h2+v) branched points of order two. to obtain
this formula notice that the branch points are obtained as the common zeros of

8

p (, z) = det(x ) and p . factorizing p = qi(i) and p = qj(
j)
where the 
js are the zeros of the derivative of p , common zeros are detected by
the vanishing of the discriminant  = qij(i 
j). this corresponds to the zeros
of n(n  1) meromorphic one forms with v poles. geometrically these are the
n(n  1) intersection points between the curves p = 0 and p = 0. each one
form possesses 2h  2 + v zeros leading to n(n  1)(2h  2 + v) branch points.
one can dene a stratication of the moduli space according to the genus
of the spectral cover [21]. as just seen the genus of the spectral cover depends
on the number of branch points via the riemann-hurwitz formula. the branch
points are the zeros of the discriminant  viewed as a n(n  1) dierential on
. denote by pd
i the eigenvalue matrix obtained by diagonalization of the residue
of x0 around the pole xi. this matrix possesses km
i eigenvalues of order m. the
order of the pole of  at xi is

oi = n 2 

n

xm=1

m2km
i .

the number of branch points is then

2n(n  1)(h  1) +

v

xi=1

oi

leading to the genus of the spectral cover

gs = 1 + n 2(h  1) + pv

i=1 oi
2

.

(26)

(27)

(28)

in the generic case where all the eigenvalues are dierent one gets k1
i = n and
the previous formula (25). this denes the generic stratum of the moduli space.
other lower dimensional strata are obtained when there are multiple eigenvalues.
the generic stratum is an open dense subset of the moduli space whose boundary
comprises the other strata.

we are now in position to compute the dimension of the moduli space of
instantons. this dimension is given by the number of independent matrices hi,
mi and pi modulo a residual global symmetry. once the holomorphic eld x0 is
dened in terms of the parameters (hi, mi, pi) the gauge eld is determined by the
matrix u. the adjoint action of the residual symmetry sl(n) on (hi, mi, pi) is
deduced from x0  adj(v )x0, h  v h. this reduces the real dimension of the
moduli space by 2(n 2  1). the numbers of parameters (hi, mi, pi) modulo the
residue condition is 4n 2h + 2vn 2  2n 2. combining with the residual symmetry
we get dimm = 2n 2(2h + v  2) + 2. using the genus formula we obtain

dimcm = 2gs  1 + p

(29)

9

this dimension coincides with the dimension of the space of higgs bundles[19]
which precisely correspond to the complex vector bundles adjp with a section
of k  adjp . this is not unexpected as we started with such a section x0 to
dene the instantons.
let us now consider the lower strata of the moduli space. it is also possible
to count the number of moduli. the main dierence with the generic stratum
comes from the number of moduli preserving coinciding eigenvalues. it is easy
i preserve the eigenvalues of
i=1 oi parameters for
the changes of basis. now the number of marked points on the spectral cover is

to see that changes of basis in gl(n)/qn
pi. this provides pv

i complex eigenvalues and pv

m=1 gl(m)km

i=1 pn

m=1 km

p =

v

n

xi=1

xm=1

km
i

(30)

it follows that the number of moduli is still given by (10). we can get rid of one
dimension of the moduli space by factorizing the complex rescalings of x0. this
leads to a dimension dimcm = 2gs  2 + p for the moduli space of instantons.
this formula has a simple geometric interpretation.
the link with the spectral cover is provided by the existence of a natural one
form xd, the pull-back of the one form xd under the projection  : s  
dened by   z(). locally the pull-back is dened by dz where  denes the
coordinates on the spectral cover. this one-form on the spectral cover possesses
a pole at all the inverse images of the poles of xd. the number of zeros ii of
xd is then 2gs  2 + p. on the generic stratum they are of two sorts, there are
the n(n  1)(2h 2 + v) branch points bi and the n(2h 2 + v) inverse images
of the zeros zi of each of the is. as we vary the parameters of the instantons
the zeros ii move.

consider a spectral cover s0 with zeros i 0

i and a projection 0 : s0  
corresponding to an instanton x0. this spectral cover is dened by the values
(h0, m0, p0) of the instanton parameters. for dierent values of these parameters
one obtains a family of spectral covers parameterized by 2gs 2 + p coordinates ti
on the instanton moduli space. each spectral cover is endowed with a projection
t depending on the moduli t. locally one can dene a map  = 1
t 0 : s0  st
as i
0)) encoding the deformations of s0 due to the variations of the
moduli t. this denes a 2gs  2 + p family of spectral covers st. the family of
forms 
t xd on st vanish on the zeros ii(t). one can use the coordinates of the
zeros ii(t) to parameterize the moduli space.

0  i(z0(i

more precisely one can reconstruct the u(n) instantons from the knowledge
of the spectral cover and a line bundle p over s. indeed let us consider the
gauge where the gauge connection vanishes and the instanton is reduced to a
diagonal matrix of one forms subject to monodromies around the branch points.
similarly this matrix can be viewed as arising from the single form xd dened

10

on s under the push-down map  sending xd = dz on s to idz on . the
one form xd is a section of the line bundle p of one forms s whose divisors
satisfy (s) + p  0. conversely let consider the line bundle p and its push-
down p = ln
i=1 vi the direct sum of one dimensional vector spaces. choose
a section s of p and its push-down s. this denes a diagonal matrix of one
forms on  from which one can obtain the characteristic polynomial and then
an instanton. one can write the divisor (s) = i  p for an eective divisor i
of degree 2gs  2 + p where s vanishes. this divisor of zeros parameterizes the
moduli space of instantons.
it is more convenient to factor out a trivial factor from the moduli space cor-
responding to the position of one zero. the reduced moduli space has dimension

dimcmr = 2gs  3 + p.

(31)

the dimension of the reduced moduli space coincides with the result of a calcula-
tion using an index theorem[11]. we have thus conrmed this indirect argument
by an explicit construction.

3 mandelstam diagrams and the moduli space

of instantons

we shall be concerned with the matrix string setting, i.e. the riemann surface 
is obtained by a conformal map of the cylinders with (v  2) marked points to a
sphere with v marked points. in this case the poincare series parameterizing the
instantons are simply

where pv

i=1 pi = 0. diagonalizing this matrix leads to the spectral cover s. in

this case the genus of the spectral cover is simply

gs = 1  n 2 +

n(n  1)v

2

(33)

on the generic stratum. notice that on the generic stratum gs  0 with equality
only when p = 2n + 2. the dimension of the moduli space is simply given by the
number of matrices pi modulo the residual global symmetries and the momentum
conservation condition pv
i=1 pi = 0. for instance one can describe the genus zero
scattering of six external states with a (n = 2) covering of the cylinder with one
marked point.

there is an alternative description of the spectral cover which will be par-
ticularly fruitful. let us recall a few useful facts about mandelstam diagrams
[2, 4]. mandelstam diagrams represent the propagation of circular strings joining

11

v

x0 =

pi

xi=1

1

z  xi

(32)

p1

p2

2

1

3

4

5

i1

i2

i3

i4

i5

i6

p3

p4

1

2

3

4

5

6



figure 1: the string diagram of the spectral cover with interaction points ii,
i = 1..6. the interaction times i and the angles i dene the location of the
interaction points. the external states correspond to the marked points pi, i =
1..4

at interaction points. for strings of length 2 the radii of the cylinders are iden-
tied with the momenta p+ in the light cone frame. a dening property of the
mandelstam diagram of a riemann surface is the existence of a time axis  and
of periodic angular coordinates  on each of the cylinders. the complex variable
dened by w =  + i parameterizes each of the cylinders.

a mandelstam diagram is uniquely specied by its interaction points where
dw vanishes, gs internal momenta and gs internal shifts. on the whole this
provides 3gs  3 + p complex coordinates forming a cover of the moduli space
of marked riemann surfaces [16]. finding these parameters will allow us to
construct the mandelstam diagram associated to the interaction of strings on the
spectral cover.

the construction of a mandelstam diagram has to be adapted to the case of

the spectral cover. let us use the function

w() = z 

xd

dened up to the periods of xd. consider now the real part

 = re( w)

12

(34)

(35)

up to the real parts of the periods. this real function has critical points at the
zeros ii with an index 14. at the poles one sees that   . the function
 is a morse function allowing to stratify the spectral cover according to its
level sets. the image of the spectral cover under w is interpreted as a string
diagram with interaction points at the zeros ii corresponding to the splitting or
joining of two strings. topologically this string diagram is dened by 2gs + p 3
complex coordinates corresponding to the interaction points the position of the
interaction points is specied by the interaction times and the twist angles along
2gs  3 + p branches of the string diagram (g. 1).
the spectral cover can be given a metric using the string diagram. let us
dene the at metric d wd w on the spectral cover. this is the induced metric
from the at metric on the string diagram. on the spectral cover we obtain

g = |

dz
d|2

(36)

due to the holomorphy of the zweilbein w = dz/d the metric is almost at
apart from the zeros and the poles creating a delta function singularity in the
curvature

2gs 2+p

p

r(q) = 2

xi=1

(q  ii)  2

xi=1

(q  pi)

(37)

of course the integral of the curvature gives the euler characteristic. this is
consistent with the string interpretation of the string diagram where the strings
are at cylinders joining at the interaction points. the string diagram denes the
dynamics of the string interactions, i.e. a contact interaction at the interaction
points. the kinematics of the strings is not yet specied as we have not explicitly
described the momenta of the incoming and outgoing strings. this is provided
by the addition of wilson lines on the spectral cover.

up to now we have not taken into account the discrete zn twists along ho-
mology cycles which can be turned on in the construction of at bundles. this
corresponds to adding dierent twisted sectors in the quotient u(1)/zn . the
at vector bundle with the gauge connection a can be viewed as the quotient
(   su(n)  s1)/  where  is the universal cover of , su(n) the lie al-
gebra of su(n) and s1 the unit circle. the equivalence relation is (x, u, ) 
((x), adj()u, ) where  is a loop on  acting on  as covering transformation
and adj() is the monodromy in the adjoint representation. notice that the s1
factor is not involved in the quotient. one can dene a twisted version of the
equivalence relation (x, u, )  ((x), adj()u, +r1() as) obtained by integrat-
ing a u(1)/zn connection as on s along the inverse image of . this twisting
modies the u(1) part of the gauge connection. it does not change the eld x.

4this gives a contribution 2  2gs  p to the euler characteristic.

13

let us consider a u(1) bundle over the spectral cover s that we endow with a
at connection as. the building of such a at vector bundle is characterized by
maps in hom(1(s), u(1)). this corresponds to having dierent winding numbers
along the non-trivial loops of s. the at vector bundle is modeled on the bundle
( s  u(1))/  where  is the equivalence relation (x, )  ((x),  + 2d), s
is the universal cover of s and  is an angle. the winding number d depends
on the loop  which acts on x as a covering transformation. we can now easily
incorporate the zn orbifold characterized by maps in hom(1(s), zn ). for a
given loop  in 1(s) one can dene a twisted action with twist 2k/n by  
 + 2k/n, k  [0, n  1]. the range of k is extended to the whole integers by
taking into account the non-trivial winding numbers. as the fundamental group
of the spectral cover is of dimension 2gs this gives n 2gs sectors. physically these
discrete transformations are discrete wilson lines in the u(1) part of the gauge
theory.

one can always construct such a at u(1) gauge eld as. put as = b + b
i=1 uii and the one forms i form a

where b is a holomorphic one form b = pgs

basis of holomorphic abelian dierentials. now we prescribe the wilson lines

zai

as =

2ki
n

, zbi

as =

2k
i
n

.

(38)

the complex coecients ui are always uniquely dened as the period matrix
ij = rbj i has an invertible imaginary part. one obtains the push-down of as
to  as as = (ad), i.e. a diagonal matrix of one forms b(i)di +b(i)di where
as = b()d + b()d. this matrix possesses monodromies around the branch
points corresponding to the exchange of the dierent sheets. the u(1) gauge
eld

a = tr(as)in n

(39)

denes a u(1) at gauge connection on . this connection is diagonally embed-
ded in u(n). the total gauge connection is the sum of a and the connection
(16).

as will be recalled in the next section the semi-classical evaluation of the
matrix string path integral involves a residual u(1) gauge eld a [6] living on the
spectral cover. the other elds correspond to strings degrees of freedom in the
green-schwarz formulation. considering the hamiltonian picture of this theory
on the spectral cover the physical states are identied with light cone string states
carrying some information coming from the quantization of the extra u(1) factor.
the discrete wilson lines modify the behaviour of the string states propagat-
ing along the string diagram of the spectral cover. given a state | > located at
a non-trivial ai loop on the string diagram (g. 1) and going along the cycle ai
transforms the string state | > into e2iki/n| >. normalizing the string length
to 2 we nd that the state | > acquires a momentum ki/n. similarly the same

14

a1

b1

a2

b2

figure 2: the equivalent mandelstam diagram to the spectral cover where the
momenta along the cycles ai, i = 1, 2 and the twist angles along the cycles bi,
i = 1, 2 are quantized

state transported along the cycle bi picks up a phase e2ik
shift of the origin of the string by k

i/n.

i/n corresponding to a

the marked points correspond to the location of the external vertex operators.
one can open up a small disc around each marked point to obtain a puncture.
the punctures lead to (p1) extra cycles. the (p1) cycles around the punctures
give quantized external momenta k
i . this is achieved by modifying the u(1) at
connection demanding that

zi

as =

2k
i

n

(40)

where i are the p cycles around the punctures. one can always nd the gauge
connection as as = b + b where b = pgs
i=1 vip0pi and p0pi is a
meromorphic one form with poles at pi and p0 with residues one and minus
one respectively. the periods of these one forms p0pi are imaginary along the
a and b cycles. requiring that b is holomorphic at p0 implies the momentum

i=1 uii + pp

conservation pp

i=1 k

i = 0.

the picture emerging from the description of the spectral cover ts with what
is expected from light cone string theory[20]. first of all the continuous part of
the construction leads to the spectral cover and its interpretation as a string
diagram for closed strings. the parameterization of the spectral cover in terms
of the coordinates of the interaction points species the interaction times and
2gs  3 + p shifts. the discrete part of the construction, i.e. the assignment of
zn elements to the 2gs + p  1 non-trivial cycles is equivalent to prescribing the
internal and the external momenta in a quantized fashion. the strings are also
twisted along the b cycles with discrete shifts sa, a = 1 . . . gs.

15

with this information we can construct the mandelstam diagram of the spec-
tral cover s. one can assign to all the p external cylinders and the (3gs  3 + p)
internal cylinders a radius equal to the quantized momentum  as determined
by momentum conservation. this requires to dene new coordinates on each of
the cylinders by rescaling w by /l where l is the radius measured using the
coordinates w. the radius of each of the cylinders is now . globally one patches
up the new coordinates w on each of the cylinders by imposing that going around
the b cycles the imaginary part of w is shifted by sa. the coordinates

w =  + i

(41)

built this way are dened globally and describe the mandelstam diagram. the
coordinates of the interaction points are now wi = i + ii, i = 1 . . . 2gs  3 + p.
the mandelstam diagram of s has been built by joining the p external cylin-
ders and the 3gs  3 + p internal cylinders. the relative orientation of the
at cylinders is prescribed by the dierent shifts i i = 1 . . . (2gs  3 + p) and
sa a = 1 . . . gs. the length of the cylinders is given by the interaction times i.
in another parameterization which will be useful when identifying the measure
over the instanton moduli space one can utilize the twisting angles

i = 2

i
i

, a = 2

sa
a

(42)

where the is and the as are the quantized momenta along the corresponding
internal cylinders. we have thus constructed a mandelstam diagram from the
coordinates of the interactions points ii and the quantized external and internal
momenta.

deformations of the mandelstam diagram by varying the positions of the
interaction points, the shifts and the momenta correspond to changing the pa-
rameters of the instantons. on the whole we have identied the moduli space of
instantons as a discretization of the moduli space of marked riemann surfaces.
this result had already be obtained in [11] using independent arguments. here
we have shown how this decomposition is intimately linked to the moduli space
of matrix string instantons. in the next section we will study the dynamics of
the string interactions more carefully and come back to the essential u(1) factor
in the semi-classical approximation.

4 the scattering amplitudes

the path integrals of matrix models can be evaluated in a semi-classical fashion
in the small string coupling limit[6]. the objects of interest are the scattering

16

amplitudes dened by the path integral

a(1, ...., n) = z dadxd(0)()v1...vv2es(x,a,).

(43)

the vertex operators are the analogue of the light cone string vertex operators.
we also have inserted a wave function at both ends of the cylinder. these wave
functions depend on the boundary values of the elds on the external circles.
the link between the vertex operators and the wave functions is the usual one,
i.e. obtained by integration over all the eld congurations on a small disc with
a vertex operator inserted at its centre. the vertex operators only involve the
diagonal part of the elds in a suitable gauge. the string interpretation of the
scattering amplitudes involves the semi-classical evaluation and the lifting of the
action to the spectral cover.

let us rst deal with the action in the semi-classical regime [6]. we expand
the action around the instantons. the instantonic conguration (a, x) is taken
in the gauge where the bosonic eld xd is diagonal. this amounts to applying a
multivalued gauge transformation u 1 to all the elds. in particular the diagonal
uctuations xi
d are multivalued due to the non-trivial monodromies at the branch
points.

the path integral measure needs to be dened by xing a gauge and intro-

ducing faddeev-popov ghosts. the gauge is xed by

gw w = a w + aw + ig2([xd, x] + [ xd, x]).

(44)

capital letters are only used for the background instantons. the fadeev-popov
action is

sf p = 

1

2g2 tr(z d2wc

g


c)

where  is the gauge variation parameter. the gauge xing is simply

sgf =

1

4g2 tr(z d2wg2).

(45)

(46)

(48)

the elds are dened by an appropriate rescaling. the diagonal elds ad, cd are
rescaled by a factor of g.

aw = gad

w + and

w , x = xd + xd +

xnd
g

, x i = xi

d +

xi
nd
g

,  = d +

nd
g

(47)

where i = 3..8 are the directions transverse to the instanton. the ghosts are
likewise

c = gcd + gcnd

17

and similarly for c. the euclidean action becomes

s = sd + snd + o(

1
g

)

(49)

the non-diagonal action snd is quadratic and can be integrated out giving unity
by supersymmetry. the higher order terms are all suppressed by the gauge
coupling constant. in the small string coupling limit we are left with a purely
diagonal path integral. the normalization of the diagonal elds has been chosen
in such a way that the quadratic action is independent of the string coupling
constant.

the evaluation of the path integral is not trivial due to the multivalued nature
of the diagonal elds. to obtain single-valued elds one needs to lift the elds to
the spectral cover. the spectral cover is dened by considering the instanton on
the riemann sphere  and pulling it back to the cylinder c via the conformal
mapping f : c  . one gets xc = f x. the spectral cover of the cylinder is
then obtain from the eigenvalue equation det(xc) = 0. this allows use to use
the previous results and lift the elds from the riemann sphere to the spectral
cover.

the diagonal vectors xdj, j = 1 . . . n dene a section x of a line bundle on the
spectral cover s by the rule x(i(z)) = xi(z) where i(z) is the ith eigenvalue of
xd at z. similarly the gauge eld is lifted to the spectral cover leading to a one
form ai(z) = a(i)di/d. this leaves us with an action dened on the spectral
cover s for the bosonic elds

1


(z d2gaa + z d2xi

dxi
d)

(50)

the integration is over s. notice that the metric vanishes at the interaction
points. at these points the inverse metric is ill dened and the semi-classical
approximation breaks down. the action for the ghost fermions c, c is easily
derived

1

 z d2c c

(51)

the ghost elds are anticommuting scalars on the spectral cover.

we can now turn to the space time fermions. as dened in the path integral
over the cylinder these elds are anticommuting scalars on the world sheet. they
can be promoted to world sheet fermions on the spectral cover. this requires
the use of the one form  and its square root. the square root of the one form
 requires the choice of a spin structure on the spectral cover. this amounts
to choosing the square root along non-trivial cycles. the spin structure is speci-
ed by 2gs signs corresponding to such a choice. once a spin structure has been
chosen it is called even if the product of the 2gs signs is even and odd in the oppo-
site case. this endows the spectral cover with the structure of a super-riemann

18

surface. to maintain the physical interpretation of the space-time fermions we
impose that the square root of  picks up a minus sign on all the possible cycles
of the string diagram. the spin structure is then even.

this allows to transform the space time fermions into world sheet fermions

with values in the spin representations of so(8)

 = ,   =  .

(52)

the action for the fermions ,  is lifted to the spectral cover to give the usual
dirac action

i

 z d2(     +  ).

(53)

notice that the choice of the spin structure implies that there are cuts ending at
the interaction points and the marked points.

on the whole we nd that the end-result of the semi-classical approximation is
to produce a theory dened on the spectral cover of the matrix string instantons.
once the spectral cover is specied the theory is given by the light-cone green-
schwarz action for space-time bosons and fermions. the space time fermions are
also world sheet fermions on the spectral cover. this theory is coupled to a u(1)
theory.

before completing the analysis of the path integral it is noteworthy to consider
the hamiltonian formulation of the theory. this is most conveniently achieved by
considering the at coordinates w and the time axis  on the string diagrams. us-
ing these coordinates the actions for the scalars, fermions and gauge elds reduce
to free eld theories dened on the at cylinders forming the string diagrams. in
the hamiltonian picture there are green-schwarz string states |gs > propagating
along each of these cylinders and interacting at the interaction points. because
of the presence of non-trivial u(1) backgrounds as the intermediate states | >
are also characterized by fractional momenta  on all the internal and external
cylinders. there are also fractional shifts sa for gs internal cylinders. the hilbert
space of the theory is

(54)
where hgs is the hilbert space of the gs states |gs > and r is the hilbert
space deduced from the quantization of the u(1) theory.
consider one of the cylinders on the spectral cover, we normalize its radius

h = hgs  r

to l. the corresponding u(1) action is then

1

2g2 z 2l

0

d d(0a1)2

(55)

in the gauge a0 = 0. in this gauge it is convenient to introduce the wilson line

g = e2ila1

19

(56)

at a given time  for  independent gauge elds. in terms of this wilson line the
action reads

1

42lg2 z d| g|2

(57)

(58)

and the hamiltonian

h = 42lg2|p|2.

this is the hamiltonian of a free particle on a circle. the motion of this free
particle depends on the dierent types of boundary conditions, i.e. on the discrete
wilson lines.
in the untwisted sector the circle is identical to r/2z. in the
twisted sectors with a wilson line k/n the eigenvectors pick up a phase e2ik/n .
in all cases denoting by  the angular variable the momentum reads i/ with
eigenvectors e2i(n+k/n ). the states |n, k > associated to these eigenvectors form
a basis of the u(1) hilbert space on the cylinder. there is one more subtlety due
to the possible shifts si along the bi cycles bording the cylinder. the hilbert space
r is spanned by all the |n, k, si > which are eigenstates of h on the dierent
cylinders and having a monodromy e2isi along the bi cycles.
it simply

let us come back to the energy associated to these eigenstates.

reads

h|n, k, si >= 42lg2(n + k/n)2|n, k, si > .

(59)

combined with the eigenstates of the gs hamiltonian h0 acting on light cone gs
states we obtain eigenstates spanning the hilbert space h. the total hamiltonian
reads ht = h + h0. the propagation of the eigenstates from one end of the
cylinder to the other end gives the evolution operator in euclidean time

e (42lg2(n+k/n )2+(pi )2+m2)

(60)

where m is the mass of the gs state and pi its transverse momentum. notice that
the corrections to the gs eigenvalues are non-perturbative and of order 1/g2
s . in
the limit gs  0 the only non-vanishing terms satisfy n = 0, i.e. the contributions
from the winding modes decouple. moreover the non-perturbative corrections to
the string scattering amplitude vanish altogether provided g2
sn 2/l  . for
the long strings where l  n the most stringent condition is then

g2
s n  .

(61)

in the nite gs and n cases the string amplitude is corrected by non-perturbative
contributions coming from the creation of d0 branes.

to study the string scattering amplitude we change coordinates and use the
w coordinates. in these coordinates the radius of each cylinder is equal to the
momentum  = k/n. the light cone hamiltonian whose bosonic part is

1

2 z 2

0

)2 + (

xi
d


)2)

d((

xi
d


20

(62)

has eigenvalues 2p where

the evolution operator is now

p =

(pi)2 + m2

2

.

e2ip

(63)

(64)

where we have performed a wick rotation on the world sheet. this evolution op-
erator coincides with the light cone string eld evolution operator. more precisely
the evolution operator is associated to the hamiltonian[16]

k = i


  h0.

(65)

this hamiltonian is easily identied with the light cone string eld hamiltonian
with the canonical quantization rule [x, p] = i yielding p = i/x. we
obtain the following
(66)
similarly with p+   = i/x we nd that the x coordinate is periodic, the
radius of the circle parameterized by x is

x+ = 2.

r = n.

(67)

this completes the identication of the small string coupling regime of matrix
string theory with light cone string theory where the radius r goes to innity
with n. in conclusion we have seen that the large n limit is necessary in order
to decouple non-perturbative eects and decompactify the x direction.

we can now make the above picture global. to do so we use the global co-
ordinates w patched up to construct the mandelstam diagram. by inserting a
complete set of observables at the internal ends of the cylinders we build the scat-
tering amplitude by propagating the states with the e2iip evolution operator
on each internal cylinder. we still have to specify the interaction vertices. this
necessitates to study the ghost action and its zero modes.

5 picture changing operators and supermod-

uli

the usual rules of string perturbation theory prescribe the inclusion of picture
changing operators at the string interaction points[4]. in the rns string context
the picture changing operators appear after integrating over the supermoduli[13,
14]. to do so one deforms the super-riemann surface structure by an anticom-
muting 1/2 tensor v and x the two-dimensional gravitino eld v to be equal to
a linear combination of the super-moduli. the deformation of the super-riemann

21

surface induces a supersymmetry transformation of the bosons and fermions. this
leads to a direct coupling of the gravitino to the supersymmetric current. the
integration over the components of the gravitino yields an insertion of the super-
symmetric current at all the interaction points and hence the picture changing
operators.

in this section we will repeat parts of this construction. the deformation
of the super-riemann surface will lead to the inclusion of the picture changing
operators at the interaction points as already discussed in the dvv paper.

in the following we shall need to integrate functionally over various types of
tensors on s. we dene it by considering the hilbert space of square integrable
n tensors dened by the scalar product

(n, n) = z d2(g)1n nn.

(68)

imposing that the integral is well-dened in the vicinity of the interaction points
implies that for meromorphic tensors such that n  1/p one should verify that
p < 2  n. functions can have at most a pole at the interaction points. the
spinors n = 1/2 can also develop a pole. the one-forms have to be holomorphic
while the quadratic dierentials have to vanish. the same analysis in the vicinity
of a marked point where the metric admits a pole implies that p < n. thus
functions have to vanish at the marked points while tensors of higher degrees can
either be constant for n = 1 or have a pole n  2.
let us now study the normalizable ghost zero modes. the gauge elds (a, a)
have been lifted to the spectral cover where they become single-valued. this
entails that the only normalizable zero modes of the gauge elds are the gs
holomorphic dierentials. this is dierent for the ghosts. indeed there are zero
modes of the fermionic ghosts which are normalizable though not single-valued
on the spectral cover. these zero modes are solutions of

c = 0

(69)

corresponding to meromorphic 1/2 tensors 1/2 on the spectral cover under the
world sheet boson-fermion correspondence sending 1/2  1/2
 1/2. these
meromorphic zero modes 1/2 are well dened on the whole spectral cover apart
from possible singularities at the interaction points where the metric vanishes.
their images under the boson-fermion correspondence yield (2gs  2 + p) multi-
valued ghost zero modes5.
it is easy to construct the zero modes 1/2 in the case of an even spin structure.
one can nd for each of the 2gs  2 + p interaction points a single zero mode
5 one can also nd gs meromorphic zero modes obtained from the gs holomorphic dier-
entials. the integration over the ghost elds is dened by discarding, in a similar way to the
integration over the gauge elds, these gs meromorphic zero modes.

22

with a simple pole with residue one located at one of the interaction points ii,
the szego kernel sii(). this leads to a 2gs  2 + p family of ghost zero modes.
are in one to one correspondence with the super-moduli of
these zero modes  1
the spectral cover, i.e. the holomorphic 3/2 dierentials

2

 3

2

=  1

2

.

(70)

c = pa ma1/2
 a

the integration over the ghosts (c, c) is obtained by decomposing the zero modes
form a basis of the zero modes. the coordinates
ma are the anticommuting super-moduli coordinates. the measure of integration
over the zero modes is

where the a

1
2

1
2

(ya

dmad ma)| det(a

1
2

, b

1
2

1

)|

where the integration is over the anticommuting variables (ma, ma).
the light cone green-schwarz action possesses a supersymmetry

xi = i

  ,   = i
 

xi

(71)

(72)

where  is a spinor. in particular the variation of the action under this super-
symmetry reads

s = 

1

 z d2j

where we have dened

the derivative

j = i
 

xi .

 = 

(73)

(74)

(75)

plays the role of a gravitino. similar expressions can be written with j .

the gravitino eld is a classical eld which encapsulates the super- riemann
surface status. in particular the light-cone green-schwarz action is written for
 = 0. the deformation of the super-riemann structure induces a non-zero
value for the gravitino eld. consider a (0,1/2) anticommuting tensor v which
parameterizes the deformation of the super-riemann surface. using a local basis
for the spinors u, e.g. a local section of the bundle k 1/2
s  s+ where s+ is
the vector bundle modeled on the spin representation of so(8) is of the form
 =   u, we can dene the supersymmetry parameter

 = vu

(76)

the action is not invariant under the supersymmetry transformations parame-
terized by . the scattering amplitude is only invariant if the expansion of the

23

gravitino eld is chosen to involve the supermoduli which are explicitly integrated
over

2gs2+p

 = (

xi=1

mii)  u

(77)

where the is dene a slice of the supermoduli space. they form a basis of the
(1,1/2) tensors. the coupling of the gravitino eld to the supercurrent leads
to a sum of terms in correspondence with each of the interaction points

mi

 z d2iuj.



(78)

integrating over the supermoduli is now easy, it amounts to expanding the expo-
nential of the action and picking the linear terms in the supermoduli. this leads
to the following insertion at each of the interaction points

z d2i xi i

(79)

where we have dene the world-sheet fermion with values in the vector represen-
tation of so(8)

a convenient choice for the is is to be -function supported[14] leading to the
insertion of

at the interaction point ii. we have included the left and right sectors. this is
the operator insertion introduced in dvv.

having identied the interaction generated by the integration over the super-
moduli let us come back to the origin of the eld i . as dened it involves a
local section of the so(8) spin bundle u. introducing the twist eld

 =

1


and using the section u one can dene the world-sheet spinor

  = u 

from which one can derive the operator product expansion

()i(0) 

i
 

 (0)

(82)

(83)

(84)

in the neighbourhood of one of the interaction points. of course this identies
the pair (i,  ) with the spin elds associated to .

24

i = i

 u .

xi i  xi i

(80)

(81)

finally let us comment on the ambiguities of the integration over the super-
moduli. the insertion of the picture changing operator is intimately linked to
the choice of the basis i. another choice for the is result in a dierent result
after integration over the supermoduli. as in the case of superstring perturba-
tion theory this ambiguity might only be resolved by a global denition of the
integration over the supermoduli space.

6 the large n limit of the scattering ampli-

tudes

we have now identied the scattering amplitudes in matrix string theory with a
discrete version of the light cone string scattering amplitudes. the discretization
appears in the x sector of the theory. moreover we have reproduced the dvv
operator insertion at the string interaction points. in this section we consider the
issue of the integration measure over the instanton moduli and the link with the
weil-petersson measure.

in the path integral we consider a background abelian gauge eld as as de-
ned in section 3 and expand around this background conguration. one has to
sum over all the possible wilson lines to take into account the dierent possible
backgrounds. in the small coupling regime the contribution from the background
gauge eld decouples leaving a gaussian integral dened by excluding from the
path integration over the one-form a the zero modes due to the gs holomorphic
abelian dierentials on the spectral cover. the result of the gaussian integral is
given by the determinant of 1 acting on one-forms. there is a correspondence
1  1/ between the normalizable eigenvectors 1 of 1 and the normaliz-
able eigenvectors 0 of the laplacian on scalars 0 for non-vanishing eigenvalues.
this gives for the integral over a

1

det 0

(85)

the constant zero mode is not in the hilbert space as it is not a normalizable
mode. similarly the integral over the eight scalar coordinates leads to a factor

combining the two determinants we nd a factor of

1

det4 0

1

det5 0

(86)

(87)

the quadratic action of the ghost eld leads to a gaussian integration over non-
zero modes. the resulting integration yields the determinant of the laplacian

25

operator acting on scalars

combined with the integration over the space time fermions we get a factor of

det (0).

(88)

det 5(0).

(89)

cancelling the bosonic determinants.

let us now come to grips with the integration over the matter elds xd and
(, ). recall that the fermions (, ) are world-sheet fermions on the spectral
cover with values in the spin representations of so(8). we use the mandelstam
d, ,  ) and the following
coordinates w. consider now a polynomial p (xi
vertex operator

d, xi

v = p (xi

d, xi

d, ,  )eipi xi

d

(90)
corresponding to the insertion of states |phys >= v |0 > with momentum pi at
one of the marked points of the spectral cover. these vertex operators allow to
dene the string wave functions which are inserted at the end of the open cylinders
of the mandelstam diagram. the open cylinders are obtained using a cut-o
limiting the length of the external cylinders. the ends of the open cylinders are
located at times a. consider the wave function specied by the boundary string
conguration (xi

d = x0,  = 0,  = 0) at the end of an external cylinder

a(x0, 0, 0, a) = zx0,0, 0 dxi

ddd  vaes(xi

d,,  )

(91)

obtained by integrating over the elds dened on the innite cylinder   [, a]
and the disc closing the cylinder at innity where the vertex operator va is in-
serted. the explicit dependence on the stopping times a of the wave function
i(a) is removed by inserting the propagator[16]

a(x0, 0, 0) = e2ip

a aa(x0, 0, 0, a)

(92)

a , pi

a , p

where (p+
a) is the momentum of the state inserted at the marked point
pa. the momentum p+
a appears explicitly in the construction of the mandelstam
diagram, the momentum p
a completes
the mass shell condition. the scattering amplitude is obtained by integrating the
d, ,  ) subject to the boundary
wave functions a over the space-time elds (xi
conditions (x0, 0, 0) at the end of the external cylinders

a is explicit in the wave function a while pi

z dxi

ddd  (

2gs 2+p

yi=1

vi)(

p

ya=1

a)es(xi

d,,  ) =<

p

ya=1

a(pa) >

(93)

where the dvv operators vi have been inserted at the interaction points 6.

6 there is a vanishing factor coming from the liouville action due to the non-chiral splitting

of the laplacian acting on fermions. it is given by ((qi (pi))/(qi (ii)))1/3 where  is the

weyl factor. this term has to be absorbed in the denition of the path integral

26

we still have to take into account the sum over the classical instantons. this
amounts to summing over the moduli space of the instantons. moreover we must
divide by the number of twisted sectors due to the twisting by wilson lines. on
the whole this leads to

a =

1

n 2gs xk1...k2gs

zmr

d| det(a

1
2

, b

1
2

)|

1

<

p

ya=1

a(pa) >

(94)

where d is the measure of the instanton moduli space.

this measure species that one has to integrate over the coordinates of the
interaction points of the mandelstam diagram. a change of the parameters of
the instantons amounts to moving the coordinates of the interaction points. let
us describe the zero modes associated to the variation of the interaction points,
i.e. the tangent space to the moduli space[22]. locally around an interaction
point the spectral cover s0 is dened by

w0 =

1
2

2
0

(95)

corresponding to a one form 
and move the interaction point. the equation of the perturbed s reads

0xd = 0d0. let us perturb this spectral cover

w0 =

1
2

(  4).

(96)

the interaction point is at  = 2. the one form associated to s is 
(  2)d. it is easy to see that (  )d = 0d0 implying that

 xd =

 xd = 


0xd  

(97)

where  = d, i.e. the one form dening s0 has been perturbed by . notice that
the perturbation is holomorphic on s. this is not the case when pulled back to
s0 where it reads in the vicinity of the two singularities

  ( i/2
0  (i)

))1/2d0.

(98)

these innitesimal perturbations of so are determined by the one form d0/1/2
shifted away from the interaction points by i. so the zero modes characterizing
the tangent space to the moduli space are spanned by the analytic one forms with
a square root divergence at the interaction points of the spectral cover. globally

0

these one forms are found to be 1/2 where 1/2 is one of the 2gs2+p spinors

with a pole at the the interaction points. this identies the tangent space to the
moduli space and emphasizes the crucial role played by the interaction points. in
particular we retrieve the dimension of the moduli space 2gs  3 + p measuring
the relative positions of the interaction points.

27

the measure in terms of the coordinates wi of the interaction points is now

d = | det(a

1
2

, b

1
2

)|(

yi=1

dwid wi)

2gs 3+p

(99)

this is the measure on the at cylinders forming the mandelstam diagram. notice
that the determinant arising from the tangent space to the moduli space cancels
the determinant coming from the supermoduli measure. inserting this measure
in a we nd that the scattering amplitude is obtained by integrating over all the
possible topologies of the string diagram as specied by the coordinates of the
interaction points.

the scattering amplitude a on a spectral cover of genus gs carries a factor
of (1/g)2gs2+p coming from the 2gs  2 + p fermionic zero modes. this springs
from the rescaling c  gc used in the semi-classical expansion. now as the string
coupling is inversely proportional to g we nd that the scattering amplitude
is weighted with a factor g(s)
as it should in the string scattering expansion7.
notice that this amounts to adding a factor of gs to each of the interaction points.
so the scattering amplitude carries the appropriate factor of gs to be identied
with the string amplitude. together with the hamiltonian picture of gs states
propagating on the mandelstam diagram this shows that the scattering amplitude
of matrix string theory is similar to a discrete version of the usual type iia
superstring amplitude in the light cone gauge.

s

let us now investigate the n dependence of the scattering amplitude a. first
of all the geometry of the spectral cover is independent of n. indeed we have
seen that the number of moduli is uniquely specied by the genus gs and the
number of marked points p. fixing gs and p in the large n limit one can study
the amplitude on a prescribed string diagram. now the mandelstam diagram
depends on the momenta and shifts due to the wilson lines.
in the large n
limit these momenta and shifts cover the entire real line, the discretization step
1/n goes to zero. so we retrieve the light cone mandelstam diagrams of string
theory. in particular all the external and internal momenta become continuous.
it is then easy to see that in the large n limit the discrete sums in a converge to
a=1 adada. on the whole, combining with the
measure d, we reconstruct the weil-petersson measure over the moduli space of
marked riemann surfaces

the integral over the measure qgs

d wp = (

2gs 3+p

yi=1

ididi)(

gs

ya=1

adada)

(100)

in terms of the twisting angles i and a (42). the convergence towards the
weil-petersson measure is only a weak convergence.

7here the euler characteristic (s) is dened for the open riemann surface with punctures

obtained after removing a disc around the marked points.

28

having obtained the measure of the moduli space of curves in the large n limit
we nd that the scattering amplitude a coincides with the scattering amplitude
of superstring theory in the light cone gauge.

7 conclusion

we have given an explicit description of the moduli space of matrix string in-
stantons. they are dened in terms of (2gs  3 + p) continuous parameters in
correspondence with the deformations of the spectral cover. the scattering am-
plitudes in matrix string theory are equivalent to string scattering amplitudes on
a mandelstam diagram where the interaction points are free to move while the
momenta of the interacting strings are quantized due to the presence of discrete
wilson lines in the description of at bundles. the interaction points are associ-
ated to the supermoduli describing the structure of super-riemann surface on the
spectral cover. we have explicitly integrated over the supermoduli and retrieved
the dvv insertion of the picture changing operators at the interaction points.
finally we have studied the large n limit and shown that the measure on the
matrix string instanton moduli space converges to the weil-petersson measure
on the moduli space of marked riemann surfaces.

acknowledgements: i would like to thank d. bernard for useful comments on
vector bundles and f. nesti, p. vanhove and t. wynter for numerous discussions
on matrix theory. this work was partially supported by the eu training and
mobility of researchers program (contract fmrx-ct96-0012).

29

references

[1] r. dijkgra, e. verlinde and h. verlinde nucl. phys. b 500 (1997) 43.

[2] e. dhoker and d. h. phong rev. mod. phys. vol 60 (1988) 917.

[3] t. wynter phys. lett. b 415 (1997) 349

[4] s. mandelstam nucl. phys. b 64 (1973) 205.

[5] g. bonelli, l. bonora and f. nesti phys. lett. b435 (1998) 303.

[6] g. bonelli, l. bonora and f. nesti nucl. phys. b 538 (1999) 100.

[7] s. b. giddings, f. haquebord and e. verlinde nucl. phys b 537 (1999)

260.

[8] n. j. hitchin proc. lond. math. soc. 55 (1987) 59.

[9] n. j. hitchin topology 31 (1992) 449.

[10] n. j. hitchin duke math. j. 54 (1987) 255.

[11] g. bonelli, l. bonora, f. nesti and a. tomasiello matrix string theory

and its moduli space hep-th/9901093.

[12] i. k. kostov and p. vanhove phys. lett b 444 (1998) 196.

[13] e. verlinde and h. verlinde phys. lett b 192 (1987) 95.

[14] e. verlinde and h. verlinde lectures on string perturbation theory trieste

spring summer school on superstrings, april 1988.

[15] e. dhoker and s. b. giddings nucl. phys. b 291 (1987) 90.

[16] s. b. giddings fundamental strings in particles, strings and supernovae,
proceedings of the 1988 theoretical advanced study institute, brown uni-
versity, eds. a. jevicki and c. i. tan (world scientic, singapore, 1989).

[17] s. kobayashi dierential geometry of complex vector bundles princeton

university press.

[18] d. bernard nucl. phys. b 309 (1988) 145.

[19] r. donagi spectral covers in current topics in complex algebraic geometry,

math. scien. res. inst. publ. 28 (berkeley, ca1992/92) 65-86.

[20] s. b. giddings and s. a. wolpert comm. math. phys 109 (1987) 177.

[21] n. nekrasov comm. math. phys. 180 (1996) 587.

[22] t. wynter high energy scattering amplitudes in matrix string theory

hep/th 9905087

30

