9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
8

 

 
 

1
v
7
6
0
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

a hikers guide to k3

aspects of n = (4, 4) superconformal field theory

with central charge c = 6

werner nahm

katrin wendland

abstract

we study the moduli space m of n = (4, 4) superconformal eld theories with central
charge c = 6. after a slight emendation of its global description we nd the locations of
various known models in the component of m associated to k3 surfaces. among them are
the z2 and z4 orbifold theories obtained from the torus component of m. here, so(4, 4)
triality is found to play a dominant role. we obtain the b-eld values in direction of the
exceptional divisors which arise from orbifolding. for z4 orbifolds this yields an unexpected
result. we prove t-duality for the z2 orbifolds and use it to derive the form of m purely
within conformal eld theory. for the gepner model (2)4 and some of its orbifolds we nd
the locations in m and prove isomorphisms to nonlinear  models. in particular we prove
that the gepner model (2)4 has a geometric interpretation with fermat quartic target space.

this paper aims to make a contribution to a better understanding of the n = (4, 4) supercon-
formal eld theories with left and right central charge c = 6. ultimately, one would like to know
their moduli space m as an algebraic space, their partition functions as functions on m and
modular functions on the upper half plane, and an algorithm for the calculation of all operator
product coecients, depending again on m. this would constitute a good basis for the under-
standing of quantum supergravity in six dimensions, and presumably for an investigation of the
more complicated physics in four dimensions.
the moduli space m has been identied with a high degree of plausibility, though a number
of details remain to be claried. it has two components, mtori and mk3, one 16dimensional
associated to the fourtorus and one 80dimensional associated to k3. the superconformal eld
theories in mtori are well understood. one also understands some varieties of theories which
belong to mk3, including about 30 isolated gepner type models and varieties which contain
orbifolds of theories in mtori. in the literature one can nd statements concerning intersections
of these subvarieties, but not all of them are correct. indeed, their precise positions in m had
not been studied up to now. one diculty is due to the fact that the standard description of
mtori is based on the odd cohomology of the torus, which does not survive the orbifolding.
as varieties of superconformal theories mtori and mk3 cannot intersect for trivial reasons. as
ordinary conformal theories without z2 grading intersections are possible and will be shown to
occur.
the plan of our paper is as follows. in section 1 we will review known results following [am94,
asp96]. we correct some of the details and add proofs for wellknown conjectural features. in
section 1.1 we explain the connection between our description of mtori in terms of the even
cohomology and the one given by narain much earlier by odd cohomology [cent85, nar86].
both are eightdimensional, and they are related by so(4, 4) triality. section 2 deals with z2

email: werner@th.physik.uni-bonn.de
email: wendland@th.physik.uni-bonn.de

1

and z4 orbifold conformal eld theories. we arrive at a description for the subvarieties of these
theories within mk3. in particular, we present a proof for the wellknown conjecture that orbifold
conformal eld theories tend to give the value b = 1
2 [asp96, 4] to the b-eld in direction of the
exceptional divisors gained from the orbifold procedure and determine the correct b-eld values
for z4 orbifolds. we calculate the conjugate of torus t-duality under the z2 orbifolding map to
mk3 and nd that it is a kind of squareroot of the fouriermukai t-duality on k3. this yields
a proof of the latter and allows us to determine the form of mk3 purely within conformal eld
theory, without having recourse to landau-ginzburg arguments. we disprove the conjecture that
z2 and z4 orbifold moduli spaces meet in the gepner model (2)4 [eoty89]. we show that the z4
orbifold of the nonlinear  model on the torus with lattice  = z4 has a geometric interpretation
on the fermat quartic hypersurface.
section 3 is devoted to the study of special points with higher discrete symmetry groups in moduli
space, namely gepner models (actually (2)4 and some of its orbifolds by phase symmetries).
we stress that our approach is dierent from the one advocated in [fkss90, fks92] where
massless spectra and symmetries of all gepner models and their orbifolds were matched to those
of algebraic manifolds corresponding to these models. the correspondence there was understood
in terms of landau-ginzburg models, a limit which we do not make use of at all. we instead
explicitly prove equivalence of the gepner models under investigation to nonlinear  models.
this also enables us to give the precise location of the respective models within the moduli space
mk3. we prove that the gepner model (2)4 is isomorphic to the z4 orbifold and therefore to
the fermat quartic model studied in the previous section. we moreover nd two meeting points
of mk3 and mtori generalizing earlier results for bosonic theories [ks88] to the corresponding
n = (4, 4) supersymmetric models. in section 4 we conclude by gathering the results and joining
them to a panoramic view of part of the moduli space (gure 4.1).
in the context of  models we must x our  conventions. for ease of notation we use the
rather unusual  = 1, so t-duality for a bosonic string compactied on a circle of radius r reads
r 7 1
often, the leftright transformed analogue of some statement will not be mentioned explicitly, in
order to avoid tedious repetitions. fourier components of holomorphic elds are labelled by the
energy, not by its negative.

r . we hoped to save us a lot of factors of 2 this way.

1 the moduli space of n = (4, 4) superconformal eld the-

ories with central charge c = 6

we consider unitary two dimensional superconformal quantum eld theories. they can be de-
scribed as minkowskian theories on the circle or equivalently as euclidean theories on tori with
parameter  in the upper complex halfplane. the worldsheet coordinates are called 0, 1.
the hilbert space h of quantum eld theories has a real structure given by cpt. for any
n = (4, 4) superconformal theory h contains fourdimensional vector spaces ql and qr of real
left and right supercharges. since we consider left and right central charge c = 6, h carries the
action of an su(2) su(2) current algebra of level 1. the (3+3)-dimensional lie group generated
by the corresponding charges will denoted by su (2)susy
and its {(1 , 1 ), (1 ,1 )}
l
quotient by so(4)susy . the commutant of su (2)susy
in so(ql) will be called su (2)l. here and
in the following we use the notation so(w ) for the special orthogonal group of a real vector
space w with given scalar product.
one can identify su (2)susy
with su (2)l by selecting one vector in ql. the subgroup of so(ql)
which xes this vector is an so(3) group with surjective projections to the two su (2) groups
modulo their centers and allows an identication of the images. such an identication seems to
be implicit in many discussions in the literature, but will not be used in this section.

 su (2)susy

r

l

l

2

l

r

r

l

 u(1)susy

r

4 , 1; 1

we will consider canonical subspaces of h spanned by the states with specied conformal di-
mensions (h; h) which belong to some irreducible representation of su (2)susy
 su (2)susy
. the
latter are labelled by the charges (q; q) with respect to a cartan torus of su (2)susy
l  su (2)susy
.
since any two cartan tori are related by a conjugation, the spectrum does not depend on the
choice of this torus. charges are normalized to integral values, as has become conventional in
the context of extended supersymmetry.
we assume the existence of a quartet of spectral ow elds with (h, q; h, q) = ( 1
4 , 2), i 
in-
{1}. operator products with each of them yield a combined left+right spectral ow.
stead of using n = (4, 4) supersymmetry it suces to start with n = (2, 2) and this quartet.
indeed, the operator product of a pair of quartet elds yield lefthanded ow operators with
(h, q; h, q) = (1,2; 0, 0), and analogously on the righthanded side for another pair. these
enhance the u(1)susy
subalgebra of the n = (2, 2) superconformal algebra to an
1  a(1)
a(1)
1 kac-moody algebra. thus the n = (2, 2) superconformal algebra is enhanced to
n = (4, 4) [eoty89].
our assumptions are natural in the context of superstring compactication. there, unbroken
extended spacetime supersymmetry is obtained from n = (2, 2) worldsheet supersymmetry with
spectral ow operators [sen86, sen87]. thus our superconformal theories may be used as a
background for n = 4 supergravity in six dimensions. here, however, we concentrate on the
internal conformal eld theory. external degrees of freedom are not taken into account.
let us give a brief summary on what is known about the moduli space m so far. the hilbert
spaces of the conformal theories form a hilbert bundle over m. they can be decomposed into
irreducible representations of the left and right n = 4 supersymmetries. the irreducible rep-
resentations are determined by their lowest weight values of (h, q). these representations can
be deformed continuously with respect to the value of h, except for the representations of non-
zero witten index, also called massless representations [et88a, et88b, tao89]. apart from
the vacuum representation with (h, q) = (0, 0), the lowest weight states of massless representa-
tions are labelled by (h, q) = ( 1
4 ,1) or
(h, q) = ( 1
4 , 0) in the ramond sector. let us enumerate the representations which are massless
with respect to both the left and the right handed side. apart from the vacuum we already
mentioned the spectral ow operators with (h, q; h, q) = ( 1
4 , 2), i  {1}. they form
a vector multiplet under so(4)susy. since the vacuum is unique, there is exactly one multiplet
of such elds. on the other hand, the dimension of the vector space of real ( 1
4 , 0) elds is
not xed a priori. we shall denote it by 4 + . with a slight abuse of notation, the orthogonal
group of this vector space will be called so(4 + ). these are all the possibilities of massless
representations in the ramond sector. the corresponding ground state elds describe the entire
cohomology of landau-ginzburg or  model descriptions of our theories [lvw89].
if in a given model there is a eld with (h, q; h, q) = ( 1
2 ,1; 0, 0), application of spectral ows
and supersymmetry operators yields four lefthanded and four righthanded fermions and the
corresponding abelian currents. thus the model has an interpretation as nonlinear  model on
a torus, with the currents as generators of translation and the fermions as parallel sections of a
at spin bundle. such models have  = 0 and constitute the component mtori of m.
the vector space f1/2 spanned by the elds with (h, q; h, q) = ( 1
2 , 2), i  {1} is obtained
from the ( 1
4 , 0) ramond elds by spectral ow. thus it forms an irreducible 4(4 + )
dimensional representation of su(2)susy
r  so(4 + ). it determines the supersymmetric
deformations of the theory, as will be considered below.
the massless representations cannot be deformed, so  is constant over the generic points of
a connected component of m. tensor products of a massive lefthanded representation with a
righthanded massless representation cannot be deformed either, since hh must remain intergral.
the span of such tensor products in the hilbert space yields a string theoretic generalization of the

2 ,1) in the neveu-schwarz sector and by (h, q) = ( 1

l  su(2)susy

4 , 1; 1

4 , 0; 1

4 , 0; 1

2 , 1; 1

3

elliptic genus [sw86a, sw86b], which is constant for all theories within a connected component
of m. it vanishes over mtori. for all known theories in m  mtori it is the same [eoty89]
and is interpreted as index of a supercharge acting on the loop space of k3 [wit87, wit88].
we call one of our conformal eld theories associated to torus or k3, depending on the elliptic
genus. for the theories associated to k3 one has  = 16. since all theories in m are expected to
have a geometric interpretation in terms of a compactication on a ricci at kahler manifold,
no further components are expected to exist, but an algebraic proof is lacking.
to understand the local structure of the moduli space m we must determine the tangent space
h1 in a given point of m, i.e. describe the deformation moduli of a given theory. this space
is given by real elds of dimensions h = h = 1 in the hilbert space h over the chosen point.
the zamolodchikov metric [zam86] on the space of such elds establishes on m the structure
of a riemannian manifold, with holonomy group contained in so(h1). to preserve the su-
persymmetry algebra, h1 must consist of so(4)susy invariant elds in the image of f1/2 under
(ql)1/2(qr)1/2, where the latter subscripts denote fourier components. accordingly, f1/2h1
yields a wellknown representation of the osp(2, 2) superalgebra spanned by (ql)1/2, su(2)susy
and the virasoro operator l0. in particular, h1 should be 4(4 + )dimensional and form an
irreducible representation of su(2)l  su(2)r  so(4 + ). we shall assume that all elements of h1
really give integrable deformations, as expected from supersymmetric perturbation theory. note,
however, that there is no complete proof yet.
the holonomy group of m projects to an so(4 + ) action on the uncharged massless ramond
representations and to an so(4) action on ql  qr. thus its lie algebra is contained in su(2)l 
su(2)r  so(4 + ). the two lie algebras are equal for mtori and one expects the same for  = 16.
below we shall nd an isometry from mtori to a subvariety of mk3, such that the holonomy lie
algebra of the latter space is at least su(2)l  su(2)r  so(4). moreover, this isometry shows that
mk3 is not compact. since one has the inclusion

l

su(2)  su(2)  o(4 + ) = sp(1)  sp(1)  o(4 + )  sp(1)  sp(4 + ),

the moduli space of n = (4, 4) superconformal eld theories with c = 6 associated to torus or
k3 is a quaternionic kahler manifold of real dimension 4(4 + ). its local structure should follow
from bergers classication of quaternionic kahler manifolds [ber55, sim62]. indeed, it has been
argued that it must be given by a wolf space [ps90, cfg89, cec90]. it is not clear to us, however,
if a ricci at factor or products of wolf spaces have been conclusively excluded, though they are
certainly unlikely. in any case we assume that the moduli space locally is the wolf space

t 4,4+ = so+(4, 4 + ; r)(cid:14)so(4)  so(4 + ),

(1.1)

i.e. the grassmannian of oriented spacelike fourplanes x  r4,4+ [cec91], reproducing narains
and seibergs previous results [cent85, nar86, sei88]. here so+(w ) denotes the identity
component of the special orthogonal group so(w ) of a vector space w with given scalar product.
from the preceding discussion, x can be interpreted as the so(4)susy invariant part of the tensor
product of ql  qr with the four-dimensional space of charged ramond ground states. note that
the action of so(4) = su(2)l  su(2)r discussed above generates orthogonal transformations of
the fourplane x  t 4,4+ corresponding to the theory under inspection, whereas so(4 + ) acts
on its orthogonal complement.
we repeatedly used the splitting so(4) = su(2)l  su(2)r. consider the antisymmetric product
2x of the above fourplane x. we choose the orientation of x such that su(2)l xes the anti
selfdual part (2x) of 2x with respect to the zamolodchikov metric on t 4,4+ which is the
group invariant one.
when the theory has a parity operation which interchanges ql and qr, this induces a change of
orientation of x. the choice of an n = (2, 2) subalgebra within the n = (4, 4) superconformal

4

algebra corresponds to the selection of a cartan torus u(1)lu(1)r of su(2)lsu(2)r. this induces
the choice of an oriented twoplane in x. the rotations of x in this twoplane are generated by
u(1)l+r, those perpendicular to the plane by u(1)lr. thus the moduli space of n = (2, 2)
superconformal eld theories with central charge c = 6 is given by a grassmann bundle over m,
with bre so(4)/(so(2)l+r  so(2)lr) = s2  s2.
generic examples for our conformal theories are the non-linear  models with the oriented four
torus or the k3 surface as target space x.
in the k3 case, the existence of these quantum
eld theories has not been proven yet, but their conformal dimensions and operator product
coecients have a well dened perturbation theory in terms of inverse powers of the volume. we
tacitly make the assumption that a rigorous treatment is possible and warn the reader that many
of our statements depend on this assumption.
a nonlinear  model on x assigns an action to any twocycle on x. this action is the sum of
the area of the cycle for a given ricci at metric plus the image of the cycle under a cohomology
element b  h 2(x, r). since integer shifts of the action are irrelevant, the physically relevant
b-eld is the projection of b to h 2(x, r)/h 2(x, z). thus the parameter space of nonlinear 
models has the form ricci at metrics  b  elds. the corresponding teichmuller space is

t 3,3+  r+  h 2(x, r),

(1.2)

where x denotes the fourtorus or k3 target space. its elements will be denoted by (, v, b).
the rst factor of the product is the teichmuller space of ricci at metrics of volume 1 on
x, the second parametrizes the volume, and the last one represents the b-eld. the zamolod-
chikov metric gives a warped product structure to this space. worldsheet parity transformations
(0, 1) 7 (0, 1) change the sign of the cycles, or equivalently the sign of b, which yields an
automorphism of the parameter space.
target space parity for b = 0 yields a specic worldsheet parity transformation and thus an
identication of su(2)l with su(2)r. the corresponding diagonal lie algebra su(2)l+r generates
an so(3) subgroup of so(4). under the action of this subgroup, x decomposes into a line and
its orthogonal threeplane   x. the s2  s2 bundle over m now has a diagonal s2 subbundle.
each point in the bre corresponds to the choice of an so(2) subgroup of so(3) or a subalgebra
u(1)l+r of su(2)l+r. geometrically this yields a complex structure in the target space. thus the
s2 bundle over the b = 0 subspace of m is the bundle of complex structures over the moduli
space of ricci at metrics on the target space.
recall some basic facts about the teichmuller space t 3,3+ of einstein metrics on an oriented
fourtorus or k3 surface x. we consider the vector space h 2(x, r) together with its intersection
product, such that h 2(x, r) = r3,3+. in other words, positive denite subspaces have at most
dimension three, negative denite ones at most dimension 3 + . on k3 this choice of sign
determines a canonical orientation. when one wants to study mtori by itself, the choice of a
torus orientation is superuous. our main interest, however, is the study of torus orbifolds. for
a canonical blowup of the resulting singularities one needs an orientation. the eect of a change
of orientation on the torus will be considered below.
metric and orientation on x dene a hodge star operator, which on h 2(x, r) has eigenvalues +1
and -1. the corresponding eigenspaces of dimensions three and 3 +  are positive and negative
denite, respectively. let   h 2(x, r) be the positive denite threeplane obtained in this
way. the orientation on x induces an orientation on . one can show that ricci at metrics
are locally uniquely specied by , apart from a scale factor given by the volume. since the
hodge star operator in the middle dimension does not change under a rescaling of the metric,
the volume v must be specied separately. it follows that t 3,3+  r+ is the teichmuller space
of einstein metrics on x. explicitly, we have

t 3,3+ = so+(h 2(x, r))(cid:14)so(3)  so(3 + ).

5

(1.3)

the so(3) group in the denominator is to be interpreted as so(0) for some positive denite
reference threeplane in h 2(x, r), while so(3 + ) is the corresponding group for the orthogonal
complement of 0.
for higher dimensional calabi-yau spaces, the  model description works only for large volume
due to instanton corrections, but in our case the latter are absent [ns95]. therefore the teichmul-
ler space (1.2) of  models on x should be be a covering of a component of m, thus isomorphic
to the teichmuller space t 4,4+ obtained in (1.1). indeed, for  = 16 a natural isomorphism

t 4,4+ = t 3,3+  r+  h 2(x, r)

(1.4)

was given in [am94, asp96], with a correction and clarication by [rw98, dg99]. the same
construction actually works for  = 0, too. it uses the identication

t 4,4+ = so(h even(x, r))(cid:14)so(4)  so(4 + ),

where so(4) is to be interpreted as so(x0) for some positive denite reference fourplane in
h even(x, r), while so(4 + ) is the corresponding group for the orthogonal complement of x0.
in other words, the elements of t 4,4+ are interpreted as positive denite oriented fourplanes
x  h even(x, r) by h even(x, r) = r4,4+. note that all the cohomology of k3 is even, whereas
h odd(x, r) = r4,4 when x is a fourtorus.
to explicitly realize the isomorphism (1.4) one also needs the positive generators 0 of h 0(x, z)
and  of h 4(x, z), which are poincare dual to points and to the whole oriented cycle x, respec-
tively. they are nullvectors in h even(x, r) and satisfy h, 0i = 1. thus over z they span an
even, unimodular lattice isomorphic to the standard hyperbolic lattice u with bilinear form

now consider a triple (, v, b) in the right hand side of (1.4). dene

(cid:18) 0

1

1

0 (cid:19) .

 :   h even(x, r),
x := spanr(cid:16) () , 4 := 0 + b +(cid:16)v  kbk2

() :=   hb, i,

2 (cid:17) (cid:17) .

(1.5)

then e = () is a positive denite oriented threeplane in h even(x, r), and the vector 4 is
orthogonal to e. since k4k2 = 2v , it has positive square. together, e and 4 span an oriented

fourplane x  h even(x, r). obviously, the map (, v, b) 7 x is invertible, once  and 0 are
given.
to describe the projection from teichmuller space to m we need to consider the lattices h 2(x, z)
and h even(x, z). they are even, unimodular, and have signature (p, p + ) with p = 3 and p = 4,
respectively. such lattices are isometric to p,p+ = u p  e8(1)/8. here each summand is a
free z module, e8 has as bilinear form the cartan matrix of e8, and for any lattice  we denote
by (n) the same z module  with quadratic form scaled by n.
we now consider the projection from teichmuller space to m. first we have to identify all
points in t 3,3+ which yield the same ricci at metric. this means that we have to quotient the
teichmuller space (1.3) by the socalled classical symmetries. the projection is given by

so+(h 2(x, z))(cid:15)t 3,3+

(1.6)

[kt87]. here we use the notation so+() for the intersection of so+(w ) with the automorphism
group of a lattice   w . the interpretation of the quotient space (1.6) as moduli space of
einstein metrics of volume 1 on x is straightforward in the torus case, but for x = k3 one has

6

t 4,4+  so+(h even(x, z))(cid:15)t 4,4+.

(1.7)

to include orbifold limits (see section 2). the corresponding  models are not expected to exist
for all values of b [wit95]. to simplify the discussion we include such conifold points in m.
on t 4,4+ the group of classical symmetries lifts by (1.5) to the subgroup of so+(h even(x, z))
which xes both lattice vectors  and 0.
next we consider the shifts of b by elements   h 2(x, z), which neither change the physical con-
tent. one easily calculates that this also yields a left action on t 4,4+ by a lattice automorphism
in so+(h even(x, z)), generated by w 7 w  hw, i for hw, i = 0 and 0 7 0 +   kk2
2 .
these transformations x  and shift 0 to arbitrary nullvectors dual to . thus the choice of
0 is physically irrelevant.
we shall argue that the projection from teichmuller space to m is given by

the group so+(h even(x, z)) acts transitively on pairs of primitive lattice vectors of equal length
[lp81, nik80b]. thus (1.7) would imply that dierent choices of , 0 are equivalent. for mtori
(1.7) is indeed the correct projection [cent85, nar86].
anticipating this result in general, we call the choice of an arbitrary primitive nullvector  
h even(x, z) a geometric interpetation of a positive oriented fourplane x  h even(x, z). such
a choice yields a family of  models with physically equivalent data (, v, b). a conformal eld
theory has various dierent geometric interpretations, and the choice of  is comparable to a
choice of a chart of m.
aspinwall and morrison also identify theories which are related by the worldsheet parity trans-
formation. we regard the latter as a symmetry of m.
it is given by change of orientation
of the fourplane x or equivalently by a conjugation of so+(h even(x, r)) with an element of
so(h even(x, r))  so+(h even(x, r)) which transforms the lattice h even(x, z) and the refer-
ence fourplane x0 into themselves. to stay in the classical context, one can choose an element
which xes  and 0.
let us consider the general pattern of identications. when two points in teichmuller space are
identied the same is true for their tangent spaces. higher derivatives can be treated by pertur-
bation theory in terms of tensor products of the tangent spaces h1. assuming the convergence of
the perturbation expansion in conformal eld theory, any such isomorphism can be transported
to all points of t 4,4+. therefore  model isomorphisms are given by the action of a group g()
on this space. in the previous considerations we have found a subgroup of g().
below we shall prove that the interchange of  and 0 also belongs to g(). when b = 0, this
yields the map (, v, 0) 7 (, v 1, 0). this is the fourier-mukai transform [rw98]. in the torus
case, it is known as t-duality and it seems natural to extend this name to x = k3. we will not
use the name mirror symmetry for this transformation.
it is obvious that classical symmetries, integral b-eld shifts t-duality and classical symme-
tries generate all of so+(h even(x, z)). thus g() contains all of this group. as argued in
[am94, asp96], it cannot be larger, since otherwise the quotient of t 4,4+ by g() plus the parity
automorphism would not be hausdor [all66]. for a proof of the hausdor.property of m one
will need some features of the superconformal eld theories, which should be easy to verify once
they are somewhat better understood. first, one has to check that all elds are generated by
the iterated operator products of a nite dimensional subspace of basic elds. next one has to
show that the operator product coecients are determined in terms of a nite number of basic
coecients, and that the latter are constrained by algebraic equations only. this would show
that m is an algebraic space. in particular, every point has a neighborhood which contains no
isomorphic point. all of these features are true in the known examples of conformal eld theories
with nite eective central charge, in particular for the unitary theories. they certainly should
be true in our case.

7

below, fourier-mukai duality will be obtained as a product of two known symmetries. it would
be interesting to nd theories for which it can be obtained directly. aspinwall and morrison have
announced that one gepner model has a geometric interpretation as a fermat curve and yields
such a theory, but the details of the calculation are complicated and have not been published.
apparently, they rely on the landau-ginzburg methods. an easier case should be the quotient
of the a4 lattice of volume 1 with vanishing b-eld by the binary icosahedral group, as we hope
to show in a subsequent publication.
in the context of  models, it often is useful to choose a complex structure on x. by what was
said above, the choice of an n = (2, 2) subalgebra of the n = (4, 4) algebra of a given theory x
corresponds to the choice of complex structure in every geometric interpretation of x. when such
a structure is given, the real and imaginary parts of any generator of h 2,0(x, c) span an oriented
two-plane   . conversely, any such subspace  denes a complex structure. this means that
the choice of an einstein metric is nothing but the choice of an s2 of complex structures on x, in
other words a hyperkahler structure. in terms of cohomology,  species h 2,0(x, c)h 0,2(x, c).
the orthogonal complement of  in h 2(x, r) yields h 1,1(x, r). any vector   h 1,1(x, r) of
positive norm yields a kahler class compatible with the complex structure and the hyperkahler
structure  spanned by  and .
since h 2(x, z) is torsionfree for tori and k3 surfaces, the neron-severi group n s(x) can be
identied with the picard lattice p ic(x) := h 2(x, z)  h 1,1(x, r). by a result of kodairas,
x is algebraic, if n s(x) contains an element  of positive length squared [kod64]. given a
hyperkahler structure  we can always nd    such that x becomes an algebraic surface. it
suces to choose  as the projection of  on  and  as the corresponding orthogonal complement.
the projection is non-vanishing, since the orthogonal complement of  in h 2(x, r) is negative
denite. varying  one obtains a countable innity of algebraic structures on x. thus the
occasionally encountered interpretation of moduli of conformal eld theories as corresponding to
nonalgebraic deformations of k3 surfaces does not make sense (this was already pointed out in
[cec91] by dierent arguments).

this selects a (2, 2) subalgebra of the (4, 4) superalgebra. we will refer to the choice of such a

the choice of    lifts to a corresponding choice of a two-plane e  x. as discussed above
twoplane as xing a complex structure. more precisely, the twoplane e species a complex

structure in every geometric interpretation of the conformal eld theory.

1.1 moduli space of theories associated to tori
originally, narain determined the moduli space mtori of superconformal eld theories associated
to tori by explicit construction of nonlinear  models [cent85, nar86]. using the formalism
given above, we can reproduce his description as follows.
let us consider tori of arbitrary dimension d. we change the notation by inverting the groups
elements, which exchanges group actions on the left and the right side by inversion. this yields

mtori = so(d)  so(d)(cid:15)so+(d, d)/so+(d,d).

(1.8)

the rspan of d,d is naturally isomorphic to rd  (rd), where rd is considered as an isotropic
subspace and w  denotes the dual of a vector space w , and analogously for lattices. thus
so(d, d) can be considered as the special orthogonal group of a vector space with elements (, )
with ,   rd and scalar product

(, )  (, ) =    +   .

there is a canonical maximal positive denite d-plane given by  =  in rd  (rd). the
group so(d)  so(d) is supposed to describe rotations in this d-plane and in its orthogonal

8

complement. in this description, the parity transformation consists of interchanging these two
orthogonal d-planes, plus a sign change of the bilinear form on rd,d.
now we use the isometry

v : so(d)(cid:15)gl+(d)  skew(d  d, r)  so(d)  so(d)(cid:15)so+(d, d) = t d,d

given by

v (, b) =(cid:18) 

0

0

(t )1 (cid:19)(cid:18) 1

b 1 (cid:19) .

0

(1.9)

(1.10)

we identify   gl+(d) with the image of zd under . finally we change coordinates by
pl := ( + )/2, pr := (  )/2, such that the scalar product becomes

(pl; pr)  (pl; pr) := plpl  prpr.

(1.11)

this means that the positive denite d-plane is given by pr = 0 and its orthogonal complement
by pl = 0. altogether a point in mtori is now described by the lattice

(  b + ;   b  )(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) (, )    o .

(, b) =n (pl(, ); pr(, )) := 12
the corresponding  model has the real torus t = rd/ as target space and b  h 2(t, r) =
skew(d  d, r) as b-eld. introducing d majorana fermions 1, . . . , d as superpartners of the
abelian currents j1, . . . , jd on the torus one constructs an n = (2, 2) superconformal eld theory
with central charge c = 3d/2 which will be denoted by t (, b). from equation (1.10) it is clear
that integral shifts of b and lattice automorphisms yield isomorphic theories.
the theory is specied by its charge lattice (, b). namely, to any pair (, )    
there corresponds a vertex operator v, carrying charge (pl(, ); pr(, )) with respect to
(j1, . . . , jd; 1, . . . , d) and with dimensions (h; h) = ( 1
r). thus h and h are the squares of
the projections of (pl; pr) to the positive denite d-plane and its orthogonal complement, respec-
tively. in this description, the parity operation is represented by the interchange of the latter
two planes plus a sign change in the quadratic form on rd,d.
the partition function of this theory is

(1.12)

2 p2

2 p2

l ; 1

z(, z) = z,b( )  1

2

i(, z)

( )

4xi=1(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

d

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

, z,b( ) =

1

2 (pl(,))2

1

2 (pr(,))2

q

,

q

1

|( )|2d x(,)

(1.13)
where q = exp(2i ) and analogously for q. the functions j(, z), j = 1, . . . , 4 are the classical
theta functions and ( ) is the dedekind eta function. for ease of notation we will write  =
( ), j (z) = j(, z), and j = j(, 0) in the following.
by considering h1, one easily checks that all theories in mtori are described by some even
unimodular lattice . we want to show that every such lattice has a  model interpretation
 = (, b) (see also [asp96]). choose a maximal nullplane y  rd,d = rd  (rd) such that
y     is a primitive sublattice. apply an so+(d, d) transformation such that the equation
of this plane becomes  = 0. put y   = (, 0). next choose a dual nullplane y 0 such that
y y 0 = rd,d and y 0   is a primitive lattice, too. existence of y 0 can be shown by a gram
type algorithm. then y 0 = {(b, ) |   rd} for some skew matrix b, and  = (, b).
note that dierent choices of y 0 merely correspond to translations of b by integral matrices. so
the geometric interpretation is actually xed by the choice of y alone as soon as b is viewed as
an element of skew(d)/skew(d  d; z).
in this interpretation, rd is identied with the cohomology group h 1(rd/zd, r) of the reference
torus t = rd/zd. in addition to its dening representation, the group so+(d, d) also has half-
spinor representations, namely its images in so+(h odd(t, r)) and in so+(h even(t, r)). for

9

d = 4 one has the obvious automorphism so+(4, 4) = so+(h odd(t, r)), which together with
so+(4, 4) = so+(h even(t, r)) yields the celebrated d4 triality [lm89, i.8].
it is the latter
automorphism which we will need in this paper, since the odd cohomology of x does not survive
orbifold maps.
note that for spin(4, 4) representations on r4,4 there is the same triality relation as for spin(8)
representations on r8, i.e. an s3 permuting the vector representation, the chiral and the antichiral
weyl spinor representation. the role of triality is already visible upon comparison of the geometric
interpretations, where the analogy between choices of nullplanes y, y 0 as described above and
nullvectors , 0 in (1.5) is apparent. indeed, part of the triality manifests itself in a one to one
correspondence between maximal isotropic subspaces y  r4,4 and null weyl spinors  such that
y = {y  rd,d | c(y)() = 0} where c denotes cliord multiplication on the spinor bundle [bt88].
one can regard this as further justication for interpreting  as volume form which generates
h 4(t, z) in our geometric interpretation. recall also that in both cases dierent choices of y 0, 0
correspond to b-eld shifts by integral forms.
we now explicitly describe the isomorphism (1.8) to show that it as a triality automorphism. first
compare (1.9) to (1.4) and notice that skew(4) = r3,3 which will simply be written skew(4) 
b 7 b  r3,3 in the following. moreover, because |det | is the volume of the torus t = rd/,
we can decompose o(4)\gl(4) = so(4)\sl(4) r+. now let t0 = r4/0 where 0 is a lattice
of determinant 1 and is viewed as element of sl(4). consider the induced representation  of
sl(4) on the exterior product 2(r4) which denes an isomorphism 2(0) = h2(t0 , z) for
every 0  sl(4). because  commutes with the action of the hodge star operator  and 2 = 1
on twoforms, sl(4) is actually represented by o(3, 3). in terms of coordinates as in (1.10) and
with  = v 1/40 = (1, . . . , 4), v = |det |, we can write

 (0) = v 1/2 (1  2 , 1  3 , 1  4 , 3  4 , 4  2 , 2  3)

(1.14)

 o (h2(t, r)) = o(3, 3).

because o++(3, 3) = sl(4)/z2 and so(3)  so(3)/z2 = so(4) we nd so(4)(cid:15)sl(4) = t 3,3

and all in all have

t 4,4

(1.9)

= o(4)(cid:15)gl+(4)  skew(4) = t 3,3  r+  r3,3

(1.4)

= t 4,4.

(1.15)

by (1.15) the geometric interpretation of a superconformal eld theory is translated from a
in terms of  = h1(t, z), to a
description in terms of the lattice of the underlying torus, i.e.
description in terms of h2(t, z) = 2(). this translation is essential for understanding the
relation between the moduli spaces mtori and mk3. to actually arrive at the description (1.4)
in terms of hyperkahler structures, i.e. in terms of h 2(t, z), we have to apply poincare duality
or use the dual lattice  instead of . this is a technical step which we omit for the following
discussion and assume to be done in concrete calculations.
we insert the coordinate expressions in (1.10) and (1.5) into (1.15), write  = v 1/40, v = |det |
as before and arrive at

v (, b) 7 s(, b) =

0

0

v 1/2

0

(0)

0

0

0

v 1/2

.

(1.16)





1 bt  kbk2

2

0

0

1

0

b

1



observe that (1.16) is a homomorphism t 4,4  t 4,4 and thus gives a natural explanation for
the quadratic dependence on b in (1.5). moreover, (1.16) reveals the structure of the warped
product (1.4) alluded to before. but above all on lie algebra level one can now easily read o

10

that (1.16) is the triality automorphism exchanging the vector representation v with the spinor
representation s. namely, let h1, . . . , h4 denote generators of the cartan subalgebra of so(4, 4).
here hi generates dilations of the radius ri of our torus in direction i. noting that exp(hi)
scales v 1/2 by e/2 and using (1.14) one then nds that (1.16) indeed is induced by the triality
automorphism which acts on the cartan subalgebra by

h1 7 1
h3 7 1

2 (h1 + h2 + h3 + h4), h2 7 1
2 (h1  h2 + h3  h4), h4 7 1

2 (h1 + h2  h3  h4),
2 (h1  h2  h3 + h4) :

h2+h4

 

  

t

t

h1h3


h2h3

 

t

h2h4

t

it is interesting to notice that so(4, 4) triality appears in various disguises in the context of
string compactication. as communicated to us by n. obers in connection with the calculation
of g(z) invariant string theory amplitudes one can use triality to write down new identities for
eisenstein series [opa, opb].
we now come to a concept which is of major importance in the context of calabi-yau com-
pactication and nonlinear  models, namely the idea of large volume limit. a precise notion is
necessary of how to associate a unique geometric interpretation to a theory described by an even
self dual lattice  when parameters of volume go to innity. intuitively, because of the unique-
ness condition, this should describe the limit where all the radii of the torus in this particular
geometric interpretation are large. because in the charge lattice (1.12)    and    are
interpreted as winding and momentum modes, the corresponding nullplane y should have the
property

y   =n 12

(; )  (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)kk2  1o n (pl; pr)  (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) kplk2  1,kprk2  1o =:e.

because kplk2 kprk2  z, for (pl; pr) e we have kplk2 = kprk2. this shows y   =e because

any (pl; pr) 6 y  = y must have large components. moreover, if a maximal isotropic plane y as
in (1.17) exists, then it is uniquely dened, thus yielding a sensible notion of large volume limit.

(1.17)

(1.18)

1.2 moduli space of theories associated to k3 surfaces

we now give some more details about the moduli space of conformal eld theories associated to
k3 which we will concentrate on for the rest of the paper, namely

mk3 = so+(h even(x, z))(cid:15)t 4,20

l

 su(2)susy

by (1.7). for other presentations see [am94, rw98, dg99].
in the decomposition (1.4) we determine the product metric such that it becomes an isometry. in
particular, it faithfully relates moduli of the conformal eld theory to deformations of geometric
objects. recall that the structure of the tangent space of mk3 in a given superconformal eld
theory is best understood by examining the ( 1
2 )-elds in f1/2. in our case we have related it to
the su(2)susy
1/4, where
1/4 denotes the charged and h(0)
h(4)
1/4 the uncharged ramond ground states. the invariant subspace
of ql  qr  h(4)
1/4 yields a fourplane with an orthogonal group generated by su(2)l  su(2)r.
when a frame in ql  qr is chosen, the latter tensor product factor can be omitted. the
description of m implies that h(4)
1/4 has a natural non-degenerate indenite metric and
remains invariant under deformations, but it has not been understood how this comes about.
in terms of the fourplane x  t 4,20 giving the location of our theory in moduli space, specic

invariant subspace of the tensor product ql  qr  h(4)

1/4  h(0)

1/4  h(0)

2 , 1

r

11

vectors in the tangent space txt 4,20 are described by innitesimal deformations of one generator
  x in direction x leaving   x invariant.
to formulate this in terms of a geometric interpretation (, v, b) specied by (1.5), pick a basis
1, . . . , 19 of   h 2(x, r) = r3,19. then x is spanned by {i  hi, bi ; i = 1, . . . , 19}
and 20 := 0 + b  (kbk2
2 + v ). in each of the so(4) bres over i  hi, bi , i = 1, . . . , 19
we nd a threedimensional subspace deforming generators of  by i, as well as the deformation
of b in direction of i. the bre over 20 contains b-eld deformations in direction of  and
the deformation of volume. all in all, a 3  19 = 57 dimensional subspace of h1 = txmk3 is
mapped onto deformations of  by (1, 1)-forms     h 2(x, r)  h 1,1(x, r), no matter
what complex structure we pick in . the 23 dimensional complement of this subspace is given
by 19 + 3 deformations of the b-eld by forms   h 2(x, r) and the volume deformation.
one of the most valuable tools for understanding the structure of the moduli space is the study
of symmetries. so the next question to be answered is how to translate symmetries of our super-
conformal eld theory to its geometric interpretations. those symmetries which commute with
the su(2)l  su(2)r action leave the fourplane x invariant and are called algebraic symmetries.
when the n = (4, 4) supersymmetric theories are constructed in terms of (2, 2) supersymmetric
theories one has a natural framing. in this context, algebraic symmetries are those which leave
the entire vector space ql  qr of supercharges invariant. more generally, any abelian symme-
try group of our theory projects to a u(1)l  u(1)r subgroup of su(2)l  su(2)r and xes the
corresponding n = (2, 2) subalgebra. when corresponding supercharges are xed, the abelian
symmetry group acts diagonally on the charge generators j, j of su(2)susy
. the
algebraic subgroup of this symmetry group is the one which xed these charges.
if the primitive nullvector  specifying our geometric interpretation (, v, b) is invariant upon the
induced action of an algebraic symmetry we call the latter a classical symmetry of the geometric
interpretation (, v, b). because a classical symmetry  xes x by denition we get an induced
automorphism of h 2(x, r) which leaves   h 2(x, r) and b  h 2(x, r)/h 2(x, z) invariant.
moreover, because 4 in (1.5) is invariant as well, 20 = 0 + b  (kbk2
2 + v ) is xed. thus 
acts trivially on moduli of volume and b-eld deformation in direction of . because  acts as
automorphism on h 1,1(x, r) =   h 2(x, r) for any choice of complex structure    on x
leaving the onedimensional h 1,1(x, r)   invariant, all in all, x 7 (, v, b) maps the action of
 to an automorphism of h 2(x, r) which on h 1,1(x, r) has exactly the same spectrum as 
on ( 1
if the integral action of  on h 2(x, c) is induced by an automorphism   aut(x) of nite
order of the k3 surface x, then by denition, because  acts trivially on h 2,0(x, c),  is
an algebraic automorphism [nik80a]. this notion of course only makes sense after a choice
of complex structure, or in conformal eld theory language an n = (2, 2) subalgebra of the
n = (4, 4) superconformal algebra xing generators j, j, j, j of su(2)l su(2)r. still, because
we always assume the metric to be invariant under  as well, i.e.   h 2(x, r) , this can
be regarded as mere technical remedy. on the other hand, given an algebraic automorphism 
of x which induces an automorphism of h 2(x, r) that leaves the b-eld invariant,  induces
a symmetry of our conformal eld theory which leaves j, j, j, j invariant. this in principle
gives a precise notion of how to continue such an algebraic automorphism to the conformal eld
theory level.
we are thus naturally led to a discussion of algebraic automorphisms of k3 surfaces, which are
mathematically well understood thanks to the work of nikulin [nik80a] for the abelian and mukai
[muk88] for the general case. the rst to explicitly take advantage of their special properties in
the context of conformal eld theory was p.s. aspinwall [asp95]. from [nik80a, th. 4.3,4.7,4.15]
one can deduce the following consequence of the global torelli theorem:

2 )-elds with charge q = q = 1.

2 , 1

l

 su(2)susy

r

theorem 1.1

12

let g denote an automorphism of h 2(x, c) of nite order which maps forms corresponding to
eective divisors of self intersection number 2 in p ic(x) to forms corresponding to eective

divisors. then g is induced by an algebraic automorphism of x i(cid:0)h 2(x, z)g(cid:1)  h 2(x, z) 
p ic(x) is negative denite with respect to the intersection form and does not contain elements
of length squared 2.
if for a geometric interpretation (, v, b) of x  so+(h even(x, z))\t 4,20 we have classical
symmetries which act eectively on what we read o as h 2(x, c) but are not induced by an
algebraic automorphism of the k3 surface x by theorem 1.1, then our interpretation of x as
giving a superconformal eld theory breaks down. such points should be conifold points of the
moduli space mk3, characterized by too high an amount of symmetry. one can regard nikulins
theorem 1.1 as harbinger of wittens result that in points of enhanced symmetry on the moduli
space of type iia string theories compactied on k3 the conformal eld theory description breaks
down [wit95].
by abuse of notation we will often renounce to distinguish between an algebraic automorphism
on k3 and its induced action on cohomology.
from mukais work [muk88, th. 1.4] one may learn that the induced action of any algebraic
automorphism group g on the total rational cohomology h(x, q) is a mathieu representation
of g over q, i.e. a representation with character

(g) = (ord(g)), where for n  n : (n) :=

24
(1 + 1
p )

n qp prime,

p|n

.

(1.19)

it follows that

dimq h(x, q)g = (g) :=

(ord(g))

(1.20)

1

|g|xgg

[muk88, prop. 3.4]. we remark that because g acts algebraically, we have dimq h(x, q)g =
dimr h(x, r)g = dimc h(x, c)g. by denition of algebraic automorphisms h(x, c)g 
h 0(x, c)  h 2,0(x, c)  h 0,2(x, c)  h 2,2(x, c), so

(g)  4 = dimr h 1,1(x, r)g.

(1.21)

moreover, from theorem 1.1 we know that(cid:0)h 2(x, r)g(cid:1)  h 1,1(x, r) is negative denite, and

because h 1,1(x, r) has signature (1, 19), we may conclude that it contains an invariant element
with positive length squared. thus (g)  5 for every algebraic automorphism group g [muk88,
th. 1.4]. moreover [muk88, cor. 3.5, prop. 3.6],

g 6= {1 } = (g)  16.

(1.22)

finally let us consider the special case of an algebraic automorphism  of order 4, which will be
useful in due course. by nk we denote the multiplicity of the eigenvalue ik of the induced action
 on h 1,1(x, c). because by (1.19) and (1.20) (z4) = 10 and (z2) = 16, using (1.21) we nd
n0 = 10  4 = 6, n2 = 16  4  n0 = 6. the automorphism  acts on the lattice h 2(x, z), so it
must have integer trace. on the other hand 20 = dimc h 1,1(x, c) = n0 + n1 + n2 + n3, hence

n0 = n2 = 6, n1 = n3 = 4.

(1.23)

2 special subspaces of the moduli space: orbifold theories

this section is devoted to the study of theories which have a geometrical interpretation on an
orbifold limit of k3. we begin by giving a short account on the relevant features of the orbifold
construction, for details the reader is refered to the vast literature, e.g. [dhvw86, dix87].

13

on the geometric side, the zl orbifold construction of k3 can be described as follows [wal88]:

consider a fourtorus t , where t = t 2  et 2 with two zl symmetric twotori t 2 = c/l, et 2 =
c/el which need not be orthogonal. let   zl act algebraically on (z1, z2)  t 2  et 2 by

(z1, z2) 7 (z1, 1z2). mod out this symmetry and blow up the resulting singularities; that is,
replace each singular point by a chain of exceptional divisors, which in the case of zl-xed points
have as intersection matrix the cartan matrix of al1. in particular, the exceptional divisors
themselves are rational curves, i.e. holomorphically embedded spheres with self intersection
in terms of the homology of the resulting surface x these rational curves are
number 2.
elements of h2(x, z)  h1,1(x, c). to translate to cohomology we work with their poincare
duals, which now are elements of p ic(x) with length squared 2. one may check that for
l  {2, 3, 4, 6} this procedure changes the hodge diamond by
1

1

1

2

2

2

2

4

1

1

7

1

0

0

1

0

0

20

1

and indeed produces a k3 surface x, because the automorphism we modded out was algebraic.
we also obtain a rational map  : t  x of degree l by this procedure. to x a hyperkahler
structure we additionally need to pick the class of a kahler metric on x. we will consider orbifold
limits of k3 surfaces, that is use the orbifold singular metric on x which is induced from the
at metric on t and assigns volume zero to all the exceptional divisors. the corresponding
einstein metric is constructed by excising a sphere around each singular point of t /zl and gluing
in an eguchi hanson sphere e2 instead for l = 2, or a generalized version el with boundary
el = s3/zl at innity and nonvanishing betti numbers b0(el) = 1, b2(el) = b2 (el) = l  1,
i.e. (el) = l. the orbifold limit is the limit these eguchi hanson type spheres have shrunk
to zero size in. the description (1.6) of the moduli space of einstein metrics of volume 1 on
k3 includes orbifold limits [kt87], and as was shown by anderson [and92] one can dene an
extrinsic l2-metric on the space e of regular einstein metrics of volume 1 on k3 such that the
completion of e is contained in the set of regular and orbifold singular einstein metrics.
on the conformal eld theory side the orbifold construction is in total analogy to the geometric
one described above. assume we know the action of zl on the hilbert space h of a conformal eld
theory with geometric interpretation on the torus t we had above. to construct the orbifold
conformal eld theory, keep all the invariant states in h and then  for the sake of modular
invariance, if we argue on the level of partition functions  add twisted sectors. for   zl,
the -twisted sector consists of states corresponding to elds  which are only well dened up to
-action on the world sheet of the original theory, that is  : z  t, (0 +1, 1) = (0, 1). z
denotes the conguration space as mentioned in the introduction and coordinates (0, 1), 0 
0 + 1, (0, 1)  (0 + 0, 1 + 1) are chosen such that (0, 0) is a xed point. in other words,
the constant mode in the fourier expansion of  is a xed point p of . the other modes are
of non integral level, so the ground state energy in the twisted sector is shifted away from zero.
more precisely, the ground state |,pi of the -twisted sector h,p belongs to the ramond
sector and has dimensions h = h = c
4 . the corresponding eld ,p introduces a cut in z
from (0, 0) to (0, 1)  (0, 0) to establish the transformation property (0 + 1, 1) = (0, 1)
for |i  h,p , often refered to as boundary condition. the eld ,p is called a twist eld. for
explicit formulae of partition functions for zl orbifold conformal eld theories see [eoty89], for
the special cases l = 2 and l = 4 we are studying here see (2.3) and (2.14).
to summarize, we stress the analogy between orbifolds in the geometric and the conformal eld
theory sense once again; in particular, the introduction of a twist eld for each xed point and

24 = 1

14

boundary condition corresponds to the introduction of an exceptional divisor in the course of
blowing up the quotient singularity, if we use the metric which assigns volume zero to all the
exceptional divisors. this correspondence has its manifestation in the fact that the yukawa cou-
plings of the orbifold conformal eld theory reproduce the intersection form of the corresponding
orbifold k3 surface.
by construction orbifold conformal eld theories have a prefered geometric interpretation in the
sense of section 1.2. we will now investigate this geometric interpretation for z2 and z4 orbifolds,
particularly taking advantage of their specic algebraic automorphisms. a program for nding
a stratication of the moduli space could even be formulated as follows: find all subspaces of
theories having a geometric interpretation (, v, b) with given algebraic automorphism group
g. relations between such subspaces may be described by the modding out of algebraic au-
tomorphisms. any innitesimal deformation of  by an element of h 1,1(x, r)g will preserve
the symmetries in g, as well as volume deformations and b-eld deformations by elements in
h 2(x, r)g. the subspace of theories with given classical symmetry group g in a geometric inter-
pretation therefore can maximally have real dimension 3((g) 5) + 1 + (g) 2 = 4((g)  4)
in accord with (1.21).
in particular, for the minimal value (g) = 5, the only deformations
preserving the entire symmetry are deformations of volume and those of the b-eld by elements
of .
of course, the above program is far from utterly realizable, even in the pure geometric context,
but it might serve as a useful line of thought. z2 orbifolds actually yield the rst item of this
program: we can map the entire torus moduli space into the k3 moduli space by modding
out the symmetry z 7 z. the description is straightforward if we make use of the geometric
interpretation of torus theories given by the triality automorphism (1.15), because the geometric
data then turn out to translate in a simple way into the corresponding data on k3.

2.1 z2 orbifolds in the moduli space
some comments on z2 orbifold conformal eld theories as described at the beginning of the
section are due, before we can show where they are located within the moduli space mk3. we
denote the z2 orbifold obtained from the nonlinear  model t (, bt ) by k(, bt ). if the theory
on the torus has an enhanced symmetry g we frequently simply write g/z2, e.g. su (2) 2
1 /z2 for
k(z4, 0).
in the nonlinear  model on the torus t = r4/ as described in section 1.1 the current jk
generates translations in direction of coordinate xk. this induces a natural correspondence
between tangent vectors of t and elds of the nonlinear  model which is compatible with the
o(4) action on the tangent spaces of t and the moduli space, respectively. after selection of an
appropriate framing of qlqr to identify su (2)susy
l,r with su (2)l,r as described in section 1 the k
are the superpartners of the jk. hence the choice of complex coordinates z1 := 12
(x1 +ix2), z2 :=
12

(x3 + ix4) corresponds to setting

(1)
 := 12

(1  i2), (2)

 := 12

(3  i4).

the holomorphic w -algebra of our theory has an su(2) 2

j := (1)
a := (1)

+ (1)
+ (1)

 + (2)
  (2)

+ (2)
j + := (1)
 ,
 , a+ := (1)
+ (2)

1 -subalgebra generated by
 (1)
 ;
+ (1)
 .

+ (2)
j := (2)
+ ,
 , a := (2)
+ (2)

(2.1)

(2.2)

its geometric counterpart on the torus is the cliord algebra generated by the twoforms dz1 
dz1 + dz2  dz2, dz1  dz2, dz1  dz2; dz1  dz1  dz2  dz2, dz1  dz2, dz2  dz1 upon cliord
multiplication.

15

the nonlinear  model on the kummer surface k() is the ordinary z2 orbifold of the above,
where z2 acts by jk 7 jk, k 7 k, k = 1, . . . , 4. note that the entire su(2) 2
1 -algebra (2.2)
is invariant under this action, thus any nonlinear  model on a kummer surface possesses an
su(2) 2

1 -current algebra. the n s-part of its partition function is

here and in the following we decompose partition functions into four parts corresponding to the







24

23

4

2(z)

4

3(z)

34

4

4(z)

zn s(, z) = 1

4(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
four sectors n s,gn s, r,er, i.e with y = exp(2iz), y = exp(2iz)

2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2(z,b( )(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
4(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
2(cid:0)zn s + zgn s + zr + zer(cid:1) ,
24 yj0yj 0i
24 yj0yj 0i

zn s(, z) = trn shql0 c
zgn s(, z) = trn sh(1)f ql0 c
zr(, z) = trrhql0 c
zer(, z) = trrh(1)f ql0 c

24 yj0yj 0i = zn s(, z + 1
24 yj0yj 0i

= zr(, z + 1

4(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

z = 1

24 ql0 c

24 ql0 c

24 ql0 c

24 ql0 c

2 )

2 ).

1(z)



(2.3)

4) .

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

= (qq)

c

24 yy zn s(, z + 
2 )

(2.4)

given zn s the entire partition function can be determined by using the above ows to nd

zgn s, zr and zer.
let us now focus on the description of the resulting geometric objects, namely kummer sur-
faces denoted by k() if obtained by the z2 orbifold procedure from the fourtorus t = r4/.
generators of the lattice  are denoted by 1, . . . , 4. from (1.15) we obtain an associated
threeplane t  h 2(t, r), i.e. an einstein metric on t , and we must describe how the teich-
muller space t 3,3 of einstein metrics of volume 1 on the torus is mapped into the corresponding
space t 3,19 for k3. this is best understood in terms of the lattices h 2(t, z) = 3,3 and
h 2(x, z) = 3,19, x = k(). in our notation h 2(t, z) is generated by j  k, j, k  {1, . . . , 4}
if (1, . . . , 4) is the basis dual to (1, . . . , 4). t is dened by its relative position to a reference
lattice 3,3 = h 2(t, z)  h 2(t, r). note that in order to simplify the following argumentation
we rather regard t  h 2(t, z) as giving the position of the lattice h 2(t, z) = spanz(j  k)
relative to a xed threeplane spanr(e1  e2 + e3  e4, e1  e3 + e4  e2, e1  e4 + e2  e3) with
respect to the standard basis (e1, . . . , e4) of r4.
to make contact with the theory of kummer surfaces we pick a complex structure t  t .
the z2 action on t has 16 xed points 1
2. we can therefore choose indices
in f4
2 to label the xed points. note that this is not only a labelling but the torus geometry
indeed induces a natural ane f4
2-structure on the set i of xed points [nik75, cor. 5]. the
twoforms corresponding to the 16 exceptional divisors obtained from blowing up the xed points
are denoted by {ei | i  i}. they are elements of p ic(x) no matter what complex structure we
choose, because we are working in the orbifold limit, i.e. ei    i  i. let   p ic(x) denote
the primitive sublattice of the picard lattice containing {ei | i  i}. it is called kummer lattice
and by [nik75, th. 3]:

k=1 kk,   f4

2p4

theorem 2.1

the kummer lattice  is spanned by the exceptional divisors {ei | i  i} and { 1
is a hyperplane}. on the other hand, a k3 surface x is a kummer surface i p ic(x) contains
a primitive sublattice isomorphic to .

2pih ei | h  i

to understand how to locate an orbifold singular kummer surface within the moduli space

16

(1.6) of einstein metrics of volume 1 on k3, we must describe the corresponding threeplane
  h 2(x, r). by construction  = t , where  : t  x is the rational map of degree two,
thus   k := (cid:0)h 2(t, z)(cid:1) = h 2(t, z)(2) (here (2) denotes  with quadratic form scaled by
2), and for generators of k we may write 2j  k, j, k = 1, . . . , 4. it will therefore suce to
give a description of how the lattices k and  are embedded in h 2(x, z), as can be found in
2pip ei | p  i is
[nik75]. first notice k/k = (z2)6 = /, where / is generated by { 1
a plane}. the isomorphism  : k/k  / is most easily understood in terms of homology
2pip ei.
by assigning the image in x of a twocycle through four xed points in a plane p  i to 1
for example, ( 12
2 the jth standard
basis vector. note that pjk may be exchanged by any of its translates l + pjk, l  f4
2. next check
that the discriminant forms of k/k and /, i.e. the induced q valued quadratic forms, agree
up to a sign. then

2pipjk
h 2(x, z) = {(x, y)  k   | (x) = y} ,

ei, pjk = spanf2(fj, fk)  f4

j  k) = 1

2, fj  f4

x, y denoting the images under projection to k/k, /. the isomorphism (2.5) provides a
natural primitive embedding k    h 2(x, z), which is unique up to isomorphism [nik75,
lemma 7]. here, h 2(x, z) = 3,19 is generated by

(2.5)

m :=n 12

j  k + 1

2 xipjk

ei+l, l  io and spanz (ei, i  i) .

(2.6)

hence 3,3 = h 2(t, z)  h 2(x, z) = 3,19 is naturally embedded, and in particular  
h 2(x, r) = h 2(x, z)  r is obtained directly by regarding t  h 2(t, r) = h 2(t, z)  r 
h 2(x, z)  r as threeplane in h 2(x, r).
to describe where the image k(, bt ) of the superconformal eld theory t (, bt ) under z2
orbifold is located in mk3 we now generalize the above construction to the quantum level. again,
the procedure is best understood in terms of the lattices h even(t, z) = 4,4 and h even(x, z) =
4,20. apart from j  k the lattice h even(t, z) has generators , 0 as dened in (1.5). note
that bk := k  spanz(, 0) cannot be embedded as primitive sublattice in 4,20 such that
bk   because bk/bk = (z2)8 6= (z2)6 = /. the idea now is to extend the set of generators
m in (2.6) in an so+(h even(t, z)) invariant way. the extended set cm thus contains vectors
12
 + , where 0,    are the sums over those forms ei corresponding to the
exceptional divisors which the poincare duals of 0,  intersect. recall that 0,  are interpreted
as generators of h 0(x, z) and h 4(x, z), respectively, so

4 0, 12

0 + 1

cm := m n 12

4xii
0  1

ei;  12

 + ei, i  io .

(2.7)

the prefactors 1

4 , 1 of , 0 in the additional generators are necessary to have an even integer

lemma 2.2

we now nd

lattice spanned by cm . in analogy to nikulins description (2.5) and (2.6) of h 2(x, z) = 3,19
the lattice  spanned by cm and {   |  m  cm : h, mi  z} is isomorphic to 4,20.

proof:
dene

 + ei.

(2.8)

4xii
ei + 2, cei :=  12
0  1
then  is generated by b,b0 and the lattice
2 xipjkce i+l, l  i; cei, i  i(cid:17) .

b := 2,
b0 := 12
b := spanz(cid:16) 12

j  k + 1

17

because hcei,ceji = 2ij and upon comparison to (2.6) it is now easy to see that b = 3,19.
moreover,b,b0 b and spanz(b,b0) = u completes the proof.

in particular, lemma 2.2 describes a natural embedding 4,4 = h even(t, z)  h even(x, z) =
4,20. as in the case of embedding the teichmuller spaces t 3,3  t 3,19 this enables us to directly
locate the image under z2 orbifold of a conformal eld theory corresponding to a fourplane
x  h even(t, r) = 4,4r within mk3 by regarding x as fourplane in h even(x, r) = 4,20r.
note that in this geometric interpretationb,b0 are the generators of h 4(x, z) and h 0(x, z).

theorem 2.3
let (t , vt , bt ) denote a geometric interpretation of the nonlinear  model t (, bt ) as given
by (1.15). then the corresponding orbifold conformal eld theory k(, bt ) associated to the
kummer surface x = k() has geometric interpretation (, v, b) where   t 3,19 as described
after theorem 2.1, v = vt

bt + 1

2 b(2)

z , b(2)

z = 1

2 and b = 12

cei  h even(x, z) of length squared -2 given in (2.8).

in particular, the z2 orbifold procedure induces an embedding mtori  mk3 as quaternionic
submanifold.

2piicei  h even(x, z) with

proof:
pick a basis i, i  {1, 2, 3} of t . then by (1.5) the nonlinear  model t (, bt ) is given by the

2 (cid:17) .
fourplane x with generators i = i hi, bti, i  {1, 2, 3} and 4 = 0 + bt +(cid:16)v  kbt k2
using the embedding 4,4  r = h even(t, r)  h even(x, r) = 4,20  r given in lemma 2.2 it
is now a simple task to reexpress the generators of x using the generatorsb,b0 of h 4(x, z) and
h 0(x, z):
2(cid:19)b.
z (cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)
12(cid:16)0 + bt +(cid:16)v  kbt k2

2 (i  hi, bti) = 2i  h
2 (cid:17) (cid:17) = b0 + 12

comparison with (1.5) directly gives the assertion of the theorem.


theorem 2.3 makes precise how the statement that orbifold conformal eld theories tend to give
value b = 1
2 to the b-eld in direction of exceptional divisors [asp96, 4] is to be understood.
note that x  4,20 does not contain vectors of length squared 2, namely ei  x,keik2 = 2
but ei 6 h even(x, z).
in the context of compactifactions of the type iia string on k3 this
proves that z2 orbifold conformal eld theories do not have enhanced gauge symmetry. a similar
statement was made in [asp95] and widely spread in the literature, but we were unable to follow
the argument up to our result of theorem 2.3.

2i, 12
2 b(2)
bt + 1

btib
z +(cid:18) vt

2(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13) 12

2  1

bt + 1

2 b(2)

2.2 tduality and fouriermukai transform
by theorem 2.3 any automorphism on the teichmuller space t 4,4 of mtori is conjugate to an
automorphism on the teichmuller space t 4,20 of mk3. in particular, nonlinear  models on tori
related by tduality must give isomorphic theories on k3 under z2 orbifoldizing. to show this
explicitly and discuss the duality transformation on mk3 obtained this way is the object of this
subsection.
for simplicity assume that our  model on the torus t = r4/ has vanishing b-eld, and that
we have chosen a geometric interpretation (t , vt , 0). then tduality acts by (t , vt , 0) 7
(t , 1/vt , 0). by theorem 2.3 the corresponding z2 orbifold theories have geometric interpreta-
tions (, vt /2, b) and (, 1/2vt , b), respectively, where  is obtained as image of the embedding

18

2 b(2)

z = 1

hence

b +(cid:16) 1

1vtb0 + 1vt

t  h 2(t, r)  h 2(x, r) and b = 1
an automorphism  of the lattice h even(x, z) which xes the fourplane x corresponding to the
model with geometric interpretation (, vt /2, b) and acts by vt /2 7 1/2vt . in other words,
we will explicitly give the duality transformation induced by torus tduality on mk3.
by (1.5), the fourplane x  h even(x, z) is spanned by  and the vector 4 =b0 + b + ( vt
(notations as in theorem 2.3). because by the above  xes x and  pointwise, the unit vector
4/vt    x must be invariant, too, i.e.
invariant under the transformation vt 7 1/vt .
+pvt(cid:17)e

4piicei  h even(x, z). we will now construct
2 + 1)b

2pvt + 1vt(cid:17)b =pvte0 +pvteb +(cid:16) 1
e0 + eb +e = 1
2b,
icei + ab = xii

for any value of vt . we sete := (b),e0 := (b0) etc. and deduce
b0 + b +b = 1
2e.
the rst equation together with heb,ei = heb,e0i = 0,kebk2 = 2 implies heb,bi = 4 and
(i  1)2 = 1, xii
2 , 9
{0, 2} for some i0  i and i0 = 1 for i 6= i0, correspondingly a  { 7
2}. we conclude that if
the automorphism  exists, then it is already uniquely determined up to the choice of a and of
one point i0  i; in the following we pick a =  7

the only solutions satisfyingpii icei  h even(x, z), which must be true by (2.9), are i0 

eb = 4b0 xii

i = 8  2a.

justies the ansatz

2 and nd

2vt

(2.9)

(2.10)

e = 2(b +b0) + 1

2xiicei,

e0 = 2(b +b0) + 1

2xiicei ce i0 .

as well as 1

2) = f4

one easily checks that eu := spanz(e,e0) = u . by e we denote the orthogonal complement of eu
in spanz(b,b0)   = u  , where  is the kummer lattice of x as introduced in theorem 2.1.

note that in i there are 15 hyperplanes hi, i  i0 = i  {i0} which do not contain i0. the label
i  i is understood as the vector dual to the hyperplane hi, where we have chosen an appropiate
isomorphism (f4

2. one now checks that e is spanned by the vectorsfei, i  i in
 :=cei + xji{i0}cej + 4(b +b0)
2 xjhicej +b +b0, fei

fe j0 :=b b0, fei := 1
2pihfei for any hyperplane h  i. the latter is most easily seen by noticing that the
 can be regarded as dual to thefei and by using the description of the kummer lattice  given
fei
in theorem 2.1. moreover, hfei,feji = 2ij, and again by theorem 2.1 this means that e = .
hence (cei) :=fei is a continuation of (2.10) to an automorphism of lattices u   = eu  e.

note that the action of  can be viewed as a duality transformation exchanging vectors i  i with
hyperplanes hi, i  i. twoplanes p  i are exchanged with their duals p  which shows that
 can be continued to the entire lattice h(x, z) consistently with (2.5). the induced action on
k = h 2(t, z) in particular leaves  invariant. we also see that the above procedure is easily
generalized to arbitrary nonlinear  models t (, bt ). all in all we can now formulate
theorem 2.4

(2.11)

torus tduality induces duality transformations on the subspace of mk3 of theories associated
to kummer surfaces in the orbifold limit. they are given by the automorphisms of h even(x, z)

19

determined by equations (2.10) and (2.11) above.

in particular, twofold application of such

symmetries with signs appropriately chosen is the fouriermukai transform which exchanges b
with b0.
because all the expressions on the right hand sides are invariant under exchange ofb andb0.

proof:
only the last statement of the theorem remains to be shown. this is easily observed from (2.10),

note that by theorem 2.4 we can prove aspinwalls and morrisons description (1.7) of the moduli
space mk3 purely within conformal eld theory without recourse to landauginzburg argu-
ments. namely, as explained in section 1, the group g(16) needed to project from the teichmuller
space (1.1) to the component mk3 of the moduli space contains the group so+(h 2(x, z))

of classical symmetries which x the vectors b,b0 determining our geometric interpretation.
moreover, for any primitive nullvector e0 there exists an element eg  g(16) such that egb = b
and egb0 = e0. by theorem 2.4 the symmetry   so+(h even(x, z) which exchanges b and
b0 and leaves x invariant also is an element of g(16), thus so+(h even(x, z))  g(16) and

so+(h even(x, z)) = g(16) under the assumption that mk3 is hausdor, as argued in section 1.

2.3 algebraic automorphisms of kummer surfaces
to describe strata of the moduli space mk3 we will study subspaces of the kummer stratum
found above which consist of theories with enhanced classical symmetry groups in the geometric
interpretation given there. concentrating on the geometric objects rst, in this subsection we
investigate algebraic automorphisms of kummer surfaces which x the orbifold singular metric.
such an automorphism induces an automorphism of the kummer lattice  because by k =
h 2(t, z)(2) and (2.5) all the lattice vectors of length squared 2 in  belong to , and   r
by theorem 2.1 is spanned by the lattice vectors ei, i  i of length squared 2. vice versa,
lemma 2.5
the action of an algebraic automorphism  which xes the orbifold singular metric on a kummer
surface x is uniquely determined by its action on the set {ei | i  i} of forms corresponding to
exceptional divisors, i.e. by an ane transformation a  a(i).
proof:
let  denote the induced automorphism on the kummer lattice . by theorem 2.1 and (2.5)
the quadratic form on  is negative denite and the ei, i  i are the only lattice vectors of
length squared 2. therefore,  is uniquely determined by (ei) = i()ea(i) for i  i, where
i()  {1} and a  a(i). actually, i() = i(a), because a(i) = 1 = i() = 1
for otherwise ei  (h 2(x, z) ) with length squared 2 contradicting theorem 1.1. assume
a = a for another algebraic automorphism  xing the metric. then g := (1  ) acts
trivially on , and because  is xed by g as well, for the group g generated by 1   we nd
(g)  2 + 3 + 16 = 21. now (1.22) shows that g is trivial, proving  = .

by abuse of language in the following we will frequently use the induced action of an algebraic
automorphism on  or in a(i) as a shorthand for the entire action.

theorem 2.6
for every kummer surface x the group of algebraic automorphisms xing the orbifold singular
metric contains f4

2  a(i), which acts by translations on i.

proof:
any translation ti  a(i) by i  i acts trivially on /. thus ti can be continued trivially to
h 2(x, z) by (2.5). one now easily checks that the resulting automorphism of h 2(x, c) satises
the criteria of theorem 1.1.


20

next we will determine the group of algebraic automorphisms for the kummer surface associated
to a torus with enhanced symmetry:

theorem 2.7

2  f4

2  f4

2)  f4

2. here, z2

kummer = z2

2  gl(f4

the group of algebraic automorphisms xing the orbifold singular metric of x = k(),   z4
is g+
2 = a(i) is equipped with the standard
semidirect product.
for ex = k(e), where e is generated by i = riz2, ri  r, i = 1, 2, the group of algebraic
automorphisms xing the orbifold singular metric generically is eg+

proof:
to demonstrate z2
kummer we will show that certain algebraic automorphisms on the
underlying torus t = r4/ can be pushed to x and generate an additional group of automor-
phisms z2
2) on . namely, in terms of standard coordinates (x1, . . . , x4) on t , we are
looking for automorphisms which leave the forms

kummer = z2  f4
2.

2  gl(f4

2  g+

2  f4

dx1  dx3 + dx4  dx2,

dx1  dx4 + dx2  dx3,

dx1  dx2 + dx3  dx4

(2.12)

invariant. this is true for

r12 :
r13 :
r14 = r12  r13 :

(x1, x2, x3, x4) 7 (x2, x1, x4,x3),
(x1, x2, x3, x4) 7 (x3,x4, x1, x2),
(x1, x2, x3, x4) 7 (x4,x3, x2,x1).
the induced action on  is described by permutations akl  a(i) of the f4
r12 b= a12 = (12)(34), r13 b= a13 = (13)(24). to visualize this action we introduce the following
helpful pictures rst used by h. inose [ino76]: the vertical line labelled by j  f 2

2-coordinates, namely

2 symbolizes

(2.13)

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11
00

 

 


 
 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

 



 

 
10

 
01

01

10

11

00

 


 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
00

 

 

 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
11

 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

 
10

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
01

 

 

01

10

11

00

figure 2.1: action of the algebraic automorphisms r12 (left) and r13 (right) on .

2 we have {x  t | (x3, x4) = 1

the image of the twocycle {x  t | (x1, x2) = 1
2 j} in x, and analogously for the horizontal line
2 j}. then the diagonal lines from cycle j
labelled by j  f 2
to cycle j symbolize the exceptional divisor obtained from blowing up the xed point labelled
(j, j)  i. fat diagonal lines mark those exceptional divisors which are xed by the respective
automorphism.
one may now easily check that the automorphisms (2.13), viewed as automorphisms on h 2(x, c),
satisfy the criteria of theorem 1.1 and thus indeed are induced by algebraic automorphisms of x.
to see that g+
kummer does not contain any further elements, by lemma 2.5 it will suce to
show that no other element of aut() can be continued to h 2(x, z) consistently such that
it satises the criteria of theorem 1.1. because all the translations of i are already contained
in g+
2)  a(i) which

kummer we can restrict our investigation to those elements a  gl(f4

21

can be continued to h 2(x, z) preserving (2.12). as a necessary condition one nds that a
must commute with all the transformations listed in (2.13). this means that a acts on i by
akl(i) = akl(i) + |i|(1, 1, 1, 1),|i| = pk ik  f2. but if any such akl  g+
kummer, then also
a  g+
kummer, where a(i) = i + |i|(1, 1, 1, 1). a leaves invariant a sublattice of  of rank 12.
but then, because of (1.22) and from (1.21) it is clear that a cannot be induced by an algebraic
automorphism xing the orbifold singular metric of x.
the result for eg+
dened on e.

kummer is clear by the above proof. namely, if (x1, x2) are standard coordinates
on 1  r and (x3, x4) on 2  r, then among the automorphisms (2.13) only r12 is generically


by exactly the same technique we can prove:

 , (2)

2  a(i).

theorem 2.8
the group of algebraic automorphisms which x the orbifold singular metric of k(),   d4 =

{x  z4 |pi xi  0 (2)} consists only of the translations f4
2.4 z4 orbifolds in the moduli space
this subsection is devoted to the study of z4 orbifolds in the moduli space mk3. we rst
turn to some features of the z4 orbifold construction on the conformal eld theory side which
need further discussion. from what was said at the beginning of the section,
in terms of
complex coordinates (2.1) on t = r4/ the z4 action on the nonlinear  model is given
by ((1)
 ). from (2.2) we readilly read o that there always is a
surviving su(2)1  u(1) subalgebra of the holomorphic w-algebra generated by j, j, a. to
have a z4 symmetry on the entire hilbert space of the torus theory, the charge lattice (1.12)
must obey this symmetry. so in addition to picking a z4 symmetric torus, i.e. a lattice 
generated by i = riz2, ri  r, i = 1, 2, we must have an appropriate b-eld bt in the
in terms of cohomology we need
nonlinear  model on t which preserves this symmetry.
bt  h 2(t, r)z4 = spanr (1  2, 3  4, 1  3 + 4  2, 1  4 + 2  3). as in section
2.1 (1, . . . , 4) denotes a basis dual to (1, . . . , 4), i being generators of  and t  h 2(t, r)
is regarded as giving the position of h 2(t, z) relative to a xed threeplane spanr(e1  e2 + e3 
e4, e1  e3 + e4  e2, e1  e4 + e2  e3).
to determine the partition function, a lengthy but straightforward calculation using [eoty89,
(5.2)-(5.5)] shows

 ) 7 (i(1)

 ,i(2)

zn s(, z) = 1

2 z,bt ( ) + 1

2"(  1
+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

4

+ 1

2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

4(z)



4

34

4

2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

+ 1

23

2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
4(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)



23

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

34

4(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

4

2(z)

24

1(z)

3(z)



2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

24

4!(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
4(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)



4)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
4# ,
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(2.14)

where for z,bt ( ) one has to insert the expression for the specic torus t as obtained from
(1.13). comparing to (2.3) the partition function (2.14) coincides with that of the z2 orbifold
of a theory whose ns-partition function is the expression in curly brackets in (2.14). indeed,
the partition function of su (2) 2
1 /z4, i.e. of the z4 orbifold of t = r4/z4 with bt = 0, agrees
with that of the z2 orbifold k(d4, 0) [eoty89]. in section 2.1 we showed that every nonlinear
 model on a kummer surface has an su(2) 2
1 subalgebra of the holomorphic w-algebra. on the
other hand, as demonstrated above, the z4 orbifold generically only possesses an su(2)1  u(1)
current algebra. for su (2) 2
1 /z4 this is enhanced to su(2)1  u(1)3 which still does not agree
with the one for kummer surfaces proving that although the theories have the same partition
function, they are not isomorphic.

22

we note that a similar eect is observed in another example. namely, the partition function of
the z4 orbifold of the torus model with so(8)1 symmetry agrees with that of k(z4, 0) as can
be seen from (3.7). in this case we can even show that both theories have (1, 0)-current algebra
su(2) 2
to have a better understanding of their location within the moduli space and their geometric
properties we now construct z4 orbifolds by applying another orbifold procedure to theories with
enhanced symmetries which have already been located in moduli space.

1  u(1)4 (use (3.18)), so one may conjecture that these theories indeed agree.

theorem 2.9

kummer, blowing up the singularities and using the induced orbifold singular metric. then x

let e denote a lattice generated by i = riz2, ri  r, i = 1, 2. consider the k3 surface x
obtained from the kummer surface k(e) by modding out the algebraic automorphism r12 
eg+
is the z4 orbifold of t = r4/e.

proof:
by construction (2.13), r12 is induced by the automorphism (x1, x2, x3, x4) 7 (x2, x1, x4,x3)
with respect to standard coordinates on t . in terms of complex coordinates as in (2.1) this is
just the action  : (z1, z2) 7 (iz1,iz2), and because k() = ]t /2, the assertion is clear.


remark:
study gure 2.1 to see how the structure a6

1  a4

3 of the exceptional divisors in the z4 orb-

ifold comes about: twelve of the xed points in k(e) are identied pairwise to yield six z2

xed points in the z4 orbifold, that is a6
1. the four points labelled i  {(0, 0, 0, 0), (1, 1, 0, 0),
(0, 0, 1, 1), (1, 1, 1, 1)} are true z4 xed points. the induced action of r12 on the corresponding
exceptional divisor cp1 = s2 is just a 180 rotation about the north-south axis, and north and
south poles are xed points. blow up the resulting singularities in k()/r12 to see how an a3
arises from the a1 over each true z4 xed point.

for a z4 orbifold x there is an analog
of the kummer lattice  described in theorem 2.1,
the primitive sublattice of p ic(x) containing all the twoforms which correspond to exceptional
as for  and are
divisors by poincare duality. we have found an analogous description of
able to formulate the action of algebraic automorphisms in terms of
similarly to the kummer
case. the embedding of the moduli space of z4 orbifolds in mk3 therefore works totally anal-
ogously to that of z2 orbifold conformal eld theories as described in subsection 2.1. only the
calculations are much more involved due to the more complicated structure of the singularities.
let us x some notations. let  : t  x denote the rational map of degree four. then
k := h 2(t, z) = spanz (21  2, 23  4, 1  3 + 4  2, 1  4 + 2  3). for the
twoforms corresponding to the exceptional divisors of the z4 orbifold we adopt the labelling of
xed points by i = f4
2 as used in the z2 orbifold case. here, we have six z2 xed points labelled
by i  i (2) := {(j1, j2, 1, 0), (1, 0, j3, j4) | jk  f2}. the four true z4 xed points are labelled by
i  i (4) := {(i, i, j, j) | i, j  f2}. the corresponding twoforms are denoted by ei for i  i (2), and
, e(0)
for each z4 xed point i  i (4) we have three exceptional divisors poincare dual to e()
such that he()
i = 0. for ease of notation we also use the combinations
ei := e(+)
4 (e(+)
) for i  i (4). note that keik2 = 2, and
ei, e(0)
as a rst step we determine the analogs of (2.5) and (2.6) in order to describe the primitive
 h 2(x, z). by (2.5) we have to compute the intersection numbers of
embedding k 
images   k of cycles corresponding to combinations of 1
2 j  k with exceptional divisors.
then the correctly weighted sums of those twoforms corresponding to divisors intersecting 
must be added to . we again adopt the notation pjk = spanf2(fj, fk) used in subsection 2.1.

i + e(0)
, fi are pairwise orthogonal.

, e()
and fi := 1

i  e()

i

i

i

i

i

i

i = 1,he(+)

, e(0)
i + e()

i

i

i

23

remember to count z2 xed points only once, e.g. p12 = {(0, 0, 0, 0), (1, 0, 0, 0), (1, 1, 0, 0)}. we
then have

lemma 2.10
the lattice generated by the set m which consists of

fi+(1,1,0,0),

  {0, 1};

fi+(1,1,0,0) + 1

2 0,

  {0, 1};

1

1

2 1  2  1

2 xip12
2 xip34
2 3  4  1
2 xipjk

j  k  1
2 (1  3 + 4  2)  1

1

ei+(1,1,0,0)  1

ei+(1,1,0,0) + 1

2 xip12i (4)
2 xip34i (4)
2 xip14{(0,0,0,0)}
2 xip13{(0,0,0,0)}

1

2 (1  4 + 2  3)  1
2 (1  2  3  4 + 1  4 + 2  3) + 1

ei+j ,

1

2 0

ei+(0,0,1,0),

(j, k)  {(1, 2), (3, 4)};

ei+j ,

j  i (4);

+ 1

2 e(0,1,0,1)+(0,0,1,1)  1

2

1

2 (1  2  3  4 + 1  3 + 4  2)

+ 1

2 e(0,1,1,0)+(0,0,1,1)  1

2

j  i (4);
i+(0,0,1,1)  2fi+(0,0,1,1)(cid:17) ,   {0, 1};
i+(0,0,1,1)  2fi+(0,0,1,1)(cid:17) ,   {0, 1};

xi{(0,0,0,0),(1,1,1,1)}(cid:16)e(0)
xi{(0,0,0,0),(1,1,1,1)}(cid:16)e(0)

i

i

, e(0)

and by {e()
, i  i (4); ei, i  i (2)} is isomorphic to 3,19 if we set 0 = 0. this gives a
 h 2(x, z) and in particular an embedding of the z4 invariant
natural embedding k 
part (h 2(t, z))z4  h 2(x, z) = 3,19 of h 2(t, z) = 3,3. given a kahlereinstein metric in
t 3,3 dened by t  h 2(t, r)z4, its image  under the z4 orbifold procedure is read o from
the embedding t  h 2(t, r)z4 = (h 2(t, z))z4  r  h 2(x, z)  r = h 2(x, r).
in order to prove lemma 2.10 one has to show that the lattice under inspection has signature
(3, 19) and is self dual. we omit the tedious calculation.
to describe the location in mk3 of the image of t (, bt ) under z4 orbifold we have to lift the
above picture to the quantum level. as before, h even(t, z) = 4,4 is generated by j  k and

, 0 dened in (1.5). as in (2.7) we extend the set m of lemma 2.10 to cm := m  {b,b0} by

fi + 2.

ei + 1

e(0)
i  1

2 0  1

4 xii (2)i (4)

4 xii (4)

2 xii (4)

dening

b := 2,
:=  3

i

b0 := 1
be()

,

i

i

i

i

i

,

,

:=  1

lemma 2.11

:=  + e(0)

2  + e(+)

2  + e()

one now easily checks in exactly the same fashion as in lemma 2.2

be(+)
be(0)
, be(0)
the lattice generated bycm and {  spanz(be()
, i  i (4);bei, i  i (2)) |  m  cm : h, mi 
z := xii (2)i (4) bei  xii (4) be(0)
i + 2 xii (4) bfi  h even(x, z)

z} is isomorphic to 4,20.
now use

bei :=  + ei

(2.15)

(2.16)

b(4)

i

i

24

to nd

1

4(cid:16)0 + bt +(cid:16)v  kbt k2

2 (i  hi, bti) = 2i  h2i, 1
2 bt + 1

2 (cid:17) (cid:17) = b0 + 1

2 btib

4 b(4)

z +(cid:18) vt

which proves

2(cid:19)b
z (cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

4  1

2 bt + 1

4 b(4)

2(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13) 1

4 b(4)

z , b(4)

2 bt + 1

4 and b = 1

z  h even(x, z) as in (2.16).

theorem 2.12
let (t , vt , bt ) denote a geometric interpretation of the nonlinear  model t (, bt ) as given
by (1.15). assume that  is generated by i = riz2, ri  r, i = 1, 2 and bt  h 2(t, z)z4 such
that a z4 action is well dened on t (, bt ). then the image x  t 4,20 under the z4 orbifold
procedure has geometric interpretation (, v, b) where   t 3,19 is found as described in lemma
2.10, v = vt
in particular, the moduli space of superconformal eld theories admitting an interpetation as z4
orbifold is a quaternionic submanifold of mk3. moreover, x  h even(x, z) does not contain
vectors of length squared 2.
note that from (2.16) it is easy to read o the ow of the b-eld obtained from the orbifold
procedure through an a3 divisor over one of the true z4 xed points of x: for i  i (4) it
8 e()
is given by 3
i + 1
in analogy to saying that the b-eld determined in theorem 2.3
corresponds to b = 1
2 in direction of the exceptional divisors obtained from orbifoldizing, here
4 )  ( 1
4 , 0, 1
we have b = ( 3
2 in direction of the
a1 divisors obtained from the z4 orbifold procedure.
theorem 2.12 proves that z4 orbifold conformal eld theories do not correspond to string com-
pactications of the type iia string on k3 with enhanced gauge symmetry. concerning the
algebraic automorphism group of z4 orbifolds we can prove

4 ) in direction of the a3 divisors and b = 1

8 e(+)

4 , 0, 1

.

i

theorem 2.13

let x denote the z4 orbifold of t = r4/. then the group g of algebraic automorphisms xing
the orbifold singular metric of x consists of all the residual symmetries induced by algebraic
automorphisms of k() which commute with r12. thus, generically g = f2
2 is generated by the
induced actions of t1100 and t0011. if   z4, g = d4 is generated by the induced actions of t1100
and r13.
if we want invariance of the conformal eld theory under the entire group g = d4 of algebraic
automorphisms found in theorem 2.13 we must restrict bt to values such that bt  h 2(t, r)z4 
h 2(x, r)d4 =  where we regard h 2(t, r)z4  h 2(x, r) as described in lemma 2.10. if bt is
viewed as element of skew(4) acting on r4 this condition is equivalent to bt commuting with
the automorphisms listed in (2.13).

2.5 application: fermats description for su(2) 4
theorem 2.14

1 /z4

the z4 orbifold of t (z4, 0) admits a geometric interpretation on the fermat quartic

in cp3 with volume vq = 1
2 .

q =(cid:8)(x0, x1, x2, x3)  cp3(cid:12)(cid:12)

3xi=0

x4

i = 0(cid:9)

proof:

(2.17)

25

let e1, . . . , e4 denote the standard basis of z4. then i = ei, and by theorem 2.12 the z4 orbifold
of t (z4, 0) is described by the fourplane x  t 4,20 spanned by

1 = 1  3 + 4  2,
3 = 2(1  2 + 3  4),

2 = 1  4 + 2  3,

4 = 4b0 + b(4)

z + 5b.

to read o a dierent geometric interpretation, we dene

2 (1  3 + 4  2  1  4  2  3) + 1

q := 1
0
q := 1  3 + 4  2 + 1  2 + 1

2(cid:16)be(0,1,1,0)  be(1,0,1,0)(cid:17) ,

2(cid:16)be(0,0,0,1) + be(1,1,0,1)  be(0,1,1,0)  be(1,0,1,0)(cid:17) .

one checks q, 0
show that q, 0
interpretation (q, vq, bq) we nd that q is spanned by

(2.18)
q  h even(x, z) as given in lemma 2.11, kqk2 = k0
qi = 1 to
q is an admissible choice for nullvectors in (1.5). for the corresponding geometric

qk2 = 0 and hq, 0

(q)
1
(q)
2
(q)
3

= 1  3 + 4  2 + 1  4 + 2  3  2q,
= 2(1  2 + 3  4)  2q,

= 4b0 + b(4)

z + 5b.

2

3

2

and (q)

as complex structure q  q we pick the twoplane spanned by (q)
. note that
this plane is generated by lattice vectors, so the picard number (x) := rk p ic(x) = rk ( 
h 2(x, z)) of the corresponding geometric interpretation x is 20, the maximal possible value. k3
surfaces with picard number 20 are called singular and are classied by the quadratic form on
their transcendental lattice p ic(x)  h 2(x, z). in other words there is a one to one correspon-
dence between singular k3 surfaces and even quadratic positive denite forms modulo sl(2, z)
equivalence [si77]. because (q)
are primitive lattice vectors, one now easily checks that
x equipped with the complex structure given by q has quadratic form diag(8, 8) on the tran-
scendental lattice. by [ino76] this means that our variety indeed is the fermat quartic (2.17) in
cp3.
volume and b-eld can now be read o using (1.5) and noting that in our geometric interpretation

, (q)

3

1  3 + 4  2  1  4  2  3 = (q)

4  0

q + bq +(cid:16)vq  1

2 kbqk2(cid:17) q.



3 special points in moduli space: gepner and gepner type

models

finally we discuss the probably best understood models of superconformal eld theories associ-
ated to k3 surfaces, namely gepner models [gep87, gep88]. the latter are rational conformal
eld theories and thus exactly solvable. for a short account on the gepner construction and its
most important features in the context of our investigations see appendix a. in this section, we
will explicitly locate the gepner model (2)4 and some of its orbifolds within the moduli space
mk3. this is achieved by giving  model descriptions of these models in terms of z2 and z4
orbifolds which we know how to locate in moduli space by the results of section 2.

 we thank noriko yui and yasuhiro goto for drawing our attention to the relevant literature concerning

singular k3 surfaces.

26

(see also [gp90]). note that only elements of the subgroup

ryj=1

zkj +2 

zkj +2,

ryj=1
:=(cid:26)[a1, . . . , ar]  gab(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

galg

ab

[a1, . . . , ar] 7 [a1 + 1, . . . , ar + 1]

aj

kj + 2  z(cid:27)  gab

(3.2)

rxj=1

3.1 discrete symmetries of gepner models and algebraic automor-

phisms of k3 surfaces

as argued before, a basic tool to characterize a given conformal eld theory is the study of its
discrete symmetry group. we will rst discuss the abelian group given by phase symmetries of
a gepner modelqr
j=1(kj) with central charge c = 6 and r even [gep87]. recall that this theory
is obtained from the fermionic tensor product of the n = 2 superconformal minimal models
(kj ), j = 1, . . . , r, by modding out a cyclic group z = zn, n = lcm{2; ki + 2, i = 1, . . . , r}. the
model therefore inherits a zkj +2 symmetry from the parafermionic subtheories of each minimal
model factor (kj) whose generator acts by

lj
mj ,sj ;mj ,sj 7 e

2i

2(kj +2) (mj +mj )

lj

mj ,sj ;mj ,sj

(3.1)

on the jth factor. the resulting abelian symmetry group of qr
denotes charge conjugation and gab = (qr

j=1(kj ) is z2  gab, where z2
j=1 zkj +2)/zm, m = lcm{ki + 2, i = 1, . . . , r}. here,

zm acts by

l

r

 su(2)susy

commute with spacetime supersymmetry, elements of gab  galg
ab describe r-symmetries [gep87].
assume we can locate our gepner model within mk3, that is we explicitly know the correspond-
ing fourplane x  h even(x, r) as described in section 1. furthermore assume that by picking a
primitive nullvector   h even(x, z) we have chosen a specic geometric interpretation (, v, b).
by construction, a gepner model comes with a specic choice of the n = (2, 2) subalgebra corre-
sponding to a specic twoplane   . we stress that this is true for any geometric interpretation
of (2)4: the choice of the n = (2, 2) subalgebra does not x a complex structure a priori, it xes
a choice of complex structure in every geometric interpretation of our model, as was explained
in section 1. still, we now assume our k3 surface x to be equipped with complex structure
and kahler metric. by our discussion in section 1.2 we know that after a choice of framing in
ql  qr to identify su (2)susy
l,r with su (2)l,r any symmetry of the gepner model which leaves the
su(2)susy
currents j, j, j, j and the vector  invariant may act as an algebraic
automorphism on x. because j =(cid:0)0
(see appendix a) we
conclude from (3.2) that elements of galg
ab can act as algebraic automorphisms on x xing the
b-eld b  h 2(x, r), and vice versa. more explicitly by what was said in section 1.2, the action
of such a gepner-symmetry on the(cid:0) 1
with the induced action of an algebraic automorphism of x on h 1,1(x, r). with reference to
its possible geometric interpretation we call galg
the abelian algebraic symmetry group of the
gepner model.
in the following subsections we will investigate where in the moduli space of superconformal eld
theories associated to k3 surfaces to locate the gepner model (2)4 and some of its orbifolds by
ab = (z4)2. from the above discussion it is clear that given a denite geometric
elements of galg
interpretation for (2)4 the geometric interpretation of its orbifold models is obtained by modding
out the corresponding algebraic automorphisms.
apart from symmetries in z2  gab our gepner model will possess permutation symmetries in-
volving identical factor theories. their discussion is a bit more subtle, because as noted in

2,2;0,0(cid:1)r
2(cid:1)-elds with charges, say, q = q = 1 should be identied

and j =(cid:0)0

0,0;2,2(cid:1)r

2 , 1

ab

27

[fks92] permuting fermionic elds will involve additional signs (a.9). this in particular ap-
, meaning that odd permutations can only act algebraically when

plies to j = (cid:0)0

2,2;0,0(cid:1)r

accompanied by a phase symmetry

[a1, . . . , ar]  gab :

aj
kj + 2  z + 1
2 .

rxj=1

(3.3)

we will discuss this phenomenon in detail for the example of prime interest to us, namely the
ab = (z4)2, and the entire algebraic symmetry group is generally
gepner model (2)4. here galg
believed to be galg = (z4)2  s4 [asp95]. moreover, based on landau-ginzburg computations
and comparison of symmetries [gvw89, gp90, fkss90, asp95] it is generally believed that (2)4
has a geometric interpretation (q, vq, bq) given by the fermat quartic (2.17) in cp3. indeed, q
is a k3 surface with algebraic automorphism group (z4)2 s4 [muk88], and arguments in favour
of the viewpoint that it yields a geometric interpretation of (2)4 will arise from the following
discussion. it is proved in corollary 3.6 under the assumption that aspinwalls and morrisons
description (1.7) of the moduli space is correct.
to give the action of the two generators [1, 3, 0, 0] and [1, 0, 3, 0] of galg
with charges q = q = 1 we use the shorthand notation

2 , 1

2(cid:1)-elds

y (n1, n2, n3, n4) := n1

n1,0;n1,0  n2

n2,0;n2,0  n3

n4,0;n4,0

(3.4)

ab = (z4)2 on the(cid:0) 1
n3,0;n3,0  n4

x := (1

1,0;3,2)4,

(ni  n) and nd
[1, 3, 0, 0] 
 [1, 0, 3, 0]

1

1

i

i

1

1
i

i

y (1, 1, 1, 1), x

y (0, 2, 0, 2), y (2, 0, 2, 0) y (1, 0, 1, 2) y (1, 2, 1, 0)

y (2, 2, 0, 0), y (0, 0, 2, 2) y (2, 0, 0, 2), y (0, 2, 2, 0) y (2, 1, 0, 1) y (0, 1, 2, 1)

y (1, 1, 0, 2)

y (1, 1, 2, 0)

y (2, 0, 1, 1)

y (2, 1, 1, 0) y (1, 2, 0, 1)

y (0, 2, 1, 1)

y (1, 0, 2, 1) y (0, 1, 1, 2)

(3.5)
note rst that by (1.20) we have (z4z4) = 6, in accordance with (1.21) and 2 = 64 invariant
elds in the above table. one moreover easily checks that the spectrum of every element g  galg
ab
of order four agrees with the one computed in (1.23) for algebraic automorphisms of order four
on k3 surfaces. this is a strong and highly non-trivial evidence for the fact that one possible
geometric interpretation of (2)4 is given by a k3 surface whose algebraic automorphism group
contains (z4)2.
as stated above, further discussion is due concerning the action of s4 because transpositions of
fermionic modes introduce sign ips (a.9). in particular, odd elements of s4 do not leave j
invariant. to have an algebraic action of the entire group s4 we must therefore accompany   s4
by a phase symmetry a = [a1(), a2(), a3(), a4()]  gab which for odd  satises (3.3). thus
a transposition (, )  s4 must be represented by ((, )) = (, )  a(,) = a(,)  (, ) in
order to have ((, ))2 = 1 . with any such choice of  on generators (j , j) of s4 one may
coincides with the spectrum of the algebraic automorphism group s4. namely, any element of
order two (or three, four) in s4 leaves (z2)  4 = 12 (or (z3)  4 = 8, (z4)  4 = 6) states
invariant, and elements of order four have the spectrum given in (1.23). note in particular that

then check explicitly that  denes an algebraic action of s4, i.e. its spectrum on the(cid:0) 1

2(cid:1)-elds

2 , 1

28

by (3.3) with any consistent choice of  7 a the group s4 acts by  7 sign() on y (1, 1, 1, 1)
and trivially on x. this leaves x = (1
1,0;3,2)4 as the unique invariant state upon the action of
(z4)2  s4 in accordance with ((z4)2  s4) = 5 and (1.21).
summarizing, we have shown that the action of the entire algebraic symmetry group galg =
(z4)2  s4 of (2)4 as described above exhibits a spectrum consistent with its interpretation as
group of algebraic automorphisms of a k3 surface, e.g. the fermat quartic with (q, vq, bq).
thus by what was said in section 2 the only four invariant ( 1
1,0;3,2)4 are those
corresponding to moduli of volume deformation and of b-eld deformation in direction of q.
this might appear as a surprise if one compares with the analogous situation for c = 9, where
the fermat quintic is associated to gepners model (3)5 but the moduli of volume and b-eld
deformation are claimed to be the (1, 1)-superpartners of (1

remember that (cid:0)galg(cid:1) = 5 is the minimal possible value of  by the discussion in section 1.2.

2 )-elds (1

2 , 1

1,0;1,0)5 [dg88].

3.2 ideas of proof: an example with c = 3

in this subsection we give a survey on the steps of proof we will perform to show equivalences
between gepner or gepner type models and nonlinear  models. as an illustration we then
prove the well known fact that gepners model (2)2 admits a nonlinear  model description on
the torus associated to the z2 lattice.
given two n = 2 superconformal eld theories c1,c2 with central charge c = 3d/2 (d = 2 or
d = 4) and hilbert spaces h1,h2, to prove their equivalence we show the following:

i. the partition functions of the two theories agree.

ii. the elds of dimensions (h, h) = (1, 0) in the two theories generate the same algebra
a = af  ab, where af = u(1) for d = 2, af = su(2) 2
1 for d = 4, and u(1)d  ab. in
particular, u(1)c  a. af contains the u (1)-current j (1) = j of the n = 2 superconformal
algebra, and a second u (1)-generator j (2) if d = 4. furthermore, the elds of dimensions
(h, h) = (0, 1) in both theories generate algebras isomorphic to a as well, such that each of
the left moving u (1)-currents j has a right moving partner .

iii. for i = 1, 2 dene

hi

b :=n|i  hi (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) j (k)|i = 0,

2}o
k  {1, d

and denote the u (1)-currents in u(1)d  ab by j1, . . . , jd. we normalize them to

jk(z) jl(w) 

kl

(z  w)2 .

(3.6)

let jd+k  j (k), k  {1, d
too, and set j := (j1, . . . , jd; 1, . . . , d). the charge lattices

2} denote the remaining u (1)-currents when normalized to (3.6),

i

b :=(cid:8)  rd;d(cid:12)(cid:12)  |i  hi

b : j |i = |i(cid:9)

b and h2

of h1
cause the states in hi
of the j -action on a set of states whose charge vectors generate a self dual lattice b.

b with respect to j are isomorphic to the same self dual lattice b  rd;d; be-
b are pairwise local, in order to prove this it suces to show agreement

theorem 3.1

if i.-iii. are true then theories c1 and c2 are isomorphic (the converse generically is wrong, of
course).

29

proof:
using i.-iii. we rst show h1
state in hi
appear with multiplicity one, because otherwise by fusing [v i
states 1 i
1, 1 i
of the vacuum. now for any  = (l; r),  = (l; r)  b we have

b =: hb. denote by v i[] the primary eld corresponding to a
b with charge  = (l; r)  b. notice that in both theories every charge   b must
k] we nd two
b with vanishing charges under a total u(1)c  a in contradiction to uniqueness
2  hi

k []] = [1 i

k []]  [v i

b = h2

v i[](z) v i[](w)  ci

,(z  w)ll(z  w)r r v i[ + ](w) +  ,

so it remains to be shown that we can arrange c1
, for all ,   b by normalizing the
primary elds appropriately. in other words, we must nd constants d  r for any   b such
that  ,   b : c2
,. this is possible, because having xed d, d, d, d  r such
that

, = ddc1

, = c2

for four nonzero twopoint functions ci

c2
, = ddc1

,, c2

, = ddc1

,, c2
,, ci

,, c2

, = ddc1
,, by the crossing symmetries

, = ddc1

,

,, ci

,

c1
,c1
,c1
c1

=

,, ci
c2
,c2
,c2
c2

,

,
,
, = ddc1

and

c1
,c1
c1
,c1

,

,

=

c2
,c2
c2
,c2

,

,

, and c2

b = h2

, = ddc1

b. by ii. and iii. t := 1

b = hb is now complete.

etc. we automatically have c2
,. if more than two of the six
twopoint functions vanish, then by similar arguments the normalization of one of the primaries is
independent of the three others and a consistent choice of d, d, d, d  r is therefore possible,
too. the proof of h1
because b is self dual, for any state |i  hi carrying charge  with respect to j we have   b
k=1(jk)2 acts as virasoro
and thus nd vertex operators v i[]  hi
eld t i on each of the theories (check that t  t i has dimensions h = h = 0 with respect to t i).
thus the restriction of the virasoro eld t i to hi
k=1(jk)2, and by picking
suitable combinations p of descendants jk
n, n  0, k  {1, . . . , d}, we
nd |i := p v i[]|i such that

2pc
2pd
n and ep of ascendants jk
f :=(cid:8)|i  hi | t i
|i  hi

this shows hi = hi
f are representations of af = u(1) (for d = 2) or
af = su(2) 2
1 (for d = 4) which are completely determined by charge and dimension of the lowest
weight states. because by ii. af contains the u (1)-current j of the total n = 2 superconformal
algebra, the partition functions of our theories agree by i., and we already know hi = hi
f  hb
for i = 1, 2, we may conclude h1

lets see how the procedure described above works:

|i = |i  v i[]ep |0ib

and
f and h2
f hb for i = 1, 2. h1

b|i = 0(cid:9) .

b is given by t i

f = h2
f .

b := 1

theorem 3.2

with su (2) 2

gepners model c1 = (2)2 has a nonlinear  model description c2 on the two dimensional torus
tsu(2) 2
proof:
if we can prove i.-iii. in the above list, by theorem 3.1 we are done.

1 lattice  = z2 and b-eld b = 0.

1

i. using (a.10) for computing the partition function of (2)2 on one hand and (1.13) for the

partition function of the  model on tsu(2) 2

with b = 0 on the other, we nd

zn s(, z) =

4

1

2"(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

for both theories.

1

4

+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

3

 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

4

4#(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

3(z)



2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

30

ii. the nonlinear  model on tsu(2) 2

has two rightmoving abelian currents j1, j2 which we

1

normalize to

j(z) j(w) 

1
2 
(z  w)2 .

their superpartners are free majorana fermions 1, 2 with coupled boundary conditions.
by e1, e2 we denote the generators of the lattice  =  = z2 which denes our torus.
then using notations as in (1.12) the (1, 0)-elds in the nonlinear  model are given by the
three abelian currents j = i21 (the u (1) current of the n = 2 superconformal algebra),
q = j1 + j2, r = j1  j2, and the four vertex operators vei ,ei, i = 1, 2.
in the gepner model (2)2 we have an abelian current j, j from each minimal model factor
along with majorana fermions , , where by (a.8)  = 0
4,2;0,0. the u (1)
current of the total n = 2 superconformal algebra is j = j + j, and comparing j, q, r-
charges we can make the following identications:

4,2;0,0  0

i21 = j = j + j,
ve1,e1 = 0
2,0;0,0  0
2,0;0,0  0
2,2;0,0  0
2,2;0,0  0

ve2,e2 = 0
ve1,e1 = 0
ve2,e2 = 0

j1 + j2 = q = j  j,
2,2;0,0,
2,2;0,0,
2,0;0,0,
2,0;0,0.

2,0;0,0  0
2,0;0,0  0
2,2;0,0  0
2,2;0,0  0

2,2;0,0 + 0
2,2;0,0  0
2,0;0,0 + 0
2,0;0,0  0

j1  j2 = r = i,

thus the (1, 0)-elds in the two theories generate the same algebra a = u(1)  su(2) 2
af  ab. obviously, the same structure arises on the right handed sides.

1 =

2 (;),   {1}2(cid:9), carried by vertex operators vei,0, v0,ei , i =

b for the  model is just the bosonic part of the theory. the charge lattice b
with respect to the currents j := (q, r; q, r) = (j1 +j2, j1j2; 1 +2, 12) thus contains

iii. the space h1
the charges m := (cid:8) 1
1, 2. m generates the self dual lattice (cid:8) 1
 0 (2)(cid:9) = b.
to complete the proof of iii. we observe that in the gepner model the elds 1
n,0;n,0 
1
n,0;n,0  1
n,0;n,0, n 
{1}, are uncharged with respect to j and carry j = (j  j, i;   , i )-charges
m =(cid:8) 1

we remark that  model descriptions for the other two gepner models with c = 3, namely (1)3
and (1)(4), are also known. for proofs of the corresponding identications see [dnw].

2 (;),   {1}2(cid:9) generating b.

2 (a + b; a  b) | a, b  z2,p2

k=1 ak  p2

3n,2;n,0 and 1

3n,2;n,0  1

3n,2;n,0  1

n,0;n,0  1

3n,2;n,0  1

k=1 bk

3.3 gepner type description of su(2) 4
theorem 3.3

1 /z2

let c1 = (b2)4 denote the gepner type model which is obtained as orbifold of (2)4 by the group
z2 = h[2, 2, 0, 0]i  galg
surface k(z4, 0) associated to the torus tsu(2) 4
eld.

ab . then c1 admits a nonlinear  model description c2 on the kummer
1 lattice  = z4 and vanishing b-

with su (2) 4

1

proof:
we prove conditions i.-iii. of section 3.2 and then use theorem 3.1.

31

i. from (1.13) one nds

4!#2
applying the orbifold procedure for the z2-action of [2, 2, 0, 0]  galg
to the partition
function (a.10) of the gepner model (2)4 [fkss90] one checks that c1 and c2 have the
same partition function obtained by inserting (3.7) into (2.3).

z=z4,bt =0( ) =" 1
2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(3.7)

2

3

4

ab

4

4

.

ii. in the nonlinear  model c2 the current algebra (2.2) is enhanced to u(1)4  su(2) 2

1 . the
additional u (1)-currents are ui := vei,ei + vei,ei , i = 1, . . . , 4, where the ei generate
 =  = z4.

in the gepner type model c1 = (b2)4, apart from the u (1)-currents j1, . . . , j4 from the factor

theories with j = j1 + + j4 we nd four additional elds with dimensions (h, h) = (1, 0);
comparing the respective operator product expansions the following identications can be
made:

j = j1 + j2 + j3 + j4,

j = (cid:0)0
a = j1 + j2  j3  j4, a = (cid:0)0

2,2;0,0(cid:1)4
2,2;0,0(cid:1)2

;

(cid:0)0

2,2;0,0(cid:1)2

;

(3.8)

1

1

1

2 (u1 + u2) = p = j1  j2;
2 (u3 + u4) = q = j3  j4;

2 (u1  u2) = r = i(cid:0)0
2 (u3  u4) = s = i(cid:0)0

4,2;0,0(cid:1)2
0,0;0,0(cid:1)2

1

(cid:0)0
(cid:0)0

0,0;0,0(cid:1)2
4,2;0,0(cid:1)2

;

.

thus the (1, 0)-elds in the two theories generate the same algebra a = su(2) 2
af  ab. obviously, the same structure arises on the right handed sides.

1  u(1)4 =

iii. we will show that h1

b and h2

lattice

b both have self dual j := (p, q, r, s; p , q, r, s)-charge
(3.9)

b =(cid:8)(x + y; x  y)(cid:12)(cid:12)x  1

2 d4, y  d4(cid:9) ,

generated by

mtw := (cid:8) 1

2 (x; x)  r4,4(cid:12)(cid:12)
:= (cid:8)(; 0)(cid:12)(cid:12)  {1}4(cid:9) .

and minv

x  {(1, 2, 0, 0), (0, 0, 1, 2), (0, 1, 2, 0), (1, 0, 0, 2), i  {1}}}

2p4

in the  model c2 we denote by ,   f4
2 the twist eld corresponding to the xed point
p = 1
i=1 iei of the z2 orbifold. to determine the action of ui on twist elds notice that
by denition,  introduces a cut on the conguration space z to establish the boundary
condition (0 + 1, 1) = (0, 1) for elds  in the corresponding twisted sector, i.e.
(0, 0) = p (see section 2). action of a vertex operator with winding mode  will shift the
constant mode p of each twisted eld by  [hv87]. hence,

in our coordinates d4 = {x  z4 |p 4

1/2
ui(z) (w) 
z  w
i=1 xi  0 (2)} and d

4 = z4 + (z + 1/2)4.

+ei (w),

(3.10)

32

where the factor 1
and h = h = 1
elds. one now easily checks that

2 is determined up to phases by observing t 2

i=1 (ui)2,
4 for twist elds. the phases are xed by appropriately normalizing the twist

f |i = 0, t 2

b = 1

4p4

   {1}4 :

s := xf4

2

(i)i 

4yi=1

e
kl

are uncharged under (j; j) and (a; a) and carry j -charges mtw. for ,   {1} and
k, l  {1, . . . , 4} we dene

2 (vel,el  vel,el)(cid:1) .

:= (cid:0)jk  

2 (vek,ek  vek,ek )(cid:1)(cid:0)jl  
introducing o(n1) := (cid:0)1

13, e

14, e

then e

24 are (j, a; j, a)-uncharged and carry j -charges minv.
, p(n2) := 0

23, e
n2,n2;n2,n2 
in the gepner model,
0
n2,n2;n2,n2 (ni  {1}) as shorthand notation we nd (j, a; j , a)-uncharged states
o(n1)  o(n2), o(n1)  p(n2), p(n1)  o(n2), p(n1)  p(n2) which after diagonal-
ization with respect to the j -action carry charges mtw.
similarly, setting q(n, s) := 0
{1}, si  {0, 2} after diagonalization have charges minv.

2n,s+2;0,0, the elds q(n1, s1)  q(n2, s2), ni 

2,1;2n1,n1(cid:1)2

2n,s;0,0  0

for later reference we note that by what was said in section 1 there are eight more elds in the
ramond sector with dimensions h = h = 1
4 . each of them is uncharged under j and either (a; a)
or (j; j). we denote by w j
1,2, i  {1} the elds corresponding to the lowest weight
states of su(2)1 = hj, ji or su(2)1 = ha, ai, with (j; j) or (a; a)-charge (1; 2) respectively
and identify

1,2, w a

w j

w a

1,2 = (cid:0)0
1,2 = (cid:0)0

1,1;2,2(cid:1)4
1,1;2,2(cid:1)2

(cid:0)0

1,1;2,2(cid:1)2

.

(3.11)

1,2 we obtain ( 1

in  model language and by the discussion in section 1, by applying left and right handed spectral
ow to the j-uncharged w a
2 )-elds in f1/2, the real and imaginary parts of
whose (1, 1)-superpartners describe innitesimal deformations of the torus tsu(2) 4
our kummer
surface is associated to.
summarizing, we can now obtain a list of all elds needed to generate h1 and h2 as well as a
complete eld by eld identication by comparison of charges; for the resulting list of ( 1
4 )-elds
see appendix b.


4 , 1

2 , 1

1

note that because d4 = 2d4 for the j -charge lattice (3.9)

b =n 12

( + ,   )(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)   d4,   d4o .
(0; 0), 0 =pi ei   on the charge lattice of tsu(2) 4

thus b is the charge lattice of the  model c3 = t (d4, 0). theory c1 was obtained by taking
the ordinary z2 orbifold of the torus model on tsu(2) 4
, but as pointed out in [ks88], for the
bosonic part of the theory this is equivalent to taking the z2 orbifold associated to a shift
 = 1
. under this shift orbifold, the
22
lattices  =  = z4 are transformed by

1

1

 7  +(cid:0) + 1

2 0(cid:1) = d4,  7 {   |h0, i  0 (2)} = d4,

so the bosonic part of the resulting theory indeed is that of c3. the operator content of c1 = c2
agrees entirely with that of c3, because the shift acts trivially on fermions, and the ordinary

33

z2 orbifold just interchanges twisted and untwisted boundary conditions of the fermions in time
direction. the dierence between the theories merely amounts in opposite assignments of ramond
and neveu-schwarz sector on the twisted states resulting in dierent elliptic genera for the k3-
model c1 = c2 and the torus model c3. the fact that the partition functions actually do not
agree before projection onto even fermion numbers is not relevant here because locality is violated
before the projection is carried out. so, on the level of conformal eld theory:

remark 3.4

the gepner type model c1 = (b2)4 viewed as nonlinear  model c2 on the kummer surface
k(z4, 0) is located at a meeting point of the moduli spaces of theories associated to k3 surfaces
and tori, respectively. namely, its operator content is identical with that of the nonlinear  model
c3 = t (d4, 0).
this property does not translate to the stringy interpretation of our conformal eld theories,
though. when we take external degrees of freedom into account, spin statistics theorem dictates
in which representations of so(4) the external free elds may couple to internal neveu-schwarz
or ramond elds, respectively. the theories c1 = c2 and c3 therefore correspond to dierent
compactications of the type iia string.

3.4 gepners description for su(2) 4
theorem 3.5

1 /z4

the gepner model ci = (2)4 admits a nonlinear  model description cii on the z4 orbifold of
the torus tsu(2) 4

1 -lattice  = z4 and vanishing b-eld.

with su (2) 4

1

proof:

it is clear that ci = (2)4 can be obtained from c1 = (b2)4, for which we already have a  model

description by theorem 3.3, by the z2 orbifold procedure which revokes the orbifold used to
construct c1. the corresponding action is multiplication by 1 on h[2, 2, 0, 0]i-twisted states, i.e.

[2, 2, 0, 0] :

4oi=1

li
mi,si;mi,si 7 e

2i

8 (m1m1m3+m3)

li

mi,si;mi,si

.

(3.12)

4oi=1

among the (1, 0)-elds the following are invariant under [2, 2, 0, 0] (use (2.2) and (3.8)):

j = (1)
a = (1)

+ (1)
+ (1)

 + (2)
  (2)

 , j + = (1)
+ (2)
+ (2)
 ;

p = 1

+ (2)
+ ,
2 (u1 + u2) ; q = 1

j = (2)

 (1)
 ;
2 (u3 + u4) .

(3.13)

4 , 1

4 )-elds in c1 = (b2)4 together with their description in the  model c2

hence we have a surviving su(2)1  u(1)3 subalgebra of our holomorphic w-algebra. in appendix
b we give a list of all ( 1
on the kummer surface k(z4, 0). a similar list can be obtained for the (2, 0)-elds as discussed in
the proof of theorem 3.3. from these lists and (3.13) one readilly reads o that the states invariant
under (3.12) coincide with those invariant under the automorphism r12 on k(z4, 0) (see theorem
2.7) which is induced by the z4 action (j1, j2, j3, j4) 7 (j2, j1, j4,j3), i.e.
 ) 7
(i(1)
. the appertaining permutation of exceptional
divisors in the z2 xed points is depicted in gure 2.1. the action of r12 and that induced by
(3.12) agree on the algebra a of (1, 0)-elds and a set of states generating the entire hilbert
space, thus they are the same. because of c1 = c2 (theorem 3.3) and the fact that ci = (2)4 is
obtained from c1 by modding out (3.12), it is clear that modding out k(z4, 0) by the algebraic
automorphism r12 will lead to a  model description of (2)4. as shown in theorem 2.9 the result
is the z4 orbifold cii of tsu(2) 4


 ) on the underlying torus tsu(2) 4

 ,i(2)

 , (2)

((1)

.

1

1

34

theorem 3.5 has been conjectured in [eoty89] because of agreement of the partition functions
of ci and cii . this of course is only part of the proof as can be seen from our argumentation
in section 2.4. there we showed that su (2) 4
1 /z4 does not admit a  model description on a
kummer surface although its partition function by [eoty89] agrees with that of k(d4, 0), too.
from theorem 2.14 and theorem 3.5 we conclude:

corollary 3.6
then the gepner model (2)4 admits a geometric interpretation on the fermat quartic (2.17) in
cp3 with volume vq = 1
2 .

let (, v, b) denote the geometric interpretation of (2)4 we gain from theorem 3.5. by the proof
of theorem 3.3 we know the moduli v ,  v , and i(v ,  v 
,), ,   {1} for volume
of our z4 orbifold: we
and b-eld deformation in direction of  of the underlying torus tsu(2) 4
apply left and right handed spectral ows to w a
1,1 as given in (3.11) and then compute
the corresponding (1, 1)-superpartners. in terms of gepner elds this means

1,1, w a

1

v +
, = 2

v , = (cid:0)0

2,2;2,2  2
0,0;0,0(cid:1)2

2,0;2,0 (cid:0)0
2,2;2,2  2
 2

+ 2

0,0;0,0(cid:1)2
2,0;2,0 +(cid:0)0

2,0;2,0  2
0,0;0,0(cid:1)2

2,2;2,2 (cid:0)0
2,0;2,0  2
 2

0,0;0,0(cid:1)2

2,2;2,2.

,

(3.14)

indeed, v , are uncharged under j and a as they should, because both u (1)-currents must
survive deformations along the z4 orbifold line. on the other hand by our discussion in section
,0;3,2)4, which carry (a; a)-charges (1; 1), give the moduli
3.1 the (1, 1)-superpartners of (1
of volume and corresponding b-eld deformation if we choose the quartic hypersurface (2.17) as
geometric interpretation of gepners model (2)4. hence along the quartic line we generically
only have an su(2)1-algebra of (1, 0)-elds. this agrees with the analogous picture for c = 9 and
the gepner model (3)5 where all additional u (1)-currents vanish upon deformation along the
quintic line [dg88].
finally we remark that computing the yukawa couplings of (2)4 it is easy to obtain the structure
of the intersection matrix a6

3 associated to the exceptional divisors on a z4 orbifold.

1  a4

4

among the algebraic symmetries z2

given in (3.12) which reverts the orbifold with respect to [2, 2, 0, 0] must belong to the algebraic

4  s4 of the gepner model (2)4 all the phase symmetries z2

leaves 6 6= 8 = (z2  z2)  4 states invariant and thus does not act algebraically by (1.21). we
temporarilly leave the symmetry [1, 3, 0, 0] out of discussion, because then by using the methods

symmetries and algebraic automorphisms revised: (2)4 and (b2)4
commute with the action of [2, 2, 0, 0] which we mod out to obtain (b2)4. the residual z2  z4
has a straightforward continuation to (b2)4 (i.e. to the twisted states). moreover, [2, 2, 0, 0] as
symmetry group bgalg of (b2)4. nevertheless, one notices that z2  z2 = h[2, 2, 0, 0], [1, 3, 0, 0]i
described in section 3.1 we nd a consistent algebraic action of (z2  z4)  d4 on (b2)4, where
z2  z4 = h[2, 2, 0, 0], [1, 0, 3, 0]i and d4 = h(12), (13)(24)i  s4 is the commutant of [2, 2, 0, 0].
let us compare to the  model description k(z4, 0) of (b2)4: in theorem 2.7 the group of algebraic
automorphisms of k(z4, 0) which leave the orbifold singular metric invariant was determined to
g+
kummer = z2
2. although it is isomorphic to the algebraic symmetry group (z2z4)d4 of
(b2)4 found so far, g+
kummer must act dierently on (b2)4. namely, from the proof of theorem 3.5 we
know that the  model equivalent of [2, 2, 0, 0] is r12  g+
kummer. thus only the commutant h 
g+
kummer of r12 can comprise residual symmetries descending from the z4 orbifold description on
(2)4. this is no contradiction, because by the discussion in section 1.2 dierent subgroups of the
entire algebraic symmetry group of (b2)4 may leave the respective nullvector  invariant which

denes the geometric interpretation. by what was said in section 1 it is actually no surprise to

2 f4

35

nd symmetries of conformal eld theories which do not descend to classical symmetries of a

of such symmetries can be checked explicitly.
by the results of section 2.3 we nd h = z2  d4 = hr12, r13, t1100i (see also theorem 2.13). we
now use our state by state identication obtained in the proof of theorem 3.3 (see appendix b)

given geometric interpretation. the gepner type model (b2)4 is an example where the existence
to determine the corresponding elements of bgalg and nd

(3.15)

r13 = (13)(24)
t1100 =   [1, 3, 0, 0] =:

 s4

[1, 3, 0, 0].

here  acts by multiplication with 1 on those gepner states corresponding to the 16 twist elds
 of the kummer surface and trivially on all the other generating elds of the hilbert space
we discussed in the proof of theorem 3.3. note that  is a symmetry of the theory because by
the selection rules for amplitudes of twist elds any n-point function containing an odd number

of twist elds will vanish. the geometric interpretation tells us that modding out (b2)4 by  will
the modication (3.15) of the [1, 3, 0, 0]-action the full group bgalg = (z2
braically on (b2)4. the subgroup h consists of all the residual symmetries of (2)4 surviving both

revoke the ordinary z2 orbifold procedure i.e. produce t (z4, 0). we conclude remarking that by
2  z4)  d4 acts alge-
deformations along the quartic and the z4 orbifold line and acting classically in both geometric
interpretations of (2)4 known so far, the z4 orbifold and the quartic one.

3.5 gepner type description of so(8)1/z2
theorem 3.7

let ec1 = (e2)4 denote the gepner type model which is obtained as orbifold of (2)4 by the group
z2  z2 = h[2, 2, 0, 0], [2, 0, 2, 0]i  galg
ec2 on the kummer surface k( 12
 = 12
mechanism.

ab . this model admits a nonlinear  model description
d4, b) associated to the torus tso(8)1 with so(8)1-lattice
d4 and b-eld value b for which the theory has enhanced symmetry by the frenkel-kac

proof:
let e1, . . . , e4 denote the standard basis of z4. with respect to this basis the b-eld which leads
to a full so(8)1 symmetry for the  model on tso(8)1 is

b =

0
1
1 0

0

0

0
1
1 0

 :   r    r

which is a twotorsion point in h 2(tso(8)1 , z).
we are now ready to use theorem 3.1 if we can prove i.-iii. of section 3.2.

(3.16)

(3.17)

i. from (1.13) we nd

z 12

d4,b ( ) =

8

1

2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

8

+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

3

 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

4

 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

8! .

applying the orbifold procedure for the z2  z2 action of h[2, 2, 0, 0], [2, 0, 2, 0]i  galg
the partition function (a.10) of the gepner model (2)4 [fkss90] one checks that ec1 and
ec2 have the same partition function obtained by inserting (3.17) into (2.3).

to

ab

36

ii. we have an enhancement of the current algebra (2.2) of the nonlinear  model ec2 to su(2) 6
the 12 additional (1, 0)-elds are u := 12
the d4 rootsystem { 12
ej}. we set

1 .
(v,+b + v,b), where  belongs to

ei  12
w i,j := 1

2(cid:16)u 12

(ei+ej )  u 12

(eiej )(cid:17)

to see that upon a consistent choice of cocycle factors for the vertex operators these elds
indeed comprise an extra su(2) 4
1 :

1,4 + w +
1,4  w +

p := w +
q := w +

2,3, p  := 12(cid:0)w +
2,3, q := 12(cid:0)w +

1,3(cid:1) ,
2,4 + w +
1,3(cid:1) ,
2,4  w +
r := w 1,4  w 2,3, r := 12(cid:0)w 1,2  w 3,4(cid:1)  12(cid:0)w 2,4  w 1,3(cid:1) ,
s := w 1,4 + w 2,3, s := 12(cid:0)w 1,2 + w 3,4(cid:1)  12(cid:0)w 2,4 + w 1,3(cid:1) .

3,4(cid:1)  12(cid:0)w +
3,4(cid:1)  12(cid:0)w +

1,2 + w +
1,2  w +

(3.18)

4,2;0,0 in the ith and jth position and factors 0

for the gepner type model ec2 = (e2)4 we use xij as a shorthand notation for the eld having

factors 0
0,0;0,0 otherwise, and yij for the
eld having factors 0
2,2;0,0 otherwise. by
comparison of operator product expansions one then checks that the following identications
can be made:

2,2;0,0 in the ith and jth position and factors 0

;

a+ = y12, a = y34;

j = (cid:0)0

j = j1 + j2 + j3 + j4,
a = j1 + j2  j3  j4,
p = 12
q = 12
r = i2
s = i2

2,2;0,0(cid:1)4
(j1  j2 + j3  j4) , p + = y13, p  = y24;
(j1  j2  j3 + j4) , q+ = y14, q = y23;
(x14 + x23) ,
(x14  x23) ,

r =  1
s =  1

2 (x13  x24) + i
2 (x13 + x24) + i

2 (x34 + x12) ;
2 (x34  x12) .

1 =

(p, q, r, s; p , q, r, s)-charge lattice

thus the (1, 0)-elds in the two theories generate the same algebra a = su(2) 2
af  ab. obviously, the same structure arises on the right handed sides.
iii. we will show that the hilbert spaces eh1
eb =n 12

b and eh2
(x + y; x  y)(cid:12)(cid:12)x, y  z4o .

1  su(2) 4
b of ec1 and ec2 both have self dual j :=

in the gepner type model ec1 = (e2)4 we nd 16 elds with dimensions h = h = 1
4 which
are uncharged under (j, a; j , a); diagonalizing them with respect to the j -action for j 
{p, q, r, s} we obtain elds ej , f j uncharged under all u (1)-currents apart from j and
with (j, )-charge 12

(3.19)

(1,1) and 12
1,1;1,1  0
1,1;1,1  0
1,1;1,1  0
1,1;1,1  0

(1,1), respectively. namely,
1,1;1,1  0
1,1;1,1  0
1,1;1,1  0
1,1;1,1  0
1,1;1,1  0
1,1;1,1  0
1,1;1,1  0
1,1;1,1  0

ep = 0
f p = 0
eq = 0
f q = 0

1,1;1,1,
1,1;1,1,
1,1;1,1,
1,1;1,1,

37

and with r := 1, s := 1 for j  {r, s}

+ j(cid:0)1
2,1;2,1(cid:1)4
ej = (cid:0)1
(cid:2)1
2,1;2,1  1
2,1;2,1  1
+j 1
2,1;2,1(cid:1)2
(cid:0)1
f j = (cid:0)1
(cid:2)1
2,1;2,1  1
2,1;2,1  1
+j 1

2,1;2,1(cid:1)4
2,1;2,1  1
2,1;2,1  1
2,1;2,1
2,1;2,1  1
2,1;2,1  1
2,1;2,1(cid:1)2
+ j(cid:0)1
2,1;2,1(cid:1)2
2,1;2,1  1
2,1;2,1  1
2,1;2,1  1
2,1;2,1  1

2,1;2,1

2,1;2,1(cid:3) ,
(cid:0)1
2,1;2,1(cid:3) .

2,1;2,1(cid:1)2

among the corresponding charges under j we nd 12
in the sigma model ec1 we set

(e1 + e4) , 2 := 12

1 := 12

(e1  e4) , 3 := 12

(e2  e3) .
let ,   f4
i=1 ii. the
action of p, q, r, s and their right handed partners is determined as in (3.10). then by
normalizing appropriately the j -action is diagonalized on the following combinations of
twist elds:

2 denote the twist eld corresponding to the xed point 1

(ei;ei) generatingeb.
(e1  e2) , 4 := 12
2p4

   {1}4 such that

i = 1 :

4yi=1

s+


s

(i)i 

:= xf4
:= xf4

2|3=0 yi6=3
2|3=1 yi6=3
(e2e3)(cid:17) the eld s has (u;u)

(i)i .

namely, with u :=(cid:16)u 12

(e1+e4), u 12

(e1e4), u 12

(e2+e3), u 12

1
22

charge

(;), and hence the corresponding j -charges generateeb.


recall the greene-plesser construction for mirror symmetry [gp90] to observe that the z2  z2

orbifold (e2)4 of (2)4 is invariant under mirror symmetry. this can be regarded as an explanation
for the high degree of symmetry found for (e2)4 = ec1. a similar behaviour is observed on the

moduli space of n = 2 superconformal eld theories with central charge c = 3 [dnw].
in view of (3.19) it is clear that the same phenomenon as described in remark 3.4 appears for the
theory discussed above:

remark 3.8

1 -torus with vanishing b-eld.

for the bosonic part of the theory this again can be deduced from the results in [ks88] once
one observes that the lattice denoted by o(n)o(n) there in the case n = 4 is isomorphic to

the gepner type model ec1 = (e2)4 viewed as nonlinear  model ec2 on the kummer surface
k( 12
d4, b), b given by (3.16), is located at a meeting point of the moduli spaces of theories
associated to k3 surfaces and tori, respectively. namely, its operator content is identical with
that of the nonlinear  model ec3 on the su (2) 4
eb as dened in (3.19). the relation between the two meeting points (2)4 = c1 = c2 = c3 and
(e2)4 = ec1 = ec2 = ec3 of the moduli spaces found so far is best understood by observing that
ec1 = (e2)4 can be constructed from c1 = (b2)4 by modding out z2 = h[2, 0, 2, 0]i  gab
formulate the orbifold procedure in terms of the charge lattice b of c1 = (b2)4 as described in

alg. if we

38

1

[gp90], this amounts to a shift orbifold by the vector  = 1
2 (1, 1, 0, 0; 1,1, 0, 0) on b. indeed,
this shift simply reverts the shift we used to explain remark 3.4 and brings us back onto the torus
tsu(2) 4
of the type iia string.
from (3.15) we are able to determine the geometric counterpart of [2, 0, 2, 0] on k(z4, 0): it is the
unique nontrivial central element t1111 of the algebraic automorphism group g+
kummer depicted
in gure 3.1. hence the commutant of t1111 is the entire g+
kummer, but it is not clear so far how

. but as for c1 = c2 and c3, ec1 = ec2 and ec3 will correspond to dierent compactications

 

 


 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
 
00

 

 
11

 

 


 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
 
10

 

 
01

01

10

11

00

figure 3.1: action of the algebraic automorphism t1111 on the kummer lattice .

kummer/z2 algebraically to the twisted sectors in (e2)4 with respect to

to continue the residual g+
the t1111 orbifold. as to the geometric interpretation of (e2)4 induced by k( 12
have an algebraic automorphism group gkummer = f4
we remark that conformal eld theory also helps us to draw conclusions on the geometry of the
kummer surfaces under inspection: k( 12
d4, b) is obtained from k(z4, 0) by modding out the
classical symmetry t1111, so in terms of the decomposition (1.4) we stay in the same coordinate
chart of mk3, i.e. choose the same nullvector  for both theories. this means that we can
explicitly relate the respective geometric data. for both kummer surfaces we choose the complex

2 by theorem 2.8.

d4, b) we only

2,2;2,2(cid:1)4

structures induced by the n = (2, 2) algebra in the corresponding gepner models (b2)4 and (e2)4.
thus we identify j =(cid:0)0

in both theories with the twoforms (dz1  dz2), (dz1 
dz2) dening the complex structure of k(). here  : t  k() is the rational map of degree
two,  = z4 or  = 12
d4, respectively. then both k() are singular k3 surfaces (see section
2.5). given the lattices of the underlying tori one can compute the intersection form for real
and imaginary part of the above twoforms dening the complex structure. one nds that they
span sublattices of the transcendental lattices with forms diag(4, 4) for k(z4) and diag(8, 8) for
k( 12
d4), respectively. the factor of two dierence was to be expected, because t1111 has degree
two. nevertheless, one may check that the transcendental lattices themselves for both surfaces
have quadratic form diag(4, 4). note that for a given algebraic automorphism in general it is
hard to decide how the transcendental lattices transform under modding out [ino76, cor. 1.3.3].
in our case, we could read it o thanks to the gepner type descriptions of our conformal eld
theories.

4 conclusions: a panoramic picture of the moduli space

we conclude by joining the information we gathered so far to a panoramic picture of those strata
of the moduli space we have fully under control now (gure 4.1).
the rest of this section is devoted to a summary of what we have learned about the various
components depicted in gure 4.1. all the strata are dened as quaternionic submanifolds of the

39



z4 orbifold-line

z4 orbifold-plane

quartic line




s



r12








r12

(2)4








(e2)4




k(d4, 0)

t1111


  z4



(b2)4







  



s

 

 






s





s

  

 

 

  d4

 

 

 

z2 orbifolds k(, bt ),
bt + 1

t = r/, b = 12

2 bz

 = z4,
bt = 0

k(z4, 0)

tori t (, bt ),

t = r4/

 

 

 

 

 

  

t (d4, 0)

t (z4, 0)







k( 12

d4, b)

figure 4.1: strata of the moduli space.

moduli space mk3 consisting of theories which admit certain restricted geometric interpretations.
in other words, a suitable choice of  as described in section 1 yields (, v, b) such that , b
have the respective properties. in the following we will always tacitly assume that an appropriate
choice of  has been performed already.
figure 4.1 contains two strata of real dimension 16, depicted as a large horizontal plane and a
mexican hat like object, respectively. the horizontal plane is the kummer stratum, the subspace
of the moduli space consisting of all theories which admit a geometric interpretation on a kummer
surface x in the orbifold limit. in other words, it is the 16 dimensional moduli space of all theories
k(, bt ) obtained from a nonlinear  model on a torus t = r4/ by applying the ordinary
z2 orbifold procedure; the b-eld takes values b = 12
bt + 1
z , where bt  h 2(t, r) 
h 2(x, r) (see the explanation after theorem 2.1), and b(2)
z  h even(x, z) as described in section
2.1. by theorem 2.3 we have an embedding mtori  mk3 as quaternionic submanifold, and
we know how to locate this stratum within mk3. kummer surfaces in the orbifold limit have
a generic group f4
2 of algebraic automorphisms which leave the metric invariant. any conformal
eld theory associated to such a kummer surface possesses an su(2) 2
1 subalgebra (2.2) of the
holomorphic w-algebra.
the mexican hat like object in gure 4.1 depicts the moduli space (1.8) of theories associated
to tori. two meeting points with the kummer stratum have been determined so far, namely

2 b(2)

d4, b) = t (z4, 0), where b was dened in (3.16).

(b2)4 and (e2)4 (see remarks 3.4 and 3.8). we found (b2)4 = k(z4, 0) = t (d4, 0) and (e2)4 =
k( 12
the upper horizontal plane in gure 4.1 depicts a stratum of real dimension 8, namely the moduli
space of theories admitting a geometric interpretation as z4 orbifold of a nonlinear  model on
t = r4/. in order for the orbifold procedure to be well dened we assume  to be generated
by i = riz2, ri  r, i = 1, 2 and bt  h 2(t, r)z4  h 2(x, r) (see lemma 2.10). the

40

4 b(4)

z

2 bt + 1

d4, b), where b is given by (3.16), which probably agrees with k(z4, 0) = (b2)4. because

b-eld then takes values b = 1
as described in theorem 2.12, where the embedding
of this stratum in mk3 is also explained. the generic group of algebraic automorphisms for z4
orbifolds is z2  f4
2. a possible meeting point with the kummer stratum is the z4 orbifold of
t ( 12
this meeting point remains conjectural, it is not depicted as such in gure 4.1.
the four lines in gure 4.1 are strata of real dimension 4 which are dened by restriction to
theories admitting a geometric interpretation (, v, b) with xed  and allowed b-eld values
b  . thus the volume is the only geometric parameter along the lines and we can associate
a xed hyperkahler structure on k3 to each of them. for all four lines it turns out that one
can choose a complex structure such that the respective k3 surface is singular. hence  can be
described by giving the quadratic form on the transcendental lattice and the kahler class for this
choice of complex structure. specically we have:

 z4-line: the subspace of the kummer stratum given by theories k(, bt ) with   z4

and bt  , which is marked by   z4 in gure 4.1.

 z4 orbifold-line: the moduli space of all theories which admit a geometric interpretation
on a k3 surface obtained from the nonlinear  model on a torus t = r4/,   z4 with
b-eld bt commuting with the automorphisms listed in (2.13).

 quartic line: though well established in the context of landau-ginzburg theories, this
stratum has been somewhat conjectural up to now. we describe it as the moduli space of
theories admitting a geometric interpretation (q, vq, bq) on the fermat quartic (2.17)
equipped with a kahler metric in the class of the fubini-study metric, in order for q to
be invariant under the algebraic automorphism group g = z2
4 s4. the b-eld is restricted
to values bq  q, because (g) = 5 and therefore h 2(x, r)g = q.

 d4-line: the moduli space of theories admitting as geometric interpretation a kummer

surface k(, bt ),   d4 and bt  . this line is labelled by   d4 in gure 4.1.

the four lines are characterized by the following data:

name of line

z4-line

z4 orbifold-line

quartic line

d4-line

associated form on
the transcendental
lattice

0

0

(cid:18) 4
(cid:18) 2
(cid:18) 8
(cid:18) 4

0

0

0

0

4 (cid:19)
2 (cid:19)
8 (cid:19)
4 (cid:19)

0

0

group of algebraic au-
tomorphisms leaving
the metric invariant
g+
2  f4
kummer = z2
2
= (z2  z4)  d4

generic (1, 0)cur-
rent algebra

su(2) 2
1

d4

su(2)1  u(1)

(z4  z4)  s4

f4
2

su(2)1

su(2) 2
1

in gure 4.1 we have two dierent shortdashed arrows indicating relations between lines. consider
the kummer surface k(z4) associated to the z4-line. as demonstrated in theorem 2.9, the
group g+
kummer of algebraic automorphisms of k(z4) which leave the metric invariant contains
the automorphism r12 of order two (see gure 2.1) which upon modding out produces the z4
orbifold-line. the entire moduli space of z4 orbifold conformal eld theories is obtained this way

the quadratic form for the transcendental lattice of quartic and k(z4) can be found in [ino76, si77].

41

1 -torus.

to the d4-torus theory in the meeting point (b2)4 (the arrow with label  in gure 4.1). we stress

from z2 orbifold theories k(, bt ) where  is generated by i = riz2, ri  r, i = 1, 2 and
bt  h 2(t, r)z4.
modding out t1111  g+
kummer (see gure 3.1) on the z4-line produces the d4-line, as argued at
the end of section 3.5. note that the k3 surfaces associated to z4- and d4-lines have the same
quadratic form on their transcendental lattices and hence are identical as algebraic varieties. still,
the corresponding lines in moduli space are dierent because dierent kahler classes are xed.
in our terminology this is expressed by the change of lattices of the underlying tori on transition
from one line to the other. the d4-line can also be viewed as the image of the z4-line upon shift
orbifold on the underlying su (2) 4
finally, we list the zero dimensional strata shown in gure 4.1.
to construct k(d4, 0) on the d4-line, we may as well apply the ordinary z2 orbifold procedure
that in contrast to what was conjectured in [eoty89] this is not a meeting point with the z4
orbifold-plane.
as demonstrated in theorem 3.5 and also conjectured in [eoty89], gepners model (2)4 is
the point of enhanced symmetry  = z4, bt = 0 on the z4 orbifold-line.
in section 3.1 we
have studied the algebraic symmetry group of (2)4 and in corollary 3.6 proved that it admits a
geometric interpretation with fermat quartic target space, too. in terms of the gepner model,
the moduli of innitesimal defomation along the z4 orbifold and the quartic line are real and
imaginary parts of v ,(,   {1}) as in (3.14) and of the (1, 1)-superpartners of (1
,0;3,2)4,
respectively (see section 3.4).
the gepner type models (b2)4 and (e2)4 which are meeting points of torus and k3 moduli spaces
(e2)4


 (2)4 in gure 4.1 we explicitly know the symmetries to be modded out from the gepner
(type) model as well as the corresponding algebraic automorphisms on the geometric interpreta-
tions. hence for these examples we know precisely how to continue geometric symmetries to the
quantum level.



 (b2)4

have been mentioned above. for all the longdash arrowed correspondences (2)4



acknowledgements

the authors would like to thank a. taormina for very helpful discussions on n = 4 superconfor-
mal eld theory and v. nikulin for his explanations concerning the geometry of kummer surfaces.
k.w. thanks f. rohsiepe for valuable discussions and his most ecient crash course in c++. we
thank m. rosgen and f. rohsiepe for proof reading.

a minimal models and gepner models

the n = 2 minimal superconformal models form the discrete series (k), k  n of unitary rep-
resentations of the n = 2 superconformal algebra with central charges c = 3k/(k + 2). for
constructing the model (k) we may start from a zk parafermion theory and add a free bosonic
eld. more precisely, (k) is the coset model

su (2)k  u (1)2
u (1)k+2,diag

.

(a.1)

the primary elds are denoted by l
m,s;m,s(z, z), where l  {0, . . . , k} is twice the spin of the
corresponding eld in the ane su (2)k and we have tacitly specialized to the diagonal invariant
by imposing l = l. the remaining quantum numbers m, m  zk+2 and s, s  z4 label the
representations of u (1)2 and u (1)k+2,diag in the decomposition (a.1), respectively, and must

42

obey l  m + s  m + s (2). here, the elds with even (odd) s create states in the lefthanded
neveu-schwarz (ramond) sector, and analogously for s and the righthanded sectors. moreover
the identication

m,s;m,s(z, z)  kl
l
holds. by (a.1), the corresponding characters x l
functions cl
b = 2k(k + 2) by [gep88, ry87, qiu87]

m,s;m,s can be obtained from the level k string
j, l  {0, . . . , k}, j  z2k of su (2)k and classical theta functions a,b, a  z2b of level

m+2k,s+2;m+2k,s+2(z, z)

(a.2)

x l

m,s;m,s(, z) = l

m,s( , z),

m,s(, z)  l
kxj=1

l

m,s(, z) =

modular transformations act by

cl
4j+sm( )2m(k+2)(4j+s),2k(k+2) (,

z

k + 2

) .

(a.3)

l

m,s( + 1, z) = exp(cid:20)2i(cid:18) l(l + 2)  m2
m,s(cid:0) 1

(cid:1) = (k) xl,m,s

sin(cid:18) (l + 1)(l + 1)

4(k + 2)

s2
8 

k + 2

 , z

+

l

c

24(cid:19)(cid:21) l
(cid:19) ei mm

m,s(, z)

(k+2) ei ss

2 l

m,s (, z),

(a.4)

where (k) is a constant depending only on k and the summation runs over l  {0, . . . , k}, m 
{k  1, . . . , k + 2}, s  {1, . . . , 2}, l + m + s  0 (2).
let l
m,s denote a lowest weight state in the irreducible representation of the n = 2 supercon-
formal algebra with character l

m,s. conformal dimension and charge of l

m,s then are

hl
m,s =

l(l + 2)  m2

4(k + 2)

+

s2
8

mod 1, ql

m,s =

m
k + 2 

s
2

mod 2.

the fusion-algebra is

hl
m,sihl

m,si =

min (l+l,2kll)xl=|ll|

ll+l(2)

m+m,s+si .
hl

(a.5)

(a.6)

note that by (a.5) and (a.6) the operators of left and right handed spectral ow are associated
to the elds 0
1,1, respectively.
the ns-part of our modular invariant partition function is now given by

1,1;0,0 = 0

0,0;1,1 = 0

1,1 and 0

zn s(, z) = 1

2 xl=0,...,k

m=k1,...,k+2

l+m0(2)

(cid:0)l,0

m (, z) + l,2

m ( , z) + l,2

(a.7)

m (, z)(cid:1)(cid:0)l,0

m ( , z)(cid:1) ,

and expressions for the other three parts zgn s, zr, zer are obtained by ows as described in (2.4).

in the case k = 2 which we employ in this paper, the parafermion algebra is nothing but the
algebra satised by the majorana fermion  of the ising model. by inspection of the charge
lattice one may conrm that the minimal model (2) can readilly be constructed by tensoring the
ising model with the one dimensional free theory which describes a bosonic eld  compactied
on a circle of radius r = 2. the primary elds decompose as

l

m,s;m,s(z, z) = l
j;(z, z) = 2
0

ms;ms(z, z) e
j2;2(z, z) = 0

i

22

i

(m+2s)(z) e
0
j (z)0
0 = 1 , 0

 (z),

22

(m+2s)(z)

2 = ,

(a.8)

43

1,1 = 1

1,1, 1

1,1 = 1

1,1 denote the ground states of the two h = h = 1

and 1
16 representations
of the ising model. indeed, the level 2 string functions are obtained from the characters of lowest
weight representations in the ising model by dividing by the dedekind eta function.
to construct a gepner model with central charge c = 3d/2, d  {2, 4, 6}, one rst takes the
(fermionic) tensor product of r minimal models r
i=1(ki) such that the central charges add up
i=1 3ki/(ki + 2) = 3d/2. the bosonic modes acting on dierent theories commute and the
fermionic modes anticommute. more concretely [fks92, (4.5)],

topr

m1,s1;m1,s1  l2
l1

m2,s2;m2,s2

= (1)

1

4 (s1s1)(s2s2)l2

m2,s2;m2,s2  l1

m1,s1;m1,s1

.

(a.9)

i=1(ki) is the orbifold of r

the diagonal sums t, j, g of the elds which generate the n = 2 algebras of the factor theories
(ki) then comprise a total n = 2 superconformal algebra of central charge c = 3d/2. denote
by z the cyclic group generated by e2ij0, then z = zn with n = lcm{2; ki + 2, i = 1, . . . , r}.
now the gepner model qr
i=1(ki) with respect to z. eectively this
means thatqr
i=1(ki) by projecting onto integer left and right charges
in the (n s +gn s)-sector, onto integer or half integer left and right charges in the (r +er)-sector

according to c being even or odd, and adding twisted sectors for the sake of modular invariance.
in particular, the so constructed model describes an n = (2, 2) superconformal eld theory with
central charge c = 3d/2 and (half) integer charges. for d = 4 the gepner model is thus associated
to a k3 surface or a torus, as discussed in the introduction. we again decompose the partition
function as in (2.4) and nd

i=1(ki) is obtained from r

zn s(, z) =

nxb=0 x(~l, ~m)



ryj=1(cid:16) 1

2(cid:16)lj ,0

mj +2b( , z)(cid:17)(cid:17) ,

(a.10)

mj (, z) + lj ,2

mj +2b( , z) + lj ,2

mj (, z)(cid:17)(cid:16)lj ,0

mj

mj

j=1

j=1

mj ,sj ;mj ,sj

j=1 li

2,2;0,0(cid:1)r

kj +2 , pr
0,0;2,2(cid:1)r

(~l, ~m) denotes the sum over all values (~l, ~m)  z2r with lj  {0, . . . kj}, mj  {kj 
kj +2  z . we note that the eld
of the resulting gepner model belongs to the bth twisted sector with respect to
the orbifold by z i 2b  (mj  mj) mod n for j = 1, . . . , r. this means that the (b + 1)st twisted
sector is obtained from the bth twisted sector by applying the twofold right handed spectral ow
of our theory. we explicitly see that

where p
1, . . . , kj + 2}, lj + mj  0 (2) and pr
qr
which itself is associated to the primary eld(cid:0)0
for c = 6 the elds(cid:0)0

belonging to the operators of twofold lefthanded spectral ow
are nothing but the su (2)-currents j which extend the n = 2 superconformal algebra to an
n = 4 superconformal algebra, and analogously for the righthanded algebra. moreover, to calcu-
late zn s(, z;  , z) instead of using the closed formula (a.10) one may proceed as follows: start
by multiplying the ns-parts of the partition functions of the minimal models (ki), i = 1, . . . , r.
keep only the z-invariant i.e.
integrally charged part of this function; let us denote the result
by f (, z;  , z). add the bth twisted sectors, b = 1, . . . , n, by performing a 2b-fold righthanded
spectral ow, i.e. by adding qdb2/4ydb/2f (, z;  , z + b ). this way calculations get extremely
simple as soon as the characters of the minimal models are written out in terms of classical theta
functions.
we further note that to accomplish gepners actual construction of a consistent theory of su-
perstrings in 10  d dimensions we would rstly have to take into account 8  d additional free
superelds representing at (10-d)-dimensional minkowski space in light-cone gauge, secondly
perform the gso projection onto odd integer left and right charges and thirdly convert the re-
sulting theory into a heterotic one. however, at the stage described above we have constructed
a consistent conformal eld theory with central charge c = 3d/2 which for d = 4 is associated to
a k3 surface or a torus, so we may and will omit these last three steps of gepners construction.

44

b explicit eld identications: (b2)4 = k(z4, 0)

in this appendix, we give a complete list of ( 1
their equivalents in the nonlinear  model on k(z4, 0). as usual, , i  {1} and we use
notations as in (3.10) and (3.11).

4 )-elds in (b2)4 (see theorem 3.3) together with

4 , 1

untwisted ( 1

4 , 1

4 )-elds with respect to the h[2200]i-orbifold:

= w j

1,2

= w a
,
= 0000  1100 + 1111  0011
= 1010 + 0101  0110  1001

(cid:0)0
1,1;2,2(cid:1)4
,;,(cid:1)2
,;,(cid:1)2
(cid:0)0
(cid:0)0
(cid:0)1
2,1;2,1(cid:1)4
2,1;2,1(cid:1)4
(cid:0)1
1,1;1,1  0

 0

1,1;1,1

2,1;2,1(cid:1)2
(cid:0)1
2,1;2,1(cid:1)2
(cid:0)1
0
1,1;1,1  0

 0

0
1,1;1,1  0

0
1,1;1,1  0

1,1;1,1

1,1;1,1  0
1,1;1,1 (cid:0)1
1,1;1,1 (cid:0)1
1,1;1,1  0

2,1;2,1(cid:1)2
2,1;2,1(cid:1)2
1,1;1,1  0

1,1;1,1

= 0000  1100  1111 + 0011 + 0010 + 0001  1101  1110

= 0000  1100  1111 + 0011  0010  0001 + 1101 + 1110

= 0000 + 1100  1111  0011 + 1000 + 0100  1011  0111

= 0000 + 1100  1111  0011  1000  0100 + 1011 + 0111

= (0000 + 1100 + 1111 + 0011) + (1000 + 0100 + 0111 + 1011)
+ (0010 + 0001 + 1101 + 1110) + (1010 + 0101 + 0110 + 1001)

0
1,1;1,1  0

1,1;1,1  0

1,1;1,1  0

1,1;1,1

= (0000 + 1100 + 1111 + 0011) + (1000 + 0100 + 0111 + 1011)
 (0010 + 0001 + 1101 + 1110)  (1010 + 0101 + 0110 + 1001)

0
1,1;1,1  0

1,1;1,1  0

1,1;1,1  0

1,1;1,1

= (0000 + 1100 + 1111 + 0011)  (1000 + 0100 + 0111 + 1011)
 (0010 + 0001 + 1101 + 1110) + (1010 + 0101 + 0110 + 1001)

0
1,1;1,1  0

1,1;1,1  0

1,1;1,1  0

1,1;1,1

= (0000 + 1100 + 1111 + 0011)  (1000 + 0100 + 0111 + 1011)
+ (0010 + 0001 + 1101 + 1110)  (1010 + 0101 + 0110 + 1001)

twisted ( 1

4 , 1

4 )-elds with respect to the h[2200]i-orbifold:

(cid:0)0
(cid:0)0
,;,(cid:1)2
,;,(cid:1)2
2,1;2,1(cid:1)2
(cid:0)1
2,1;2,1(cid:1)2
(cid:0)1
2,1;2,1(cid:1)2
2,1;2,1(cid:1)2
(cid:0)1
(cid:0)1

,

= w a
= 1000  0100 + 0111  1011
= 0010  0001 + 1101  1110

45

= 1000  0100 + 1011  0111 + 1010  0101 + 1001  0110

= 1000  0100 + 1011 + 0111  1010 + 0101  1001 + 0110

2,1;2,1(cid:1)2
(cid:0)1
2,1;2,1(cid:1)2
(cid:0)1
0
1,1;1,1  0

0
1,1;1,1  0

 0

1,1;1,1  0

1,1;1,1

 0
1,1;1,1  0
1,1;1,1 (cid:0)1
1,1;1,1 (cid:0)1

1,1;1,1

2,1;2,1(cid:1)2
2,1;2,1(cid:1)2

= 0010  0001  1101 + 1110 + 1010  0101  1001 + 0110

= 0010  0001  1101 + 1110  1010 + 0101 + 1001  0110

references

[all66]

[am94]

n. allan, maximality of some arithmetic groups, ann. acad. brasil. ci. 38 (1966),
223227 and 243244.

p.s. aspinwall and d.r. morrison, string theory on k3 surfaces, in: mirror
symmetry, b. greene and s.t. yau, eds., vol. ii, 1994, pp. 703716; hep-th/9404151.

[and92] m.t. anderson, the l2 structure of moduli spaces of einstein metrics on 4-

manifolds, geom. funct. anal. 2 (1992), 2989.

[asp95]

p. aspinwall, enhanced gauge symmetries and k3 surfaces, phys. lett. b371
(1995), 329334; hep-th/9507012.

[asp96]

p.s. aspinwall, k3 surfaces and string duality, ru-96-98, 1996; hep-th/9611137.

[ber55]

[bt88]

[cec90]

m. berger, sur les groupes dholonomie des varietes `a connexion ane et des
varietes riemmannienes, bull. soc. math. france 83 (1955), 279330.

p. budinich and a. trautmann, the spinorial chessboard, springer-verlag,
berlin heidelberg new york london paris tokyo, 1988.

s. cecotti, n = 2 supergravity, type iib superstrings and algebraic geometry,
comm. math. phys. 131 (1990), 517536.

[cec91]

, n=2 landau-ginzburg vs. calabi-yau -models: non-perturbative aspects,

int. j. mod. phys. a6 (1991), 17491813.

[cent85] a. casher, f. englert, h. nicolai, and a. taormina, consistent superstrings
as solutions of the d = 26 bosonic string theory, phys. lett. b162 (1985), 121126.

[cfg89]

s. cecotti, s. ferrara, and l. girardello, geometry of type ii superstrings
and the moduli of superconformal eld theories, int. j. mod. phys. a4 (1989), 2475
2529.

[dg88]

[dg99]

j. distler and b. greene, some exact results on the superpotential from calabi-
yau compactications, nucl. phys. b309 (1988), 295316.

r. dijkgraaf, instanton strings and hyperkaehler geometry, nucl. phys. b543
(1999), 545571; hep-th/9810210.

46

[dhvw86] l. dixon, j. harvey, c. vafa, and e. witten, strings on orbifolds ii,

nucl. phys. b274 (1986), 285314.

[dix87]

l. dixon, some world-sheet properties of superstring compactications, lectures
given at the 1987 ictp summer workshop in high energy physics and cosmology
(trieste, june 29 - august 7).

[dnw]

s. dulat, w. nahm, and k. wendland, classication of n = (2, 2) supercon-
formal eld theories with central charge c = 3, to appear.

[eoty89] t. eguchi, h. ooguri, a. taormina, and s.-k. yang, superconformal algebras
and string compactication on manifolds with su(n) holonomy, nucl. phys. b315
(1989), 193221.

[et88a]

t. eguchi and a. taormina, extended superconformal algebras and string com-
pactications, trieste school 1988: superstrings, pp. 167188.

[et88b]

, on the unitary representations of n = 2 and n = 4 superconformal algebras,

phys. lett. 210 (1988), 125132.

[fks92]

j. fuchs, a. klemm, and m.g. schmidt, orbifolds by cyclic permutations in
gepner type superstrings and in the corresponding calabi-yau manifolds, annals
phys. 214 (1992), 221257.

[fkss90]

j. fuchs, a. klemm, ch. scheich, and m.g. schmidt, spectra and symme-
tries of gepner models compared to calabi-yau compactications, annals phys. 204
(1990), 151.

[gep87]

d. gepner, exactly solvable string compactications on manifolds of su (n ) holon-
omy, phys. lett. 199b (1987), 380388.

[gep88]

, space-time supersymmetry in compactied string theory and superconformal

models, nucl. phys. b296 (1988), 757778.

[gp90]

b.r. greene and m.r. plesser, duality in calabi-yau moduli space, nucl. phys.
b338 (1990), 1537.

[gvw89] b.r. greene, c. vafa, and n. warner, calabi-yau manifolds and renormaliza-

tion group ows, nucl. phys. b324 (1989), 371390.

[hv87]

[ino76]

s. hamidi and c. vafa, interactions on orbifolds, nucl. phys. b279 (1987), 465
513.

h. inose, on certain kummer surfaces which can be realized as non-singular quartic
surfaces in p3, j. fac. sci. univ. tokyo sec. ia 23 (1976), 545560.

[kod64]

k. kodaira, on the
i. amer. j. math. 86 (1964), 751798.

structure of

compact

complex

analytic

surfaces,

[ks88]

[kt87]

k.-i. kobayashi and m. sakamoto, orbifold-compactied models in torus-
compactied string theories, z. phys. c41 (1988), 5563.

r. kobayashi and a.n. todorov, polarized period map for generalized k3 sur-
faces and the moduli of einstein metrics, tohoku math. journ. 39 (1987), 341363.

47

[lm89]

[lp81]

h.b. lawson and m.-l. michelsohn, spin geometry, princeton university press,
princeton, new jersey, 1989.

e. looijenga and c. peters, torelli theorems for k3-surfaces, comp. math. 42
(1981), 145186.

[lvw89] w. lerche, c. vafa, and n.p. warner, chiral rings in n = 2 superconformal

theories, nucl. phys. b324 (1989), 427474.

[muk88]

[nar86]

s. mukai, finite groups of automorphisms of k3 surfaces and the mathieu group,
invent. math. 94 (1988), 183221.

k.s. narain, new heterotic string theories in uncompactied dimensions < 10,
phys. lett. 169b (1986), 4146.

[nik75]

v.v. nikulin, on kummer surfaces, math. ussr isv. 9 (1975), 261275.

[nik80a]

, finite automorphism groups of kaehler k3 surfaces, trans. moscow

math. soc. (1980), 71135.

[nik80b]

, integral symmetric bilinear forms and some of their applications, math. ussr

isv. 14 (1980), 103167.

[ns95]

[opa]

m. nagura and k. sugiyama, mirror
int. j. mod. phys. a10 (1995), 233252; hep-th/9312159.

symmetry of k3 and torus,

n. obers and b. pioline, eisenstein series
hep-th/9910115.

and

string

thresholds;

[opb]

, eisenstein series in string theory, to be published in the proceedings of strings

99, potsdam, germany, 19-25 july 1999; hep-th/9910115.

[ps90]

[qiu87]

[rw98]

[ry87]

[sei88]

[sen86]

v. periwal and a. strominger, kahler geometry of the space of n = 2 super-
conformal eld theories, phys. lett. b235 (1990), 261267.

z. qiu, modular invariant partition functions for n = 2 superconformal eld theo-
ries, phys. lett. b198 (1987), 497502.

s. ramgoolam and d. waldram, zero branes on a compact orbifold, jhep
9807:009 (1998); hep-th/9805191.

f. ravanini and s.-k. yang, modular invariance in n = 2 superconformal eld
theories, phys. lett. 195b (1987), 202208.

n. seiberg, observations on the moduli space of superconformal eld theories,
nucl. phys. b303 (1988), 286304.

a. sen, (2, 0) supersymmetry and space-time supersymmetry in the heterotic string
theory, nucl. phys. b278 (1986), 289308.

[sen87]

, heterotic string theory on calabi-yau manifolds in the green-schwarz formal-

ism, nucl. phys. b284 (1987), 423448.

[si77]

t. shioda and h. inose, on singular k3 surfaces, in: complex analysis and
algebraic geometry, w.l. bailey and t. shioda, eds., cambridge univ. press, 1977,
pp. 119136.

48

[sim62]

j. simons, on transitivity on holonomy systems, ann. of math. 76 (1962), 213234.

[sw86a]

a. schellekens and n. warner, anomalies and modular invariance in string
theory, phys. lett. 177b (1986), 317323.

[sw86b]

, anomaly cancellation and selfdual lattices, phys. lett. 181b (1986), 339343.

[tao89]

[wal88]

[wit87]

[wit88]

a. taormina, the n = 2 and n = 4 superconformal algebras and string compacti-
cations, islamabad 1989, proc. mathematical physics.

m. walton, the heterotic string on the simplest calabi-yau manifold and its orb-
ifold limits, phys. rev. d 37 (1988), 377390.

e. witten, elliptic genera and quantum eld theory, comm. math. phys. 109
(1987), 525536.

, the index of the dirac operator in loop space, in: elliptic curves and modular
forms in algebraic geometry, p. landweber, ed., springer-verlag, 1988, pp. 161181.

[wit95]

, string theory dynamics in various dimensions, nucl. phys. b443 (1995), 85

126; hep-th/9503124.

[wol65]

[zam86]

j.a. wolf, complex homogeneous contact manifolds and quaternionic symmetric
spaces, j. math. mech. 14 (1965), 10331047.

a.b. zamolodchikov, irreversibility of the ux of the renormalization group in
a 2-d eld theory, jetp lett. 43 (1986), 730732.

49

