on the varying speed of light in a brane-induced frw universe

stephon h.s. alexander

physics department, brown university, providence, ri 02912, usa

we investigate a string/m theoretic realization of the varying speed of light scenario. we consider
a 3+1 dimensional probe-brane universe in the background of a black hole in the bulk formed by a
stack of branes, in the spirit of kiritsis (hep-th/9906206). we generalize the dynamics of the system
at hand by including rotation and hubble damping of the bulk space-time and show that this may
lead to a mechanism to stabilize the brane-universe and hence x the speed of light at late times.

9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
6

 

 
 

1
v
7
3
0
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

pacs numbers: 98.80cq

i. introduction and motivation

one of the main challenges for modern cosmology is the
horizon problem: the cosmic microwave background is
observed to have the same temperature to a few parts in
105 over regions which were causally disconnected (out-
side of each others hubble radius) at the time of recom-
bination trec when the microwave photons last scattered.
in standard big bang cosmology, the hubble radius is
(up to irrelevant factors of order 1) equal to the causal
horizon, the maximal region of causal contact starting at
the big bang. the seminal point of the horizon problem,
therefore, is that in the context of standard cosmology
there are no causal microphysical processes which can ex-
plain the observed degree of isotropy which corresponds
to correlations on these length scales.

a major success of inationary cosmology [1] is that
it provides a simple solution of the horizon problem. in-
ation uses a scalar (inaton) eld minimally coupled
to gravity whose equation of state is assumed to be ini-
tially dominated by an almost constant potential energy
and which consequently leads to exponential expansion
of the universe. since in this case the causal horizon
expands exponentially relative to the hubble radius, in-
ation solves the horizon problem. current ination-
ary models, however, generally are plagued by important
problems of principle (see e.g. [2] for a recent review), for
example ne-tuning of the potential required to obtain
ination and to obtain the desired magnitude of density
uctuations. furthermore, vachaspati and trodden have
recently argued [3] that ination simply shifts the causal-
ity problem to the level of having to demand acausally
correlated initial data in order to obtain ination (see,
however, [4] for a dierent point of view on this issue).
in light of this, it is reasonable to investigate other pos-
sible solutions of the horizon problem.

recently albrecht and magueijo [5] (see also moat [6]
for earlier work) have proposed an alternative solution of
the horizon problem by postulating a varying the speed
of light (which determines the angle of the light cone).
the scenario is quite simple: if at early times the speed
of light is much larger than at the present time, then
the forward light cone at trec will be much larger than it

would be in standard cosmology, i.e.
if computed with
constant speed of light. one example of this scenario is if
at a critical time tc < trec in the universes past, a phase
transition occurs when the speed of light changes from
c to c+, where c is much larger than the current speed
of light c+.

kiritsis [7] recently discovered a realization of the vary-
ing speed of light scenario in the context of string/m the-
ory. he demonstrated that a 3 + 1 dimensional brane-
world which probes a black hole background of stacked
3-branes obtains a speed of light which varies as the dis-
tance between the probe and the black hole changes.
since the system corresponds to a vacuum conguration
of d-branes, residing in the coulomb branch of string/m
theory, this yields a rather natural realization of the vary-
ing speed of light scenario. in this note we will generalize
kiritsiss approach of solving the horizon problem with a
varying speed of light, by proposing a mechanism which
can stabilize the probe universe relative to the black hole
and can thus lead to a speed of light which is constant
at late times. we also address some other issues relevant
to cosmology which inevitably arise in this framework.

ii. the brane/yang-mills setup

how is one to realize a varying speed of light in the
context of string theory? since our visible universe occu-
pies 3 spatial dimensions and string/m theory requires at
least 11 for consistency, it is reasonable to look at vacuum
congurations (points in moduli space) that predict non-
trivial 3+1d background space-times consistently. since
d-branes are embedded hypersurfaces in the higher di-
mensional target space of all consistent string theories, it
is reasonable to visualize our universe as being a d3 brane
immersed in a higher dimensional bulk space-time. re-
cently, this brane-world interpretation has been utilized
to solve the hierarchy problem [9]. likewise, this point
of view motivates the realization of a variable speed of
light in the context of string/m theory [7].

one of the fascinating properties of d-branes is their
ability to be stacked on top of each other without any
cost in energy. this is possible because they are bps

1

objects [10]. when d-p branes with the same ramond-
ramond charge are placed close to one another they
experience zero net force, since their attractive gravita-
tional force exactly cancels their electromagnetic repul-
sion. consequently, many branes with the same charge
can be stacked coincident to each other. for example,
a stack of n d3 branes, dened by a su (n ) gauge the-
ory on its world volume, describes a point in the moduli
space in string theory [11].

furthermore, moving one brane a distance r away from
the stack of n d3-branes (keeping the branes parallel) is
in the corresponding gauge theory equivalent to turn-
ing on a higgs expectation value r/ =<  > which
leads to the gauge symmetry breaking pattern su (n ) 
su (n1)u (1) [11]. giving an expectation value to the
scalar eld associated with the position of the transverse
position of the brane moves one onto the coulomb branch
[7] - a space of maximally supersymmetric but noncon-
formal vacua. n = 4 su (n ) super yang-mills theory
includes the scalar elds i(i = 1...6) which transform
in the vector representation of the so(6) r symmetry
group and in the adjoint representation of su (n ). the
coulomb branch corresponds to giving these elds ex-
pectation values subject to the atness conditions of the
potential () = [i, j] = 0. hence these elds can be
diagonalized and the moduli space is parametrized by
the 6n eigenvalues y(a)
(a = 1...n ) since some scalars
obtain non-vanishing expectation values in the coulomb
branch, the remaining massless bosons will mediate the
long-range coulomb interactions.

i

on the other hand, it is well understood through the
ads/cft duality [12], that in the limit n   and
large t hooft coupling , the d brane stack is well de-
scribed by supergravity with a specic background eld
conguration which is asymptotically ads space-time
with an ads black hole at the center. one can study
a probe d3 brane separated by a distance r from the
ads black hole with the u (1) part of thermal n = 4
sym su (n )  su (n  1) u (1). based on this setup,
kiritstis [7] investigated the situation in which a probe
d3 brane is moving in the vicinity of the horizon of the
ads5  s5 black hole, a black hole at nite temperature.
since n is large we can trust the supergravity solu-
tion and likewise treat the probe brane correctly with a
dirac-born-infeld (dbi) action. hence, one can inter-
pret this process as our early universe emerging from the
probe brane, while the higher dimensional black hole is
fully described by the bulk supergravity. the essence of
kiritsis calculation is to show how the elds living on the
brane probe world volume (our universe) are aected by
the nontrivial higher dimensional bulk space-time (the
blackhole) in which the brane is moving. what we will
see emerging is a variable speed of light on the probe
brane world volume as the brane falls towards or away
from the black hole. this scenario raises some important

issues that will be discussed in this note.

iii. realization of the varying speed

of light scenario

given that we are going to do our analysis in the
coulomb branch, it is useful to exploit some well known
technology. in particular, we will be able to study the
brane probe in the background of other branes by mak-
ing use of the dirac-born-infeld (dbi) action which de-
scribes the physics on the probe brane in the background
of the 10d sugra solution which describes the col-
lection of parallel stacked branes. the dbi action in-
volves the pullback of the bulk spacetime metric onto the
brane world volume to determine the metric and neces-
sary gauge elds localized on the brane. therefore, there
exists a direct way to study the action of the bulk on
both the elds and the space-time of the probe 3 brane
universe.

first, we will review kiritsis way of obtaining a vary-
ing speed of light on the probe brane. we begin with
the relevant bosonic part of the action of type iib string
theory:

siib = z d10xg([r + 4()2] 

2

(8  p)!

f 2)

(1)

where f is a rr-form eld strength. an object extended
along p=3 spatial dimensions couples electrically to a 4
form gauge potential, and thus corresponds to a non-
zero 5 form eld strength. as mentioned in the previous
section, the consistent bulk spacetime solution within the
coloumb branch is the product manifold of s5 and a ve-
dimensional ads black hole, which corresponds to a p-
brane solution. in this case, the ux of the ve-form eld
strength through s5 carries quantized d3 brane charge.
the metric of the background geometry (in the string
frame) of a near-extremal black hole describing n coin-
ciding d3 branes is [7]:

ds2 = f (r)dt2 + ~dx
ph3(r)

where

2

+ph3(r)(

dr2
f (r)

+ r2d2
5)

(2)

h3(r) = 1 +

l4
r4

f (r) = 1 

r4
0
r4 .

the parameters l and r0 determine the ads throat
size and the position of the schwarzschild horizon, re-
spectively and are both related to the adm mass m and
the integer ramond-ramond charge n. we will deal with
the spacetime in the near horizon ads geometry of the

2

extremal r0  0 black d3 brane solution. therefore, in
the near horizon limit, h(r)  l4
r4 and l  r. the re-
sulting metric describes an ads  schwarzschild black
hole [8]:

ds2 =

r2
r2 (f (r)dt2 + dx2

1 + dx2

2 + dx2

3) +

r2dr2
f (r)r2 + r22
(3)

5

here the 3 brane lls the coordinates x0...x3, r is the
direction transverse to the branes and r is the radius of
the ads5 spacetime and the ve-sphere.

in the near horizon regime, one can take a probe brane
far (but not so far that the near-horizon limit of the bulk
metric breaks down) away from the black hole and eval-
uate the eects of the bulk space-time by using the dbi
action. the probe is taken parallel to the stack of n
three-branes to preserve supersymmetry. hence, the dbi
action is:

sp = tpz d dpeqdet(gx  x  + f  b)

+ tpz cp+1

(4)

where tp is the dp-brane tension, the r-r charge is the
source to the p-form eld cp, f and b are the gauge elds
living on the brane world volume, (x) is the dilaton eld
and x  are the target space coordinates.

given that a brane probe is often embedded in a curved
bulk space-time, the pullback of such a background onto
the brane world volume needs to be computed directly.
the existence of the curved background and the fact that
the induced metric on the probe brane depends on the
background elds are the main reasons why the speed
of light on the brane can vary in time in this scenario.
hence, this calculation will make the origin of the varying
speed of light on the probe brane transparent.

first, let us expand the action keeping quadratic terms

in derivatives .

here g is the determinant of the worldvolume metric
g = gx x . since we know g, the near
horizon black hole metric, we are able to nd the induced
world volume metric. we use the static gauge

x 0 = t

x  = x

x 4 = r

x  = x(5),

where  = 1...3 and 5 represent the coordinates on the
ve sphere.

3

since the gauge elds are smaller in magnitude than
|f| < |g|, we can expand the dbi

the curvature, i.e.
action using the identity:

det1/2(1 + m ) = exp(

1
2

tr[m 

1
2

m 2 +

1
3

m 3 + ...]) (5)

with m 

 = fg

now we are to look at the rst order kinetic terms of
the gauge elds living in the brane. for simplicity, we
set b = 0:

[ggf f]

~e2 +pf (r) ~b2] .

(6)

sgf = t3z d4x
= 2t3z d4x[

1

1

pf (r)
pf (r)

where ei = f0i, bi = ijkfjk/2.
here we see that the function f(r) that appears in front
of the electric and magnetic elds, respectively, is indeed
the speed of light that appears in the maxwell equations:

cef f = pf (r) = r1  (

r0
r

)4 .

(7)

from this equation we see that the speed of light de-
creases as the probe-brane universe approaches the black
hole and vanishes at the horizon. hence, from this anal-
ysis we are able to realize a varying speed of light in the
context of a brane universe. however, our universe today
does not have a vanishing speed of light. it is therefore
important to investigate how the speed of light can be
stabilized in the context of the coulomb branch picture.
in the next section we will build on kiritsis analysis by
generalizing the dynamics of the system to include rota-
tion.

iv. inclusion of rotation

given that the speed of light can vary on a probe 3-
brane universe as it falls into or moves away from a black
hole, it is natural to investigate how this situation will be
aected by generalizing the scenario to a rotating black
hole. in other words, what will happen to the speed of
light on the brane if it falls into a rotating black hole
with a denite angular momentum? also, how can we
stabilize the probe brane in some xed orbit, thus, ren-
dering the speed of light constant at late times? in order
to address these questions, it is important that the anal-
ysis remain consistent with the coulomb branch analysis
of kiritsis. thus, we aim to study the same system of a
brane probing a black hole and generalize it to include ro-
tation. interestingly, it has been demonstrated [13] that
a rotating collection of d3 branes will still remain in the
coloumb branch, and in cases relevant to our analysis,
maintain thermodynamic stability. therefore, one can
still trust the probe brane scenario.

we begin with a collection of n branes which are ro-
tating. following cai [13], we consider the rotating d3-
brane solution with an angular momentum parameter.
the metric is

ds2 =

1
h
+ h[

(f dt2 + dx2
dr2
f 

r4h

4mlcosh

1 + dx2

2 + dx2
3)

sin2dtd

+ r2(d2 + sin2d2 + cos2d2
3]

where

h = 1 +

2msinh2

r4

,

 = 1 +

l2cos2

r2

,  = 1 +

l2
r2 +

2ml2sin2

r6h

f = 1 

2m
r4

, f =

1


[1 +

l2
r2 

2m
r4 ].

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

here  is the angle in the plane in which the black
hole is spinning and the angles in the 3-sphere specify
a direction labeled rcos above and orthogonal to this
plane. the remaining angle  runs between the plane and
the the rcos direction. the term sinh is proportional
to the total d3 brane charge nd3. the rotating d3 brane
is supported by the self-dual 5-form eld strength f5 of
type iib string theory.

note that the action for the varying speed of light of
the gauge elds, eq (6), will carry over to the case of the
rotating background. hence, there will be no angular
momentum dependence of the speed of light on the probe
brane to rst order in its velocity.

using the dbi action (4) one obtains the low velocity
action of a d3 probe brane moving in a rotating back-
ground of n d3-branes:

s = t3v3z d h 1[pf  hw2  1 + h0
 h +

(1  h)lsin2

sinh

]

where

and

w2 =



+ r2( 2 + sin2 2 + cos2 2
3)

r2
f
4mlcosh

r4h

sin2 .

h0 = 1 +

r4
r4

.

(12)

(13)

(14)

this action generalizes the probe brane action to a
rotating background. it has been demonstrated that the

4

probe brane can possess stable circular orbits around the
black hole. in other words solutions to the equations of
motion for a constant radius and (t) = wt exists for
eq (12), where w is the frequency of the orbit. these
orbits arise because the rotation of the black hole causes
a frame dragging eect on the probe brane motion. this
is revealed in the w2 term in the action (12). since the
speed of light on the brane probe depends only on the
radial direction a stable orbit will render the speed of
light a constant on the probe brane.

furthermore, since the speed of light on the brane van-
ishes at the horizon, we have to stabilize the brane in an
orbit away from the horizon. therefore, rotation pulls
the brane in the direction of the local inertial frame. this
is a frame dragging eect which will deect the falling
brane from the ergosphere which is situated outside the
horizon. hence, we see that including rotation keeps the
brane-universe from falling into the horizon. this step is
crucial, but not sucient to stabilize the brane at a xed
radius away from the horizon, and thus not sucient to
provide a theory in which the speed of light stabilizes at
a small value at late times.

we wish to propose a natural mechanism for stabilizing
the speed of light on the probe-brane at late times to a
small value. crucial ingredients are rotation of the black
hole (as mentioned above), expansion of the bulk space-
time, and virialization of bulk density uctuations. if the
bulk contains matter, the bulk will expand. this expan-
sion leads to a decrease in peculiar velocities of probe
particles and probe branes. thus, a brane which ap-
proaches the black hole and is deected by the rotation
will not move away at the same speed. rather, it will
lose energy and gradually spiral towards the black hole.
since the expansion rate of the bulk will decrease as time
increases (as our universes expansion rate is decreasing
as time increases), the damping eect will weaken.

in addition, the region of bulk space-time surrounding
the black hole corresponds to a bulk density uctuation.
this uctuation will increase in magnitude by the usual
gravitational instability mechanism and may freeze out
from the general hubble expansion once the density con-
trast reaches order unity, analogous to how galaxies freeze
out from the universal expansion of our universe once the
density contrast in the galaxy reaches order unity. af-
terwards, the region of bulk space-time in the vicinity of
the black hole will virialize like a galaxy virializes [14] and
settles into a stable angular motion in a four-dimensional
expanding universe. after freezeout and virialization,
the probe particle peculiar velocities will no longer de-
crease. therefore, the probe brane will settle into stable
rotation about the black hole, thus achieving a state with
constant (and small) speed of light.

v. discussion and conclusion

[8] s.w hawking and d. page, comm. math. phys. 87(1983)

577.

[9] l. randall and r. sundrum, phys. rev. lett. 83, 3370

(1999), hep-ph/9905221.

[10] j. polchinski, string theory, vol ii (cambridge univ.

press, cambridge, 1998)

[11] e. witten, nucl. phys. b, 460:335-35 (1996), hep-

th/9510135

[12] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 231 (1998),

hep-th/9711200.

[13] r-g. cai, jhep 9909:027 (1999), hep-th/9909077.
[14] p.j.e. peebles, the large-scale structure of space-time

(princeton univ. press, princeton, 1980)

[15] s. das, s. mathur, s. kalyana rama, p. ramadevi, hep-

th/971103

[16] i. klebanov, hep-th/9906220

in this letter we have proposed a realization of the
varying speed of light scenario for solving the horizon
problem in the context of string/m theory. it is based on
an extension of the analysis of kiritsis [7] in which the
observed four dimensional universe is a probe brane in a
higher dimensional bulk space-time in which a black hole
produced by a stack of 3 branes. as kiritsis realized,
the speed of light on the probe brane decreases in time
as the probe brane moves towards the black hole in the
bulk space-time. the new ingredients in our approach
are the use of a rotating black-hole background to pre-
vent the probe brane from hitting the horizon, the use
of bulk expansion to provide an eective friction for the
probe brane dynamics, which enables the brane to remain
close to the black hole at late times; and the freezeout of
the bulk space-time near the black hole, and subsequent
virialization to stabilize the radius of the probe brane or-
bit. this will ensure that the speed of light tends to a
constant at late times.

related to this work is the following question: can one
describe the dynamical capture of the probe brane quan-
tum mechanically by an absorption cross section? this
has been successfully realized in the context of scalar eld
absorption using the ads/cft correspondence [16,15].
we are currently investigating the rotating black hole
background required for our scenario and will report on
our ndings in future work.

acknowledgments

i wish to thank robert brandenberger and sanjaye
ramgoolam for the illuminating discussions and encour-
agement throughout the course of this project. also, i
thank joao magueijo for inspiring me to write this paper.
i thank the gaann fellowship program for the nancial
support.

[1] a. guth, phys. rev. d23, 347 (1981).
[2] r. brandenberger, inationary cosmology: progress and

problems, hep-ph/9910410.

[3] t. vachaspati and m. trodden, causality and cosmic

ination, gr-qc/9811037.

[4] j. kung and r. brandenberger, phys. rev. d42, 1008

(1990).

[5] a. albrecht and j. magueijo, phys. rev. d59, 0433516

(1999).

[6] j. moat, int. j. mod. phys. d2, 351 (1993).
[7] e. kiritsis, jhep, 9910:010 (1999), hep-th/9906206.

5

