9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
4
1

 

 
 

1
v
5
1
1
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

translocality and a duality principle in

generally covariant quantum field theory

hadi salehi1

department of physics, shahid beheshti university , evin tehran 19839 iran

abstract

it is argued that the formal rules of correspondence between local observation
procedures and observables do not exhaust the entire physical content of generally
covariant quantum eld theory. this result is obtained by expressing the distin-
guishing features of the local kinematical structure of quantum eld theory in the
generally covariant context in terms of a translocal structure which carries the to-
tality of the nonlocal kinematical informations in a local region. this gives rise
to a duality principle at the dynamical level which emphasizes the signicance of
the underlying translocal structure for modelling a minimal algebra around a given
point. we discuss the emergence of classical properties from this point of view.

1 introduction

quantum eld theory studies the properties of algebras which are expected to give ac-
curate mathematical descriptions of physical systems. in general, the manner in which
one can extract informations of direct physical relevance from the algebraic description
is very subtle because, for a given abstract algebra, there may exist in general many
(unitarily inequivalent) representations in terms of operator algebras acting on a hilbert
space. therefore, the basic problem of quantum eld theory concerns the characterization
of physically admissible representations.
this problem is considerably simplied in the presence of space-time symmetries. for
example, in quantum eld theory in minkowski space, because of the lorentz symmetry,
it is always possible to refer to a representation containing the physical vacuum. a sim-
ilar simplication could, in principle, arise in any theory admitting at least a group of

1 e-mail address: h-salehi@cc.sbu.ac.ir

1

space-time symmetry with a global time-like generator.
it turns out that in a generally covariant quantum eld theory, because of the dynamical
role played by the space-time metric, no a priori notion of space-time symmetry exists.
consequently, considerable diculties arise if one wants to characterize the physically
admissible representations.
because of the lack of a priori space-time symmetries in the generally covariant context,
it is useful for the general treatment of the basic problem of quantum eld theory in that
context to isolate those features of the problem which can be discussed without refer-
ence to any pre-assigned space-time symmetries.
it is perfectly possible that this may
not resolve the problem completely, nevertheless attempts in this direction may provide
important indications for understanding the physical content of generally covariant quan-
tum eld theory. the present paper contemplates a consideration of this issue within the
scope of the algebraic approach to quantum eld theory [1].
we rst briey discuss the question of how general covariance can be incorporated into
the conventional framework of quantum eld theory [2]. the basic idea is to start with
free algebras, i.e. algebras which are free from a priori relations. the need for this is
obvious, since otherwise we have a priori no principle at hand ensuring that the algebraic
relations are kept unchanged under the action of an arbitrary space-time dieomorphism.
the general scheme we shall now describe is a generalization of the scheme used in [2-5].
we consider a dierentiable manifold m and assume the existence of a net of free algebras
over m generated by what we call kinematical procedures. in specic terms we require
an intrinsic correspondence between each open set o  m and a free involutive algebra
a(o) such that the additivity

a(o)  a(o),

if o  o

(1)

holds. the attribute intrinsic means that the principle of general covariance is imple-
mented by considering the group dif f (m) of all dieomorphisms of the manifold as
acting by automorphisms on the net of the algebras a(o), i.e. each dieomorphism
  dif f (m) is represented by an automorphism  such that

(a(o)) = a((o))

(2)

holds. given such an intrinsic correspondence between open sets and algebras, we call a
self adjoint element of a(o) a kinematical procedure in o.
we should emphasize that, because there is no dieomorphism invariant notion of locality,
it is by no means clear whether there is an a priori correspondence between kinematical
procedures and local properties in the underlying manifold. for example we may nd
a coordinate system in which the kinematical procedures carry the global properties of
the entire manifold in a local domain, i.e., in a nite range of that coordinate system.
typical examples of such coordinate systems in general relativity are coordinate systems
which compactify the structure of innity. indeed, the exploration of the question con-
cerning the characterization of local kinematical procedures is one of the basic tasks of
the present analysis. it will be dealt with in the next section.
there could be many kinematical procedures which are equivalent with respect to the ac-
tion of a physical system on them which is, in general, expected to connect the kinematical

2

procedures with dynamical procedures (traditionally identied with observables). thus,
the essential question is how to identify the dynamical procedures of the net o  a(o)
as suitable equivalence classes of kinematical procedures?
for this aim, we rst note that the precise mathematical description of a physical system
is given in terms of a state which is taken to be a positive linear functional over the
total algebra of kinematical procedures a := s a(o). given a state , one gets via the
gns-construction a representation  of a by an operator algebra acting on a hilbert
space h with a cyclic vector   h. in the representation (, h, ) one can select
a family of related states on a, namely those represented by vectors and density matrices
in h. it corresponds to the set of normal states of the representation , the so called
folium of .
once a physical state  has been specied, one can consider in each subalgebra a(o) the
equivalence relation

a  b   (a  b) = 0,    f .

(3)

here f  denotes the folium of the state . the set of such equivalence relations generates
a two-sided ideal i (o) in a(o). one can construct the algebra of dynamical procedures
a(o) from the algebra of kinematical procedures a(o) by taking the quotient

a(o) = a(o)/i (o).

(4)

by this annihilation all the relevant relations between the dynamical procedures can be
characterized by the totality of elements in the kernel of the representation , namely
the total ideal i 

i  = [ i (o).

(5)

this construction implies that the mapping from kinematical procedures to dynamical
procedures becomes fundamentally state-dependent. this aspect reects one of the char-
acteristic features of generally covariant quantum eld theory.
crucial for further investigations is the realization that a dieomorphism   dif f (m)
can act as an automorphism  on the net o  a(o) provided

(i (o)) = i ((o))

(6)

holds. any dieomorphism satisfying this condition is called dynamical (or proper). oth-
erwise it is called nondynamical (or improper). nondynamical dieomorphisms can not
be represented as automorphisms on the algebra of the dynamical procedures. for dy-
namical dieomorphisms such a representation is possible. they generate a group g
which is called in the following the dynamical group of  and will be denoted by g. the
elements of g correspond to state-dependent automorphisms of the algebra of dynamical
procedures with a pure geometric action.

3

2 local inertial sector

one of the basic diculty of the above scheme is that, in general, the gns-representation
of a physical state can not unitarily be xed in an intrinsic manner, because the struc-
ture of the total ideal i  depends crucially on the particular coordinates one uses. for
example, starting from the gns-representation of a physical state one can obtain an-
other representation if the kinematical procedures are transformed by a nondynamical
dieomorphism. the representation obtained in this way may not be in the equivalence
class of the former because it may have a dierent kernel. thus a physical state will, in
general, provide us with a variety of unitarily inequivalent representations depending on
the nature of the coordinates that happened to have been chosen for a given problem,
and a priori it is not known which representation is physical.
the problem can be addressed on various levels. one possibility is to take a global point
of view and select the equivalence class of representations for a physical state  as that
for which the dynamical group g is nontrivial and acts globally on the manifold m. the
geometric action of this group would then determine the nature of the equivalence class
of coordinates to which the representation refers. these are coordinates which are related
by the geometric action of the dynamical group g. such coordinates may be considered
as typical examples of global inertial coordinates.
a criterion of this type may be useful to analyze the particular type of a physical theory
resulting from the transition from the generally covariant description of a physical state
to the special relativistic one.
for the description of a physical state in the generally covariant context we shall formulate
a local variant of the above criterion. specically, we assume that, given a physical state
, we can assign to any point x  m a neighbourhood o
x so that by the restriction of
the gns- representation  to o
x a nontrivial dynamical group g is established which
acts on o
x . to emphasize the individuality of the point x, we shall assume that the
geometric action of g on o
x leaves the point x invariant. in an alternative formulation
we shall require the invariance of the local ideal i (o
x ) under the (nontrivial) action of
the dynamical group g, namely

(i (o

x )) = i (o

x ),

  g

(7)

with x being invariant under to the geometric action of g. for any physical state 
this acts as a criterion to select a characteristic local equivalence class of representations.
in symbols we shall write for this local equivalence class {|o
x } and refer to it as a
local inertial sector of a physical state . correspondingly the equivalence class of local
coordinate systems to which {|o
x } refers are called the equivalence class of local inertial
coordinates with the origin at x. the neighbourhood o
x is called a normal neighbourhood.

3 local and translocal properties

one consequence of a local inertial sector of a physical state would be the distinction
it would draw between the two dierent ideal sets of kinematical procedures. given

4

x ) for which this condition can not be satised is called local2.

x }. a
x ) is called translocal (or absolute) if it escapes the
x . in mathematical terms, this is taken to
x ). a kinematical

a physical state  and a point x  m, consider a local inertial sector {|o
kinematical procedure in a  a(o
local action of the dynamical group g in o
mean that for an arbitrary element   g we have (a)  a  i (o
procedure a  a(o
it can be shown that this distinction between local and translocal kinematical procedures
is preserved at the dynamical level of the theory. in fact we prove the following
statement: for a local (respectively translocal) kinematical procedure a  a(o
x ) the
corresponding equivalence class in the sense of (3) contains local (respectively translocal)
kinematical procedures only.
consider rst the case of a translocal kinematical procedure a  a(o
any kinematical procedure b  a(o
arbitrary element  of the dynamical group g we have (a) = a + i with i  i(o
since b  a we also have b = a + i  with i   i(o
that

x ). we show that
x ) which is equivalent to a is translocal. for an
x ).
x ). it then follows for all   g

(b) = (a) + (i ) = a + i + (i ) = b  i  + i + (i).

this together with the invariance of the ideal, relation (7), implies (b)  b  i (o
thus b is translocal. now consider the case of a local kinematical procedure a  a(o
we show that any kinematical procedure b  a(o
we have b = a + i with i  i (o
dynamical group so that the dierence  = (a)  a does not lie in i (o
that

x ).
x ).
x ) which is equivalent to a is local.
x ). since a is local there exist an element  of the
x ). it follows

(b) = (a) + (i) = a +  + (i) = b  i +  + (i)

x ). thus b is local.

from which one infers that (b)  b can not be in i (o
from this consideration it follows that the dynamical procedures of a local inertial sector
decompose into two distinct sets, namely the sets containing all equivalence classes of
local and translocal kinematical procedures respectively. a member of the rst set (re-
spectively the second set) is called a local (respectively translocal) dynamical procedure.
we emphasize that this distinction between dynamical procedures takes the concept of
dynamical activity in a local inertial sector as basic. a translocal dynamical procedure
in a local inertial sector is taken to be a dynamical procedure that continually transforms
into itself by the local action of the dynamical group. they correspond to absolute prop-
erties of a local inertial sector.
it should be emphasized that the appearance of the translocal kinematical procedures
in a(o
in fact, any
restriction to local kinematical procedures inside a local inertial sector {|o
x } would
be fundamental only to the extend to which the dieomorphism group refers only to the
properties inside the normal neighbourhood o
x . that this is not the case is seen by
the following consideration which furnishes the necessary prerequisite for our subsequent
presentations.

x ) illustrates a novel eect of the principle of general covariance.

2in reality there are certain limitations on the applicability of this denition, because of the limited
x ) exactly. we

accuracy of actual experiments which makes it impossible to determine the ideal i (o
shall ignore problems of this type.

5

x . now consider a dieomorphism acting entirely outside o

consider the identication of points inside o
x , made in a system of local inertial coor-
dinates, and consider a kinematical procedure parametrized in a local coordinate system
outside o
x . in general a kinematical procedure of this type characterizes a nonlocal kine-
matical property outside o
x which does not transform under the change of the system
of local inertial coordinates inside o
x , so it escapes the local action of the dynamical
group in o
x . we shall call
a dieomorphism of this type a gauge transformation. the essential point is that it
needs only to apply an appropriate gauge transformation, namely a gauge transformation
x , to convert a nonlocal kinematical property outside o
which has its image inside o
x
into a translocal kinematical procedure inside o
x . this argument demonstrates that a
translocal kinematical procedure is the image of a non-local kinematical procedure out-
side o
x under an appropriate gauge transformation. thus, gauge transformations can be
applied to generate the totality of all translocal kinematical procedures inside o
x as the
local codications of the totality of all nonlocal kinematical procedures outside o
x . this
connection between a local inertial sector and the associated appearance of translocal
(absolute) properties is the distinctly marked conclusion of the present analysis.
at this point a clarifying remark concerning the status of translocal kinematical proce-
dures with respect to the conventional quantum eld theory appears to be in place. from
our presentation one can immediately observe that, in any theory in which one nds a
dynamical group globally acting on the underlying (space-time) manifold, there would be
no obvious way to introduce (quasi) invariant kinematical procedures with respect to that
group, so a translocal kinematical procedure would not be obvious in the fundamental
description of the theory. this is specially so in minkowski-space quantum eld theory
with the lorentz-group playing the role of a global dynamical group3. in particular, in
the latter theory the proven statement at the begin of this section trivializes because all
kinematical procedures becomes essentially local, because they can not escape the global
action of a nontrivial lorentz-transformation.

4 the axioms of translocality

from the scheme presented so far one can immediately infer that the set of all translo-
cal dynamical procedures in a local inertial sector {|o
x } is closed under the algebraic
operations. this statement may not have in general an analog with respect to the lo-
cal dynamical procedures. actually, there is a principal possibility that a translocal
dynamical procedure can be approximated by nite algebraic operations on local dy-
namical procedures.
in such a situation the dynamical informations monitored by an
actual measurement on a physical system would algebraically connect both the local and
the translocal properties. it is not the objective of this paper to develop the particular
mathematical formalism needed to describe physics of this sort which is indeed a very

3the situation would change if one considers the embedding of the manifold with a global dynamical
group into a larger manifold without extending the action of the dynamical group. in this case any kine-
matical procedure which lies outside the initial manifold can obviously be interpreted as a (quasi)invariant
object with respect to the action of dynamical group.

6

x } generates a
x ) which has a trivial intersection5 with the algebra of

complicated enterprise4.
the kind of behavior, that we may expect to occur for a large class of physical systems
in the generally covariant context, is that it should categorically not possible to connect
the local and translocal dynamical procedures by a nite (or innite in an admissible
sense) algebraic process in a local inertial sector. mathematically, this requirement may
be converted into the rst axiom of translocality formulated as the statement:
the set of all local dynamical procedures in a local inertial sector {|o
weakly closed subalgebra of a(o
translocal dynamical procedures inside o
x .
this axiom emphasizes the feasibility of a substantial distinction between the local and
translocal properties inside a local inertial sector.
we shall exclusively deal with theories satisfying this axiom. for such theories the local
kinematical procedures in a(o
x ) can be identied with ordinary local observation pro-
cedures (pure description of possible laboratory measurements) and their corresponding
equivalence classes in a(o
x ) with local observables. the equivalence classes of translo-
cal kinematical procedures in a(o
x ) correspond to the properties which do not respond
to a local measurement process inside o
x . we denote the algebra generated by local
x by a
observables of a normal neighbourhood o
it is considered as a weakly
closed subalgebra of a(o
particular attention should be directed to the transformation properties of a local iner-
tial sector {|o
x ). consider rst the case of
an inner-automorphism  of a(o
x ) generated by a translocal dynamical procedure u,
namely

x } under various automorphisms of a(o

obs(o

x ).

x ).

(a) = uau 1,

a  a(o

x ).

(8)

an inner-automorphism of this kind is called a translocal morphism. the properties
of a physical system in the generally covariant context depends very crucially on the
particular way in which a translocal morphism acts geometrically. the second axiom
of translocality assumes a one to one correspondence between the action of a translocal
morphism and the action of a gauge transformation. more precisely, this axiom emphasizes
that a given translocal morphisms has a geometric action corresponding to the action of a
gauge transformation and conversely a given gauge transformation has an algebraic action
corresponding to a translocal morphism.
since gauge transformations are dieomorphisms acting entirely outside o
x , it follows
that a translocal morphism should not aect the local observables inside the normal
neighbourhood o
x . this would require an arbitrary element u of the algebra of the
translocal dynamical procedures to commute with all local observables of a local inertial
sector {|o

x }, namely

[a, u] = 0,

a  a

obs(o

x ).

(9)

4it may be expected that nonunitary evolution would be the dominating feature of physics of this

type.

5the dierence between a trivial intersection and an empty intersection is that the former is allowed

to contain multiples of the identity element.

7

obs(o

x )].

obs(o

obs(o

obs(o

obs(o
obs(o

x )]. we prove, namely, that [a

x )] = a
x ) and the translocal elements of [a

thus the second axiom of translocality implies that the total activity of translocal dynam-
ical procedures inside a local inertial sector can be reduced to the presence of a (nontrivial)
commutant of the algebra of local observables in that sector. we call it the translocal
commutant of a local inertial sector. it will be denoted by [a
using the rst axiom of translocality we can establish a general property of the translo-
cal commutant [a
x )] should have a trivial
center: let us assume the opposite case. then, by applying the bicommutant property
[a
x ), we would get a nontrivial intersection of the local elements of
a
x )]. this is a contradiction to the rst
axiom of translocality. thus, the triviality of the center of [a
x )] becomes impera-
tive.
we may note that the triviality of the center of [a
x )] may be illustrated as a
statement about the global deniteness of the totality of all (non-local) complementary
properties of a local inertial sector {|o
x }. in the generally covariant context, this def-
initeness seems to be important in determining the long range dynamical coupling of a
physical state with distant sources. in particular this global deniteness proves to be very
crucial in forming the algebraic action of dynamical group g inside a local inertial sector
{|o
x }. to illustrate this point, we note rst that, by assumption, this action leaves
the translocal dynamical procedures in {|o
x } unchanged. the most immediate way
to manifestly express this property is to approximate an element   g inside o
x by
an inner-automorphism of a(o
x ),
namely

x ) generated by a corresponding element l  a

obs(o

obs(o

obs(o

obs(o

(a) = lal1
 ,

a  a(o

x ).

(10)

obs(o

obs(o

x )]. we infer that the triviality of the center of [a

this relation can be used to study the nature of the group-operator l. we are particu-
larly interested in a situation in which the group-operator l is uniquely determined by
this relation. in general, this relation leaves us an ambiguity concerning the choice of the
group-operator l. in fact, with (10) we get the freedom to replace the group-operator
l by lc, where c is an arbitrary element in the center of the translocal commutant
[a
x )], which was implied
by the rst axiom of translocality, appears to be a powerful restriction in order to char-
acterize the group-operator l.
putting the totality of the translocal dynamical procedures into the translocal commu-
tant [a
x )] by no means implies that correlations can not occur between the local
observables and the translocal dynamical procedures inside o
x . indeed, an essential input
is to make an assumption of general nature to characterize the form of the correlations
implied by the activity of the translocal dynamical procedures. this issue is addressed by
formulating the third axiom of translocality which reects the impossibility of isolating
the algebra generated by local observables with respect to the dynamical activity of the
translocal commutant. to arrive at its mathematical formulation we shall require that
for a physical state , the corresponding vector  in a local inertial sector {|o
x } be a
separating vector for the algebra of local observable a
x ). this means that it should
not be possible to annihilate the vector  by elements of a

obs(o

obs(o

obs(o

x ), namely

a  = 0  a = o,

8

a  a

obs(o

x ).

(11)

by the standard theorems of the theory of operator algebras [6] the above requirement
can alternatively be replaced by the requirement of the cyclicity of the vector  with
respect to the translocal commutant [a
x )]. in this formulation the third axiom of
translocality emphasizes the distinguishing role played by translocal dynamical procedures
inside a local inertial sector in singling out a dense subset of the corresponding hilbert
space.

obs(o

5 commutant duality

in reality, the more informations which should, in principle, be available in the form of
correlations between local observables and translocal dynamical procedures has a signif-
icant eect on the eective description of the short-distance behavior of the underlying
theory. to understand this eect, one has to extrapolate the physical informations car-
ried by the members of the translocal commutant to the short-distance characteristics
of a local inertial sector. this issue can be addressed by formulating a duality principle
which, in essence, connects the long distance properties of states with their corresponding
short-distance counterparts using a gauge transformation:
given a local inertial sector {|o
x of the point
x which is invariant under the geometric action of the dynamical group g an invariant
neighbourhood of the origin.
we argue that to any local inertial sector {|o
x } one can assign a characteristic in-
variant neighbourhood of the origin. by denition, the origin x is invariant under the
geometric action of the dynamical group. thus, one needs only to pass from the origin
to one of its neighborhoods ox on which the action of the dynamical group remains still
arbitrarily close to the identity such that no local observable can properly be aliated to
ox. the operational way to achieve this is as follows: one may start with a contracting
sequence of neighborhoods o

x }, we call any neighbourhood ox  o

x  o

x of the point x

o+1

x  o
x,

(12)

which is ideally taken to shrink to the point x as   , and continue to truncate the
sequence at some suciently large . the prex suciently large characterizes an index
 for which the set of numbers

| ((a))   (a)|, a  a(o
x)

taken for all states   in the folium f  of  and for all elements  of the dynamical group
g, remains smaller than a characteristic nonvanishing small number  characterizing the
limited accuracy of the local measurements. in this way the correspondence between a
local inertial sector and a characteristic invariant neighbourhood of the origin may be
established. for this neighbourhood we use the name the continuous image of the origin.
our objective is now to apply the second axiom of translocality to derive a duality principle
which emphasizes the signicance of translocal dynamical procedures for modelling the
algebra corresponding to the continuous image of the origin in a local inertial sector.
consider a gauge-transformation  in a local inertial sector, which according to the second

9

axiom of translocality, has the algebraic action corresponding to a translocal morphism.
given a local inertial sector {|o
x } it is always possible to obtain a representation in
the equivalence class of  by applying a gauge transformation  to a(o
x ). let us now
consider a gauge transformation  which sends the totality of points outside o
x into the
continuous image of the origin inside a local inertial sector {|o
x }. it follows that for
the image of the translocal commutant under  we can establish the inclusion property

[a

obs(o

x )]  a(ox)

(13)

which holds for any neighbourhood ox  o
x , which contains the continuous image
of the origin as a proper subset. the inclusion property (13) tells us that the gauge-
transformation  can be used to aliate the translocal commutant into the continuous
image of the origin. sine gauge transformations are symmetry operations inside a local
inertial sector we infer that by restricting a state to the continuous image of the origin the
folium of  becomes indistinguishable from the set of normal states over the translocal
commutant. this is the expression of what we call the commutant duality.
we should emphasize that the geometric gauge transformations underlying the formula-
tion of commutant duality is a novel feature of the principle of general covariance and
can not be exemplied in conventional models of quantum eld theory with no geometric
gauge group. since the geometric gauge transformations can, in principle, be used to af-
liate the translocal commutant to any open region inside the normal neighbourhood o
x ,
one can generally say that the theory deals profoundly with two dierent phases inside
a local inertial sector, depending on whether the local or the translocal properties are
considered as primary properties. once this has been recognized, then the investigation
of a possible symmetry between these two distinct phases appears to be a problem of
direct physical relevance. this symmetry, which can generally be termed under the name
of duality, needs the study of those coordinate transformations exchanging the local and
translocal dynamical procedures which are related, in a specic model, to dierent sets
of dynamical variables. one can generally expect that the formulation of this symmetry
would reect new geometric gauge invariance which is not visible inside a local inertial
sector. it is needless to say that such a development would also shed new light on the
symmetry behind the currently discussed duality of supersymmetric gauge theory6 and
string theory.
our last remark in this section concerns the notion of quantum equivalence principle.
there exists a formulation of this principle in the framework of quantum eld theory in
curved space which takes the correspondence between the leading short-distance singular-
ity of states and the corresponding singularity of the vacuum in minkowski space [8][2] as
basic. in the present context, the commutant duality requires a profoundly smooth short-
distance behavior, so there is the need to reformulate the quantum equivalence principle
in a dierent way. this formulation is implied by the commutant duality itself. in fact,
combining it with the third axiom of translocality it follows that the state-vector  can
be considered as a cyclic vector for any algebra a(ox)  a(o
x ), for which the neigh-
bourhood ox contains the continuous image of the origin as a proper subset. this cyclicity

6see [7] and references therein.

10

property establishes an exact correspondence between the structure of correlations of the
state  in a local inertial sector and that of the vacuum state in minkowski-space7. we
may, therefore, take this correspondence, which is implied by the commutant duality, as
a coded form of a quantum equivalence principle.

6 classical properties

we analyze now the consequence of commutant duality in an idealized limit which destroys
the algebraic informations of the translocal commutant in a local inertial sector. at
this level of description a state is unable to monitor the exact form of all conceivable
correlations between the local observables and the individual members of the translocal
commutant and the description of a state is transferred to a positive linear functional
over the algebra of local observables in a local inertial sector. this corresponds to the
conventional description of states in quantum eld theory. however, the essential point is
that, at such a level of description, the ignorance concerning the accurate form of algebraic
informations contained in the translocal commutant implies a structural dependence of
the short-distance behavior of the underlying theory on classical properties. we have to
clarify this.
given a local inertial sector {|o
x }, we may ideally transfer  the description of the
state  to a positive linear functional over the algebra of local observables in that sector.
the question we shall address is how this change of the level of description will alter
the nature of the translocal commutant. the resolution is quite immediate. indeed, the
inclusion relation (13) implies that the translocal commutant can then be approximated
obs(o
by a commutative algebra lying in the center of any subalgebra a
x )
for which the neighbourhood ox  o
x contains the continuous image of the origin as a
proper subset. in this way the emergence of classical properties in a local inertial sector
may be an irreducible feature of the theory if we transfer to the conventional level of the
description of a state in quantum eld theory.

obs(ox)  a

7 concluding remarks

in this paper we have discussed the impact of the principle of general covariance on the
algebraic framework of quantum eld theory. at rst sight the implementation of this
principle seems to create confusion concerning a substantial identication of local proper-
ties. we have proposed a tentative resolution of the problem which takes the dynamical
activity in a local inertial sector as basic. however, the principle of general covariance
implies that the set of all local properties in a local inertial sector may not be considered
as a completed totality. the notion of translocality was introduced to address this is-
sue. in our approach there is an eective crossover from local properties to the translocal
properties, once the short-distance scaling is performed inside a local inertial sector. this

7actually, in minkowski-space there is a general result, obtained by reeh and schlieder, which states
that the vacuum is cyclic not only for the whole algebra but also for the algebra of any open region [1]

11

interrelation of short-distance scaling with the translocal properties which is implied by
the commutant duality may be of particular importance for expressing machs principle
[9] within the framework of quantum eld theory [5]. in particular it emphasizes that
the short-distance property of quantum eld theory in the generally covariant context is
profoundly dierent from ordinary quantum eld theory. remarkably, this is especially so
for an important class of currently discussed theories generally termed by string theory.
we can not at the present understand how an exemplication of the general principles
of generally covariant quantum eld theory in a model can be related to string theory.
but, nevertheless it can be expected that for the unication of quantum eld theory with
certain features of string theory the commutant duality may have a vital role to play.
the next point implied by commutant duality concerns the transition to the conventional
description of states in quantum eld theory. on this level of description the dominant
structure of a generally covariant quantum eld theory has been recognized to be the
occurrence of classical properties. it is an interesting subject to analyze the interrelation
of such classical properties with the classical space-time metric of general relativity. we
hope to address the issue elsewhere.

acknowledgment
the author would like to specially acknowledge the nancial support of the oce of
scientic research of shahid beheshti university. thanks are also due to an anonymous
referee for useful suggestions.

references

1. haag r, local quantum physics, springer (1992)
2. fredenhagen k and haag r, commun. math. phys. 108, 91 (1987)
3. salehi h, class. quantum grav. 9 2557-2571 (1992)
4. salehi h, inter.j.theo.phy. 36, 9, (1997)
5. salehi h, inter.j.theo.phy. 36, no.4, (1998)
6. bratteli o, robinson d, operator algebras and quantum statistical mechanics i,

springer (1979)

7. seiberg n, (the power of duality, exact results in 4d susy eld theory) hep-th/9506077
8. haag r, narnhofer h and stein u, commun. math. phys. 94, 219, (1984)
9. brans c, dicke r h, phys. rev.124, 925-935 (1961)

12

