pupt-1898
itfa-99-39
spin-1999/29

9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
2

 

 
 

1
v
2
1
0
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

on the holographic renormalization group

jan de boer2,3, erik verlinde1, and herman verlinde1,4

1 physics department, princeton university, princeton, nj 08544

2 spinoza institute, university of utrecht,

leuvenlaan 4, 3584, ce utrecht, the netherlands

3 insituut-lorentz for theoretical physics, university of leiden, p.o.box 9506, nl-2300

ra leiden, the netherlands.

4 institute for theoretical physics, university of amsterdam, 1018 xe amsterdam

abstract

we propose a direct correspondence between the classical evolution equations of 5-d super-
gravity and the renormalization group (rg) equations of the dual 4-d large n gauge theory.
using standard hamilton-jacobi theory, we derive rst order ow equations for the classical
supergravity action s, that take the usual form of the callan-symanzik equations, includ-
ing the corrections due to the conformal anomaly. this result gives direct support for the
identication of s with the quantum eective action of the gauge theory. in addition we
nd interesting new relations between the beta-functions and the counterterms that aect
the 4-d cosmological and newton constant.

introduction

a central element in the correspondence between classical 5-dimensional supergravity
and 4-dimensional large n gauge theory [1] is the interpretation of the extra radial 5-th
coordinate r with a renormalization group parameter of the 4-d eld theory [2] [3] [4]. the
radial evolution of the 5-d elds indeed shares many features with an rg ow [5] [6] [7]
[8] [9] [10] [11] [12], but a complete understanding of this correspondence still seems to be
lacking. the purpose of this paper is to ll some of the gaps in this dictionary and to further
clarify the relation between gravity and the renormalization group. concretely, we will show
that the supergravity equations of motion can be reduced to a ow equation for the classical
supergravity action s, which furthermore, in the asymptotic limit, can be cast in the form
of a standard callan-symanzik equation. we regard this result as additional justication
for the identication of the supergravity action s with the quantum eective action of the
dual 4-d gauge theory. we furthermore will obtain new interesting relations between the
various terms in the gravitational part of the 4-d eective action, in particular the terms
that aect the newton constant and the cosmological term. these relations suggest an
intimate connection between the physics of the renormalization group and the 4-d einstein
equations. this point is worked out in more detail in a separate paper [13]. our discussion
will be quite general and will not be restricted to a particular dual pair of supergravity and
(conformal) gauge theory. although our approach is new, there is some overlap between our
results and earlier papers [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] on the holographic rg-ow.

the holographic correspondence

to set notation we begin with a quick review of the basic elements of the ads/cft
correspondence [1] [2] [3]. the central proposal here is that there exists an exact duality
between large n 4-dimensional n = 4 yang-mills theory and type iib string theory, or for
large t hooft coupling, iib supergravity living on s5 times ads5. the supergravity theory
contains scalars i that represent the couplings of the 4-d gauge theory, and the propagation
of these elds in the r-direction is believed to correspond to the 4-dimensional rg-ow. since
these elds are coupled to gravity, their stress energy will aect the shape of the background
geometry, which as a result will no longer be given by the pure ads form. to study this
radial evolution it will be convenient to choose an analogue of the familiar temporal gauge,
in which the 5-d metric takes the form1

ds2 = dr2 + g(x, r)dxdx.

(1)

the metric g and the elds i are allowed to be dependent on all ve coordinates x and
r.

we choose a set-up in which the 5-d space has euclidean signature and has a boundary
at a nite value of r. we now dene s[, g] as the classical action of the supergravity
1to re-introduce the lapse and shift functions one can make the substition dr  n dr and dx 

dx + n dr

1

solution with boundary values i(x) for the elds, and g(x) for the metric. to get a
unique conguration for a given choice of i and g we further impose that the resulting
ve-dimensional space, even though it is geometrically dierent from ads5, still has the
same topology, namely that of a ve-ball b5. by requiring that the elds i and the metric
remain regular in the interior of b5, there is in principle one unique classical solution for
given boundary values of the elds and the metric [3]. according to the prescription of [2]
[3], the classical action s[, g] evaluated on the corresponding classical solution describes the
generating function of gauge invariant operators oi in the gauge theory

hoi1(x1) . . .oin(xn)i =

1
g



i1(x1)

. . .

1
g



in(xn)

s [  , g ].

(2)

when one puts the elds i to zero after doing the variation one computes the correlators of
the unperturbed n = 4 supersymmetric yang-mills theory. one can also put i equal to a
nite value, which corresponds to switching on a nite perturbation of the eld theory. so in
principle we could consider all gauge theories that can be obtained by a general perturbation
of the n = 4 sym theory.

keeping the boundary at a nite radial position r amounts to keeping a nite uv cut-
o in the gauge theory. before one can remove this cut-o and take the limit r  ,
one must cancel the innities that arise in the classical action of the supergravity solution.
the main source of innities is the growing metric, or volume, at innity, since we have
g  e2r g, where  denotes the inverse curvature radius of the asymptotic ads-space.
one of our goals will be to use the classical supergravity equations to show that, after
subtracting these innities, the resulting correlation functions satisfy the standard callan-
symanzik equations, identical in form to the one derived from the gauge theory. the idea
behind this correspondence is that the innities one nds in taking the ads-boundary to
innity can be directly matched those of the quantum eld theory calculation. in both cases
the divergences can be canceled by means of a nite number of counter terms, provided one
restricts to renormalizable perturbations. on the supergravity side, these renormalizable
perturbations are represented by tachyonic scalar elds i with 4 < 2m2
i < 0. these
elds decay exponentially as we approach the boundary at r = , and therefore will not
contribute to any additional innities. in the following we will always restrict ourselves to
renormalizable and marginal perturbations.

radial evolution

the 5-d equations of motion in the gauge (1) can be written as a hamilton system, with
time replaced by the radial coordinate r. the hamiltonian that generates this radial ow is
the analog of the familiar adm hamiltonian

h = z d4xg h,

2

(3)

with

h =(cid:16)

1
3




(cid:17) +

1
2

igij ()j + l(, g).

(4)

here  and i are the canonical momentum variables conjugate to g and i, and l
denotes the local lagrangian density

l(, g) = v () + r +

1
2

igij () j

(5)

with v () and gij() the 5-d scalar potential and metric. here we have chosen to work in
the 5-dimensional einstein frame, so that we can use 5-d planck units with 5 = 1.

the 5-dimensional supergravity equations of motion are implied by the standard hamil-

ton equations, supplemented with the additional constraints

as well as the hamilton constraint

 + ii = 0,

h = 0,

(6)

(7)

which ensures the invariance under local shifts r  r + r(x) of the equal time slices r =
const.

hamilton-jacobi equation

let us now bring the action s[, g] back in to our discussion. it is a standard fact, well
known in classical mechanics, that the value of the canonical momentum conjugate to i
at a given time r is equal to the functional i derivative of the classical action s, for the
classical solution with boundary value i(r) = i. this fact also holds when the time
direction is replaced by a space-like coordinate. calling this momentum variable i , we thus
have

i =

1
g

s
i .

(8)

this relation is true independent of the initial conditions or other details of the classical
trajectory. furthermore, the momentum i is related to the ow velocity i by

i = gij j

(9)

where gij is again the 5-d scalar metric on the space of couplings. here the dot represents
dierentiation with respect to the radial coordinate r, even though it is actually a space-like
coordinate.

3

we can do the same for the metric. in classical 5-d gravity, the momentum variable 

conjugate to g is expressed as

 =

1
g

s
g .

and is related to the ow velocity of g via2

g = 2 

2
3


 g.

(10)

(11)

combining these four equations gives the rst order form of the ow of the couplings i and
the metric. given the functional form of the classical action s[, g] one can unambiguously
compute the radial derivative of the couplings and metric in terms of their values at that
point.

let us insert the relations (10) and (11) into the constraints (6) and (7). equation (6)

gives

 s

g + i s

i = 0.

(12)

this constraint is easily satised:
under 4-d coordinate transformations. equation (7) takes the form

it simply means that the eective action s is invariant

1

g   1

3(cid:16)g s
g(cid:17)2

s
g

s
g 

1
2

gij s
i



s

j! = gl(, g).

(13)

this hamilton-jacobi constraint will play a central role in the remainder. it is important
to realize that it is not a constraint on the value of the variations of the action s nor an
equation of motion of the 4-dimensional elds:
instead one must read it as a functional
dierential equation3 that determines the functional form of the classical action s.

derivative expansion .

at the scale of the cut-o c  er the action s[, g] is non-local. but at an energy scale
 << c a part of s can be represented as a local action. hence, the action s[, g] can in
that case be be decomposed in a local and a non-local part

s[  , g ] = sloc [  , g ] +  [  , g ]

(14)

2with non-trivial lapse and shift g  n 1( g  n   n).
3it is instructive to compare it to the hamilton-jacobi equation for a relativistic point particle: (ts)2 
(xs)2 = m2. we see that scale variation plays the role of time dierentiation, which presumably is part of
the reason for why the conformal factor has the wrong sign in the einstein action.

4

with

sloc [  , g ] = z g(cid:16)u() + ()r +

1
2

imij () j(cid:17),

(15)

where u,  and mij are local functions of the couplings, and [, g] contains all higher
derivative and non-local terms. eventually we are interested in the limit c  , or
more precisely,  = /c  0. in that limit the local potential term will contain quartic
divergences, while the other local terms are quadratically divergent. in fact, even  contains
divergences of a logarithmic type. we further note that the local action sloc is similar in
structure as the lagrangian term l in the hamilton constraint (13). in fact, as we will see,
the dierent terms in sloc have a direct relation with the corresponding terms in l.
the idea of the following calculations will be to insert the expansion (14) into the hamil-
ton constraint (13), combine the contributions on the left hand side that have the same
functional form as the terms on the right hand side, and require them to cancel. this proce-
dure becomes a systematic expansion in the situation where  << c, since the dierent local
and non-local terms can then be distinguished by their scaling behavior, up to a redenition
of  [  , g ] by nite local terms. we rst will focus on the potential term, which in the
limit c   would be quartically divergent. the other terms involving  and mij will be
considered in a later section.
by comparing the potential terms on both side, we derive that u and the 5-d potential

term v are related via

v =

1
3

u 2 

1
2

i u gij j u.

(16)

hence v is expressed in terms of u in the same way as if u were the superpotential w
of the 5-d supergravity. for supersymmetric ows u is indeed equal to the superpotential.
however, in deriving this expression we have not made use of supersymmetry: it is simply a
consequence of the standard hamilton-jacobi theory applied to 5-d gravity, cf. [12]. in fact,
as we will show in the appendix, dierent potentials u could lead to the same potential v ,
and hence u may in general be dierent from the superpotential w . we nally note that
the relation (16) between the 4-d potential u and the 5d potential v was also found to be a
sucient, and possibly necessary condition for the stability of domain wall structures in 5-d
ads gravity [11] [14].

holographic rg-ow

let us return to the ow equations (9) and (11). the eld i and also the metric g
play a dual role in our discussion. on the one had they represent the couplings and the
geometrical background of the gauge theory, while on the other hand they describe the
sources for the local operators oi and the stress-energy tensor t. in standard quantum
eld theory one computes the beta-functions for the coupling constants in a at background
without any sources. indeed, to compare our ow equations with the standard rg-ow we
have to consider the theory at a length scale which is much longer than the cut-o scale, so

5

that at the cut-o scale the elds practically are independent of the 4-d coordinates. in this
limit the potential term u will dominate over all other terms.

so let us write the ow equation for the scalar elds and the metric while keeping only

the potential term,

i = gij ()j u()

g =

1
3

u() g.

(17)

we see that the metric simply rescales. hence we can solve its ow equation by the ansatz

where bg is independent of r and the prefactor a satises

a =

u() a.

g = a2bg,

1
6

(18)

(19)

since the parameter a in fact determines the physical scale, we now replace the r derivatives
in the ow equations by derivatives with respect to a, by using the relation (19). in this way
we obtain

where the beta-functions are dened by

a

d
da

i = i()

i() =

6

u()

gij ()j u().

(20)

(21)

thus we see that the holographic rg-ow is in general derived from a potential.

relations for the local terms

the relation (16) for the potentials v and u can now be re-expressed as a condition on

the squares of the beta-functions:

1
24

igij j = 1 

3v
u 2 .

(22)

since the left hand side is positive denite, the potential u obeys the inequality u 2  3v ,
where the equal sign only holds at xed points of the rg-ow. the relations between the
other local terms in the action are also conveniently expressed in terms of the beta-functions.
comparing the curvature and kinetic terms on the right- and left-hand side gives

kk = 2 +

6
u

,

6

(23)

and

kkmijki mkjkj mik = 2mij +

6
u

gij.

(24)

in addition, there is also a term on the left-hand side of (13) proportional to 2 that is not
present on the right-hand side. requiring the coecient in front of it cancels gives another
interesting expression for the beta-function in terms of purely 4-d quantities

i = m ij j .

(25)

in most studies of the ads/cft correspondence, the local terms of the boundary eective
action are considered to be non-universal, since they diverge as we take the limit r  .
here we see, however, that they contain very important information about the ow of the
couplings constants, and even conspire in an interesting way to make up the lagrangian term
l of the 5-d gravity theory.

callan-symanzik equation

as was mentioned before, the action s represents the generating function of correlation
functions of local operators oi in the gauge theory. in fact, the information about n-point
functions of operators oi at dierent points is all contained in the non-local part of the
action . we already established various relations between the local terms. following the
same strategy we will now derive a ow equation for the correlation functions that exactly
take the form of callan-symanzik equations.

the computation proceeds as follows: we again insert the decomposition (14) into the
constraint (13), and drop all local terms with two or fewer derivatives. at the order we are
interested in, there are cross terms that involve (functional derivatives of) the potential u
and the non-local eective action . at that same order one also nds curvature squared
terms and products of the curvature with space-time derivatives of the scalar elds. here
we will not write these terms explicitly. the relation we then nd is

1

g(cid:16)g 

g  i()



i(cid:17)  [ , g ] = 4-derivative terms

(26)

in order to derive the callan-symanzik equations for expectation values of local operators
we vary this relation with respect to elds i. after doing the variations, the elds are
put to their constant average value given by the couplings of the gauge theory. we further
take the metric to be of the form g = a2, where a is x-independent. the 4-derivative
terms will drop out after this step, and play no role as long as one considers operators oi
at dierent points in space. finally, we integrate the resulting expression over all of space
and replace the functional derivatives by ordinary derivatives by using the denitions

z g 

g = a


a

,

z


i =


i

(27)

7

in this way one derives after some straightforward algebra from (26) the standard form of
the callan-symanzik equations

(cid:16)a



a  ii(cid:17)hoi1(x1) . . .oin(xn)i 

nxi=1

ii

ji hoi1(x1)..oji(xi)..oin(xn)i = 0

(28)

where4

i

j = ij

(29)

represent the anomalous scaling dimensions of the operators oi. we should note, however,
that this equation is derived still with a nite cut-o. we will describe in a moment how
one can remove the cut-o and obtain the c-s equation for the full renormalized n-point
functions.

the conformal anomaly

in order to recover the conformal anomaly, let us relax the condition that the metric is
at, and use the constraint (13) to compute an expression for the trace of the nite part of
the expectation value of the stress tensor:

hti =

1

g


g

(30)

the calculation is again similar as outlined above. we nd that the trace anomaly takes
form

h t i = ii + c rr  d r2.

(31)

where t = t 
 , and the curvature squared terms simply arise due to the square of the
einstein term in the action sloc. we recognize this equation as a standard type expression
as dictated by the broken scale invariance of the eective action  and the trace anomaly
relation.5 the coecients c and d are given in terms of  and  by

c =

62
u

,

d =

2

u(cid:16)2

3
2

i gijj (cid:17).

(32)

we can perform a quantitative check on these coecients, by going to the xed point situ-
ation, where all i derivative vanish. a simple calculation shows we can then express c and
4 by an appropriate choice of contact term, the ordinary i derivative is turned in a covariant derivative
i that is dened in terms of the metric gij . this ensure that the whole formalism stays covariant under
eld redenitions.
5for a general 4-d conformal eld theory one would also have a term given by the square of the weyl
tensor. in order to reproduce such a term one would have to add it by hand to the hamilton constraint, as
a higher order correction to the 5-d einstein action.

8

d in terms of the 5-d potential term v as c = 3d = (v /3)3/2 = 3/8, which reproduces the
expression of the holographic weyl anomaly obtained in [17]. the function c is the analogue
of the central charge of the 4-d qft, and has been proposed as a candidate c-function in
[8] and [7].

removing the uv cut-o

so far we studied the rg-ow of the couplings, action, and correlation functions as a
function of the uv cut-o. to make contact with more standard type rg-equations, we
have to follow the usual renormalization procedure of cancelling divergences, introducing
renormalized couplings, and then sending the cut-o to innity. here we will outline how
this procedure works in the present context. in particular we will consider how (28) can be
rewritten as the standard callan-symanzik equation for the renormalized n-point function.
removal of the cut-o amounts to taking the limit r  . a practical way to describe

this limit is to write the metric and the couplings as

and

g = 2gr


i = i(r, )

(33)

(34)

 and i

where gr
  0. the relation between the bare couplings i and the renormalized couplings i
obtained by integrating the rg-ow

r are the renormalized metric and couplings which are kept xed as we send
r is



i


= i()

i = i

r

at  = 1

(35)

form the supergravity perspective, this procedure for introducing the renormalized couplings
means the following. consider the unique classical supergravity trajectory with asymptotic
boundary conditions specied by the bare elds (i, g). the renormalized elds (i
r, gr)
then represent the values of the scalar eld on this trajectory at some nite value of the scale
factor, corresponding to some xed rg scale.

as we consider only relevant perturbations, the couplings i will actually go to zero as
i /, as we take the limit   0 while keeping r xed. the metric g on the other hand
diverges. hence we still nd, upon inserting the expressions (33) and (34) into the action
s, that the various terms contained in sloc diverge in the limit   0. for example, the
potential term u will in general be quartically divergent, while  and mij contain at most
quadratic divergences. even the term  has a potential logarithmic divergence that has
to be removed in the renormalization procedure. this can be done by adding appropriate
counterterms. the renormalized eective action r is dened by

r[r, gr] = lim
0

nite[ (r, ), 2gr]

(36)

9

where nite is obtained from  by subtracting its divergent part.

we now would like to show that the action r again satises a similar callan-symanzik

equation as before, but now expressed in terms of the renormalized couplings and metric

1

g(cid:16)g

r


r  i
g

r(i
r)


i

r(cid:17) r [ r, gr ] = local terms

(37)

the derivation of this relation is basically a change of variables from i to i
r. the beta-
functions behave as vector elds on the space of couplings, and simply transform accordingly.
this can be seen as follows. since the relation between i and i
r can also be obtained
r should be such that the variation of i due to an
by owing down, the beta-function i
innitesimal shift in the cut-o  while keeping i
r constant, can be exactly compensated by
an innitesimal rg transformation of i
r:



i


= j

r

i
j

r

.

(38)

by comparing this relation with (35) one indeed nds the usual transformation properties
of a vector eld. this implies that we can directly make the substitution

i 

i = i

r


i

r

(39)

furthermore, since the metric g
 and g are related by a constant rescaling, one can
simply relate their functional derivatives as well. finally, the operators oi also have to be
renormalized, in order for their correlators to stay nite. we have

r

r

o
i = oj

j
i

r

(40)

with these substitutions it is straightforward to recover the callan-symanzik equations for
all renormalized n-point functions.

(cid:16)a


a  i

ri(cid:17)ho

r

r

i1(x1) . . .o

in(xn)i 

nxi=1

r

r

r

(r)ii

ji ho

i1(x1)..o

ji(xi)..o

in(xn)i = 0

(41)

the above procedure for dening the renormalized beta-functions is quite standard. as
presented, however, it may not be entirely obvious that the beta-functions at a given scale
 can in fact be extracted from just the knowledge of the uv physics at smaller scales. to
see how this arises from the supergravity perspective, recall that i
r represents the value of
the scalar eld on a specied classical supergravity trajectory. once we know the values of

10

the bare elds as well as the initial velocities at the cut-o scale, we can integrate inwards
and obtain the renormalized beta-functions i
r(r) as the radial velocities (as measured
relative to the overall scale of the metric) of the elds at this point. this procedure requires
knowledge of the supergravity solution in the outside region only.

discussion and outlook

in this paper we have shown that the hamilton-jacobi equations for 5d einstein gravity
can be written in the form of rst order rg-ow equations. these results can in principle
be applied to every 4d gauge theory that can be represented as a relevant or marginal
perturbation of a large n superconformal eld theory, or any of its variations for which an
ads/cft correspondence has been established. also, generalizations to other dimensions
are straightforward.
in deriving the callan-symanzik equations we made use of the fact
that asymptotically the metric and scalar elds behave as in ads-space, but the hamilton-
jacobi equations themselves are valid in much more general situations. for example, it is
conceivable that the rg-ow of practically any large n gauge theory is, in leading order in
n , described by classical supergravity equations of this type.

the relation between the 5d einstein equation, the rg-ow and callan-symanzik equa-
tion, as presented in the main text, was derived in the special gauge with xed lapse and
shift functions. reintroducing the lapse and shifts would presumably lead to rg-equations
that are invariant under local redenitions of the scale as well as scale-dependent coordinate
transformations. together these invariances reect the underlying 5-d general coordinate
invariance of the dual supergravity theory.

1

i

it would be interesting to identify the modications of our equations that are required to
incorporate 1/n corrections. the hamilton-jacobi equations can be considered as the clas-
sical limit of the quantum wheeler-dewitt equation, which (when the wdw wave-function
h s) contains an additional term proportional to a second order variation of the
is written as e
action s. the resulting equation has a striking similarity with polchinskis version of the
exact renormalization group [15]. we believe that this is not a coincidence, since it should
describe the rg-ow of the regularized (through string theory) quantum supergravity theory.
the internal 5-manifold that features in the usual ads/cft framework has not played
an explicit role in our discussion, but its geometry is implicitly present in the form of the
scalar elds i and the metric gij . so the rg-ow equations in principle also describe the
behavior of this manifold as one ows towards the infra-red.

finally, it is an interesting question whether the holographic description of the rg-
ow that we presented in this paper also applies to 4-d gauge theories that are coupled to
gravity. it has been argued in [16] that one needs to replace the asymptotic ads geometry
be a compact internal manifold, as would naturally arise in warped compactications that
give rise to 4-d gauge theories with gravity. this leads to an interesting interplay between
the 4-d einstein equations and the rg-ow equations, that in particular seems to shed new
light on the role of the cosmological constant. this direction is further investigated in [13] .

11

acknowledgements

this work is supported by nsf-grant 98-02484, a pionier fellowship of nwo, the packard
foundation and the stichting fom. we would like to thank v. balasubramanian, r. dijk-
graaf, s. kachru, i. klebanov, g. lifschytz, v. periwal, a. polyakov, l. randall, c. schmid-
huber, e. silverstein, k. skenderis for helpful discussions.

appendix: comment on the hamilton-jacobi relation for the potential.

in this appendix we study the relation between the potentials u and v that follows from
the hamilton-jacobi equation in more detail. for simplicity we go to a basis in which the
metric gij is given by ij , so that we can write the relation as

1
3

u 2 

1
2

(iu)2 = v

(a.1)

one might wonder whether any potential v can be written in this form. our derivation of this
relation did not assume any special properties of v , except the existence of a classical solution
that can be extended from the boundary to the interior. this of course puts restrictions on
the potential v , and apparently forces it to be of the supersymmetric form. we will show
in this appendix that the 4d potential u is for a large part, but not entirely, determined by
the 5d potential v .

let us expand the 5-d potential in powers of i as

v = 122 

1
2

m2

iii + gijkij k . . .

(a.2)

where we used the freedom to shift the elds to remove a possible linear term in i. to
obtain a solution to (a.1) for the 4-d potential, we rst try a similar expansion.

u = 6 +

1
2

iii + ijkijk

(a.3)

here we already xed the constant term so that it matches with that of v . the beta-functions
derived from this potential are

where

i = (4  i )i + ci

jkj k

i = 4 

i


cijk =

3


ijk

(a.4)

(a.5)

12

are the scaling dimensions and operator product coecients of the operators oi correspond-
ing to the couplings i. inserting both expansions (a.2) and (a.3) in to (a.1) then gives
the relation

2
i + 4i = m2
i

(a.6)

which upon inserting the relation (a.5) is recognized as standard relation between the scale
dimensions i of the 4-d couplings and the corresponding masses mi of the 5-d elds [2]
[3]. notice that this relation implies that the 5-d potential must in fact satisfy the unitarity
bound m2
i  42. if this inequality is violated, there are no bounded solutions that extend
all the way to the asymptotic boundary.

by looking at the next order in the i expansion we obtain the relation

(i + j + k  4)ijk = gijk,

(a.7)

which via (a.5) expresses the operator product coecients cijk in terms of the cubic term
in v . note that this expression degenerates in the case that i + j + k = 8. the
interpretation of this will become clear when we look at deformations of u that preserve the
relation (a.1) with v .

an innitesimal variation u preserves (a.1) if it satises the linear relation

or

4uu  6iui (u) = 0,

(4  ii )u = 0.

(a.8)

(a.9)

these equations tell us that those terms in u that have total dimension 4 are not determined
by the hamilton-jacobi constraint. it is interesting to note that these are precisely those
terms that remain nite in the continuum limit. therefore, it appears that the hamilton-
jacobi relation only constrains the divergent terms of the potential u, but not the nite
part.

references

[1] j. maldacena, the large n limit of supercomformal eld theories and supergravity, adv.

theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200.

[2] s. gubser, i. klebanov and a. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from non-critical

string theory, phys.lett.b428 (1998) 105, hep-th/9802109;

[3] e. witten, anti-de sitter space and holography, adv.theor.math.phys.2 (1998) 253,

hep-th/9802150;

13

[4] l. susskind and e. witten, the holographic bound in anti-de sitter space, hep-

th/9805114

[5] e.t. akhmedov, a remark on the ads/cft correspondence and the renormalization

group flow, phys. lett. b442 (1998) 152, hep-th/9806217.

[6] e. alvarez and c. gomez geometric holography, the renormalization group and the

c-theorem, nucl. phys. b541 (1999) 441, hep-th/9807226.

[7] d. z. freedman, s. s. gubser, k. pilch, n. p. warner, renormalization group flows

from holographysupersymmetry and a c-theorem, hep-th/9906194.

[8] l. girardello, m. petrini, m. porrati, a. zaaroni, the supergravity dual of n = 1

super yang-mills theory, hep-th/9909047.

[9] l. girardello, m. petrini, m. porrati, a. zaaroni, novel local cft and exact results

on perturbations of n=4 super yang mills from ads dynamics, hep-th/9810126;
m. porrati, a. starinets, rg fixed points in supergravity duals of 4-d field theory
and asymptotically ads spaces, phys.lett. b454 (1999) 77, hep-th/9903241.

[10] v. balasubramanian, p. kraus, space-time and the holographic renormalization group,

phys.rev.lett 83 (1999) 3605, hep-th/9903190,

[11] k. skenderis, p.k. townsend, gravitational stability and renormalization-group flow,

hep-th/9909070.

[12] o. dewolfe, d.z. freedman, s.s. gubser, a. karch, modelling the fth dimension with

scalars and gravity, hep-th/9909134.

[13] e. verlinde and h. verlinde, rg flow, gravity, and the cosmological constant, to appear.

[14] k. behrndt, m. cvetic, supersymmetric domain-wall world from d=5 simple gauged

supergravity, hep-th/9909058;
u. ellwanger, constraints on a brane-world from the vanishing of the cosmological
constant, hep-th/9909103;

[15] j. polchinski, renormalization and eective lagrangians, nucl. phys, b231 (1984) 269.

[16] h. verlinde, holography and compactication, hep-th/9906182; l. randall and r. sun-
drum, a large mass hierarchy from a small extra dimension, hep-ph/9905221; an
alternative to compactication, hep-th/9906064.

[17] m. henningson and k. skenderis, the holographic weyl anomaly, jhep 9807:023

(1998), hep-th/9806087 .

14

