9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
1
2

 

 
 

1
v
8
0
2
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

standard models from heterotic m-theory

ron donagi1, burt a. ovrut2, tony pantev1 and daniel waldram3 4

1department of mathematics, university of pennsylvania

philadelphia, pa 191046395, usa

2department of physics, university of pennsylvania

philadelphia, pa 191046396, usa

3department of physics, joseph henry laboratories
princeton university, princeton, nj 08540, usa

4theory division, cern ch-1211, geveva 23, switzerland 

abstract

we present a class of n = 1 supersymmetric models of particle physics, derived di-

rectly from heterotic m-theory, that contain three families of chiral quarks and leptons

coupled to the gauge group su (3)csu (2)lu (1)y. these models are a fundamental

form of brane-world theories, with an observable and hidden sector each conned,

after compactication on a calabiyau threefold, to a bps three-brane separated by

a ve dimensional bulk space with size of the order of the intermediate scale. the re-

quirement of three families, coupled to the fundamental conditions of anomaly freedom

and supersymmetry, constrains these models to contain additional ve-branes wrapped

around holomorphic curves in the calabiyau threefold. these ve-branes live in

the bulk space and represent new, non-perturbative aspects of these particle physics

vacua. we discuss, in detail, the relevant mathematical structure of a class of torus-

bered calabiyau threefolds with non-trivial rst homotopy groups and construct

holomorphic vector bundles over such threefolds, which, by including wilson lines,

break the gauge symmetry to the standard model gauge group. rules for constructing

phenomenological particle physics models in this context are presented and we give a

number of explicit examples.

cern-th/99-407, upr-853t

december 1999

current address

1 introduction

in fundamental work, it was shown by horava and witten [1, 2] that if eleven-dimensional

m-theory is compactied on the orbifold s1/z2, a chiral n = 1, e8 gauge supermultiplet

must exist in the twisted sector of each of the two ten-dimensional orbifold xed planes. they

argued that this gave the low-energy description of the strongly coupled e8  e8 heterotic

string. this is relevant for phenomenological particle physics since, when compactied to

four-dimensions [3], such theories will exhibit the left-right asymmetry of quark and lepton

electroweak couplings required to describe the weak interactions.

it is important to note

that, in this theory, the chiral gauge matter is conned solely to the orbifold planes, while

pure supergravity inhabits the bulk space between these planes. thus, horava-witten theory

is a concrete and fundamental representation of the idea of a brane-world.

witten then showed [3] that, if further compactied to four dimensions on a calabiyau

threefold, the n = 1 supersymmetric low energy theory exhibits realistic gauge unication

and gravitational coupling strength provided the calabiyau radius, r, is of the order of
inverse 1016gev and that the orbifold radius, , is larger than r. estimates of /r vary

from 4-5 to several orders of magnitude [3, 4]. thus, horavawitten theory has a large

internal bulk dimension, although it is of order the intermediate scale and not the inverse

tev-size, or larger, bulk dimensions, discussed recently [5, 6].

as in the case of the weakly coupled heterotic string, when compactifying the horava

witten theory to lower dimensions, it is possible that all or, more typically, a subset of

the e8 gauge elds do not vanish classically in the internal calabiyau threefold directions.

since these gauge elds live on the calabiyau manifold, 3 + 1-dimensional lorentz in-

variance is left unbroken. furthermore, demanding that the associated eld strengths satisfy
the hermitian yangmills constraints fab = fab = gabfab = 0, ensures that n = 1 su-
persymmetry is preserved. these gauge eld vacua have two important eects. first, they

spontaneously break the e8 gauge group. suppose that the non-vanishing gauge elds are
associated with the generators of a subgroup g  e8. then, at low energies, the e8 gauge

group is spontaneously broken to the commutant subgroup h, formed from those generators

of e8 which commute with g. this allows one, in principle, to reduce the e8 gauge group

to smaller and phenomenologically more interesting gauge groups such as unication groups

e6, so(10) and su(5) as well as the standard model gauge group su(3)csu(2)lu(1)y.

the second eect is on the spectrum of massless charged particles in the low-energy theory

1

which arise from the dimensional reduction of elds associated with the broken generators.

by choosing the gauge vacuum, one can control the number of families of chiral quarks and

leptons on the orbifold xed plane.

a new ingredient in compactications of horavawitten theory is that there may also

be m-theory vebranes in the vacuum [3, 7]. requiring that supersymmetry and the 3 +

1-dimensional lorentz invariance is unbroken restricts the form of the vebranes. their

six-dimensional worldvolumes are required to span the external 3 + 1-dimensional space

while wrapping around a real two-dimensional surface w within the calabiyau manifold.
thus each vebrane is at a denite point in the s1/z2 orbifold. furthermore, in order to
preserve n = 1 supersymmetry, the real surface w in the calabiyau threefold must be

holomorphic [3], meaning it is dened by the vanishing of functions which depend only on

the holomorphic and not the anti-holomorphic coordinates of the calabiyau space. since

the surface has one complex dimension, we will often refer to it as a (complex) curve.

there is an important cohomological constraint which relates the number of vebranes

and the curves on which they are wrapped to properties of the gauge vacuum and the calabi

yau manifold [3]. without vebranes, this becomes a constraint directly relating the gauge

vacuum to the calabiyau space. one of the important properties of including vebranes in

the background is that it relaxes this condition, making it much easier to nd gauge vacua

with suitable unbroken gauge groups and low-energy particle content. as we will see, all the

examples of realistic compactications we will give necessarily include vebranes.

we refer to the general compactication of horavawitten theory on backgrounds with

arbitrary supersymmetric gauge elds and m vebranes as heterotic m-theory. the sim-

plest heterotic m-theory vacuum, with the spontaneous breaking of e8 to e6 by taking

g = su(3) and identifying it with the spin connection of the calabiyau threefold, the

standard embedding, was discussed in the original paper of witten [3]. such vacua do not

contain vebranes. a discussion of general gauge vacua in this context and their low-energy

implications was presented in [7, 8], with some explicit orbifold examples given in [9]. five-

branes were rst introduced into heterotic m-theory vacua, and their properties discussed,

in [7].

an important result of this analysis is that there is an eective ve-dimensional theory [10,

11] which realizes the heterotic m-theory vacua as bps brane-worlds. the bulk theory

is gauged supergravity with a negative cosmological constant, and the orbifold planes and

2

vebranes appear as an array of bps three-branes domain walls. the branes coming from

the orbifold planes can have negative tension and the full spacetime solution is very similar

to the anti-de sitter space solution of randall and sundrum [6]. in fact, if one chooses to

x the calabiyau moduli, it precisely realizes the solution of [6].

having dened heterotic m-theory, the real question is whether explicit heterotic m-

theory vacua exist with the required low-energy properties. as for weakly coupled heterotic

string compactications, the dicult part in nding such models is in constructing the gauge

vacuum. given a calabiyau threefold z, what supersymmetric non-abelian gauge eld vac-

uum congurations associated with a subgroup g  e8 can be dened on it? unfortunately,
solving the six-dimensional hermitian yangmills constraints explicitly is rarely possible,

even in at space. one, therefore, must look for an alternative construction of these yang-

mills connections. such an alternative is to be found in the work of donaldson [12] and

uhlenbeck and yau [13], which recasts the problem in terms of holomorphic vector bun-

dles. these authors proved that for each holomorphic vector bundle, with structure group

g over z, satisfying the condition of being semi-stable, there exists a solution to the six-

dimensional hermitian yangmills equations, and conversely. thus, the analytic problem

of nding gauge vacua by solving the hermitian yangmills constraint equations over z is

reduced to an essentially topological problem of constructing semistable holomorphic vector

bundles over the same manifold.

it is not immediately clear that any simplication has been achieved, but indeed it has,

since some methods for constructing semi-stable holomorphic vector bundles are known. in

particular, bundles were constructed for calabiyau manifolds which appear as complete

intersections in weighted projective spaces [14, 15]. recently, however, there were important

new results by several authors [16, 17, 18] on the construction of semi-stable holomorphic

vector bundles over elliptically bered calabiyau manifolds. these are manifolds with a

bered structure, where the ber is a two-dimensional torus, and which admit a global sec-

tion. they are of particular interest because the heterotic string compactied on such spaces

has a dual f-theory description. one method, the spectral-cover construction, essentially

uses t-duality on the elliptic ber to form the bundle from a simpler t-dual conguration.

the simplest examples are for structure groups su(n)  e8, but other structure subgroups

are possible as well. thus, using holomorphic vector bundles and the donaldsonuhlenbeck

yau theorem, it has been possible to classify and give the properties of a large class of su(n)

3

gauge vacua even though the associated solutions of the yangmills equations are unknown.

this one might call the mathematicians approach, but, at present, it seems to be by far

the simplest solution to an important physical problem.

this new construction on elliptically bered calabiyau threefolds allows one to construct

a number of phenomenologically interesting gauge vacua. in [19, 20], using the construction

of [16, 17, 18] and results of [21, 22], three-family vacua with unication groups such as e6,

so(10) and su(5) were obtained, corresponding to vector bundle structure groups su(3),

su(4) and su(5) respectively. the classical moduli space of the vebranes in such vacua

was then discussed in [23]. however, it was not possible to break e8 directly to the standard
gauge group su(3)csu(2)lu(1)y in this manner.

a natural solution to this problem, and that utilized in this paper, is to use non-trivial

wilson lines to break the gut group down to the standard gauge group [24, 25]. this

requires that the fundamental group of the calabiyau threefold be non-trivial. unfortu-

nately, one can show that all elliptically bered calabiyau threefolds are simply connected,

with the exception of such threefolds over an enriques base.

in this case, however, we

demonstrated in [20] that the vacuum obtained via spectral covers is not consistent with

the requirement of three families of quarks and leptons. further progress clearly required

resolution of this fundamental problem.

with this in mind, recall that an elliptic bration is simply a torus bration that admits

a zero section. as we noted above, the requirement of a zero section severely restricts the

fundamental group of the threefold to be, modulo the enriques exception, trivial. however,

if one lifts the zero section requirement, and considers holomorphic vector bundles over

torus-bered calabiyau threefolds without section, then one expects to nd non-trivial

rst homotopy groups and wilson lines in vacua that are consistent with the three-family

requirement.

in this paper, we give the relevant mathematical properties of a specic class of torus-

bered calabiyau threefolds without section and construct holomorphic vector bundles over

such threefolds. the technique is familiar from standard heterotic string constructions [25].

one starts with an elliptically bered calabiyau threefold x which has trivial fundamental

group, but is chosen to have a discrete group of freely acting symmetries . modding out, by

identifying points on x related by , one forms a new, smooth threefold z = x/ which has

fundamental group 1(z) = . however, in general, z no longer admits a global section, and

4

so is torus-bered but not elliptically bered. to construct holomorphic vector bundles on

the torus-bered calabiyau threefold z, one nds those bundles on x which are invariant

under . these then descend to bundles on z.

we next use these results to explicitly construct a number of three-family vacua with

unication group su(5) which is spontaneously broken to the standard gauge group

su(3)csu(2)lu(1)y

by wilson lines [24, 25]. this is done by taking  = z2. the restriction to this specic

class of torus-bered threefolds and the gut group su(5) is for simplicity only. by the

same techniques one can construct a much wider class of torus-brations with more general

unication groups. this will be presented elsewhere. we also leave a detailed exploration of

the phenomenological and cosmological aspects of these models to later publications.

in this paper, we explicitly do the following. sections 2 and 3 give new mathematical

results necessary for constructing semi-stable holomorphic bundles on a torus-bered three-

fold z which admits wilson lines. we will not give all the derivations, but try and highlight

the ideas and main results. more mathematical details will be given in [26]. in section 2, we

discuss the general construction of z, with 1(z) = z2, as the quotient of elliptically bered

threefolds x by an involution x. this leads to considering threefolds x which admit two

sections. we present the general conditions for a freely acting involution x on such an x,

and give the general homology classes, eective curves and second chern class of x.

in

section 3, we construct the theory of semi-stable holomorphic vector bundles v over x via

a spectral cover, describing how this is essentially the action of t-duality. this involves a

number of new features, since the spectral cover in such manifolds has a subtle structure. we

discuss the conditions for invariance of v under the involution. this gives us a description

of bundles over z. the second and third chern classes of these bundles are presented.

in the last sections we return to physics. in section 4, we give explicit rules for the con-

struction of three-family particle physics vacua on z with gut group su(5). since 1(z) =
z2, these vacua have wilson lines that break su(5) to the standard su(3)csu(2)lu(1)y
gauge group. in section 5 we present explicit examples of these standard model vacua for

the base surfaces b = f2 and dp3 of the torus bration. finally, we summarize the resulting

brane-world picture that emerges from these examples.

in conclusion, heterotic m-theory vacua give a concrete realization of the following

brane-world (see figure 1). six of the eleven m-theory dimensions are compactied on

5

a small calabiyau manifold z, typically on the scale of inverse 1016 gev. the additional
compact direction, the s1/z2 orbifold is larger, perhaps of order the intermediate scale. mat-
ter is localized on the xed planes of the s1/z2 orbifold as well as on a number of vebranes.
(the exact matter content on the vebranes depends on how they wrap the internal calabi

yau space.) in the eective ve-dimensional theory, where the spacetime is the external
(3 + 1)-dimensional space together with the s1/z2 orbifold, the orbifold xed planes and
the vebranes appear as a series of domain walls or bps threebranes [10, 11, 7]. the xed

planes act as the boundaries of the orbifold interval, while the wrapped vebranes appear
as a series of threebranes arrayed throughout s1/z2. by choosing an appropriate gauge
vacuum, one can break one of the e8 gauge groups on the orbifold xed planes to the stan-
dard model group su(3)csu(2)lu(1)y, with three families of chiral matter. thus the
standard model is realized on one xed plane, while the other xed planes and the vebranes

represent hidden sectors which only couple gravitationally to the standard model. related

constructions, using quotients of an elliptic calabiyau threefold, were considered in [27].

however, we nd that our results are in disagreement with the calculations and conclusions

of that paper.

z

g vector bundle

z

z

z

z wilson line
2

w
1

w
n

h=su(3)

xsu(2)

xu(1)

l

y

c

n

gen

=3

.......

5d bulk

1 /

s

z
2

fixed plane
(visible sector)

m fivebrane
(hidden sector)

.......

m fivebrane
(hidden sector)

fixed plane
(hidden sector)

figure 1: heterotic m-theory brane-world

6

2 fibered calabiyau threefolds with non-trivial 1

in this section, we construct and describe the particular calabiyau manifolds z we will

use to compactify horavawitten theory. two properties are required. first, we must

choose particular non-trivial gauge eld congurations on the calabiyau compactication

to break the e8 gauge group to a smaller gut gauge group with three families. in this

paper, we use the spectral-cover construction to describe these gauge eld congurations.

this construction requires the calabiyau manifold to be elliptically bered. the second

condition comes from breaking the gut group down to su(3)csu(2)lu(1)y. this is
most naturally accomplished by including non-trivial wilson lines [24, 25] on the calabiyau

manifold z. this requires that the threefold not be simply connected, that is, 1(z) must

be non-trivial.

it turns out that these two conditions are incompatible, except possibly in one case which

is discussed in [20] and also below. thus we are required to weaken one of the conditions

and allow z to be bered by tori which are not necessarily elliptic. we will review this

distinction below.

to be specic, we will consider the case where the grand unied group is

h = su(5).

(2.1)

it is well known [24, 25] that this can be broken to su(3)csu(2)lu(1)y by a z2 wilson

line. similar constructions work for other gut groups, such as so(10) or e6. although our

construction can be generalized to larger groups, in this paper we restrict our discussion to

gut group su(5) and to the simplest case of nding a torus-bered calabiyau threefold

z with 1(z) = z2.

2.1 torus and elliptic brations

by a torus-bered threefold we mean a three-dimensional complex manifold x which is

equipped with a holomorphic map

 : x  b

(2.2)

to some complex surface b so that, for a general point b  b, the ber 1(b) is a smooth

complex curve of genus one. the surface b is called the base of x. if one further demands

7

that the canonical bundle be trivial, then x is called a torus-bered calabiyau threefold.

this condition is equivalent to assuming that

c1(t x) = 0,

(2.3)

where c1(t x) is the rst chern class of the tangent bundle t x. in this paper, x will always

be assumed to be a smooth manifold. note, however, that the smoothness of x does not

imply the smoothness of the base b. in fact, bases with isolated singularities do occur in

most of the interesting examples below.

now consider a holomorphic map

 : b  x,

(2.4)

satisfying    = idb. such a map is called a section of x. it is important to note that a

mapping of this type need not exist. thus, there can be torus-bered threefolds, including

torus-bered calabiyau threefolds, that have no section. in fact, it is precisely such calabi

yau threefolds that will be required to construct realistic particle physics vacua.

let us consider a torus-bered threefold that does admit a section. then the image,
(b), of the base in x intersects each ber 1(b) at a unique point (b). this point plays

the role of a natural zero for the addition law on each ber, turning each torus into an

elliptic curve. for this reason, a torus bration that admits a section is called an elliptic

bration. an elliptic bration naturally possesses a line bundle, l, on b whose ber at any
point b  b is the cotangent line tp(1(b)) to the elliptic curve at the zero point pb. that
is, l is the conormal bundle to the section (b) in x. in the case where the elliptically

bered manifold is a calabiyau threefold, the requirement that c1(t x) = 0 restricts the
conormal bundle l to satisfy

l = k 1
b ,

(2.5)

where kb is the canonical bundle of the base b. this requirement restricts the possible

bases b [28]. it turns out that, for smooth b, the only possible cases are (i) the del pezzo

surfaces dpi for i = 1, . . . , 9, (ii) the hirzebruch surfaces fr for any non-negative integer
r, (iii) certain blow-ups of the hirzebruch surfaces and (iv) the enriques surface e. thus,

elliptically bered calabiyau threefolds allow only a fairly restricted set of smooth base

surfaces b. the properties of these bases are well known and reviewed in the appendix

of [20].

8

elliptically bered manifolds have a useful description in terms of a weierstrass model.
one recalls that a general elliptic curve can be embedded via a cubic equation into cp2.

without loss of generality, the equation can be put in the weierstrass form

zy2 = 4x3  g2xz2  g3z3.

(2.6)

where g2 and g3 are general coecients and (x, y, z) are homogeneous coordinates on cp2.
to dene an elliptic bration over a base b, one needs to specify how the coecients g2

and g3 vary as one moves around the base. in general, the coecients must be sections of
the line bundles l4 = k 4
b respectively. one notes that the torus bers are
actually elliptic curves, because there is always one solution to the weierstrass equation,

b and l6 = k 6

namely (x, y, z) = (0, 1, 0). this denes a global section  of the bration, usually called the

zero section.

the elliptic curve becomes singular when two roots of the weierstrass equation (2.6)

coincide. this occurs when the discriminant, dened by

 = g3

2  27g2

3

(2.7)

vanishes. in the bration, the discriminant is a section of l12 = k 12

b . the set of points in

the base over which the bration becomes singular is given by the discriminant locus

 = 0.

(2.8)

and denes a complex curve in the base.

in some cases, although some of the elliptic bers are singular, the full space described

by the weierstrass model is smooth. however, as we will see below, the weierstrass model

may also be singular. in this case, the smooth calabiyau threefold x is a blow up of the

corresponding singular weierstrass model.

2.2

involutions and the construction of z with 1(z) = z2

unfortunately, one can show that most elliptically bered calabiyau threefolds z have

trivial 1(z). the one exception is when the base b is an enriques surface. it was shown

in [20] that spectral cover constructions on such geometries cannot give models with three

families of chiral matter. dierent constructions of bundles on such geometries do exist

[29] but they do not seem to allow enough exibility for satisfying the anomaly cancellation

9

condition. hence, we choose a dierent route; we keep the bases general but we relax the

elliptic bration condition.

the easiest way to produce a bered space z with non-trivial 1(z) is by quotienting

an elliptically bered space x by a freely acting discrete symmetry. since here we consider

only the simplest case of 1(z) = z2, we need only nd an elliptically bered manifold x

with a freely acting involution. specically, we would like to construct an involution

x : x  x

(2.9)

that preserves the bration , as well as the holomorphic volume form, and acts freely on

x, that is, without xed points. we can then construct the quotient space

z = x/x.

(2.10)

since x acts freely and preserves the holomorphic volume form, z is a smooth calabiyau

threefold. however, in general, the section  of x will not be invariant under x, so it will

not descend to a section of z. it follows that there is no reason to expect z to have a section

and, hence, to be an elliptic bration. it is, in general, only a torus-bration.

how does one construct such an involution and what constraints does its existence place

on x? this is most easily analyzed by constructing x as the combination of two involutions,

one acting on the base and one acting on the ber. note, rst, that if there is an involution

x on x that preserves the bration, this must project to some involution

b : b  b

(2.11)

on b. since it is x/x that must be smooth and not b/b, we do not require that b act
freely on b. in fact, generally b will not admit a freely acting b. we denote by fb the
set of points in b that are xed under b. in general, fb can contain either a continuous

or a nite set of elements.

fix one such involution b. among all calabi-yau manifolds x, bered over b, we want
to show there are some for which the involution b lifts to an involution  : x  x which
preserves the section . we can then combine  with an involution t on the bers, to give

x. the lifting is possible only if the bration is invariant under b. this means that the

coecients g2 and g3 in the weierstrass equation must be invariant under b,

 
b(g2) = g2,

 
b(g3) = g3,

(2.12)

10

if these conditions are satised, then b can indeed be lifted to an involution  : x  x,
which is uniquely determined by the additional requirements that it x the zero section 

and that it preserve the holomorphic volume form on x. a local computation shows that

this  leaves xed the whole ber above each xed point in the base, that is all the points

in fb . thus it is not by itself a suitable candidate for x.

to construct an involution without xed points, we combine  with a translation of the

ber. the action of translation on a smooth torus acts without xed points. one might

then expect that a simple translation on all the elliptic bers of x might by itself give an

involution without xed points. the problem is that the translation might not act freely on

the singular bers. thus, in general, a translation alone is not a candidate for x either.
however, one recalls that  left invariant only those bers above points in the base in fb .
if we combine  with a translation in the ber, then, provided none of the bers above fb

are singular, the resulting transformation should act without xed points.

let us be more specic. the easiest (but not most general) way to construct an elliptically

bered calabiyau threefold x with a ber translation symmetry is to require that x has
two sections. the zero section  marks the zero points pb on the bers 1(b). suppose
there is a second section . consider any ber 1(b). denote by b the unique point of
intersection of this ber with the image (b) of the base in x. let us further assume that,

for any point b  b, b is a point of order two in the ber, that is, b + b = (b). in terms
of the sections themselves, this can be written as

 +  = .

(2.13)

using this property, one can dene an involution t : x  x as follows. let x be any point
in x. then x lies in a ber 1(b) for some b  b. dene

t(x) = x + b.

(2.14)

clearly, t satises t t = idx and, hence, is an involution. furthermore, t has the property
that

t() = ,

t() = .

exchanging the two sections.

we then construct the mapping

x : x  x,

11

(2.15)

(2.16)

dened by combining  with the ber translation t as

x =   t.

(2.17)

clearly x is an involution on x. by construction, x preserves the bration  and induces

the involution b on the base. since  preserves the ber, it leaves the two sections invariant

() = ,

() = .

(2.18)

combined with the action of t given in (2.15), this implies that x interchanges the two

sections, so

 
x() = ,

 
x() = .

(2.19)

thus neither section is preserved under x and, consequently, the quotient space z = x/x

generically has no sections and so is only torus-bered. furthermore, since one can show

that t preserves the holomorphic volume form, we can conclude that x also preserves the

holomorphic volume form.

does x have xed points in x? in general, the answer is armative. however, as
discussed above, if none of the bers of the set of xed points in the base fb are singular
then the action of x is free. thus x will act freely on x if and only if

fb  { = 0} = ,

(2.20)

where { = 0} is the discriminant locus in the base b. except for the case of the enriques

base, this then implies that fb must consist of a nite number of xed points.

furthermore, since x preserves the bration  of x and induces the involution b on

b, it follows that z is a torus-bration over the base space

s = b/b.

(2.21)

recall that, since involution b generically has xed points, s, unlike z, is generically not a

smooth manifold.

in summary, we can construct a torus-bered calabiyau threefold with 1(z) = z2 by

the following quotient

in order to construct such a manifold z we require

x

y

y

12

q

 z = x/x

b  s = b/b

(2.22)

 x has two sections  and  such that  +  =  under ber-wise addition,

 b acts on the base b with a xed point set fb with the property that fb  { =

0} = ,

 in the weierstrass model for x we have  

b(g2) = g2 and  

b(g3) = g3, ensuring that

the involution preserves the bration.

in the next subsection, we will discuss what these conditions imply about the structure of

x.

finally, we note that the chern classes ci  h (z, q) of the tangent bundle t z can be

determined from the chern classes of t x as follows. let

be the quotient map. since x is a double cover of z, it follows that

q : x  z

ci(t z) =

1
2

qci(t x),

(2.23)

(2.24)

where qci(t x) is the push-forward of ci(t x).

2.3 structure of x

the main requirement on x is that it is a smooth elliptically bered calabiyau threefold

admitting two sections. such manifolds can be constructed from the corresponding weier-

strass model as follows. first, in order to have a pair of sections  and , the weierstrass

polynomial must factorize as

zy2 = 4(x  az)(x2 + axz + bz2),

where, comparing to equation (2.6), we see that

g2 = 4(a2  b),

g3 = 4ab.

(2.25)

(2.26)

note that this implies that a and b are sections of k 2

b respectively. the zero
section  is given by (x, y, z) = (0, 1, 0) and the second section  by (x, y, z) = (a, 0, 1). the

b and k 4

bers are singular over the discriminant curve  = 0, where

 = 12
2

13

(2.27)

and

1 = a2  4b,

2 = 4(2a2 + b).

(2.28)

we see that the discriminant curve has two components.

as constructed, the weierstrass model is singular.

it is easy to show that there is a

curve of singularities over the 2 = 0 component of the discriminant curve. we note that

the vanishing of 2 corresponds to one of the roots of the second factor of the weierstrass
polynomial (2.25) being coincident with the zero of the x  az factor. consequently, the

singular points over the part of the discriminant curve where 2 = 0 all live in the  section.

specically, the singular points form a curve l in section  given by

(x, y, z) = (a, 0, 1),

2a2 + b = 0,

(2.29)

to construct the smooth calabiyau threefold, it is necessary to blow up this entire curve.

(it turns out that one blowup suces.) this is achieved as follows. the singular point of
each individual ber over 2 = 0 is replaced by a sphere cp1. this is a new curve in the
calabiyau threefold, which we denote by n. this reects the fact that the general elliptic

ber f has split over 2 = 0 into two spheres: the new ber n plus the proper transform of
the singular ber, which is in the class f n. the union of these new bers over the curve of

singularities (2.29) forms a surface in the calabiyau threefold, specically, an exceptional

divisor denoted by e. there is an analogous surface e  formed by the union of the f  n

bers over 2 in the zero section. the blown-up weierstrass model is the smooth elliptically

bered calabiyau threefold x with two sections. the blown up space together with the
inverse image l of the singular curve l is shown in figure 2.

we recall that to admit an involution we required in addition that g2 and g3 were invariant

under b. in terms of the parameters a and b this translates into

 
b(a) = a,

 
b(b) = b.

(2.30)

the action of the involution x can be seen in figure 2. we recall that, under x, the two

sections are exchanged. similarly, the two surfaces e and e  are exchanged. a generic ber

fb over a point b  b, will be exchanged with the ber fb over the image point b = b(b)

under the involution on b.

14









e



~
l



2

e

figure 2: structure of x

2.4 classes, eective curves and the chern class c2(t x)

let us consider the smooth elliptically bered calabiyau threefold x with two sections,

constructed as in the previous section. we would like to identify the independent classes of

both surfaces and curves on x. for the classes of surfaces, generically, we have the classes

of the two sections  and , of the new exceptional divisor e obtained from the blowing-

up procedure and the pull-back to x of classes of curves  from the base b, which we

denote by .

in fact, these divisor classes are not all independent. for the classes of

curves, generically, we have the class of elliptic ber f , of the new class n obtained from
the blowing-up procedure, the image l of the curve of singularities and the embeddings via
the two sections of classes of curves  from the base b, which we write as  and 

respectively. once again, these curve classes are not all independent. an independent set of

15

divisors and curves, together with their intersections, is given by









   c1   0

f  n

n

0

0

1

0

0

1

,

(2.31)

where  and  are classes of curves in b and c1 denotes the rst chern class of the base,

c1(b).

the exceptional divisor from the blowing up procedure is given by

while it image e  under x is

e = 2 (   + c1) .

e  = 2 (   + c1) .

meanwhile, the transform of the curve of singularities is

l = 8[c1 + c2

1(f  n)]

and we have the important relationship between classes of curves

   =    + (  c1)[(f  n)  n].

(2.32)

(2.33)

(2.34)

(2.35)

finally, to complete the description of the cohomology ring we have the following intersec-

tions between divisors

   = c1,

   = c1,

   = 0,

(2.36)

   = ,

   = 

the action of the involution x on each class is easy to identify. we have for the divisors

 
x() = ,

 
x() = ,

 
x() =  

b(),

(2.37)

while for the curves

 
x(f  n) = n,

 
x(n) = f  n,

 
x = b() = b() + (  c1)[(f  n)  n],

(2.38)

 
x = b()

16

when describing the vebranes in our model, it is important to identify the eective

classes of curves in x. as discussed in [19, 20, 23], these are the cohomology classes which

can be realized by the sum curves in the calabiyau corresponding to an actual collection of

vebranes (and no anti-vebranes). not all classes are of this form. thus we would like to

identify the conditions for a class [w ] in x to be eective, that is, for [w ] to lie in the mori

cone of h2(x, z). we recall that in blowing up the weierstrass model, the singular point of
a ber over the 2 = 0 was replaced by a sphere cp1 represented by the new class n. this
class is by denition eective. recall further that the ber over 2 = 0 in fact splits into a

pair of spheres. the other sphere is the proper transform of the singular ber and is in the

class f  n. it is by denition eective. furthermore, the lift  of any eective class 

in the base into the zero section  is must also be eective in x. it follows from (2.31) that

we can, in general, write the class of a curve w in h2(x, z) as

[w ] =  + c(f  n) + dn,

(2.39)

where  is a class in the base b and c and d are integers. it is easy to show that a sucient

condition for w to be an eective class is that

 is eective in b,

c  0,

d  0.

= [w ] is eective in x

(2.40)

we will, in the following, often denote an expression such as [w ] is eective in x simply

by [w ]  0.

it will be essential in this paper to know the second chern class of the tangent bundle

t x of the relevant calabiyau threefolds. the second chern class c2(t x) of an elliptically

bered calabiyau threefold with two sections can be calculated by blowing up the associated

weierstrass model, as discussed above. here, we simply present the result. we nd that

c2(t x) = 12  c1 + (c2 + 11c2

1)(f  n) + (c2  c2

1)n,

(2.41)

where c1 and c2 stand for the chern classes c1(b) and c2(b) of the base b respectively. this

formula was originally given, though in a dierent form, by andreas, curio and klemm [27].

note that setting n to zero reduces expression (2.41) to the original formula given by fried-

man, morgan and witten [16] for the case of elliptically bered calabiyau threefolds with

a single section .

17

3 holomorphic vector bundles on bered calabiyau

threefolds

having identied the structure of the torus-bered calabiyau manifold z on which we

will compactify, the next question is to construct general supersymmetric gauge vacua on

z.

in particular, vacua with structure group g = su(5)  e8. as discussed in the

introduction, constructing supersymmetric vacua corresponds to constructing general semi-

stable holomorphic vector bundles over z. we recall that the work of [16, 17, 18] shows

how to construct such bundles over elliptically bered manifolds. here z is the quotient

x/x of an elliptically bered threefold x by an involution x. thus the easiest way to

construct bundles over z is to construct suitable vector bundles v over x which descend to

the quotient threefold z. this restricts us to those bundles on x which are invariant under

the involution. that is, we will need to nd v such that  

x(v ) = v .

in this section, we discuss the details of such a construction. we rst review the spectral

cover construction of semi-stable holomorphic bundles v over an elliptically bered manifold

x. we stress a physical picture, where the spectral data can be viewed as the t-dual of

the gauge bundle v over x. we then discuss the structure of the spectral data, in the case

of the particular class of calabiyau manifolds with two sections discussed in the previous

section. finally, we turn to the question of identifying those v which are invariant under

the involution. we also give explicit expressions for the chern classes of v and for the

corresponding bundles on z. a number of important subtleties complicate this analysis as

compared with the generic case where x has only one section. for simplicity, we will not give

the derivations of all of our results in this paper. also, we will often use the chern classes to

characterize a bundle rather than deal with the bundles themselves. the full mathematical

details will be given elsewhere [26].

3.1 t-duality and the spectral construction

we would like to characterize semi-stable holomorphic su(n) vector bundles over an ellipti-

cally bered calabiyau threefold x. let us generalize slightly and consider u(n) bundles

of degree zero over the bers. it was shown in [16, 17, 18] that, generically, a semi-stable

rank n holomorphic vector bundle v on x can be constructed from two objects

 a divisor c of x which is an n-fold cover of the base b, known as the spectral cover,

18

 a line bundle n on c.

the relationship between the spectral data (c, n ) and the bundle v actually has a simple

physical interpretation. the spectral data is the t-dual of the semi-stable holomorphic

bundle v .

to understand the what is meant by t-duality in this context, recall that the calabiyau

manifold x has an elliptically bered structure. this means that we can consider making

a t-duality transformation on the ber. specically, on each ber we make a t-duality

transformation along each cycle of the torus, preserving the complex structure on the torus,

but inverting the volume. of course, the transformation is more subtle at the points where

the bration is singular, but it can in general be dened. the resulting t-dual manifold

ex, is also elliptically bered. in fact, with regard to complex structure, it is isomorphic to
the original manifold x. mathematically, it is the associated jacobian bundle ex  j().

thus we have

by the action of t-duality on each ber.

t-duality

 ex  j() = x

x

(3.1)

what happens to the vector bundle v under such a duality transformation? physically,

we recall that vector bundles (or, more generally, sheaves) can describe a collection of d-

branes. the low-energy theory of n coincident d-branes is a (d + 1)-dimensional yangmills

theory with a gauge group u(n). from this point of view, we can view our rank n vector

bundle on the threefold x as n d6-branes all wrapping the calabiyau manifold.

if v

is non-trivial, the conguration is a source not only of d6-brane charge but also of d4-

brane, d2-brane and d0-brane charge. the charges are given [30] in terms of the chern

character classes ch0(v ) = n, ch1(v ), ch2(v ) and ch3(v ) for d6-, d4-, d2- and d0-brane

charge respectively. thus, in general, the bundle describes some collection d6-, d4-, d2-

and d0-branes.

this description can be extended to the case where we have, for instance, only d4-, d2-

and d0-branes on x. this implies that the rank of the bundle is zero (no d6-brane charge)

but the the higher chern classes are non-zero. this is, of course, not possible to describe in

terms of a vector bundle, but can be described as a sheaf. a simple example is a single

d4-brane wrapping a divisor c in x. there will be a line-bundle n on c describing the

u(1) gauge elds on x (and in general describing embedded d2- and d0-brane charge).

19

there is an inclusion map ic : c  x. we can try and use this map to push the bundle on
c into an object on x. this will be a bundle ic n which is simply n when restricted to

the d4-brane on c but everywhere else in x the ber is dimensionless. such an object is a

sheaf. a general vector bundle can then be regarded as a special type of sheaf.

viewing v as a set of d-branes, we know that d-branes are in general mapped under t-

duality to new d-branes of dierent dimension. roughly, d4-, d2- and d0-branes transverse

x and the singular bers, but this is the general picture.) thus, in general, the bundle v

d4- and d2-branes wrapping the ber of x become d4-, d2- and d0-branes transverse to

to the ber of x should become d6-, d4- and d2-branes wrapping the ber of ex, while d6-,
the ber of ex. (the actual transformation is more complicated because of the curvature of
should map to some new bundle (or more generally new sheaf) ev on ex describing the t-dual
conguration of d-branes. since we can dualize back from ex to x, the map is invertible.
bundle ev on ex to v on x. thus, t-duality induces an invertible map s between sheaves
ev on ex and sheaves v on x so that

in what follows, it is more convenient to dene the map in terms of the duality from the

mathematically, this map is known as the fouriermukai transform. (to be more precise,

this transform acts not on sheaves but on the derived category of sheaves on x as described,

for instance, in [31].) we note that it induces a map s on cohomology exchanging the d-brane

charges:

we would expect that the t-duality acts linearly on the d-brane charges. and indeed, one

can show that s is linear on cohomology.

so far, while interesting, the t-duality map has not helped us solve the problem of

characterizing semi-stable bundles v on x. in general, the dual bundle ev appears to be

just as complicated as the original bundle v . however, we have not yet utilized the semi-

stability condition. the spectral cover construction makes a specic semi-stability assump-
tion, namely that the bundle is still semi-stable when restricted to a generic ber 1. the

1it is known [16] that for an appropriate choice of the kahler form  on x, o-stability indeed implies

semi-stability on the generic ber.

20

v = s(ev ).

chi(v ) = s chi(ev )

(3.2)

(3.3)

d4-branes and no d6-branes. in particular, this is precisely the information contained in

consequence of this is that if v is semi-stable then its t-dual ev = s 1(v ) describes only
the spectral data. namely, the spectral cover c is the surface in ex on which the d4-brane

wraps and n describes the gauge eld on the brane. thus, formally, if

is the inclusion map of the spectral cover, the t-dual ev of v is the sheaf

this then is the spectral cover construction

ic : c  ex
ev = ic n .

 the bundle v is the ber-wise t-dual or fouriermukai transform

v = s(ic n )

(3.4)

(3.5)

(3.6)

of the sheaf ev = ic n as dened by the spectral data (c, n ).

we note that the spectral data naturally lives in the isomorphic t-dual space ex. the

construction is shown diagrammatically in figure 3.

v

x

-1

s

s

~
v=i

n

c*

c

~
x

figure 3: the fouriermukai t-duality transform

one can get an idea of why the semi-stability condition implies that ev contains no d6-

branes as follows. it is easy to show that requiring the restriction of v to a generic ber

21

to be semi-stable implies that rst chern class c1(v ) restricted to a generic ber is zero.

this clearly restricts the form of the d4-brane charge. in particular, it means that there

can be no d4-branes wrapping sections of x. however, it is precisely d4-branes wrapped

on sections of x which become d6-branes under t-duality since they are transverse to the

ber direction. thus ev contains only d4-, d2- and d0-branes. note that, in addition, the
original n d6-branes will map into n d4-branes wrapping sections of the dual ex. to be

more precise, they in general map to a d4-brane which is an n-fold cover of the base b. this

is indeed precisely the form of the spectral cover c.

3.2 bundles on x and the form of the spectral data

let us now return to the specic question of the description of semi-stable holomorphic

su(n) bundles on x. we will nd that the specic form we chose for x gives additional

degrees of freedom for the spectral data, which are not present in the generic case.

in

particular, as we discuss, the spectral cover is no longer everywhere a nite cover of the base

b. in this paper, we will mention some of the complexities this introduces, but save the

more mathematical analysis for a later publication [26].

first, we need to impose the condition that we have an su(n) bundle, so that

c1(v ) = 0,

(3.7)

where c1(v ) is the rst chern class of the bundle v . the map s in cohomology induced by

the fouriermukai transform (3.3) gives expressions for the chern classes ci(v ) in terms of

the chern classes ci(ev ) of ev = ic n . the latter are easily expressed in terms of c and the

rst chern class c1(n ) of the line bundle n . we will not give the details here but simply
present the results. requiring that c1(v ) vanishes on x, rather than just on the bers,
imposes restrictions on c and n . we nd that the class of the spectral cover is constrained

to be

c = n + ,

(3.8)

where  is the pull-back into x of some divisor class  in the base b. since c is an actual

surface in ex, we have the addition condition that

 must be an eective class on b

(3.9)

22

note, in addition, that equation (3.8) involves only the zero section  and not the second

section . furthermore, the vanishing of c1(v ) also requires that

c1(n ) =

1
2

(c + c1)|c + ,

(3.10)

where the rst term is the restriction to c of a divisor class in x, while  is a class on c

with the property that, if p is the projection p : c  b, then the push-forward of  vanishes

p = 0

(3.11)

as an element of h2(b, z).

we would like to have an explicit expression for the additional freedom  in the line

bundle n . to do this, we need to know the generic classes on the spectral cover c and then

nd which of these classes satisfy the projection condition p = 0.

if c were completely generic, we would expect that the only classes on c are those that

come from the restriction of classes in x to c. that is, we expect classes of the form

 = d|c where d  h4(x, z) is a divisor class on x. from section 2.4, the divisors on x
are d  {, , } where  is a class in h2(b, z). however, we recall that the c1(v ) = 0

condition meant that the spectral cover was not generic, but was restricted so that the class

of c is of the form n + . in this case, extra classes appear on the spectral cover. they

can be seen by considering the intersection of c with the exceptional divisor e. we have

from (2.31) and (2.32) that, as a class in x,

e|c = e  c = 2(   + c1)  (n + ) = 4(  c1)n

(3.12)

since both c and e are actual surfaces in x, this implies that they intersect in a curve

wrapping the new ber 4  c1 times. for generic c, if we project down to the base, the curve
c  e projects to 4  c1 distinct points. thus we can argue that, generically, the curve c  e
splits into 4c1 distinct curves each wrapping the new component of the ber over a dierent
point in the base. in x, all of these curves are in the same homology class. however, in c,

since each curve can be separately blown down, they must be in distinct cohomology classes

in h2(c, z). let us denote these distinct classes as ni for i = 1, . . . , 4  c1. thus, as a class

in c, we have e|c =pi ni.

the fact that c necessarily includes the exceptional curves ni has important conse-

quences. in particular, it means that c is no longer everywhere a nite cover of b. generi-

cally it is an n-fold cover, but there are 4  c1 special points in b where it spans the whole

23

of a new ber n above the base. this has important consequences for the spectral cover

construction. in the previous section, we claimed that a smooth semi-stable holomorphic

a line-bundle on c. however, this is only strictly true for generic c. if c is singular or is

vector bundle v on x is the fouriermukai transform of the sheaf ic n on ex, where n is
no longer a nite cover, more general sheaves on ex can lead to a smooth semi-stable bundle

v . in particular, one is led to consider sheaves supported on the new bers ni. we leave

the discussion of these subtleties to a more mathematical paper [26]. in this paper, we will

restrict ourselves to the simple case of line bundles over c, and will mostly been concerned

with the chern classes rather than the specic realization of the bundles themselves.

returning to the classes on c, in summary, for a generic spectral cover c = n +  in

x, the generic classes on c can be taken as

restrictions from x:

|c,

|c,

new ber classes:

ni,

(3.13)

where i = 1, . . . , 4  c1. furthermore, from their intersections in x and the fact that each

ni can be separately blown down, one can show that

as an intersection in c, while

ni  nj = 2ij

ni  |c = ni  |c = 0,

(3.14)

(3.15)

for all i. one might expect that there is also a class from |c. however, we recall that
e = 2(   + c1), so this class is not independent. we note, however, that 1
2e is also an
integral class on x. thus, we do have the useful fact that

1
2

e|c =

ni

1

2xi

(3.16)

is actually an integral class on c, despite the rational coecients in the sum.

having identied the classes on c, we can now nd the generic form of . a short

calculation shows that  has the form

 =  (n   + n c1)  c +xi

ini.

(3.17)

24

in order for c1(n ) to be an integral homology class, the coecients  and i are restricted,
so that, in the case where n is odd, we have, recalling that 1

2pi ni is integral

(3.18)

  1

2  z,
2m  z,

i  1

where m is an integer. in this paper, we restrict our results to n odd since all of the examples

we present below will involve the structure group su(5).

the other chern classes of v , which by the fouriermukai transform could be written

in terms of c = n +  and n , then reduce to expression in terms of ,  and i. we nd

that

c2(v ) =   ( 1

24(cid:0)n3  n(cid:1) c2

1 

( 1

24(cid:0)n3  n(cid:1) c2

1 

1

2(cid:18)2 

1

1

2(cid:18)2 
4(cid:19) n (  nc1) xi
4(cid:19) n (  nc1) x 2
i +xi

1

2

i) (f  n)
i) n,

(3.19)

and

c3(v ) = 2 (  nc1) ,

(3.20)

where c1 and c2 stand for the chern classes c1(b) and c2(b) of the base b respectively. it is

important to note that the expression for c2 depends on the i, but the one for c3 does not.

setting i to zero in (3.19) returns one to the formula for c2 given by friedman, morgan,

witten [16], as it must. the single section threefolds case of expression (3.20) for c3(v ) was

derived in [21].

3.3 vector bundles on z = x/x

we now want to construct semi-stable holomorphic vector bundles vz on the torus-bration

z = x/x. every such bundle can be pulled back to a bundle v over x that is invariant

under the involution x and conversely. that is, if

 
x(v ) = v

(3.21)

then v is the pull-back of a bundle vz on z. we therefore must characterize the condition

that v be invariant under x.

25

recall that v is constructed as the fouriermukai transform of the sheaf ev = ic n given

the spectral cover c and the line bundle n on c. the generic forms of c and n are given

in equations (3.8) and (3.17) respectively. what additional conditions on the spectral data

does the requirement (3.21) that v is invariant under x imply?

this can be calculated directly by nding the induced action of x on the spectral data. in

particular, if s is the fouriermukai transform from ev to v , and s 1 the inverse transform,

we have that under x

ev = ic n  ev  = s 1   

x  s(ic n )

(3.22)

rather than considering this action in general, let us start by considering the condition

involution x is the combination of two involutions, x =   t, where  is the lift of the
involution b and t is a translation in the ber of x. under t-duality, a translation on the

invariance will place on the spectral cover, and then on the chern classes of ev .
we recall that the spectral data live naturally in the t-dual space ex. furthermore, the
ber of x has no realization as an action on the dual space ex. the induced action of t
on ex is trivial. the involution on the base b, however, carries over into the corresponding
involution in the base of ex = j(). thus, recalling that x and ex are isomorphic, we expect

that one of the requirements of the invariance of v under x is that the t-dual d4-brane

described by the spectral cover c is invariant under . that is, we require that

(c) = c

(3.23)

recall from (2.18) that  is invariant under . we nd then, using the form of c given in

equations (3.8), that the condition (3.23) is satised provided

b() = .

(3.24)

it is more subtle, however, to calculate the induced transformation of n under the action
of x on v . here, rather than calculate the action of s 1   
x  s directly, we will consider
the transformation of the chern classes of v to get information about how n transforms.

let us write v  =  
x(v ) for the pullback of the bundle v under the involution and  ,  and
i for the corresponding spectral data. given the transformation of the classes on x under

x given in (2.37) and (2.38), we nd that, assuming the spectral cover condition (3.24) that

26

    

b() = ,

c2(v ) =  

x(c2(v )) = c2(v ) +xi

c3(v ) =  

x(c3(v )) = c3(v )

( 1
2  i) [n  (f  n)]

(3.25)

comparing this to the general expressions (3.19) and (3.20) for c2(v ) and c3(v ), we can

conclude that under x we must have that  remains unchanged.

while for i, we have

such that

   = ,

i  
i,

xi



i =xi

( 1
2  i).

(3.26)

(3.27)

(3.28)

it might appear that there is also a condition onpi 2

s 1  x  s is an involution, reduces this condition to that above.

i . however, the additional fact that

in summary, necessary conditions for v to be invariant are the relations

b() = ,

xi

i =xi

1

4 =   c1.

(3.29)

since the chern classes do not completely determine the bundle, there may be non-invariant

bundles with invariant chern classes satisfying these conditions. to nd the exactly invariant

bundles requires the details of how the i transform individually.

since physically we are interested mostly in the chern classes, in this paper, for simplicity,

we will restrict ourselves to the necessary conditions given above, without considering the

details of identifying within this class of bundles the specic ones which are exactly invariant

under x. therefore, we take the condition that nding holomorphic vector bundles vz over

the torus-bered threefold z = x/x reduces to constructing holomorphic vector bundles

v over the elliptically bered threefold x that satisfy condition (3.29).

the chern classes of a vector bundle vz can be determined from the chern classes of
the x invariant vector bundle v from which it descends as follows. let q : x  z be the

27

quotient map. since x is a double cover of z, it follows that

where qci(v ) is the push-forward of any chern class ci(v ) of v .

ci(vz) =

1
2

qci(v ),

(3.30)

4 rules for realistic particle physics vacua

in this section, we give the rules required to construct realistic particle physics vacua with

n = 1 supersymmetry, three families of quarks and leptons with the standard model gauge

group su(3)csu(2)lu(1)y. for simplicity, we will restrict ourselves in this paper to
in the observable
considering vector bundles with the structure group su(n) for n odd.

sector we will choose the structure group g = su(5). the generalization to other structure

groups is relatively straightforward.

the rst set of rules deals with the selection of the elliptically bered calabiyau three-

fold x which admits a freely acting involution x, and the construction of bundles on x

invariant under x. as we have discussed, this allows us to construct a torus-bered calabi

yau threefold z = x/x, with non-trivial fundamental group 1(z) = z2, and also to

describe the bundles vz on z. these rules are summaries of the conditions we have already

derived in the last two sections. if one was using this construction to build vector bundles

for each of the two e8 groups in horava-witten theory, then this rst set of constraints is

applicable to each bundle individually. the rules are

 involution conditions: start with an elliptically bered calabiyau threefold x. if the

base b is smooth it must be either (i) a del pezzo, (ii) a hirzebruch, (iii) a blown-up

hirzebruch or (iv) an enriques surface. to admit a freely acting involution x, we

required x to have two sections  and . in the weierstrass model, this corresponds

to an explicit choice of

with a discriminant curve

g2 = 4(a2  b),

g3 = 4ab,

 = 4(2a2 + b)(a2  4b) = 0,

28

(4.1)

(4.2)

the existence of x further required that

b(a) = a,

b(b) = b

where b is the projection of x onto the base, and in addition

fb  { = 0} = ,

(4.3)

(4.4)

where fb is the set of xed points of b. it is helpful to note that this last condition
implies that fb must be nite, except when the base b is a dp9 or a k3 surface.

 bundle condition: semi-stable holomorphic vector bundles over x are given in terms

of spectral data (c, n ). the condition that c1(v ) = 0 implies that the spectral data
can be written, via (3.8),(3.10),(3.17), in terms of a class  in b and coecients  and

i, which satisfy

  1

2  z,

i  1

2m  z,

(4.5)

with m integer. furthermore, since c is an actual surface in the calabiyau manifold,

we must also have

as a class on b.

 is eective

(4.6)

 bundle involution conditions: in order for v to descend to a vector bundle vz over z,

the class  in b and the coecients i must satisfy the constraints

b() = ,

xi

i =   c1.

(4.7)

the second set of rules is directly particle physics related. in general, in horavawitten

theory, we are free to choose two vector bundles, vz1 and vz2, located on the observable

and hidden orbifold planes respectively. in this paper, for simplicity, we will always take

vz2 to be the trivial bundle. hence, the gauge group e8 remains unbroken on the hidden

orbifold plane.

on the observable orbifold plane, the structure group of the bundle is g  e8. the
commutant subgroup h in e8 is then the group preserved by the bundle. in this paper,

29

we will spontaneously break h to the standard model group su(3)csu(2)lu(1)y by
means of a z2 wilson line on z [24, 25]. this is possible since, by construction, we have

1(z) = z2. to achieve such a breaking requires us to take

so that the unication group will be

g = su(5).

h = su(5).

(4.8)

(4.9)

thus, we will assume that bundle on the observable plane vz1 has structure group g =

su(5).

the rst of the particle physics conditions is the requirement that the theory have three

families of quarks and leptons in the visible sector. the number of generations associated

with the vector bundle vz1 over z is given by

ngen = 1

2 c3(vz1).

(4.10)

requiring ngen = 3 then, using (3.20) and (3.30), leads to the following rule for the associated

vector bundle v over x.

 three-family condition: to have three families we must require

(  nc1) = 6.

(4.11)

the second such rule is associated with the anomaly cancellation requirement [3] that

[wz] = c2(t z)  c2(vz1)  c2(vz2),

(4.12)

where [wz] is the class associated with non-perturbative ve-branes in the bulk space of the

theory. since vz2 is trivial by assumption, c2(vz2) vanishes and condition (4.12) simplies

accordingly. using equations (2.24), (3.30) and the fact that, by denition,

condition (4.12) can be pulled-back onto x to give

[wz] =

1
2

q[w ],

[w ] = c2(t x)  c2(v ).

30

(4.13)

(4.14)

inserting expressions (2.41) and (3.19) gives

[w ] =  + c(f  n) + dn

 = 12c1  

(4.15)

(4.16)

where

and

24

c = c2 +(cid:18) 1
d = c2 +(cid:18) 1

24

(n3  n) + 11(cid:19) c2
(n3  n)  1(cid:19) c2

1 

1 

1

2(cid:18)2 
2(cid:18)2 

1

1

4(cid:19) n (  nc1) xi
4(cid:19) n (  nc1) xi

1

2
i ,

(4.17)

2

i +xi

i.

(4.18)

the class [wz] must represent an actual physical holomorphic curve in the calabiyau

threefold z since physical ve-branes are required to wrap around it. hence, [wz] must be

an eective class, that is, [wz] must be in the mori cone of h2(z, z). it can be shown that

[wz] is eective in z if and only if its pull-back [w ] is an eective class in the covering

threefold x. therefore, we must require that [w ] be in the mori cone of h2(x, z). using

equation (2.40), this leads to the following rule.

 eectiveness condition: for [w ] to be an eective class, we require

 is eective in b,

c  0,

d  0.

(4.19)

next, it is possible that our bundle with structure group g may actually have a smaller

structure group. if this is the case, then the preserved subgroup of e8 will be larger than

the commutant h of g. rajesh [32] has shown (in the context of toric x) that this will not

be the case if the vector bundle satises a further constraint, so that for the case of su(5)

we have

 rajesh condition: let g = su(5)  e8 and g be the structure group of the vector
bundle. then the commutant h = su(5) in e8 will be the largest subgroup preserved

by the bundle if

  5c1

31

(4.20)

geometrically, this corresponds to requiring that the spectral cover does not split over the

base b.

finally, we recall that the point of constructing z with 1(z) = z2 was that we can then

include a z2 wilson line on z to break spontaneously the h = su(5) gut group. we break

su(5)  su(3)csu(2)lu(1)y,

(4.21)

by assuming that the bundle contains a non-vanishing wilson line with generator

g =  13

12 ! .

(4.22)

in h = su(5)

if one follows the above rules, the vacua will correspond to an n = 1 supersymmetric

brane-world theory with, in the observable sector, three families of quarks and leptons and

the standard model gauge group su(3)csu(2)lu(1)y. armed with these rules, we now
turn to the explicit construction of phenomenologically relevant non-perturbative vacua.

5 three family models

5.1 example 1: b = f2

in our rst example, we take the base of the calabiyau threefold to be the hirzebruch

surface

b = f2.

(5.1)

as discussed in the appendix of [20], the hirzebruch surfaces are cp1 brations over cp1.
there are two independent classes on f2, the class of the base s and of the ber e. their

intersection numbers are

s  s = 2,

s  e = 1,

e  e = 0.

the rst and second chern classes of f2 are given by

c1(f2) = 2s + 4e,

32

(5.2)

(5.3)

and

c2(f2) = 4.

(5.4)

we now must show that there is an elliptically bered calabiyau threefold x with f2

base that admits a freely acting involution x satisfying the condition given in the previous

section. the condition (4.4) implies that the projection b of x to the base has only a nite

number of xed points. to dene b, we recall that there is a single type of involution on
cp1. if (u, v) are homogeneous coordinates on cp1, it can be written as (u, v)  (u, v).

this clearly has two xed points, namely the origin (0, 1) and the point at innity (1, 0) in
the u-plane. to construct the involution b, we combine an involution on the base s = cp1
with one on the ber e = cp1. we will not give details here, except to note that one nds
that fb contains four xed points, coming from the xed points of the cp1 bers above
the xed points of the involution on the base. we should also point out that, in general, it

is not possible to nd involutions with a nite number of xed points for all fr.

to ensure that we can construct a freely acting involution x from b, we further need to

show (4.4) that the discriminant curve can be chosen so as not to pass through these xed

points. we recall that the discriminant curve is given by

4(cid:0)2a2 + b(cid:1)2

(a2  4b) = 0,

(5.5)

and that the parameters a and b are sections of k 2
b respectively, where kb is the
canonical bundle of the base. in order to lift b to an involution of x, we also require (4.3)

b and k 4

that

b(a) = a,

b(b) = b.

(5.6)

this restricts the allowed sections a and b and, consequently, the form of 1 and 2. the

question is then whether, within the class of allowed sections a and b, there are examples

where the corresponding discriminant curves avoid the xed points. one can easily show

that such sections a and b do exist.

to satisfy the conditions (4.7) on the invariance of v under the involution, we need to

nd the classes  in f2 that are invariant under b. we nd that the involution preserves
both s and e separately, so that

b(s) = s,

b(e) = e.

(5.7)

33

since any class  is a linear combination of s and e, we see that, in fact, an arbitrary 

satises b() = .

we can now search for ,  and i satisfying the three family (4.11), eectiveness (4.19)

and rajesh (4.20) conditions given above. we nd that there are two classes of solutions

solution 1:

solution 2:

 = 14s + 22e,  = 3
2,

2
i  60,

xi
xi

i =   c1 = 44, xi
i =   c1 = 60, xi

 = 24s + 30e,  =  1
2 ,
2
i  76.

(5.8)

first note that the coecients  satisfy the bundle constraint (4.5). furthermore, one

can nd many examples of i with i = 1, . . . , 4  c1, satisfying the bundle constraint (4.5),

the given conditions onpi 2

i and the invariance conditionpi i =   c1.

using n = 5, (5.3), (5.8) and the intersection relations (5.2), one can easily verify that

both solutions satisfy the three-family condition (4.11).

next, from (4.15), (4.16), (4.17) and (4.18), as well as n = 5, (5.3), (5.4), (5.8) and the

intersection relations (5.2), we can calculate the ve-brane curves w associated with each

of the solutions. we nd that

solution 1:

[w ] =  (10s + 26e) + (112  k) (f  n) + (60  k) n,

solution 2:

[w ] =  (18e) + (132  k) (f  n) + (76  k) n,

where

k =xi

2
i

it follows that the base components for [w ] are given by

solution 1:  = 10s + 26e,

solution 2:  = 18e,

(5.9)

(5.10)

(5.11)

which are both eective. furthermore, we note that for each ve-brane curve the c and

d coecients of classes f  n and n respectively are non-negative integers (given the

constraints (5.8) on k). hence, eectiveness condition (4.19) is satised.

34

finally, note that the rajesh condition requires   5c1. in both of the above solutions

 > 10s + 20e = 5c1,

(5.12)

so that the rajesh condition is satised.

we conclude that, over a hirzebruch base b = f2, one can construct torus-bered calabi

yau threefolds, z, without section and with non-trivial rst homotopy group 1(z) = z2.

assuming a trivial gauge vacuum on the hidden brane, we have shown that we expect

these threefolds to admit two classes of semi-stable holomorphic vector bundles vz, (5.8),
associated with an n = 1 supersymmetric theory. these vacua have three families of chiral

quarks and leptons and gut group h = su(5) on the observable brane-world. since

1(z) = z2, wilson lines break this gut group

su(5)  su(3)c  su(2)l  u(1)y ,

(5.13)

to the standard model gauge group. anomaly cancellation and supersymmetry require the

existence of non-perturbative ve-branes in the extra dimension of the bulk space. these

ve-branes are wrapped on holomorphic curves in z whose homology classes (5.9) are exactly

calculable.

5.2 example 2: b = dp3

let us now choose the base of the calabiyau threefold x to be

b = dp3.

(5.14)

recall that dp3 can be thought of as the projective plane cp2 blown-up at three points. in
terms of the homogeneous coordinates (u, v, w) on cp2, the points we blow up may be taken
to be

(1, 0, 0),

(0, 1, 0),

(0, 0, 1).

(5.15)

the blownup surface b can be embedded in cp6 with homogeneous coordinates (z0, . . . , z6)
given by

(z0, . . . , z6) = (uvw, u2v, w2v, v2w, u2w, w2u, v2u).

(5.16)

35

the blown-up points (5.15) then correspond to projective lines in cp6. for instance, con-
sidering the limit as v and w go to zero, we see that the point (u, v, w) = (1, 0, 0) maps to
the whole cp1 given by (z0, . . . , z6) = (0, v, 0, 0, w, 0, 0) in cp6.

the properties of del pezzo surfaces were reviewed in the appendix of [20]. for dp3, one

nds a basis for h2(dp3, z) composed entirely of eective classes given by l (the pullback of
the hyperplane class of cp2) and three exceptional divisors ei for i = 1, 2, 3 corresponding
to the three blown-up points. their intersection numbers are

l  l = 1,

l  ei = 0, ei  ej = ij.

(5.17)

in addition, there are three other dependent exceptional classes

l  e2  e3,

l  e3  e1,

l  e1  e2,

(5.18)

corresponding to the lines in cp2 passing through pairs of the blown-up points. these lines

are given by

u = 0,

v = 0, w = 0

respectively. the rst and second chern classes for dp3 are

c1(dp3) = 3l  e1  e2  e3,

and

c2(dp3) = 6.

(5.19)

(5.20)

(5.21)

first, we must again show that the calabiyau threefold x based on b = dp3 admits a

freely acting involution. the requirement (4.4) implies that the projection b of x to the

base must have a nite number of xed points. we start, therefore, by showing that such a
b exists. in terms of the cp2 coordinates (u, v, w) dene b by

b : (u, v, w)  (u1, v1, w1).

(5.22)

in the ambiant space cp6 space this is simply the map exchanging z1 and z2, z3 and z4, and
z5 and z6. thus it is clearly an involution of the dp3. furthermore, it follows from (5.22)

that b has four isolated xed points

fb = {(1, 1, 1)}.

(5.23)

36

to ensure that we can construct a freely acting involution x from b, we need to show

that the discriminant curve can be chosen so as not to intersect these xed points. we recall

that the two components of the discriminant curve are given by

1 = a2  4b = 0,

(5.24)

2 = 4(cid:0)2a2 + b(cid:1) = 0,

b and k 4

and that the parameters a and b are sections of k 2
the canonical bundle of the base. the rst chern class of the anti-canonical bundle k 1
c1(b). thus from (5.20), we see that as classes

b respectively, where kb is
b is

[a] = 2 (3l  e1  e2  e3) ,

[b] = 4 (3l  e1  e2  e3) .

(5.25)

in terms of the blown-up cp2, a and b each correspond to curves. the function a is a degree

six homogeneous polynomial in (u, v, w), describing a curve which passes twice through

each of the blown-up points. the function b is a degree twelve polynomial and describes a

curve passing four times through each blow-up. these conditions restrict the form of the

polynomials. for instance, all the terms involving fth- or sixth-order powers of u, v or w are

excluded in a. in addition, in order to lift b to an involution of x, recall that we required

b(a) = a,

b(b) = b.

(5.26)

this means that the polynomials are further restricted to be homogeneous functions of

(u, v, w) which are invariant under the involution (5.22). it is a simple process to identify all

such polynomials. the discriminant curves are then given by the vanishing of the twelfth-

order polynomials 1 and 2. the question is then whether, within the class of allowed a

and b polynomials, there are examples where the corresponding discriminant curves avoid

the xed points. in fact, from the form of a and b, one can show that there is enough freedom

in choosing the polynomials, so that any generic choice leads to discriminant curves which

do not intersect any of the xed points.

in order to have invariant bundles on x, by the condition (4.7), we need to nd classes

 in dp3 that satisfy b() = . using (5.15), (5.19) and the denition of b, we nd that

b(e1) = l  e2  e3,

b(e2) = l  e3  e1,

b(e3) = l  e1  e2.

37

(5.27)

since the involution must preserve the intersection numbers and map eective curves to

eective curves, this implies that

b(l) = 2l  e1  e2  e3.

(5.28)

from these expressions, we see that there are three independent curves:

satisfying

a1 = l + e1  e2  e3,

a2 = l  e1 + e2  e3,

a3 = l  e1  e2 + e3,

b(ai) = ai

for i = 1, 2, 3, and one perpendicular class

satisfying

p = l  e1  e2  e3,

b(p) = p.

(5.29)

(5.30)

(5.31)

(5.32)

the three classes ai for i = 1, 2, 3 generate all other b invariant curves. note that each

class ai can be written as a sum of eective classes with non-negative integer coecients.
for example, a1 = e1 + (l  e2  e3). hence, each ai is an eective class. it follows that
the condition b() =  can be solved simply by demanding that  be written in terms of

invariant classes only. that is

 = m1a1 + m2a2 + m3a3,

(5.33)

where the mi are constant coecients. in addition, note that the rst chern class of dp3

given in (5.20) can be written as

c1 = a1 + a2 + a3

(5.34)

and, hence, is invariant under b, as it must be.

38

we can now search for ,  and i satisfying the three family (4.11), eectiveness (4.19)

and rajesh (4.20) conditions given above. we nd that there are three classes of solutions

solution 3:

solution 4:

solution 5:

xi
xi
xi

i =   c1 = 34, xi
i =   c1 = 36, xi
i =   c1 = 42, xi

2
i  66,

(5.35)

 = 17l  3e1  7e2  7e3,

 = 1
2,

2
i  64,

 = 18l  2e1  8e2  8e3,

 = 1
2,

 = 21l + e1  11e2  11e3,

 =  1
2,

2
i  72,

first note that the coecients  satisfy the bundle constraint (4.5). furthermore, one

can nd many examples of i with i = 1, . . . , 4  c1, satisfying the bundle constraint (4.5),

the given conditions onpi 2

i and the invariance conditionpi i =   c1.

second, we see that each curve  can be expressed as

solution 3:

 = 7a1 + 5a2 + 5a3,

solution 4:

 = 8a1 + 5a2 + 5a3,

solution 5:

 = 11a1 + 5a2 + 5a3,

(5.36)

and, therefore, each  is invariant under b. using n = 5, (5.20), (5.35) and the intersection

relations (5.17), one can easily verify that all three solutions satisfy the three-family condition

(4.11). now, from (4.15), (4.16), (4.17) and (4.18), as well as n = 5, (5.20), (5.21), (5.35)

and the intersection relations (5.17), we can calculate the ve-brane curves w associated

with each of the three solutions. we nd that

solution 3:

[w ] =  (5a1 + 7a2 + 7a3) + (102  k) (f  n) + (64  k) n,

solution 4:

[w ] =  (4a1 + 7a2 + 7a3) + (102  k) (f  n) + (66  k) n,

(5.37)

solution 5:

[w ] =  (a1 + 7a2 + 7a3) + (102  k) (f  n) + (72  k) n,

where, as before,

k =xi

2
i .

39

(5.38)

it follows that the base components for [w ] are given by

solution 3:  = 5a1 + 7a2 + 7a3,

solution 4:  = 4a1 + 7a2 + 7a3,

solution 5:  = a1 + 7a2 + 7a3.

(5.39)

since the ai are eective, so is each of these  classes. furthermore, we note, given the
conditions on k, that for each ve-brane curve the c and d coecients of the classes f  n

and n respectively are all non-negative integers. hence, the eectiveness condition (4.19) is

satised.

finally, note that the rajesh condition requires   5c1. in all of the above solutions

 > 5a1 + 5a2 + 5a3 = c1

(5.40)

so the rajesh condition is satised.

we conclude that, over a del pezzo base b = dp3, one can also construct torus-bered

calabiyau threefolds, z, without section and with non-trivial rst homotopy group 1(z) =

z2. assuming a trivial gauge vacuum on the hidden brane, we have shown that we expect

these threefolds to admit three families (2.39) of semi-stable holomorphic vector bundles

vz, associated with an n = 1 supersymmetric theory with three families of chiral quarks
and leptons and gut group h = su(5) on the observable brane-world. since 1(z) = z2,

wilson lines break this gut group

su(5)  su(3)c  su(2)l  u(1)y ,

(5.41)

to the standard model gauge group. anomaly cancellation and supersymmetry require the

existence of non-perturbative ve-branes in the extra dimension of the bulk space. these

ve-branes are wrapped on holomorphic curves in z whose homology classes, (5.37), are

exactly calculable.

6 conclusions

in view of the technical nature of this paper, it is useful to conclude by focusing on the

structure and physical properties of these standard model supersymmetric heterotic m-

theory vacua.

40

the heterotic m-theory vacua discussed in this paper are constructed by compactifying

horavawitten theory on a smooth calabiyau threefold, z, one of a specic class with the

property that

1 (z) = z2.

(6.1)

the threefolds discussed here were constructed from elliptically bered calabiyau three-

folds, x, with two sections, by modding out a free involution that exchanges the two sections.

the resulting calabiyau spaces, z, are torus-bered but not elliptically bered since they

admit no global sections. for instance in section 5, example 2 we constructed z from an

elliptically bered threefold x with base b = dp3, by modding out the involution which,

restricted to the base, acts as

(u, v, w)  (u1, v1, w1),

(6.2)

where u, v and w are complex coordinates on the dp3.

the vacua of the eective low-energy theory consist of a large ve-dimensional bulk space

bounded on each end of the fth dimension by a bps domain wall with n = 1 supersymmetry

on its world volume. a priori, these walls carry the e8 gauge supermultiplets of the heterotic

m-theory. we call one of the walls the observable sector and the other the hidden sector

of the theory.

first consider the observable wall. in this paper, we constructed a class of smooth semi-

stable holomorphic vector bundles over x with the structure group

g = su(5).

(6.3)

whose chern classes are invariant under the involution x. the involution acts on this class

of bundles; the invariant ones are precisely the bundles which come from z. their detailed

construction is not required here since it is only the chern classes that enter the physical

discussion. the description of the invariant bundles will be given in a forthcoming paper

[26].

each such bundle corresponds to some su(5) instanton conguration on z, which pre-

serves n = 1 supersymmetry. however, it spontaneously breaks e8 to the unication group

h = su(5), which is the commutant of g = su(5) in e8. thus the gauge group on the

observable wall is only h = su(5).

41

these bundles were constructed by rst forming semi-stable holomorphic su(5) bundles

over x via the spectral cover construction, and then restricting to bundles that were invariant

under the involution. such bundles descend to z. for instance, in example 3 in section 5,

the spectral data, specifying the bundle over x, were the class of a curve

 = 17l  3e1  7e2  7e3

in b = dp3, together with the coecients

and i satisfying

 = 1
2

xi

i = 34, xi

2
i  64.

(6.4)

(6.5)

(6.6)

this data species a class of g = su(5) semi-stable holomorphic bundle over x whose

chern classes are invariant under the involution x. the involution x therefore acts on the

moduli space of these bundles. the xed points of this action correspond to bundles which

descend to a g = su(5) semi-stable holomorphic bundle on z.

in addition, with the given choices of  and , the associated vector bundle vz over z

has third chern class c3(vz) = 6. this implies that the number of generations of quarks and

leptons in the observable sector is

ngen = 3.

(6.7)

finally, since 1(z) = z2, the g = su(5) gauge bundles can be enlarged by z2 wilson

lines. these spontaneously break the unication group su(5) as

su(5)  su(3)c  su(2)l  u(1)y

(6.8)

on the observable domain wall.

now consider the hidden wall. in this paper, for simplicity, we assume that we take a

trivial vector bundle in this sector. hence, e8 is the unbroken gauge group on the hidden

sector domain wall.

the vector bundles of the observable and hidden sectors are linked to the structure of

z by the requirement of anomaly cancellation. specically, this relates the second chern

42

classes of the vector bundles to the second chern class of the tangent bundle of z. we nd

that, for three families in the observable sector, anomaly cancellation implies the existence

of ve-branes in the bulk space wrapped around a holomorphic curve in z. the homology

class of this curve, w , can be explicitly computed given z and the two vector bundles. for

instance, for example 2 of section 5, we showed that

[w ] =  (19l  9e1  5e2  5e3) + (102  k) (f  n) + (64  k) n

(6.9)

where k =pi 2

is shown pictorially in figure 1.

i . the generic structure of these standard model heterotic m-theory vacua

acknowledgments

r. donagi is supported in part by an nsf grant dms-9802456 as well as a upenn research

foundation grant. he was partially supported by a grant from the emmy noether institute

and the minerva foundation of germany, as well as by the hebrew university of jerusalem

and rims, kyoto during visits to those institutiuons. b. a. ovrut is supported in part

by a senior alexander von humboldt award, by the doe under contract no. de-ac02-

76-er-03071 and by a university of pennsylvania research foundation grant. t. pantev

is supported in part by an nsf grant dms-9800790 and by an alfred p. sloan research

fellowship. d. waldram was supported in part at princeton university by the doe under

contract no. de-fg02-91er40671 and also wishes to acknowledge the hospitality of the

aspen center for physics where part of this work was done.

references

[1] p. horava and e. witten, heterotic and type i string dynamics from eleven dimen-

sions, nucl. phys. b460, 506 (1996) [hep-th/9510209].

[2] p. horava and e. witten, eleven-dimensional supergravity on a manifold with bound-

ary, nucl. phys. b475, 94 (1996) [hep-th/9603142].

[3] e. witten, strong coupling expansion of calabi-yau compactication, nucl. phys.

b471, 135 (1996) [hep-th/9602070].

43

[4] t. banks and m. dine, couplings and scales in strongly coupled heterotic string

theory, nucl. phys. b479, 173 (1996) [hep-th/9605136];

i. antoniadis and m. quiros, large radii and string unication, phys. lett. b392,

61 (1997) [hep-th/9609209];

k. benakli, phenomenology of low quantum gravity scale models, phys. rev. d60,

104002 (1999) [hep-ph/9809582].

[5] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, the hierarchy problem and new di-

mensions at a millimeter, phys. lett. b429, 263 (1998) [hep-ph/9803315];

i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, new dimensions at

a millimeter to a fermi and superstrings at a tev, phys. lett. b436, 257 (1998)

[hep-ph/9804398].

[6] l. randall and r. sundrum, a large mass hierarchy from a small extra dimension,

phys. rev. lett. 83, 3370 (1999) [hep-ph/9905221];

l. randall and r. sundrum, an alternative to compactication, hep-th/9906064.

[7] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, non-standard embedding and ve-branes in

heterotic m-theory, phys. rev. d59, 106005 (1999) [hep-th/9808101].

[8] z. lalak, s. pokorski and s. thomas, beyond the standard embedding in m-theory on

s(1)/z(2), nucl. phys. b549, 63 (1999) [hep-ph/9807503].

[9] s. stieberger, (0,2) heterotic gauge couplings and their m-theory origin, nucl. phys.

b541, 109 (1999) [hep-th/9807124].

[10] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut, k. s. stelle and d. waldram, the universe as a domain wall,

phys. rev. d59, 086001 (1999) [hep-th/9803235].

[11] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut, k. s. stelle and d. waldram, heterotic m-theory in ve

dimensions, nucl. phys. b552, 246 (1999) [hep-th/9806051].

[12] s. donaldson, proc. london math. soc. 3 1 (1985).

[13] k. uhlenbeck and s.-t. yau, comm. pure app. math. 39 257 (1986), 42 703 (1986).

[14] j. distler and b. greene, aspects of (2,0) string compactications, nucl. phys.

b304, 1 (1988).

44

[15] s. kachru, some three generation (0,2) calabi-yau models, phys. lett. b349, 76

(1995) [hep-th/9501131].

[16] r. friedman, j. morgan and e. witten, vector bundles and f theory, commun.

math. phys. 187, 679 (1997) [hep-th/9701162].

[17] r. donagi, asian. j. math. 1, 214 (1997).

[18] m. bershadsky, a. johansen, t. pantev and v. sadov, on four-dimensional compact-

ications of f-theory, nucl. phys. b505, 165 (1997) [hep-th/9701165].

[19] r. donagi, a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, non-perturbative vacua and

particle physics in m-theory, jhep 9905, 018 (1999) [hep-th/9811168].

[20] r. donagi, a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, holomorphic vector bundles and

non-perturbative vacua in m-theory, jhep 9906, 034 (1999) [hep-th/9901009].

[21] g. curio, chiral matter and transitions in heterotic string models, phys. lett. b435,

39 (1998) [hep-th/9803224].

[22] b. andreas, on vector bundles and chiral matter in n = 1 heterotic compactications,

jhep 9901, 011 (1999) [hep-th/9802202].

[23] r. donagi, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, moduli spaces of vebranes on elliptic

calabi-yau threefolds, jhep 9911, 030 (1999) [hep-th/9904054].

[24] j. d. breit, b. a. ovrut and g. c. segre, e(6) symmetry breaking in the superstring

theory, phys. lett. b158, 33 (1985);

[25] e. witten, symmetry breaking patterns in superstring models, nucl. phys. b258,

75 (1985).

[26] r. donagi, b. a. ovrut, t. pantev and d. waldram, in preparation.

[27] b. andreas, g. curio and a. klemm, towards the standard model spectrum from

elliptic calabi-yau, hep-th/9903052.

[28] a. grassi, internat. j. math. 4, 203 (1993);

d. r. morrison and c. vafa, compactications of f-theory on calabiyau threefolds

 ii, nucl. phys. b476, 437 (1996) [hep-th/9603161].

45

[29] r. thomas some bundles on non-simply connected calabi-yau 3-folds, harvard

preprint, 1999.

[30] m. li, boundary states of d-branes and dy-strings, nucl. phys. b460, 351 (1996)

[hep-th/9510161];

m. b. green, j. a. harvey and g. moore, i-brane inow and anomalous couplings on

d-branes, class. quant. grav. 14, 47 (1997) [hep-th/9605033].

[31] p. s. aspinwall and r. y. donagi, the heterotic string, the tangent bundle, and derived

categories, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 1041 (1998) [hep-th/9806094].

[32] g. rajesh, toric geometry and f-theory/heterotic duality in four dimensions, jhep

9812, 018 (1998) [hep-th/9811240].

46

