9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
6

 

 
 

2
v
1
0
0
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

hutp-99/a065
hep-th/9912001

ads/cft and gravity

steven s. gubser

lyman laboratory of physics, harvard university, cambridge, ma 02138, usa

abstract

the radiation-dominated k = 0 frw cosmology emerges as the induced metric on a
codimension one hypersurface of constant extrinsic curvature in the ve-dimensional
ads-schwarzschild solution. that we should get frw cosmology in this way is an
expected result from ads/cft in light of recent comments regarding the coupling of
gravity to boundary conformal eld theories. i remark on how this calculation bears
on the understanding of randall and sundrums alternative to compactication. a
generalization of the ads/cft prescription for computing greens functions is sug-
gested, and it is shown how gravity emerges from it with a strength g4 = 2g5/l. some
numerical bounds are set on the radius of curvature l of ads5. one of them comes
from estimating the rate of leakage of visible sector energy into the cft. that rate
is connected via a unitarity relation to deviations from newtons force law at short
distances. the best bound on l obtained in this paper comes from a match to the

parameters of string theory. it is l < 1 nm if the string scale is 1 gev. higher string

scales imply a tighter bound on l.

november 1999

1 introduction

the ads/cft correspondence [1, 2, 3] (see [4] for a review) relates a quantum eld
theory in one dimension to a theory in one higher dimension that includes gravity. the
primary example is n = 4 super-yang-mills theory, which is related to the dimensional
reduction of type iib string theory on s5 to the ve-dimensional non-compact geometry
ads5 (anti de-sitter space). the boundary of the poincare patch of ads5 is simply
minkowski space, except that the metric on the boundary is only specied up to a
conformal transformation. this is ok because n = 4 super-yang-mills theory is
conformal, even at the quantum level. the correspondence is usually studied in a
strong coupling region for the gauge theory, where it is far from classical, but the dual
gravity picture is classical in the sense that curvatures are small on the planck and
string scales.

in [5] it was proposed that slices of ads5 could serve as an alternative to compact-
ication manifolds. it was shown that when the near-boundary region of ads5 is cut
away and the bulk spacetime simply ends on a wall of constant extrinsic curvature (a
horosphere of ads5 to be precise), there is a normalizable graviton mode which has
zero mass in the four dimensions of the boundary. the metric of ads5 is

ds2

5 = e2r/l(dt2 + d~x2) + dr2

(1)

where ~x is an ordinary 3-vector. this metric is a solution to r =  4
l2 g. hyper-
surfaces of constant r are horospheres. the part of the metric that is cut away in [5]
is r > r for some given r.

in fact the proposal of [5] was to glue two identical copies of the sliced anti-de sitter
space together along the 3 + 1 dimensional boundary. however the four-dimensional
graviton pointed out in [5] is quite a general phenomenon, and there is a large freedom
in what one might have on the other side of the horospherical boundary of a given
copy of ads5. an illustration of this can be found in [6], where a single copy of ads5
is obtained as part of a type iib string compactication on an orientifold of t 6. the
relevant point is that for a vacuum state of the theory, the extrinsic curvature of the
boundary should be proportional to the induced metric:

ij = 

1
l

g(induced)
ij

.

(2)

regarding the boundary as a positive tension 3 + 1-dimensional brane separating two
sliced copies of ads5, this amounts to the statement that the stress energy of the brane
should respect 3 + 1-dimensional poincare invariance. the constant of proportionality,
1/l, is required so that there is a balance between the brane tension and the bulk cos-
mological constant. more generally, a codimension one boundary of a ve-dimensional
l g(induced)
space with no excitations on it should have the same property that ij =  1
.

ij

1

the authors of [5] termed their construction an alternative to compactication,
which seemed appropriate because one can travel an innite spatial distance into the
ve-dimensional bulk. it should be remarked however that there is a length scale, l,
involved in the construction: it is the scale of curvature of ads5.

it was suggested by j. maldacena [7] that this alternative to compactication
should properly be viewed in light of the ads/cft correspondence as a coupling of
gravity to whatever strongly coupled conformal theory the ads5 geometry is dual to.
this view was also taken by h. verlinde in [6, 8]. a convincing statement of the case
was made by e. witten [9] in response to [10, 11].

from now on i will restrict myself to a minimal scenario where a single copy of
ads5 is cut o by an end-of-the-universe brane. such objects are well known in type i
string theory [12] and in horava-witten theory [13], so there is no problem of principle
in having a true end of the universe. however my comments basically apply to any
compactication geometry which involves the near-horizon part of ads5.

the idea that the scenario of [5] is best viewed in the context of ads/cft has not
been universally embraced, perhaps partly because it is hard to see what to do with
it. (that diculty is not usually regarded as fatal, but it does seem to have held up
progress on the current issue). the goal of section 2 is to make the idea seem more
denite by using it to derive the radiation-dominated friedmann-robertson-walker
(frw) cosmology. there have been several recent papers on related subjects: these
include [14, 15, 16], and the second of these has a much better list of references for
brane-world cosmology than i can assemble. the approach is rather dierent from the
older string cosmology literature; see [17] for references.

the approach of the current paper is distinctive in that an frw solution can be ob-
tained by altering properties of the bulk spacetime rather than by exciting matter on the
cuto brane. readers determined to understand it from a brane-world perspective may
nd it most useful to think of the bulk as the background of near-extremal d3-branes.
although this is correct on the level of formulas, i consider the brane-world perspective
subtly misleading: rather i would say that the entirety of the ve-dimensional bulk is
nothing more than a manifestation of the dynamics of a conformal eld theory.

section 3 consists of some remarks on the general framework of ads/cft with a
cuto brane. a generalization of the prescription [2, 3] for computing greens functions
is suggested at the level of eective eld theory. the four-dimensional einstein action
can be derived in this formalism, with the result g4 = 2g5/l. this relation obtains
regardless of the location of the cuto brane in ads5. in standard ads/cft, where
there is no cuto brane and hence no normalizable graviton, the terms responsible
for the einstein action were removed using local counter-terms [18]. corrections to
newtons force law are discussed from the cft perspective, but i avoid presenting
details since the idea of the calculation is not original to me.

2

matter on the cuto brane is incorporated naturally in the formalism. although i
do not propose a denite model, the idea is to have visible sector matter on the cuto
brane, somewhat as in certain heterotic m-theory models [19]. excitations of that

matter would have to dominate over the solution in section 2 for z < 1010 in order for

the cosmology to be realistic.

in section 4, i make some rough numerical estimates. one is to check the cosmological
eects of visible sector matter losing its energy to the cft. in ads language this
corresponds to absorption of bulk gravitons by the horizon of the poincare patch,
as in [20, 21, 22]. the rate of energy loss is directly related to the deviations from
newtons force law. another is to estimate parameters of string theory that would
permit the deviations from newtons force law to be observed experimentally, assuming
that ads5 emerges from a string theory construction. to obtain deviations at the scale
of even a nanometer (still three orders of magnitude below the sensitivity of proposed
experiments) an extremely low string scale is requiredapproximately 1 gev. i make
some speculative remarks regarding low string scales at the end of section 4.

throughout the paper,  will denote a ve-dimensional bulk spacetime index and
i is a four-dimensional index. in cases where precision is required, i will denote ve-
dimensional coordinates as x = (t, ~x, r) and four-dimensional coordinates as i =
(, ~). throughout the paper, pl will denote the four-dimensional planck length:
pl = g4  1.6  1033 cm in units where h = c = 1.

2 a cosmological solution

let us start purely from a four-dimensional point of view, and turn on a nite temper-
ature for the conformal eld theory which is small in planck units. if we calculate the
corresponding energy density , use the trivial equation of state p = /3, and apply
the standard equation

a(cid:19)2
(cid:18) a

=

8g4

3

 ,

(3)

(4)

what must result is the standard radiation-dominated frw cosmology,

ds2 = d 2 + a( )2d~x2 ,

where a( )2 is linear in  .1 i will always use  for four-dimensional cosmological time;
t will be reserved for the poincare time in ads5. the only diculty is nding the
constant of proportionality in   t 4: if the conformal eld theory is interacting, it
could be a non-trivial exercise even in the limit t  1/pl where gravity loops shouldnt
1there is probably no obstacle in principle to extending the calculation to positive spatial curvature.

however for negative spatial curvature i worry that the pathology observed in [23] might emerge.

3

matter. however if the theory in question has an ads dual, then the study of black
holes in ads guarantees the relation

 =

32
2

ct 4 ,

(5)

where c is the coecient for the trace anomaly in a normalization where c = (n 21)/4
for n = 4 su(n) super-yang-mills theory.2 in this normalization, a single abelian
photon has c = 1/10. there is a standard relation in ads/cft [18]

c =


8

l3
g5

.

(6)

it should be remarked that for n = 4 gauge theory at weak coupling, (5) becomes
 = 22ct 4. this is the 4/3 problem, rst noted in [24, 25], and now understood as
being a result of the strong interactions.

so far we have employed the ads/cft correspondence merely as a tool for deter-
mining a detail of the strong-coupling thermodynamics. however the calculation can
be done entirely on the ads side if we take seriously the idea that the cuto brane
is no more nor less than a coupling of gravity to the conformal eld theory. it seems
inevitable from a string theory perspective that the gravity would be quantized, and
that the detailed structure of the cuto brane encodes the details of the quantum
gravity; but by taking t  1/pl we will be able to ignore this issue. the cuto brane,
or planck brane, controls gravity, while the bulk of ads5 controls the conformal
eld theory. by assumption, the planck brane is not appreciably inuenced by nite
temperature, but the conformal eld theory is; so we should retain (2), but change the
bulk background from ads5 to ads5-schwarzschild. the metric of ads5-schwarzschild
is

(7)

ds2

5 = e2r/l(cid:16)h(r)dt2 + d~x2(cid:17) +

h(r) = 1  b4e4r/l

b = lt0 .

dr2
h(r)

here t0 is the hawking temperature associated with the time coordinate t.
it is a
constant parameter of the ads5-schwarzschild solution. the calculation will deal only
with the coordinate patch covered by (t, ~x, r).

given an orientable surface with unit normal ni (which species a notion of outside
and inside by the direction in which it points), the extrinsic curvature can be dened
i  nink)knj. we will follow [26] in taking ni to be the outward unit
as ij = (k
2the calculation of [18] shows that in the limit where classical gravity is applicable to the ads
black holes there is in fact only one independent coecient in the trace anomaly. this and (5) are
non-trivial constraints on theories which can have ads duals.

4

normal, which points toward the true boundary of ads5. there is a set of solutions to
(2) which form a foliation of the coordinate patch in question:

t
l

=

er/l
b2 +

1
4b

4

xk=1

ik log(1  ikber/l) +

t0
l

,

(8)

where t0 is a constant of integration specifying a particular leaf. all leaves have the
same induced metric since they are related by translation in t. using (2) with the same
constant of proportionality, 1/l, avoids a four-dimensional cosmological constant
more about this later. it proves most convenient to parametrize a particular leaf by
(r, ~x), where r = r is a solution of (8) for r in terms of t. then the induced metric is

if we dene

ds2

(induced) = 

e4r/l
b4 dr2

 + e2r/ld~x2 .

 = l

e2r/l
2b2

then the metric (9) assumes the standard frw form:

ds2

l

(induced) = d 2 + a( )2d~x2
a( ) = bs 2

.

(9)

(10)

(11)

thus we do indeed observe the linear a( )2 that we expected. this behavior is strictly
a consequence of conformal invariance: any conformal eld theory provides a source
term for einsteins equations just like a bunch of massless photons.

we can be a little more quantitative and rederive the coecient in (5) from the new

perspective. in the late time limit, we are safe using the relation

1
g4

=

1

g5 z r



dr e2(rr)/l =

l
2g5

.

(12)

actually this relation comes from a kaluza-klein reduction of ve-dimensional gravity
to four for a horospherical planck brane in pure ads5. it should be ok to leading
order for a brane in an asymptotically ads5 region of bulk spacetime, provided the
brane is only slightly curved on the scale l. such a brane is locally like a horosphere of
ads5. it is perhaps more common in the literature to see a modication of (12) that
arises from removing the factor of e2r/l from inside the integral. the discrepancy is
merely due to the fact that our four-dimensional metric is precisely the induced metric,
whereas more commonly the four-dimensional metric on a horosphere is taken to be
e2r/lds2
(induced), which
does seem the natural one in the present context.

(induced). the form of (12) is forced on us by the choice ds2

4 = ds2

5

combining the relation

with (12) and (6) leads to

1

a(cid:19)2
4 2 = (cid:18) a

=

8g4

3



 =

3b4

16g5le4r/l =

32
2

c(er/lt0)4 .

(13)

(14)

now, the temperature t0 measured with respect to the time t is not the same as the
temperature t measured with respect to the time  ; rather,

(15)
where we have used the relation t = 2l /b. so (14) is indeed identical to (5),
coecient and all.

t0 = er/lt0 ,

t =

dt
d

the reader who feels that the calculation of section 2 must be some sort of cheat is
reminded that string theory on ads5 is identical to a 3+1-dimensional conformal eld
theory. this aphorism is not intended to increase the sense of puzzlement, but rather
to resolve it, as follows. we wanted our cosmology to be driven by the conformal eld
theory dual to the bulk ads geometry rather than by anything on the planck brane. so
we left the planck brane in its ground state and made the bulk ads geometry thermal
by adding a black hole horizon.

it is worth remarking that i employed no stabilization mechanism because none
was needed. from a brane-world point of view, the worst has already happened: the
negative tension brane of [27] has retreated to innity,3 and the delicate near-horizon
cusp has been cut o by a nite temperature horizon. the eect of that horizon is
most transparent when viewed in light of the ads/cft correspondence: it means that
the 3 + 1-dimensional conformal eld theory is at nite temperature.

in a generic bulk geometry, the retreating planck brane would cause the four-
dimensional newton constant to change. in this regard, an asymptotically ads space
is very special: provided we use the induced metric on the planck brane (rather than
some warping of it) as the four-dimensional metric, (12) will hold asymptotically when
the planck brane is moving in the asymptotically ads region with curvatures which
are small compared to l.

that ds2

(induced) turned out to be exactly the radiation-dominated frw metric should
excite some suspicion on the part of the reader. mightnt there be quantum gravity
eects at suciently early times which modify the picture? we derived the agreement

3the reality of such a negative tension object is something i am only provisionally willing to allow
for the sake of argument, since i am aware of no fully satisfactory string theory construction of it in
an ads background.

6

between (5) and (14) using a late-time relation, (12). it seems like a massive conspiracy
that the physics of early times would arrange for the cosmology to remain exactly
radiation-dominated frw. there are limits to what we can assert about physics at
early times without specifying the nature of the planck brane.
it seems inevitable
however that (2) will receive corrections at higher orders in derivatives.

is this real cosmology? not as it stands: nucleosynthesis would be dramatically
spoiled if the hidden cft that ads5 represents had any sizable eect on the radiation-
dominated era of our universe. however it is straightforward to extend the discussion
by adding matter to the brane, and its stress tensor, t (matter)
, could take over from
t (cft)
at late times. (if all were worried about is nucleosynthesis, then late times
ij
means z < 1010). the ads/cft equation relevant to such phenomena is

ij

g(induced)

ij



ij

 8g4t (cft)
2
l (cid:20)ij (cid:18) +

 8g4t (matter)
3
l(cid:19) g(induced)

ij

ij

=

(cid:21)  8g4t (matter)

ij

(16)

.

this equation is a rearrangement of a formula obtained in [26] in the course of deriving
quasi-local stress-energy tensors for ads/cft in various dimensions.4 i have used (12)
to dene g4. it is necessary to check that visible matter does not lose energy to the
cft fast enough to spoil the cosmology. since the cfts couplings are essentially
of gravitational origin, this is perhaps plausible. an estimate will be presented in
section 4.

actually, (16) is content-free from a physical perspective: it is only an approximate
statement of translation, via ads/cft, from purely four-dimensional quantities to
quantities which constrain how the planck brane sits in the ve-dimensional space-
time. all the physics comes from setting either side equal to zero. in this section we
considered a case where t (brane)
= 0; then setting the right hand side equal to zero
amounts to requiring (2). solving (2) gave us back radiation-dominated frw cos-
mology, which perhaps sounded surprising; but the identity (16) makes it inevitable,
because if the right hand side vanishes, so must the left hand side.

ij

suppose now we knew all about the matter on the brane, and discovered that it
with  > 0.

generated a positive cosmological constant: 8g4t (matter)
assuming the ads part to be at zero temperature, we would then reduce (16) to

= g(induced)

ij

ij

g(induced)

ij

+ g(induced)

ij

2

l "ij   +

3
l

= 

+

l2

2 ! g(induced)

ij

# .

(17)

it is straightforward to show that setting the right hand side equal to zero leads to an
induced metric which is ds4. approximately this calculation has appeared elsewhere
4only i have changed the sign of the einstein tensor. this is necessary because of a dierence in
sign conventions. the derivation in section 3 will serve as a check that the signs in (16) are consistent.

7

in the literature, for instance [28, 29, 14, 16]. a direct analog in lower dimensions was
treated in [30], and a fairly general discussion of induced metrics on codimension one
domain walls in ads4 was given.

3 the general framework

the equation (16) is an approximate rst variation of a more general relation, which
is the natural extension of the prescriptions of [2, 3]:

se[ij, ] = s4d gravity[ij] + s4d matter[ij, ] + wcft[ij]

= extremum

g(induced)

ij

=ij(cid:16)sbulk[g] + sbrane[g(induced)

ij

, ](cid:17) .

(18)

the rst equation indicates a natural way of splitting up the four-dimensional eective
action into four-dimensional gravity, the cft, and the four-dimensional matter which
comes from excitations on the planck brane. the second equation is the actual state-
ment of ads/cft, which in this case includes a brane reduction of ve-dimensional
gravity to four dimensions, as envisaged in [27, 5]. wcft is the generating functional of
connected greens functions of the conformal eld theory, ij is the metric on the planck
brane, and  are the extra matter elds which live on the planck brane. the extremum
on the right hand side is taken subject to the boundary condition that the metric in-
duced from g on the cuto brane is ij. it is the saddle-point approximation to quan-
tum gravity in the bulk. if we wanted to do quantum gravity in some more complete
way (i.e. string theory), we would make the replacement extremum s  1
i logr [dg]eis,
where r [dg] represents path integration. (path integration in the sense that i mean is
ill-dened in our current understanding of string theory, but we might imagine some
equivalent way of improving the saddle point approximation). in a real string theory
model, there would probably be many more bulk elds besides the metric g that sbulk
would depend on, and they would also have to have their boundary values specied
in the extremum (or path integral). wcft would depend on those boundary values,
and there would also be new terms added to s4d gravity for the dynamics of the zero
modes of the extra elds. how much of a problem all this extra junk is depends on
the couplings to the standard model elds. the optimistic view is that such couplings
are about as important in particle physics contexts as the coupling of electrons and
quarks to gravity. the zero modes of extra bulk elds would modify long-distance
four-dimensional gravity if they remained massless, but any sort of connement or
mass generation mechanism could prevent this problem.

like all of ads/cft, (18) is a claim to be substantiated rather than an assumption.
however, no proof of it can be complete because wcft is a complicated non-local
functional of ij whose exact form would be independently accessible to us only through

8

a strong coupling qft computation. if one takes the boundary to be the true boundary
of ads5, the evidence is compelling [4] that the extremum on the right hand side of
(18) does indeed lead to the generating functional of connected greens functions for
a cft. through the uv-ir relation we understand that cutting o a portion of ads5
should change physics in the ultraviolet only. thus (18) is true insofar as it is well-
dened (that is, on the level of an eective eld theory on scales much lower than the
four-dimensional planck scale) provided we can show that s4d gravity + s4d matter emerges
from the extremum on the right hand side. that is what i will actually demonstrate
concretely. in the process i will derive (12) in a general setting, and also check that
the sign that seemed worrisome in (16) is ok.

the proof is piggy-backed on the calculations of [18]. in order to keep the presenta-
tion self-contained, i will recapitulate parts of that work. the setting is a foliation of
a ve-dimensional einstein manifold m (for instance, ads5 or ads5-schwarzschild),
whose boundary has a metric in the conformal class of a specied metric g(0), and
whose metric can be written in the form [31]

ds2

5 = gdxdx =

1
42 d2 +

1


gijdidj .

(19)

in (19) and the following equations, l has been set to 1. the metric gij can depend
on , but according to [18, 31] it has an expansion

g = g(0) + g(2) + 2 log  h(4) + 2g(4) + . . . .

(20)

here g(2) and h(4) are tensors constructed from g(0) using two and four derivatives,
respectively. the expansion breaks down after the logarithmic term, in the sense that
the g(n) are no longer covariant tensors. fortunately the rst two terms of (20) are all
that we will need. explicitly,

g(2)
ij =

1

2 (cid:18) o

rij 

1
6

o

r g(0)

ij (cid:19) ,

where

o

rij is the ricci tensor of g(0)

ij and

o

r is the associated ricci scalar.

the action under the extremum in (18) is

sbulk[g] + sbrane[g(induced)

ij

, ] =

1

16g5 zm

d5xg [r + 20] +

1

16g5 zm

d4qg(induced) [2 + ] .

(21)

(22)

we have located the cuto brane on the hypersurface m dened by the equation
 = . we have also dened

 = 0 +

16g5

qg(induced)lmatter(g(induced)

ij

9

, ) .

(23)

the constant 0 is what we will adjust to balance the tension of the planck brane
against the bulk cosmological constant. an imperfect adjustment would lead to the
ds4 induced metric, as commented on after (17). thus we are not claiming to make
headway on the cosmological constant problem; rather, we are pushing it into the
planck brane. the extrinsic curvature term in (22) is necessary in order to have a
well-dened variational principle.

extremizing (22) subject to g(induced)

5 have the
form (19) and then setting gij = ij at  =  (this is at least true up to errors which
will be subleading in a derivative expansion). then (cf. (10) of [18])

= ij can be achieved by letting ds2

ij

extremum
g(induced)

=ij(cid:16)sbulk[g] + sbrane[g(induced)

ij

ij

, ](cid:17) =

1

16g5 z d4 l

where

d

3q| det g| +" 1
l = 4z
= q| det g(0)|(cid:20)   6
2 +
oa(4) = 

here we have dened

2 (8 + 4 + )g#=


2

tr g1

0 g2  log  oa(4) + (nite)(cid:21) .

1
8

o

rij

o

rij +

o

r2 .

1
24

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

this quantity was identied in [18] as the conformal anomaly of the cft. the ads/cft
prescription as detailed there is simply to remove the terms that diverge as   0 via
local counterterms. this is the only sensible course if the ultimate goal is to take   0
so that the cuto boundary becomes the true boundary. instead we want to keep the
cuto boundary at a nite, arbitrary  and regard the induced metric ij on m as
the einstein metric of the four-dimensional world. rewriting (25) in terms of ij, one
nds

l = q| det |(cid:20)  6 +

1
2

r  log  a4 + . . .(cid:21) ,

h(4) = 0.

where now r is the ricci scalar of the metric ij and a4 is dened as in (26) only
using curvature tensors pertaining to ij rather than to g(0)
ij . one might fear that the
logarithmic term in (20) would contribute to the log  term in (27). it doesnt because
tr g1
(0)
because powers of  cancel in (27) (and  is nite anyway) there is no longer an expan-
sion parameter in (27). the expansion can only be justied as a derivative expansion,
provided that the embedding of the cuto brane in the ve-dimensional einstein space
involves only curvatures which are slight on the length scale l. combining (23) and

10

(24) with (27), setting 0 = 6, and repristinating powers of l, we nd

extremum
g(induced)

ij

=ij(cid:16)sbulk[g] + sbrane[g(induced)
32g5 z d4 r +z d4 lmatter(ij, ) + wcft[ij]

, ](cid:17) =

l

ij

(28)

where wcft includes the log  term in (27) plus all the other terms which we indicated
with . . . . we indeed verify the relation g4 = 2g5/l. also, since the ricci scalar came
in with the right sign in (28), the signs of (16) are consistent. the calculation leading
to (28) is similar to kaluza-klein reduction, the main dierence being that the relation
g4 = 2g5/l does not involve the total length of the fth dimension (which could be
innite), but rather the curvature scale of the ve-dimensional geometry. this makes
the current scenario rather dierent from those of [32], where the circumference of the
extra dimensions does aect the four-dimensional planck length.
extremizing (22) with respect to g without requiring g(induced)

= ij would amount,
at leading order in derivatives, to setting the right hand side of (16) to zero. some
higher derivative corrections to (2) and to the right hand side of (16) would be accessible
through a more meticulous treatment of this unrestricted extremization problem. the
trick of (18) is to extremize rst with the induced metric held xed and then argue (as
we have just done) that the extremization that remains to be carried out gives us the
equations of four-dimensional gravity (and brane matter if we want it), plus something
non-local which i called wcft. the claim that this something arises equivalently by
integrating out a cft is the substance of ads/cft and the basis for the suggestions
in [7, 6, 9].

ij

the argument (19)-(28) stands in relation to the observation [5] of a normalizable
graviton approximately as the derivation of the low-energy eective action of string
theory via beta-functions stands in relation to the calculation of the massless string
spectrum.

with enough terms computed in the derivative expansion of wcft[ij], it should be
possible to obtain corrections to einsteins equations and hence newtons force law to
any desired order. in fact it seems likely that the leading correction is already accessible
from the anomaly term a4. however it is more transparent to follow the analysis of
[9], where we merely dierentiate wcft[ij] twice with respect to ij to obtain the
rst correction to the graviton propagator (see gure 1). the position space two-point
function of the cft stress tensor has the form ht (x)t (0)i  c/x8.
in momentum
space this is ht (p)t (p)i  c p4 log p. the corrected graviton propagator is

g(2)(p) 
g(2)(x) 

11

1
p2 +
1
x2 +

1

p2 pl(cid:16)c p4 log p(cid:17) pl
c 2
pl
x4 ,

1
p2

(29)

g ij

1
p2

a)

cft

t

t

1
p2

4c p  log p

1
p2

b)

figure 1: contributions to the graviton propagator, following [9]: a) free graviton
propagation; b) leading cft correction. the blob between the stress tensor insertions
is intended to denote the full ht ticft correlator.

where the factors of the four-dimensional planck length are vertex factors for the
coupling of the stress tensor to the graviton. the altered propagator gives rise to
deviations from newtons 1/r2 force law, estimated already from the ads side in [5]:

f =

gm1m2

r2

 1 + a1

l2

r2 + . . .! ,

(30)

where a1 is a dimensionless number on the order of unity.5 in (30) i have used (6) and
(12) to combine c 2
pl into l2/4. i do not claim any originality for the computation
in (29) and (30). the only further addition i would make to the recorded comments
in [9] is that the coecient of leading correction is indeed computable from the cft
side: up to factors of order unity it is g4 times the central charge of the cft.

clearly, by dierentiating (18) and keeping track of all the lorentz structure we
could obtain the corrected propagator in complete detail and extract the exact value
of a1. i will refrain from entering into this computation here because another group is
pursuing similar lines [33]. it was important however to present the general outline of
the analysis because it will gure prominently in the next section.

4 preliminary estimates

note that (6) and (12) together imply that the central charge is c = 
, where
4
as usual pl is the four-dimensional planck length. for ads5 backgrounds arising
from type iib geometries including d3-branes, c  n 2 where n is the number of
x4 depen-
dence, and the a1 term in (30) included a factor of log r. these errors were due to incorrect fourier
transforms.

5in the original hep-th version of this paper, the leading correction to g(2)(x) had a log x

l2
2
pl

12

d3-branes. so n  l/pl. to be denite, let us suppose that l is on the order of
a micron. measurements of gravity in the foreseeable future might probe newtons
force law to this short a distance. from current measurements we can already say

l < 1 mm (modulo the uncertainty of a1, which i have not computed). l  1 m
means n  1029. this number seems on the high side for a string compactication:
something has to soak up the ve-form ux. d3-brane charge is conserved, so it is true
that if we managed to set n = 1029 through some arcane string theory construction, we
wouldnt worry about it wiggling. as disciples of ads/cft we would also be relieved
that ve-dimensional quantum gravity eects arent an immediate problem. however,
in order not to spoil nucleosynthesis, we should start by requiring that cft  cbr,
where cbr is the energy density of the cosmic background radiation. that translates
roughly to tcft < tcbr/c1/4, or tcft < 1014 k today if we want l on the order of a
micron.6 to summarize,

c  n 2 ,

l  npl ,

tcft < tcbr/n .

(31)

suppose the cft is cold enough to satisfy cft  cbr.7 cosmology could still be
spoiled if energy leaks too quickly from visible matter into the cft. the analogous
problem in theories with compact extra dimensions is cooling by emission of bulk
gravitons [34]. to evaluate whether there is a problem in our case, we must investigate
the mechanisms of thermal equilibration between the cft and the other matter in the
universe, operating on the assumption that the cft is very cold. fortunately the tools
are already partly in hand. standard model particles can lose energy to the conformal
eld theory through processes controlled by the graph in gure 2a). the inclusive
rates from these graphs are related to the 1/r4 correction to newtons law through
the unitarity relation illustrated in gure 2b). in particular, the inclusive rate goes
as 2
pll2. by dimensional analysis the contribution they make to the loss of standard
model energy density over time is

d!lost
  d

= a22

pll2t 9

sm ,

(32)

where a2 is a dimensionless number of order unity and tsm is the temperature of
standard model excitations. from an ads point of view, (32) is literally the rate at
which energy density falls across the horizon to be absorbed by the d3-branes. three
6it has long surprised me that ads/cft predicts   ct 4: naively counting at directions in
n = 4 super-yang-mills theory suggests   ct 4. even if this were somehow true for a special
cft, it would only soften (31) to tcft < tcbr/n 1/4.

7section 2 treated the opposite limit. one should be able to use the equation (16) with t (cf t )

= 0
to nd a hypersurface in ads5 whose induced metric is real-world cosmology. but this is only an
equivalent means to nd what we already know by solving einsteins equations. so we will cast
down the ladder and work directly in four dimensions whenever possible.

ij

13

a)

b)

g ij

t

cft

2

sm

g ij

cft

sm

t

cft

1
i

disc

cft

sm

sm

figure 2: a) standard model particles losing energy via graviton exchange to cft
excitations. b) the inclusive rate is given by a unitarity cut of the rst correction to
the graviton propagator.

powers of tsm come from the absorption cross section [20, 21, 22]; also there are powers
of tsm from the nite temperature kinematics of the standard model particles. energy
density also decreases because of hubble expansion: in total,

dsm
d

a
a

= 

t 4
sm  2

pll2t 9

sm ,

(33)

where we have dropped factors of order unity. one such factor is the central charge of
the standard model elds which are light compared to the temperature at any given
time. approximately this same factor appears in both terms on the right hand side
of (33), so it doesnt matter much for the relative size of the terms. however a2 does
matter, and so do the factors of 2 and  from the stefan-boltzmann constant that we
have suppressed in the rst factor. we have also suppressed a term in (33) for cft
energy leaking back into visible elds, but that is ok since we are operating on the
assumption that the cft is cold.

to determine whether the cft is appreciably aecting the cosmology, one should

compare the two terms in (33). their ratio is

 = 2

pll2t 5

smh 1

(34)

where h 1 = a/ a is the inverse hubble time (a function of  ). the cft will not
appreciably aect cosmology as long as cft  sm and  is small. what small means

14

in this context depends on all the factors of order unity that we have dropped. all
these factors are calculable: once we have (6) and (12) the rest is essentially kinematics.
in order to make some preliminary estimates i will assume that the hubble expansion
term in (33) dominates over the energy loss term when   1.

the state of the universe today does not lead to a dramatic bound on l: one nds

l2 

1
o t 5
plh 1

cbr  1033 cm2 ,

(35)

which is easily passed by any realistic theory. however the bound tightens as one goes
back in time. tracing the matter-dominated cosmology back to the time of last scatter
at z  104, one obtains roughly
l2  1033 cm2(cid:18)alast scatter

= 1033 cm2(cid:18)alast scatter

(cid:19)5 h 1

= 1019 cm2 , (36)

(cid:19)7/2

last scatter

h 1

ao

ao

o

still not meaningfully restrictive. tracing the radiation-dominated cosmology back
to nucleosynthesis at z  1010, one obtains (by an estimation which now may be
excessively naive)

l2  1019 cm2(cid:18)anucleosynthesis

alast scatter (cid:19)5 h 1

h 1

last scatter

nucleosynthesis

alast scatter (cid:19)3
= 1021 cm2(cid:18)anucleosynthesis

= 10 cm2 .

(37)
still this bound is satised with four orders of magnitude to spare (in l) if we suppose
l to be on the order of a micron. i emphasize the extreme simple-mindedness of the
estimates: all i have done in (37) is to write

l2 = 

1
smh 1  
2
plt 5

1

2
plt 5

cbrh 1

o

1

last scatter   zlast scatter

znucleosynthesis!3

z7/2

,

(38)

and then demand   1. the powers of z in (36)-(38) arise from the relations h 1 
a3/2 for the matter dominated cosmology and h 1  a2 for the radiation dominated
cosmology. in view of the actual number obtained in (37), a more accurate estimate
would be desirable. one can also attempt to trace cosmology back to larger z and
tighten the bound on l further, if one feels convinced that  must still be small for
z > 1010.

an independent bound on l could obtained by checking the eect on supernovas of
energy loss to the cft, as in [34]. the energy scales here are on the order of 30 mev,
so a slightly better bound than (37) might be expected.

there is yet another way to set a bound on l if we assume that the ads5 geometry
comes from type iib string theory through some freund-rubin ansatz or related com-
pactication. in such compactications, the extra ve dimensions have the same length

15

scale l as ads5. suppose ads5s5 is the relevant geometry. then the standard string
theory relation 16g10 = (2)7g2
s4 combined with (12) and vol s5 = 3l5 leads us
to

s   1634

g4 !1/6

l = g1/3

.

(39)

type iib theory has an s-duality symmetry which takes gs  1/gs. thus we can
assume that gs  1. a conventional value of  would be only a few times the four-
dimensional planck length, pl. this results in a bound on l which is also a few times
pl. in order to make l observably big, we would have to make  big too. what
is the biggest  we could possibly imagine? in the old days of string theory the
answer would have been   1 gev1  0.2 fm: this is literally the regge slope of
observed hadronic spectra. in recent literature [35], values  as big as 1tev1 have
been regarded as acceptable. plugging these numbers into (39) leads to

l < 107 cm
l < 1011 cm

for   1gev1
for   1tev1 .

(40)

the bad news is that deviations from newtons force law on length scales this small
wouldnt detected any time soon. the good news is that standard cosmology is no
problem, as far back as nucleosynthesis and further. if we assume that the radiation-
dominated frw solution still pertains, we can estimate the redshift z and the thermal
energies t at which  = 1. the result is

z  1015 , t  100 gev
z  1018 , t  100 tev

for   1gev1
for   1tev1 .

(41)

to get the numbers in (41) we have combined several approximations and assumptions.
the error in the exponent should probably be taken to be about 2. it is somewhat
suggestive that the values of t we found are within errors of the boundary of our
direct knowledge of particle physics.
if the string scale is at a tev, then physics
changes suciently there that we can no longer have any condence that the radiation-
dominated frw cosmology is relevant. thus the second line of (41) only shows that
there are no cosmological problems as far back as we can trace the theory. strings at
a gev are a dierent matter, and we will return to them shortly.

although type iib string theory provides the best-understood vacua involving ads5,
it is conceivable that some other type of string theory, even a non-critical string, could
have an ads5 vacuum: see for example [36]. for a non-critical string, (39) would not
be the right estimate, since some or all of the ve compact dimensions simply arent
there. suppose the non-critical string lives in n dimensions, with n  5. assume also
that it exhibits some form of s-duality, so that the coupling cannot be parametrically

16

large. then

l <  

pl ! 

(42)

where  = 2/(n  4). if we allow n to range from 10 to 5, the corresponding range of
 is from 1/3 to 2. it is also conceivable that some intersecting conguration of branes
in critical string theory could have an ads5 component in its near-horizon geometry,
and a dierent relation from (39) could pertain if some of the branes had more than
3+1 worldvolume dimensions. i am not currently aware of any well-dened non-critical
string theory other than the c  1 toys. nor can i give a denite example of intersecting
branes with an ads5 near-horizon geometry. besides, if the extra dimensions of the
intersecting branes are larger than l, then the salient physics of extra dimensions would
be more along the lines of [32] than [5]. for the sake of a concrete discussion, let us
stick to (39), with (42) as a possible alternative.

once we have ventured to set   1 gev1, the burning question is why all collider

physics from a gev up to a tev isnt dramatically dierent. the simplest answer is
rather iconoclastic. it is that from a four-dimensional point of view, strings are nothing
more than qcd ux tubes. for energies well above 1 gev, a better set of variables
is the quarks and gluons of the standard model.
in the low-energy regime where
strings are the good variables, we would quantize them and nd a massless graviton.
there could also be a massless open string spectrum if the planck brane involves d-
branes; such states would have to be included in the visible sector.
intuitively, the
reason why a disk diagram with two gluon boundary insertions and one bulk insertion
of a graviton wouldnt couple gluons to gravity on the scale of femtometers is that
the wavefunction overlap is small. this is the magic of extra dimensions (exploited
similarly in [32]): (39) is roughly a condition on how big the extra dimensions have to
be in the well-understood type iib string theory examples to make low-energy strings
consistent with gravity at the four-dimensional planck scale. the modied relation
(42) could be pertinent for alternative models, as discussed in the previous paragraph.
the view taken in the previous paragraph is distinct from those of [37] or [6]. wilson
loops in ads/cft usually seek out a location of large redshift in the bulk geometry in
order to lower their tension to the scale of connement. the current scenario has wilson
loops terminating on the planck brane, and the relevant geometry is the geometry near
the planck brane. i would not exclude scenarios where a large redshift does exist near
the planck brane, and the parameter entering into the regge relation is a redshifted
. if that is the way we think qcd strings are realized, then once again the bound
on l is tighter than l < 1 nm, since the  that enters (39) is the honest-to-goodness,

un-redshifted string tension.

strings at a gev seem like a natural apotheosis of the proposals of [32, 35]. we do
not have to get rid of the graviton if there are extra dimensions on the scale of a

17

nanometer. (signicantly smaller l would work in a model where (42) pertains). we do
not have to worry about nucleosynthesis if the estimate (37) bears out. but we do have
to face some hard questions. first, if l  1 nm, how do we manage to accommodate
n = l/pl  1026 d3-branes? something has to soak up all the ramond-ramond
ux, and that sounds like an impossible stretch for string compactications (see for
example [6]). we should remember however that either small gs or models where (42)
pertains could lower n. second, string theory would have to face up to hadron physics
in the energy range between pions and partons. regge trajectories are as suggestive as
they always were, but there is much more to be explained. processes where some or all
of the nal energy winds up in cft excitations could easily be a problem. however
the relevant branching ratios typically depend on l rather than , and amount to yet
another way of setting an upper bound on l. third, strings could stretch from the
planck brane all the way into the ads5 bulk (to connect with a d3-brane if one wants
to think in those terms) at only a nite cost in energy. the mass of such a string is
roughly l/, which comes out to be approximately 3000 tev if we use l  1 nm. this
is out of the range of colliders, but it is nevertheless a dangerous number for any sort of
loop computation because these strings are so numerous: there are as many of them as
there are d3-branes. again (42) alleviates the diculty somewhat: l/  1018 gev.
fourth and nally, if ux tubes are long strings ending on the planck brane, then what
are quarks?

there is a precise way of characterizing the strings stretched from the planck brane
to the horizon of ads5: they are the massive w bosons associated with the separation
of the planck brane from the l/pl d3-branes that create the ads5 geometry. the
scale of this higgsing could be lowered, say to 30 tev, if l falls suciently short of
saturating the bound in the rst line of (40). or we could return to strings at a tev and
get approximately the same 30 tev higgs scale by saturating the bound in the second
line of (40). either way, we are left with a version of [38], only with an enormous hidden
sector gauge group and strings at a gev or a tev. in [38], it seemed like coupling the
cft to gravity might resurrect the hierarchy problem. this is less of a problem if the
string scale is smaller than or comparable to the scale of soft breakings of the cft,
since gravity is a low-energy phenomenon. one may then inquire whether there is any
reason to have an ultraviolet cuto for the cft. in ads language, the planck brane
could just be a test brane moving in a ads5, with no part of it cut away. now there
is no obstacle to having a large number of d3-branes, since ads5 is non-compact. but
the existence of a normalizable four-dimensional graviton is an issue for the consistency
of the picture.

in conclusion, insisting that ads5 has to come from string theory provides a bound
on l which is sharper than we were able to obtain from nucleosynthesis, and which
appears to rule out experimental observation of (30). there are two reasons why string

18

theory demands a small l. first, l/pl  n, where n is the number of units of
ramond-ramond ve-form ux. it is hard to make this number really big in string
compactications. second, g4l6 < 4, so we can only get big l if we allow big .
strings at a gev. even this radical step only gave us l < 1 nm. if we made  even

in an attempt to be maximally optimistic about the size of l, we have reconsidered

bigger, it would only heightens the diculties we encountered trying to make sense
of gev strings. the strategies proposed in ads/cft contexts to relate strings to
qcd ux tubes generally have the property that the fundamental  is smaller than
1 gev2, implying a tighter bound on l.

5 discussion

the frw cosmology found in section 2 is an interesting check of the claim that the
alternative to compactication proposed in [5] is simply a conformal eld theory
coupled to four-dimensional gravity. however, as emphasized in section 4, the cft
shouldnt make any sizeable contribution to the actual cosmology of our universe at
times later than z = 1010. before that time, one is entitled to speculate about the
physical relevance of the solution of section 2. suppose that the cft and the visible
sector matter on the planck brane were in thermal equilibrium at some early time.
assuming that the cft has a much larger central charge, we have cft  matter, and
the solution found in section 2 should approximately describe the cosmology. at late
times one needs cft  matter. in parallel with [34], we might imagine an inationary
scenario where the inaton lives on the planck brane. then reheating directly aects
only the visible sector, and if  is small by the time of reheating there is substantially
no thermal equilibration with the cft.

in a scenario with gev strings, thermalization with the cft sets in signicantly
around 100 gev (although we must recall that the estimates here were extremely
crude). that alone might lead us to rule this case out unless a reheating mechanism
could be proposed at a lower scale.

in known string compactications, the number n of d3-branes is typically on the
order of 10. as many as 103 d3-branes were claimed to be attainable in certain
orbifold examples [6]. if we take this as a strict bound, then the relation l/pl  n
puts our entire discussion at an inaccessibly small length scale: l  1030 cm for
n = 103. (recall, pl is the four-dimensional planck scale). the formalism developed
in section 3 could still be useful for extracting a low-energy eective theorylow-
energy being interpreted now as much less than 1016 gev. standard ination occurs
around 1014 gev, so it is possible one might embed a conventional inationary model
in ads using the ds4 solution discussed after (17). the amusing aspect of such a model
is that there is a natural candidate for the pre-inationary universe: it is the radiation-

19

dominated frw solution found in section 2.

there are two solid conclusions to be drawn from the estimates of section 4. first,
our present understanding of nucleosynthesis would not be threatened if deviations
from newtons force law of the form (30) were found. we already know that such
deviations cannot be present on scales much larger than a millimeter, and this is
enough to suppress the associated loss of energy to the conformal eld theory for z as
large as 1010. second, string theory as we understand it seems to forbid an ads5 space
large enough to cause measurable deviations from newtons force law. even if we are
willing to take the string scale down to 1 gev and regard strings as collective eects
of qcd, l still cant be larger than 1 nm.

there is nothing sacred about an ads5 bulk spacetime:

it has been the focus of
so much recent literature in part because it is simple. practically any string theory
realization of ads5 will include scalar elds, and if they have a non-trivial prole, large
deviations from ads5 are the generic behavior. the literature on renormalization
group in ads/cft ows provides ample evidence of this (see for example [39, 40, 41,
42, 43, 44]this is far from an exhaustive list). only a subset of these geometries can
support nite temperature, due to boundary conditions on the scalars at the black hole
horizon. a felicitous feature of ads5, which will not be shared by generic rg ow
geometries, is that the relation g4 = 2g5/l obtains no matter where the planck brane
is in the bulk geometry. the formalism worked out in section 3 will still retain its
general features in a more generic bulk geometry, but details will be rather dierent:
for instance, it is no longer clear that the induced metric on the cuto brane will be
the einstein frame metric.

a cuto brane in a bulk geometry whose ads/cft dual is a quantum eld theory
undergoing renormalization group ow corresponds to gravity coupled to that same
qft. we might attempt to put the entire standard model in the depths of bulk, far
from the planck brane; this would be more in the spirit of [27]. such a construction
would be interesting, but ads/cft would give us little computational power over it:
in almost all the examples i know, the standard model branes would sit at a region
of strong curvatures. the exceptions are compactications of type i string theory or
horava-witten theory, where negative tension ends of the world are possible. it is
possible to develop a formalism similar to the one in section 3 for these constructions,
but it would have more the avor of an ordinary kaluza-klein reduction, where heavy
elds are integrated out and light elds are kept. the distinctive feature of (18) is that
it enables us to integrate out infrared degrees of freedom.

string theory and string dualities have taught us that extra dimensions are theoreti-
cally inexpensive. but the view of the fth dimension espoused in the current paper is
not excessively literal: rather than making the claim that there is actually a large extra
dimension of space waiting to be discovered, the statement is that an extra dimension

20

is a convenient way to describe collective phenomena of a strongly coupled quantum
eld theoryin the present case, a conformal eld theory coupled to gravity. to make
this seem more denite, suppose measurements of gravity at a micron did after all turn
up deviations from newtons law of the form (30). the ads interpretation would
be that gravitons are propagating in the fth dimension, while the cft interpre-
tation would be that a loop of gauge bosons in a purely four-dimensional theory had
contributed. which interpretation we prefer is a matter of ontology: if ads/cft is
right then they are absolutely indistinguishable on experimental grounds.
i confess
that my current ontology isnt very happy either with a cft with c  1058 or with a
fth dimension with curvatures on the scale of a micron. but it is in the subtle guises
of string duality and string compactication that i suspect extra dimensions have the
best chance of improving our understanding of the physical world.

note added

after this work was completed, i learned of [45, 46, 47], which overlap with aspects
of the present paper. i thank p. kraus, t. shiromizu, and h. tye for bringing these
works to my attention.

acknowledgements

although it is tricky to assign credit in the absence of publications, i should acknowl-
edge the important contributions of j. maldacena and e. witten. as far as i can
ascertain, j. maldacena was the rst to enunciate the view that the randall-sundrum
alternative to compactication is nothing more nor less than gravity coupled to a
strongly interacting cft; and as far as my personal knowledge extends, e. witten
was the rst to suggest a denite calculation based on the idea, namely a correction to
newtons law based on the two-point function of the stress tensor of the cft. i have
also proted greatly from conversations with h. verlinde.
i thank the participants
of the conference new dimensions in string theory and field theory at the itp in
santa barbara for lively discussionsespecially i. klebanov, m. gremm, r. myers,
v. periwal, b. ovrut, k. skenderis, s. giddings, s. elitzur, e. witten, v. hubeny,
l. bildsten, r. maimon, r. sundrum, and g. horowitz. i thank n. warner, k. pilch,
d. freedman, o. dewolfe, a. karch, e. silverstein, and s. kachru for earlier discus-
sions, and particularly d. gross for reading an early version of the manuscript and for
useful comments.

this research was supported by the harvard society of fellows, and also in part by
the nsf under grant number phy-98-02709, and by doe grant de-fgo2-91er40654.

21

i thank the itp at santa barbara for hospitality while the work was carried out.

references

[1] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal eld theories and
supergravity, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200.

[2] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov, and a. m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators

from noncritical string theory, phys. lett. b428 (1998) 105, hep-th/9802109.

[3] e. witten, anti-de sitter space and holography, adv. theor. math. phys. 2

(1998) 253, hep-th/9802150.

[4] o. aharony, s. s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri, and y. oz, large n eld

theories, string theory and gravity, hep-th/9905111.

[5] l. randall and r. sundrum, an alternative to compactication,

hep-th/9906064.

[6] h. verlinde, holography and compactication, hep-th/9906182.

[7] j. maldacena, private communications.

[8] h. verlinde, invited talk at itp santa barbara conference, new dimensions in

field theory and string theory,
http://www.itp.ucsb.edu/online/susy c99/verlinde/.

[9] e. witten, remarks at itp santa barbara conference, new dimensions in field

theory and string theory,
http://www.itp.ucsb.edu/online/susy c99/discussion/.

[10] r. sundrum, invited talk at itp santa barbara conference, new dimensions in

field theory and string theory,
http://www.itp.ucsb.edu/online/susy c99/sundrum/.

[11] s. giddings, invited talk at itp santa barbara conference, new dimensions in

field theory and string theory,
http://www.itp.ucsb.edu/online/susy c99/giddings/.

[12] j. polchinski and e. witten, evidence for heterotic - type i string duality,

nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 525540, hep-th/9510169.

[13] p. horava and e. witten, heterotic and type i string dynamics from eleven

dimensions, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 506524, hep-th/9510209.

22

[14] o. dewolfe, d. z. freedman, s. s. gubser, and a. karch, modeling the fth

dimension with scalars and gravity, hep-th/9909134.

[15] c. csaki, m. graesser, l. randall, and j. terning, cosmology of brane models

with radion stabilization, hep-ph/9911406.

[16] d. n. vollick, cosmology on a three-brane, hep-th/9911181.

[17] r. brustein and g. veneziano, the graceful exit problem in string cosmology,

phys. lett. b329 (1994) 429434, hep-th/9403060.

[18] m. henningson and k. skenderis, the holographic weyl anomaly, jhep 07

(1998) 023, hep-th/9806087.

[19] b. a. ovrut, n = 1 supersymmetric vacua in heterotic m-theory,

hep-th/9905115.

[20] i. r. klebanov, world-volume approach to absorption by non-dilatonic branes,

nucl. phys. b496 (1997) 231, hep-th/9702076.

[21] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov, and a. a. tseytlin, string theory and classical
absorption by three-branes, nucl. phys. b499 (1997) 217, hep-th/9703040.

[22] s. s. gubser and i. r. klebanov, absorption by branes and schwinger terms in

the world volume theory, phys. lett. b413 (1997) 4148, hep-th/9708005.

[23] e. witten and s. t. yau, connectedness of the boundary in the ads/cft

correspondence, hep-th/9910245.

[24] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov, and a. w. peet, entropy and temperature of

black 3-branes, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 39153919, hep-th/9602135.

[25] a. strominger, unpublished.

[26] v. balasubramanian and p. kraus, a stress tensor for anti-de sitter gravity,

hep-th/9902121.

[27] l. randall and r. sundrum, a large mass hierarchy from a small extra

dimension, phys. rev. lett. 83 (1999) 33703373, hep-ph/9905221.

[28] t. nihei, ination in the ve-dimensional universe with an orbifold extra

dimension, phys. lett. b465 (1999) 8185, hep-ph/9905487.

[29] n. kaloper, bent domain walls as braneworlds, phys. rev. d60 (1999)

123506, hep-th/9905210.

23

[30] m. cvetic, s. gries, and h. h. soleng, local and global gravitational aspects
of domain wall space-times, phys. rev. d48 (1993) 26132634, gr-qc/9306005.

[31] c. feerman and c. r. graham, conformal invariants. in elie cartan et les

mathematiques daujourdhui (asterisque, 1985) 95.

[32] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, and g. dvali, the hierarchy problem and

new dimensions at a millimeter, phys. lett. b429 (1998) 263, hep-ph/9803315.

[33] s. giddings, e. katz, and lisa randall, to appear.

[34] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, and g. dvali, phenomenology, astrophysics

and cosmology of theories with sub-millimeter dimensions and tev scale
quantum gravity, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 086004, hep-ph/9807344.

[35] i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, and g. dvali, new dimensions
at a millimeter to a fermi and superstrings at a tev, phys. lett. b436 (1998)
257, hep-ph/9804398.

[36] a. m. polyakov, the wall of the cave, int. j. mod. phys. a14 (1999) 645,

hep-th/9809057.

[37] e. witten, anti-de sitter space, thermal phase transition, and connement in

gauge theories, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 505, hep-th/9803131.

[38] p. h. frampton and c. vafa, conformal approach to particle phenomenology,

hep-th/9903226.

[39] l. girardello, m. petrini, m. porrati, and a. zaaroni, novel local cft and

exact results on perturbations of n = 4 super yang-mills from ads dynamics,
jhep 12 (1998) 022, hep-th/9810126.

[40] j. distler and f. zamora, non-supersymmetric conformal eld theories from

stable anti-de sitter spaces, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1999) 1405,
hep-th/9810206.

[41] s. s. gubser, dilaton-driven connement, hep-th/9902155.

[42] a. kehagias and k. sfetsos, on running couplings in gauge theories from

type-iib supergravity, phys. lett. b454 (1999) 270, hep-th/9902125.

[43] d. z. freedman, s. s. gubser, k. pilch, and n. p. warner, renormalization

group ows from holography supersymmetry and a c-theorem, hep-th/9904017.

24

[44] l. girardello, m. petrini, m. porrati, and a. zaaroni, the supergravity dual

of n = 1 superyang-mills theory, hep-th/9909047.

[45] p. kraus, dynamics of anti-de sitter domain walls, hep-th/9910149.

[46] t. shiromizu, k. maeda, and m. sasaki, the einstein equation on the 3-brane

world, gr-qc/9910076.

[47] e. e. flanagan, s.-h. h. tye, and i. wasserman, cosmological expansion in the

randall-sundrum brane world scenario, hep-ph/9910498.

25

