9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
1
2

 

 
 

1
v
3
0
2
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the rest-frame instant form of dynamics and

diracs observables.

luca lusanna

sezione infn di firenze,

largo e.fermi 2, 50125 firenze, italy

e-mail; lusanna@.infn.it

february 1, 2008

talk given at the int.worshop physical variables in gauge theories, dubna

1999.

since our understanding of both general relativity and the standard model of
elementary particles either with or without supersymmetry is based on singular la-
grangians, whose associated hamiltonian formalism requires dirac-bergmann the-
ory of constraints[1], it is very dicult to identify which are the physical degrees of
freedom to be used in the description and interpretation of the fundamental interac-
tions. this is the problem of the physical observables in gauge theories and general
relativity.

while behind the gauge freedom of gauge theories proper there are lie groups
acting on some internal space so that the measurable quantities must be gauge
invariant, the gauge freedom of theories invariant under dieomorphism groups of
the underlying spacetime (general relativity, string theory and reparametrization
invariant systems of relativistic particles) concerns the arbitrariness for the observer
in the choice of the denition of what is space and/or time (and relative times
in the case of particles), i.e. of the denitory properties either of spacetime itself
or of the measuring apparatuses. this is the classical mathematical background on
which our understanding of the quantum eld theory of electromagnetic, weak and
strong interactions in the modern brs formulation is based. the same is true for
our attempts to build quantum gravity notwithstanding our actual incapacity to
reconcile the inuence of gravitational physics on the existence and formulation of
spacetime concepts with the basic ideas of quantum theory, which requires a given
absolute background spacetime.

1

in minkowski spacetime, one uses the covariant approach based on the brs
symmetry which, at least at the level of the algebra of innitesimal gauge transfor-
mations, allows a regularization and renormalization of the relevant theories inside
the framework of local quantum eld theory. however, problems like the under-
standing of nite gauge transformations and of the associated moduli spaces, the
gribov ambiguity dependence on the choice of the function space for the elds and
the gauge transformations, the connement of quarks, the denition of relativistic
bound states and how to put them among the asymptotic states, the nonlocality
of charged states in quantum electrodynamics, not to speak of the conceptual and
practical problems posed by gravity, suggest that we should revisit the foundations
of our theories.

when we will succeed to reformulate classical physics in terms of the physical
degrees of freedom hidden behind manifest gauge and/or general covariance, the
quantization of the resulting theories will require to abandon local eld theory at
the non-perturbative level and to understand how to regularize and renormalize the
coulomb and radiation gauges of electrodynamics to start with.

i revisited the classical hamiltonian formulation of theories described by singu-
lar lagrangians trying to choose the mathematical frameworks which at each step
looked more natural to clarify the physical interpretational problems by means of
the use of suitable adapted coordinates. in particular, after many years of domi-
nance of the point of view privileging manifest lorentz, gauge and general covariance
at the price of loosing control on the physical degrees of freedom and on their de-
terministic evolution (felt as a not necessary luxury only source of diculties and
complications), i went back to the old concept of dirac observables, namely of those
gauge invariant deterministic variables which describe a canonical basis of measur-
able quantities for the electromagnetic, weak and strong interactions in minkowski
spacetime. instead, in general relativity, due to the problem of the individuation of
the points of spacetime, measurable quantities have a more complex identication,
which coincides with diracs observables (in any case indispensable for the treat-
ment of the cauchy problem) only in a completely xed gauge (total breaking of
general covariance).

see ref.[2] for a complete review of what has been understood till now in the
hamiltonian framework of constraint theory, where the physical observables of gauge
theories are identied with the gauge invariant dirac observables (this denition can
be extended to theories invariant under dieomorphisms like general relativity, but
i will not speak about this topic in this short review).

in the search of physical observables there are two primary problems:
a) the choice of the function space in which our classical eld theory is dened.
the existence of the gribov ambiguity in gauge theories with the associated cone
over cone structure of singularities and stratication of both the space of solutions
of the equations of motion and of the associated constraint manifold in phase space
depends on such a choice.
if the gribov ambiguity is only a mathematical ob-
struction one must work in special weighted sobolev spaces where it is absent. if,

2

instead, there is some physics hidden into it, one works in ordinary sobolev spaces,
but one has to face the above singularities and stratication, which can constitute
an obstruction already at the classical level for the construction of global dirac
observables. when this type of singularities can be avoided, the search of dirac ob-
servables is done by solving the multitemporal equations and by looking for special
shanmugadhasan canonical trasformations[3] to nd special darboux bases adapted
to the constraints of the theory and containing as a subset a canonical basis of dirac
observables[2, 4].

in the nite dimensional case general theorems connected with the lie theory of
function groups ensure the existence of local shanmugadhasan canonical transfor-
mations from the original canonical variables qi, pi, in terms of which the rst class
constraints (assumed globally dened) have the form (q, p)  0, to canonical bases
p, q, pa, qa, such that the equations p  0 locally dene the same original
constraint manifold (the p are an abelianization of the rst class constraints); the
q are the adapted abelian gauge variables describing the gauge orbits (they are a
realization of the times  of the multitemporal equations in terms of variables qi,
pi); the qa, pa are an adapted canonical basis of dirac observables. these canonical
transformations are the basis of the hamiltonian denition of the faddeev-popov
measure of the path integral[5] and give a trivialization of the brs construction
of observables (the brs method works when the rst class constraints may be
abelianized[6]).

putting equal to zero the abelianized gauge variables one denes a local gauge
of the model. if a system with constraints admits one (or more) global shanmugad-
hasan canonical transformations, one obtains one (or more) privileged global gauges
in which the physical dirac observables are globally dened and globally separated
from the gauge degrees of freedom [for systems with a compact conguration space
q this is generically impossible]. these privileged gauges (when they exist) can be
called generalized coulomb gauges.

when there is reparametrization invariance of the original action s = r dtl, the
canonical hamiltonian vanishes and both kinematics and dynamics are contained
in the rst class constraints describing the system: these can be interpreted as
generalized hamilton-jacobi equations, so that the dirac observables turn out to be
the jacobi data. when there is a kinematical symmetry group, like the galileo or
poincare groups, an evolution may be reintroduced by using the energy generator
as hamiltonian.

inspired by ref.[7] the canonical reduction to noncovariant generalized coulomb
gauges, with the determination of the physical hamiltonian as a function of a canon-
ical basis of diracs observables, has been achieved for the following isolated systems
(for them one asks that the 10 conserved generators of the poincare algebra are nite
so to be able to use group theory):

1) relativistic particle mechanics. its importance stems from the fact that quan-
tum eld theory has no particle interpretation: this is forced on it by means of the
asymptotic states of the reduction formalism which correspond to the quantization

3

of independent one-body systems described by relativistic mechanics. after a study
of the one-body problems corresponding to the basic wave equations, the two-body
drozvincent-todorov-komar model [see ref.[2] for the related bibliography] with an
arbitrary action-at-a-distance interaction instantaneous in the rest frame has been
completely understood both at the classical and quantum level [8]. its study led
to the identication of a class of canonical transformations (utilizing the standard
wigner boost for timelike poincare orbits) which allowed to understand how to de-
ne suitable center-of-mass and relative variables (in particular a suitable relative
energy is determined by a combination of the two rst class constraints, so that
the relative time variable is a gauge variable), how to nd a quasi-shanmugadhasan
canonical transformation adapted to the constraint determining the relative energy,
how to separate the four, topologically disjoined, branches of the mass spectrum (it
is determined by the other independent combination of the constraints; therefore,
there is a distinct shanmugadhasan canonical transformation for each branch). at
the quantum level it was possible to nd four physical scalar products, compatible
with both the resulting coupled wave equations (i.e. independent from the relative
and the absolute rest-frame times): they have been found as generalization of the
two existing scalar products of the klein-gordon equation: all of them are non-local
even in the limiting free case and dier among themselves for the sign of the norm
of states on dierent mass-branches. this example shows that the physical scalar
product knows the functional form of the constraints. the wave functions of the
quantized model can be obtained from the solutions of a bethe-salpeter equation
with the same instantaneous potential by multiplication for a delta function con-
taining the relative energy to exclude its spurious solutions (non physical excitations
in the relative energy). the extension of the model to two pseudoclassical electrons
and to an electron and a scalar has been done and the rst was used to get good
ts to meson spectra.

i  m2

the previous canonical transformations were then extended to n free particles
described by n mass-shell rst class constraints p2
i  0 : n-1 suitable rela-
tive energies are determined by n-1 combinations of the constraints (so that the
conjugate n-1 relative times are gauge variables), while the remaining combination
determines the 2n branches of the mass spectrum. the n gauge freedoms associ-
ated with these n combinations of the rst class constraints are the freedom of the
observer: i) in the choice of the time parameter to be used for the overall evolution
of the isolated system; ii) in the choice of the description of the relative motions
with any given delay among the pairs of particles.
2) both the open and closed nambu string[9].
3) yang-mills theory with grassmann-valued fermion elds [10] in the case of a
trivial principal bundle over a xed-xo r3 slice of minkowski spacetime with suit-
able hamiltonian-oriented boundary conditions; this excludes monopole solutions
(to have them, even if they have been not yet found experimentally, one needs a
nontrivial bundle and a variational principle formulated on the bundle, because the
gauge potentials on minkowski spacetime are not globally dened) and, since r3 is

4

not compactied, one has only winding number and no instanton number. after
a discussion of the hamiltonian formulation of yang-mills theory, of its group of
gauge transformations and of the gribov ambiguity, the theory has been studied in
suitable weighted sobolev spaces where the gribov ambiguity is absent [11] and the
global color charges are well dened. the global dirac observables are the trans-
verse quantities ~aa(~x, xo), ~ea(~x, xo) and fermion elds dressed with yang-mills
(gluonic) clouds. the nonlocal and nonpolynomial (due to the presence of classi-
cal wilson lines along at geodesics) physical hamiltonian has been obtained: it is
nonlocal but without any kind of singularities, it has the correct abelian limit if
the structure constants are turned o, and it contains the explicit realization of the
abstract mitter-viallet metric.

4) the abelian and non-abelian su(2) higgs models with fermion elds[12],
where the symplectic decoupling is a renement of the concept of unitary gauge.
there is an ambiguity in the solutions of the gauss law constraints, which reects
the existence of disjoint sectors of solutions of the euler-lagrange equations of higgs
models. the physical hamiltonian and lagrangian of the higgs phase have been
found; the self-energy turns out to be local and contains a local four-fermion inter-
action.

5) the standard su(3)xsu(2)xu(1) model of elementary particles[13] with

grassmann-valued fermion elds. the nal reduced hamiltonian contains nonlocal
self-energies for the electromagnetic and color interactions, but local ones for the
weak interactions implying the nonperturbative emergence of 4-fermions interac-
tions.

b) all the physical systems dened in the at minkowski spacetime, have the
global poincare symmetry. this suggests to study the structure of the constraint
manifold from the point of view of the orbits of the poincare group. if p is the total
momentum of the system, the constraint manifold has to be divided in four strata
(some of them may be absent for certain systems) according to whether p2 > 0,
p2 = 0, p2 < 0 or p = 0. due to the dierent little groups of the various poincare
orbits, the gauge orbits of dierent sectors will not be dieomorphic. therefore the
constraint manifold is a stratied manifold and the gauge foliations of relativistic
systems are nearly never nice, but rather one has to do with singular foliations.
for an acceptable relativistic system the stratum p2 < 0 has to be absent to avoid
tachyons. to study the strata p2 = 0 and p = 0 one has to add these relations as
extra constraints.

for all the strata the next step is to do a canonical transformation from the
original variables to a new set consisting of center-of-mass variables x, p and of
variables relative to the center of mass. let us now consider the stratum p2 > 0.
= p2(1;~0),
by using the standard wigner boost l

p) (p = l

p)




p

,





p



 (p,



 (p,

5

 = sign po), one boosts the relative variables at rest. the new variables are still
canonical and the base is completed by p and by a new center-of-mass coordinate
x, diering from x for spin terms. the variable x has complicated covariance
properties; instead the new relative variables are either poincare scalars or wigner
spin-1 vectors, transforming under the group o(3)(p) of the wigner rotations in-
duced by the lorentz transformations. a nal canonical transformation[8], leaving
xed the relative variables, sends the center-of-mass coordinates x, p in the new
set p  x/p2 = p  x/p2 (the time in the rest frame), p2 (the total mass),
~k = ~p/p2 (the spatial components of the 4-velocity k = p/p2, k2 = 1),
~z = p2(~x  xo~p/po). ~z is a noncovariant center-of-mass canonical 3-coordinate

multiplied by the total mass: it is the classical analog of the newton-wigner position
operator (like it, ~z is covariant only under the little group o(3)(p) of the timelike
poincare orbits). analoguous considerations could be done for the other sectors.

the nature of the relative variables depends on the system. the rst class
constraints, once rewritten in terms of the new variables, can be manipulated to nd
suitable global and lorentz scalar abelianizations. usually there is a combination of
the constraints which determines p2, i.e. the mass spectrum, so that the time in
the rest frame p x/p2 is the conjugated lorentz scalar gauge variable. the other

constraints eliminate some of the relative variables (in particular the relative energies
for systems of interacting relativistic particles and the string): their conjugated
coordinates (the relative times) are the other gauge variables: they are identied
with a possible set of time parameters by the multitemporal equations. the dirac
observables (apart from the center-of-mass ones ~k and ~z) have to be extracted from
the remaining relative variables and the construction shows that they will be either
poincare scalars or wigner covariant objects. in this way in each stratum preferred
global shanmugadhasan canonical transformations are identied, when no other
kind of obstruction to globality is present inside the various strata.

to covariantize the description of the previous reduced systems, which is valid
in minkowski spacetime with cartesian coordinates, again the starting point was
given by dirac[1] with his reformulation of classical eld theory on spacelike hyper-
surfaces foliating minkowski spacetime m 4 [the foliation is dened by an embedding
r    m 4, (, ~) 7 z()(, ~)   , with  an abstract 3-surface dieomorphic
to r3, with  its copy embedded in m 4 labelled by the value  (the minkowski at
indices are (); the scalar time parameter  labels the leaves of the foliation, ~ are
curvilinear coordinates on  and (, ~) are  -adapted holonomic coordinates for
m 4); this is the classical basis of tomonaga-schwinger quantum eld theory]. in this
way one gets a parametrized eld theory with a covariant 3+1 splitting of minkowski
spacetime and already in a form suited to the transition to general relativity in its
adm canonical formulation. the price is that one has to add as new indepen-
dent conguration variables the embedding coordinates z()(, ~) of the points of
the spacelike hypersurface  [the only ones carrying lorentz indices] and then to
dene the elds on  so that they know the hypersurface  of  -simultaneity
[for a klein-gordon eld (x), this new eld is (, ~) = (z(, ~)):
it contains

6

the nonlocal information about the embedding]. then one rewrites the lagrangian
of the given isolated system in the form required by the coupling to an external
gravitational eld, makes the previous 3+1 splitting of minkowski spacetime and
interpretes all the elds of the system as the new elds on  (they are lorentz
scalars, having only surface indices). instead of considering the 4-metric as describ-
ing a gravitational eld (and therefore as an independent eld as it is done in metric
gravity, where one adds the hilbert action to the action for the matter elds), here
one replaces the 4-metric with the the induced metric gab[z] = z()
b on 
[a functional of z(); here we use the notation a = (, r); z()
a = z()/a are at
tetrad elds on minkowski spacetime with the z()
s tangent to  ] and considers
the embedding coordinates z()(, ~) as independent elds [this is not possible in
metric gravity, because in curved spacetimes z
a 6= z/a are not tetrad elds so
that holonomic coordinates z(, ~) do not exist]. from this lagrangian, besides a
lorentz-scalar form of the constraints of the given system, we get four extra primary
rst class constraints

a ()()z()

r

h()(, ~) = ()(, ~)  l()(, ~)t  
[here t  

sys(, ~), t  r

sys(, ~)  zr()(, ~)t  r

sys(, ~)  0

sys(, ~), are the components of the energy-momentum tensor
in the holonomic coordinate system, corresponding to the energy- and momentum-
density of the isolated system; one has {h()(, ~),h()(, ~ )} = 0] implying the
independence of the description from the choice of the 3+1 splitting, i.e. from the
choice of the foliation with spacelike hypersufaces.

in special relativity, it is convenient to restrict ourselves to arbitrary spacelike
hyperplanes z()(, ~) = x()
r ( )r. since they are described by only 10 vari-
ables, after this restriction we remain only with 10 rst class constraints determining
the 10 variables conjugate to the hyperplane in terms of the variables of the system:

s ( )+b()

s

s

s

 s()()

s  p()

a ( ) (with the b()

(sys)  0, h()()( ) = s()()

h()( ) = p()
the 20 variables for the phase space description of a hyperplane are:
s ( ), p()

(sys)  0.

, parametrizing the origin of the coordinates on the family of spacelike
is determined by the

i) x()
hyperplanes. the four constraints h()( )  0 say that p()
4-momentum of the isolated system.
ii) b()
r ( )s being three orthogonal spacelike unit vectors gener-
ating the xed  -independent timelike unit normal b()
 = l() to the hyperplanes)
b = 4ab
and s()()
a  4()()b()
, b()
a } = 4()()b()
[enforced by assuming the dirac brackets {s()()
a ,
{s()()
the structure constants of the
lorentz algebra]. in these variables there are hidden six independent pairs of degrees
of freedom. the six constraints h()()( )  0 say that s()()
coincides the spin ten-
s
= x()
sor of the isolated system. then one has that p()
s +s()()
s x()
,

with the orthonormality constraints b()

} = c ()()()()

with c ()()()()

4()()b()

= s()()

s

, s()()

s()()

s

, j ()()

s

s

s

s

s p()

s p()

s

s

()()

()()

s

a

7

satisfy the algebra of the poincare group.

s

, because u()

s (ps) = p()

s /p2

s

s  [invariant mass of the isolated system under investigation] = msys;

let us remark that, for each conguration of an isolated system there is a priv-
ileged family of hyperplanes (the wigner hyperplanes orthogonal to p()
, existing
when p2
s > 0) corresponding to the intrinsic rest-frame of the isolated system. if we
choose these hyperplanes with suitable gauge xings, we remain with only the four
constraints h()( )  0, which can be rewritten as
qp2
~psys = [3  momentum of the isolated system inside the w igner hyperplane]  0.
there is no more a restriction on p()
s gives the ori-
entation of the wigner hyperplanes containing the isolated system with respect to
an arbitrary given external observer.
in this special gauge we have b()
ps) (the standard wigner boost
for timelike poincare orbits), s()()
system, and the only remaining canonical
variables are the noncovariant newton-wigner-like canonical external center-of-
mass coordinate x()
. now 3 degrees
of freedom of the isolated system [an internal center-of-mass 3-variable ~sys dened
inside the wigner hyperplane and conjugate to ~psys] become gauge variables [the
natural gauge xing is ~sys  0, so that it coincides with the origin x()
s ( ) =
z()(, ~ = 0) of the wigner hyperplane], while the x() is playing the role of a
kinematical external center of mass for the isolated system and may be interpreted
as a decoupled observer with his parametrized clock (point particle clock). all the
elds living on the wigner hyperplane are now either lorentz scalar or with their 3-
indices transformaing under wigner rotations (induced by lorentz transformations
in minkowski spacetime) as any wigner spin 1 index.

s ( ) (living on the wigner hyperplanes) and p()

a  l()
 s()()

a(ps,

s



s

s

one obtains in this way a new kind of instant form of the dynamics (see ref.[15]),
the wigner-covariant 1-time rest-frame instant form[16] with a universal breaking
of lorentz covariance. it is the special relativistic generalization of the nonrelativistic
separation of the center of mass from the relative motion [h = ~p 2
2m + hrel]. the
role of the center of mass is taken by the wigner hyperplane, identied by the point
x()( ) and by its normal p()
. the invariant mass msys of the system replaces
the nonrelativistic hamiltonian hrel for the relative degrees of freedom, after the
addition of the gauge-xing ts    0 [identifying the time parameter  , labelling
the leaves of the foliation, with the lorentz scalar time of the center of mass in the
rest frame, ts = ps  xs/msys; msys generates the evolution in this time].
the determination of ~sys may be done with the group theoretical methods
of ref.[17]: given the internal realization on the phase space of a given system
of the ten poincare generators [it is determined by the previous constraints] one
can build three 3-position variables only in terms of them, which in our case of
a system on the wigner hyperplane with ~psys  0 are:
i) a canonical center of
mass (the internal center of mass ~sys); ii) a noncanonical mller center of energy
~(e)
sys ; iii) a noncanonical fokker-pryce center of inertia ~(f p )
. due to ~psys  0,

sys

8

sys

sys  ~(f p )

we have ~sys  ~(e)
. by adding the gauge xings ~sys  0 one can
show that the origin x()
s ( ) becomes simultaneously the dixon center of mass of
an extended object and both the pirani and tulczyjew centroids (see ref.
[18]
for the application of these methods to nd the center of mass of a conguration
of the klein-gordon eld after the preliminary work of ref.[19]). with similar
methods one can construct three external collective positions (all located on the
wigner hyperplane) from the rest-frame instant form realization of the external
; ii)
poincare group:
the external noncanonical and noncovariant mller center of energy r()
; iii) the
external covariant noncanonical fokker-pryce center of inertia y ()
(when there
are the gauge xings ~sys  0 it also coincides with the origin x()
s ).
it turns
out that the wigner hyperplane is the natural setting for the study of the dixon
multipoles of extended relativistic systems[20] and for dening the canonical relative
variables with respect to the center of mass. the wigner hyperplane with its natural
euclidean metric structure oers a natural solution to the problem of boost for
lattice gauge theories and realizes explicitly the machian aspect of dynamics that
only relative motions are relevant.

i) the external canonical noncovariant center of mass x()

s

s

s

i

the isolated systems till now analyzed to get their rest-frame wigner-covariant
generalized coulomb gauges [i.e. the subset of global shanmugadhasan canonical
bases, which, for each poincare stratum, are also adapted to the geometry of the cor-
responding poincare orbits with their little groups; these special bases can be named
poincare-shanmugadhasan bases for the given poincare stratum of the presymplec-
tic constraint manifold (every stratum requires an independent canonical reduction);
till now only the main stratum with p2 timelike and w 2 6= 0 has been investigated]
are:
a) the system of n scalar particles with grassmann electric charges plus the
electromagnetic eld [16]. the starting conguration variables are a 3-vector ~i( )
for each particle [x()
( ) = z()(, ~i( ))] and the electromagnetic gauge potentials
aa(, ~) = z()(,~)
a a()(z(, ~)), which know the embedding of  into m 4. one
has to choose the sign of the energy of each particle, because there are not mass-
shell constraints (like p2
i  0) among the constraints of this formulation, due
to the fact that one has only three degrees of freedom for particle, determining the
intersection of a timelike trajectory and of the spacelike hypersurface  . for each
choice of the sign of the energy of the n particles, one describes only one of the
2n branches of the mass spectrum of the manifestly covariant approach based on
the coordinates x()
i  0 (in
the free case).
in this way, one gets a description of relativistic particles with a
given sign of the energy with consistent couplings to elds and valid independently
from the quantum eect of pair production [in the manifestly covariant approach,
containing all possible branches of the particle mass spectrum, the classical coun-
terpart of pair production is the intersection of dierent branches deformed by the
presence of interactions]. the nal diracs observables are: i) the transverse radia-

( ), i=1,..,n, and on the constraints p2

i  m2

i  m2

( ), p()

i

i

9

tion eld variables ~a, ~e; ii) the particle canonical variables ~i( ), ~i( ), dressed
with a coulomb cloud. the physical hamiltonian contains the mutual instantaneous
coulomb potentials extracted from eld theory and there is a regularization of the
coulomb self-energies due to the grassmann character of the electric charges qi
[q2
i = 0]. in ref.[21] there is the study of the lienard-wiechert potentials and of
abraham-lorentz-dirac equations in this rest-frame coulomb gauge and also scalar
electrodynamics is reformulated in it. also the rest-frame 1-time relativistic statis-
tical mechanics has been developed [16]. the extraction of the darwin potential
from the lienard-wiechert solution is nearly accomplished [22]. a general study of
the relativistic center od mass, of the rotational kinematics and of dixon multipolar
expansions[20] is under investigation[23].

b) the system of n scalar particles with grassmann-valued color charges plus
the color su(3) yang-mills eld[24]: it gives the pseudoclassical description of the
relativistic scalar-quark model, deduced from the classical qcd lagrangian and with
the color eld present. the physical invariant mass of the system is given in terms
of the dirac observables. from the reduced hamilton equations the second order
equations of motion both for the reduced transverse color eld and the particles
are extracted. then, one studies the n=2 (meson) case. a special form of the
requirement of having only color singlets, suited for a eld-independent quark model,
produces a pseudoclassical asymptotic freedom and a regularization of the quark
self-energy. with these results one can covariantize the bosonic part of the standard
model given in ref.[13].

2, 0) or (0, 1

c) the system of n spinning particles of denite energy [( 1

2) rep-
resentation of sl(2,c)] with grassmann electric charges plus the electromagnetic
eld[25] and that of a grassmann-valued dirac eld plus the electromagnetic eld
(the pseudoclassical basis of qed) [26]. in both cases there are geometrical compli-
cations connected with the spacetime description of the path of electric currents and
not only of their spin structure, suggesting a reinterpretation of the supersymmetric
scalar multiplet as a spin bration with the dirac eld in the ber and the klein-
gordon eld in the base; a new canonical decomposition of the klein-gordon eld
into center-of-mass and relative variables [19, 18] will be helpful to clarify these prob-
lems. after their solution and after having obtained the description of grassmann-
valued chiral elds the rest-frame form of the full standard su(3)  su(2)  u(1)
model can be achieved.
d) the study of the denition of collective and relative variables for the klein-
gordon eld, initiated in refs.[19], has been reformulated in the rest-frame instant
form[18] with a discussion of how to nd the canonical internal center of mass
of the eld conguration. also dixons multipolar expansions are studied at the
hamiltonian level on the wigner hyperplanes. now the same problematic is under
investigation for the electromagnetic eld[27].

e) the relativistic perfect uids[28].
as shown in refs.[16, 10], the rest-frame instant form of dynamics automatically
gives a physical ultraviolet cuto in the spirit of dirac and yukawa: it is the mller

10

radius[29]  = w 2/p2 = |~s|/p2 (w 2 = p2 ~s2 is the pauli-lubanski casimir

when p2 > 0), namely the classical intrinsic radius of the worldtube, around the
covariant noncanonical fokker-pryce center of inertia y (), inside which the non-
covariance of the canonical center of mass x is concentrated. at the quantum
level  becomes the compton wavelength of the isolated system multiplied its spin

eigenvalue qs(s + 1) ,  7  = qs(s + 1)h/m = qs(s + 1)m with m = p2 the

invariant mass and m = h/m its compton wavelength. therefore, the criticism to
classical relativistic physics, based on quantum pair production, concerns the testing
of distances where, due to the lorentz signature of spacetime, one has intrinsic clas-
sical covariance problems: it is impossible to localize the canonical center of mass
x adapted to the rst class constraints of the system (also named pryce center of
mass and having the same covariance of the newton-wigner position operator) in a
frame independent way. for more details see ref.[2].

in conclusion, the best set of canonical coordinates adapted to the constraints and
to the geometry of poincare orbits in minkowski spacetime and naturally predisposed
to the coupling to canonical tetrad gravity is emerging for the electromagnetic,
weak and strong interactions with matter described either by fermion elds or by
relativistic particles with a denite sign of the energy.

after having studied the canonical reduction in the 3-orthogonal gauge of a
new formulation of tetrad gravity[2, 30] and its deparametrization to the rest-frame
instant form of dynamics in minkowski spacetime when the newton constant is
switched o, the main tasks for the future are:

a) make the canonical quantization of scalar electrodynamics in the rest-frame
instant form on the wigner hyperplanes, which should lead to a particular realiza-
tion of tomonaga-schwinger quantum eld theory, avoiding the no-go theorems of
refs.[31]. the main problems to be investigated are
i) the use of the wave functions of the quantization of positive energy scalar particles[32]
to dene tomonaga-schwinger asymptotic states and a lsz reduction formalism
[since fock states do not constitute a cauchy problem for the eld equations, be-
cause an in (or out) particle can be in the absolute future of another one due to
the tensor product nature of these asymptotic states, bound state equations like the
bethe-salpeter one have spurious solutions which are excitations in relative energies,
the variables conjugate to relative times]. moreover, it should be possible to include
bound states among the asymptotic states.
ii) the search of a schroedinger-like equation for bound states by using the schwinger-
dyson equations but avoiding the bethe-salpeter equation with its spurious solutions
[2] [see refs.[33, 34] for the nonrelativistic case).
iii) use the mller radius as a physical ultraviolet cuto for the point splitting tech-
nique.
iv) see how to use the results of refs.[35] about the infrared dressing of asymptotic
states in s matrix theory to avoid the infraparticle problem[36].

b) study the linearization of tetrad gravity in the 3-orthogonal gauge to refor-

mulate the theory of gravitational waves in this gauge.

11

c) study the n-body problem in tetrad gravity at the lowest order in the newton

constant (action-at-a-distance plus linearized tetrad gravity).

d) begin the study of the standard model of elementary particles coupled to

tetrad gravity starting from the einstein-maxwell system.

references

[1] p.a.m.dirac, can.j.math. 2, 129 (1950); lectures on quantum mechanics,
belfer graduate school of science, monographs series (yeshiva university,
new york, n.y., 1964). j.l.anderson and p.g.bergmann, phys.rev. 83, 1018
(1951). p.g.bergmann and j.goldberg, phys.rev. 98, 531 (1955).

[2] l.lusanna, towards a unied description of the four interactions in terms of
dirac-bergmann observables, invited contribution to the book of the indian
national science academy for the international mathematics year 2000 ad
(hep-th/9907081).

[3] s.shanmugadhasan, j.math.phys. 14, 677 (1973).

[4] l.lusanna, phys.rep. 185, 1 (1990). riv. nuovo cimento 14, n.3, 1
(1991). j.math.phys. 31, 2126 (1990). j.math.phys. 31, 428 (1990).
int.j.mod.phys. a8, 4193 (1993). m.chaichian, d.louis martinez and
l.lusanna, ann.phys.(n.y.)232, 40 (1994).

[5] l.d.faddeev and popov, phys.lett. b25, 30 (1967).

[6] m.henneaux, phys.rep. 126, 1 (1985).

[7] p.a.m.dirac, can.j.phys. 33, 650 (1955).

[8] g.longhi and l.lusanna, phys.rev. d34, 3707 (1986).

[9] f.colomo, g.longhi and l.lusanna,

int.j.mod.phys. a5, 3347 (1990);
mod.phys.letters a5, 17 (1990). f.colomo and l.lusanna, int.j.mod.phys.
a7, 1705 and 4107 (1992).

[10] l.lusanna, int.j.mod.phys. a10, 3531 and 3675 (1995).

[11] v.moncrief, j.math.phys. 20, 579 (1979). m.cantor, bull.am.math.soc. 5, 235

(1981).

[12] l.lusanna and p.valtancoli,

int.j.mod.phys. a12, 4769 (1997)
th/9606078) and int.j.mod.phys. a12, 4797 (1997). (hep-th/9606079).

(hep-

[13] l.lusanna and p.valtancoli,

int.j.mod.phys. a13, 4605 (1998)

(hep-

th/9707072).

12

[14] k.kuchar, j.math.phys. 17, 777, 792, 801 (1976); 18, 1589 (1977).

[15] p.a.m.dirac, rev.mod.phys. 21 (1949) 392.

[16] l.lusanna, int.j.mod.phys. a12, 645 (1997).

[17] m.pauri and m.prosperi, j.math.phys. 16, 1503 (1975).

[18] l.lusanna and m.materassi, the canonical decomposition in collective and
relative variables of a klein-gordon field in the rest-frame wigner-covariant
instant form, firenze univ.preprint (hep-th/9904202).

[19] g.longhi and m.materassi, j.math.phys. 40, 480 (1999) (hep-th/9803128);
collective and relative variables for a classical klein-gordon field, firenze
univ.preprint (hep-th/9890024), to appear in int.j.mod.phys. a.

[20] w.g.dixon, j.math.phys. 8, 1591 (1967). extended objects in general rel-
ativity: their description and motion, in isolated gravitating systems in
general relativity, ed.j.ehlers (north-holland, amsterdam, 1979).

[21] d.alba and l.lusanna, int.j.mod.phys. a13, 2791 (1998) (hep-th/9705155).

[22] h.crater and l.lusanna, the rest-frame darwin potential from the lienard-

wiechert solution in the radiation gauge, in preparation.

[23] d.alba, l.lusanna and m.pauri, in preparation.

[24] d.alba and l.lusanna, int.j.mod.phys. a13, 3275 (1998) (hep-th/9705156).

[25] f.bigazzi and l.lusanna, int.j.mod.phys. a14, 1429 (1999) (hep-th/9807052).

[26] f.bigazzi and l.lusanna, int.j.mod.phys. a14, 1877 (1999) (hep-th/9807054).

[27] l.assenza and l.lusanna, in preparation.

[28] l.lusanna and d.nowak-szczepaniak, in preparation.

[29] c.mller, ann.inst.h.poincare 11, 251 (1949); the theory of relativity (ox-

ford univ.press, oxford, 1957).

[30] l.lusanna and s.russo, tetrad gravity i): a new formulation, firenze
univ. preprint 1998 (gr-qc/9807073). tetrad gravity ii): diracs observables,
firenze univ. preprint 1998 (gr-qc/9807074). r.depietri and l.lusanna,
tetrad gravity iii): asymptotic poincare charges, the physical hamil-
tonian and void spacetimes, (gr-qc/9909025). r.depietri, l.lusanna and
m.vallisneri, tetrad gravity iv): the n-body problem, in preparation.

[31] c.g.torre and m.varadarajan, phys.rev. d58, 064007 (1998); class.quantum

grav. 16, 2651 (1999).

13

[32] c.lammerzahl, j.math.phys. 34, 3918 (1993).

[33] s.s.schweber, ann.phys.(n.y.) 20, 61 (1962).

[34] l.lusanna, from relativistic mechanics towards greens functions: multi-
temporal dynamics, proc. of the vii seminar on problems of high energy
physics and quantum field theory, protvino 1984.

[35] r.horan, m.lavelle and d.mcmullan, pramana 51, 317 (1998); asymp-
totic dynamics in quantum field theory, hep-th/9909044. m.lavelle and
d.mcmullan, phys.rep. 279, 1 (1997).

[36] d.buchholz, phys.lett. b174, 331 (1986).

14

