9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
1
2

 

 
 

1
v
6
0
2
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

bonn-th-99-17

target-space duality

in heterotic and type i eective lagrangians

zygmunt lalak1,2 stephane lavignac1,3 and hans peter nilles1

1physikalisches institut, universitat bonn

nussallee 12, d-53115 bonn, germany

2institute of theoretical physics

warsaw university, poland

3service de physique theorique, cea-saclay

f-91191 gif-sur-yvette cedex, france

abstract

we study the implications of target-space duality symmetries for low-energy eective actions
of various four-dimensional string theories. in the heterotic case such symmetries can be incor-
porated in simple orbifold examples. at present a similar statement cannot be made about the
simplest type iib orientifolds due to an obstruction at the level of gravitational anomalies. this
fact conrms previous doubts concerning a conjectured heterotic-type iib orientifold duality
and shows that target-space symmetries can be a powerful tool in studying relations between
various string theories at the level of the eective low-energy action. contraints on eective
lagrangians from these symmetries are discussed in detail. in particular, we consider ways of
extending t -duality to include additional corrections to the kahler potential in heterotic string
models with n = 2 subsectors.

1 introduction

the idea of the string-driven unication of fundamental interactions has been given a new
perspective with the discovery of the web of links, usually referred to as dualities, possibly
connecting dierent string theories. evidence in favour of the existence of these links has been
accumulated through the comparison of various compactications of dierent ten-dimensional
models and of eleven-dimensional supergravity. however, for the application of these new
developments to phenomenologically relevant models in four dimensions, progress has been
made in two specic areas. first, the low-energy limit of the strongly coupled heterotic e8 e8
superstring and properties of its four-dimensional eective lagrangian have been worked out
in some detail [1][21]. second, the novel class of four dimensional chiral type i models has
been constructed through the compactication of the type iib string theory on six-dimensional
orientifolds [22][34].

the type iheterotic duality in ten dimensions of polchinski and witten [35], which ex-
changes the strongly coupled sector of one theory with the weakly coupled sector of the other,
suggests then the existence of links between heterotic and type i models in lower dimensions.
in addition, it has been realized that the volume of the compact six-dimensional space appears
as a new parameter relevant for duality symmetries. this allows the possibility that heterotic
type i duality can link weakly coupled models on one side to weakly coupled models on the
other side in four dimensions. this has even lead to the concept of a generalized duality be-
tween heterotic orbifolds and type iib orientifolds [24], relating models with dierent numbers
of antisymmetric tensor elds. and indeed, candidate dual models in the compactications
of the heterotic so(32) string have been found. however, since the underlying string theories
look quite dierent, a detailed comparison between type iib orientifolds and heterotic models is
needed either to establish the conjectured duality rmly, or to diagnose points where it breaks
down.

one obvious test of the 4d heterotic-type iib orientifold duality is related to the presence of
anomalous local u(1) symmetries. in orientifold models several independent anomalous u(1)
factors may be present, whereas in the explicitly known models on the heterotic side there is
always only a single anomalous u(1). attempts to understand the physics of the presumably
dual models with anomalous abelian factors have shed new light on the above duality conjecture,
and in fact have lead us to identify certain doubts on the validity of 4d heterotic-type iib duality
[34]. a nontrivial test of duality at the level of the 4d eective lagrangians is associated
with isometries of the 4d moduli spaces of prospective dual partners. the experience from
the heterotic superstring models tells us that very often such isometries can be extended to
symmetries of the full classical eective lagrangian. in the heterotic string models the best
known example of these symmetries are target-space dualities, which are reections of the
underlying symmetry of string theory. as such, target-space dualities are expected to be good
quantum symmetries of the eective lagrangian, which means that currents associated with
them should be free of triangle gauge and gravitational anomalies. the requirement of exact
quantum t-duality turns out to be a powerful tool in studies of the four-dimensional string
models. this symmetry restricts tree-level couplings in the eective action, and in addition
allows us to determine the structure of one-loop corrections to that action. this can be shown
to be the case of threshold corrections to the gauge couplings in orbifold models. in the present

1

paper we use target-space duality in this spirit, to generalize the form of one-loop corrections
to the kahler potential in the heterotic lagrangian.

to decide whether the 4d heterotictype iib orientifold duality holds, one has to understand
what exactly happens to target-space duality in the type iib orientifold models. in addition, if
target-space duality is there in the type iib orientifold models, this might help to reconstruct
the form of their eective lagrangians, which is crucial from the point of view of phenomeno-
logical applications. the problem of realization of target-space duality as a quantum symmetry
in eective lagrangians which might describe type iib orientifold models in four dimensions
is discussed in detail in section 3 of the present paper. we show that even in the simplest
models with only d9-branes, it is impossible to enforce cancellation of both gauge and grav-
itational target-space duality anomalies by a green-schwarz mechanism. furthermore, even
if one disregards the gravitational duality anomalies, the structure of the recently computed
threshold corrections [36] is not compatible with the green-schwarz cancellation of gauge du-
ality anomalies and seems to indicate that target-space duality does not hold at the one-loop
level in orientifold models.

however, there is more to say about the one-loop eective lagrangian. in section 4 we ex-
amine in detail specic heterotic models with respect to t-duality invariance. we explain that
further corrections to the eective one-loop lagrangian or to target-space duality transforma-
tions must arise in models with a plane xed under some of the orbifold twists. this necessity
is due to those one-loop corrections to the kahler potential which come together with the well
known holomorphic threshold corrections in models with n = 2 subsectors. the corrections
that we discuss were not taken into account in the earlier analysis of modular anomalies. in the
version of the eective lagrangian, where only holomorphic thresholds are corrected to become
covariant with respect to t-duality, the nonholomorphic corrections argued for in section 4 vio-
late t-duality severely. they do it in a way that cannot be easily repaired without introducing
additional kinetic mixing between s and t moduli. we propose such a modication, which
generalizes the nonholomorphic corrections to the form which is invariant over the full range of
the values of the t modulus. the proper inclusion of the nonholomorphic corrections discussed
in section 4 may modify somewhat phenomenological implications of the well-known heterotic
models.

2 eective lagrangians in heterotic models

2.1 classical symmetries of moduli space

dimensional reduction of the ten-dimensional supergravity gives a nontrivial kinetic lagrangian
for the universal dilaton and geometric moduli superelds, which is invariant under the action
of various symmetry transformations. geometry of the moduli space is reected by the kahler
potential

k =  log(s + s) 

log(ti + ti)

3xi=1

(1)

2

there are two obvious symmetries1 of the kinetic part of the lagrangian obtained by using this
k (for simplicity we put t1 = t2 = t3 = t in the rest of this section):

t 

at  ib
ict + d

and

as  ib
.
ics + d

s 

(2)

the rst symmetry, target-space duality, is believed to be, in its discrete form, the target-space
version of a symmetry of the underlying string theory. the second is broken down at the level of
the perturbative lagrangian to an axionic shift through the coupling to the gauge elds. this
target-space s-duality may be restored by nonperturbative eects, but this issue lies beyond
the scope of the present paper.

to make the target-space t-duality (2) the classical symmetry of the supergravity la-

grangian [37, 38, 39, 40], one needs to transform the superpotential, w, as well

k  k + 3 log(ict + d) + h.c. , w  (ict + d)3w

(3)

if one switches o all the matter and nonuniversal moduli superelds, the suitable form of the
superpotential is w (t ) = const
6(t ) where 2 is the squared dedekinds modular form of weight one.
further, it is possible to extend this clasical symmetry of the tree-level lagrangian to include
also matter and nonuniversal moduli elds. these elds transform as tensors, i.e. linearly, and
their entries in the kahler potential are modular invariant on their own (see the appendix). for
instance, the kahler potential for untwisted matter is ka = a a/(t + t ), for twisted moduli
c it turns out to be kc = c c/(t + t )3, and for twisted matter ac kac = ac ac/(t + t )2
(like in the z3 orbifold example).

2.2 cancellation of one-loop anomalies

target-space duality transformations involve sigma-model transformations, and we have to
check whether they are anomalous at the one-loop order [41], [42], [43]. by the term sigma
model we understand the supersymmetric sigma model dened through the kinetic terms of
the form gij(t, t )i j where gij = k/i j with the kahler potential2 k. the form
of the sigma model metric gij for indices corresponding to various elds was given at the end
of the previous subsection. we can see, that upon t -duality transformations the form of gij
changes, and to compensate for that change one needs to rotate the s. these rotations,
due to supersymmetry, act also on all fermions present in the model, and transform them in
the way of chiral rotations, with charges related to the modular weights of the elds (see the
appendix). this chiral transformation results in an anomaly in the divergence of the current
associated with t -duality. in addition, under t -duality the kahler potential is not invariant,
but suers a shift of the form f (t ) + f ( t ) where f is holomorphic. this shift is absorbed
in the redenition of the superpotential w , which in turn cancels against the transformation
(3) of w . such kahler transformation also results in the rotation of chiral fermions, this time
with the same charge for all chiral multiplets and just the opposite one for gauginos. this

1the symmetries which contain as a subset the invariances of the kinetic lagrangian of the moduli we shall

refere to as sigma model symmetries.

2we suppress the dependence on the modulus s as at tree level s is inert under the t -duality transformations.

3

rotation is also anomalous and the anomaly must be taken into account in addition to the
sigma-model anomaly. the anomalous diagrams can be visualized as triangle diagrams with
two gauge bosons or two gravitons and one composite connection which plays the role of the
gauge eld of t -duality. in fact, the part of the composite connection whose t -duality variation
leads to nonvanishing variation of the diagrams is v  (t t )
, since one typically assumes
that all other non-inert elds uctuate around vanishing vacuum values, hence the anomalous
graphs are simply these with im(t ) at one vertex and gauge bosons or gravitons at remaining
vertices. the sigma model anomalies can be computed in eld theory limit of string theories,
and should be cancelled for the sake of the quantum exactness of the target-space dualities.
the form of the one-loop terms needed in the eective lagrangian to cancel anomalies can be
worked out in eld theory limit, but these terms can also be directly computed in string theory
in various orbifold models, and there they have simply the status of one-loop corrections to the
eective action, with their coecients given from string theory. in the rest of this subsection
we recapitulate briey the status of these corrections in relevant classes of orbifold models.

t + t

let us start with the the simplest cases when all the orbifold planes are rotated by the
orbifold twists (e.g. the z3 and z7 orbifolds). then there are neither holomorphic threshold
corrections, nor the associated corrections to the kahler potential that will be described in
section 4, and all t-duality anomalies, gauge and gravitational, are cancelled through the
universal four dimensional green-schwarz mechanism. more precisely, the 1-loop anomalies
get cancelled by the shift of the dilaton supereld s: s  s  3gs
82 log(ict + d). then the
82 log(t + t )) which is t-duality
dilaton kahler potential is modied to k =  log(s + s  3gs
invariant. the details of that cancellation are given in the appendix. this four-dimensional
green-schwarz mechanism [44], [45], [46] is sucient to cancel all anomalies in models as e.g.
the z3 and z7 orbifolds.

in orbifold models with invariant planes, which contain n=2 subsectors, anomalies are no
longer universal and one needs additional counterterms to cancel them completely [41]. these
counterterms depend on moduli in a holomorphic way, and they are interpreted as holomorphic
one-loop corrections to the tree-level gauge kinetic functions. in the most general case, using eq.
(a.6), (a.9) and (a.11) from the appendix, one can rewrite the one-loop eective lagrangian
for the gauge elds as3:

lgk =

1



1

4 xa z d2 w aw a pc(" s + s +  +  
82 xi

82 xi
gs) lnh|(ti)|4(ti + ti)i) + h.c.

(bi
a  i

1

gs ln(ti + ti)#

i

(4)

where (t ) is the holomorphic part of the universal one-loop threshold correction invariant
under sl(2, z) t -duality transformations and approaching  1
4 t when t  . the two
terms in the bracket are separately modular invariant. from this expression one can extract
the evolution of gauge couplings, upon adding the eld-independent terms due to loops of

3 for simplicity we suppress the dependence of the threshold corrections on the complex structure moduli

u .

4

massless charged states:

1
g2

a (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)1-loop = res + re 
162 xi



1

bn =2
a,i

1

gs ln(ti + ti) 
i

162 xi
lnh|(ti)|4(ti + ti)i

ba
162 ln

2
m 2
h

(5)

where mh is the (heterotic) string scale. this expression reects already the knowledge of the
explicit string computations of the nonuniversal threshold corrections to gauge couplings, as
the coecients bn =2
are one-loop beta functions coming from n = 2 subsectors associated with
invariant planes. the holomorphic part of the universal threshold correction  (t )  remains
to be determined for arbitrary t via string calculations.

a,i

string results are naturally formulated in the linear multiplet formalism (see the appendix),
since the string degrees of freedom are antisymmetric tensor elds themselves and not the pseu-
doscalars dual to them. later in this paper we shall try to nd relations between these string
degrees of freedom and the chiral multiplets suitable for low-energy supergravity description
of the type iib orientifold models. here we merely point out that the expression of the one-
loop string coupling 1/l in terms of the eective supergravity moduli elds res and reti (the
one-loop chiral-linear duality relation (b.4)) is determined by the cancellation of sigma-model
anomalies (see the appendix).

we can now move on to the discussion of the z3 and z7 type iib orientifold compactications

and their relation to heterotic compactications.

3 target-space duality in d = 4, n = 1 type iib zn

orientifolds

let us consider orientifolds [22, 23] of type iib string theory compactied on a t 6/zn orb-
ifold [24][31]. consistency of these models (absence of rr tadpoles that would spoil the uv
niteness of the theory) requires the introduction of d-branes on which open strings can end.
if the orientifold projector is chosen to be the world-sheet parity , one can have either only
d9-branes or both d9-branes and d5-branes. in addition, not all twists leading to n = 1 su-
persymmetry are allowed by tadpole conditions (for a classication see ref. [30]); the consistent
zn orientifolds that contain only 9-branes are the odd n (z3 and z7) orientifolds.

it has been noticed [47] that the classical lagrangian of orientifolds with only d9-branes
is invariant under sl(2, r)ti transformations. indeed, the eective lagrangian describing the
dynamics of the open string and untwisted closed string sectors of these models, which can
be obtained by reduction and truncation from the d = 10 type i supergravity action, has the
same structure as the lagrangian of the untwisted sector of heterotic orbifolds:

f9 = s ,

w  c 9

1 c 9

2 c 9
3 ,

k =  ln(s + s)  xi

ln(cid:16)ti + ti + |c 9

i |2(cid:17) ,

(6)

(7)

where f9 denotes the gauge kinetic function for gauge elds of the d9-brane sector, and c 9
i
is a generic (99) matter eld associated with the ith complex plane. the addition of the

5

twisted closed string states (which are gauge singlets) does not spoil this invariance. in models
containing 5i-branes (5-branes wrapping on the ith compact plane), sl(2, r)ti is explicitly
broken by the gauge kinetic function of the (5i5i) gauge bosons, f5i = ti, but modular invariance
with respect to the jth compact plane still holds as soon as no 5j-branes are present [47].

one may then ask whether target-space modular invariance is a good quantum symmetry
of d = 4, n = 1 type iib orientifolds. although it is not clear what would be the origin of this
symmetry in the underlying string theory4, it is expected to hold at the one-loop level if heterotic
- type iib duality is valid, because then sigma-model anomalies are compensated for in the
dual heterotic orbifold models (strictly speaking, this argument does not apply to orientifolds
containing 5-branes, since these models do not seem to have any perturbative heterotic dual).
thus investigating the possibility of cancelling sigma-model anomalies in orientifolds amounts
to testing duality. also, the question of whether target-space modular invariance is a good
quantum symmetry in orientifolds is interesting on its own, even if this string duality does not
hold, because it could give us information on the eective lagrangian of those models, which
are not so well known. the purpose of this section is to investigate this question at the level
of the eective eld theory, using the information given by recent string computations.

the authors of ref.

[47] have proposed a mechanism for the cancellation of sigma-model
anomalies that is reminiscent of the way abelian gauge anomalies are compensated for in ori-
entifolds [48]. the gauge group of orientifold models often contains several anomalous abelian
factors u(1)i. their anomalies are cancelled by a generalized [49] green-schwarz mechanism
involving rr twisted antisymmetric tensors bk
 with appropriate couplings to the gauge elds.
in a more familiar chiral supereld language, those antisymmetric tensors are described by their
pseudoscalar duals ak, which lie in the same chiral multiplets mk as the scalars corresponding
to the blowing-up modes of the orientifold, ak = immk |==0. the basic ingredients of the
generalized green-schwarz mechanism are a coupling of the mk to the gauge elds,

fa = fp +

[ n 1

2 ]xk=1

sak mk ,

(8)

with fp = s for gauge group coming from 9-branes, and a shift of the twisted axions ak under
a u(1)i gauge transformation:

(9)

mk  mk + i k

i i .

f =1 m f

in eq. (8), the sum goes over independent twisted sectors, and for a twist k with no xed
plane, the mk elds are dened by mk = 1
k }f =1...nk are the states from
the kth twisted sector, each of them living at one of the nk points that are xed under k (for
a twist leaving some plane unrotated, not all twisted states t into linear multiplets, see ref.
[51]). it is interesting to note that the shift (9) is a one-loop eect in the low-energy eective
eld theory, although its string origin is a tree-level green-schwarz coupling at the level of the

k , where {m f

nk pnk

4in heterotic compactications, discrete modular transformations of the ti moduli correspond to a fundamen-
tal quantum string symmetry, t -duality. on the contrary, there is no such connection between the target-space
modular invariance observed at the level of the eective lagrangian of orientifolds and t -duality, since the
latter exchanges dirichlet and neumann boundary conditions, and therefore does not leave a given d-brane
conguration invariant.

6

orientifold. from eq. (8) and (9) one obtains that mixed u(1)gaga anomalies are cancelled if
the following conditions are fullled:

c i

a = 8 2xk

ck
a k
i

.

(10)

this green-schwarz cancellation of u(1)-gauge anomalies has been conrmed by a string com-
putation of the couplings sak and k
[36]. since the absence of u(1)-gravitational anomalies is
i
also required for the model to be consistent, it is natural to assume [47] that they are compen-
sated for by the same mechanism (this proposal has been conrmed in the recent paper [52]),

i.e. that the twisted axions ak couple to the rer term:

u(1)-gravitational anomalies must then satisfy the conditions:

1
4



trxi
12

(a + tk ak) rer .
= 8 2xk

tk k
i

.

(11)

(12)

(13)

contrary to the sak, the couplings tk have not been computed yet; however, they can be
extracted from eq. (12), since the k

i are known from ref. [36].

the authors of ref. [47] have proposed that sigma-model anomalies associated with complex
planes that are rotated by all twists are cancelled by a similar green-schwarz mechanism. the
most general possibility is that both s and the mk shift under sl(2, r)ti transformations:
82 i,s
s  s  1
gs ln(iciti + di). the sigma-gauge anomalies
must then satisfy:

gs ln(iciti + di), mk  mk  1

82 i,k

a = i,s
bi

gs + xk

sak i,k

gs .

gs and i,k

since there are generically as many green-schwarz parameters i,s
gs as anomalies, it is
always possible to cancel the sigma-gauge anomalies by means of a green-schwarz mechanism.
given the couplings sak, which are known from ref. [36], and the anomaly coecients bi
a, which
are computed from the massless spectrum, eq. (13) determines uniquely the green-schwarz
parameters that are needed in order to ensure anomaly cancellation. one nds [47] i,s
gs = 0
for all zn orientifolds of ref.
[30], i.e. the dilaton does not play any role in the cancellation
of sigma-gauge anomalies. although this last feature, which is reminiscent of the mechanism
of abelian gauge anomaly cancellation, may appear to be suggestive, it should be stressed
that it is not possible to check the conjecture of a green-schwarz mechanism on the basis of
an analysis of the mixed gauge anomalies, since there are as many potential counterterms as
anomalies. this situation is to be contrasted with the case of heterotic orbifolds with no xed
planes, in which three parameters i
gs, i = 1, 2, 3 must cancel all anomalies, thus implying
several consistency relations that can be checked in explicit models (namely the anomalies bi
a
must be gauge-group independent).

3.1 sigma-gravitational anomalies

however, one can test this conjecture by considering sigma-gravitational anomalies. indeed, any
shift of the universal and/or twisted axions under target-space modular transformations induces,

7

through the couplings (11), a variation of the lagrangian l = i
of the triangle anomaly bi
grav. assuming that the sigma-gauge anomalies are compensated for by
a green-schwarz mechanism, the shifts of the axions a and ak under sl(2, r)ti are determined
in an unambiguous way by eq. (13), therefore the corresponding coecient bi
grav read, given
the fact that i,s

gravrer that cancels part

gs = 0 in all cases:

7682

bi

bi

grav = 24 xk

tk i,k
gs

(14)

grav = bi

if a green-schwarz mechanism ensures the validity of target-space duality at the one-loop level,
then one should have bi
grav. it is straightforward to check this relation in explicit models.
for deniteness we restrict ourselves to the odd order zn orientifolds, which contain only 9-
branes and do not have any xed plane. the values of the triangle anomaly bi
grav and of the
green-schwarz contribution bi
m denotes the contribution
of the mk elds to bi
closed; since they transform non-linearly under sl(2, r)ti, they have zero
modular weights and bi
m = 27 and 21 for z3 and z7
respectively). following ref. [47], we also give, for later discussion, the separate contributions
of the open and closed string states to the triangle anomaly:

m is just the number of mk elds (bi

grav are displayed in table 1, where bi

bi

open =  dim g + x

bi
closed = 21 + 1 + bi

(1 + 2ni

) ,

mod ,

(15)

(16)

where bi
bi
grav = bi

mod denotes the contribution of the other modulinos than the dilatino, and by denition
open + bi

closed.

model

bi
open

bi
closed

bi
grav

bi

grav  24pk tki,k

gs

z3

z7

10

6

19 + bi
m

9 + bi
m

21 + bi

m 15 + bi
m

18

6

table 1

grav 6= bi

from table 1 it is obvious that bi

grav, i.e. the green-schwarz mechanism alone cannot
compensate for both sigma-gauge and sigma-gravitational anomalies. however, there may exist
some other eect that would cancel the remaining anomaly bi
grav. this is actually
suggested by the string diagramatics relevant for sigma-gravitational anomalies in open string
models, as explained in ref. [47]. indeed, only diagrams with an open string loop (the annulus
and moebius amplitudes) can contribute to sigma-gauge anomalies (as well as u(1) anomalies),

grav  bi

8

open and bi

but in the case of sigma-gravitational anomalies, there are additional contributions coming from
diagrams with a closed string loop (the torus and klein bottle amplitudes). such diagrams are
not present for sigma-gauge anomalies, because they would be of higher order in the string
coupling. the statement that sigma-gravitational anomalies are cancelled is equivalent to the
statement that all four diagram topologies should sum up to zero, and that the eld theory
limit of these string diagrams should contain both the triangle anomaly (which one can split
into two separate contributions, bi
closed) and the corresponding counterterms. the
open string diagrams are expected to provide the eld theory anomalous tree graphs that
are characteristic of a green-schwarz mechanism, since these diagrams, when considered in
the closed string (tree) channel, are suggestive of a factorized form with closed string states
propagating in the cylinder (from the cancellation of sigma-gauge anomalies, we know that
those states must be twisted rr antisymmetric tensors). the interpretation of the closed
string diagrams is less obvious. the authors of ref.
[47] assume that factorization is possible
and that these diagrams generate a one-loop mixing between the dilaton and the t moduli that
make up the sigma-model connection. however, this proposal appears to be incompatible with
the above eld theory analysis, since it would imply a one-loop5 shift of the universal axion
under sl(2, r)ti transformations, which has already been excluded on the basis of sigma-gauge
anomaly cancellation (the same conclusion would hold for an additional mixing between the
twisted mk elds and the t moduli). this suggests that the possible counterterms originating
from closed string loops are not green-schwarz terms. the only alternative possibility we can
think of would be a ti-dependent correction to the cp-odd r2 terms with the appropriate
behaviour under sl(2, r)ti, i.e.

lct =

1

322 im (t ) rer ,

(t )

sl(2,r)ti (t ) +

grav  bi
bi
24

grav

ln(iciti + di) .

(17)

however, such corrections are not expected in models which do not possess any n = 2 sectors.
moreover, they cannot appear at the perturbative level because of the peccei-quinn symmetries
associated to the ti axions. still one cannot exclude the possibility that they are generated
nonperturbatively.

before concluding this subsection, let us comment more precisely on the concrete proposal
[47]. there it was assumed that the contribution of the open string sector to sigma-
of ref.
gravitational anomalies, bi
open, was exactly compensated for by the sl(2, r)ti shift of the mk
moduli, whereas bi
closed was taken care of by closed string loop diagrams (interpreted as a
mixing between the dilaton and the t moduli, which as explained above seems to be strongly
disfavoured by the eld theory analysis). if this picture were correct, one would nd bi
grav
in all explicit orientifold models. however, table 1 shows that it is not veried in the z3 case,
although it accidentally holds in the z7 case.

open = bi

we are therefore led to the following conclusion: either modular invariance is not a good
quantum symmetry in orientifold models, which casts a new doubt on the validity of heterotic
- type iib duality; or it is a good quantum symmetry and the anomalies cannot be cancelled

5although it has been argued [47] on the basis of string diagramatics that a one-loop mixing between
the dilaton and the t moduli should not aect sigma-gauge anomalies, because it would give a higher order
contribution, this is not the case in the eective eld theory, where such a mixing would yield terms proportional

to f aef a in the variation of the lagrangian, together with the rer piece.

9

by a pure green-schwarz mechanism, even in models that do not possess any xed planes.
one would then require ti-dependent, holomorphic corrections to the r2 terms, which however
cannot arise perturbatively.

3.2 one-loop corrections to the gauge couplings

as stressed above, the consideration of eld theory anomalies is not enough to decide whether
target-space duality is a good quantum symmetry of type iib orientifolds, mainly because of
the large number of possible counterterms. although the cancellation of sigma-gravitational
anomalies already appears to be problematic, further tests of this symmetry are needed. the
one-loop corrections to gauge couplings that have been recently computed in type iib orien-
tifolds [36] give us the opportunity to perform such a test. indeed, the string result should
agree with the one-loop corrections computed in the eective supergravity theory. while the
former depends on the linear multiplets of the theory, the latter is expressed in terms of chiral
multiplets only; a duality transformation relates the two formulations. the relations between
the linear multiplets and their dual chiral multiplets are dened order by order in perturbation
theory. as is well known from the heterotic case6, the presence of green-schwarz counterterms
modies these relations at the one-loop order (see eq. (b.4) in appendix b). in the following,
we shall then try to relate the string and supergravity expressions for the one-loop gauge cou-
plings through an explicit linear-chiral duality transformation. the duality relations obtained
in this way should tell us whether the couplings needed for the cancellation of sigma-model
anomalies are indeed generated in orientifold models.

let us rst establish the tree-level duality relations. the linear multiplets we have to deal
with are the universal linear multiplet l  (l, b, ) and a model-dependent number of twisted
linear multiplets lk  (mk, bk, k), which describe the dilaton and the blowing-up modes,
respectively, as well as their antisymmetric tensor partner. the tree-level lagrangian for l and
lk has to reproduce the tree-level gauge couplings (here we consider only gauge groups coming
from the 9-brane sector) [36]

1
g2
a

=

1
l

+ xk

sak mk .

(18)

assuming no kinetic mixing between the dierent linear multiplets (this is indeed the case in
the basis in which formulae (18) is written), one nds:

l = z d4  (bl,blk) ,

 (bl,blk) = lnbl  xk bl2

k ,

(19)

where bl = l  2  and blk = lk +pa saka are the modied, gauge invariant multiplets.

following the standard procedure (see appendix b), one then obtains the tree-level duality
relations:

6green-schwarz cancellation of sigma-model anomalies in the presence of several linear multiplets l and lk

has been described in detail in ref. [51].

=

s + s

,

2

1

bl

mk + mk

2

blk =

,

(20)

10

as well as the kahler potential and gauge kinetic function that dene the lagrangian describing
the dual chiral superelds s and mk:

fa = s + xk

sak mk ,

k(s, s, mk, mk) =  ln(s + s) +

1
4

(mk + mk)2 .

(21)

one recovers, as expected, the gauge kinetic function (8). note that, since we started from eq.
(18), which is the rst order in a perturbative expansion around the orientifold point mk = 0,
eq. (19), (20) and the kahler potential in eq. (21) are valid at leading order in mk only.

at the one-loop level, the lagrangian (19) receives corrections which modify the duality
relations (20) and the lagrangian in the chiral basis (21). the loop-corrected lagrangian in
the linear basis (respectively the chiral basis) should reproduce the one-loop gauge couplings
computed in ref.
[36] (respectively the one-loop gauge couplings computed in the eective
supergravity theory [53]). for the sake of simplicity, we restrict our discussion to the case of
odd n zn orientifolds. these models do not possess any n = 2 sectors, so that the only way
to compensate for sigma-model anomalies is the green-schwarz mechanism, as discussed in the
previous subsection. the one-loop gauge couplings obtained from the string computation of
ref. [36] read:

g2

1

a (2) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)1-loop

=

1
l

+ xk

sak mk 

ba
162 ln

2
m 2
i

.

(22)

the generic expression for one-loop gauge couplings in eective supergravity theories read [53]:

g2

1

a(2) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)1-loop = refa |1-loop 

ba
162 ln

2
m 2
pl

1

162 " ca k + 2 c2(ga) ln g2

+

a  2 x

t (r) ln det zr# ,

(23)

where zr is the eective wave function normalization matrix for the representation r, and
ca = p t (r)  c2(ga). in the right hand side of eq. (23), the functions k, g2
and zr
are truncated at tree-level, while fa |1-loop includes the one-loop string corrections. since
formula (23) is valid in any supergravity eective theory, independently of its string origin,
we can apply it to the orienfold models we are considering. then fa is given by its tree-
level expression (21) (the string threshold corrections vanish in the absence of n = 2 sectors),

k = k(s, s; mk, mk) pi ln(ti + ti) where k(s, s; mk, mk) is given by (21), and zr =

r . eq. (23) then becomes:

i(ti + ti)ni

a

1

g2
a(2)

= res + xk

sak remk  xi

bi
162 ln(ti + ti) 
a

ba
162 ln

res 2

m 2
pl

,

(24)

up to terms that are suppressed both by a one-loop factor and a dependence on remk, which
we can neglect. note that the t -dependent non-harmonic corrections (third piece in the right
hand side of eq. (24)) are related, through supersymmetry, to the anomalous triangle diagrams
associated with the sigma-model connection.

assuming that it is possible to perform a linear-chiral duality transformation at the one-
loop level in a consistent way, one can obtain the one-loop linear-chiral duality relations for

11

bl and blk, as was done in ref. [36], by comparing the string expression (22) with the eective

supergravity expression (24). this gives:

= res ,

(25)

1
l

1

bk

162 ln(cid:18) res

i reti(cid:19)1/2

mk = remk 

gs ln(ti + ti) 
i,k
gs are dened by eq. (13) (with i,s

162 xi
= pk sak bk. the second piece in the right hand side of the

where the coecients i,k
cients bk are dened by bn =1
duality relation (26) then comes precisely with the coecients needed for the green-schwarz
cancellation of the sigma-gauge anomalies; however, the third piece transforms under sl(2, r)ti
in the same way as green-schwarz counterterms and seems to spoil anomaly cancellation. the
presence of this troublesome term can be traced back to the diculty of relating the string ex-
pression (22) to the supergravity expression (24) through a linear-chiral duality transformation,
as we discuss below.

gs = 0 in all models), and the coef-

(26)

,

a

the expression for the one-loop gauge couplings in the linear basis, eq.

(22), does not
contain any term proportional to ln(ti + ti). this means that the one-loop lagrangian for the
linear multiplets must contains a term7

1

82 xi,k

i,k

lgs = 

gs blk ln(ti + ti)
from the supersymmetric partners of the anomaly diagrams, pi

whose contribution to the gauge couplings exactly cancels the non-harmonic corrections coming
bi
162 ln(ti + ti). note that
a
this green-schwarz mechanism is not enough to ensure sl(2, r)ti invariance of the gauge
couplings, since the upper scale of logarithmic running, the string scale mi, is not invariant on
its own. indeed, when expressed in units of the planck mass, mi depends on the ti moduli:
i = i m 2
m 2
i /i and reti =
v i
i m 2
i is the volume of the ith
compact torus in the string metric). now the addition of the green-schwarz counterterms (27)
to the lagrangian (19) leads to the modied duality relations

i /i [30], where i is the ten-dimensional string coupling and v i

2 res (we have used the identities res = vim 6

2 res = ( res
ireti

)1/2 m 2

(27)

p l

p l

1

=

bl
blk =

s + s

,

2

1

2 " mk + mk 

gs ln(ti + ti)# ,

i

1

82 xi

(28)

(29)

which do not agree with eq. (26) and therefore yield an expression for the gauge couplings in
the chiral basis that does not t the supergravity expression (24).

one can try to solve this problem by adding to the lagrangian of the linear multiplets,

beyond the terms (27), the piece that reproduces the tted duality relation (26), i.e.

l2 =

1

162 xk

bkblk ln"bl yi

(ti + ti)#

(30)

7as stressed before in the context of abelian gauge anomalies, the couplings i,k

gs arise at the one-loop level

in the eective eld theory, although they are presumably present at tree level in the orientifold sense.

12

(l2 also modies the duality relation between bl and s, but the corrections can be neglected,

because it is proportional both to a one-loop factor and to mk). this reproduces the supergrav-
ity expression (24), but looks somewhat ad hoc; in particular, this amounts to shift the upper
scale of running to the invariant scale m 2
p l/res and to absorb the residual, non-invariant log-
arithmic term into the eective one-loop lagrangian. note that the non-invariant part of l2
has the same form as the green-schwarz counterterms lgs; as a result, this new term mod-
ies the shift of the mk elds under sl(2, r)ti and only a part of the sigma-model anomalies
is cancelled. indeed, the modied kahler potential obtained from the duality transformation is

a function of the combinations of chiral superelds corresponding to the linear multiplets blk;

then requiring invariance of k amounts to modify the shift of the mk to:

(31)

mk  mk 

1

82  i,k
gs 
a pk sak(i,k
gs  bk

bk

2! ln(iciti + di) .

the uncancelled anomaly is bi

2 ) = ba/2. alternatively, one may absorb

no longer invariant.

the terms (30) into a redenition of the twisted linear multiplets at the one-loop level, elk =
322 ln [bl i(ti + ti)]. the one-loop duality relations are then given by eq. (29), and
lk  bk
the green-schwarz couplings ensure exact cancellation of sigma-gauge anomalies. however,
target-space duality is violated at the level of one-loop corrections to the kahler potential, due
322 ln [bl i(ti + ti)]) = 0 and d2lk = 0 are

to the fact that the constraints d2lk = d2(elk  bk

we conclude that the structure of the one-loop corrections to gauge couplings in type iib
orientifolds does not seem to be compatible with the cancellation of sigma-gauge anomalies
by a pure green-schwarz mechanism, even in the simplest models with no n = 2 subsectors,
contrary to what the mere analysis of anomalies would suggest. this, together with the di-
culty observed at the level of mixed gravitational anomalies, suggests that target-space duality
is merely an accidental, tree-level symmetry of the eective supergravity lagrangian of ori-
entifold models, and strengthen previous doubts [34] on the validity of the heterotic - type
iib duality. note that it is not completely clear how the agreement between the string and
eective supergravity expressions for the one-loop gauge couplings is obtained; in this respect,
an explicit string computation of corrections to the twisted moduli kahler potential would give
very useful information.

3.3 threshold corrections and heterotic - type iib duality

we have seen that target-space duality can be used as a tool to test heterotic - type iib duality
at the one-loop level. for completeness, we would like to mention another nontrivial check based
on the comparison of the threshold corrections in candidate dual orbifold/orientifold models,
which also raises doubts on the validity of this duality (the following discussion is taken from
ref.
[36]). specically, we shall consider the z3 models, in which a perfect matching of the
massless spectra and gauge groups of both low-energy eective eld theories is obtained after
decoupling of the anomalous u(1). the one-loop gauge couplings of the z3 orbifold/orientifold
computed in string theory read [36]:

1

g2
a(2) |h

=

1
lh 

bh
a
162 ln

2
m 2
h

,

13

(32)

1

g2
a(2) |i

=

1
li

+ sa m 

bi
a
162 ln

2
m 2
i

,

(33)

where mh (respectively mi) is the heterotic (respectively type i) string scale, and m is the
symmetric combination of the 27 twisted scalars. at tree level8, the d = 10 heterotic - type i
duality implies lh = li, but this relation does no longer hold at the one-loop level. the correct
duality relation is found by expressing the linear multiplets in terms of the chiral elds s and
ti, and using the duality dictionary derived by dimensional reduction of the d = 10 duality
relations [35] h = 1
i (where h, respectively i, is the d = 10 heterotic,
h(i) is the compact

respectively type i dilaton). one nds vh = vi, where vh(i) = r dx6qg(6)

volume in the string metric, as well as9 (res)h = (res)i and (reti)h = (reti)i.

i and m 2

h = 1

i m 2

on the heterotic side, the expression of lh in terms of s and ti is given by the linear-
chiral relation (b.4), which in the particular case of the orbifold considered can be rewritten as
1
l = res 

h), thus yielding:

bh
su (12)
162

ln(v 1/3

h m 2

1

g2
a(2) |h

= res 

bh
su (12)
162

ln (v 1/3

h m 2

h ) 

bh
a
162 ln

2
m 2
h

.

(34)

this is however not yet the relevant expression for the low-energy gauge couplings, since it
holds in the trivial vacuum with a nonzero anomalous u(1) d-term, dx = 2
h. considering
the physical at direction with maximal gauge symmetry g = su(12)  so(8), along which
2
h is compensated for by vevs of the twisted moduli mk, one nally nds:

1

g2
a(2) |h

= res 

bi
162 ln (v 1/3
a

h 2) .

(35)

the change from eq. (34) to eq. (35) is due to the fact that along the at direction considered,
some twisted charged states become massive and decouple, yielding bh
a  bi
a.
this results in a shift of the unication scale from the string scale to the compactication scale
mc = v 1/3
h .

su (12)  bi

a and bh

on the orientifold side, using the dilaton linear-chiral duality relation (25), we obtain:

1

a(2) |i
g2

= res + sa m 

bi
a
162 ln

2
m 2
i

.

(36)

unlike in the heterotic case, the fayet-iliopoulos term depends now on the twisted moduli
[48, 54, 34] and the point of maximal gauge symmetry corresponds to 2
i = 0; as can be seen
from an explicit linear-chiral duality transformation, 2
i is proportional to the twisted modulus
m in the linear basis. therefore, at the point of maximal symmetry, one has m = 0 and:

1

a(2) |i
g2

= res 

bi
a
162 ln

2
m 2
i

,

(37)

8needless to say, there is a perfect matching of the gauge couplings of both models at tree-level. indeed, at
i = 0) on the orientifold side, so that

the point of maximal gauge symmetry, one has m = 0 (corresponding to 2

1
g2
a|i

= 1
li

is indeed dual to

9recall that (res)h = vh m 6

1
g2
a|h

= 1
.
lh
h and (reti)h = v i
h/2

2-torus t i) on the heterotic side, and (res)i = vi m 6

h m 2

i /i and (reti)i = v i

h (where v i denotes the volume of the compact
i /i on the orientifold side [30].

i m 2

14

which is obviously not dual to eq. (35). note that, as was noticed in [36], duality would be
restored if some (presumably nonperturbative) mechanism ensured that 2
i = 0 for rem = 0.

4 more terms in the one-loop heterotic lagrangian

4.1 one-loop corrections to the kahler potential

we now consider specic one-loop corrections to the kahler potential that are related to the
well known holomorphic threshold corrections. in the remaining part of this paper we call these
one-loop terms corrections. both types of corrections are uniquely correlated through the
anomaly cancellation ten-dimensional green-schwarz terms [44].

let us start with the perturbative heterotic string. as pointed out by green and schwarz
for the gauge groups e8  e8 and so(32) the anomaly twelve form i12 factorizes as i4x8
and all gauge, gravitational and mixed gauge-gravitational anomalies are cancelled by the
variation of well dened local counterterms. the crucial role in this cancellation is played by
the antisymmetric eld bm n , which must transform nontrivially under gauge transformations.
to recover classical gauge invariance at tree level the strength of the antisymmetric tensor eld
is modied so that it is gauge invariant and obeys dh = i4. in the horava-witten model [2]
representing the low-energy eective theory of the strongly coupled heterotic e8  e8 string,
where the two e8 gauge sectors live on opposite boundaries of the eleven-diemnsional bulk, the
role of the eective antisymmetric tensor elds participating in the green-schwarz mechanism
is played by the components cab11 of the three-form c.
in general, there can be as many
factorizable components of the anomaly form id+2 in d dimensions, as many antisymmetric
tensor elds are available in the model under considarations. a generalized green-schwarz
mechanism involving more than one antisymmetric tensor eld is at work in type i/type
iib orientifold models [24], [48]. the local green-schwarz counterterms must be added to
the ten-dimensional action of the heterotic superstring, and must be taken into account when
one performs the dimensional reduction/compactication down to four dimensions. partial
reduction of the gs terms has been performed in [55], [56], [57], and more recently in [3], [15]
in the context of the strongly coupled heterotic string.
in particular reference [57] contains
essentially the complete result. among the terms coming from this reduction the best known
ones are the axionic parts of the holomorphic threshold corrections,  f f , where  = im(t ),
which have exactly the same form in the strongly coupled and in the weakly coupled heterotic
e8  e8 string cases (they can be directly computed as the large t limit of the threshold
corrections in weakly coupled orbifolds [4], [14]). however, those are not the only relevant
terms that contribute one-loop terms to the four dimensional lagrangian. the other ones,
ignored so far, are terms involving derivatives of the matter elds. to see these terms arising
from the compactication we need the explicit form of the gs counterterms in the case of the
e8  e8 heterotic string. if we denote the anomaly associated with the twelve-form i12 by g,
the new part in the 10d action satisfying gaugesgs + g = 0 can be written as

where dx7 = x8 and x8 = 1

sgs =z (cid:18)4(3l 
24t rf 4  1

7200 (t rf 2)2  1

15

1
30

3y )x7  6bx8(cid:19)

(38)

240t rf 2trr2 + 1

8trr4 + 1

32(trr2)2. to be

specic, let us take the case of the standard embedding where f (1)
m n = rm n and the bianchi
identity is fulllled pointwise. the index on f indicates that we use the gauge connection of
only one of the two e8s, say the rst one, to solve the bianchi identity. as is well known, in
that case the rst e8 is broken down to its e6 subgroup, and the components of its connection
with compact indices give rise to scalars a in h1,1 27 and h1,2 27 representations of e6. there
are no matter elds associated with the unbroken e8. the numbers ha,b are the hodge numbers
of the calabi-yau manifold which forms the compact 6d space. the usual axionic thresholds
come from the terms which couple compact components of b, the bm n , to the f (i) f (i) term
composed of 4d gauge eld strengths. these come from the integral of 6 b x8 over the calabi-
yau space. noting that the expansion of the compact components of b in harmonics on the
cy space is bm n =ph1,1
m n (y) where z are the harmonic (1, 1) forms, the resulting
z(cid:18)f (1) f (1)zk

z  tr(f (1)  f (1))  f (2) f (2)zk

z  tr(f (2)  f (2))(cid:19)

4d coupling is

z(x)z

1
20

l =

(39)

1

i.e. the couplings have exactly the same magnitude and opposite sign for e6 and e8 factors.
the second coupling between 4d zero modes comes from the terms in sgs which contain space-
time components of b i.e. those proportional to b. the physical degree of freedom associated
with these components is the pseudoscalar dual to h = db + 3l  1
30 3y . after integration
by parts one obtains the relevant part of the gs terms

sgs, h = 6zk

hx 1
7

(40)

where the standard embedding is assumed and x 1
if we were looking at corresponding terms with (2)
same expression with the opposite sign. the couplings of interest come from the terms

1  1
2trr2). let us note that
3y then we would obtain the

7 = 1
3y (trf 2
3y instead of (1)

120 1

m n p qrsht r(am an )(trf 2

1 

1
2

trr2)p qrs

(41)

assuming the calabi-yau space with h1,2 = 0, going over to complex coordinates b1 =
1/2(a4+ia5), ...,b3 = 1/2(a8+ia9) and using the expansion [58] b1 = taxakxgank
1n, b1 =
1n, etc. with orthogonality relation for the gauge group generators t r(tax tby) =
tax ak xgan k
gabxy one readily obtains the 4d coupling of the form

l =

i
40

h(azx  ay y)xyzk

g(6)m n p qrsgt u z

m t y

n u (trf 2

1
2

trr2)p qrs

(42)

1 

4

e63/2d where g(10)

in the next step one needs to use the duality relation between h and the universal axion
d: h = g1/2
m n ) and  is related to the string
dilaton10. then one obtains the terms da  a which give rise to kinetic mixing of the
dilaton supereld s and untwisted matter superelds a. to nd the relation between the
integrals which are coecients in the terms (42) and (39) we go now to the case h1,1 = 1. then
10we recall that denitions of the universal moduli complex scalars in the weakly coupled string convention

ab = (e3g(4)

 ; eg(0)

are: s = e33/4 + 3i2d and t = e3/4 + i2.

16

the cohomology group h 1,1 consists only of the kahler class generated by the kahler form
k = igijdzi  dzj where gij is the cy metric. going over to the holomorphic coordinates one
can see that the integrand in (42) contains the factor

gmnkqmkpn = gpq = ikpq

(43)

which nally allows one to write the coecient of the 4d operator in (42) in the form of the
2rk k  tr(f (1)  f (1)) which is the same as the integral in the axionic
topological integral  1
threshold formula (39). the simple derivation we have given here is equivalent to wittens
truncation on the six-torus when one replaces gmn  mn and kmn  imn = mn. one should
notice that the antisymmetric symbol  introduced above reduces to the usual 2d antisymmetric
symbol for each two-plane of the torus in the real coordinates.

the above eld-theoretical model calculation establishes the intimate relation between the
axionic threshold correction (which is imaginary part of the holomorphic threshold correction)
and the nonholomorphic correction (42): either both of them vanish or both are present in the
4d eective lagrangian. in terms of the four dimensional chiral superelds the nonholomorphic
correction leads to the modied kahler potential

ks =  log(s + s  a a)

(44)

this mixing with the 4d dilaton supereld is expected to hold for all untwisted matter multi-
plets, including the case of h1,2 6= 0, in orbifold compactications and is also valid in the case
of nonstandard embeddings of the gauge group. the corrections to the kahler potential arise
obviously at one-loop order in the string coupling, since they come from the ten-dimensional
green-schwarz terms. the sign of the mixing terms depends on the gauge group under con-
sideration: it would be dierent for matter coming from the breaking of the second e8. the
same eect is present in the context of the horava-witten model which describes low-energy
behaviour of the strongly coupled heterotic e8  e8 superstring. let us complete this ar-
gument by summarizing the relevant calculation in the horava-witten model.
in that case
the decomposition of the eleven-dimensional metric which leads to canonical einstein-hilbert
terms in the four-dimensional action and exhibits relevant four-dimensional degrees of freedom
is g(11)
ij ). in this expression e3 is the uctuating vol-

ab = (e2(x)(x)g(4); e2(x)+2(x); e(x)g(0)

ume v of the 6d calabi-yau space in units of the reference volume v0 = rkqg(0). the real

parts of the chiral moduli superelds in the eective action are re(s) = e3 and re(t ) = e.
one should note, that the 10d source of kinetic terms for the 4d gauge elds and for 4d scalars
is the operator

1
8(4k2

11)2/3 r d10xgt rfabf ab. the relevant parts of it are
11)2/3 z d10xgt rff  +

11)2/3 z d10xgt rfm f m

4(4k2

1

1

8(4k2

(45)

where ,  are noncompact and m the compact indices, and k2
11 is the eleven-dimensional
gravitational constant. using the decomposition of the gauge elds am given below formula
(40) and the decomposition of the 11d metric in terms of ,  one obtains

lkin =

v0
8(4k2

11)2/3 z d4xqg(4)e3t rff  +

17

v0
2(4k2

11)2/3 z d4xqg(4) 6

e |a|2 .

(46)

as pointed out in [2] computing corrections to the eective lagrangian in the linear order in
perturbations of the metric of the compact six-dimensional space corresponds to substitution
v = e3v0  vv,h = (e3  0e)v0 at the visible and hidden walls respectively. the parameter
0 is given by the topological integral

0 = 

0

2(4)4/3k2/3
11

1

82zx

k  ( trf (1)  f (1) 

1
2

trr  r ).

(47)

the normalization that gives direct correspondence with the weakly coupled case is established
through v0 = 2(4k2
where one typically puts  = 1/2. in the
kinetic terms of the gauge elds this leads to the well known dierence between gauge couplings
(gauge kinetic functions) on dierent walls, and upon substitution into the second term in (45)
this gives immediately the corrections to the kinetic terms for scalars11

11)2/3 and  =

k2/3
11
0

1

(4)2/32

lkin = |a|2

t + t  0|av,h|2
s + s

.

(48)

these corrections have opposite sign for matter on opposite walls, and are interpreted as cor-
rections to the s-dependent part of the 4d kahler potential

ks =  log(s + s)  0

av,h av,h
s + s   log(s + s  0av,h av,h)

(49)

which is exactly the same expression that we have obtained in the weakly coupled heterotic
string for matter living on the visible wall (one should observe that with the standard normal-
ization of the integrals 0 = ). as we can see clearly in the context of the horava-witten model
these corrections are indeed uniquely related to the corrections to the holomorphic gauge kinetic
functions fv,h = s  0t . they both have here the geometric interpretation of the correction to
the volume of the 6d compact space induced by dierent vacuum gauge uxes on dierent walls.
in the weakly coupled regime the same eects are seen as one-loop quantum eects, and from
the point of view of the four-dimensional eective theory the matching is exact. the reason
for this matching is anomaly cancellation. the crucial observation is that the massless spec-
trum of weakly and strongly coupled theories is the same, and, hence, that ten-dimensional and
eleven-dimensional green-schwarz terms participating in anomaly cancellation must be strictly
related to each other. the most relevant term in the compactication down to four dimensions
is the topological term c  g g of eleven dimensional horava-witten lagrangian, where c is
the eleven-dimensional three-form eld and g is its modied strength. it turns out that com-
pactication12 of the components with the index structure  ijkl 11m n ggijklc11m n
produces in four dimensions axionic parts of the threshold corrections

l(4) = 1
k2
11

0

24(cid:16) k11

4(cid:17)4/3

tr(f (1) f (1))hzrx z  (tr(f (1)  f (1))  1

11we remove the factor of 12 through rescaling of matter elds a.
12the compactication includes here substitution of the lowest order nontrivial solutions for g along the

4tr(r  r))i
 1

2 tr(f (2)  f (2))

eleventh dimension.

18

+ 1
k2
11

0

24(cid:16) k11

4(cid:17)4/3

tr(f (2) f (2))hzrx z  (tr(f (2)  f (2))  1

4tr(r  r))i .
 1

2tr(f (1)  f (1))

(50)

these expressions, after substitution of 0, coincide with the axionic threshold corrections given
in (39). in the same way the results of the compactication of the part of the cgg with the
index structure m n  ijkl 11 gm n gijklc11 coincide precisely with the da  a terms
given in (42) for matter in the visible sector (the sign would be the opposite one if we had matter
in the hidden e8 sector). zero modes of the c11m n and c11 coincide with the axions which are
zero modes of bm n and b. thus we can see, that the relation between holomorphic threshold
corrections and the -corrections to the kahler potential receives even stronger support when
viewed from the perspective of the strongly coupled heterotic models. there both types of 4d
terms come from the topological term of the eleven dimensional supergravity, which is uniquely
constrained by supersymmetry and by anomaly cancellation. either both types of terms are
present, or both should be absent in any heterotic model. with the present observation taken
into account the 4d eective lagrangians from the weakly and strongly coupled theories look
exactly equivalent at the - respectively - one loop and linear in cy deformation orders13.

equally important from the point of view of the rest of the present paper is the observation,
that it is natural to expect the corrections to ks to have the same nature also in the heterotic
so(32) models. the structure of the green-schwarz terms is in this case very much the
same as described above and to be specic one can think of the decomposition so(32) 
su(3)  u(1)  so(26) where su(3) is identied with the holonomy group of the calabi-yau
space in analogy with the calculation presented earlier in this section.

4.2 modular transformations in the presence of -corrections to the

kahler function

as argued in the previous section in the (2,2) compactications with holomorphic threshold
corrections to the gauge couplings we expect the presence of nonholomorphic corrections which
have a natural interpretation of one-loop contributions to the kahler function. in what follows
we restrict ourselves to the stndard embedding, with matter in the visible e6 sector only. then
in the most symmetric case, with just the single t-modulus, the relevant parts of the kahler
function and the kinetic function are

k =  log(s + s +

3gs
42 log(t + t )  a a)  3 log(t + t ) +

a a
t + t

f = s  (

6


+

3
22 ) log 2(t ) + (t )

(51)

(52)

where  is a computable numerical parameter and (t ) is the holomorhic part of universal one-
loop threshold correction which is invariant under the sl(2, z) t-duality transformations and
approaches  1
42 log(ict + d), t  atib
13this concerns here models without ve-branes in the 5d bulk on the strongly coupled side.

4 t as t  . with the transformations s  s + 3gs

ict +d

19

the model given by the above k and f is no longer invariant at one loop. one can cancel the
variation of the -term in ks with a combination of the two modied transformations14:

 s  s + 3gs
 t  t = atib

ict +d  t

42 log(ict + d) + s a a(

1

(ict +d)(ic t +d)  1)/2,

22
3gs

(ict +d)(ic t +d)1
(ict +d)2(ic t +d)2 (t + t )a a.

where s +t = 1. any combination of s is troublesome. first, let us note that the new terms
should not be counted in pck which enters the nonlocal term representing the triangle graphs
with a kahler or sigma-model connection, as that would be a higher order eect. second,
the new terms turn a chiral supereld into a general supereld. let us look more closely
at various possibilities. the new terms in the transformation of s do not spoil the anomaly
cancellation, but they vary at one-loop order the physical, 1pi, gauge coupling constant, which
is not consistent with the symmetry. these terms in the transformation of t are proportional to
the ratio of two parameters  and gs. one can assume that this ratio is small and treat these
new terms as one-loop contributions. then one should drop it in the t-dependent threshold
corrections to gauge couplings, but the kahler function kt =  log(t + t ) becomes non-
covariant, and there is no suitable term to restore covariance. one should observe for instance,
that although the t + t and |(t )|4 both transform identically with respect to the tree-
level modular transformations, their derivatives are completly dierent, hence the higher order
terms in the expansion in powers of |a|2 of their images under the full transformations cannot
be matched to restore the covariance.
to see this more explicitly lets us assume the kahler potential for the supereld t in the form

kt =  log(t + t + |(t )|4)

(53)

the requirement that the covariance is restored at one-loop gives a solution for the coecient
 (we put here t = 1 for convenience)

 = 

1
4

|(t )|4
re(g2(t ))

(54)

where t = (at  ib)/(ict + d). this solution obviously does not make sense, as the coecient
 turns out to be a function depending on the parameters of the modular transformation. let
us note, that the form of the above solution suggests that one could try another counterterm,

kt =  log(t + t +



| g2(t )|

)

(55)

14this form of modied t -duality transformation is reminiscent of the situation in the (2,2) orbifold models
when the moduli c, charged under the subgroup h from the decomposition h  e6  e8 of the orbifold gauge
group are to obtain an expectation value. then the transformation of t is no longer an sl(2, z) transformation,
but becomes extended in a holomorphic way by terms which can be represented in the form of the power-law
expansion in the blowing-up moduli c: t  at ib
ict +d + gn(t )cn, n  3 [39]. one should notice, that when the
duality transformation gets modied at tree level due to blowing up of the orbifold, either the transformation
of s must get further modied at one loop, or the t-dependent counterterm under the logarithm must change
to keep the k(s, s) invariant.

20

where g2 is the covariant version of the eisenstein form g2(t ), transforming with modular
weight 2. it is a straightforward calculation to nd out that this form of the counterterm does
not work, however, as under 

3gs

24 (ict + d)2 g4(t )
g2(t )
(ic t +d)2

+

g2(t )  g2(t ) = g2(t )(cid:18)1 + a a(cid:18) 5
g2(t )  4ic(ict + d) g2(t )

g2(t )  42c2

g2(t )

2(t )

(t + t )2

+ 4

g2(t ) (cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)

24(cid:18)(ict + d)2 g2
 1
(ict +d)(ic t +d)1
with  =  22
(ict +d)2(ic t +d)2 (t + t ). hence, once again, one obtains a coecient  that
depends explicitly on the transformation parameters.
finally, one could ask whether, when we take s 6= 0, in the gauge kinetic function f the
new term due to transformation of s, as, would not cancel against the term at from the
transformation of t . the point is that as  gs and at  2/gs, hence the terms are of
dierent orders in loop expansion parameters. in other words, such cancellation would require
certain conspiracy between  and gs  quantities which have very dierent microscopic origin
and in principle do not need to be related.
in addition, even a successful cancellation in f
would not solve the problem of the covariance of kt .

(56)

the problem which we have described in this section does not imply neccesarily that target-
space duality does not hold in the heterotic string models. on the contrary, there are very
good reasons to believe that it is an exact symmetry of many heterotic compactications and
as such should be representable in the eective lagrangian. we would rather argue that there
should exist further nonperturbative contributions to the kahler function for moduli and matter
elds. to illustrate these statements, let us recall that we have identied the corrections to
the kinetic terms in eld theoretical limit, i.e. in the limiting domain of large re(t ). in this
limit the gauge kinetic function is f = s  t (for e6 and e8 sectors) which is at odds with the
usual form of t -duality. to establish t -duality one needs to promote t in the f to log 2(t )
plus sl(2, z)-invariant universal terms. this is the necessary extension of f to the case of
arbitrary, both large and small, values of re(t ). similar nontrivial extension of ks is likely to
be necessary to restore one-loop duality in the full eective lagrangian, valid over the whole
moduli space. the possible form of the generalized kahler function could be

k(s, s; a, a) =  log(s + s  a a

log(j(t )  744) + log(j( t )  744)

2(t + t )

)

(57)

where j(t ) is the sl(2, z)-invariant form. with the expression (57) substituted into the kahler
function the lagrangian becomes modular invariant at the one-loop level without the need to
modify the standard t-duality transformation for moduli and matter elds. also, in the large t
limit it reduces to the expressions which we have computed in the section 4.1 . the expression
(57) is not the only one which fullls these conditions. there exist other possible choices15,

15for instance:

k(s, s; a, a) =  log(s + s  a a|(t )|4 |j(t )  744|1/6) ,

k(s, s; a, a) =  log(s + s  a a| g2(t )|( 1

3 

log(j(t )744)+log(j( t )744) )1/2) .

4

to name just two examples. also, these are lowest order terms in the expansion in a a. the exact form has to
be determined by string calculations.

21

with a dierent behaviour at small t .

however, it still makes sense to discuss the eective lagrangians with the perturbative form
of ks (including -terms) and to compare them to perturbative lagrangians coming from other
compactications, having in mind that one restricts oneself to a part of moduli space where
re(t ) >> 1 in natural units and compare terms that might violate t -duality.

the kinetic mixing between the dilaton modulus s and matter elds transforming like
tensors under sl(2, z) leaves some questions concerning heterotictype iib orientifold duality.
on one hand it spoils the one-loop duality invariance of the naive eective lagrangian, thus
making the situation more symmetric between the two classes of models - t-duality could be
violated at one-loop level in a region of moduli space in both of the models. however, the way
it would actually be violated seems to be completely dierent on both sides. moreover, we
recall, that we believe that in orbifold models corrections are due to the existence of n = 2
subsectors. hence, in this respect, making relations with orbifold models is justied in the
analysis of the orientifolds like the z6 one (whose dual partner is not known). in addition, we
do not expect similar matter-dilaton kinetic mixing in type iib orientifold models. the reason
is that there exists no one-loop coupling between the untwisted antisymmetric tensor eld,
corresponding to the imaginary part of the dilaton, and gauge elds. if the intuition gained
during the analysis of the anomaly cancelling counterterms in heterotic models is correct, the
kinetic mixing terms would rather be partners of the b(k) f (k) couplings. speculating further,
4(mk + mk + kak ak)2 to the
by the same token we would expect modications of the form 1
kahler functions of twisted moduli dual to twisted antisymmetric tensor elds, which have not
been seen in explicit calculations.

5 conclusions

many of the properties of string theory can be understood through a study of symmetries. in
view of possible phenomenological applications it is important to incorporate such symmetries
(if possible) into the low-energy eective eld theory actions. we have seen that target-space
duality is a very useful symmetry, able to constrain severely those eective actions.
in the
framework of simple compactication schemes of the heterotic theories, target-space duality
can be incorporated successfully. this even goes beyond the classical level and constrains the
one-loop eective action, including a mechanism for cancellation of all target-space anomalies.
in the rst part of the paper we recall the discussion of the simplest cases, z3 and z7
heterotic orbifolds, in detail. we then try to extend this picture to certain type iib orientifold
models (again z3 and z7), that have received some attention recently. one of the results of this
paper is the observation that target-space duality now suers from anomalies that cannot be
cancelled by a mechanism similar to that in the heterotic case. the failure at the level of sigma-
gravitational anomalies could in principle be repaired by t -dependent corrections to the cp-odd
r2 terms, but those would have to arise nonperturbatively. our results (independently of the
question of interpretation) strengthen the earlier arguments against a conjectured duality of a
certain class of heterotic-type iib orientifold models. target-space dualities can be cancelled
on the heterotic side, while no such satisfactory eld theoretical cancellation mechanism seems
to be at work in the considered z3 and z7 type iib orientifolds.

22

another face of the problem with t-duality, and consequently with heterotictype iib ori-
entifold duality, shows up when one tries to interpret the threshold corrections that have been
recently computed in zn orientifold models in the light of the cancellation mechanism suggested
by the eld-theoretical analysis of anomalies. in heterotic orbifolds, the structure of threshold
corrections is intimately linked to the mechanism of mixed sigma-model-gauge anomaly can-
cellation, and one can actually infer from the explicit form of the one-loop corrections to gauge
couplings how these anomalies are precisely compensated for. the interpretation of threshold
corrections in orientifolds is less obvious due to the fact that the upper scale of logarithmic
running is not modular invariant. upon performing the linear-chiral duality transformation
that relates the string result to the one-loop gauge couplings computed in the eective super-
gravity theory, one nds that this results in the impossibility to ensure target-space duality at
the one-loop level: either sigma-gauge anomalies are cancelled, but the twisted moduli kahler
potential is not invariant; or the shift of the twisted moduli leaves an uncancelled anomaly. of
course, these results may simply point out that some nonperturbative terms in the orientifold
lagrangian are still missing, and in any case further string calculations in these models are
truly needed. however, as far as one can trust the eld theory approach, we have seen that
target-space symmetries are a powerful tool to study and test conjectured relations between
various string theories and the structure of their eective lagrangians.

it is well established that on the heterotic side, a symmetry that corresponds to t -duality
does exist at the level of string theory. therefore, a suitable description of this symmetry should
be possible at the level of the eld theoretic low-energy eective lagrangian. as we have seen
earlier, this works without problems in the simplest models.
in section 4 we report on an
attempt to generalize this to more general cases (e.g. to those models which contain n = 2
subsectors). we point out that a manifestly symmetric incorporation of t-duality becomes
problematic due to the appearance of one-loop corrections to the kahler potential. several
possibilities to make these terms consistent with t-duality are proposed. here the question
arises, whether string theory can be approximated by a single unique low-energy eective
action. after all, the traditional approach treated this action as relevant for the large t limit.
maybe dierent low-energy eective actions might be necessary to describe other patches of t
moduli space. nevertheless, we demonstrate that such a unique description might be possible
for the heterotic models under consideration.

acknowledgments

the authors would like to thank i. antoniadis, c. bachas, e. dudas, m. klein and n. obers
for useful conversations. this work has been supported by tmr programs erbfmrxct96
0045 and ct960090. z.l. is additionaly supported by the polish committee for scientic
research grant 2 p03b 037 15 and by m. curie-sklodowska foundation.

23

appendix a: sigma-model anomalies in heterotic orbifolds

in this appendix, we recall some basic facts about sigma-model anomalies in d = 4, n = 1
heterotic orbifolds. at tree level, the lagrangian is invariant under sl(2, r) reparametrizations
of the geometric moduli16 [37, 38, 39],

ti 

aiti  ibi
iciti + di

,

aidi  bici = 1 ,

together with linear transformations of the matter elds:

 

3yi=1

(iciti + di)ni

  ,

(a.1)

(a.2)

where the ni
 are the modular weights of the chiral supereld . at the one-loop level,
this symmetry known as target-space duality is generally anomalous; indeed, it acts as a chiral
rotation on fermions and can have mixed anomalies with gauge symmetries and gravity17. under
an sl(2, r)ti transformation, the one-loop lagrangian undergoes an anomalous variation

lanomaly =

i

322 xa

bi

a f aef a 

i
7682 bi

grav rer ,

(a.3)

where i = arg(iciti + di) is the angle of the chiral rotation, and the mixed sigma-gauge and
sigma-gravitational anomaly coecients bi

grav are given by [41, 40]:

a and bi

bi

a =  c2(ga) + x

bi
grav = 21 + 1 + bi

(1 + 2ni

) t (r) ,

mod  dim g + x

(1 + 2ni

) .

(a.4)

(a.5)

in eq. (a.4), c2(ga) is the quadratic casimir of the gauge group ga and t (r) is the index of
the representation r of ga; in eq. (a.5), dim g is the dimension of the total gauge group, 21
and 1 stand for the contribution of the gravitino and the dilatino respectively, and bi
mod denotes
the contribution of the other (gauge singlet) modulinos, which is model-dependent. the mixed
sigma-gauge anomaly is reproduced by the variation of the following nonlocal term [42, 41]:

ln.l. = 

1

322 xa z d2 w aw a xi

bi

a pch ln(ti + ti)i + h.c. ,

(a.6)

1 d2d2 is the chiral projector, dened such that d (pch) = 0 for any
where pc =  1
supereld h, and pch = h if h is a chiral supereld. in terms of components, ln.l. also
contains a non-harmonic contribution to gauge couplings:

16



1

4 xa

f af a   xi

bi
a

162 ln(ti + ti)! .

(a.7)

16we consider only the diagonal moduli ti, i = 1, 2, 3, which are common to all orbifolds. in the presence of

o-diagonal moduli tij (i 6= j), the target-space duality group is actually larger thanq3

17strictly speaking, as explained in subsection 2.2, target-space duality transformations combine a sigma-
model reparametrization and a kahler transformation, both of which are anomalous [41]. following the liter-
ature, we shall call the resulting anomalies (a.4) and (a.5) indierently target-space duality anomalies or
sigma-model anomalies.

i=1 sl(2, r)ti.

24

this shows that non-harmonic one-loop corrections to the gauge couplings are related, through
supersymmetry, to the presence of sigma-model anomalies.

since the discrete version of the above symmetries is related to t -duality, which is an
exact symmetry of the heterotic string, these anomalies must be compensated in some way.
two mechanisms can be at work [41]: (i) a green-schwarz mechanism [44] similar to the one
responsible for the cancellation of abelian gauge anomalies [45], which involves a non-linear
transformation of the dilaton supereld at the one-loop level:

s  s 

1
82 i

gs ln(iciti + di) ;

(a.8)

(ii) non-invariant, ti-dependent holomorphic corrections to the gauge kinetic function. such
corrections arise from loops of massive string states and are associated with complex planes
that are left invariant by some of the orbifold twists (corresponding to n = 2 subsectors of the
orbifold). in a large class of models, they take the form [59]

f 1loop

a

= 

1

42 xi

ca,i ln [(ti)] ,

(a.9)

where the coecient ca,i, to be determined by an explicit string computation, vanishes when
the ith complex plane is rotated by all twists. note that ti-dependent threshold corrections
explicitly break the continuous sl(2, r)ti symmetry to its discrete version sl(2, z)ti, while the
green-schwarz mechanism preserves it. under an sl(2, z)ti transformation, one has 2(ti) 
(iciti + di) 2(ti) and

f 1loop
a

 f 1loop

a



1

82 (cid:16) i

gs + ca,i(cid:17) ln(iciti + di) .

anomaly cancellation occurs provided the following relations are satised:

bi
a = i

gs + ca,i .

(a.10)

(a.11)

since ca,i = 0 when the ith complex plane is rotated by all twists, eq.
(a.11) imposes a
strong constraint on the corresponding sigma-model anomalies, which must then be gauge-
group independent (exactly as happens for abelian gauge anomalies compensated by a green-
schwarz mechanism). cancellation of mixed sigma-gravitational anomalies is realized in a
similar manner.

collecting all contributions to the one-loop eective lagrangian for the gauge elds, eq.

(a.6) and (a.9), and using eq. (a.11), one obtains [41]:

lgauge =

1



1

4 xa z d2 w aw a pc(cid:26)(cid:20) s + s 
82 xi

gs ln(ti + ti)(cid:21)
gs) lnh|(ti)|4(ti + ti)i) + h.c. .

1
82 i

(bi
a  i

(a.12)

eq. (a.12), together with eq. (b.5), shows that the structure of one-loop corrections to the
eective string action is strongly constrained by target-space duality anomaly cancellation.

25

note that anomaly considerations do not tell us anything about possible holomorphic, modular
invariant corrections [4] that are not included in eq. (a.12).

appendix b: green-schwarz mechanism in the linear multiplet for-
malism

the green-schwarz mechanism that cancels part of the sigma-model anomalies in het-
erotic orbifolds can be naturally described in the linear multiplet formalism18.
indeed, in
terms of the string massless states, the axion-dilaton-dilatino system ts into a linear multi-
plet l = (l, b, ), where the antisymmetric two-tensor b is dual to the model-independent
axion a = ims, a   b. l couples to the gauge elds in such a way that the combi-
nation bl = l  2, where  is the chern-simons supereld dened by d2 =pa w aw a and
d2 =pa
w a w a, is gauge invariant. a gauge-invariant lagrangian for l then takes the sim-
ple form ll =r d4 (bl). the transformation to the dual formulation in terms of the dilaton
chiral supereld is accomplished by treating bl as an unconstrained supereld and adding the
constraint d2(bl + 2) = d2(bl + 2) = 0 to the lagrangian:

l = z d4 (cid:20) (bl) 

1
2

(s + s) (bl + 2)(cid:21) ,

where s is the dilaton chiral supereld, and an unconstrained supereld  dened by s = d2
plays the role of the lagrange multiplier. the equation of motion for  is nothing else but the

constraint for bl, while the equation of motion for el gives the duality relation:



(b.1)

(b.2)

putting (b.2) into (b.1), one obtains the lagrangian for s, ls =r d4 k(s, s) + 1

with f (s) = s and the kahler potential given by:

4 r d2 f (s),

1
2

=

(s + s)

bl
k (s, s) = (cid:20) (bl) 



bl = bl (s, s) .

1
2

(s + s)bl(cid:21)

bl = bl (s, s)

.

(b.3)

at tree level, one has (bl) = lnbl, which leads to the duality relation 1/bl = (s + s)/2 and the
kahler potential k(s, s) =  ln(s + s). the green-schwarz terms needed for the cancellation
of sigma-model anomalies come at one loop and take the form lgs = pi
162 bl ln(ti + ti).
in components, this contains a coupling between the antisymmetric tensor b and the sigma-
model connection. through a linear-chiral duality transformation, lgs translates into a
one-loop mixing between the dilaton and the geometric moduli. indeed, the one-loop duality
relation reads

i
gs

1

2 " s + s 

=

gs ln(ti + ti)# ,

i

1

82 xi

1

bl

18for a useful reference about the linear multiplet in eective heterotic string theories, see [50] and references

therein.

(b.4)

26

implying a kahler potential of the form (the dots refer to further corrections that are not related
to sigma-model anomaly cancellation):

k 1loop (s, s) =  ln" s + s 

gs ln(ti + ti) + . . .# .

i

1

82 xi

(b.5)

target-space modular invariance then requires that s transforms at one loop according to (a.8).
in type iib orientifold compactications we need to add more linear multiplets mk, k =
1, ..., nf where f is the number of twisted sectors. such an extension of the linear multiplet
formalism becomes somewhat subtle in the context of supergravity. to illustrate the trouble,
let us take the simple case of just a single additional linear multiplet.
if one neglects the
superpotential couplings, the lagrangian is given by l = s0 s0( l, m) where s0 = (z0, 0, f0)
is the conformal compensator. let us take

 =

1
2

ek/3(x1/2 +

s
2

x 1/2y 2) ,

(b.6)

with x = ek/3
in the form

l

s0 s0

, y = ek/3

m
s0 s0

1
2



r (

|z0|3

(2ekl)1/2 +

4

sm2

(2ekl)1/2

. using this form of  one obtains the graviton kinetic term

) .

(b.7)

|z0|3

it is clear that choosing the value of z0 which corresponds to the einstein frame, |z0|3 =
(1  s
4 m2)(2ekl)1/2 for small m, leads in general to a mixing between m and l. the eective
lagrangian becomes simple and similar in its form to the heterotic eective lagrangian only in
the vicinity of the point < m >= 0. there the choice (b.6) gives in the leading order in m the
gauge coupling 1
l + s m and the quadratic form of the kahler potential for the dual chiral
eld m: k  (m + m)2 + ... . in this regime it is also possible to take into account one-loop
corrections to 1/g2, e.g. through (1)  3b0

log(x) which produces  b0 log(l) in 1/g2.

g2 = 1

m
s0 s0

4

27

references

[1] e. witten, nucl. phys. b471 (1996) 135.

[2] p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 506; p. horava and e. witten, nucl.

phys. b475 (1996) 94.

[3] t. banks and m. dine, nucl. phys. b479 (1996) 173.

[4] h.p. nilles and s. stieberger, nucl. phys. b499 (1997) 3.

[5] i. antoniadis, m. quiros, nucl. phys. b505 (1997) 109.

[6] e. dudas, ch. grojean, nucl. phys. b507 (1997) 553.

[7] h.p. nilles, m. olechowski and m. yamaguchi, phys. lett. b415 (1997) 24.

[8] z. lalak and s. thomas, nucl. phys. b515 (1998) 55.

[9] a. lukas, b. ovrut, d. waldram, nucl. phys. b532 (1998) 43.

[10] e. a. mirabelli and m. e. peskin, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 65002.

[11] h.p. nilles, m. olechowski and m. yamaguchi, nucl. phys. b530 (1998) 43.

[12] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut, k.s. stelle, d. waldram, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 86001.

[13] j. ellis, z. lalak, s. pokorski and w. pokorski, nucl. phys. b540 (1999) 149.

[14] s. stieberger, nucl. phys. b541 (1998) 109.

[15] z. lalak, s. pokorski and s. thomas, nucl. phys. b549 (1999) 63.

[16] j. ellis, z. lalak and w. pokorski, eprint hep-ph/9811133, nucl. phys. b in press.

[17] k. meissner, h.-p. nilles and m. olechowski, eprint hep-th/9905139, nucl. phys. b in

press.

[18] j. ellis, z. lalak, s. pokorski, s. thomas, eprint hep-th/9906148, nucl. phys. b in press.

[19] t. li, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 107902.

[20] z. lalak, s. thomas, eprint hep-th/9908147.

[21] a. lukas, k.s. stelle, preprint outp-99-49p, eprint hep-th/9911156.

[22] a. sagnotti, in cargese 87, non-perturbative quantum field theory, eds. g. mack
et al. (pergamon press, oxford, 1988), p. 251; p. horava, nucl. phys. b327 (1989) 461,
phys. lett. b231 (1989) 251; j. dai, r. leigh and j. polchinski, mod. phys. lett. a4
(1989) 2073; r. leigh, mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 2767.

28

[23] e. g. gimon, joseph polchinski, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 1667.

[24] c. angelantonj, m. bianchi, g. pradisi, a. sagnotti, and ya.s. stanev, phys. lett. b385

(1996) 96.

[25] z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b512 (1998) 221.

[26] z. kakushadze and g. shiu, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 3686.

[27] z. kakushadze, g. shiu and s.-h.h. tye, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 25.

[28] z. kakushadze and g. shiu, nucl. phys. b520 (1998) 75.

[29] l.e. ibanez, jhep 9807 (1998) 002.

[30] g. aldazabal, a. font, l.e. ibanez, and g. violero, nucl. phys. b536 (1998) 29.

[31] j. lykken, e. poppitz, s. p. trivedi, nucl. phys. b543 (1999) 105.

[32] l.e. ibanez, c. munoz and s. rigolin, preprint ftuam-98-28, eprint hep-ph/9812397.

[33] m. cvetic, l. everett, p. langacker and j. wang, preprint upr-0831t, eprint hep-

th/9903051.

[34] z. lalak, s. lavignac and h.p. nilles, nucl. phys. b559 (1999) 48.

[35] j. polchinski and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 525.

[36] i. antoniadis, c. bachas and e. dudas, nucl. phys. b560 (1999) 93.

[37] s. ferrara, d. lust, a. shapere, s. theisen, phys. lett. b225 (1989) 363.

[38] j. lauer, j. mas and h. p. nilles, phys. lett. b226 (1989) 251; nucl. phys. b351 (1991)

353.

[39] s. ferrara, d. lust, s. theisen, phys. lett. b242 (1990) 39.

[40] l. e. ibanez, d. lust, nucl. phys. b382 (1992) 305.

[41] j.-p. derendinger, s. ferrara, c. kounnas and f. zwirner, nucl. phys. b372 (1992) 145.

[42] g. l. cardoso, b. a. ovrut, nucl. phys. b369 (1992) 351.

[43] g. l. cardoso, b. a. ovrut, nucl. phys. b392 (1993) 315.

[44] m. green and j. schwarz, phys. lett. b149 (1984) 117.

[45] m. dine, n. seiberg, e. witten, nucl. phys. b289 (1987) 589.

[46] i. antoniadis, e. gava, k.s. narain, t.r. taylor, nucl. phys. b407 (1993) 706.

29

[47] l.e. ibanez, r. rabadan and a.m. uranga, preprint ftuam-99-14, eprint hep-

th/9905098.

[48] l.e. ibanez, r. rabadan and a.m. uranga, nucl. phys. b542 (1999) 112.

[49] a. sagnotti, phys. lett. b294 (1992) 196.

[50] j.-p. derendinger, f. quevedo and m. quiros, nucl. phys. b428 (1994) 282.

[51] m. klein, preprint ftuam-99-34, eprint hep-th/9910143.

[52] c.a. scrucca, m. serone, eprint hep-th/9912108.

[53] v. kaplunovsky and j. louis, nucl. phys. b422 (1994) 57.

[54] e. poppitz, nucl. phys. b542 (1999) 31.

[55] j.p. derendinger, l.e. ibanez, h.p. nilles, nucl. phys. b267 (1986) 365.

[56] l.e. ibanez, h.p. nilles, phys. lett. b169 (1986) 354.

[57] h. itoyama and j. leon, phys. rev. lett. 56 (1986) 2352.

[58] e. witten, phys. lett. b155 (1985) 151.

[59] l.j. dixon, v. kaplunovsky and j. louis, nucl. phys. b355 (1991) 649.

30

