0
0
0
2

 

n
a
j
 

1
2

 
 

3
v
1
0
0
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

hutp-99/a065
hep-th/9912001

ads/cft and gravity

steven s. gubser

lyman laboratory of physics, harvard university, cambridge, ma 02138, usa

abstract

the radiation-dominated k = 0 frw cosmology emerges as the induced metric on a
codimension one hypersurface of constant extrinsic curvature in the ve-dimensional
ads-schwarzschild solution. that we should get frw cosmology in this way is an
expected result from ads/cft in light of recent comments regarding the coupling of
gravity to boundary conformal eld theories. i remark on how this calculation bears
on the understanding of randall and sundrums alternative to compactication. a
generalization of the ads/cft prescription for computing greens functions is sug-
gested, and it is shown how gravity emerges from it with a strength g4 = 2g5/l.
some upper bounds are set on the radius of curvature l of ads5. one of them comes
from estimating the rate of leakage of visible sector energy into the cft. that rate
is connected via a unitarity relation to deviations from newtons force law at short
distances. the best bound on l obtained in this paper comes from a match to the

parameters of string theory. it is l < 1 nm if the string scale is 1 gev. higher string

scales imply a tighter bound on l.

november 1999

1 introduction

the ads/cft correspondence [1, 2, 3] (see [4] for a review) relates a quantum eld
theory in one dimension to a theory in one higher dimension that includes gravity. the
primary example is n = 4 super-yang-mills theory, which is related to the dimensional
reduction of type iib string theory on s5 to the ve-dimensional non-compact geometry
ads5 (anti de-sitter space). the boundary of the poincare patch of ads5 is simply
minkowski space, except that the metric on the boundary is only specied up to a
conformal transformation. this is ok because n = 4 super-yang-mills theory is
conformal, even at the quantum level. the correspondence is usually studied in a
strong coupling region for the gauge theory, where it is far from classical, but the dual
gravity picture is classical in the sense that curvatures are small on the planck and
string scales.

in [5] it was proposed that slices of ads5 could serve as an alternative to compact-
ication manifolds. it was shown that when the near-boundary region of ads5 is cut
away and the bulk spacetime simply ends on a wall of constant extrinsic curvature (a
horosphere of ads5 to be precise), there is a normalizable graviton mode which has
zero mass in the four dimensions of the boundary. the metric of ads5 is

ds2

5 = e2r/l(dt2 + d~x2) + dr2

(1)

where ~x is an ordinary 3-vector. this metric is a solution to r =  4
l2 g. hyper-
surfaces of constant r are horospheres. the part of the metric that is cut away in [5]
is r > r for some given r.

in fact the proposal of [5] was to glue two identical copies of the sliced anti-de sitter
space together along the 3 + 1 dimensional boundary. however the four-dimensional
graviton is quite a general phenomenon, and there is a large freedom in what one
might have on the other side of the horospherical boundary of a given copy of ads5.
an illustration of this can be found in [6], where a single copy of ads5 is obtained as
part of a type iib string compactication on an orientifold of t 6. the relevant point is
that for a vacuum state of the theory, the extrinsic curvature of the boundary should
be proportional to the induced metric:

ij = 

1
l

g(induced)
ij

.

(2)

regarding the boundary as a positive tension 3 + 1-dimensional brane separating two
sliced copies of ads5, this amounts to the statement that the stress energy of the brane
should respect 3 + 1-dimensional poincare invariance. the constant of proportionality,
1/l, is required so that there is a balance between the brane tension and the bulk cos-
mological constant. more generally, a codimension one boundary of a ve-dimensional
l g(induced)
space with no excitations on it should have the same property that ij =  1
.

ij

1

the authors of [5] termed their construction an alternative to compactication,
which seemed appropriate because one can travel an innite spatial distance into the
ve-dimensional bulk. eorts such as [6] to realize the construction in string the-
ory, using coincident d3-branes to produce the ads5 background, represent strong-
coupling extrapolations of perturbative string compactications, where the massless
four-dimensional graviton is the usual zero-mode of the spin 2 closed string state. in
such a picture, the kaluza-klein gravitons of [5] are interpreted as the strong-coupling
description of open string excitations on the d3-branes, in line with the extensive
literature on absorption by d3-branes [7, 8, 9].

it was suggested by j. maldacena [10] that this alternative to compactication
should properly be viewed in light of the ads/cft correspondence as a coupling of
gravity to whatever strongly coupled conformal theory the ads5 geometry is dual to.
this view was also taken by h. verlinde in [6, 11]. a convincing statement of the case
was made by e. witten [12] in response to [13, 14].

from now on i will restrict myself to a minimal scenario where a single copy of
ads5 is cut o by an end-of-the-universe brane. such objects are well known in type i
string theory [15] and in horava-witten theory [16], so there is no problem of principle
in having a true end of the universe. however my comments basically apply to any
compactication geometry which involves the near-horizon part of ads5.

the idea that the scenario of [5] is best viewed in the context of ads/cft has
not been universally embraced, perhaps partly because it is hard to see what to do
with it. (that diculty is not usually regarded as fatal, but it does seem to have
held up progress on the current issue). the goal of section 2 is to make the idea
seem more denite by using it to derive the radiation-dominated friedmann-robertson-
walker (frw) cosmology. the approach is to change the bulk spacetime from ads5
to ads-schwarzschild, but not to excite any matter on the cuto brane. the hawking
temperature of the ads-schwarzschild geometry, measured with respect to time on
the cuto brane, can be interpreted as the temperature of the cft which the bulk
spacetime is dual to. readers determined to understand the construction from a brane-
world perspective may nd it most useful to think of the bulk as the background
of near-extremal d3-branes. however, ads/cft allows us to reinterpret the entire
ads-schwarzschild geometry as a manifestation of the dynamics of a four-dimensional
conformal eld theory at nite temperature. with the cft interpretation in mind,
it is easier to understand why the radiation-dominated frw geometry emerges: all
cfts have the same equation of state up to numerical factors, so the frw equations
take the same form as they do in the radiation-dominated era of our universe.

the literature on brane-world cosmology is large and somewhat scattered; indeed i
became aware of some recent overlapping papers only after this work was completed.
early work on supergravity domain walls in ads4 has been reviewed in [17]. cosmo-

2

logical solutions to horava-witten theory compactied on a calabi-yau manifold were
investigated in [18]; see also [19] for subsequent development, and [20] for an analogous
treatment of type i. the works [21, 22, 23, 24] include constructions equivalent to
equations (8)-(11), although the cft interpretation was not oered. reference [25]
includes some formal developments and presents equations equivalent to (16). discus-
sions of cosmological constraints in [23, 26] have some overlap with section 4. and there
are a number of papers [27, 28, 29, 30, 31] that use similar brane-world techniques. a
more extensive list of references on brane-world cosmology can be found in [30]. the
whole approach is rather dierent from the older string cosmology literature; see [32]
for references.

section 3 consists of some remarks on the general framework of ads/cft with a
cuto brane. a generalization of the prescription [2, 3] for computing greens functions
is suggested at the level of eective eld theory. the four-dimensional einstein action
can be derived in this formalism, with the result g4 = 2g5/l. this relation obtains
regardless of the location of the cuto brane in ads5. in standard ads/cft, where
there is no cuto brane and hence no normalizable graviton, the terms responsible
for the einstein action were removed using local counter-terms [33]. corrections to
newtons force law are discussed from the cft perspective, but i avoid presenting
details since the idea of the calculation is not original to me.

matter on the cuto brane is incorporated naturally in the formalism. although i
do not propose a denite model, the idea is to have visible sector matter on the cuto
brane, somewhat as in certain heterotic m-theory models [34]. excitations of that

matter would have to dominate over the solution in section 2 at least for z < 1010 in

order for the cosmology to be realistic.

in section 4, i make some rough numerical estimates. one is to check the cosmolog-
ical eects of visible sector matter losing its energy to the cft. in ads language this
corresponds to absorption of bulk gravitons by the horizon of the poincare patch, as
in [7, 8, 9]. the rate of energy loss is directly related to the deviations from newtons
force law. another is to estimate parameters of string theory that would permit the
deviations from newtons force law to be observed experimentally, assuming that ads5
emerges from a string theory construction. to obtain deviations at the scale of even
a nanometer (still three orders of magnitude below the sensitivity of proposed experi-
ments) an extremely low string scale is requiredapproximately 1 gev. i make some
speculative remarks regarding low string scales at the end of section 4.

throughout the paper,  will denote a ve-dimensional bulk spacetime index and
i is a four-dimensional index. in cases where precision is required, i will denote ve-
dimensional coordinates as x = (t, ~x, r) and four-dimensional coordinates as i =
(, ~). throughout the paper, pl will denote the four-dimensional planck length:
pl = g4  1.6  1033 cm in units where h = c = 1.

3

2 a cosmological solution

let us start purely from a four-dimensional point of view, and turn on a nite temper-
ature for the conformal eld theory which is small in planck units. if we calculate the
corresponding energy density , use the trivial equation of state p = /3, and apply
the standard equation

a(cid:19)2
(cid:18) a

=

8g4

3

 ,

(3)

(4)

what must result is the standard radiation-dominated frw cosmology,

ds2 = d 2 + a( )2d~x2 ,

where a( )2 is linear in  .1 i will always use  for four-dimensional cosmological time;
t will be reserved for the poincare time in ads5. the only diculty is nding the
constant of proportionality in   t 4: if the conformal eld theory is interacting, it
could be a non-trivial exercise even in the limit t  1/pl where gravity loops shouldnt
matter. however if the theory in question has an ads dual where the supergravity
approximation is good, then the study of black holes in ads guarantees the relation

 =

32
2

ct 4 ,

(5)

where c is the coecient for the trace anomaly in a normalization where c = (n 21)/4
for n = 4 su(n) super-yang-mills theory.2 in this normalization, a single abelian
photon has c = 1/10. there is a standard relation in ads/cft [33]

c =


8

l3
g5

.

(6)

it should be remarked that for n = 4 gauge theory at weak coupling, (5) becomes
 = 22ct 4. this is the 4/3 problem, rst noted in [36, 37], and now understood as
being a result of strong interactions.

so far we have employed the ads/cft correspondence merely as a tool for deter-
mining a detail of the strong-coupling thermodynamics. however the calculation can
be done entirely on the ads side if we take seriously the idea that the cuto brane is
no more nor less than a coupling of gravity to the conformal eld theory. it seems in-
evitable from a string theory perspective that the gravity would be quantized, and that
the detailed structure of the cuto brane encodes the details of the quantum gravity;

1there is probably no obstacle in principle to extending the calculation to positive spatial curvature.

however for negative spatial curvature the pathology observed in [35] might emerge.

2the calculation of [33] shows that in the limit where classical gravity is applicable to the ads
black holes there is in fact only one independent coecient in the trace anomaly. this and (5) are
non-trivial constraints on theories which can have ads duals.

4

but by taking t  1/pl we should be able to ignore this issue. the cuto brane,
or planck brane, controls gravity, while the bulk of ads5 controls the conformal
eld theory. by assumption, the planck brane is not appreciably inuenced by nite
temperature, but the conformal eld theory is; so we should retain (2), but change the
bulk background from ads5 to ads-schwarzschild. the metric of ads-schwarzschild
is

ds2

5 = e2r/l(cid:16)h(r)dt2 + d~x2(cid:17) +

h(r) = 1  b4e4r/l

b = lt0 .

dr2
h(r)

(7)

here t0 is the hawking temperature associated with the time coordinate t.
it is a
constant parameter of the ads-schwarzschild solution. the calculation will deal only
with the coordinate patch covered by (t, ~x, r).

given an orientable surface with unit normal n (which species a notion of outside
and inside by the direction in which it points), the extrinsic curvature can be dened
  nn)n. we will follow [38] in taking n to be the outward unit
as  = (
normal, which points toward the true boundary of ads5. there is a set of solutions to
(2) which form a foliation of the coordinate patch in question:

t
l

=

er/l
b2 +

1
4b

4

xk=1

ik log(1  ikber/l) +

t0
l

,

(8)

where t0 is a constant of integration specifying a particular leaf. all leaves have the
same induced metric since they are related by translation in t. using (2) with the same
constant of proportionality, 1/l, avoids a four-dimensional cosmological constant
more about this later. it proves most convenient to parametrize a particular leaf by
(r, ~x), where r = r is a solution of (8) for r in terms of t. then the induced metric is

if we dene

ds2

(induced) = 

e4r/l
b4 dr2

 + e2r/ld~x2 .

 = l

e2r/l
2b2

then the metric (9) assumes the standard frw form:

ds2

(induced) = d 2 + a( )2d~x2
a( ) = bs 2

.

l

(9)

(10)

(11)

thus we do indeed observe the linear a( )2 that we expected. this behavior is strictly
a consequence of conformal invariance: any conformal eld theory provides a source
term for einsteins equations just like a bunch of massless photons.

5

we can be a little more quantitative and rederive the coecient in (5) from the new

perspective. in the late time limit, we can use the relation

1
g4

=

1

g5 z r



dr e2(rr)/l =

l
2g5

.

(12)

actually this relation comes from a kaluza-klein reduction of ve-dimensional gravity
to four for a horospherical planck brane in pure ads5. it should be ok to leading
order for a brane in an asymptotically ads5 region of bulk spacetime, provided the
brane is only slightly curved on the scale l. such a brane is locally like a horosphere of
ads5. it is perhaps more common in the literature to see a modication of (12) that
arises from removing the factor of e2r/l from inside the integral. the discrepancy is
merely due to the fact that our four-dimensional metric is precisely the induced metric,
whereas more commonly the four-dimensional metric on a horosphere is taken to be
e2r/lds2
(induced), which
does seem the natural one in the present context.

(induced). the form of (12) is forced on us by the choice ds2

4 = ds2

combining the relation

with (12) and (6) leads to

1

a(cid:19)2
4 2 = (cid:18) a

=

8g4

3



 =

3b4

16g5le4r/l =

32
2

c(er/lt0)4 .

(13)

(14)

now, the temperature t0 measured with respect to the time t is not the same as the
temperature t measured with respect to the time  ; rather,

(15)
where we have used the relation t = 2l /b. so (14) is indeed identical to (5),
coecient and all.

t0 = er/lt0 ,

t =

dt
d

the foregoing calculation is more than a formal manipulation: it is an illustration
that string theory on ads5 is identical to a 3+1-dimensional conformal eld theory.
we wanted our cosmology to be driven by the conformal eld theory dual to the bulk
ads geometry rather than by anything on the planck brane. so we left the planck
brane in its ground state and made the bulk ads geometry thermal by adding a black
hole horizon.

it is worth remarking that no stabilization mechanism was employed because none
was needed. from a brane-world point of view, the worst has already happened: the
negative tension brane of [39] has retreated to innity,3 and the delicate near-horizon
3the reality of such a negative tension object is something i am only provisionally willing to allow
for the sake of argument, since i am aware of no fully satisfactory string theory construction of it as
yet in an ads background.

6

cusp has been cut o by a nite temperature horizon. the eect of that horizon is
most transparent when viewed in light of the ads/cft correspondence: it means that
the 3 + 1-dimensional conformal eld theory is at nite temperature.

in a generic bulk geometry, the retreating planck brane would cause the four-
dimensional newton constant to change. in this regard, an asymptotically ads space
is very special: provided we use the induced metric on the planck brane (rather than
some warping of it) as the four-dimensional metric, (12) will hold asymptotically when
the planck brane is moving in the asymptotically ads region with curvatures which
are small compared to l.

that ds2

(induced) turned out to be exactly the radiation-dominated frw metric should
excite some suspicion. mightnt there be quantum gravity eects at suciently early
times which modify the picture? we derived the agreement between (5) and (14)
using a late-time relation, (12). it seems like a massive conspiracy that the physics
of early times would arrange for the cosmology to remain exactly radiation-dominated
frw. there are limits to what we can assert about physics at early times without
specifying the nature of the planck brane. it seems inevitable however that (2) will
receive corrections at higher orders in derivatives.

is this real cosmology? not as it stands: nucleosynthesis would be dramatically
spoiled if the hidden cft that ads5 represents had any sizable eect on the radiation-
dominated era of our universe. however it is straightforward to extend the discussion
by adding matter to the brane, and its stress tensor, t (matter)
, could take over from
t (cft)
at late times. (if all were worried about is nucleosynthesis, then late times
ij
means z < 1010). the ads/cft equation relevant to such a scenario is

ij

g(induced)

ij



ij

 8g4t (cft)
2
l (cid:20)ij (cid:18) +

 8g4t (matter)
3
l(cid:19) g(induced)

ij

ij

=

(cid:21)  8g4t (matter)

ij

(16)

.

this equation is a rearrangement of a formula obtained in [38] in the course of deriving
quasi-local stress-energy tensors for ads/cft in various dimensions.4 i have used (12)
to dene g4. it is necessary to check that visible matter does not lose energy to the
cft fast enough to spoil the cosmology. since the cfts couplings are essentially
of gravitational origin, this is perhaps plausible. an estimate will be presented in
section 4.

actually, (16) is only an approximate statement of translation, via ads/cft, from
purely four-dimensional quantities to quantities which constrain how the planck brane
sits in the ve-dimensional spacetime. equations with physical meaning arise from
setting either side equal to zero. in this section we considered a case where t (brane)
= 0;

ij

4only i have changed the sign of the einstein tensor. this is necessary because of a dierence in
sign conventions. the derivation in section 3 will serve as a check that the signs in (16) are consistent.

7

then setting the right hand side equal to zero amounts to requiring (2). solving (2)
gave us back radiation-dominated frw cosmology, which perhaps sounded surprising;
but the identity (16) makes it inevitable, because if the right hand side vanishes, so
must the left hand side.

suppose now we knew all about the matter on the brane, and discovered that it
with  > 0.

generated a positive cosmological constant: 8g4t (matter)
assuming the ads part to be at zero temperature, we would then reduce (16) to

= g(induced)

ij

ij

g(induced)

ij

+ g(induced)

ij

2

l "ij   +

3
l

= 

+

l2

2 ! g(induced)

ij

# .

(17)

it is straightforward to show that setting the right hand side equal to zero leads to
a hypersurface in ads5 whose induced metric is ds4. approximately this calculation
has appeared elsewhere in the literature, for instance [27, 28, 29, 31]. a direct analog
in lower dimensions was treated in [17], where a fairly general discussion of induced
metrics on codimension one domain walls in ads4 was also given.

3 the general framework

the equation (16) is an approximate rst variation of a more general relation, which
is the natural extension of the prescriptions of [2, 3]:

se[ij, ] = s4d gravity[ij] + s4d matter[ij, ] + wcft[ij]

= extremum

g(induced)

ij

=ij(cid:16)sbulk[g] + sbrane[g(induced)

ij

, ](cid:17) .

(18)

the metric ij is the metric on the planck brane, and  are the extra matter elds
which live on the planck brane. the rst equation indicates a natural way of splitting
up the four-dimensional eective action into four-dimensional gravity, the cft, and
the four-dimensional matter which comes from excitations on the planck brane. the
second equation is the actual statement of ads/cft, which in this case includes a
brane reduction of ve-dimensional gravity to four dimensions, as envisaged in [39, 5].
wcft is the generating functional of connected greens functions of the conformal eld
theory, with a cuto imposed at some energy scale . see [40] for an early discussion
of cutos in ads/cft.

one way to dene the cuto  is as the energy of a fundamental string stretched
from the planck brane all the way to the horizon of ads5. this gives   l/ if we
measure energies with respect to a time  on the planck brane such that   = 1.
there can however be ambiguities in normalizing , depending on the physical question
one is asking, as explained in [41]. if ads5 is generated as the background of many

8

coincident d3-branes, then we can imagine peeling one of them o and bringing it
close to the planck brane. a fundamental string stretched from this d3-brane back
to the main cluster has the interpretation of a massive w-boson. in the supergravity
description, this fundamental string stretches to the horizon of ads5. thus the relation
  l/ has a simple motivation in terms of a bps quantity, namely the mass for the
heaviest w-boson which can be included in the eective theory by higgsing the cft.
a comprehensive discussion of interactions might require a more precise specication of
how a geometric cuto in ads5 translates into a cuto in the four-dimensional theory.
the extremum on the right hand side of (18) is taken subject to the boundary
condition that the metric induced from g on the cuto brane is ij. it is the saddle-
point approximation to quantum gravity in the bulk.
if we wanted to do quantum
gravity in some more complete way (i.e. string theory), we would make the replacement

extremum s 

1
i

logz [dg]eis ,

(19)

where r [dg] represents path integration. (path integration in the sense of (19) would

amount to closed string eld theorya subject where our understanding is incomplete.
we might however imagine some other way of improving the saddle point approxima-
tion). in a real string theory model, there would probably be many more bulk elds
besides the metric g that sbulk would depend on, and they would also have to have
their boundary values specied in the extremum (or path integral). wcft would de-
pend on those boundary values, and there would also be new terms added to s4d gravity
for the dynamics of the zero modes of the extra elds. how much of a problem all this
extra junk is depends on the couplings to the standard model elds. the optimistic
view is that such couplings are about as important in particle physics contexts as the
coupling of electrons and quarks to gravity. the zero modes of extra bulk elds would
modify long-distance four-dimensional gravity if they remained massless, but any sort
of connement or mass generation mechanism could prevent this problem.

like all of ads/cft, (18) is a claim to be substantiated rather than an assumption.
however, it is dicult to give a complete proof because wcft is a complicated non-
local functional of ij whose exact form is independently accessible only through a
strong coupling qft computation. if one takes the boundary to be the true boundary
of ads5, the evidence is compelling [4] that the extremum on the right hand side of
(18) does indeed lead to the generating functional of connected greens functions for a
cft.5 through the uv-ir relation we understand that cutting o a portion of ads5
should change physics in the ultraviolet only. thus (18) is true insofar as it is well-
dened (that is, on the level of an eective eld theory on energy scales much lower

5a conformal transformation on ij is needed as the cuto is removed to keep ij nite. however,

wcft without a cuto only depends on the conformal class of ij.

9

than the cuto ) provided we can show that s4d gravity + s4d matter emerges from the
extremum on the right hand side. that is what i will actually demonstrate concretely.
in the process i will derive (12) in a general setting, and also check that the sign that
seemed worrisome in (16) is ok.

the proof is piggy-backed on the calculations of [33]. in order to keep the presen-
tation self-contained, i will recapitulate parts of that work. the setting is a foliation
of a ve-dimensional einstein manifold m (for instance, ads5 or ads-schwarzschild),
whose boundary has a metric in the conformal class of a specied metric g(0), and
whose metric can be written in the form [42]

ds2

5 = gdxdx =

1
42 d2 +

1


gijdidj .

(20)

in (20) and the following equations, l has been set to 1. the metric gij can depend
on , but according to [33, 42] it has an expansion

g = g(0) + g(2) + 2 log  h(4) + 2g(4) + . . . .

(21)

here g(2) and h(4) are tensors constructed from g(0) using two and four derivatives,
respectively. the expansion breaks down after the logarithmic term, in the sense that
the g(n) are no longer covariant tensors. fortunately the rst two terms of (21) are all
that we will need. explicitly,

g(2)
ij =

1

2 (cid:18) o

rij 

1
6

o

r g(0)

ij (cid:19) ,

where

o

rij is the ricci tensor of g(0)

ij and

o

r is the associated ricci scalar.

the action under the extremum in (18) is

sbulk[g] + sbrane[g(induced)

ij

, ] =

1

16g5 zm

d5xg [r + 20] +

1

16g5 zm

d4qg(induced) [2 + ] .

(22)

(23)

we have located the cuto brane on the hypersurface m dened by the equation
 = . we have also dened

 = 0 +

, ) .

(24)

the constant 0 is what we will adjust to balance the tension of the planck brane
against the bulk cosmological constant. an imperfect adjustment would lead to the
ds4 induced metric, as commented on after (17). thus we are not claiming to make
headway on the cosmological constant problem; rather, we are pushing it into the

16g5

qg(induced)lmatter(g(induced)

ij

10

planck brane. the extrinsic curvature term in (23) is necessary in order to have a
well-dened variational principle.

extremizing (23) subject to g(induced)

5 have the
form (20) and then setting gij = ij at  =  (this is at least true up to errors which
will be subleading in a derivative expansion). then (cf. (10) of [33])

= ij can be achieved by letting ds2

ij

where

here we have dened

, ](cid:17) =

1

16g5 z d4 l

ij

ij

d

extremum
g(induced)

=ij(cid:16)sbulk[g] + sbrane[g(induced)
3q| det g| +" 1
l = 4z
= q| det g(0)|(cid:20)   6
2 +
oa(4) = 

tr g1

rij +


2

o

rij

1
8

o

o

r2 .

1
24

2 (8 + 4 + )g#=

0 g2  log  oa(4) + (nite)(cid:21) .

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

this quantity was identied in [33] as the conformal anomaly of the cft. the ads/cft
prescription as detailed there is simply to remove the terms that diverge as   0 via
local counterterms. this is the only sensible course if the ultimate goal is to take   0
so that the cuto boundary becomes the true boundary. instead we want to keep the
cuto boundary at a nite, arbitrary  and regard the induced metric ij on m as
the einstein metric of the four-dimensional world. rewriting (26) in terms of ij, one
nds

l = q| det |(cid:20)  6 +

1
2

r  log  a4 + . . .(cid:21) ,

h(4) = 0.

where now r is the ricci scalar of the metric ij and a4 is dened as in (27), only
using curvature tensors pertaining to ij rather than to g(0)
ij . one might fear that the
logarithmic term in (21) would contribute to the log  term in (28). it doesnt because
tr g1
(0)
because powers of  cancel in (28) (and  is nite anyway) there is no longer an expan-
sion parameter in (28). the expansion can only be justied as a derivative expansion,
provided that the embedding of the cuto brane in the ve-dimensional einstein space
involves only curvatures which are slight on the length scale l. combining (24) and
(25) with (28), setting 0 = 6, and repristinating powers of l, we nd

extremum
g(induced)

ij

=ij(cid:16)sbulk[g] + sbrane[g(induced)
32g5 z d4 r +z d4 lmatter(ij, ) + wcft[ij]

, ](cid:17) =

l

ij

(29)

where wcft includes the log  term in (28) plus all the other terms which we indicated
with . . . . we indeed verify the relation g4 = 2g5/l. also, since the ricci scalar came

11

g ij

1
p2

a)

cft

t

t

1
p2

4c p  log p

1
p2

b)

figure 1: contributions to the graviton propagator, following [12]: a) free graviton
propagation; b) leading cft correction. the blob between the stress tensor insertions
is intended to denote the full ht ticft correlator.

in with the right sign in (29), the signs of (16) are consistent. the calculation leading
to (29) is similar to kaluza-klein reduction, the main dierence being that the relation
g4 = 2g5/l does not involve the total length of the fth dimension (which could be
innite), but rather the curvature scale of the ve-dimensional geometry. this makes
the current scenario rather dierent from those of [43], where the circumference of the
extra dimensions does aect the four-dimensional planck length.
extremizing (23) with respect to g without requiring g(induced)

= ij would amount,
at leading order in derivatives, to setting the right hand side of (16) to zero, as well
as satisfying the bulk equations of motion. given some information regarding the
structure of the planck brane, higher derivative corrections to (2) and to the right
hand side of (16) would be accessible through a more meticulous treatment of this
unrestricted extremization problem. the trick of (18) is to extremize rst with the
induced metric held xed and then argue that the extremization that remains to be
carried out gives us the equations of four-dimensional gravity (and brane matter if
we want it), plus something non-local which we called wcft. the claim that this
something arises equivalently by integrating out a cft below a cuto  is the substance
of ads/cft and the basis for the suggestions in [10, 6, 12].

ij

the argument (20)-(29) stands in relation to the observation [5] of a normalizable
graviton approximately as the derivation of the low-energy eective action of string
theory via beta-functions stands in relation to the calculation of the massless string
spectrum.

it should be possible to relate corrections to einsteins equations and hence newtons
force law directly to the anomaly term a4, proceeding along the lines of [44]. however
it is more transparent to follow the analysis of [12], where we merely dierentiate
wcft[ij] twice with respect to ij to obtain the rst correction to the graviton prop-
agator (see gure 1). the position space two-point function of the cft stress tensor

12

has the form ht (x)t (0)i  c/x8. in momentum space this is ht (p)t (p)i  c p4 log p.
the corrected graviton propagator is

g(2)(p) 
g(2)(x) 

1
p2 +
1
x2 +

1

p2 pl(cid:16)c p4 log p(cid:17) pl
c 2
pl
x4 ,

1
p2

(30)

where the factors of the four-dimensional planck length are vertex factors for the
coupling of the stress tensor to the graviton. the altered propagator gives rise to
deviations from newtons 1/r2 force law, estimated already from the ads side in [5]:

f =

gm1m2

r2

 1 + a1

l2

r2 + . . .! ,

(31)

where a1 is a dimensionless number on the order of unity. in (31) i have used (6) and
(12) to combine c 2
pl into l2/4. i do not claim any originality for the computation
in (30) and (31). the only further addition i would make to the recorded comments
in [12] is that the coecient of leading correction is indeed computable from the cft
side: up to factors of order unity it is g4 times the central charge of the cft.

clearly, by dierentiating (18) and keeping track of all the lorentz structure we
could obtain the corrected propagator in complete detail and extract the exact value
of a1. i will refrain from entering into this computation here because another group is
pursuing similar lines [45]. it was important however to present the general outline of
the analysis because it will gure prominently in the next section.

4 bounds and estimates

l2
2
pl

note that (6) and (12) together imply that the central charge is c = 
, where as
4
usual pl is the four-dimensional planck length. for ads5 backgrounds arising from
type iib geometries including d3-branes, c  n 2 where n is the number of d3-branes.
so n  l/pl. to be denite, let us suppose that l is on the order of a micron. direct
measurements of gravity already restrict l < 1 mm, and proposed experiments might
probe newtons force law to distances as small as a micron. l  1 m means n  1029.
this number seems on the high side for a string compactication: something has to
soak up all the ve-form ux. d3-brane charge is conserved, so it is true that if we
managed to set n = 1029 through some arcane string theory construction, we wouldnt
worry about it wiggling. as disciples of ads/cft we would also be relieved that ve-
dimensional quantum gravity eects arent an immediate problem. however, a large
hidden cft is very dangerous in cosmology. nucleosynthesis, for example, would be

spoiled if cft > sm, where sm is the energy density of the standard model elds.

13

let us assume then that cft  sm around the time of nucleosynthesis. because the
cft has a large number of degrees of freedom as compared to the standard model, this
is possible only if the cft is much colder than standard model excitations. suppose
that the standard model and the cft are to a good approximation decoupled. then
cft and sm decrease in xed ratio during the radiation-dominated era, up to factors
of order unity associated with freezing out the various massive elds of the standard
model. in the matter-dominated era, cft and cbr decrease in xed ratio. so we can
guarantee that nucleosynthesis is unaected by the cft if we demand cft  cbr
today. this translates roughly to tcft < tcbr/c1/4  1014 k today if we want l on
the order of a micron.6 to summarize,

c  n 2 ,

l  npl ,

tcft < tcbr/n .

(32)

suppose the cft is cold enough at some early time to satisfy cft  sm.7 cosmol-
ogy at later times could still be spoiled if energy leaks too quickly from visible matter
into the cft. the analogous problem in theories with compact extra dimensions is
cooling by emission of bulk gravitons [46]. to evaluate whether there is a problem
in our case, we must investigate the mechanisms of thermal equilibration between the
cft and the other matter in the universe, operating on the assumption that the cft
is very cold. fortunately the tools are already partly in hand. standard model par-
ticles can lose energy to the conformal eld theory through processes controlled by
the graph in gure 2a). the inclusive rates from these graphs are related to the 1/r4
correction to newtons law through the unitarity relation illustrated in gure 2b). in
particular, the inclusive rate goes as 2
pll2. by dimensional analysis the contribution
they make to the loss of standard model energy density over time is

d!lost
  d

= a22

pll2t 9

sm ,

(33)

where a2 is a dimensionless number of order unity and tsm is the temperature of
standard model excitations. from an ads point of view, (33) is literally the rate at
which energy density falls across the horizon to be absorbed by the d3-branes. three
powers of tsm come from the absorption cross section [7, 8, 9]; also there are powers of
tsm from the nite temperature kinematics of the standard model particles. energy
6we have used the ads/cft prediction   ct 4. naively counting at directions in n = 4
super-yang-mills theory suggests   ct 4. even if this were somehow true for a special cft, it
would only soften (32) to tcft < tcbr/n 1/4.

7section 2 treated the opposite limit. one should be able to use the equation (16) with t (cft)

= 0
to nd a hypersurface in ads5 whose induced metric is real-world cosmology. but this is only an
equivalent means to nd what we already know by solving einsteins equations. in this section we
will cast down the ladder and work directly in four dimensions whenever possible.

ij

14

a)

b)

g ij

t

cft

2

sm

g ij

cft

sm

t

cft

1
i

disc

cft

sm

sm

figure 2: a) standard model particles losing energy via graviton exchange to cft
excitations. b) the inclusive rate is given by a unitarity cut of the rst correction to
the graviton propagator.

density also decreases because of hubble expansion: in total,

dsm
d

a
a

= 

t 4
sm  2

pll2t 9

sm ,

(34)

where we have dropped factors of order unity. one such factor is the central charge of
the standard model elds which are light compared to the temperature at any given
time. approximately this same factor appears in both terms on the right hand side
of (34), so it doesnt matter much for the relative size of the terms. however a2 does
matter, and it should be computed if a more accurate estimate than the one presented
here is desired. we have also suppressed a term in (34) for cft energy leaking back
into visible elds, but that is ok since we are operating on the assumption that the
cft is cold.

to determine whether the cft is appreciably aecting the cosmology, one should

compare the two terms in (34). their ratio is

 = 2

pll2t 5

smh 1

(35)

where h 1 = a/ a is the inverse hubble time (a function of  ). the cft will not
appreciably aect cosmology as long as cft  sm and  is small. what small means
in this context depends on all the factors of order unity that we have dropped. all
these factors are calculable: once we have (6) and (12) the rest is essentially kinematics.

15

in order to make some preliminary estimates i will assume that the hubble expansion
term in (34) dominates over the energy loss term when   1.

the state of the universe today does not lead to a dramatic bound on l: for instance,

estimating  for the rate of energy loss from the cbr to the cft gives

l2 

1
o t 5
plh 1

cbr  1033 cm2 ,

(36)

which is easily passed by any realistic theory. however the bound tightens as one goes
back in time. tracing the matter-dominated cosmology back to the time of last scatter
at z  104, one obtains roughly
l2  1033 cm2(cid:18)alast scatter

= 1033 cm2(cid:18)alast scatter

(cid:19)5 h 1

= 1019 cm2 , (37)

(cid:19)7/2

last scatter

h 1

ao

ao

o

still not meaningfully restrictive. tracing the radiation-dominated cosmology back to
nucleosynthesis at z  1010, one obtains
alast scatter (cid:19)5 h 1
l2  1019 cm2(cid:18)anucleosynthesis

alast scatter (cid:19)3
= 1021 cm2(cid:18)anucleosynthesis

= 10 cm2 .

nucleosynthesis

(38)
still this bound is satised with four orders of magnitude to spare (in l) if we suppose
l to be on the order of a micron. i emphasize the extreme simple-mindedness of the
estimates: all i have done in (38) is to write

last scatter

h 1

l2 = 

1
smh 1  
2
plt 5

1

2
plt 5

cbrh 1

o

1

last scatter   zlast scatter

znucleosynthesis!3

z7/2

,

(39)

and then demand   1. the powers of z in (37)-(39) arise from the relations h 1 
a3/2 for the matter dominated cosmology and h 1  a2 for the radiation-dominated
cosmology. in view of the actual number obtained in (38), a more accurate estimate
would be desirable. one can also attempt to trace cosmology back to larger z and
tighten the bound on l further, if one feels convinced that  must still be small for
z > 1010.

an independent bound on l could obtained by checking the eect on supernovas of
energy loss to the cft, as in [46]. the energy scales here are on the order of 30 mev,
so a slightly better bound than (38) might be expected.

there is yet another way to set a bound on l if we assume that the ads5 geometry
comes from type iib string theory through some freund-rubin ansatz or related com-
pactication. in such compactications, the extra ve dimensions have the same length
scale l as ads5. suppose ads5s5 is the relevant geometry. then the standard string

16

theory relation 16g10 = (2)7g2
to

s4 combined with (12) and vol s5 = 3l5 leads us

l = g1/3

s   1634

g4 !1/6

.

(40)

type iib theory has an s-duality symmetry which takes gs  1/gs. thus we can
assume that gs  1. a conventional value of  would be only a few times the four-
dimensional planck length, pl. this results in a bound on l which is also a few times
pl. in order to make l observably big, we would have to make  big too. what is
the biggest  we could possibly imagine? in the old days of string theory the answer
would have been   1 gev1  0.2 fm: this is literally the regge slope of observed
hadronic spectra. in recent literature [47], values of  as big as 1tev1 have been
regarded as acceptable. plugging these numbers into (40) leads to

l < 107 cm
l < 1011 cm

for   1gev1
for   1tev1 .

the bad news is that deviations from newtons force law on length scales this small
wont be detected any time soon. the good news is that standard cosmology is no
problem, as far back as nucleosynthesis and further. if we assume that the radiation-
dominated frw solution still pertains, we can estimate the redshift z and the thermal
energies t at which  = 1. the result is

z  1015 , t  100 gev
z  1018 , t  100 tev

for   1gev1
for   1tev1 .

to get the numbers in (42) we have combined several approximations and assumptions.
the error in the exponent should probably be taken to be about 2. it is somewhat
suggestive that the values of t we found are within errors of the boundary of our
direct knowledge of particle physics.
if the string scale is at a tev, then physics
changes suciently there that we can no longer have any condence that the radiation-
dominated frw cosmology is relevant. thus the second line of (42) only shows that
there are no cosmological problems as far back as we can trace the theory. strings at
a gev are a dierent matter, and we will return to them shortly.

although type iib string theory provides the best-understood vacua involving ads5,
it is conceivable that some other type of string theory, even a non-critical string, could
have an ads5 vacuum: see for example [48]. for a non-critical string, (40) would not
be the right estimate, since some or all of the ve compact dimensions simply arent
there. suppose the non-critical string lives in n dimensions, with n  5. assume also
that it exhibits some form of s-duality, so that the coupling cannot be parametrically
large. then

(41)

(42)

(43)

l <  

pl ! 

17

where  = 2/(n  4). if we allow n to range from 10 to 5, the corresponding range of
 is from 1/3 to 2. it is also conceivable that some intersecting conguration of branes
in critical string theory could have an ads5 component in its near-horizon geometry,
and a dierent relation from (40) could pertain if some of the branes had more than
3+1 worldvolume dimensions. i am not currently aware of any completely well-dened,
non-critical string theory other than the c  1 toys. nor can i give a string theoretic
example of intersecting branes with an ads5 near-horizon geometry. besides, if the
extra dimensions of the intersecting branes are larger than l, then the salient physics
of extra dimensions would be more along the lines of [43] than [5]. for the sake of a
concrete discussion, let us stick to (40), with (43) as a possible alternative.

once we have ventured to set   1 gev1, the burning question is why all

collider physics from a gev up to a tev isnt dramatically dierent. the simplest
answer is rather iconoclastic. it is that from a four-dimensional point of view, strings
are nothing more than qcd ux tubes. for energies well above 1 gev, but below the
cuto scale   l/, a better set of variables is the particles of the standard model,
plus a massless propagating graviton. in the low-energy regime where strings are the
good variables, there is a massless graviton in the closed string spectrum. the graviton
must be present in a description of the theory at any scale: on very general grounds
[49] it is impossible for the graviton to be a composite particle.8 the spectrum could
also include massless open strings if the planck brane involves d-branes. the gluons
in the standard model lagrangian might be represented in this way at low energies.
intuitively, the reason why a disk diagram with two gluon boundary insertions and
one bulk insertion of a graviton wouldnt couple gluons to gravity on the scale of
femtometers is that the wavefunction overlap is small. this is the magic of extra
dimensions (exploited similarly in [43]): (40) is roughly a condition on how big the
extra dimensions have to be in the well-understood type iib string theory examples to
make low-energy strings consistent with gravity at the four-dimensional planck scale.
the modied relation (43) could be pertinent for alternative models, as discussed in
the previous paragraph.

the view taken in the previous paragraph is distinct from those of [50] or [6]. wilson
loops in ads/cft usually seek out a location of large redshift in the bulk geometry in
order to lower their tension to the scale of connement. the current scenario has wilson
loops terminating on the planck brane, and the relevant geometry is the geometry near
the planck brane. i would not exclude scenarios where a large redshift does exist near
the planck brane, and the parameter entering into the regge relation is a redshifted
. if that is the way we think qcd strings are realized, then once again the bound
on l is tighter than l < 1 nm, since the  that enters (40) is the un-redshifted string

tension.

8i thank m. strassler and r. sundrum for discussions on this point and related issues.

18

strings at a gev seem like a natural apotheosis of the proposals of [43, 47]. we do
not have to get rid of the graviton if there are extra dimensions on the scale of a
nanometer. (signicantly smaller l would work in a model where (43) pertains). we do
not have to worry about nucleosynthesis if the estimate (38) bears out. but we do have
to face some hard questions. first, if l  1 nm, how do we manage to accommodate
n = l/pl  1026 d3-branes? something has to soak up all the ramond-ramond
ux, and that sounds like an impossible stretch for string compactications (see for
example [6]). n comes out somewhat smaller if gs is small, or in models where (43)
pertains with n < 10. second, string theory would have to face up to hadron physics
in the energy range between pions and partons. regge trajectories are as suggestive as
they always were, but there is much more to be explained. processes where some or all
of the nal energy winds up in cft excitations are likely to be a problem. however
the relevant branching ratios typically depend on l rather than , and amount to yet
another way of setting an upper bound on l. third, strings could stretch from the
planck brane all the way into the ads5 bulk (to connect with a d3-brane if one wants
to think in those terms) at only a nite cost in energy. the mass of such a string is
roughly l/, which comes out to be approximately 3000 tev if we use l  1 nm. this
is out of the range of colliders, but it is nevertheless a dangerous number for any sort
of loop computation because these strings are so numerous: there are as many of them
as there are d3-branes. their mass is bigger if (43) applies: l/  1018 gev. fourth
and nally, if ux tubes are long strings ending on the planck brane, then what are
quarks?

as observed in section 3, there is a precise way of characterizing the strings stretched
from the planck brane to the horizon of ads5: they are the massive w bosons associ-
ated with the separation of the planck brane from the l/pl d3-branes that create the
ads5 geometry. the scale of these masses could be lowered, say to 30 tev, if l falls
suciently short of saturating the bound in the rst line of (41). or we could return
to strings at a tev and get approximately the same 30 tev higgs scale by saturating
the bound in the second line of (41). either way, we are left with a version of [51],
only with an enormous hidden sector gauge group and strings at a gev or a tev. in
[51], it seemed like coupling the cft to gravity might resurrect the hierarchy problem.
this is less of a problem if the string scale is smaller than or comparable to the scale
of soft breakings of the cft: one may hope that stringy softness ameliorates the
divergences of gravity already at the string scale. there is no clear microscopic picture
of what the theory is without specifying the nature of the planck brane. however, the
relation (40) between newtons coupling and other low-energy quantities should not
depend on the detailed properties of the planck brane.

in conclusion, insisting that ads5 has to come from string theory provides a bound
on l which is sharper than we were able to obtain from nucleosynthesis, and which

19

appears to rule out experimental observation of (31). there are two reasons why string
theory demands a small l. first, l/pl  n, where n is the number of units of
ramond-ramond ve-form ux. it is hard to make this number really big in string
compactications. second, g4l6 < 4, so we can only get big l if we allow big .
strings at a gev. even this radical step only gave us l < 1 nm. if we make  even

in an attempt to be maximally optimistic about the size of l, we have reconsidered

bigger, it only heightens the diculties we encountered trying to make sense of gev
strings. the strategies proposed in ads/cft contexts to relate strings to qcd ux
tubes generally have the property that the fundamental  is smaller than 1 gev2,
implying a tighter bound on l.

5 discussion

the frw cosmology found in section 2 is an interesting check of the claim that the
alternative to compactication proposed in [5] is equivalent to a cuto conformal eld
theory coupled to four-dimensional gravity. however, as emphasized in section 4, the
cft shouldnt make any sizeable contribution to the actual cosmology of our universe
at times later than z = 1010. before that time, one is entitled to speculate about the
physical relevance of the solution of section 2. suppose that the cft and the visible
sector matter on the planck brane were in thermal equilibrium at some early time.
assuming that the cft has a much larger central charge, we have cft  matter, and
the solution found in section 2 should approximately describe the cosmology. at late
times one needs cft  matter. in parallel with [46], we might imagine an inationary
scenario where the inaton lives on the planck brane. then reheating directly aects
only the visible sector, and if  is small by the time of reheating there is substantially
no thermal equilibration with the cft.

in a scenario with gev strings, thermalization with the cft sets in signicantly
around 100 gev (although we must recall that the estimates here were extremely
crude). that alone might lead us to rule this case out unless a reheating mechanism
could be proposed at a lower scale.

in known string compactications, the number n of d3-branes is typically on the
order of 10. as many as 103 d3-branes were claimed to be attainable in certain
orbifold examples [6]. if we take this as a strict bound, then the relation l/pl  n
puts our entire discussion at an inaccessibly small length scale: l  1030 cm for
n = 103. (as usual, pl is the four-dimensional planck scale). the formalism developed
in section 3 could still be useful for extracting a low-energy eective theorylow-
energy being interpreted now as much less than 1016 gev. standard ination occurs
around 1014 gev, so it is possible one might embed a conventional inationary model
in ads5 using the ds4 solution discussed after (17). the amusing aspect of such a

20

model is that there is a natural candidate for the pre-inationary universe:
radiation-dominated frw solution found in section 2.

it is the

there are two solid conclusions to be drawn from the estimates of section 4. first,
our present understanding of nucleosynthesis would not be threatened if deviations
from newtons force law of the form (31) were found. we already know that such
deviations cannot be present on scales much larger than a millimeter, and this is
enough to suppress the associated loss of energy to the conformal eld theory for z as
large as 1010. second, string theory as we understand it seems to forbid an ads5 space
large enough to cause measurable deviations from newtons force law. even if we are
willing to take the string scale down to 1 gev and regard strings as collective eects
of qcd, l still cant be larger than 1 nm.

there is nothing sacred about an ads5 bulk spacetime:

it has been the focus of
so much recent literature in part because it is simple. practically any string theory
realization of ads5 will include scalar elds, and if they have a non-trivial prole, large
deviations from ads5 are the generic behavior far from the boundary. the literature
on renormalization group in ads/cft ows provides ample evidence of this (see for
example [52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57]). only a subset of these geometries can support nite
temperature, due to boundary conditions on the scalars at the black hole horizon. a
felicitous feature of ads5, which will not be shared by generic rg ow geometries, is
that the relation g4 = 2g5/l obtains no matter where the planck brane is in the bulk
geometry. the formalism worked out in section 3 will still retain its general features
in a more generic bulk geometry, but details will be rather dierent: for instance, it is
no longer clear that the induced metric on the cuto brane will be the einstein frame
metric.

a cuto brane in a bulk geometry whose ads/cft dual is a quantum eld theory
undergoing renormalization group ow corresponds to gravity coupled to that same
qft. the proposal of [39] is to put the standard model not on the cuto brane,
but rather on some brane far from the boundary, where gtt is very small. there are
several ways that such a construction could be realized in string theory. first, if
the ve-dimensional space-time ends at a nite minimum of gtt, then one can show
that the end-of-the-world brane must have negative tension. the best-understood
constructions in the current literature which admit negative tension end-of-the-world
branes are type i string theory and certain calabi-yau compactications of horava-
witten theory. at the classical level, these constructions do not allow an ads5 bulk:
there is always some scalar that evolves across the ve-dimensional bulk. there is not
yet compelling evidence that all scalars could be held xed and an ads5 bulk obtained.
it would be possible to develop a formalism similar to the one in section 3 for type i or
horava-witten constructions, but it would have more the avor of an ordinary kaluza-
klein reduction, where heavy elds are integrated out and light elds are kept. the

21

distinctive feature of (18) is that it enables us to obtain a non-local functional which
summarizes the dynamics of infrared degrees of freedom.

if there are no negative tension branes, the only option is for the ve-dimensional
space-time to continue all the way to gtt = 0. if there are scalars involved, the generic
behavior is for curvatures to become strong as gtt  0. ads/cft has limited com-
putational power in such circumstances. the best hope is that string theory provides
a resolution of the strong curvatures. if visible sector elds live on branes at strong
curvatures, then we are not in a position to say much about the physics.
it is also
conceivable [58] that visible sector elds live on a probe brane at small but nonzero gtt.
there are potential phenomenological virtues to such a model, but it seems somewhat
contrived.

string theory and string dualities have taught us that extra dimensions are theoreti-
cally inexpensive. but the view of the fth dimension espoused in the current paper is
not excessively literal: rather than making the claim that there is actually a large extra
dimension of space waiting to be discovered, the statement is that an extra dimension
is a convenient way to describe collective phenomena of a strongly coupled quantum
eld theoryin the present case, a conformal eld theory coupled to gravity. to make
this seem more denite, suppose measurements of gravity at a micron did after all turn
up deviations from newtons law of the form (31). the ads interpretation would
be that gravitons are propagating in the fth dimension, while the cft interpre-
tation would be that a loop of gauge bosons in a purely four-dimensional theory had
contributed. which interpretation we prefer is a matter of ontology: if ads/cft is
right then they are absolutely indistinguishable on experimental grounds. my current
ontology isnt very happy either with a cft with c  1058 or with a fth dimension
with curvatures on the scale of a micron. but it is in the subtle guises of string duality
and string compactication that i suspect extra dimensions have the best chance of
improving our understanding of the physical world.

acknowledgements

although it is tricky to assign credit in the absence of publications, i should acknowl-
edge the important contributions of j. maldacena and e. witten. as far as i can
ascertain, j. maldacena was the rst to enunciate the view that the randall-sundrum
alternative to compactication is nothing more nor less than gravity coupled to a
strongly interacting cft; and as far as my personal knowledge extends, e. witten
was the rst to suggest a denite calculation based on the idea, namely a correction to
newtons law based on the two-point function of the stress tensor of the cft. i have
also proted greatly from conversations with h. verlinde. i thank the participants of
the conference new dimensions in string theory and field theory at the itp in santa

22

barbara for lively discussionsespecially i. klebanov, m. gremm, r. myers, v. peri-
wal, b. ovrut, k. skenderis, s. giddings, s. elitzur, e. witten, v. hubeny, l. bildsten,
r. maimon, r. sundrum, m. strassler, and g. horowitz. i thank n. warner, k. pilch,
d. freedman, o. dewolfe, a. karch, e. silverstein, and s. kachru for earlier discus-
sions, and particularly d. gross for reading an early version of the manuscript and for
useful comments.

this research was supported by the harvard society of fellows, and also in part by
the nsf under grant number phy-98-02709, and by doe grant de-fgo2-91er40654.
i thank the itp at santa barbara for hospitality while the work was carried out.

references

[1] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal eld theories and
supergravity, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200.

[2] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov, and a. m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators

from noncritical string theory, phys. lett. b428 (1998) 105, hep-th/9802109.

[3] e. witten, anti-de sitter space and holography, adv. theor. math. phys. 2

(1998) 253, hep-th/9802150.

[4] o. aharony, s. s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri, and y. oz, large n eld

theories, string theory and gravity, hep-th/9905111.

[5] l. randall and r. sundrum, an alternative to compactication,

hep-th/9906064.

[6] h. verlinde, holography and compactication, hep-th/9906182.

[7] i. r. klebanov, world-volume approach to absorption by non-dilatonic branes,

nucl. phys. b496 (1997) 231, hep-th/9702076.

[8] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov, and a. a. tseytlin, string theory and classical
absorption by three-branes, nucl. phys. b499 (1997) 217, hep-th/9703040.

[9] s. s. gubser and i. r. klebanov, absorption by branes and schwinger terms in

the world volume theory, phys. lett. b413 (1997) 4148, hep-th/9708005.

[10] j. maldacena, private communications.

[11] h. verlinde, invited talk at itp santa barbara conference, new dimensions in

field theory and string theory,
http://www.itp.ucsb.edu/online/susy c99/verlinde/.

23

[12] e. witten, remarks at itp santa barbara conference, new dimensions in field

theory and string theory,
http://www.itp.ucsb.edu/online/susy c99/discussion/.

[13] r. sundrum, invited talk at itp santa barbara conference, new dimensions in

field theory and string theory,
http://www.itp.ucsb.edu/online/susy c99/sundrum/.

[14] s. giddings, invited talk at itp santa barbara conference, new dimensions in

field theory and string theory,
http://www.itp.ucsb.edu/online/susy c99/giddings/.

[15] j. polchinski and e. witten, evidence for heterotic - type i string duality,

nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 525540, hep-th/9510169.

[16] p. horava and e. witten, heterotic and type i string dynamics from eleven

dimensions, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 506524, hep-th/9510209.

[17] m. cvetic, s. gries, and h. h. soleng, local and global gravitational aspects
of domain wall space-times, phys. rev. d48 (1993) 26132634, gr-qc/9306005.

[18] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut, and d. waldram, cosmological solutions of

horava-witten theory, phys. rev. d60 (1999) 086001, hep-th/9806022.

[19] h. a. chamblin and h. s. reall, dynamic dilatonic domain walls, nucl. phys.

b562 (1999) 133, hep-th/9903225.

[20] a. chamblin, m. j. perry, and h. s. reall, non-bps d8-branes and dynamic

domain walls in massive iia supergravities, jhep 09 (1999) 014,
hep-th/9908047.

[21] p. kraus, dynamics of anti-de sitter domain walls, hep-th/9910149.

[22] s. mukohyama, brane-world solutions, standard cosmology, and dark

radiation, hep-th/9911165.

[23] p. binetruy, c. deayet, u. ellwanger, and d. langlois, brane cosmological

evolution in a bulk with cosmological constant, hep-th/9910219.

[24] a. kehagias and e. kiritsis, mirage cosmology, jhep 11 (1999) 022,

hep-th/9910174.

[25] t. shiromizu, k. maeda, and m. sasaki, the einstein equation on the 3-brane

world, gr-qc/9910076.

24

[26] e. e. flanagan, s.-h. h. tye, and i. wasserman, cosmological expansion in the

randall-sundrum brane world scenario, hep-ph/9910498.

[27] t. nihei, ination in the ve-dimensional universe with an orbifold extra

dimension, phys. lett. b465 (1999) 8185, hep-ph/9905487.

[28] n. kaloper, bent domain walls as braneworlds, phys. rev. d60 (1999)

123506, hep-th/9905210.

[29] o. dewolfe, d. z. freedman, s. s. gubser, and a. karch, modeling the fth

dimension with scalars and gravity, hep-th/9909134.

[30] c. csaki, m. graesser, l. randall, and j. terning, cosmology of brane models

with radion stabilization, hep-ph/9911406.

[31] d. n. vollick, cosmology on a three-brane, hep-th/9911181.

[32] r. brustein and g. veneziano, the graceful exit problem in string cosmology,

phys. lett. b329 (1994) 429434, hep-th/9403060.

[33] m. henningson and k. skenderis, the holographic weyl anomaly, jhep 07

(1998) 023, hep-th/9806087.

[34] b. a. ovrut, n = 1 supersymmetric vacua in heterotic m-theory,

hep-th/9905115.

[35] e. witten and s. t. yau, connectedness of the boundary in the ads/cft

correspondence, hep-th/9910245.

[36] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov, and a. w. peet, entropy and temperature of

black 3-branes, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 39153919, hep-th/9602135.

[37] a. strominger, unpublished.

[38] v. balasubramanian and p. kraus, a stress tensor for anti-de sitter gravity,

hep-th/9902121.

[39] l. randall and r. sundrum, a large mass hierarchy from a small extra

dimension, phys. rev. lett. 83 (1999) 33703373, hep-ph/9905221.

[40] l. susskind and e. witten, the holographic bound in anti-de sitter space,

hep-th/9805114.

[41] a. w. peet and j. polchinski, uv/ir relations in ads dynamics, phys. rev.

d59 (1999) 065011, hep-th/9809022.

25

[42] c. feerman and c. r. graham, conformal invariants. in elie cartan et les

mathematiques daujourdhui (asterisque, 1985) 95.

[43] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, and g. dvali, the hierarchy problem and

new dimensions at a millimeter, phys. lett. b429 (1998) 263, hep-ph/9803315.

[44] h. liu and a. a. tseytlin, d = 4 super yang-mills, d = 5 gauged supergravity,

and d = 4 conformal supergravity, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 88,
hep-th/9804083.

[45] s. giddings, e. katz, and lisa randall, to appear.

[46] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, and g. dvali, phenomenology, astrophysics

and cosmology of theories with sub-millimeter dimensions and tev scale
quantum gravity, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 086004, hep-ph/9807344.

[47] i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, and g. dvali, new dimensions
at a millimeter to a fermi and superstrings at a tev, phys. lett. b436 (1998)
257, hep-ph/9804398.

[48] a. m. polyakov, the wall of the cave, int. j. mod. phys. a14 (1999) 645,

hep-th/9809057.

[49] s. weinberg and e. witten, limits on massless particles, phys. lett. b96

(1980) 59.

[50] e. witten, anti-de sitter space, thermal phase transition, and connement in

gauge theories, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 505, hep-th/9803131.

[51] p. h. frampton and c. vafa, conformal approach to particle phenomenology,

hep-th/9903226.

[52] l. girardello, m. petrini, m. porrati, and a. zaaroni, novel local cft and

exact results on perturbations of n = 4 super yang-mills from ads dynamics,
jhep 12 (1998) 022, hep-th/9810126.

[53] j. distler and f. zamora, non-supersymmetric conformal eld theories from

stable anti-de sitter spaces, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1999) 1405,
hep-th/9810206.

[54] s. s. gubser, dilaton-driven connement, hep-th/9902155.

[55] a. kehagias and k. sfetsos, on running couplings in gauge theories from

type-iib supergravity, phys. lett. b454 (1999) 270, hep-th/9902125.

26

[56] d. z. freedman, s. s. gubser, k. pilch, and n. p. warner, renormalization

group ows from holography supersymmetry and a c-theorem, hep-th/9904017.

[57] l. girardello, m. petrini, m. porrati, and a. zaaroni, the supergravity dual

of n = 1 superyang-mills theory, hep-th/9909047.

[58] j. lykken and l. randall, the shape of gravity, hep-th/9908076.

27

