hep-th/9912239
eth-th/99-30
par-lpthe 99-45

9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
3
2

 

 
 

1
v
9
3
2
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

correlation functions and boundary conditions

in rcft and three-dimensional topology

giovanni felder, j urg fr ohlich, j urgen fuchs and christoph schweigert

abstract. we give a general construction of correlation functions in rational con-
formal eld theory on a possibly non-orientable surface with boundary in terms of
3-dimensional topological quantum eld theory. the construction applies to any mod-
ular category. it is proved that these correlation functions obey modular invariance
and factorization rules. structure constants are calculated and expressed in terms of
the data of the modular category.

1. introduction

in this paper, we study correlation functions in conformal eld theory from the point

of view of 3-dimensional topological quantum eld theory.

in conformal eld theory, correlation functions are expressible in terms of conformal
blocks. correlation functions on closed orientable surfaces can be expressed as bilin-
ear combinations of conformal blocks. however, in the general case of surfaces with
boundary, possibly non-orientable, the right point of view [a, fs] is to regard correla-
tion functions on a surface x as taking values in the space of conformal blocks of the
double x, an oriented two-fold cover of x, ramied on the boundary. for example the
double of a disk is a sphere. if x has empty boundary and is orientable, then x consists
of two copies of x, with opposite orientations, and one recovers the original denition
of correlation functions.

the problem of nding correlation functions on general compact surfaces is thus the
problem to nd a particular element in the space of conformal blocks of the double.
this element should satisfy certain factorization and modular properties and depends
on boundary conditions. for possibly non-orientable surfaces with boundary, these prop-
erties have been formulated [c, l, pss2, gaw]. also some candidates obeying at least
some of these properties have been proposed, in special models of conformal eld theory,
see [c, bs, pss1] and references therein.

the purpose of this paper is to give a systematic, model independent, construction of
correlation functions obeying all modularity and factorization properties. the solution
we propose is such that the correlation function on the torus is given by the charge

date: december 1999.

1

2

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

conjugation modular invariant sesquilinear combination of conformal blocks and the
boundary conditions are labeled by the same set of labels as the primary elds (the
cardy case [c]). more general solutions will be studied elsewhere.

in view of wittens characterization of the space of conformal blocks as the state space
of a topological 3-dimensional quantum eld theory (tqft), it is natural to represent a
correlation function as a state associated to a 3-manifold whose boundary is the double
of the given surface.

before describing our results, let us describe our proposal in physical terms. assume
rst that the surface is a disk and the model is the wzw model with simply connected
group. then both the primary elds and the boundary conditions (that preserve the full
bulk symmetry) are labeled by the set i of equivalence classes of integrable irreducible
representations of an ane kacmoody lie algebra.

consider the correlation function of n points in the interior of the disk with labels
i1, . . . , in  i and m points on the boundary, with labels j1, . . . , jm  i. let the boundary
condition on the arcs between the kth and k+1st boundary points be labeled by ak. then
our ansatz for the correlation function is the conformal block on the sphere associated
to the wilson graph in the 3-ball depicted in fig. 1. the points zk, zk project to the kth
interior point on the disk, and xl projects to the lth boundary point. intuitively, the
correlation function is obtained by performing the path integral for the chernsimons
theory, in the presence of holonomies of the connection along the paths drawn in the
gure in the representations specied by their labels. at the triple points one contracts
the indices using an invariant form on the tensor product of the three representations
labeling the incoming lines. these invariant forms are part of the data of the correlation
functions and are represented by the labels i in fig. 1.

in the case of a general surface x, correlation functions are the invariant of a cer-
tain wilson graph on the connecting 3-manifold mx, whose boundary is the double of
x. this manifold was rst considered by horava [h] in his study of chernsimons
theory on z2-orbifolds. for wzw models on surfaces with empty boundary, our pro-
posal coincides with horavas chernsimons orbifold amplitudes. in the case of surfaces
with boundary, however, only certain combinations of special boundary conditions were
studied in [h]. the connecting manifold comes with a projection p: mx  x whose
bers over interior points are closed segments, and an inclusion i: x  mx, which is
a homotopy equivalence such that p i = idx. the wilson graph consists then of bers
of p over the interior insertion points, and circular wilson running close to i(x) and
connected by short lines to the boundary insertion points. thus the circular wilson lines
represent non-trivial homology classes in mx if x has connected components which
are non-trivial in h1(x).

if x is a closed orientable surface, the connecting 3-manifold is a cylinder over the
surface and expressions similar to ours were derived in the context of canonical quantiza-
tion of the chernsimons theory [emss,fk,ms]. however, even in this case it was not
veried that this ansatz leads to correlation functions obeying modular and factorization
rules.

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

3

z
2

i
2

z1

i1

m
j
m

xm

z

1

a
m

z
2

z

n

...

in

a
1

1
1j

x1

z

n


2
2j

x2

figure 1.

let us turn to the description of our results in the mathematical framework of topo-
logical quantum eld theory. three-dimensional topological quantum eld theory was
put on mathematically precise terms in [rt1, rt2, t]. in this framework a tqft is
associated to every modular category. in particular one has a modular functor, which
is an assignment of a vector space h( x), the space of states, to each oriented compact
surface x provided with marked disjoint arcs (or marked points with tangent vectors)
labeled by simple objects and a lagrangian subspace of its rst homology. examples of
modular categories may be built out of representations of quantum groups at roots of
unity, without reference to path integrals. then, for each ribbon graph in an oriented
3-manifold with boundary x, so that the boundary of the ribbon graph is at the marked
arcs, the tqft associates an element, its invariant, of h( x).
in this paper, we present a construction of correlation functions for every modular
category. a correlation function on a surface x, with some additional data (labeled
marked arcs, boundary conditions), is a special element of the space of tqft states
h( x) on the double x of x. it is the invariant of a ribbon graph in the connecting 3-
manifold mx, canonically associated to x. we formulate and prove the factorization and
modular invariance properties of our correlation functions. we then compute structure
constants, namely the correlation functions for elementary building blocks: the disk
with three boundary points, the disk with one interior and one boundary point, and
the projective plane with one point. the results are given in terms of the data (fusing
matrices, modular s matrix) of the modular category.

4

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

we also give formulae for the annulus, the klein bottle and the mobius strip. in these
cases the double is a torus; we show that the coecients of correlation functions with
respect to a natural basis of the space of conformal blocks are integers.

the correlation functions are thus given in our approach as states of a tqft. to get
actual functions of the insertion points and moduli, say for wzw models, one uses the
modular category of integrable modules of an ane lie algebra [kl,f]. the dependence
of the moduli should then be obtained by integrating the knizhnikzamolodchikov con-
nection. in the case of the sphere and general wzw models such a construction might
be possible along the lines of [k].

the paper is organized as follows. we begin by giving a review of three-dimensional
topological quantum eld theory, following [t] in sect. 2. in this section modular cate-
gories, tqft and modular functors are introduced, and subtleties such as the framing
anomaly are explained. in sect. 3 we present our proposal for correlation functions. we
also formulate and prove the factorization and modular properties they obey. these
properties imply in particular that correlation functions on general surfaces may be
expressed in terms of basic correlation functions. we compute these basic correlation
functions in sect. 4. in sect. 5 we compute correlation functions in the cases where the
double has genus one, and prove integrality results.

in appendix a we give the denition of modular categories and in appendix b we
describe how to obtain the real projective space by surgery on the unknot, a result
needed to compute correlation functions on the projective plane.

some of these results were announced in [fffs2].

acknowledgements. g. f. is thankful to v. turaev for useful correspondence.

2. modular categories and 3-dimensional tqft

2.1. modular categories. a modular category is a strict monoidal ab-category m
(see appendix a) with unit object 1 and an additional set of data obeying a system of
axioms. the data are

1. a nite set i of simple objects containing 1.
2. for each pair of objects v, w , a braiding morphism cv,w  hom(v w, wv ).
3. for each object v , a twist v  hom(v, v ).
4. a duality:

for each object v there is a unique dual object v  and morphisms

bv  hom(1, v v ) and dv  hom(v v, 1).

these data obey a number of axioms, which we collect in appendix a. see [t] for
more details. in general modular categories, hom(1, 1) is a general ring. we assume
here that hom(1, 1) = c. the general case may be dealt with similarly, as we only use
the axioms and results in the general theory of [t]. however, in order to simplify certain
normalizations, we do use the fact that c is an algebraically closed eld.

the axioms can be best understood in the language of ribbon graphs,

i.e. nite
collections of disjoint ribbons, annuli and coupons. ribbons are oriented rectangles
[1/10, 1/10] [0, 1] embedded in r2  [0, 1], so that [1/10, 1/10] (0, 1) is entirely

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

5

contained in r2  (0, 1). annuli are oriented annuli [1/10, 1/10] s1, embedded in
r2  (0, 1). ribbons and annuli are labeled by objects of the category. the core
{0} [0, 1] or {0} s1 of each ribbon or annulus is also given an orientation. the
coupons are oriented rectangles embedded in r2  (0, 1) with two preferred opposite
sides, the top and the bottom, and are labeled by morphisms of the category. the
ends [1/10, 1/10]{0},
[1/10, 1/10]{1} of the ribbons are glued to the top or
the bottom of coupons, so that the orientations match to give an oriented (topological)
2-manifold with boundary, or are contained in r2 {0, 1}. the coupons are labeled
by morphisms from the tensor product of the objects labeling the ribbons glued to the
bottom boundary, or their dual objects, to the tensor product of the objects labeling
the ribbons glued to the top boundary, or their dual objects. the ordering of the tensor
product reects the ordering (from left to right) of the ribbons meeting at the coupon.
the dual object is taken when the orientation of the core points in the upwards (bottom
to top) direction. for example, if the upper side of the coupon

w

x

y

f

u

v

is the top boundary, and the orientation is the standard orientation of the plane, then
f  hom(u  v, w  x  y ).

using this correspondence the basic morphisms are represented as follows:

cv,w =

v

w

v =

v

bv =

v

v

dv =

.

choosing an orientation of a ribbon in an oriented 3-manifold is the same as choosing
a preferred side, which in our drawings will usually face the reader. the other side is
drawn as shaded.

the tensor product of morphisms is represented by the juxtaposition of the factors,
and the composition f g is obtained by drawing f on top of g and gluing the ends of the
ribbons. then the axioms are such that the morphism corresponding to a ribbon graph

6

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

depends only on its isotopy class. in particular for every ribbon graph  in s3 = r3 
we get an isotopy invariant ||  hom(1, 1) = c.
in drawing the graphs representing morphisms we will often make use of the black-
board framing notation. instead of drawing ribbons we will only draw their cores, with
the understanding that the ribbons are contained in the plane of the page (or of the
screen) and inherit the orientation from the standard orientation of the plane.

as a consequence of the axioms one then proves that the objects in i are pairwise
non-isomorphic and are a system of representatives of all isomorphism classes of simple
objects. also one shows that there is a canonical isomorphism v  (v ) for all objects
v given in terms of braiding, twist and duality. we will tacitly identify (v ) with v
via this isomorphism below.

of particular importance is the (quantum) trace of an endomorphism f  hom(v, v ).
it is dened by the formula tr(f ) = dv cv,v (v f idv )bv  c. it obeys tr(f g) = tr(gf )
(whenever both sides are dened) and tr(id1) = 1.

out of the trace one then denes the quantum dimensions of simple objects: 1

and the modular matrix with matrix elements

dim(i) = tr(idi),

si,j = tr(cj,i ci,j).

these numbers depend only on the isomorphism classes of the simple objects i, j. one
shows that, as a consequence of the axioms, dim(i) = dim(i) 6= 0, dim(1) = 1, and that
the modular matrix obeys si,j = sj,i = si,j , si,1 = dim(i).
on the simple modules i, the isomorphism i acts as a scalar vi 6= 0 times the identity.
a rank of a modular category is a number d  c such that

dim(i)2.

d2 =xii

in the following, we shall assume that a rank has been xed. related to the rank is the
charge  of the modular category. it is dened by the formula

the charge appears in the description of the framing anomaly.

 = d1xji

v1
j dim(j)2.

out of si,j, vi, d one constructs a projective representation of the mapping class group

of the torus, see 2.5.2 below.

examples.

1. the category of nite dimensional modules over the group algebra c[z2n ] has
simple non-isomorphic objects labeled by i = z2n , representing all isomorphism
classes of simple objects. all objects are direct sums of simple objects. this

1 we usually denote simple objects by lower case letters i, j, . . . , and general objects by capital letters

u, v, . . . .

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

7

category can be made into a modular category as follows. let  = exp (i/2n).
let for each object v , v  be the dual vector space to v with action g  =  
(g), g  zn ,  v . thus j j for a simple object j  i. let dv : v v  c,
bv : c v v , are the canonical homomorphisms (evaluation and its dual). for
simple objects let j = vj idj with vj = j2 and cj,k = jk idcc. these denitions
are extended to general objects by (bi)linearity with respect to direct sums. then

vj = j2

,

sj,k = 2jk,

d = 2n ,

 = ei/4.

in particular dim(j) = 1 for all simple objects j. an equivalent category appears
in conformal eld theory and is related to the free eld with values in a circle of
radius 1/2n.

2. the puried category of representations of the quantum group uq(sl2) with q =
exp(i/(+2)), which is related to the su(2) wzw model at level , has +1 simple
objects 0, . . . ,  up to isomorphism. in this case we have

vj = ei j(j+2)
2(+2) ,

sj,k =

,

 = e

3i

4(+2) .

(cid:17)

,

+2

sin(cid:16) (j+1)(k+1)
sin(cid:0) 
+2(cid:1)

2

d = q +2
sin(cid:0) 
+2(cid:1)

2.2. spaces of morphisms. let u, v, w be objects of a modular category. then
we have linear isomorphisms hom(u  v, w )  hom(u, w  v ), hom(u  v, w ) 
hom(v, u  w ), given by
(1)

 7 (  idv )  (idu  bv ),

 7 (idu   )  (bu   idv ),

respectively. in particular we have an isomorphism

hom(i1      in, j1      jm)  hom(1, in      i1  j1      jm),

for any simple objects i1, . . . , jm.

for n+m = 3, it is then sucient to consider the space
h i,j,k = hom(1, i j  k).

we have a non-degenerate pairing h , i : h k,j ,i  h i,j,k  c, given by

h, i = dk  (id  dj  id)  (id  id  di  id  id)  (  ).

it is useful to x bases (e[ijk],  = 1, . . . , n i,j,k) of the spaces h i,j,k for i, j, k simple
objects, so that

(2)

he[kji], e[ijk]i = ,.

graphically, a basis element e[ijk] is represented by a coupon

i

j

k

e   ijk[    ]


8

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

or in the simplied blackboard framing notation by a trivalent vertex with a label 
drawn where the bottom of the coupon should be. the relation (2) may then be written
as

i

j

k





k

i



j

=

j

k

=



i





= ,.

using the isomorphisms above, the bilinear pairing may also be formulated as a pairing
between h k

i,j = hom(i j, k) and h i,j

k = hom(k, i j) given by the trace:
h, i = tr().

notations are used for the other spaces. thus n i,j,k = dim(h i,j,k) = n j,k

the dimensions (verlinde numbers) of hom(i  j, k) will be denoted by n k
the rst computations with these bases are the following two identities. the rst

i and so on.

i,j. similar

identity is

(3)

j

i





i

k

= ,

1

dim(i)

i

,

or e[ikj]e[jki] = , dim(i)1idi, if e[ikj], e[jki] are identied via (1) with
basis elements of h i

, respectively. the second identity is

j,k, h j,k

i

i

j

nj,k,i

= xki

x=1

dim(k)



k



i

i

j

j

,

(4)

whose meaning is idi  idj =pki, dim(k)e[jki]e[ikj], where e[jki] is identied

k and e[ikj] with a basis element of h k
i,j.

with a basis element of h i,j

the rst identity can be obtained by noticing that both sides of the equations are
elements of the one-dimensional vector space hom(i, i) = c idi, so they are proportional.
the constant of proportionality is computed by taking the trace on both sides.

the second identity follows from the domination axiom (appendix a, (xi)) which im-
plies that the left-hand side can be expressed as a linear combination of the morphisms
on the right-hand side, possibly with dierent basis elements e, e in the factors. to

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

9

compute the coecients c,(k) in idi  idj =pki,, c,(k)e[jki]e[ikj], we com-
pose both sides of the equation with e[ilj]  h l
i,j. since hom(k, l) = 0 for l 6= k, the
only term contributing to the sum over k is the one with k = l. using the rst identity,
we get e = p, c(l) dim(l)1e, from which the result c,(l) = dim(l), follows.

2.3. frobeniusschur indicators. a self-dual object in a modular category is an ob-
ject isomorphic to its dual object. to each simple self-dual object one associates a scalar
squaring to one, called the frobeniusschur indicator. its role in conformal eld theory
was rst emphasized in [b]. it is a generalization of a classical notion in group represen-
tation theory: if v is an irreducible representation of a group g then there is an action
of z2 on the space of invariants (v  v )g by permutation of factors. this space is at
most one-dimensional. if it is non-trivial, the generator of z2 acts by multiplication by
the frobeniusschur indicator.

in the case of a general modular category, the frobeniusschur indicator is dened as
follows. suppose v is a simple self-dual object and : v   v is an isomorphism. then
the frobeniusschur indicator is the factor of proportionality (v ) in the identity

(v   idv ) cv,v  bv = (v ) (1  ) bv ,

between two non-zero elements of the one-dimensional space hom(1, v   v ). since v
is simple,  is unique up to non-zero scalar, so (v ) is independent of the choice of
isomorphism .

lemma 2.1. let v be a simple self-dual object. then

(i) (1) = 1.
(ii) (v )2 = 1.
(iii) if v is isomorphic to w then w is simple and self-dual and (v ) = (w ).

in

particular (v ) = (v ).

proof: (i) follows from 1 = id1, c1,1 = id1  id1. to prove (ii), let us act on the equation
dening  with the morphism (v  idv )cv ,v . by the naturality of the braiding, the
left-hand side becomes cv ,v cv,v (v  v )bv , which, by the twist axiom (appendix a,
(iv)), is equal to v v bv = bv 1 = bv . the right-hand side is

(v  idv ) cv ,v (v ) (1  ) bv = (v ) ( 1) (v  idv ) cv,v  bv

= (v )2 bv .

thus (v )2 = 1.
to prove (iii),

let us introduce the dual morphism f: w   v  of a morphism
f : v  w : f = (dw  id)(id f  id)(id bv ). it is easy to see (by drawing the cor-
responding graphs) that idv = idv  and that (f g) = gf, whenever the composition
of the morphisms f , g is dened. in particular f is an isomorphism if and only if f is
an isomorphism. moreover bw = f  (f)1 bv if f : v  w is an isomorphism. using
the naturality of twist and braiding, we act by (f)1  f on the equation dening (v )

10

and get

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

(w   idw )cw,w bw = (v ) (f11  f ) bv

since f f: w   w is an isomorphism, it follows that w is self-dual (it is clear that
w is simple) and that (w ) = (v ). (cid:3)

= (v )(cid:0)(f f)1  f f(cid:1) bw ,

2.4. fusing matrices (6j-symbols). a modular category is in principle determined
by a set of numerical data. additionally to the modular matrix and the scalars vi, one
has to specify the 6j-symbols. let i, j, k, l, m, n be simple objects (in the applications
they are either elements of i or duals of elements of i). then one shows that the linear
homomorphisms

h i,j
l  h l,k

m  hom(m, i j  k),

given by    7 ( idk)  , and
h j,k
n  h i,n

m  hom(m, i j  k),

 : mli
 : mni

given by    7 (idi  )  , are isomorphisms. therefore we have an isomorphism
()1  . its components are the 6j-symbols:

j

k

(cid:26) i
l m n (cid:27) : h i,j

l  h l,k

m  h j,k

n  h i,n
m .

the matrix elements of the 6j-symbols with respect to the above bases are dened by

j

k

l m n (cid:27) e[lij]  e[mlk] =x, (cid:26) i
(cid:26) i

j

k

l m n (cid:27)



graphically, these matrix elements are dened by

e[njk]  e[min].

i

j



l



m

k

i

j

k

= xn,,



n


m

l

j

k m n (cid:27)
(cid:26) i



.

we also introduce inverse 6j-symbols as the components of the inverse map 1  :

i

j

k

i

= xl,,



n


m

k

j



l



m

l

j

(cid:26) i
k m n (cid:27)





.

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

11

2.5. the 3-dimensional topological quantum eld theory. to every modular cat-
egory there is an associated 3-dimensional topological quantum eld theory (tqft). it is
a formalization and generalization of the chern-simons path integral of [w]. the tqft
associates a nite dimensional vector space h(x) (the space of conformal blocks) to
each surface x with marked points and some additional structure, and an element of
h(x) to each 3-dimensional manifold with a graph of wilson lines bounding x.
to deal properly with the framing anomaly, we need to endow surfaces with addi-
tional structures and use ribbons instead of wilson lines. we start by introducing the
denitions, following [t].

an extended surface is an oriented closed 2-manifold x with a nite set of disjoint
oriented embedded arcs labeled by simple objects, and a lagrangian subspace (x) of
the rst homology group h1(x, r). a homeomorphism of extended surfaces f : x  y
is an orientation preserving homeomorphism mapping arcs to arcs with the same label
and the same orientation. a homeomorphism f : x  y of extended surfaces will be
called strong if it also maps (x) to (y ) 2. the opposite x of an extended surface
is the surface x with opposite orientation and the same arcs, so that if an arc of x is
labeled by a simple object i then it has opposite orientation and it is labeled by i in
x.

a cobordism of extended surfaces is a triple (m, m, +m) such that:
1. m is a 3-dimensional manifold with boundary containing a ribbon graph 3. a
ribbon graph consists of ribbons, annuli and coupons as in 2.1, but the ribbons and
annuli are labeled by simple objects only. ribbons ends are glued to coupons or
are contained in the boundary m.

2. m are disjoint disconnected subsets of the boundary m so that m = +m 
(m), endowed with lagrangian subspaces of their rst homology groups. the
marked arcs at which the ribbons in m end are given the label of the ribbons whose
core is oriented inwards, and the dual label otherwise. the lagrangian subspaces
and the oriented labeled arcs give m the structure of extended surfaces.

we say that (m, m, +m) is a cobordism from m to +m.
the tqft 4 (z,h) associated to a modular category m over c consists of the fol-
(i) for each extended surface x there is a nite dimensional complex vector space
h(x), the space of states (or of conformal blocks), such that h() = {0} and
h(x  y ) = h(x)  h(y ).

lowing data.

2 as we rarely use strong homeomorphisms we departed here slightly from the notation of [t]: there a
homeomorphism is called weak homeomorphism and a strong homeomorphism is called homeomorphism.
3 instead of ribbon graphs one often considers framed graphs, whose edges (assumed to be smoothly
embedded in a smooth manifold) come with a normal vector eld. a ribbon graph can be made into a
framed graph by taking a vector eld normal to the ribbons. the present approach [t] works also in
the topological category.

4 the notation in [t] for this tqft is ( e,t e)

12

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

(ii) to each homeomorphism of extended surfaces f : x  y there is an isomorphism
(iii) if (m, m, +m) is a cobordism of extended surfaces, then the tqft associates

f: h(x)h(y ).
to it a homomorphism

z(m, m, +m) : h(m)  h(+m)

depending linearly on the labels of the coupons.

these data obey the following axioms.
1. (naturality) let (m, m, +m), (n, n, +n) be cobordisms of extended sur-
faces. let f : m  n be a degree one homeomorphism mapping the ribbon graph
in m onto the ribbon graph in n, restricting to homeomorphisms f: m  n
preserving the lagrangian subspaces. then

(f+)  z(m, m, +m) = z(n, n, +n)  (f)

2. (multiplicativity) if m1, m2 are two cobordisms of extended surfaces, then under
the identication h(m1m2) = h(m1)h(m2) we have z(m1m2) =
z(m1) z(m2).
3. (functoriality) suppose a cobordism m is obtained from the disjoint union of m1
and m2 by gluing +m1 to m2 along a degree one homeomorphism f : +m1 
m2 preserving marked arcs with their orientation. then
z(m, m1, +m2) = m z(m2, m2, +m2)  f  z(m1, m1, +m1),
for some integer m.

4. (normalization) let x be an extended surface. let the cylinder over x be the
3-manifold x  [1, 1], with the ribbon graph consisting of the ribbons z  [1, 1],
where z runs over the marked arcs of x. their orientation is such that they induce
the orientation of the arcs on x {1}. their core is oriented from 1 to 1. then

the homomorphism z(m, m, +m) is called the invariant of the cobordism of
extended surfaces (m, m, +m). by the naturality axiom it is invariant under degree
one homeomorphisms that restrict to the identity on the boundary.

moreover the invariant does not change if we remove an edge with label 1 or we replace

the label of an edge by its dual and reverse the orientation of its core.

the tqft gives the system of vector spaces h(x) the structure of a modular functor.
next we list some of the properties of the modular functor h which we shall use.

2.5.1. duality. the space h(x) associated to the opposite of the extended surface x
is canonically isomorphic to the dual space to h(x). the isomorphism is induced by
the pairing

(6)
here x is identied with x {1} and x with x {1}.

z(x  [1, 1], x  (x),) : h(x)  h(x)  c.

(5)

z(x  [1, 1], x {1}, x {1}) = idh(x).

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

13

2.5.2. mapping class group. the action f 7 f of homeomorphisms may be expressed in
terms of the tqft. namely, let f : x  y be a homeomorphism of extended surfaces.
then the 3-manifold obtained by gluing the cylinder over x to the cylinder over y
denes a cobordism (mf , x, y ). the normalization and functoriality axioms then imply
that f = z(mf , x, y ). moreover, it can be shown, using the naturality axiom, that if
f, g are homotopic in the class of homeomorphism of extended surfaces, then f = g. in
particular, if x = y , f 7 f denes a projective representation of the mapping class
group of x.

example. let x be a torus with no marked arcs. view x as the boundary of a solid
torus h = d2  s1 and take  = (x) to be the kernel of the map induced by the
inclusion x  h. then a basis of h(x) is given by

j(x) = z((h, j),, x),

j  i where (h, j) is h with a ribbon graph consisting of an untwisted annulus [, ]s1
with label j. let s(z, w) = (w1, z), t (z, w) = (zw, z) be the standard generators of the
mapping class group sl(2, z) of x = s1  s1. then s, t are represented in this
basis by the matrices s = (d1si,j) and t = (v1
i i,j) respectively. the map f 7 f is
a projective representation of the mapping class group: the matrices s and t obey
the relations s4 = 1, ( t s)3 = s2. moreover s2 is the matrix (i,j ). note that if we
choose a third root of , a genuine representation may be obtained by replacing t by
t = (1/3v1

i i,j).

2.5.3. gluing homomorphisms. if x is an extended surface with arcs ,  labeled by i,
i, let x be an extended surface obtained as follows: let , : d2  x be orientation
preserving disjoint embeddings of the unit disk d2  c such that their restriction to
[1, 1] are parametrizations of the oriented arcs , . then x is obtained from x
by removing the interiors of the disks (d2), (d2) and gluing their boundaries by
identifying (z) with (z), for z  s1. the arcs of x are the remaining arcs of x and
the lagrangian subspace (x) consists of images in x of homology classes of cycles in
x  ((d2)  (d2)) which are mapped by the inclusion to cycles in (x).

then one has a gluing homomorphism gx,x : h(x)h(x).
the gluing homomorphism is obtained from the tqft: let m be the 3-manifold
obtained from x  [1, 1], the cylinder over x, by gluing (d2){1} to (d2){1}
via the identication ((z), 1) = ((z), 1), z  d2. let the ribbon graph in m be
obtained from the ribbon graph in x  [1, 1] by replacing the part of the ribbon through
the glued disks by a narrower one, so as to t inside m. then m has boundary x  x
and denes a cobordism of extended surfaces from x to x. then

gx,x  = z(m, x, x).

it is then known that the gluing homomorphism has the following completeness property.

14

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

if xj is the extended surface x as above, but with  labeled by j and  labeled by

j, then the sum of gluing homomorphisms

is an isomorphism.

h(xj)  h(x)

mji

2.5.4. description of h(x) as a vector space. let x be a 2-sphere with n marked
arcs labeled by simple objects j1, . . . , jn. let m be a 3-ball with boundary x and a
ribbon graph consisting of one vertex connected to the marked arcs by n ribbons. then
z(m,, x) depends linearly on the label of the vertex and is thus a linear map

z(m,, x) : hom(1, j1      jn)  h(x)

by construction of the tqft out of the modular category, this map is an isomorphism.
combining this result with the completeness of the gluing map, one deduces, by attaching
handles to the sphere, that h(x)  hom(1, j1      jn  (k k  k)g) for a surface
of genus g with n marked points. under this identication, the invariant of a cobordism
changes in a covariant way if we replace the labels of the edges by equivalent simple
objects.

2.6. trace formula. one important variant of the functoriality axiom is a formula [t]
for the invariant of a closed 3-manifold of the form m = x  s1, for a closed oriented
surface x, with some ribbon graph . we may obtain m by gluing the two components
of the boundary of n = x  [0, 1]. then the ribbon graph intersects the boundary
along arcs and +n = x  {1} becomes an extended surface. n = x {0} is then
canonically strongly homeomorphic to the same extended surface, and the trace formula
holds:

(7)

z(m,,) = trh(+n )(z(n, n, +n)).

2.7. framing anomaly. we give here the formula for the integer m appearing in the
functoriality axiom, following sect. iv.7 of [t]. it is given in terms of maslov indices,
which we proceed to dene.

let h be a symplectic real vector space with symplectic form , and 1, 2, 3  h
be lagrangian subspaces. then on the subspace (1 + 2) 3 we have a quadratic form
q(x) = (x2, x), where x = x1 + x2 with x1  1, x2  2 (q(x) does not depend on the
choice of the decomposition of x). the maslov index (1, 2, 3) is by denition the
signature of q. it is a function which is antisymmetric under permutations of its three
arguments, and in particular vanishes if any two arguments coincide.

if x is an oriented closed 2-manifold, the intersection form on h1(x, r) is symplectic.
moreover, if m is a 3-manifold with boundary and m = +mm is a decomposition
of the boundary into closed disjoint subsets, then we have a map n from the set of the
lagrangian subspaces of h1(m, r) to the set of lagrangian subspaces of h1(+m, r):
x  n() if and only if there exists an x   so that xx is homologous to zero as a cycle

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

15

in m. similarly we have a map n sending lagrangian subspaces of h1(+m, r) to the
lagrangian subspaces of h1(m, r). then the integer m appearing in the functoriality
property is
m = (fn(m1), f(+m1), n(+m2)) + (f(+m), (m2), n(+m2)).
the following property is useful for surfaces with orientation reversing involutions, such
as doubles.

lemma 2.2. let h be a real symplectic vector space with symplectic form . suppose
  endr(h) is an involution such that  = . if 1, 2, 3 are lagrangian subspaces
invariant under , then

(1, 2, 3) = 0.

proof: let x be an element of the invariant space (1 + 2)  3. if x = x1 + x2 with
xi  i, then (x) = (x1) + (x2) is a decomposition of (x) into a sum of elements of
1, 2. thus

q((x)) = ((x2), (x)) = (x2, x) = q(x).

on the other hand, the signature is an invariant, so the signature of q is equal to the
signature of q   = q. thus the signature vanishes. (cid:3)

3. boundary conditions and correlation functions

3.1. the double of a surface. suppose that x is a two-dimensional compact manifold
with boundary, possibly non-orientable. then x may be identied with x/z2 for a
closed oriented manifold x, the double of x, with an orientation reversing action of
the generator of z2 = z/2z. the double is constructed by taking the total space of the
orientation bundle p: or(x)  x (the z2-bundle over x whose ber at x consists of
the two orientations of the tangent plane at x) and identifying the two points of each
ber over the boundary: x = or(x)/ with x x i p(x) = p(x) x. the double
comes with a projection p: x  x and an orientation reversing involution : x  x
exchanging the two sheets and dening the action of z2.
here are some examples. if x is closed and orientable, then x consists of two copies of
x with opposite orientations. if x is orientable with non-empty boundary, x is obtained
by taking two copies of x with opposite orientations and gluing the two copies along
the boundary. so if x is a disk, then x can be viewed as the unit sphere s2 in r3 with
z2 action generated by the reection at the x-y plane. if x is the real projective plane
rp 2 then x is s2 with z2 action given by the antipodal map x 7 x of s2  r3. the
annulus x = s1  [1, 1] is x/z2 with x = s1  s1 and involution (1, 2) 7 (1,2),
i  r/2z = s1. taking x = s1  s1 with involution (1, 2) 7 (1, 2 + ) gives the
klein bottle. the involution (1, 2) 7 (2, 1) gives the mobius strip.

16

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

3.2. the case of closed orientable surfaces. let us rst consider the case of closed
orientable surfaces. suppose x is closed and orientable, and choose an orientation of
x. then the double of x is x = x  (x), the disjoint union of two copies of x with
opposite orientations. the involution exchanges the two copies. let x be endowed with
n distinct points z1, . . . , zn on it, labeled by simple objects i1, . . . , in. to these data one
associates a correlation function c(x)  h( x).
to be more precise, we should take care of the framing: so z1, . . . , zn should be taken
as disjoint arcs rather than points. also h( x) is only unambiguously dened if x is
given a lagrangian subspace  in its rst homology group with real coecients. as will
be clear below, a convenient choice is to take  to consist of a  (a)  h1( x, r) =
h1(x, r)  h1(x, r), where a runs over h1(x, r). we call this lagrangian subspace
canonical lagrangian subspace and denote it by ( x).
the natural candidate for c(x) is then the element of h( x) associated to the 3-
manifold x  [1, 1], with ribbon graph consisting of zi  [1, 1], where zi runs over the
marked arcs on x:

c(x) = z(x  [1, 1],, x).

see 2.5 for the orientations of the ribbons in x  [1, 1]. note that the canonical
lagrangian subspace is the kernel of the map induced by inclusion of the boundary.
let us check that this ansatz obeys the modular and factorization properties one

expects for correlation functions.

let f : x  x be a degree one homeomorphism and let f : x  x be equal to f on
each of the two copies of x. the lift f of f is the unique degree one homeomorphism of
x commuting with the involution and projecting to f .

theorem 3.1. (modular invariance) let x be a closed oriented surface with labeled
arcs z1, . . . , zn. let f : x  x be a degree one homeomorphism preserving the marked
arcs. let f be its lift to x. then

f c(x) = c(x).

proof: let f : x  [1, 1] x  [1, 1] be dened by f (x, t) = (f (x), t). f is a home-
omorphism that restricts to f on the boundary. moreover, f clearly preserves the
lagrangian subspace. thus the naturality axiom applies and we get
f z(x  [1, 1],, x) = z(x  [1, 1],, x),

proving the claim. (cid:3)

it is useful to express the correlation function for more general lagrangian subspaces.
let us say that a lagrangian subspace  of h1( x, r) is symmetric if  = . the
lagrangian subspace ( x) has this property. let us dene, for any symmetric lagrangian
subspace ,

c(x) = (id,) c(x).

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

17

here id1,2 denotes the identity map between extended surfaces which dier only in their
distinguished lagrangian subspaces. then we get the more general modularity property:

f c(x) = c(x).

this formula follows from the functoriality formula, except that we have to check that
the framing anomaly term is trivial. the reason for this is that all lagrangian subspaces
appearing in the calculation of the maslov indices are invariant under . therefore the
maslov indices vanish by lemma 2.2.
in particular we may choose the symmetric lagrangian subspace   h1(x  (x),
r) = h1(x, r) h1(x, r), for any lagrangian subspace  of h1(x, r). under these
circumstances we may identify h( x, ) = h(x, )h(x, ) and write

c(x) =xj

bj(x, )  bj(x, ),

for any basis bj(x, ) of h(x, ) and dual basis bj(x, ) with respect to the pairing
(6). in this form, the modular invariance is less apparent.
example. let x = s1  s1 be a torus with no marked arcs. let d2  c be the unit
disk and view x as the boundary of a solid torus h = d2s1. take  = (x) to be the
kernel of the map induced by the inclusion x  h. then a basis of h(x) is given by
j(x) = z((h, j),, x), j  i, see 2.5.2. let s(z, w) = (w1, z), t (z, w) = (zw, z) be
the standard generators of the mapping class group sl(2, z) of x = s1  s1. then s, t
are represented in this basis by the matrices s = (d1si,j) and t = (v1
i i,j), respectively.
the map (z, w) = (z, w) is a homeomorphism x  x, preserving orientation and
lagrangian subspace. therefore a basis of h(x) is j(x) =  j (x). this basis is
dual to the basis (j)ji, as the pairing between j(x) and k(x) is the invariant of
s2  s1 with two annuli running along s1. this invariant is j,k, by the trace formula.
thus

c(x) =xji

j(x)  j(x).

as s   =   s1 and t   =   t 1, s, t are represented in the basis (j(x))ji
by the matrices s = cs1c, t = c t 1c, with
i  j,

(8)

ci,j =(cid:26) 1,

0, otherwise.

(the anomaly does not contribute as in each maslov index there are two coinciding
arguments.) the statement of modular invariance thus reduces to

these identities may also be checked directly, using the relations of s, t of 2.5.2, the
fact that s is a symmetric matrix, and the relations vi = vi, s2 = c.

t t t = ts s = 1.

18

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

we turn to the factorization properties of correlation functions. let x be a closed
oriented surface with marked oriented labeled arcs. suppose two of the marked arcs
carry label j, j respectively. let x be obtained by removing from x a small open disk
around each of the two arcs, and gluing their boundaries by an orientation reversing
homeomorphism. we say that we obtain x by gluing x at the two marked arcs. then
x is obtained from x by performing this operation twice, at each of the inverse images
of the two arcs. therefore we have a gluing homomorphism g x, x : h( x)h( x), which
is the composition of the two gluing homomorphisms (in either order) with (id,( x )).
here  is the symmetric lagrangian subspace of h1( x, r) obtained form the canonical
lagrangian subspace ( x) of x by the gluing prescription of 2.5, and id,( x ) is
the identity map from x with lagrangian subspace  to x with canonical lagrangian
subspace.

theorem 3.2. (factorization) let x be as in theorem 3.1. let x be obtained from
x by gluing x at two marked arcs with labels j, j. let xj be the surface x, with j  i
arbitrary, and with all other labels xed. then

c(x) =xji

d1dim(j) g xj, x c(xj).

proof: let mj = xj  [1, 1]. then g xj, x c(xj) is, by 2.5.3, the invariant z(mj,, x)
of a cobordism. the 3-manifold mj is obtained from mj by gluing two disks around the
two chosen marked arcs on x {1}, and also on x {1}. the ribbons ending at the
marked arcs are then glued together to form an annulus.
it is not too hard to see that x  [1, 1] is homeomorphic to the manifold we obtain
from mj by performing a surgery at this annulus. the surgery is, by denition, the
following construction: we rst parametrize a tubular neighborhood u of the annulus
by a homeomorphism : d2  s1  mj in such a way that the annulus is contained
in ([1, 1] s1). then we glue s1  d2 to mj  int(u) via the map  restricted to
s1  s1. fig. 2 is supposed to illustrate the homeomorphism of the resulting manifold
with x  [1, 1]: on the left, we embed the region of interest of mj  int(u) in r3 and
on the right we draw s1  d2. the bers {x} [1, 1] in a plane section are drawn.
let m = mj  int(u) and j(s1  s1) = z((h, j),, s1  s1), as in the example
above. by the functoriality axiom,

z(mj,, x) = z(m, u, x)   j(s1  s1).

the maslov indices vanish by lemma 2.2. indeed, the involution of the double extends
to an involution of the boundary of m and of s1  s1 so that all lagrangian subspaces
involved are symmetric under the involution.

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

19

figure 2.

on the other hand, using the surgery presentation of x  [1, 1], we have

c(x) = z(x  [1, 1],, x)

= z(m, u, x)    s1(s1  s1).

again, the maslov indices vanish by symmetry. the claim then follows from the modular
property

s 1(s1s1) =xji

sj,1 j(s1s1).

(cid:3)

3.3. the case of the (n, m)-point function on the disk. we consider the case of
the correlation function for n interior points and m boundary points on the disk (the
(n, m)-point function). the double of the disk is a 2-sphere s2, which we view as the
unit sphere in r3. the projection p: s2  d2 is the orthogonal projection onto the x-y
plane and the involution  is the reection at the x-y plane.
let x be the disk d2 with n distinct labeled marked points in its interior and m
labeled points on its boundary. let the interior points be labeled by i1, . . . , in, and
the boundary points, cyclically ordered along the orientation of the circle, be labeled
by j1, . . . , jm. the segment between the rth and the r+1st point is given a boundary
condition, a simple object ar.

multiplicity spaces nk

moreover, the correlation function depends also on an additional datum at each bound-
ary point: the correlation function c(x) is a linear map from a tensor product of
r=1 war1,ar (jr) to h( x) (we set a0 = ak). the presence of these
multiplicity spaces reects the multiplicities of boundary elds. from the physical point
of view, one understands these multiplicities as a consequence of the eld-state corre-
spondence of the conformal eld theory, implying that they can be read o the annulus
multiplicities, which for the boundary conditions of our interest coincide with fusion rule
coecients.

20

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

accordingly, we assume that the multiplicity spaces are identied with the space of

conformal blocks on the sphere with three points:

wa,b(j) = hom(b, j  a).

using the identication hom(b, j  a) = hom(1, b  j  a), we have a basis (e[bja],
 = 1, . . . , n j,a
b ) of each multiplicity space obeying the orthogonality properties of 2.2.
our ansatz for the c(x) evaluated on a product e1      em of basis elements is
the element of h( x) associated to the graph in the 3-ball in fig. 1.
to give the precise denition we should again take the framing into account. so
the marked interior points on d2 should be taken to be disjoint oriented arcs. the
boundary points are replaced by arcs on the boundary, oriented along the orientation
of the boundary. the modular invariance property proven below will imply that these
choices are irrelevant up to canonical isomorphisms.

the graph in fig. 1 is made into a ribbon graph as follows: the vertical lines are the
cores of ribbons whose sides are the inverse images by p of the marked arcs and vertical
lines connecting the endpoints of the marked arcs. the orientation of the ribbons is
chosen so that they induce the orientation of the arcs on the upper hemisphere. the
part of the graph connected to the equator is the core of an annulus lying in the x-y
plane to which ribbons also lying in the x-y plane are glued along a side. the opposite
sides of these ribbons coincide with the marked arcs on the boundary. the orientation
of the ribbon graph is such that it induces the orientation of the boundary arcs.

let us call equatorial graph the component of the ribbon graph connected to the

equator. the remaining components we call vertical ribbons.

let m be the unit ball with this ribbon graph. then we set

c(x) = z(m,, x)  homc(m

r=1war1,ar (jr),h( x)).

let us check that this ansatz is modular invariant.

in this formula we regard z(m,, x) as a multilinear function of the labelings of vertices.
if f : d2  d2 is a degree one
homeomorphism of the disk preserving the marked arcs, then there exists a unique
degree one homeomorphism f of s2, the lift of f , so that p  f = f . it preserves the
inverse images of the arcs.

theorem 3.3. (modular invariance) let x be a disk with n marked arcs in the interior
and m marked arcs on the boundary. let f : x  x be a degree one homeomorphism
preserving the marked arcs and their orientations. let f be its lift to x. then

f c(x) = c(x).

proof: denote by x, y, z the standard coordinates of r3. view d2 as the unit disk in
the x-y plane. let f (x, y, z) = (f (x, y), z). then f is a degree one homeomorphism of
the ball d3 whose restriction to s2 is f . the image of the ribbon graph  in d3 by f
is isotopic to . therefore, by the naturality axiom, f z(m,, x) = z(m,, x). (cid:3)

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

21

we turn to the factorization properties. in the case of surfaces with boundary there are
two kinds of factorizations. one may either cut the surface along a loop in the interior,
as in the case of closed surfaces, or along a path joining points on the boundary. in the
rst case, factorization is analyzed analogously as for closed surfaces. thus we consider
here only the latter possibility.

let x, x be two oriented disks with marked labeled arcs as above. let n, n denote
the numbers of interior arcs and m, m the numbers of boundary arcs. suppose that
a marked arc x on the boundary of x has label j and that a marked arc x on the
boundary of x has dual label j. then we may glue x to x along an orientation
reversing homeomorphism from x to x. we assume that the labels of the boundary
segments on the sides of these two arcs match, so that the gluing results in a disk x
with n + n interior marked arcs and m + m  2 boundary marked arcs. we say that
x is obtained by gluing x, x at x, x. then the double x may be obtained by
gluing the extended surface x  x at the inverse image of x, x, and we have a gluing
homomorphism g x  x : h( x)h( x)h( x).
we need not care about lagrangian subspaces since the rst homology groups are
trivial in this case.

theorem 3.4. (factorization) let x be a disk obtained by gluing disks x, x at the
marked arcs x, x with labels j, j. let the labels of the boundary segment preceding
and following x be a, b respectively. let xj be the surface x, with j running over i
with all other labels xed. similarly, let xj  be the surface x, with j running over i
with all other labels xed. let us order the boundary arcs in a way compatible with the
cyclic ordering, so that x is the last arc of x and x is the rst arc of x. then for
any choice of basis e[bja] of h b,j,a and dual basis e[ajb] of ha,j ,b as in 2.2,

c(x)(u1      um+m2)
= xji,

dim(j) gx 

jx 

j ,x(cid:2)c(xj)(u1      um1  e[bja])
 c(xj )(e[ajb] um      um+m2)(cid:3).

proof: by the gluing construction (see 2.5.3), the summand labeled by j,  on the right-
hand side is dim(j) z(mj,,, x), where mj, is a ball obtained by gluing two balls
dening c(xj) and c(xj ). mj, contains a ribbon graph j, obtained by the gluing
prescription. thus j, has vertical lines and a piece lying in the x-y plane obtained by
gluing two equatorial graphs. we have to show that the sum over the labelings j and 
of the invariant of the cobordism with this graph gives the same as if we replace it by
an equatorial graph.

in the vicinity of the point at which the gluing was performed the ribbon graph looks

like

22

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

j



b

a



b

a

applying (4), after summing over j and , we can replace this part of the graph by two
horizontal bands. in this way j, is replaced by the equatorial graph appearing on the
left-hand side as desired. (cid:3)

3.4. the general case. we turn now to the general case of a compact surface, pos-
sibly with boundary, possibly non-orientable. there is a subtlety that arises when one
considers non-orientable surfaces. namely a label of a point by a simple object is only
dened if one chooses a local orientation. this is formalized by the following denitions
of labeled surfaces and their doubles. the correlation functions will then be dened for
labeled surfaces and they will take values in the space of states of their doubles, which
are extended surfaces (see 2.5).

3.4.1. labeled surfaces and their doubles. a labeled surface is a compact 2-dimensional
manifold x with (possibly empty) oriented boundary and with marked disjoint arcs
(embedded closed intervals). the arcs lie either in the interior or on the boundary and
carry labels. boundary arcs are labeled by simple objects. the connected components of
the complement in x of the boundary arcs also carry labels, called boundary conditions,
which are also simple objects. the label of an interior arc z is an equivalence class of
triples (i, or, or) where i is a simple object, or is a local orientation of the surface at x,
and or is an orientation of the arc. two triples are equivalent if they are equal or if one
is obtained from the other by taking the dual object and reversing the orientations or,
or.

we call boundary segments the connected components of the complement in x of
the boundary arcs. if a boundary arc x lies between two boundary segments labeled by
boundary conditions a, b in the order given by the orientation of the boundary, we say
that x changes the boundary conditions from a to b.

the double x of a labeled surface is an extended surface associated to a labeled
surface. it is, as an oriented 2-manifold, the double x of x, with projection p: x  x
and orientation reversing involution : x  x. the double is made into an extended
surface, by taking as arcs the inverse images of the arcs of x. the boundary arcs have
one inverse image and are labeled by the labels in x. their orientation is inherited from
the orientation of the boundary of x. each interior arc z of x has two inverse images.
they are labeled and oriented by the two labels in the equivalence class labeling z, in
such a way that the local orientation or appearing in the label agrees with the orientation

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

23

of x. the lagrangian subspace of h1( x, r) is the eigenspace of  to the eigenvalue 1.
it is called canonical lagrangian subspace and denoted by ( x).

this denition makes sense because of the

lemma 3.5. let : x  x be an orientation reversing homeomorphism of a surface x
such that    = id. then the induced map : h1( x, r) h1( x, r) is diagonalizable
and its eigenspaces are lagrangian.

proof: the induced map  is a linear involution of a real vector space. thus p = 1
2(1
) are projections onto the eigenspaces  corresponding to the eigenvalues 1. since
p+ + p = id,  is diagonalizable. let  denote the intersection pairing on h1( x, r).
since  reverses the orientation, we have (a, b) = (a, b) for all a, b  h1( x, r).
therefore  vanishes identically on + and . since + = h1( x, r), the subspaces
 are of maximal dimension with this property, i.e., lagrangian. (cid:3)
proposition 3.6. let x be a double of the extended surface x. let aut( x, ) be
the group of degree one homeomorphisms of x preserving the marked arcs with their
orientation and commuting with the involution . then f 7 f denes a representation
(not just a projective representation) of aut( x, ) on h( x).
proof: let f  aut( x, ). since f and  commute, the induced maps f,  also com-
in particular the
mute.
lagrangian subspace of x is preserved by elements of aut( x, ). under these circum-
stances the anomaly is trivial and we have the representation property (f  g) = f  g.
(cid:3).

it follows that the eigenspaces of  are preserved by f.

3.4.2. connecting 3-manifolds. to each compact surface x we associate a connecting
3-manifold mx. the connecting 3-manifold mx is a 3-dimensional oriented manifold
with boundary x. it is used to construct the correlation functions and reduces to the
cylinder x  [1, 1] if x is closed and orientable and to the ball if x is a disk.
we rst describe mx as an oriented manifold. if x has no boundary, mx is ( x 
[1, 1])/z2, where z2 acts on the rst factor by the involution  and on the second
by t 7 t. this action preserves the product orientation, so that mx is naturally an
oriented manifold. it comes with a projection [(x, t)] 7 p(x) to x. the ber of this
projection over y  x is an interval, the connecting interval over y, connecting the two
inverse images of y in x. if x has a boundary, mx is obtained from ( x  [1, 1])/z2
by contracting the bers over the boundary to single points.
alternatively, let : x  [0,) be any non-negative function such that (x) = 0 if
and only if x m. then we may dene mx to consist of [(x, t)] ( x  r)/z2 such
that t2  (p(x)). the points with t2 = (p(x)) form the boundary which is obviously
homeomorphic to x. connecting manifolds corresponding to dierent choices of  are

24

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

canonically homeomorphic. the homeomorphism commutes with p and reduces to the
identity on x  mx.
proposition 3.7. let x be the double of x, p: x  x the projection, ( x) the canon-
ical lagrangian subspace of h1( x, r).
(i) mx is a compact manifold with boundary mx = x.
(ii) the restriction of : mx  x, [(x, t)] 7 p(x) to 1(x  x) is a ber bundle
(iii) ( x) is the kernel of the homomorphism h1( x, r)  h1(mx, r) induced by
(iv) the involution  : x  x extends to the involution [(x, t)] 7 [(x,t)] of mx. its
xed point set is the image of x under the embedding i : y 7 [(x, 0)] for any x with
p(x) = y.

whose ber over y is an interval with boundary p1(y).

inclusion.

proof: choose a function  as above. let {: u  r2} be an atlas of x with connected
charts u. let , be the sign of the jacobian of   1
 . then mx is homeomorphic
to
{(y, t) ur| t2  (y)} /

g

with equivalence relation (x u, t)  (x u, , t). the projection to x is p(y, t) = y
and the involution is (y, t) = (y,t). therefore we have a surjective map x  [1, 1]
onto m given by ((y, t), s) 7 (y, ts). the bers of this map consist of two points related
by the z2 action, except if y  x where the ber is an interval.

this presentation of mx implies (i) and (ii).
to prove (iii), notice that if a is a loop on x, then a    a is the boundary of a
surface in mx consisting of connecting intervals ending at points of a. thus if c is a
cycle on x such that c is homologous to c, then c is homologous to zero in mx.
this shows that ( x) is contained in the kernel k of the homomorphism induced by
inclusion. on the other hand, it is a general fact that the intersection form vanishes on
k. therefore the dimension of k cannot be larger than the dimension of the lagrangian
subspace ( x).

(iv) is obvious. (cid:3)

3.4.3. multiplicity spaces. suppose that x is a labeled surface. if x is a marked arc on
the boundary labeled by a simple object j and changing the boundary condition a to
the boundary condition b, the multiplicity space of x is wa,b(j) = hom(b, j  a). the
multiplicity space wx of a labeled surface x is the (unordered) tensor product of the
multiplicity spaces of its boundary arcs. if there are no boundary arcs, we set wx = c.

3.4.4. construction of correlation functions. we are ready to dene correlation functions
for general labeled surfaces. let x be a labeled surface, mx be its connecting manifold
and x = mx the double of x, with its structure of extended surface. let i: x  mx be

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

25

the inclusion of x as zero section (prop. 3.7, (iv)). we construct a ribbon graph in mx.
it consists of vertical ribbons and an equatorial graph for each connected component of
x.

the vertical ribbons are associated to interior arcs of x:

if z, z are interior arcs
projecting to an interior arc of x, the corresponding vertical ribbon is the union of the
connecting intervals ending at z and z. it is an embedded rectangle with two sides equal
to z, z. the orientation of the vertical ribbon is chosen so as to induce the orientations
of z, z. if we orient the core from z to z, the label of the ribbon is equal to the label
of z. the equatorial graphs consist of annuli and joining ribbons. the annuli lie in the
zero section i(x) of mx and their cores are obtained by moving i(x) into mx by a
short amount, where short means away from the vertical ribbons. the joining ribbons
are short ribbons in i(x) connecting boundary arcs to the annuli at trivalent vertices.
they are labeled by the label of the corresponding boundary arcs and their cores are
oriented inward. the labels of the parts of the annuli between trivalent vertices are the
boundary conditions between the corresponding arcs. the orientation of the equatorial
graphs is chosen so as to induce the orientation of the boundary arcs. this does not x
the orientation of the annuli that are not connected to the boundary; but this does not
matter since the correlation function will not depend on the choice of that orientation.

then the correlation function of the labeled surface x is

c(x) = z(mx,, x) : wx  h( x),

considered as a multilinear function of the labels of the trivalent vertices. thus if u =
xux  wx with x running over the boundary arcs, c(x)u = z(mx,u,, x), where
mx,u is the connecting 3-manifold with its ribbon graph, such that the trivalent vertex
connected to x by a joining ribbon is labeled by ux.

3.4.5. modular invariance. if f : x  x is a homeomorphism of the labeled surface x,
preserving the orientation and the marked arcs of the boundary and mapping interior
marked arcs to interior marked arcs with the same label, 5 then there exists a unique
degree one homeomorphism f of x, the lift of f , so that p f = f . it preserves the inverse
images of the arcs and their orientation. f commutes with  and therefore preserves the
canonical lagrangian subspace of h1( x, r).
theorem 3.8. (modular invariance) let x be a labeled surface. let f : x  x be a
homeomorphism preserving the orientation of the boundary and mapping marked arcs to
marked arcs with the same label and boundary segments to boundary segments with the
same boundary condition. let f be its lift to x. then

f c(x) = c(x).

5 recall that a label of an interior arc is an equivalence class of triples [(i, or, or)]. the condition
for an interior arc z means that f maps z to an arc z , and if z has label [(i, or, or)], z  has label
[(i, for, for)].

26

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

proof: let f : mx  mx be the map [(x, t)] 7 [( f (x), t)] of mx  ( x  [1, 1])/z2. it
is clear that f is a well-dened degree one homeomorphism of mx. it maps vertical
ribbons to vertical ribbons with the same label. the equatorial graphs are mapped to
slight deformations of the equatorial graphs. as the boundary arcs are xed, we may
compose f with a homeomorphism g of mx with support in the vicinity of i(x) and
restricting to the identity on the boundary, in such a way that the equatorial graphs
are also kept xed. then g  f preserves the ribbon graph and restricts to f on the
boundary. therefore, by the naturality axiom, f z(m,, x) = z(m,, x). (cid:3)
remark. we may relax the condition that f preserves the boundary arcs and the
orientation of the boundary. we may just assume that f maps boundary arcs to bound-
ary arcs with the same label, or the dual label, depending on whether f preserves the
local orientation of the boundary. similarly f should be compatible with the labeling
of boundary segments. then the modular invariance reads f c(x) = c(x)(f ), for a
suitable action on the multiplicity spaces. we leave the details to the reader.

3.4.6. factorization. if x is a surface, we can obtain a new surface x by cutting and
pasting in two basic ways: either we can cut out disks around two interior marked arcs
and glue their boundaries together or we can glue two boundary arcs.

in both cases we want to relate the correlation functions on x to the correlation
functions on x. in the rst case the relation between correlation functions is called bulk
factorization. in the second case it is called boundary factorization.

let z1, z2 be two interior arcs of a labeled surface. we say that the labels of z1,
z2 match if they are of the form [(i, or1, or1)] and [(i, or2, or2)], respectively.
in this
case we construct a labeled surface x as follows. choose representatives (i, or1, or1),
(i, or2, or2) so that the arcs are oriented and we have local orientations around the
arcs. let , : d2  x be orientation preserving disjoint embeddings of the unit disk
d2  c such that their restriction to [1, 1] are parametrizations of the oriented arcs
z1, z2. then x is obtained from x by removing the interiors of the disks (d2) and
(d2), and gluing their boundaries by identifying (z) with (z), for z  s1. the
arcs of x are the remaining arcs of x.

we say that x is obtained from x by gluing z to z.
the double of x is then obtained from the double of x by gluing the inverse images
of z1 to the inverse images of z2: the inverse image of z1 with orientation or1 is glued to
the inverse image of z2 with orientation or2 and the inverse image of z1 with the opposite
orientation or1 is glued to the inverse image of z2 with the orientation or2.
then we have a gluing homomorphism g x, x : h( x)h( x), which is the composi-
tion of the two gluing homomorphisms (in either order) with (id,( x )). here  is
the symmetric lagrangian subspace of h1( x, r) obtained form the canonical lagrangian
subspace ( x) of x by the gluing prescription of 2.5, and id,( x ) is the identity
map from x with lagrangian subspace  to x with canonical lagrangian subspace.

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

27

example. let z1, z2 be two marked arcs on a sphere x. choose an orientation or
of the sphere and let (i1, or, or1), (i2, or, or2) be representatives of the labels of these
if i2 = i1, the labeled surface
two arcs chosen to agree with the global orientation.
obtained by gluing z to z is a torus. if i2 = i1, we may take the other representative
(i2 = i1,or,or2) and obtain a klein bottle as a result of gluing. in the rst case,
x is obtained from the disjoint union of the two spheres by gluing pairs of arcs on the
same connected component. in the second case, x is obtained by gluing arcs on one
connected component to arcs of the other.

theorem 3.9. (bulk factorization) let x be a labeled surface. let x be obtained from
x by gluing x at two interior marked arcs with labels [(j, or1, or1)], [(j, or2, or2)]. let
xj be the surface x, with j running over i with all other labels xed. then

c(x) =xji

d1dim(j) g xj, x c(xj).

the proof of this theorem is the same as the proof of theorem 3.2.
we now turn to the boundary factorization. let x, x be boundary arcs with the
orientation induced by the orientation of the boundary. suppose that the label of x is j
and that the label of x is j. assume that x changes the boundary conditions from a to
b and that x changes the boundary conditions from b to a. under these circumstances,
we may glue x to x via an orientation reversing homeomorphism and obtain a surface
x. we say that x is obtained from x by gluing x to x.

the double x of x may then be identied with the surface obtained from x by
gluing the inverse image in x of x to the inverse image in x of x. the lagrangian
subspace of h1( x, r) obtained by the gluing prescription coincides in this case with the
canonical lagrangian subspace ( x). we thus have a gluing homomorphism g x, x  :
h( x)  h( x).
to compare the multiplicity spaces of x and x.

to formulate the boundary factorization properties of correlation functions, we need

note that wx = wx   wa,b(j) wb,a(j), and that wa,b(j) is dual to wb,a(j). we
thus have a natural map x ,x: wx   wx obtained by taking the tensor product with
the canonical tensor. in terms of the bases of 2.2,

x ,x(w) = w x

e[bja]  e[ajb].

theorem 3.10. (boundary factorization) let x be obtained by gluing two marked
boundary arcs x, x with labels j, j of a labeled surface x. let xj be the surface
x, with j running over i with all other labels xed. then

c(x) =xj

dim(j) g xj, x   c(x)  x ,x

this theorem is proved in the same way as theorem 3.4.

28

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

4. structure constants

it is clear that using the factorization property of correlation functions (theorems 3.9
and 3.10) the calculation of any correlation function can be reduced to four basic cases:
the sphere with three points, the disk with three boundary points, the disk with one
interior point and one boundary point, and the real projective plane with one point.

we compute the correlation functions in these four cases. the special cases of two
points on the sphere and on the disk and one interior point on the disk can be in principle
deduced by setting one of the labels to 0. but since the results are particularly simple
we compute them separately.

the calculation of the two-point functions also explains the appearance of the factors

of dim(j) and d1 in the factorization formulae.
4.1. two-point functions. we calculate the two-point functions on the sphere and on
the disk.

let x = (s2, j, j) be the unit sphere in r3 with two points, say at the north pole with
label j and at the south pole with label j. we give s2 the standard orientation. as
usual, we rather have to specify two arcs than two points. let the arc at the north pole
be a short arc in the x-z plane oriented in the positive x direction, and let the arc at the
south pole be a short arc in the x-z plane, pointing in the negative direction. x may be
both viewed as a labeled surface and as an extended surface. there are no lagrangian
subspaces here since the rst homology of the sphere is trivial.

the correlation function c(x) on the sphere takes values in h(x  (x)) = h(x)

h(x). a basis of the one-dimensional vector space h(x) is given by

b(x) = z((d3, j),, x),

associated to the unit ball mx = d3 endowed with a ribbon d3  ([, ] {0} r).
the ribbon has label j; it runs vertically along the z-axis and its core is oriented from
top to bottom. the orientation of the ribbon is such that it induces the orientation of
the arcs.

to the x-z plane.

a basis of h(x) is given by b(x) = b(x), where  is the reection with respect
to compute the two-point function on the sphere, we have to compute the propor-
tionality constant c in c(s2, j, j) = c b(x) b(x). this can be done by using the
if we glue two balls, each with a ribbon inside, to
functoriality of the invariant z.
s2  [1, 1] we get s3 with an unknot labeled by j. these two balls may be viewed as
a cobordism from s2  s2 to the empty set. applying its invariant to c(s2, j, j), we
get d1dim(i), the invariant of s3 with the unknot. applying the invariant of the same
cobordism to b(x)b(x), we get the invariant d2dim(j)dim(j) of a closed manifold
with two connected components, each of which is a 3-sphere with an unknot labeled by
j and j respectively. as dim(j) = dim(j) 6= 0, we get c = d dim(j)1, with the result

c(s2, j, j) = d

dim(j)

b(s2, j, j)  b((s2, j, j)).

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

29

let us turn to the case of the disk with two boundary points labeled by j, j, and
boundary conditions a, b. the two-point correlation function c(d2, j, j; a, b) is a map
from wab(j) wba(j) to the space h(s2, j, j) of conformal blocks on the sphere. eval-
uating the correlation function on basis vectors e  e = e[jba] e[jab] we get the
invariant of d3 with an equatorial graph with two outgoing lines. this graph may be
replaced by a single ribbon using (3). the result is

c(d2, j, j) e  e =

,

dim(j)

b(s2, j, j).

remark. our two-point correlation functions have a somewhat non-standard normal-
ization, which avoids square root ambiguities. for any choice of square roots one may
dene normalized correlation functions. if x is a labeled surface with interior arcs
labeled by i1, . . . , in and m boundary arcs labeled by j1, . . . , jm, let

(9)

cnorm(x) =

n

y=1psi ,1

m

y=1ssj ,1

s1,1

c(x).

(recall that d1 = s1,1 and that dim(j) = sj,1/s1,1.) for these correlation functions
there are no factors of dim(j) or d in the two-point functions or in the factorization
theorems.

4.2. the 3-point function on the sphere. let x = (s2, i, j, k) be the sphere with
three marked arcs labeled by i, j and k. to x the conventions let us take the sphere
as the unit sphere in r3, with standard orientation and have the three marked arcs
on the equator. we orient the equator counterclockwise and orient the arcs in the
same direction. the correlation function then takes values in h(x  (x)) = h(x) 
h(x). a basis of h(x) is given by e(x) = z(mx,,, x),  = 1, . . . , nk,j,i, where
the connecting 3-manifold mx, is the 3-ball with a ribbon graph in the x-y plane with
one trivalent vertex at the origin. the vertex is labeled by the basis element e[kji]
of h k,j,i. a basis of h(x) is e(x) = e(x), where  is the reection at the x-y
plane.
as in the case of the two-point function, to compute the correlation function z(x 
[1, 1],, x  (x)) in terms of the basis e(x) e(x) of h(x  (x)) = h(x) 
h(x), we use the functoriality of z and act on c(x) with z(mx,,, x  (x),).
here, mx,, is the disjoint union of two 3-balls, each with a ribbon graph with one vertex
labeled by e, e respectively. the result is the invariant of s3 with the theta graph,
which has two vertices connected by three ribbons. by the orthogonality relations of
basis elements this invariant is d1,.
on the other hand, if we act with z(mx,,, x  (x),) on e(x)  e(x), we
obtain the invariant of s3s3 with a theta graph in each copy of s3, which is d2,,.

30

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

the result is thus

nk,j,i

c(s2, i, j, k) = d

e(s2, i, j, k)  e((s2, i, j, k)).

x=1

as usual, nk,j,i is the dimension of hom(1, k  j  i). with the normalization (9) we
then have

cnorm(s2, i, j, k) = psi,1sj,1sk,1

s1,1

nk,j,i

x=1

e(s2, i, j, k)  e((s2, i, j, k)).

4.3. the (1, 0)-point function on the disk. let x = (d2, i; a) be the unit disk with
an arc labeled by i at the origin and boundary condition a. the correlation function
c(x) takes values in h( x) with x = (s2, i, i), the sphere with two marked arcs as in
4.1. we have, by construction,

c(x) = z(m,, x).

the 3-manifold m is a 3-ball with a vertical ribbon and an equatorial graph consisting of
an annulus labeled by a. we want to express c(x) in terms of the basis b(s2, i, i) (the
ishibashi boundary state) of the one-dimensional vector space h( x). we do this as
above, by gluing a ball with a vertical ribbon inside onto m and using the functoriality of
z. the resulting closed 3-manifold is a 3-sphere with two unknots with linking number
1. it has invariant d1si,a. this has to be compared with the 3-manifold obtained by
gluing the same ball to d3 with a vertical ribbon, which is s3 with an unknot and has
invariant d1si,1 = si,1. the result is

c(d2, i; a) =

si,a
si,1

b(s2, i, i).

implementing the normalization as given in eq. (9), the corresponding normalized cor-
relation function is

cnorm(d2, i; a) =

b(s2, i, i).

si,a

psi,1

in conformal eld theory, this formula for the one-point functions on the disk was rst
obtained in [c].

4.4. the (1, 1)-point function on the disk. we calculate the correlation function
in the case of n = 1 point in the interior of the disk d2 and m = 1 point on its
boundary. the label of the interior point is i and the label of the boundary point is
j. the double x of the disk with these points is the 2-sphere s2 with one point on
the equator labeled by j and two points, say the north and south pole, labeled by i, i.
then the correlation function with boundary condition k maps wk,k(j) = hom(k, j  k)

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

31

to h( x) = hom(1, i i  j). its matrix elements r with respect to the chosen bases
are given by the formula

j

i



k

r

= x

j

i



i

.

to calculate r, we compose this morphism with the basis element e[jii] of hom(j
i, i)  hom(1, j  i i) and obtain

i

j





i





i

r

j

= x

k

i

i

=

1

dim(i)

r

i

.

the left-hand side may be evaluated in terms of fusing matrices, with the result:

1

dim(i)

i

r

= xl,,

i

l


k

i

i
k k

(cid:26) i

the expression appearing on the right may be further simplied:

j

l (cid:27)



.

32

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

i

l


k

i

i

=

vl
vivk



k

=

i

l



k



i

i



k

=

l



i

l



i

= 

1

dim(i)

vl
vivk

i

.

putting everything together, we arrive at the result

r = xl,

vl

vivk (cid:26) i

i
k k

j

l (cid:27)



.

4.5. three boundary points on the disk. the correlation function for three points
in this case x is
on the boundary of a disk can be computed in an analogous way.
the 2-sphere with three points on the equator. let us orient the boundary of the unit
disk counterclockwise and denote the labels of the three points i, j, k. the boundary
conditions are labeled by a, b, c. then c(x) is a map from wc,a(i)  wa,b(j)  wb,c(i)
to h( x) = hom(1, k  j  i). the structure constants c 
 are in this case dened by
c(x) e[aic] e[bja] e[ckb] =x
c 

 e[kji],

in terms of the bases of wc,a(i)  hom(1, a  i c), etc. the connecting 3-manifold is
in this case a ball with an equatorial graph. the computation of the structure constants
then goes as follows.

k

j

i

b





a


c

= xd,,

i



d

j



k

b



c

(cid:26) j

c

i d

b a (cid:27)





.

the diagram appearing on the right-hand side can be deformed to

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

33

k

i

j

d

b






c

= dk

1

dim(k)

k

j

i

,



with the result

c 

 =

1

dim(k)(cid:26) j

c

i k

b a (cid:27)





.

the normalized correlation function is then

cnorm(x) e[aic] e[bja] e[ckb] =s si,1sj,1

sk,1s1,1x (cid:26) j

c

i k

b a (cid:27)





e[kji],

cf. [r, bppz, fffs1].

4.6. one point on the projective plane. we consider the one-point correlation func-
tion on the projective plane. thus our labeled surface x = (rp 2, i) is rp 2 = s2/z2 with
a marked arc labeled by i i and some local orientation. the connecting 3-manifold
is here (s2  [1, 1])/z2. view s2 as the unit sphere in r3, and let us put the marked
arc z at the north (= south) pole (0, 0, 1) s2/z2 of the projective plane. the local
orientation is obtained by identifying, locally around the arc, the projective plane with
the upper hemisphere of s2. then the correlation function is the element of h( x) asso-
ciated to the ribbon graph given by the ber over z, i.e., the image in (s2  [1, 1])/z2
of the interval (0, 0, 1)  [1, 1]. the framing is determined by taking a neighboring
point, say (, 0,12) and taking at each point of the ber a vector pointing to the
ber over the neighboring point.
the space of states h( x) is one-dimensional in this case. a basis of this space is
given by the ishibashi cross cap state i. before giving its denition we notice that
there are two natural candidates for a basis. namely, we can take any of the two states
i associated to the ribbon graphs in the 3-ball d3 of fig. 3. the two states dier by
a twist, so +
i = vii . to dene the cross cap state we choose square roots of vi and
normalize the cross cap state salomonically as

i = v1/2

i i = v1/2

i

+
i .

our task is to express the one-point function c(x) on the projective plane in terms of
this basis:

c(x) = ci i = ci v1/2

i i .

34

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

i

i

*

i

i

i

*

i

figure 3. the vectors +
on the left and on the right, respectively

i , i are associated to the ribbon graphs in d3

i

in other words, we have to compute the constant of proportionality civ1/2
between two
states in h( x) given by ribbon graphs in 3-manifolds with the same boundary s2. this
can be done using the functoriality axiom by attaching a 3-ball with a ribbon graph
consisting of a single ribbon connecting the north pole with the south pole to s2, and
comparing the corresponding (scalar) invariants of ribbon graphs in closed 3-manifolds.
if we attach a 3-ball to a 3-ball we get a 3-sphere. if we choose the ribbon graph in
the 3-ball properly, we get in s3 an unknotted circle with zero framing. its invariant
is d1 dim(i), where d1 is the invariant of s3. this proper choice of the ribbon may
be described as follows. suppose for deniteness that the upper and lower sides of
the ribbon dening i are centered at the poles (0, 0,1) of s2 and lie in the x2-x3
plane. the ribbon graph in the 3-ball we attach to s2 should be chosen so that it can
be deformed to a ribbon lying on the surface s2 whose midline follows a tennis ball
pattern joining the north pole to the south pole: this pattern may be parametrized by
  [0, ]:

x() =(cid:16) 1

2 sin 2, 1

2 (1  cos 2), cos (cid:17) .

if we attach a 3-ball to the boundary of (s2  [1, 1])/z2 we get the real projective

space rp 3 = s3/z2. indeed the map s2  [1, 1]  s3:

(x, t) 7 (x cos t/4, sin t/4)  s3  r4,

denes an embedding of the connecting manifold into rp 3. its image is the complement
of the ball in rp 3 determined by the equation x2

it is known that rp 3 can be obtained from s3 by surgery on the unknot with framing
2, see appendix b. if we follow how the ribbon graph is mapped by the surgery and
view s3 as the one point compactication of r3, we may describe the situation as in
fig. 4. the region depicted is contained in a ball in r3 which after surgery on the

4 > 1/2.

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

35

figure 4.

annulus drawn as horizontal is mapped to the connecting 3-manifold (s2  [1, 1])/z2.
the vertical line is mapped to the ribbon graph in the connecting 3-manifold. if we
attach the 3-ball onto s2 and compute with the formulae of appendix b the image of
the tennis ball pattern, we see that the vertical line matches the ribbon graph in the
3-ball to give an unframed unknot linked to the horizontal unknot. according to the
reshetikhinturaev surgery formula (12) the resulting invariant is

1d1xji

v2
j dim(j) si,j,

with  =pii v1

ci = v1/2

i dim(i)2. by using  = d1 we then get
1xji
i 1xji

dim(j)
dim(i)

v2
j

si,j = v1/2

i

si,j v2

j

sj,1
si,1

.

this result can be expressed in terms of the matrix p [bs], which is dened in terms of
the representation of sl(2, z):

p = 1 t 1/2s t 2s t 1/2 = t 1/2st 2st 1/2.

the square root is dened using the choice of square roots of the vi. the matrix p is
symmetric. its square is the conjugation matrix c = (i,j ).

we then have ci = pi,1/si,1.
summarizing, our result is

the corresponding normalized correlation function agrees with the result

c(rp 2, i) =

pi,1
si,1

i.

cnorm(rp 2, i) =

i

pi,1

psi,1

36

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

obtained in conformal eld theory, see e.g. [pss1].

5. annulus, klein bottle, mobius strip

we consider here the three cases of surfaces whose double is a torus: the annulus,
the klein bottle and the mobius strip. the correlation function with no marked points
(partition function) can then be expressed in terms of the basis j(s1  s1) of invari-
ants of the solid torus. it is then expected on physical grounds that the coecients of
the partition functions obey certain integrality conditions. we compute the partition
function in these three cases and show that these conditions are obeyed. dierent ways
of computing correlation functions implies remarkable properties of the sl(2, z) repre-
sentations arising from modular categories. the most well-known one is the verlinde
formula

(10)

nj,k,l =xri

sr,jsr,ksr,l

sr,1

,

which may be understood as the result of two dierent computation of the annulus
partition function.

5.1. annulus partition function. let x = (a, a, b) be an annulus whose boundary
has connected components labeled by a and b. the double x is then a torus and
the connecting 3-manifold is a solid torus d2  s1 with two equatorial graphs without
outgoing edges. to be concrete, let us think of a as the region between two circles
centered at the origin of the x-y plane. the two circles forming the boundary are oriented
counterclockwise. then x may be thought of as the surface obtained by revolution
around the z-axis of a circle c in the x-z plane with center on the x-axis. then the
projection p: x  x is the orthogonal projection onto the x-y plane and the involution
 is the reection at the x-y plane. the connecting 3-manifold m is the solid obtained
by revolution of the disk in the x-z plane with boundary c. it contains two annuli in
the x-y plane oriented counterclockwise and labeled by a, b. a well-known calculation
using (4) and (3) shows that z(m,, s1s1) =pk n k

a,b k(s1s1). thus

c(a, a, b) =xki

n k
a,b k(s1  s1).

the alternative way of doing this calculation is to glue another solid torus with an
annulus graph to obtain the invariant of s3 with three unknots. the identity between
the two results is the verlinde formula, see [w]. our result can therefore be understood
as a three-dimensional version of the derivation of the verlinde formula in [c], and shows
that at this level the arguments of [c] are completely equivalent to those given in [w].

a similar reasoning will be used below for the mobius strip.

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

37

5.2. the partition function of the klein bottle. let z2 act on s1  s1 via the invo-
lution : (z, w) 7 (z1,w). the quotient space is the klein bottle k = (s1  s1)/z2,
with double k = s1  s1. we compute the correlation function c(k)h( k) of the
klein bottle with no marked points. a basis of h( k) is given by
j  i,

j(s1  s1) = z((h, j),, s1  s1),

with h = d2  s1 containing an annulus labeled by j, as above.

so

c(k) =xii

ci(k)i(s1  s1),

for some complex coecients ci(k). the convention we have chosen here is that the
rst factor of s1 in k = s1  s1, which becomes a contractible cycle in the solid torus
h, generates the kernel of p: h1( k, r) h1(k, r).
we compute cj(k) by composing both sides of the above equation with the invariant
z((h, j), s1  s1,). if we compose this invariant with i(s1  s1) we get i,j, the
invariant of s2  s1 with two annuli z1  s1, z2  s1 labeled by i, j. therefore the
right-hand side becomes cj(k).
the left-hand side is then the invariant of the 3-manifold m obtained by gluing
(h, j) to the connecting manifold mk of the klein bottle. we claim that this 3-
manifold is homeomorphic to s2  s1 with a certain annulus labeled by j.
to see this, let us identify s2 with cp 1 = c  {}. the connecting manifold mk
consists of classes [(z, w, t)] of triples (z, w, t)  s1  s1  [1, 1] modulo

(z, w, t)  (z1,w,t).
then we have the embedding mk  cp 1  s1 given by
etz  1
etz + 1

[(z, w, t)] 7 (2w

 :

, w2).

the complement of (k) in s2  s1 is the interior of a solid torus d2  s1, embedded
via (z, w)7 (2w(e1z1)/(e1z+1), w2). the image of the ribbon graph [, ] s1 
d2  s1 in m = s2  s1 is an annulus. the intersection of this annulus with the ber
over u  s1 consists of two segments centered at 2u and is contained in the straight
line connecting these two points. as u runs over the unit circle, the two points rotate
around the origin by 180 degrees. by the trace formula (7), the invariant of m is the
trace

z(m) = trh(s2;j,j)(j)

38

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

over the space of states for the sphere with two marked arcs of the morphism j repre-
sented by the graph

j

j

in s2[0, 1], where we think of s2 as the xy plane in r3 by stereographic projection. if
j 6 j, h(s2; j, j) = {0} and z(m) vanishes. if j  j, h(s2; j, j) is one-dimensional
with a basis given by the invariant of a ball with a ribbon graph consisting of rib-
bons connecting the two arcs to a two-valent vertex labeled by any non-zero morphism
m  hom(1, j  j). any such morphism may be written as m = (idj  )bj for any iso-
morphism : j  j. then we have (j  idj)cj,jm = (j)m, see 2.3, where (j) = 1
is the frobeniusschur indicator of j. the morphism j is then the frobeniusschur
indicator times the identity, as can be seen by acting on the basis element:

=

=

m

c  m
j,j

(

j

id

)c  m
j

j,j

therefore z(m) = (j). we conclude that

c(k) = xjj 

(j) j(s1  s1),

in agreement with [hss]. the summation is over all self-dual objects j  i.
5.3. the mobius strip. we now consider the correlation function of the mobius strip
with no marked point and boundary condition a  i. the double of the mobius strip
is s1  s1 with involution : (z, w) 7 (w/z, w). thus if mo is the mobius strip, its
connecting manifold is mmo = (s1  s1  [1, 1])/z2 and is degree one homeomorphic
via

to d2  s1. the equatorial graph consists of an annulus lying in the zero section t = 0
and running close to the boundary, see fig. 5. the correlation function has then the

2 wz1, w(cid:17) ,

(z, w, t) 7(cid:16) 1+t

2 z + 1t


correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

39

a

figure 5. a solid torus with a ribbon graph, whose invariant is the
correlation functions of the mobius strip with boundary condition a

a

l

figure 6. a link in s3 used to compute the partition function of the
mobius strip

form

c(mo; a) =xji

ma,j j(s1  s1).

the coecients ma,j may be computed by composing both sides of the equation with
the invariant of a solid torus with a ribbon graph consisting of an annulus labeled by
l  i, in such a way that the manifold obtained by gluing is the 3-sphere. the right-hand
side becomes pj ma,jd1sj,l, and the left-hand side is d1 times the invariant of the
link represented in fig. 6. the invariant may be further simplied, by rst attening
the ribbon onto a plane:

40

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

a

l

dim(k)

= xk,

dim(k)

= xk,

a

a

l

l

.




k





k

the expression in the sum is then v2
values of  may be performed, with the result
v2
kv2

kv2

l dim(k)n k

a,l

xj

ma,jsj,l =xk

l dim(k),. the sum over the n k

a,l possible

by using the relationpl si,lsl,j  =d2i,j, and expressing our result in terms of the matrix
s =d1s, we obtain:

with

(11)

c(mo; a) =xji
ma,j = xk,li

ma,j j(s1  s1),

v2
kv2

l s1,kn k

a,lsl,j .

an alternative way to do the computation is to cut out a ball in the solid torus of fig. 5
intersecting the ribbon graph in two segments, and use (4) with i = j = a. then the
ribbon graph may be replaced by a ribbon labeled by the summation index k which
starts and ends at a two-valent vertex after going once around the solid torus. the
two-valent vertex is labeled by dim(k) times the morphism represented by the graph

a

k





k

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

41

the sum over  is p e[aka] a,k e[aka], with e[aka],  = 1 . . . na,k,a, regarded
as a basis of hom(k, a a) and e[aka] as a basis of hom(a a, k). a,k is the linear
endomorphism of hom(k, a a) given by a,k(x) = (a  ida)  ca,a  x. since e[aka] 
e[aka] = dim(k)1, (eq. 3), the quantum dimensions cancel, and we are left with

ma,k = trhom(k,aa) a,k

moreover 2
a,k = vk id as may be seen by deforming the graph representing this morphism
put on top of itself or by using axioms (iv), (v) of appendix a. it follows that a,k is

diagonalizable with eigenvalues vk. therefore we have

ma,k = ma,kv1/2

,

k

ma,k  z,

ma,k  n k

a,a mod 2,

|ma,k|  n k

a,a

the two dierent ways of calculating the mobius strip partition function implies the
following result, essentially due to bantay [b], on representations of sl(2, z) arising
from modular categories.
theorem 5.1. let s = (d1sj,k), t = (v1
j j,k) the matrices dening the projective rep-
resentation of sl(2, z) associated to a modular category with rank d, see 2.5.2, and let
j,k = ni,j,k  z0 be the corresponding verlinde numbers (10). let q = s t 2s1. then
n i
the numbers

are integers and obey ma,k  n k

ma,k = v1/2

(q1)1,r

k xri

sa,r
s1,r
a,a mod 2, |ma,k|  n k
a,a.

qk,r,

the above expression for ma,k was obtained from (11) by using the verlinde formula

(10).

remarks.

1. the above formula amounts to not completely trivial identities even for the simple

z2n example of 2.1. there we have

sa,r
s1,r

= eiar/n ,

qk,r =(cid:26) 1n

e

and, with v1/2

k

= exp(ik2/4n),

i

4  i

4n (kr)2,

if kr+n is even,

0, otherwise,

ma,k =(cid:26) 1,

if k is even and a  k/2 mod 2n,

0, otherwise.

note that being even is well dened in z2n , and that if k is even the above choice
of square root of vk is unambiguous.

2. more generally one expects [pss1] the numbers

a,j = v1/2
y k

k

v1/2

j xr

(q1)j,r

sa,r
s1,r

qk,r

42

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

to be integer for any j. this has been recently shown to be true under some
additional assumptions, see [gan].

appendix a. modular categories

we give here the precise denition of modular categories, following [t]. a monoidal
(= tensor) category with product  and unit 1 for the product is called strict if for any
objects u, v, w , we have (u  v ) w = u  (v  w ), and v  1 = 1 v = v . a
monoidal ab-category is a monoidal category such that morphisms between any two
objects u, v form an additive abelian group hom(u, v ), and such that compositions
and tensor products of morphisms are bilinear. in particular the endomorphisms of the
unit 1 of the tensor product form a ring with unit. this ring is called the ground ring.
the groups of morphisms are naturally modules over the ground ring. an object v of
a monoidal ab-category is called simple if hom(v, v )  k as a k-module.
twist and a duality.

a ribbon category is a strict monoidal category with additional data: a braiding, a

a braiding associates to any pair of objects v , w an isomorphism cv,w  hom(v  w,
w  v ). a twist associates to any object v an isomorphism v  hom(v, v ). a
duality associates to any object v a dual object v  and morphisms bv  hom(1, v  v ),
dv  hom(v   v, 1).

these data obey the following set of axioms:
(i) cu,v w = (idv  cu,w )(cu,v  idw ).
(ii) cuv,w = (cu,w  idv )(idu  cv,w ).
(iii) g  f cv,w = cv,w f  g.
(iv) v w = cw,v cv,w (v  w ).
(v) v f = f v .
(vi) (idv  dv )(bv  idv ) = idv .
(vii) (dv  idv )(idv   bv ) = idv .
(viii) (v  idv )bv = (idv  v )bv .
here u, v, . . . are arbitrary objects and f  hom(v, v ), g  hom(w, w ) are arbitrary
morphisms.
finally a modular category is a ribbon ab-category with a nite family i of simple

objects such that:
(ix) 1 i.
(x) for every i i, i is isomorphic to an object in i.
(xi) every morphism f : v  v  may be decomposed into a nite sum pr grhr, where
(xii) the matrix (si,j) = (tr(cj,ici,j)) indexed by i, j  i is invertible.

hr  hom(v, i) and gr  hom(i, v ) for some i = i(r).

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

43

appendix b. surgery on the unknot

here we describe explicitly the homeomorphism between rp 3 and the 3-manifold

obtained by surgery on the unknot in s3 with framing 2.
let us rst x some conventions about orientations. we give an orientation to the
boundary of an oriented manifold m by the outward normal rst rule. this means
that a basis (b1, . . . , bn) of the tangent space txm at a boundary point x is positively
oriented if and only if (b0, b1, . . . , bn) is a positively oriented basis of txm for any b0
pointing outwards. the orientations of the disks dn = {x rn | |x|  1} are inherited
from rn. they dene orientations of the spheres sn1 = dn. we orient cn via
the isomorphism (x1 + iy1, . . . , xn + iyn) 7 (x1, y1, . . . , xn, yn) with r2n, and view odd
dimensional spheres s2n1 as subsets of cn.
recall that if l is the image of a smooth embedding of s1 in s3, and n is an integer,
then the surgery on l with framing n is the following construction. let u be a closed
tubular neighborhood of l. fix an embedding j: s1  d2  s3 with image u so that
s1 {0} is sent to l, and s1 {1} is sent to a knot l whose linking number with l
is n. the linking number is calculated using the orientations of l, l coming from the
orientation of s1 via j. we may think that l with framing n as an embedded annulus
with boundary l  l. let s3
(l,n) be the manifold obtained by gluing the complement
s3  int u of the interior of u to d2  s1 via the restriction to s1  s1 of the map j:
(l,n) = (s3  int u)  (d2  s1)/(x  j(x), x s1  s1). the orientation of s3
s3
(l,n) is
dened to be the orientation that extends the standard orientation of s3  u  s3.
if l is the unknot dened, say, by the embedding z 7 (z, 0) of s1  c into s3  c2,
and the framing is n, then we may take, for small  > 0,

j(z, w) =

(z, wzn),

(z, w)  s1  d2.

1

p1 + |w|2

indeed the map

the image is u ={(u, v) s3  c2 | |u| |v|}. the 3-manifold s3
(l,n) obtained by surgery
on this link is (for n6= 0) homeomorphic to the lens space s3/z|n|, with z|n| action gen-
erated by (u, v) 7 (u, v),  = exp(2i/|n|).
(u, v) 7(cid:18) v
is a homeomorphism s3  l  (s3  l)/z
|n| action), with
inverse map (u, v) 7 (uv1|v|, vn|v|n+1). this homeomorphism extends to a homeo-
morphism from s3
(l,n) onto s3/z|n|. this follows from the fact that in j|s1  s1: (z, w) 7
w1/n
1+2 (1, z1) extends to the homeomorphism

|n| (l is invariant under the z

|v|(cid:19)1/n

(u,|v|),

in :

(z, w) 7

(1, z)

w1/n

p1 + 2|z|2

44

g. felder, j. fr ohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert

from d2  s1 onto a tubular neighborhood of l/z|n| in s3/z|n|.
|n| action on s3 preserves
the sign of n is connected with the orientation. since the z
the orientation, the lens space s3/z
|n| inherits an orientation from s3. the map in is
then orientation preserving if n < 0 and orientation reversing if n > 0, as can be seen by
linearizing in at (0, 1).

let us summarize the results.

proposition b.1. let l be the image of the embedding z 7 (z, 0) of s1  s3. then,
for each n z  {0}, the map in: s3  l (s3  l)/z|n|
(u,|v|),

(u, v) 7(cid:18) v

|v|(cid:19)1/n

extends uniquely to a homeomorphism from the manifold s3
l with framing n onto the lens space s3/z
sign(n). in particular, i2 is a degree one homeomorphism from s3

(l,n) obtained by surgery on
|n|. the degree of this homeomorphism is

(l,2) onto rp 3.

moreover we have the reshetikhinturaev formula for the invariant of a ribbon graph
in a manifold obtained from s3 by surgery, see [t]. it can be deduced from the func-
toriality axiom applied to a solid torus. in the case of an unknot with framing n < 0,
assuming that the ribbon graph does not intersect the solid torus at which we perform
the surgery, it reads

(12)

z(s3

(l,n); ) = xji

dim(j) z(s3, j),

i dim(i)2. the ribbon graph j is obtained from  by adding l, viewed
as an embedded annulus in s3, with label j. this involves a choice of orientation of l,
but the result does not depend on this choice.

with  =pii v1
to visualize the results it is useful to stereographically project s3  {pt} to r3. for

our application, a useful projection is

(x1+ix2, x3+ix4) 7 1

1+x3

(x1, x2, x4).

it preserves the orientation. then the link l at which we do surgery is mapped to the
unit circle in the x1-x2 plane.

references

[a]

[b]

v. alessandrini, a general approach to dual multiloop diagrams, nuovo cimento 2a (1971)
321352
p. bantay, the frobenius-schur indicator in conformal eld theory, phys. lett. b 394 (1997)
8788

[bppz] r. e. behrend, p. a. pearce, v. b. petkova, and j.-b. zuber, boundary conditions in rational

[bs]

conformal eld theories, preprint hep-th/9908036
m. bianchi and a. sagnotti, the partition function of the so(8192) bosonic string, phys. lett.
b 211 (1988) 407416

correlation functions in rcft and 3d topology

45

[c]

j. l. cardy, boundary conditions, fusion rules and the verlinde formula, nucl. phys. b 324
(1989) 581596

[emss] s. elitzur, g. moore, a. schwimmer and n. seiberg, remarks on the canonical quantization

of the chern-simons-witten theory, nucl. phys. b 326 (1989) 108134
m. finkelberg, an equivalence of fusion categories, geom. funct. anal. 6 (1996) 249267

[f]
[fffs1] g. felder, j. frohlich, j. fuchs, and c. schweigert, the geometry of wzw branes, preprint

hep-th/9909030, j. geom. and phys., in press

[fffs2] g. felder, j. frohlich, j. fuchs and c. schweigert, conformal boundary conditions and three-

[fk]

[fs]

dimensional topological eld theory, preprint hep-th/9909140, phys. rev. lett., in press.
j. frohlich and c. king, two-dimensional conformal eld theory and three-dimensional topol-
ogy, int. j. mod. phys. 4 (1989) 53215399
j. fuchs and c. schweigert, branes: from free elds to general backgrounds, nucl. phys. b 530
(1998) 99136
t. gannon, integers in the open string, preprint hep-th/9910148

[gan]
[gaw] k. gawedzki, conformal eld theory: a case study, preprint hep-th/9904145
[h]

[hss]

[k]

[kl]

[l]

[ms]

p. horava, chern-simons gauge theory on orbifolds: open strings from three dimensions,
j. geom. and phys. 21 (1996) 133
l.r. huiszoon, a.n. schellekens and n. sousa, klein bottles and simple currents, preprint
hep-th/9909114
a. kirillov, on inner product in modular tensor categories. ii. inner product on conformal
blocks and ane inner product identities, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 155180
k. kazhdan and g. lusztig, tensor structures arising from ane lie algebras.
i, j. am. math. soc. 6 (1993) 905947;
j. am. math. soc. 7 (1994) 335381; iv, j. am. math. soc. 7 (1994) 383453
d. lewellen, sewing constraints for conformal eld theory on surfaces with boundaries,
nucl. phys. b 372 (1992) 654682
g. moore and n. seiberg, classical and quantum conformal eld theory, commun. math. phys.
123 (1989) 177254

ii, j. am. math. soc. 6 (1993) 9491011;

iii,

[pss1] g. pradisi, a. sagnotti and ya. s. stanev, planar duality in su(2) wzw models, phys. lett.

b 354 (1995) 279286

[pss2] g. pradisi, a. sagnotti and ya. s. stanev, completeness conditions for boundary operators in

[rt1]

[rt2]

[r]

[t]
[w]

2d conformal eld theory, phys. lett. b 381 (1996) 97104
n. yu. reshetikhin and v. g. turaev, ribbon graphs and their invariants derived from quantum
groups, commun. math. phys. 127 (1990) 126
n. yu. reshetikhin and v. g. turaev, invariants of 3-manifolds via link polynomials and
quantum groups, inv. math. 103 (1991) 547598
i. runkel, boundary structure constants for the a series virasoro minimal models, nucl. phys.
b 549 (1999) 563578
v. g. turaev, quantum invariants of knots and 3-manifolds, de gruyter 1994
e. witten, quantum eld theory and the jones polynomial, commun. math. phys. 121 (1989)
351399

g. f.: department of mathematics, eth-zentrum, ch-8092 zurich

j. f.: institute for theoretical physics, eth-honggerberg, ch-8093 zurich

j. f.: institute for theoretical physics, eth-honggerberg, ch-8093 zurich

c. s.: lpthe, universite paris vi, 4, place jussieu, f-75 252 paris cedex 05

