the ads/cft correspondence conjecture and topological

censorship

g. j. galloway

dept. of mathematics and computer science

university of miami

coral gables, fl 33124, usa

k. schleich

department of physics and astronomy

university of british columbia

vancouver, bc v6t 1z1, canada

d. m. witt

department of physics and astronomy

university of british columbia

vancouver, bc v6t 1z1, canada

e. woolgar

dept. of mathematical sciences and theoretical physics institute

university of alberta

edmonton, ab t6g 2g1, canada

0
0
0
2

 

p
e
s
8
2

 

 
 

2
v
9
1
1
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

e-mail: galloway@math.miami.edu

e-mail: schleich@noether.physics.ubc.ca

e-mail: donwitt@noether.physics.ubc.ca

e-mail: ewoolgar@math.ualberta.ca

1

abstract

in [1] it was shown that (n + 1)-dimensional asymptotically anti-de-sitter

spacetimes obeying natural causality conditions exhibit topological censor-

ship. we use this fact in this paper to derive in arbitrary dimension relations

between the topology of the timelike boundary-at-innity, i, and that of

the spacetime interior to this boundary. we prove as a simple corollary of

topological censorship that any asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetime with

a disconnected boundary-at-innity necessarily contains black hole horizons

which screen the boundary components from each other. this corollary may

be viewed as a lorentzian analog of the witten and yau result [2], but is

independent of the scalar curvature of i. furthermore, as shown in [1], the

topology of v , the cauchy surface (as dened for asymptotically anti-de sit-

ter spacetime with boundary-at-innity) for regions exterior to event horizons,

is constrained by that of i; the homomorphism 1(0)  1(v ) induced

by the inclusion map is onto where 0 is the intersection of v  with i. in

3 + 1 dimensions, the homology of v  can be completely determined from

this as shown in [1].

in this paper, we prove in arbitrary dimension that

hn1(v ; z) = z k where v is the closure of v  and k is the number of bound-

aries i interior to 0. as a consequence, v does not contain any wormholes

or other compact, non-simply connected topological structures. finally, for

the case of n = 2, we show that these constraints and the onto homomorphism

of the fundamental groups from which they follow are sucient to limit the

topology of interior of v to either b2 or i  s1.

pacs: 4.20.gz, 4.20.bw, 4.50.+h, 11.25.sq

typeset using revtex

2

i. introduction

the global structure and topology of asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetime is a topic

of particular interest due to its relevance to string theory. spacetimes that are products of

an asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetime in n + 1 dimensions and a riemannian manifold

arise in the low energy limit of certain d-brane congurations, notably for the cases of n = 2

and n = 4 [3]. furthermore, maldacena has proposed that supergravity in an asymptotically

anti-de sitter spacetime corresponds to a conformal eld theory on the boundary-at-innity1

of this spacetime in the large n limit [4]. this conjecture, the ads/cft correspondence

conjecture, is supported by recent calculations which, for example, show a direct connection

between black hole entropy as calculated classically and the number of states of the conformal

eld theory on the boundary-at-innity [5]. thus, the ads/cft correspondence conjecture

provides new insight into the old puzzle of black hole entropy in the context of string theory.

moreover, it is believed that this conjecture, if true, may hold answers to other long-standing

puzzles in gravity.

now it is well known that asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetimes admit black holes and

wormholes of various topologies [610] (for a recent review see [11]). these spaces exhibit

a boundary-at-innity which carries the topology of the event horizons. furthermore one

can show that there exist initial data sets with very general topology that evolve as anti-de

sitter spacetimes [12].

it is therefore natural to ask what implications the topology of an asymptotically anti-

1concrete discussions of the causal structure of a spacetime begin by relating a spacetime with

innitely far away points to one in which all points are at nite distance. this relation is carried

out by nding both a coordinate transformation and a conformal factor such that the original

spacetime metric is conformally related to a metric with nite coordinate ranges on a spacetime-

with-boundary (cf. [13]). the boundary-at-innity refers to the boundary of this conformally

related spacetime.

3

de sitter spacetime has for the ads/cft correspondence. that is, if the topology of an

asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetime is arbitrary, can a conformal eld theory that only

detects the topology of its boundary-at-innity correctly describe its physics? recently,

witten and yau in [2] have addressed part of this issue in the context of a generalization of

the ads/cft correspondence in which this conjecture is formulated in terms of riemannian

manifolds [14]. they show that the topology of a complete einstein manifold m of negative

curvature and boundary n admitting positive scalar curvature is constrained. in particular,

they show hn(m; z) = 0 and thus n is connected. a consequence of this result is that

riemannian manifolds satisfying these conditions do not admit wormholes.

however, the interesting results in [2] do not address the relation of the topology of

an asymptotically anti-de sitter space to that of the boundary-at-innity in the context of

lorentzian spacetimes, the standard arena for the ads/cft correspondence conjecture. we

will address this issue. we will do so by exploiting the fact that asymptotically anti-de

sitter spacetimes are members of a class of spacetimes that exhibit topological censorship;

that is any causal curve with initial and nal endpoints on the boundary-at-innity i can

be continuously deformed to a curve that lies in i itself. thus causal curves passing through

the interior of an asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetime detect no topological structure not

also present in the boundary-at-innity. this somewhat surprising result was rst proven

to hold for asymptotically at spacetimes by friedman, schleich and witt [15].

it has

been generalized to apply to a broader class of spacetimes [1,16,17]. of relevance here is

the proof in [1] that topological censorship holds for a class of spacetimes with timelike

boundary-at-innity that includes asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetimes. this proof, like

other proofs of topological censorship, holds in any such (n + 1)-dimensional spacetime with

n  2. this fact immediately implies that causal curves passing through the interior of an

asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetime detect only topological structure also present in the

boundary-at-innity in any such dimension.

it is also known that more information about the topology of a spacetime that exhibits

topological censorship can be found by algebraic topology. in 3 + 1 dimensions, chrusciel

4

and wald [18] noted that topological censorship implies that black holes are topological

2-spheres in stationary, asymptotically at spacetimes. jacobson and venkataramani [19]

generalized this result to show that it holds for a quite general class of (3 + 1)-dimensional

asymptotically at spacetimes, including spacetimes with black hole formation by collapse.

for the case of (3 + 1)-dimensional asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetimes, we showed in

[1] that the sum of the genera of black holes is bounded above by that of a spatial cut

of the boundary-at-innity. furthermore, the integral homology of cauchy surfaces (as

dened for asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetime with boundary-at-innity) is torsion free

and consequently completely determined by the betti numbers. moreover, the rst betti

number is equal to the sum of the genera of the black holes and the second betti number is

equal to the number of black holes. thus topological censorship restricts both the topology

of black holes and that of the spacetime exterior to them in 3 + 1 dimensions.

though the proof of topological censorship in [1] holds in (n + 1)-dimensional spacetime

for n  2, some of the stronger results in [1] have been derived by using certain special

properties of the topology of (3 + 1)-dimensional spacetimes. clearly one can extend some

of these arguments using algebraic topology to other dimensions. we will do so in this paper.

we rst prove a simple corollary of topological censorship, that any asymptotically anti-

de sitter spacetime with a disconnected boundary-at-innity necessarily contains black hole

horizons which screen the boundary components from each other. this result is independent

of the scalar curvature of the boundary-at-innity. but, in a certain sense, it is a lorentzian

analog of the witten and yau result [2]. furthermore the topology of v , the cauchy surface

(as dened for asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetime with boundary-at-innity) for regions

exterior to event horizons is constrained by that of the boundary-at-innity; we show that

the homomorphism 1(0)  1(v ) induced by the inclusion map is onto where 0 is the

intersection of v  with the boundary-at-innity. we also prove that the integral homology

hn1(v ; z) = z k where v is the closure of v  and k is the number of boundaries i interior

to 0. as a consequence v itself does not contain any wormholes or other compact non-

simply topological structures. furthermore, the integral homology hk(v ; z) is torsion free

5

for k = n  2. for the case of n = 2, these constraints and the onto homomorphism of the

fundamental groups are sucient to limit the topology of interior of v to either b2 or i s1.

therefore, in 2 + 1 dimensions, the topology of the boundary-at-innity almost completely

characterizes that of the interior, a desirable conclusion for the ads/cft correspondence

conjecture. however, in 4 + 1 dimensions, these constraints and the onto homomorphism

of fundamental groups in and of themselves are not sucient to completely characterize

the topology of the interior. as we will see, they do not suce to constrain the number of

compact simply connected topological structures in the interior.

ii. topological censorship in (n + 1)-dimensional

asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetimes

precisely, we will consider an (n + 1)-dimensional connected spacetime m, with metric

gab, which can be conformally included into a spacetime-with-boundary m = m  i, with

metric g

ab, such that m = i is timelike (i.e., is an n-dimensional lorentzian hypersurface

in the induced metric) and m = m \ i. note that the boundary-at-innity i can have

multiple components, that is the cardinality of 0(i) can be greater than one. the conditions

on the conformal factor   c 1(m) are that (a)  > 0 and g

ab = 2gab on m, and

(b)  = 0 and d 6= 0 pointwise on i. these are the standard conditions on  in a

conformal compactication of a spacetime with innitely extendible null geodesics such as

asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetimes.

the conformal compactication of the universal anti-de sitter spacetime in n + 1 dimen-

sions (cf. [13] p. 131) is a canonical example of such a spacetime. its boundary-at-innity

i is n-dimensional minkowski spacetime.2 group actions on this spacetime generate local

ads spacetimes containing black holes and wormholes (see for example [7,8]). in contrast to

2precisely, the boundary-at-innity is the einstein static universe sn1r in which n-dimensional

minkowski spacetime is itself conformally included.

6

universal anti-de sitter spacetime, these spacetimes can have disconnected i.

a spacetime-with-boundary m is dened to be globally hyperbolic if m is strongly causal

and the intersection of the causal future of p with the causal past of q, j +(p, m)j (q, m),

is compact for all p, q  m.3 this denition has exactly the same form as that for the case

of a spacetime without boundary. however, observe that the inclusion of the boundary is key

for spacetimes with timelike i. in particular, m, is not globally hyperbolic but m = mi

is globally hyperbolic for many spacetimes with timelike i such as asymptotically anti-de

sitter spacetimes.

for example, it is well known that universal anti-de sitter spacetime m itself is not

globally hyperbolic (cf. [13] p. 132); as i is timelike, one can nd points q and p such

that j +(p, m)  j (q, m) is not compact. such points are those such that past directed

radially outward null curves from q and future directed radially outward null curves from p

intersect i before they intersect each other. as these geodesics leave m before intersecting,

j +(p, m)  j (q, m) is not compact. however, observe that j +(p, m)  j (q, m) is

compact as it includes the appropriate part of i. intuitively, one is including additional

information about the spacetime by including the boundary-at-innity and this additional

information is sucient to ensure physical predictability.

we will also require that the spacetime satisfy a modied form of the averaged null

energy condition (anec): for each point p in m near i and any future complete null

geodesic s  (s) in m starting at p with tangent x, r 

0 ric(x, x) ds  0.4 this condition

is necessary to ensure that all radially outward directed null geodesics from a closed outer

3note that the causal future of a set s relative to u , j +(s, u ), is the union of s  u with the

set of all points that can be reached from s by a future directed non-spacelike curve in u . the

interchange of the past with future in the previous denition yields j (s, u ).

4 the term anec usually refers to a condition of this form except that the integral is taken over

geodesics complete to both past and future [21].

7

trapped surface focus to a conjugate point in nite ane parameter, ensuring that this

surface is not visible to i (see for example prop. 9.2.1 in [13], a related proof using the null

energy condition).

anec is stated in geometric form but can be interpreted physically by invoking the

einstein equations to relate the ricci tensor to its sources. in particular, if the einstein

equations with cosmological constant hold, rab  1

2rgab +gab = 8tab, then as gabx ax b = 0
for any null vector x, ric(x, x) = rabx ax b = 8tabx ax b = 8t (x, x). clearly, the

cosmological constant does not appear in this expression. consequently, anec depends

only on the stress energy tensor. anec is satised by the stress energy tensor of physically

reasonable sources of matter.

in particular, it is obvious that spacetimes with negative

cosmological constant containing no matter will satisfy this condition.

finally, a spacetime satises the generic condition if every timelike or null geodesic with

tangent vector x contains a point at which x ax bx[crd]ab[exf ] is not zero. the generic

condition will be satised if a spacetime contains matter or gravitational radiation in a

non-symmetric conguration.5

we begin by reminding readers that proofs of topological censorship, in particular that

of [1], hold in (n + 1)-dimensional spacetimes for n  2. namely,

theorem 1. let m be a globally hyperbolic spacetime-with-boundary with timelike

boundary i that satises anec. let i0 be a connected component of i. furthermore

assume either (i) i0 admits a compact spacelike cut or (ii) m satises the generic con-

dition. then every causal curve whose initial and nal endpoints belong to i0 is xed end

point homotopic to a curve on i0

this is an alternate but completely equivalent statement of theorem 2.2 proven in [1]. the

proof of theorem 1 uses the result

5all known examples of spacetimes that do not satisfy the generic condition have a high degree

of local or global symmetry.

8

theorem 2. let m be a globally hyperbolic spacetime-with-boundary with timelike

boundary i that satises anec. let i0 be a connected component of i of m. fur-

thermore assume that either (i) i0 admits a compact spacelike cut or (ii) m satises

the generic condition. then i0 cannot communicate with any other component of i, i.e.,

j +(i0)  (i \ i0) = .

this theorem is a restated form of theorem 2.1 proven in [1]. the maximally extended

schwarzchild and schwarzchild-anti-de sitter solutions provide simple examples of space-

times satisfying the conditions of this theorem. they both have two disconnected compo-

nents of i. causal curves originating from one component of i cannot end on the other;

instead they end on the black hole singularity.

it is useful to mention that theorem 1 follows from theorem 2 by constructing a covering

space of m in which all non-contractible curves not homotopic to curves on i0 are unwound.

any causal curve with endpoints on i0 not xed endpoint homotopic to a causal curve in i0

will begin on a dierent component of i in this covering space. however, this covering space

is itself a globally hyperbolic spacetime-with-boundary satisfying the conditions of theorem

2. thus such a curve cannot exist. hence the result.

ref. [1] provides a natural restatement of theorem 1 in terms of the region of spacetime

that can communicate with a given component of the boundary-at-innity. this region,

the domain of outer communications d = i (i0)  i +(i0),6 is the subset of m that is

in causal contact with i0. as we shall see later, one can think of the domain of outer

communications as the region of m which is exterior to event horizons. clearly, d is also

the interior of an (n + 1)-dimensional spacetime-with-boundary d = d  i0. now theorem

1 can be conveniently restated in terms of the fundamental group of the domain of outer

6note that the timelike future of a set s relative to u , i +(s, u ), is the set of all points that can be

reached from s by a future directed timelike curve in u . the interchange of the past with future

in the previous denition yields i (s, u ).

9

communications. observe that the inclusion map i : i0  d induces a homomorphism of

fundamental groups i : 1(i0)  1(d). then

theorem 3.

if m is a globally hyperbolic spacetime-with-boundary that satises the

conditions given in theorem 1, then the group homomorphism i : 1(i0)  1(d) induced

by inclusion is surjective.

theorem 3 says roughly that every loop in d is deformable to a loop in i. moreover, it

implies that 1(d) (= 1(d)) is isomorphic to the factor group 1(i)/ker i. in particular,

if i is simply connected then so is d, thus generalizing the result of [20].

iii. causal disconnectedness of disjoint components of the

boundary-at-infinity

the boundary of the region of spacetime visible to observers at i by past directed causal

curves is referred to as the future event horizon. this horizon is a set of one or more null

surfaces, also called black hole horizons, generated by null geodesics that have no future

endpoints but possibly have past endpoints. precisely these horizons are characterized as

the boundary of the causal past of i,

j (i). a past event horizon is similarly dened;

j +(i). the past event horizon also can consist of one or null surfaces known as white hole

horizons.

theorems 1, 2 and 3 provide a partial characterization of the topology of the region of

spacetime exterior to the event horizons in (n + 1)-dimensions. in particular, they demon-

strate that no causal curve links with event horizons in a manner such that it cannot be

deformed to a curve on the boundary-at-innity. rather causal curves in the spacetime will

only carry information about the non-triviality of curves on i. thus the topology of event

horizons in spacetimes that exhibit topological censorship is constrained.

an immediate result of theorem 2 is that spacetimes with disconnected i contain black

hole horizons which screen the boundary components from each other.

corollary. let m satisfy the conditions given in theorem 1. if i is disconnected, then the

10

spacetime contains black hole horizons, namely j (i0) 6= .

proof: let i1 be any component of i not connected to i0. theorem 2 shows that there is

no causal curve connecting i0 and i1. thus the causal past of i0 is disjoint from the causal

future of i1, j (i0)  j +(i1) = . now as both are subsets of m, clearly j (i0) is not

itself m. thus j (i0) 6= .

observe that a similar argument shows that the spacetime contains a past event horizon,

j +(i); as j +(i1) is also not itself m,

j +(i1) 6= . note that

j (i0) and j +(i1) may

coincide as is the case in the maximally extended schwarzchild and schwarzchild-anti-de

sitter spacetimes.

in simple terms, these results show that black hole spacetimes formed from the collapse

of topological structures must always have both black hole and white hole horizons. this

behavior is quantitatively dierent than that of spacetimes containing black holes formed by

collapse of matter which may, but need not exhibit a white hole horizon. therefore, white

holes are an essential feature of black hole spacetimes formed from collapse of topology.

the implications of the corollary for ads/cft correspondence are immediate.

in an

asymptotically de-sitter spacetime satisfying reasonable physical conditions, any component

of the boundary-at-innity cannot causally communicate with any other disjoint component

of the boundary-at-innity. thus a eld operator on one component of the boundary-at-

innity cannot causally interact with another eld operator on any other disjoint component.

thus a eld operator on one component of i will commute with any other eld operator on

any disjoint component i. thus conformal eld theories dened on disjoint components of

the boundary-at-innity do not interact dynamically.

clearly however, one can set up correlations in the initial vacuum states of the conformal

eld theories. in fact, the necessary appearance of white hole horizons may yield a natural

way to do so. however, any such correlations are not dynamic.

11

iv. the topology of regions exterior to black hole horizons

in n + 1 dimensions

one can obtain further information about regions exterior to black hole horizons if one

considers the topology of the intersections of certain spacelike hypersurfaces with the hori-

zons; those for which this intersection is a set of closed spacelike (n  1)-manifolds (good

cuts of the horizons). a characterization of these regions can then be given by the analysis

of the topology of these spacelike hypersurfaces, specically cauchy surfaces as dened for

asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetimes, in terms of their homology. one can show that in

n + 1 dimensions, spacetimes that obey topological censorship must have spacelike surfaces,

which contain no wormholes or other non-simply connected compact topological structures.

these results are the generalization of the previous results for 3 + 1 dimension reported in

[1] to arbitrary dimension.

precisely, let m be as described in theorem 1, and d be the domain of outer commu-

nications of a component i0 of its timelike boundary. a cauchy surface (for asymptotically

anti-de sitter spacetime with boundary-at-innity) for d is dened to be a subset v   d

which is met once and only once by each inextendible causal curve in d. then v  will be a

spacelike hypersurface which, as a manifold-with-boundary, has boundary on i. this deni-

tion of cauchy surface for asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetimes with boundary-at-innity

parallels that for spacetimes without boundary. for brevity, we will call these cauchy sur-

faces for asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetimes with boundary-at-innity simply cauchy

surfaces in the remainder of the paper.

it can be shown, as in the standard case of spacetime without boundary, that a spacetime-

with-timelike-boundary m which is globally hyperbolic admits a cauchy surface v  for d.

furthermore, d is homeomorphic to r  v . (this can be shown by directly modifying the

proof of prop. 6.6.8 in [13].) examples of spacetimes whose domains of outer communications

admit such cauchy surfaces are the locally anti-de sitter spacetimes and related models given

in [610].

12

if a globally hyperbolic d has topology r  v  (e.g.

if v  is a cauchy surface for d)

then d can be continuously deformed to v  so that i gets deformed to 0. this process

preserves fundamental groups and hence allows the application of algebraic topology to

further characterize the the spatial hypersurface v . precisely,

theorem 4. assume d (= d  i) is a globally hyperbolic spacetime that satises the

conditions given in theorem 1. suppose v  is a cauchy surface for d such that its closure

v = v  in m is a compact topological n-manifold-with-boundary whose boundary v

(corresponding to the edge of v  in m ) consists of a disjoint union of compact (n  1)-

manifolds, v = k

i=0i where 0 is on i and the i, i = 1, . . . , k, are on the event horizon.

then the group homomorphism i : 1(0)  1(v ) induced by inclusion i : 0  v is

onto.

the proof of this result is given in [1]. clearly, theorem 4 implies that if 0 is simply

connected, then so is v .

one may gain further insight into the consequences of topological censorship by asking

how can one modify the topology of v yet still satisfy the restriction 1(0)  1(v )?

a standard method of constructing topological spaces is by connected sum: one takes v

and sews in a closed n-manifold n by removing one n-ball from the interior of v and one

n-ball from n then identifying the resulting (n  1)-sphere boundaries with each other to

form v = v #n. for n = sn1  s1, this procedure adds a n-handle or wormhole to the

space. one can similarly add another compact connected topological structure to the space

by choosing n to be any other closed manifold besides sn.

clearly this procedure can add factors that will modify v such that it will no longer

satisfy i : 1(0)  1(v ) being onto. for example, the addition of a wormhole will

produce a new generator of 1( v ); a curve passing through the new handle will not be

homotopic to any curve in v . similarly, adding another compact connected topological

structure which has nontrivial 1(n) will also introduce new generators to 1( v ). however,

connected sums involving compact simply connected topological structures will not change

13

the fundamental group and thus the addition of such structures is not constrained by this

argument.

an alternate view of this eect is provided in terms of the homology of v . for example,

taking the connected sum of v with a handle n introduces a (n  1)-sphere that does not

bound an n-ball. therefore, the rank of hn1(v #n; z) is greater than that of hn1(v ; z).

it is clear on an intuitive level that if connected sums with wormholes and other compact

connected topological structures can change the topology of v , then the information pro-

vided in theorem 4 must constrain the number of wormholes and other compact non-simply

connected topological structures.

a further characterization of the spacetime is given by the analysis of the topology of

v in terms of its homology.

in the following we will assume that 0 is orientable, the

generalization to the non-orientable case being straightforward.

theorem 5. if 0 is orientable and i : 1(0)  1(v ) is onto, then the natural homo-

morphism h1(0; z)  h1(v ; z) is onto. the integral homology hk(v ; z) is torsion free

for k = 0, n  2, n  1, and n. furthermore, hn1(v ; z) = z k where k is the number of

boundaries i interior to 0.

proof: we use the fact that the rst integral homology group of a space is isomorphic to

the fundamental group modded out by its commutator subgroup. hence, modding out by

the commutator subgroups of 1(0) and 1(v ), respectively, induces from i a surjective

homomorphism from h1(0; z) to h1(v ; z).

we next prove the torsion free claims. the assumption on fundamental groups and the

orientability of 0 imply that v is orientable.7 then, since v has boundary, hn(v ; z) = 0.

7 theorem 2 contradicts the possibility of a nonorientable d satisfying the conditions of theorem

2 with orientable i. the orientable double cover of d would also satisfy the conditions of theorem

2 and would contain two copies of i connected by causal curves. as this cannot happen, d must

be orientable for orientable i. as orientable 0 implies orientable i, it follows that v is orientable.

14

also h0(v ; z) = z as v is connected. further, it is a standard fact that hn1(v ; z) is free

(cf. [22], p. 379). this follows from poincare duality for manifolds-with-boundary and the

fact that the relative rst cohomology group is in general free. thus we need to show that

hn2(v ; z) is free. the arguments we use for this we also use to show hn1(v ; z) = z k.

lemma. hn2(v ; z) is free.

to prove the lemma we rst consider the relative homology sequence for the pair v  0,

    h1(0) h1(v )

h1(v, 0)  h0(0) = 0

(4.1)

where we have assumed in the above sequence and from now on in the relative homology

arguments that the coecients are over z. here h0(0) is the reduced zeroth-dimensional

homology group. since, as discussed previously,  is onto, we have ker  = im = h1(v )

which implies   0. hence ker  = im = 0, and thus  is injective. this implies that

h1(v, 0) = 0.

now consider the relative homology sequence for the triple v  v  0,

    h1(v, 0)  h1(v, 0) = 0  h1(v, v ) h0(v, 0)    

.

(4.2)

since h0(v, 0) is torsion free and  is injective, h1(v, v ) is torsion free. next, poincare-
lefschetz duality gives h n1(v ) = h1(v, v ). hence h n1(v ) is torsion free. the universal

coecient theorem implies that

h n1(v ) = hom (hn1(v ), z)  ext (hn2(v ), z)

.

(4.3)

the functor ext(, ) is bilinear in the rst argument with respect to direct sums and

ext(zk, z) = zk. hence h n1(v ) cannot be torsion free unless hn2(v ) is. this completes

the proof of the lemma.

the boundary surfaces 1, 2, . . ., k clearly determine k linearly independent (n  1)-

cycles in v , and hence bn1  k.

it remains to show that bn1  k. since both hn1(v ) and h n1(v ) are nitely
generated and torsion free, we have hn1(v ) = h n1(v ) = h1(v, v ), where we have

15

again made use of poincare-lefschetz duality. hence, bn1 = rank h1(v, v ). to show

that rank h1(v, v )  k, we refer again to the long exact sequence (4.2). by excision,
h0(v, 0) = h0(v \ 0, ) = h0(v \ 0). hence, by the injectivity of , rank h1(v, v )

 rank h0(v, 0) = the number of components of v \ 0 = k. this completes the proof

of theorem 5.

an easy consequence of theorem 5 is that b1(0)  b1(v ). as observed earlier, the

addition of a wormhole changes not only 1(v ) but also hn1(v ). also note that rank

hn1(v ; z) = k, the number of boundaries of v interior to the cut of the boundary-at-

innity 0. therefore, there is no element of hn1(v ; z) associated with a structure in

the interior of v . that is, there are no wormholes or other compact non-simply connected

topological structures in v .

corollary. given v satisfying the conditions of theorem 5, then there exists no closed

manifold n with b1(n) > 0 such that v = u#n.

proof: observe that as n is a closed manifold, that u has the same boundaries as v ; it

follows that bn1(u)  k. the mayer-vietoris sequence yields

0  hn(v )  hn1(sn1)  hn1(u  bn)  hn1(n  bn)

 hn1(v )  hn2(sn1)   

.

now the above sequence is exact as hn2(sn1) = 0. the alternating sum of the ranks must

vanish, thus 1  (bn1(u) + 1)  b1(n)) + k = 0 using bn(v ) = 0, bn1(u  bn) = bn1(u) + 1

as u and v are manifolds with boundary. clearly this implies bn1(u) + bn1(n) = k. but

this is a contradiction to b1(n) > 0.

finally, one might be worried that cauchy surfaces satisfying theorem 4 only occur

in stationary spacetimes, that is where no black hole formation occurs. however, this is

not the case as rst pointed out by jacobson and venkataramani [19]; one can construct

surfaces that characterize cuts of black hole horizons that occur via collapse in quite general

asymptotically at spacetimes. what one does is construct a globally hyperbolic spacetime

that consists of a subset of the original spacetime. one can carry out a similar construction

16

for the asymptotically anti-de sitter spacetimes. precisely, let k be a cut of i, and let ik

be the portion of i to the future of k, ik = i  i +(k). let dk be the domain of outer of

communications with respect to ik, dk = i +(ik)  i (ik) = i +(k)  i (i). one chooses

d

k = dk  i such that it is globally hyperbolic and such that the closure of its cauchy

surface in m has a good intersection with the black hole horizons, i.e. the intersections are

(n  1)-manifolds. this new spacetime satises the conditions of theorem 1 and will contain

a surface v as required in theorem 4. therefore the conclusions of theorem 5 hold for such

surfaces as well. thus, though topological censorship does not determine the topology of

arbitrary embedded hypersurfaces, it does do so for hypersurfaces homeomorphic to cauchy

surfaces for the domain of outer communications that make good cuts of the horizons.

details regarding this procedure are discussed further in [1].

v. further results in 2 + 1 and 4 + 1 dimensions

clearly, by using special properties of manifolds in a given dimension n, the results

obtained here may be strengthened. this is particularly true in low dimension. of special

relevance to the ads/cft correspondence conjecture are results on asymptotically anti-de

sitter spacetimes in 2 + 1 and 4 + 1 dimensions.

in three dimensions one can show that

theorem 6. assume d is a globally hyperbolic spacetime-with-boundary that satises the

conditions of theorem 4. then the 2-dimensional hypersurface v is either b2 or i  s1.

proof: as all 1-manifolds are orientable, v is orientable. theorem 5 implies that the rank

of the free part of h1(v ; z) cannot be greater than that of h1(0; z), i.e., b1(v )  b1(0)

in the case n = 2, 0 is a 1-manifold so b1(0)  1 thus b1(v )  1. now v is a closed

2-manifold minus a disjoint union of discs. from the classication of 2-manifolds, v must be

a closed 2-manifold minus a disjoint union of disks. the rst betti number of such manifolds

is b1 = 2g + k where g is the genus and k + 1 the number of disjoint disks; it follows that

g = 0. since v must have at least one boundary, the only possible topologies for v are b2

17

or i  s1.

theorem 6 has very interesting consequences for the topology of (2 + 1)-dimensional

spacetimes. if i is disconnected, then v  for the domain of outer communications of each

disconnected component of i will have product topology. thus topological censorship gives a

topological rigidity theorem in (2 + 1)-dimensional gravity. as one has directly characterized

the topology of the domain of outer communications for these spacetimes, it follows, by

arguments similar to that used to characterize the topology of good cuts of black hole

horizons in the (3 + 1)-dimensional case given in [1], that the topology of a good cut of a

black hole horizon in (2 + 1)-dimensional spacetime is always s1.

the case of (2 + 1)-dimensional asymptotically at spacetimes can be similarly treated

to produce the same conclusions as theorem 6. it follows that there are no asymptotically

at geons in three dimensions.

in the case of (4+1)-dimensional spacetimes, theorem 5 yields that the integral homology

hk(v ; z) is torsion free except for k = 1. however, theorem 5 and the onto homomorphism of

the fundamental groups is not enough to even partially x the topology of v . to demonstrate

this, it is useful to rst study the restricted case for which 0 is simply connected. it follows

that v is a simply connected manifold with boundary. this is a fairly signicant restriction;

however one will have an innite number of such manifolds. one obtains these simply by

taking the connected sum of v with any closed simply connected 4-manifold. one can

readily show that the connected sum of two such manifolds leaves hk unchanged except for

h2. there are an innite number of closed simply connected 4-manifolds characterized by

their hirzebruch signature and euler characteristic.

furthermore the restriction that v is simply connected is not enough to deduce the topol-

ogy of the boundaries i even in this simple case. it is well known that all closed 3-manifolds

are cobordant to s3. in fact one can construct a cobordism with trivial fundamental group

[23]. therefore, one cannot conclude any restriction on the topology of the cuts of black

hole horizons in (4 + 1)-dimensional spacetimes from the simple arguments given above.

finally, it is clear that similar conclusions follow in the case of non-simply connected 0.

18

in particular, one will have an innite number of manifolds with the same fundamental group

and hn1(v ; z) obtained by taking the connected sum of v with any closed simply connected

4-manifold. thus the topology of the interior of a (4 + 1)-dimensional asymptotically de

sitter spacetime is constrained but not completely characterized by the topology of the

boundary-at-innity.

acknowledgments

we would like to thank g. semeno and e. witten for useful conversations. this work

was partially supported by the natural sciences and engineering research council of canada

and by the national science foundation (usa), grant no. dms-9803566.

19

references

[1] g. galloway, k. schleich, d. witt, and e. woolgar, phys. rev. d 60, 104039 (1999).

[2] e. witten, and s. yau, connectedness of the boundary in the ads/cft correspon-

dence, hep-th/9910245.

[3] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75, 4724 (1995), and tasi lectures on d-branes,

hep-th/9611050.

[4] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 231 (1998).

[5] o. aharony, s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri and y. oz, large n eld theories,

string theory and gravity, hep-th/9905111.

[6] m. banados, c. teitelboim, and j. zanelli, phys. rev. lett. 69, 1849 (1992).

[7] j. lemos, phys. lett. b 352, 46 (1995).

[8] s. aminneborg, i. bengtsson, s. holst, and p. peldan, class. quantum grav.13, 2707

(1996).

[9] r. mann, class. quantum grav. 14, 2927 (1997).

[10] d. brill, j. louko, and p. peldan, phys. rev. d 56, 3600 (1997).

[11] r. mann, in  internal structure of black holes and spacetime singularities, eds. l

burko and a. ori, ann. israeli phys. soc. 13, 311 (1998).

[12] g. mess, lorentz spacetimes of constant curvature, msri preprint 90-05808 (1990).

[13] s. hawking and g. ellis, the large scale structure of spacetime, (cambridge univer-

sity press, cambridge, 1973).

[14] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 253 (1998).

[15] j. friedman, k. schleich, and d. witt, phys. rev. lett.711486 (1993).

20

[16] g. galloway, class. quantum grav. 13, 1471 (1996).

[17] galloway, g. and woolgar, e., class. quantum grav. 14, l1 (1997).

[18] p. chrusciel and r. wald, class. quantum grav. 11, l147 (1994).

[19] jacobson, t. and venkataramani, s., class. quantum gravit. 12, 1055 (1995).

[20] g. galloway, class. quantum grav. 12, l99 (1995).

[21] a. borde, class. quantum grav. 4, 343 (1987).

[22] w .s. massey, a basic course in algebraic topology, (springer-verlag, new york,

1991).

[23] d. rolfsen, knots and links, (publish or perish, berkeley, 1976).

21

