hep-th/9912241
pupt-1907

9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
3
2

 

 
 

1
v
1
4
2
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

from sym perturbation theory to closed strings

in matrix theory

micha berkooz 1

department of physics, princeton university, princeton, nj 08544

abstract

for the purpose of better understanding the ads/cft correspondence it is useful to have

a description of the theory for all values of the t hooft coupling, and for all n . we

discuss such a description in the framework of matrix theory for sym on d4-branes,

which is given in terms of quantum mechanics on the moduli space of solutions of the

nahm equations. this description reduces to both sym perturbation theory and to closed

string perturbation theory, each in its appropriate regime of validity, suggesting a way of

directly relating the variables in the two descriptions. for example, it shows explicitly how

holes in the world-sheets of the t hooft expansion close to give closed surfaces.

12/99

1 mberkooz@feynman.princeton.edu

1. introduction

in this note we discuss a matrix model [1] (for a recent review see [2]) for the super-

yang-mills theory on d4-branes, and show how it transforms the sym weak coupling

hilbert space and interactions (in dlcq) into a weakly coupled string theory when n and

the t hooft coupling become large.

understanding the relation between gauge theories and strings has been an interesting

eld of research for some time now ([3], and references therein). a breakthrough in this eld

is the ads/cft correspondence [4], in which the large n limit of certain gauge theories

(or otherwise interacting eld theories) was solved in terms of a gravity background. using

this correspondence one can study some properties of theories with gravity and of gauge

theories [5][6] (for a recent review see [7]).

this conjecture has by now been put to the test and veried in numerous ways. still,

one might be interested in a more straightforward way of deriving strings from sym.

ideally one would like to start perhaps with sym perturbation theory (i.e., weak coupled

sym where we understanding what are the fundamental elds and their interactions)

and re-sum the perturbation theory to strong t hooft coupling, or begin with wilson

loops, which are again best understood at weak coupling, and again try and extend those

to large t hooft coupling.

in this paper we will discuss a construction along these lines for the case of sym in

4+1 dimensions (with maximal supersymmetry). we will be working at some large but

xed n. the description that we will use is the matrix description of this theory, which is

valid for all values of the t hooft coupling and n . this is a quantum mechanical system,

which has the interesting property that in the form that we will use it, it can be written

in terms of both closed string and sym variables, on almost equal footing. both sets

of variables, however, cannot be taken to be dynamical and independent at the same time,

as there are constraints which relate the two sets. one can choose only one of these sets of

variables to describe the system, giving us either an open string (sym) or an equivalent

closed string description of the same system. as expected, the sym variables describe

the system better at weak t hooft coupling where they give the sym perturbation theory,

and the closed string variables describe the system at strong t hooft coupling and large

n where they give weakly coupled closed string perturbation theory on the near horizon

geometry. again, these are two eective descriptions of the same quantum mechanical

system.

1

since the ads/cft correspondence is a strong/weak coupling duality we do not

expect to have a simple map between the hilbert space of weakly coupled sym (in dlcq)

and the hilbert space of the closed strings (in dlcq). what we will obtain, however, is the

best that one can hope for - both sym and closed strings perturbation theories in dlcq

are shown to be the asymptotic expansions (in dierent regimes) of the same underlying

quantum mechanical system, of which we have a full denition. hence the duality between

them is manifest in this approach.

the organization of the paper is the following. in section 2 we present the dlcq

(matrix) model for d4-branes. in section 3 we analyze it at weak t hooft coupling and

briey explain how sym perturbation theory is generated in this limit. in section 4 we

discuss the model at strong t hooft coupling and large n - we review the near horizon

background of a cluster of d4-branes, and then obtain it by a collective coordinate method

in the dlcq description. the method is similar to that used in [8][9].

before we proceed one should mention one caveat. sym with 16 supercharges in 4+1

dimensions exists1 only as the 6d (2,0) scft compactied on a circle (the size of the circle

then sets the sym coupling) - for a review see [10]. this means that it is not always easy

to distinguish gauge theory large t hooft coupling eects (i.e, when the loop corrections
become strong at energies 1/g2
(2,0) eld theory (which happens at some energy below g2

ymn ) from eects associate with the strong coupling of the
ym). this, however, will not play

a role in what follows.

this work is reminiscent of ideas presented at [11]. it is also related to ideas in [12],

in which closed strings fragment to form a gas of open string bits at the horizon (as in

d-branes). the construction presented here is a realization of this idea. we will see the

fragmentation quite explicitly, and how open and closed strings transform into each other.

2. the matrix model of d4-branes

matrix theory can be used to describe the dlcq of eld theories on certain solitons2.

initially one obtains a matrix model for the theory on the soliton coupled to gravity [13].

then, in order to obtain a description of the decoupled theory on the soliton, one traces the

space-time decoupling procedure in the matrix model. the result is a description of the

1 within eld theories. one may also dene it using little string theories.
2 typically, high dimensional high supersymmetry ones.

2

soliton eld theory [14,15,16,17,18] in terms of a decoupled sector in the matrix description.

as usual in matrix theory one then needs to identify states with energy that scales like

1/pnull in the large pnull limit (where pnull is momentum along the compactied null

circle), and only these can be compared with the states of the uncompactied theory. we

would like to carry out this procedure for n4 d4-branes at xed sym coupling. by that

we mean a cluster of n4 m5-branes compactied on a xed circle, whose size is then the

4+1d sym coupling. in this section we will present the model, and postpone its analysis

in weak and strong t hooft coupling to the next two sections.

the matrix model for m5-branes in at 11d space is given in terms of the d0-d4

system [13], and that of the compactied m5-branes is given by essentially t-dualizing

this system. after t-duality one obtains a system of n1 wrapped d1-branes intersecting

(transversally) n4 d3-branes with hypermultiplets living at the intersection points. the
d1-branes wrap a circle in x 4 direction and the d3-branes span coordinates x 0..x 3, and
may be located at dierent points along the x 4 circle. more precisely, the matrix model

is only the eld theory on the d1-branes together with the hypermultiplets. on a generic

point of the circle the theory is the standard theory of d1-brane, i.e., it has 16 supercharges.

the hypermultiplets live at xed points on the circle and propagate in time, i.e., they are

impurities of codimension 1, and break half of the supersymmetry. a detailed derivation,

which we will not present here, is found at [19] (and for the case of the matrix model for 4d
n = 4 sym in [18]). the system appears to be renormalizeable by naive power counting
arguments, but beyond that there is no good understanding of its quantum mechanical

properties. we will assume that it is a consistent quantum theory.

the bosonic matter content is the following. the bulk (away from the impurities)

contains:

1. a u (n1) gauge eld,
2. 3 scalar eld x i in the adjoint of u (n1). in the language of the d1-branes intersecting

the d3-branes, these parameterize the positions of the d1-branes in the spatial directions

of the d3-brane. in the matrix interpretation, these 3 elds parameterize the positions in

the 3 non-compact directions of the d4-brane, i.e., the coordinates of the d4-branes other

then time and null circle.
3. 5 scalars y  in the adjoint of u (n1). these parameterize the coordinates transverse to

the d3-branes (or d4-branes in the matrix interpretation of the model).

these elds are part of a single multiplet from the point of view of the 16 supercharges

of the bulk. the full theory, however, has 8 supercharges and the division of the bulk

3

multiplet into the n = 8 multiplets is the following. recall that in the d0-d4 system the
coordinates of the d0 branes parallel to the d4 brane were in an adjoint hypermultiplet.
when we t-dualize parallel to the d4-brane, these 4 elds generate the 3 scalar elds x i
and the component of the gauge eld a1, so all of these belong to the same n = 8 multiplet.
the remaining elds are the analogue of a vector multiplet as indeed they started their

life as a 0+1 vector multiplet in the d0-d4 system. this structure will manifest itself in

the coupling of the various d-terms below.

the impurities are hypermultiplets of the 8 supercharges, which transform as funda-

mentals of u (n1). to specify the impurity data, one species some points along the circle

which the d1-brane wrap and at each point the number, ni, of hypermultiplets. these
positions correspond to the positions of the d3-branes along the x 4 circle. each impurity

point then has a global symmetry u (ni). the total number of d4-branes is ni, and

the dierent positions of the impurities correspond to turning on null wilson lines in the
d4-brane gauge group 3 which breaks it from u (ni = n4) to u (ni). we will actually

restrict ourselves somewhat by turning on null wilson lines which break the gauge group

to a product of u (1)s, i.e., each hypermultiplet impurity is located at a dierent point.

we will refer to this conguration as the resolved model. in the large null-momentum

limit one expects that these wilson lines will not play a signicant role (although it would

be interesting to better understand directly the non-resolved model).

the action that one obtains is the following. the bulk interaction is:

z dtd(cid:18)dtx idtx i + [y , x i]2 +

1
g2

ym(cid:0)f 2 + dy dy  + [y , y ]2 + di2(cid:1)+

(2.1)

+

1

gym

di(cid:0)dx i + gymijk[x j, x k])(cid:1)(cid:19) + f ermion terms

where i = 1, 2, 3, ,  = 1..5 and d without a subscript denotes summing over both t and
. the impurities are located at points k, k = 1..n4, and their interaction is

kz dt(cid:18)(dtq

k )(dtq

k ) + y (k)2qkq

k + di(k)q

k i

q

k

(cid:19) + f ermion terms (2.2)

where k is a u (ni) index (and we were not careful in lower and upper indices in cases

where it is clear how to raise and lower them).

3 recall that the brane gauge theory appears as a global symmetry in matrix theory

4

the parameters of the 1+1 theory are related to those of spacetime in the following

way. denoting by  the size of the circle of the 1+1 theory, then

 =

1

rm 2
s

, g2

ym =

r2m 4
s

g2
s

=

r2m 2
s

g4
d4

(2.3)

where gd4 is the sym coupling on the d4-brane.

in matrix theory the coordinates x, y and q all measure spacetime distances. this

is obvious for the rst two, but is also true for q (because pq2 is related to a certain
instanton size). we will denote the distance coordinates by a subscript 1, and then
relation to the elds in (2.1)+(2.2) is

x1 = rx, q1 = rq, y1 =

r
gym

y

3. some comments on the theory at weak t hooft coupling

we are interested in discussing the dynamics of the matrix model in the limit of weak

t hooft coupling on the d4-brane. since this coupling is dimensionful we actually require

that the eective coupling at the string scale be weak. this translates according to (2.3)

to the limit

gym  

(3.1)

(keeping the energy xed). in this limit we expect the dynamics to be governed by the

moduli space and congurations close to it. in section 3.1 we will identify some congu-

rations which remain in low energies in the open string sector, and in section 3.2 we will

discuss how closed+open string perturbation theory comes about. in this section we will

be working at a large but xed n4.

3.1. the long strings

given a matrix model, the states which can be compared to those in the uncompacti-

ed theory are those whose energy scales as 1/n1 in the large n1 limit. in this subsection

we will discuss such states in the regime when open string perturbation theory is valid, i.e.,

at weak t hooft coupling. among these are of course the d4-brane u (n4) gauge bosons,

and although we will not focus on them specically in this section, it is clear how to do so.

let us briey remind the reader how weakly coupled string theory is derived in the

case of the at 10d iia string with no additional solitons embedded in it [20][21]. to nd

5

low lying states one begins by identifying appropriate pieces of the moduli space. one

then needs to identify small uctuations around these congurations whose energy has the

correct n1 scaling. only these can then be compared to the spectrum of the uncompactied

theory. in the cases of impurity systems the moduli space is rather complicated and is not

understood well enough for our purposes, but one can identify sometimes excitations whose

energy scales like 1/n1, without a need for a detailed understanding of moduli space.

it is instructive to begin by identifying the states of the single short open string,

i.e., the states in the n1 = 1 sector.

in this case one can actually identify the entire

moduli space. the theory on the d1 is a u (1) gauge theory with 16 supercharges and in

addition there are charge 1 hypermultiplets localized at impurities (which break half of the

supersymmetries). the higgs branch is the following. in this case the d-term constraints

are

x i() = 0,  6= k
q

k i

x i(k+)  x i(k) = gymq

(3.2)



, k = 1..n4

k

where by x(k) one means the limiting value of x as one approaches the point k from
above (+) or from below (-). an excited l-th hypermultiplet means that there are two

strings ending on the l-th d4-brane, with opposite charges with respect to the u (1) which

lives on that brane, and that the distance between their end points on this brane is given

by the 2nd line in (3.2). going to the higgs branch, i.e, turning on q, also makes the y

elds massive. the coordinates of the higgs branch which we have identied so far give

us a space which corresponds to n4 gauge bosons with total charge 0 in each u (1), which
are positioned at dierent points on r3. additional coordinates of the higgs branch are

related to wilson lines made out of the gauge eld a1. these do not play a role in the

weak d4-brane t hooft coupling limit, as we will discuss later.

an additional branch is of course the coulomb branch in which x, y 6= 0 but q = 0.

this branch describes short strings in the bulk of the iia string theory.

there should also be additional mixed branches, i.e., branches in which the qs

at only part of the impurities are non-zero (and zero at the rest). this will have the

interpretation of less then n4 gauge bosons starting and ending on only some of the

branes. this however appears as a submanifold in the higgs branch and it is less clear

how to think of it as an additional branch. fortunately, this problem happens primarily at

the n1 = 1 case, and is alleviated in the long string picture, where obtaining the correct

spectrum is more critical. we will briey discuss this later.

6

next we identify the conguration of a collection of p long strings, all of which begin

and end on the same brane (the generalization to when they begin and end on dierent

branes is straightforward). we will not identify the precise classical zero energy (at

directions) conguration, but rather a conguration close to it with energy 1/n1. we will

also require that the dierent open strings are far apart from each other, i.e., if we denote
the average position of these long strings by x i
in g2

p then our analysis will be to rst order
pj ). since we are primarily interested in the scaling with n1 we will

ymq2/(x i

1..x i

p1  x i

also set for now the size of the circle of the 1+1 eld theory to 2.

the 0th order conguration is a conguration of the form

x i

1im1m1

x i

2im2m2

x 

0 () = 

!,

.

.

x i

pimpmp

(3.3)

where mi are kept to be a xed fraction of n1 as we take n1  . we would now like
to turn on the hypermultiplets. since we are dealing with a single brane we will turn on

only a single fundamental hypermultiplet, which we will take to live at  = . using the

remaining u (mi) symmetries we can rotate q such that only its rst component in each
block is turned on, and we will also take q to be of the same form (this will give us a rich

enough family of approximate solutions).

once we have turned on q, we can choose the matrices at both sides of  =  to be

x i() = x i

0, x i(+) = x i

0 + gymqq.

(3.4)

to lowest order in q and q, most of the eigenvalues of x i(+) are the same as those of
x i() except that one eigenvalue in each block is shifted by order q2. it is also clear
that we can discuss, to this order, each block separately. let us focus on the rst block.
we would like to construct long strings, i.e., complete the conguration to x i() for all 

such that the energy is proportional to 1/m1. it is clear that the appropriate long string

conguration is such that it begins in, say, x1(+), winds m1 times around the circle and
ends at x1(). the minimal gradients are of order gymqq/m1, and since the length of
the long string is m1,the total energy scales like 1/m1 which is the correct scaling to be

interpreted as physical state in matrix theory. this state would be that of a string starting

and ending on the same brane.

7

we can now also discuss the situation in which some impurities are activated and some

are not. in the n1 = 1 case this was somewhat problematic because we were looking for

these states as wave functions on an exact moduli space. in the large n1 limit we relaxed

this and it is easy to understand where the additional required states come from. in this
case we are allowed to set q 6= 0 at some impurities and q = 0 at the other if we set y = 0
at the rst group and y 6= 0 at the second. we can do so while keeping the gradients of
y small (i.e., scaling like 1/n1), such that they are compatible with the requirement that

the total energy scales as 1/n1.

since we have worked in the matrix model of the full string theory then this sector

contains both the gauge bosons, as well as all the excited string states. however, it is clear

that if we mimic the space-time decoupling limit in our model, then we will end up only

with the gauge bosons.

one more complication is the following. as explained in [19] the classical moduli

space of solution to the d-term equations is actually 4n1n4 dimensional, whereas we have

identied a space which can have at most 3n1n4 parameters which corresponds to all

the segments of the strings splitting (although for matrix theory applications we were

interested in yet a smaller space). the remaining n1n4 parameters are associated with

the component a1 of the gauge eld. this is to be expected based on what was explained

before that a1 should actually be viewed as part of a hypermultiplet. a convenient gauge

invariant parameterization of these coordinates can be given by a subset of the quantities

qiexpr a1dx i1expr a1dx i2 ...q

i+1

(3.5)

where the i and i + 1 index means that we compute the wilson line between two neigh-
boring impurities. however for xed x i this coordinate is compact, and its kinetic term is
multiplied by 1/g2
have an energy proportional to g2

ym. hence the non-homogeneous wave functions along this direction will
ym which in spacetime means a mass proportional to 1/gs,
i.e, they are not perturbative string states. this is familiar from the study of the dlcq

closed string eld theory where exciting the wilson loop in the 16-supercharges 1+1 sym

corresponds [22] to d-objects.

we have briey noted before how the dirichlet boundary conditions come about (i.e.,
q 6= 0 requires y = 0 on or close to the moduli space). the neumann boundary conditions
come about in the following way. let us focus on the case of n1 = 1 (which is anyhow

similar to what we obtain after we go to the long strings). using the 2nd line of (3.2) we

8

can now solve for q in terms of x and insert it into the lagrangian (more precisely, we can

solve for q up to a phase which is a gauge degree of freedom). the resulting lagrangian

(placing the active impurity at  = 0) is

zr

(x i)2dtd +zr+

(x i)2dtd+

(3.6)

+

1

gym z fij(x)(tx i(0+, t)  tx i(0, t))(tx j(0+, t)  tx j(0, t))dt,

where f is some function which satises

f (x) =

1


f (x).

the variation of the action with respect to the boundary terms gives the equation
x(0+) and x(0) is

x(0+)(x)(0+)  x(0)(x)(0) +

1

gym

(....) = 0.

the details of the last term are irrelevant except that it is non-singular for x 6= 0, i.e.,
at generic points along the at directions. hence in the limit gym   it disappears. it
is clear that the path integral contains all values of x(0) and that the dierent values
of x(0) can be connected by physical processes (because this is the case on the moduli
space, as measured by its metric). this implies that we cant consistently set x(0) = 0.
hence the eective boundary condition that we obtain when the string splits along the

impurity is

x i(0) = 0,

(3.7)

which is the correct neumann boundary condition.

we have therefore shown how the states in the open string theory, and in particular

those of the gauge multiplets in the d4-brane, come about in the matrix model. and we

have studied how their relative position is associated to the value of the impurity variables.

next, we would like to outline how string and sym perturbation theories, in weak t hooft

coupling, come about (and what happens to them at large t hooft coupling).

9

3.2. weak t hooft coupling perturbation theory

string and sym perturbation theories come about now in the following way. the

theory contains a large number of dierent branches, in which dierent modes of the

impurities are excited. open+closed string perturbation theory comes about as one passes

from one branch to another. as we saw above, an excitation of an impurity (i.e., going
to the branch q 6= 0) corresponds to opening a hole in the world-sheet where dirichlet
boundary conditions are imposed on coordinates transverse to the brane, and neumann

boundary conditions on those parallel to the brane. if we are starting with some state, then

standard quantum mechanical perturbation theory tells us that we have to sum over all

ways of exciting an impurity, letting it decay, exciting some other impurity etc. if we start

with a closed string state, this corresponds to summing over all ways of cutting holes in

the surface. in the nite n1 system we are allowed to start these holes on a discrete set of

points on the surface. however, in the long string picture there are n4 such points within

each interval of size 1/n1 of the long string world-sheet. hence in the large n1 limit we

can open a hole everywhere in the world-sheet, and summing over all such opening (which

is the same as summing over the dierent ways of exciting the impurities) corresponds to

summing over all the moduli of the holes on the world-sheet.

hence, the open string perturbation theory, i.e., the expansion in the number of holes

on the world-sheet is an expansion in the total number of excited impurities. the transition

from a branch in which an impurity is not excited to a branch in which it is excited is

mediated by some operator, which should give the t hooft coupling gsn4 dependence of

this transition (similar to [21]). we have not carried out this computation but the factor of

n4 is easy to understand. in the resolved model it merely counts the number of dierent

impurities which can be excited, in an exact correspondence to which brane is the end

point of the string. the factor of gs is associated with exciting a single xed impurity and

therefore there is no additional n4 dependence.

jumping ahead, let us now consider what happens when the t hooft coupling becomes

large. in this case the impurities are excited frequently and an expansion in the number of

impurities excited is no longer useful. however, one should now think about the impurities
as new closed string degrees of freedom in the sense that as n1   the impurities
become dense (and evenly spread) on the world-sheet of the long string. these are unusual

closed string degrees of freedom because, for example, there are no q terms in the

lagrangian. going to the appropriate collective coordinates, we will see that their eective

dynamics is that of a closed string moving on the near horizon limit of the d4-brane.

10

4. the large t hooft coupling limit

we would like to show how the theory of closed strings on the near horizon limit of

the d4-brane comes about from the matrix model described above, and how the dynamics

of the impurity system becomes the dynamics of closed strings. for this purpose, unlike

the analysis before, it is useful to rst decouple gravity, and only then put the remaining

quantum mechanical system into the form of closed strings. the derivation of the decoupled

model is carried out in section 4.2 and the derivation of the near horizon closed string

description is carried out in section 4.3. but rst we would like to briey review the near

horizon limit of the d4-branes.

4.1. the near-horizon background

in this subsection we will briey review this near-horizon background of a cluster of

n4 d4-branes, following [23].

the near horizon limit appropriate for the d4-brane is:

y 
nh =

r
 = f ixed, g2

d4 = gs = f ixed,   0,

(4.1)

where r are the coordinates transverse to the brane, gd4 is the yang-mills coupling on the
d4-brane, and we neglected numerical factors of order 1 (this limit may also be understood
as that of an m5-brane wrapped on a circle of size g2
d4 which is held xed as mp,11  

which gives the 6d (2, 0) cft on a circle).

the corresponding type iia background is (in string metric):

ds2 = (cid:0)

3
2
nh

y

gd4n4

dx2 +

gd4n4

3
2
nh

y

dy 2

nh + gd4pn4ynhd2(cid:1)

the type iia solution can be trusted in the regime

nhg6
y 3
n4

d4

e =(cid:0)

1

4 .

(cid:1)

n 1

4 << g2

d4ynh << n

4 .

1
3

(4.2)

(4.3)

for values of ynh larger then the upper bound above, the coupling is large and one needs

to lift the solution to m-theory, where it asymptotes to the near horizon limit of the m5-

brane [4] compactied on a circle (which reects the fact mentioned before that the uv

xed point of the d4-brane is actually the 6d (2,0) xed point). for values of ynh smaller

11

than the lower bound in (4.3) the curvatures become large, i.e, the world-sheet becomes

strongly coupled which reects the fact that the 4+1 sym becomes weakly coupled in

the ir. it would seem that at the lower end of the region (4.3) the 4+1 theory is strongly

coupled because the 4+1 eective t hooft coupling is large, rather then exhibiting a strong

coupling behavior associated with the (2,0) xed point - the latter takes over at the upper

end of this region. correspondingly the dual description in this regime is given in terms

of a string theory.

4.2. the decoupled theory

equation (2.3) describes the relation between the the parameters of the matrix model

and the parameters of the type iia string theory. hence it is straightforward to follow the

decoupling limit (4.1) in the matrix model. one more useful ingredient is a convenient

scaling of the various elds in the 1+1 impurity lagrangian in this limit. the coordinates

x1 and q1 remain xed, which implies that we actually need to rescale x (but keep q

xed). the coordinate y (or y1 = r) is rescaled according to (4.1) such that ynh is kept

xed. to summarize we keep xed the coordinates

q1 = rq, x1 = rx, ynh =

1

rgym

y

while taking the limit

  0, gym  , g2

ym =

r
g4
d4

f ixed,

(4.4)

(4.5)

which, using (2.3) amounts to ms   with g2
d4 xed. in particular we see that ynh diers
from y by a nite normalization which means that we basically keep y xed in this limit.

the latter scaling is familiar from other cases in which the near horizon coulomb branch

is identied with part of the higgs branch (in a fashion that is set by the hypermultiplet-

vector couplings) [8][9]. since the size of the circle is also rescaled, it is convenient to
choose a new coordinate  which remains nite, i.e.,

 =




.

(4.6)

finally we rescale the gauge elds similarly to the coordinates, i.e., at is not rescaled, and

a is rescaled the same way as .

12

using the new quantities the bosonic part of the action becomes (and dropping the

(1) subscript)
z dtd(cid:18) 1

r

(dtx i)2 +

r
g4
d4

[x i, y 

nh]2 + r(d  ynh)2 + di(cid:0)
ym(cid:0)

(dtynn)2 +

r2
g4
d4

r4
g4
d4


g2

+

g2
d4
r

f 2(cid:19) +
+kz dt

1

where the sum is over the points of the impurities.

r(cid:0)(dtqk)2 + di(k)qkiq

g2
d4
r

(d  x) +

1
r

ijk[x j, x k]2(cid:1)+

(4.7)

[ynh, ynh]2 + di2(cid:1)+
ynh(k)2q2(cid:1)

r
g4
d4

k +

in the limit (4.5) the kinetic terms for the vector multiplet y drops out, and it should
be regarded as an auxiliary variable (in the gauge a0 = 0, f 2 is a kinetic term for a

hypermultiplet eld).

if we integrate it out we obtain the quantum mechanics of the

higgs branch. to obtain the near horizon geometry, however, we follow the procedure

of integrating out the q hypermultiplets, and describe the model in terms of an eective

closed string theory [8][9].

4.3. the eective action for the vector multiplet

we would like to integrate out the hypermultiplets q and obtain an eective descrip-

tion for the x and y elds. since these are 1+1 elds, we will obtain a string theory,

which of course will be the type iia dlcq matrix string eld theory on the near-horizon

geometry of the d4-brane. since for xed y, x and d the qs appear quadratically, it is
straightforward to do the integration. we will expand4 the result in y /y 2.

it is convenient to begin with the case that the 1+1 eld theory is a u (1) gauge theory

and take the number of d4-branes to innity. it will then be clear how the u (n1) case

works even for nite n4, which is actually our nal goal. again we will be working in the

regulated model, in which all the impurities are separated. for the case of the u (1) theory

we will also assume that the impurities are scattered more or less uniformly around the

circle of the world-sheet.

4.2.1 the u (1) eective action

4 at large values of y , where the string coupling is large, we can still go to the non-abelian

form of the matrix string eld theory on the near horizon limit. we will not, however, be able to

go reliably to the long strings picture.

13

for a u (1) gauge theory one drops all the commutator terms from the action (4.7).
integrating out the q variables is straightforward and gives (dropping the decoupled f 2)

r

z dtd(cid:18) 1
+kz dt

(tx)2 + r( ynh)2 +

(4.8)

g2
d4
r

di  x i(cid:19)+
g6
r3 d(k)2
d4

g2
d4

rynh(k)3 (tynh(k))2 +

the next step is to note that as the number of impurities goes to innity and their location

becomes dense on the circle, then we can replace the sum over impurities by an integral.

after integrating out the d-term we obtain a string action, whose bosonic part is

z dtd(cid:18) 1

r

(tx)2 +

r
g2
d4n4

y 3
nh(  x)2 +

g2
d4n4
r

y 3

nh (tynh)2 + r( ynh)2(cid:19) (4.9)

a string action of this form is somewhat less familiar since it is not in the usual gauge
 = . however, it is easy to read the world-sheet metric and the target space metric

from this action. the former is

 =(cid:18) gd4n

y 3/2

0

1
2

0

y 3/2
gd4n

2 (cid:19)

1

(where the 1st component is the time) and the latter is:

3
2

y

gd4n 1

2

dx2 +

1
2

gd4n
y 3

2

dy2

(4.10)

(4.11)

which is the string metric of the d4 background.

it is worth explaining the choice of gauge for the world-sheet metric, especially since

in the gauge (4.10) it is set to a eld (y) dependent value. this is actually natural in the

context of light cone quantization in this type of background. consider the action before

xing reparametrization invariance and the light cone condition. the relevant part for our

purposes is

z dtdx +x y

3

2 .

(4.12)

we would like to impose the gauge x + =  . in order to do that we need that  will be a
2 = 0, which implies that
solution of the equations of motion for x +, i.e., y 3
we need to set

 00  y  3

2 .

14

4.2.2 the u (n1) case

the matrix prescription instructs us to take n1  , which is what we turn to now.
we will then pass to the picture of the long strings, which is again similar to the u (1) case

above. this will also clarify why we mandated in the u (1) case (a short string) that the

number of impurities goes to innity and that they are evenly spread around the circle.

whereas this was arbitrary in the u (1) case we will see that this is automatically true for

the theory that lives on the long string.

when discussing the u (n1) theory one needs to restore the commutator terms and
the covariant derivatives in (4.7). furthermore the terms y 3(x)2 and y 3(y )2 will be
replaced by non-abelian generalizations. another change is that we will also generate a

term which is roughly of the form

 kz dt

1
y 3 [y, y ]2.

this commutator term in addition to the term [y, x]2, which is one of the commutators
we initially had, tell us that the generic at directions are when all the x and y matrices

commute. hence we can go to the long string [20][21], which is a u (1) string with length

n1.

when we go to the long string we are also instructed to concentrate on very long wave

length, i.e., on wave lengths of order n1. relative to these wave lengths the impurities are
dense since the separation between them is of order 1. in the n1   we are justied (even
for a nite number of d4-branes) to go to the continuum impurities approximation as

we did when we went from (4.7) to (4.9), leaving us with a nal result (4.9) as the eective

dynamics of the long string.

hence we obtained what we were looking for, i.e., within the impurity model we were

able to identify congurations of long strings which are governed by a sigma model on the

near horizon background of the d4-brane.

as in [21],[9] we can also estimate the behavior of the string coupling. to do so we

need to identify the mass scale set by the coecient of the commutator term. the inverse

of this mass scale will then determine the string coupling [21]. to correctly identify the

mass scale we would like to rescale the coordinates such that the world-sheet metric is

(locally) the canonical metric, and then rescale the elds such that their kinetic term is

normalized. we will, arbitrarily, focus on the x coordinates. the terms in the lagrangian

that contain only x coordinates are (neglecting n4 and gd4 dependence)

z dtd(cid:18)(tx)2 + y 3( x)2 + y 3[x, x]2(cid:19)

(4.13)

15

to go to a lorentz invariant form with canonically normalized kinetic term we rescale

 = y

to obtain the action

3

2 , x = y  3

4 x

z dtd(cid:18)(t x)2 + (  x)2 + y  3

2 [ x, x]2(cid:19).

we can now read the string coupling from the coecient of the last term to be

gs(y )  y

3
4

(4.14)

(4.15)

which is the correct dependence in (4.2).

to conclude, we have used matrix theory to formulate sym on d4-branes in a way that

contains both open and closed string variables. the closed string variables are auxiliary

variables and when we integrate the out, we obtain the open string description and sym

perturbation theory in weak t hooft coupling. when we choose to work with a dierent

set of variables, i.e, the closed string variables, we get in a straightforward manner the de-

scription of closed strings on the near horizon geometry (both metric and string coupling).

the fact that the two sets of variables are related in a fairly simple way, and that the

entire procedure is done in quantum mechanics suggests a simple way of microscopically

identifying states in the two descriptions.

acknowledgments

i would like to thank o. aharony, a. giveon, r. gopakumar, d. kutasov, g. lifschytz,

o. pelc, m. rozali, n. seiberg, s. sethi, e. silverstein, e. verlinde and h. verlinde for

useful discussions, and particularly a. kapustin for collaboration at early stages of this

work.

i would also like to thank the weizmann institute of science for its hospitality

during the completion of this work. this work is supported by nsf grant 98-02484.

16

references

[1] t. banks, w. fischler, l. susskind and s. shenker, m theory as a matrix model:

a conjecture, hep-th/9610043, phys.rev. d55 (1997) 5112-5128.

[2] t. banks, tasi lectures on matrix theory, hep-th/9911068.
[3] a. polyakov, the wall of the cave, hep-th/9809057, int.j.mod.phys. a14 (1999)

645-658.

[4] j.m. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field theories and super-

gravity, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 231, 1998.

[5] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov, a.m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from non-

critical string theory, hep-th/9802109, phys.lett. b428 (1998) 105-114.

[6] e. witten, anti de sitter space and holography, hep-th/9802150, adv. theor.

math. phys. 2 (1998) 253-291.

[7] o. aharony, s.s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri and y. oz, large n field theories,

string theory and gravity, hep-th/9905111.

[8] m. berkooz and h. verlinde, matrix theory, ads/cft and higgs-coulomb equiv-

alence, hep-th/9907100, to be published in jhep.

[9] o. aharony and m. berkooz, ir dynamics of d=2, n=(4,4) gauge theories and

dlcq of little string theories, hep-th/9909101, jhep 9910 (1999) 030.

[10] n. seiberg, notes on theories with 16 supercharges, hep-th/9705117, nucl. phys.

proc. suppl.67:158-171,1998.

[11] c. vafa, talk given at ias, spring 98; r. gopakumar, talk given at aspen, summer

99.

[12] l. susskind and j. uglum, string physics and black holes, hep-th/9511227, nucl.

phys. proc. suppl. 45bc (1996) 115-134 and references therein.

[13] m. berkooz and m.r. douglas, five-branes in m(atrix) theory, hep-th/9610236,

phys.lett. b395 (1997) 196-202.

[14] o. aharony, m. berkooz, s. kachru, n. seiberg and e. silverstein, matrix description
of interacting theories in six dimensions, hep-th/9707079, adv. theor. math. phys.
1:148-157,1998.

[15] e. witten, on the conformal field theory of the higgs branch, hep-th/9707093,

jhep 9707 (1997) 003.

[16] o. aharony, m. berkooz, s. kachru and e. silverstein, matrix description of (1,0)

theories in six dimensions, hep-th/9709118, phys.lett. b420 (1998) 55-63.

[17] s. sethi, the matrix formulation of type iib five-branes, hep-th/9710005, nucl.

phys. b523:158-170,1998.

[18] o.j. ganor and s. sethi new perspectives on yang-mills theories with sixteen su-

percharges, hep-th/9712071, jhep 9801:007,1998.

17

[19] a. kapustin and s. sethi, the higgs branch of impurity theories, hep-th/9804027,

adv. theor. math. phys. 2:571-591,1998.

[20] l. motl, proposals on nonperturbative superstring interactions, hep-th/9701025;
t. banks and n. seiberg, strings from matrices, hep-th/9702187, nucl.phys. b497
(1997) 41-55.

[21] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde and h. verlinde, matrix string theory, hep-th/9703030,

nucl.phys. b500 (1997) 43-61.

[22] w. fischler, e. halyo, a. rajaraman and l. susskind, the incredible shrinking

torus, hep-th/9703102, nucl.phys. b501 (1997) 409-426.

[23] n. itzhaki, j.m. maldacena, j. sonnenschein and s. yankielowicz, supergravity and
large n limit of theories with sixteen supercharges, hep-th/9802042, phys. rev.
d58, 1998.

18

