nsf-itp-98-077, damtp r-1998/77

puncture of gravitating domain walls

andrew chamblin1 and douglas m. eardley2

1center for theoretical physics, massachusetts institute of

technology, bldg. 6-304, cambridge, ma 02139, usa

2institute for theoretical physics

university of california

santa barbara, california 93106-4030, u.s.a.

(march 1, 2008)

abstract

we investigate the semi-classical instability of vacuum domain walls to
processes where the domain walls decay by the formation of closed string
loop boundaries on their worldvolumes. intuitively, a wall which is initially
spherical may pop, so that a hole corresponding to a string boundary com-
ponent on the wall, may form. we nd instantons, and calculate the rates,
for such processes. we show that after puncture, the hole grows exponentially
at the same rate that the wall expands. it follows that the wall is never com-
pletely thermalized by a single expanding hole; at arbitrarily late times there
is still a large, thin shell of matter which may drive an exponential expansion
of the universe. we also study the situation where the wall is subjected to
multiple punctures. we nd that in order to completely annihilate the wall by
this process, at least four string loops must be nucleated. we argue that this
process may be relevant in certain brane-world scenarios, where the universe
itself is a domain wall.

98.80.hw, 04.60.gw, 11.27.+d

9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
0
2

 

 
 

1
v
6
6
1
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

typeset using revtex

1

i. introduction

hybrid topological defects can occur in a variety of physical scenarios ( [1], [2]) where
multiple phase transitions are allowed to occur simultaneously. typically, one may envision
lower dimensional defects ending on higher dimensional defects (so-called dirichlet topo-
logical defects [2]), or conversely higher dimensional defects may end on lower dimensional
defects [3]. in this paper, we are chiey concerned with the latter situation, where domain
walls may have string boundary components.

in the rst papers to study walls ending on strings [3], the authors considered an explicit
symmetry breaking pattern whereby the unifying gauge symmetry spin(10) is broken to
su(3)  su(2)  u(1) by way of the group su(4)  su(2)  su(2). the rst symmetry
breaking pattern gives rise to the existence of z2 strings, which may form boundaries for
the domain walls which are produced by the second symmetry breaking.

in fact, this basic picture will hold in any scenario where you have a series of phase

transitions of the form

x1 h

x2 i

g

(1.1)

where 0(g) = 1(g) = i and 0(h) 6= i (here i denotes the identity group). since the
sequence (1.1) is exact it follows that

1(g/h) = 0(h)

that is to say, the rst symmetry breaking give rise to strings. the second phase transition
then gives rise to domain walls. more explicitly, if we consider the behaviour of the eld
x2 as we move around a string, we see that x2 must have a discontinuity since the eld is
not invariant under the action of h. in other words, we have to add in domain walls to
account for this discontinuity.
it follows that domain walls in these multiple phase transition scenarios are not topo-
logically stable defects.
instead, such walls are unstable to a quantum mechanical decay
process, whereby a closed string loop boundary component appears on the worldvolume of
the domain wall, and then expands. to calculate the probability, p , that this process occurs,
one typically invokes the semiclassical approximation

pae(se sb )

where se is the euclidean action of the instanton of the post-tunneling conguration (a
domain wall with a hole in it), sb is the euclidean action of the background instanton (a
domain wall without a hole in it), and a is a prefactor which is calculated by considering
uctuations about the instanton. typically, one ignores the prefactor and focusses on the
action terms (since these terms lead to exponential suppression, they typically dominate).
the trajectory of a virtual string loop moving in euclidean space is a two-sphere of radius
r, where r is the radius at which the string nucleates. the euclidean section of a planar
domain wall is (topologically) still just r3. thus, the instanton for the nal state is r3
with a ball of radius r removed, and the instanton for the initial state is r3. it follows that
the dierence between the two actions must contain a boundary term proportional to the

2

area of the two-sphere, and a bulk term proportional to the volume of the removed region;
indeed, one obtains [1]

se  sb = 4r2 

4
3

r3

(1.2)

where  is the string tension and  is the energy density of the domain wall. for typical
symmetry breaking scales associated with strings and walls, one nds that se  sb >> 1,
and so this decay process is usually supressed [1].
in all of this analysis, we have not said anything about the gravitational elds of these
domain walls. this is because we have been assuming that the walls are so light that
they have eectively decoupled from gravity. of course, there is no reason why heavy
domain walls should not suer the same instabilities as light walls. we are therefore led to
generalize the known work on light domain walls, to include the eects of gravity. however,
the gravitational eects of heavy domain walls are highly non-trivial; indeed, a gravitating
domain wall generically closes the universe! of course, this overwhelming property of domain
walls is just another reason why we should be interested in nding new decay modes to get
rid of them. we now turn to a short discussion of the gravitational eects of domain walls,
before outlining the new work on how they may decay by the formation of closed string loop
boundary components.

throughout this paper we use units in which h = c = g = 1.

ii. vis domain walls: a brief introduction

solutions for the gravitational eld of a domain wall were found by vilenkin [4] (for
an open wall) and ipser and sikivie [5] (for closed walls). the global structure of these
vilenkin-ipser-sikivie (or vis) domain walls has been extensively discussed recently ( [6],
[7]) so we will only present a brief sketch here.

to begin, we look for a solution of the einstein equations where the source term is an

energy momentum tensor describing a distributional source located at z = 0:

t = (x)diag(1, 1, 1, 0)

(2.1)

it is impossible to nd a static solution of the einstein equations with this source term;
indeed, the vis solution is a time-dependent solution describing a uniformly accelerating
domain wall. in order to understand the global causal structure of the vis domain wall, it
is most useful to use coordinates (t, x, y, z) so that the metric takes the form

ds2 = e2k|z|(cid:16)dt2  dz2(cid:17)  e2k(t|z|)(dy2 + dx2),

(2.2)

here, k = 2, and the wall is located at z = 0. the gravitational eld of this solution has
amusing properties. for example, if you take the newtonian limit of the einstein equations
for (2.2) you obtain the equation

where  is the newtonian gravitational potential and  is the energy density of the wall.
from this equation it is clear that a wall with positive surface energy density will have

2 = 2

3

a repulsive gravitational eld, whereas a wall with negative energy density will have an
attractive gravitational eld. an even simpler way to see that the (positive ) vis wall is
repulsive is to notice that the t  z part of the metric is just the rindler metric.
isometric to 2 + 1 dimensional de sitter space:

further information is recovered by noticing that the z= constant hypersurfaces are all

ds2 = dt2  e2kt(dy2 + dx2).

(2.3)

given that 2 + 1 de sitter has the topology s2  r it follows that the domain wall
world sheet has this topology. in other words, at each instant of time the domain wall is
topologically a two-dimensional sphere. indeed, in the original ipser-sikivie paper a coor-
dinate transformation was found which takes the (t, x, y, z) coordinates to new coordinates
(t, x, y, z) such that in the new coordinates the metric becomes (on each side of the domain
wall):

ds2 = dt 2  dx 2  dy 2  dz 2.

(2.4)

furthermore the domain wall, which in the old coordinates is a plane located at z = 0, is in
the new coordinates the hyperboloid

x 2 + y 2 + z 2 =

1
k2 + t 2.

(2.5)

of course, the metric induced on a hyperboloid embedded in minkowski spacetime is
just the de sitter metric, and so this is consistent with what we have already noted. this
metric provides us with a useful way of constructing the maximal extension of the domain
wall spacetime:
first, take two copies of minkowski space, and in each copy consider the interior of the
hyperboloid determined by equation (2.5), match these solid hyperboloids to each other
across their respective boundaries; there will be a ridge of curvature (much like the edge of
of a lens) along the matching surface, where the domain wall is located. thus, an inertial
observer on one side of the wall will see the domain wall as a sphere which accelerates
towards the observer for t < 0, stops at t = 0 at a radius k1, then accelerates away for
t > 0. we illustrate this construction below, where we include the acceleration horizons to
emphasize the causal structure.

4

figures

acceleration horizons (the future and past cones).

wall stops at
minimum distance
of 1/k.

the domain wall world-
sheet is the surface where
the two hyperboloids are
joined together.

identify.

worldline of inertial observer (dark line) who perceives
the domain wall as a uniformly accelerating spherical bubble.

fig. 1.

now, the repulsive eect of this vacuum domain wall is very similar to the inationary
eect of a positive cosmological constant seen in de sitter space. indeed, we often nd it is
useful to think of a vis spacetime as an inating universe where all of the vacuum energy
has been concentrated on the sheet of the domain wall.

iii. popping a vis domain wall: instanton and action

a. euclidean section of the ingoing state

before we construct instantons for popping domain walls, it is useful if we rst recall a

few basic facts about the euclidean section and action of the ordinary vis domain wall.

in the simplest scenarios, a vis domain wall will form when there is a breaking of some
discrete symmetry. usually, one thinks of the symmetry breaking in terms of some higgs
eld . if m0 denotes the vacuum manifold of  (i.e., the submanifold of the higgs eld
conguration space on which the higgs acquires a vacuum expectation value because it will
minimize the potential energy v ()), then a necessary condition for a domain wall to exist
is that 0(m0) 6= 0.
in other words, vacuum domain walls arise whenever the vacuum
manifold is not connected. given these assumptions, one usually writes the lagrangian
density for the matter eld  as

5

lm = 

1
2

g  v ().

(3.1)

the exact form of v () is not important. all that we require in order for domain walls to
be present is that v () has a discrete set of degenerate minima, where the potential vanishes.
given this matter content, the full (lorentzian) einstein-matter action then reads:

s = z m

d4xg h r

16

+ lmi +

1

8z m

d3xhk.

(3.2)

here, m denotes the four-volume of the system, and m denotes the boundary of this
region. one obtains the euclidean action, i, for the euclidean section of this conguration by
analytically continuing the metric and elds and reversing the overall sign. the simplied
form of this euclidean action in the thin wall limit has been derived in a number of recent
papers ( [6], [7]) and so we will not reproduce the full argument here. basically, one rst
assumes that the cosmological constant vanishes (r = 0) and then one uses the fact that
the elds appearing in the matter eld lagrangian depend only on the coordinate z normal
to the wall, and one integrates out this z-dependence to obtain the expression

i = 

n

xi=1

i

2 z di

d3xqhi.

(3.3)

here, di denotes the i-th domain wall, i is the energy density of the domain wall di,
hi is the determinant of the three-dimensional metric hab
(i) induced on the domain wall di
and n is the total number of domain walls. it is not hard to prove that variation relative to
hab

(i) on each domain wall will yield the israel matching conditions.
now, as we have seen the lorentzian section of a single vis domain wall is just two
portions of at minkowski space glued together.
it is therefore natural to propose that
the euclidean section is obtained by gluing two at euclidean four-balls together along
a common s3 boundary component.
in this way one obtains the lens instanton, which
describes (in the context of the no-boundary proposal) the creation of a single vis domain
wall from nothing. this lens instanton is the euclidean section of the incoming state - the
vis domain wall before the decay process (puncture) has taken place. in order to calculate
the rate for the process, we now need to construct the instanton for the perforated domain
wall.

b. euclidean section of the outgoing state

as we saw above, a vis domain wall moving in imaginary time sweeps out an s3 ridge
of curvature along the equator of the lens instanton. in a similar way, we expect a virtual
loop of string moving in imaginary time to sweep out a two-sphere, s2. for our purposes, we
want this string loop to correspond to a puncture which appears on the euclidean portion of
the domain wall, expands to some maximum size, then collapses again. in other words, the
euclidean section of the punctured domain wall is obtained by taking the lens instanton, and

6

truncating each at four-ball so that the hole swept out by the string is made manifest.
this is illustrated below:

t

z

x,y

these two-dimensional spheres correspond
to the trajectory swept out by the virtual loop
of string.  these are the boundaries of a hole,
which appears on the surface of the wall then
disappears again.

(the string trajectory is
the dark line.)

identify.

two identical flat four-balls, which we
identify along the respective boundaries.
the boundary of each ball is the three-
sphere swept out by the domain wall.

each four-ball is of radius 1/k.  the virtual string worldsheet is located at some z = constant (c) < 1/k.  put another way,
this instanton is just the lens instanton subject to the constraint that z = c < 1/k.

fig. 2.

more explicitly, if we write the metric on at space in the usual form

ds2 = dt 2 + dx 2 + dy 2 + dz 2

where t = it denotes imaginary time, then the domain wall (on the lens instanton) is
located at the boundary of each ball of radius r = 1/k. in order to obtain the instanton for
the punctured wall, we truncate the range of the variable z:

where c is some constant. in other words, we shave o a portion of the lens instanton so
that the virtual string worldsheet is located at the surface z = c.

z  c < r

c. calculation of the action and amplitude

we are now in position to calculate the action and decay rate for this process. since there
is no topology change in this situation, it is easy to construct an interpolating instanton by
nding slices of the initial instanton which match smoothly to slices of the nal instanton. we
may therefore use the no-boundary ansatz without relying on more sophicticated arguments,

7

such as the patching proposal put forward in [10]. as described in the introduction, we want
to calculate the action dierence, s, between the euclidean action of the nal conguration
(sf ) and the euclidean action of the initial conguration (si).

since the nal instanton is obtained from the initial instanton simply by removing a
cap from the boundary of each four-ball before performing identications, it follows that
the only action dierence can come from this contribution. as in the non-gravitating case
described in the introduction, the removed region will contribute a bulk term (corresponding
to the hole in the domain wall) and a surface term (the boundary of the hole).

the volume of the removed cap is calculated to be

22r3(cid:16)1 

2


(c
2r q1  c 2/r2 +

cos1(c/r)

2

)(cid:17)

likewise, the surface swept out by the string is just a two-sphere of radius (r2  c 2)1/2.
weighting the bulk term with domain wall energy density , and the surface term with
string tension  we therefore obtain

s = sf  si = 4(r2  c 2)  2r3(cid:16)1 
ignoring the prefactor term, the decay probability is then given as

(c
2r q1  c 2/r2 +

2


cos1(c/r)

2

)(cid:17) (3.4)

p = es

(3.5)

(actually, the prefactor term may contain interesting information in this situation, for the
simple reason that when the domain wall pops, the overall symmetry of the spacetime is
broken from spherical symmetry to cylindrical symmetry; presumably, uctuations about
the instanton would respect this symmetry breaking. we will have more to say about the
evolution of quantum elds in a punctured domain wall spacetime later in this paper).

now, just as for popping light domain walls [1], our use of the thin wall approximation to
derive (3.4) is only justied if the scale of symmetry breaking for the strings is much larger
than the scale of symmetry breaking for domain walls. it follows that, generically, we will
have s >> 1, and hence p << 1.

d. decay of domain walls with multiple punctures

it is also possible for several holes to spontaneously form on the surface of a domain wall.
in the simplest situation, all of the string loop boundary components will nucleate at the
same initial radius ((r2  c 2)1/2), with the same string tension  so that the total action
will just be

st ot = ns

where s is given by (3.4), and n is the total number of holes. of course, one might
also imagine more exotic scenarios where the holes nucleate at dierent initial radii ri =
2)1/2, and string tension i, so that the total action for the decay would be given as
(r2  ci

8

st ot =

n

xi=1

si

where

si = 4(r2  ci

2)i  2r3(cid:16)1 

2


(ci
2r q1  ci

2/r2 +

cos1(ci/r)

2

)(cid:17)

in either situation, the creation of multiple holes is heavily suppressed relative to the nucle-
ation of a single hole.

of course, it is of some interest to know whether or not a domain wall can ever be
completely annihilated by the processes which we are discussing here. in fact, it is not hard
to prove that a domain wall will be completely destroyed by this decay process whenever at
least four string loop boundary components are nucleated.

in order to understand this, recall that the worldvolume of the domain wall is isometric
to 2 + 1-dimensional de sitter spacetime (embedded in 3 + 1-dimensional minkowski), and
that the trajectory of a given string loop boundary component may be obtained by taking
the intersection of the hyperboloid with a surface of constant z (relative to the coordinates
(2.4) on minkowski space), which is simply a copy of 2+1 dimensional minkowski spacetime.
if we view all of this from above the hyperboloid, then we see that the domain wall is a two-
sphere which expands uniformly outwards, and that the string loop boundary components
are intersections of this two-sphere with at timelike hypersurfaces.
if there are at least
four (non-parallel) such hypersurfaces, then on each spacelike surface the hypersurfaces
will bound a tetradedron of xed size.
in three dimensions, a tetrahedron may bound
a two-sphere, and so initially at least the domain wall may still lie (partially) within the
tetrahedron. however, if the sphere continues to expand it will always eventually envelop the
tetrahedron, and hence the domain wall will have been annihilated (i.e., the string boundary
components collide precisely at the corners of the tetrahedron). if you only had three (or
fewer) timelike hypersurfaces, you could never completely bound the two-sphere in this way.
the intersection of the sphere with a given timelike hypersurface would continue unbounded
in some direction (because you would never encounter another timelike hypersurface). thus,
at least a portion of the domain wall would survive eternally. in other words, you need to
nucleate at least four punture wounds in a domain wall in order to completely annihilate
the domain wall.

iv. lorentzian evolution of punctured domain walls

in the last section, we showed that a vis domain wall may decay via the formation
of closed string loop boundary components on the worldvolume of the wall. we found
instantons, and calculated the corresponding actions and rates, for such processes. we now
turn our attention to the lorentzian, or real time, picture of this process.

first, recall the representation (fig. 1) of the vis domain wall as two solid hyperboloids
in minkowski space, identied along their respective boundaries. the constraint on the
coordinated z, z  c < r, which we imposed on the euclidean section, extends to the
lorentzian section as well. thus, in the lorentzian coordinates (t, x, y, z), the equation of
motion for the loop of string may be written as

9

x 2 + y 2 = (r2  c 2) + t 2

(4.1)

thus, the initial radius of the loop of string (at t = 0) is seen to be r2  c 2 > 0, which
is what we expect given that the lorentzian section must match smoothly to the euclidean
section. at late times, the hole is expanding at the speed of light. of course, the hole
never completely devours the wall for the simple reason that the spherical wall also expands
exponentially. the global structure of this spacetime is illustrated below:

string boundary components (dark lines) which bound the hole
in the domain wall.  the hole expands exponentially, devouring
the wall at the same rate that the wall itself expands.

nucleation surface,
where the puncture
    first appears.

identify.

the global structure of a punctured domain wall (the shaded portion of the wall is removed).

figure 3

fig. 3.

it is interesting to consider the gross properties of particles which are propagating in
the background of a wall which spontaneously decays in this way. for example, suppose we
consider some scalar eld  which couples to the higgs eld (of the domain wall)  through
the interaction

lint = 


2

22

(here, we are thinking of  as a higgs eld with a standard 4, double-well potential). in
[1] it is shown that the reection coecient for scattering of  particles o of a  domain
wall is zero in the limit that the domain wall has zero thickness. in other words, it makes
sense to think of the (innitely thin) vis domain walls which we have been considering in
this paper as spherical, accelerating, moving mirrors. put another way, each side of the
domain wall is a spherical cavity, with dirichlet boundary conditions for the elds at the
boundary of the cavity.

10

in [11] it is shown that a mirror moving with uniform acceleration a will generate (relative

to an inertial particle detector) a thermal bath of radiation at temperature

t =

a

2kb

where kb is boltzmanns constant. of course, we could have predicted that the vis spacetime
would have an entropy and temperature of this form, simply because the repulsive energy
of the wall generates a cosmological horizon which leads to loss of information.
inertial
observers in a vis spacetime can never recover information about what is happening on the
other side of the domain wall, and they will represent this ignorance by tracing over states
associated with the horizon.

if a domain wall decays by the formation of a closed string loop boundary component
on the worldvolume of the wall, the isotropic thermal nature of the initial (vis) spacetime
should be lost. this is because the initial spherical symmetry will be broken to cylindrical
symmetry when the hole forms. the hole is in some sense then a window between the
two spherical cavities, through which information can propagate. it would be interesting to
have some explicit calculation for the scattering of -particles in the background of a vis
domain wall with a single puncture.

as we have shown, if four (or more) punctures spontaneously nucleate on a wall, the
string boundary components must eventually collide and annihilate the wall, so that all of
the energy density initially stored in the wall is thermalized. the nal annihilation of a
domain wall by this process is rather analagous to the endpoint of ination, in the sense
that the source driving the exponential expansion is suddenly switched o. however, a
domain wall with several punctures will presumably generate a highly non-isotropic radiation
background, in contrast with the inationary scenario.

v. conclusions: a potential brane-world instability?

we have shown how to describe the decay of vacuum domain walls by the formation of
closed string boundary components, when the eects of gravity are included. we found new
instantons, as well as the corresponding lorentzian solutions, which describe the formation
and evolution of multiple closed string loop boundary components on a given vis domain
wall background. it would be nice to have a complete picture of how quantum elds will
evolve in the background of one of these punctured walls.

in general domain walls arise as (d-2)-dimensional defects (or extended objects) in d-
dimensional spacetimes. in fact, domain walls are a common feature in the menagerie of
objects which appear in the low-energy limit of string theory, as has been discussed in detail
in [8] and [9].

of course, there has recently been an enormous amount of interest in the possibility that
the universe itself might be a domain wall moving in some ve-dimensional bulk spacetime.
in particular, randall and sundrum [12] have recently put forward a model where the
universe is a z2-symmetric positive tension domain wall bounding two bulk regions of anti-
de sitter (ads) spacetime. in their original scenario, the bulk cosmological constant is ne-
tuned relative to the domain wall energy density so that the eective cosmological constant
on the brane is precisely zero. however, during a period of ination on the brane-world

11

the eective cosmological constant would be positive, and the domain wall would simply
be a four-dimensional de sitter hyperboloid embedded in ve-dimensional ads (for a recent
interesting discussion of various semiclassical instabilities associated with these de sitter
brane-worlds see [13]). thus, the causal structure of these de sitter brane-worlds is identical
to that of the vis domain wall.

now, one can certainly imagine that the domain wall of the randall-sundrum model
arises because of a symmetry breaking pattern which allows for the universe itself to end on
a two-brane (all that is required is an associated exact sequence of the form (1.1)). in such
a scenario, the brane-world would be unstable to the formation of holes - two-dimensional
surfaces where the universe would end. these holes would accelerate out, devouring the
universe and converting brane-world elds into bulk degrees of freedom. since a fundamental
polytope in four dimensions has ve faces, it follows that you would have to nucleate at least
ve of these holes to completely annihilate a de sitter universe in this fashion.

one could even go further and imagine scenarios where the brane-world is itself the
boundary of a puncture wound in some four-brane (in this way you could have more than
one large extra dimension).

in general, we would expect many of the (self-gravitating) p-branes of supergravity mod-
els to be unstable to the sort of decay processes which we have described in this paper. from
this point of view, the process which we have studied is just another example of the sort of
brane damage which we expect to be a generic feature of the p-branes of m-theory.

research on these and related questions is currently underway.

acknowledgements

the authors thank richard battye, robert caldwell, sean carroll, gary gibbons and
james grant for useful conversations. a.c. was supported by a drapers research fellowship
at pembroke college, cambridge, and is currently (partially) supported at mit by funds
provided by the u.s. department of energy (d.o.e.) under cooperative research agreement
de-fc02-94er40818. a.c. also thanks the organizers and participants of the itp program
on supersymmetric gauge dynamics and string theory, where this work was completed,
for stimulating discussions. at itp a.c. was supported by phy94-07194.

12

references

[1] a. vilenkin and e.p.s. shellard, cosmic strings and other topological defects, cam-

bridge university press, cambridge (1994).

[2] sean m. carroll and mark trodden, dirichlet topological defects, phys. rev. d57, 5189-

5194, (1998); hep-th/9711099 (1997).

[3] t.w.b. kibble, g. lazarides and q. sha, walls bounded by strings, phys. rev. d26,

435 (1982).

[4] a. vilenkin, phys. lett. b133, 177-179, (1983).
[5] j. ipser and p. sikivie, phys. rev. d30, 712-719, (1984).
[6] r.r. caldwell, a. chamblin and g.w. gibbons, pair creation of black holes by domain

walls, phys. rev. d53: 7103-7114, (1996); hep-th/9602126.

[7] shawn j. kolitch and douglas m. eardley, quantum decay of domain walls in cosmology:

1. instanton approach, phys. rev. d56, 4651-4662, (1997); gr-qc/9706011.

[8] p.m. cowdall, h. lu, c.n. pope, k.s. stelle and p.k. townsend, domain walls in

massive supergravities, nucl. phys. b486: 49-76, (1997); hep-th/9608173.

[9] mirjam cvetic and harald h. soleng, supergravity domain walls, phys. rept. 282: 159-

223, (1997); hep-th/9604090.

[10] r. bousso and a. chamblin, patching up the no-boundary proposal with virtual eu-

clidean wormholes, gr-qc/9803047.

[11] n.d. birrell and p.c.w. davies, quantum elds in curved space, cambridge university

press, cambridge (1982).

[12] l. randall and r. sundrum, an alternative to compactication, hep-th/9906064.
[13] j. garriga and m. sasaki, brane-world creation and black holes, hep-th/9912118.

13

