small object limit of casimir eect
and the sign of the casimir force

o. kenneth and s. nussinov

school of physics and astronomy

beverly and raymond sackler faculty of exact sciences

tel aviv university, ramat aviv, 69978, israel

abstract

we show a simple way of deriving the casimir polder interaction,
present some general arguments on the niteness and sign of mu-
tual casimir interactions and nally we derive a simple expression for
casimir radiation from small accelerated objects.

9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
1
3

 

 
 

1
v
1
9
2
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

introduction

the purpose of this short paper is threefold: (a)first we show by using di-
rect path integral techniques that the casimir attraction[1] between objects
small relative to their separation does become the celebrated casimir-polder
interaction[2]. (b) we comment on the sign of casimir forces when the type
of the boundary condition is changed and for dierent geometries. and -
nally in(c) we nd a simple and very suggestive expression for the casimir
radiation of such small bodies when these are accelerated. while many of
the issues /techniques of this paper have been considered/used before[3, 4]
we have some novel, hopefully useful insights and results.

(a)application to van-der-waals and casimir-polder

the macroscopic casimir force between say dielectric (or conducting) plates
can be obtained by summing up the pairwise microscopic casimir interactions
between polarizable atoms[6]. because these pairs are not situated in vacuum
multiple scattering corrections occur and are important. here we would like
to pursue the reverse path of deducing forces between microscopic objects by
adopting the same path integral techniques that have been used for evaluation
the casimir force between macroscopic objects say the parallel plates force
and also for the special variant with dierent directions of conduction[7].
consider the general case when some eld  is forced to vanish on some
domain a . this condition may be enforced by adding to the action a

jd4x. after integrating over d we are left with

lagrange multiplier ra

z = z dj exp(

i

2 z zaa

j(x)(x  x)j(x)d4xd4x)

(1)

where  is the propagator of the eld . in general  may be a vector and
 a matrix. equation(1) applies as well for elds  which are not the basic
canonical degrees of freedom provided that we use the correct propagator. 1

for a static conguration we fourier transform in time writing

z = z dj exp(

i

2 z zaa

j(x, )(x  x, )j(x, )d3xd3x

d
2

)

(2)

1indeed the eld  can be a composite eld or some eective uctuation in a real
medium. so long as the distance scales in the problem (size of a) are much larger then the
compositeness scale (or lattice size) the eld and its possible interactions can be described
by an appropriate eective low energy lagrangian. only the lowest order quadratic terms
yielding the infrared most relevant parts need to be maintained

1

next suppose that a is made of distinct bodies a = s ai which are small

compared with the distances between them. then in the rst approximation
we may assume that each body feels only the average value of j(x) on each
of the others. denoting the distance between the ith and jth body by rij we

2

may write the eective interaction between them as r ji()(rij)jj() d
where we dene ji() = rai j(x, )d3x. computing the self interactions of

each body is much more complicated and can be done explicitly only for
simple geometries. however we may, in the spirit of renormalization assume
that the self interaction is given by some function of ji which, at least in the
small eld limit, may be approximated by some quadratic expression which
j 2
i . by adding coupling to an external
for obvious reasons we write as
d4xjext  j and looking at the resulting equation of motion
j =  we may interpret  as some kind of susceptibility. in particular if
 is electric or magnetic eld then  is just the usual electric or magnetic
polarizability. in this case j can be identied with the electric or magnetic
polarization. these arguments hold for dielectrics as well as for conductors
since the only dierence would be adding a bare term to the self interaction
which we didnt compute anyway.
dene a matrix aij() by

eld s = ra

1
2i

i 6= j aij() = (rij), aii() =

1


(3)

(if  is a vector then a is a matrix in a larger space which we dont write
explicitly) then we obtain

z = z dj() exp(iz d

2 x ji()aij()jj())

e = i(ln z)/t = 

i
2

ln det(...) = 

ln det a()

i

2 z d

2

(4)

(5)

we have assumed that the distances rij are large compared to the typical size
a of each body. under this assumption we necessarily have also aii >> aij.
( if (, r)  1
a)n). hence there is no reason not to
use this approximation also in the evaluation of det a(). the leading term
given by the product of the diagonal elements is a constant independent
of the distances rij which we may subtract. the next term, involving the

rn then aii/aij  ( r

2

diagonal 2  2 minors yields:

e = xi<j

i

4 z d

aij()aji()
aii()ajj()

= xz iijd

4

ij(, r)2

(6)

in principle we could write extra correction to this expansion of the deter-
minant however to be consistent we may not do that until we incorporated
in our formalism the eect of higher multipole moments (and possibly of the
nonlinear corrections if such exist). if  is the electric eld ~e then

+

3
r2 ))ei||(ri)

4
3

ij(3)(r)

r

2
r



3i||

1
r3 )+

ij(, r) = hei(0)ej(r)i = (ij(

xixj
r3 (2+
(this can be obtained by dierentiating haai =  g

i||
r2 

usual casimir-polder energy is given by i12r d

(7)
r ei||(ri)) and the
12
r7 .
(the short distance van der waals relation can also be obtained from (6)
by letting  = () and assuming that the maximal frequency for which 
is non-negligible is small compared with 1
r ) the calculation still holds when
dierent elds vanish on dierent bodies. for instance the interaction energy
between electric and magnetic objects with polarizabilities e, b will be by
exactly the same reasoning

4 ij(, r)2 =  23

4

ieb

4

z dhbi(0)ej(r, )i2 =

ieb

4

z d i(

i||

r



1
r2 )

ikjxk

r

ei||r!2

=

7eb

4

1
r7

(8)

and (assuming  > 0) this force is repulsive.

the general result(6) valid for r  a may be considered as the leading
term (corresponding to the diagram r
r expansion. corrections to
it may originate from(1)higher multipole (i.e. higher derivative) interaction
(2)possible nonlinear eects (3)further expansion of ln det a(). the last of
these factors has some special interest in that it is the one responsible to
multibody forces. thus the leading three-body interaction corresponding to

r)in an a

the diagramrr

r is just the next term:

e3b = xz id

4

tr (iijjjkkki + iikkkjjji)

here the trace is over internal indices of the eld and the summation is
over unordered triplets {i,j,k}. for a scalar eld we thus easily obtain

3

123

r12r23r31(r12+r23+r31). for the electric case we nd using (7) a sim-
e3b =
ilar expression, the explicit formula for which is however too long to give any
extra insight. it should be remarked that the (2-body) corrections to eq(6)
due to higher derivative terms are typically of relative order ( a
r )2 (since they
originate from self interactions  (j)2) this is bigger then the ( a
r )3 3-body
correction to the electric casimir polder force and smaller then the a
r 3-body
correction to the scalar casimir polder force.

(b)finiteness and sign of the casimir eect

the repulsion between systems with non vanishing electrical and magnet-
ical polarizabilities come about in the above discussion rather simply it is
just reects the i factor that the euclidian correlation function hebieuc and
similarly h ieuc pick relative to heeieuc, hieuc (or hbbieuc) upon wick
rotation.2 the issue of the sign of the casimir forces and some possible puz-
zles and paradoxes there have the subject of considerable interest. here we
would like to clear up this matter as much as possible. while we will make
in the following many heuristic remarks we will clearly separate those from
rigorous parts

the electric casimir polder force between two conductors small compared
to their mutual distance is attractive as is the force between two atoms.
therefore it is natural to expect that the total casimir force between any
two conducting objects should also be attractive. however because of the non
additive nature of the casimir force (and specically the existence of many
body and not only 2-body interactions)this conclusion is not quite obvious.
indeed for the case of two conducting plates adding the casimir polder inter-
actions (and taking the formal limit    in the clausius mossotti relation
4n
+1 with n the molecular density and  the polarizability) falls short
hc
of the correct answer w
a3 by 30%[6]. the gap is bridged by many
body interactions3. could it be that for some special geometries we can even
achieve a complete sign reversal and repulsion between, say, two electrically
conducting bodies?

3  1

a = 2

720

the issue of the sign of the casimir energy cannot be meaningfully ad-
dressed unless we nd for it a convergent, well dened expressions. let us

2the relative repulsion of electrically and magnetically conducting plates and the in-

tuitive explanation of this pattern have been discussed at length by[12]

3the approximations involved in deriving the clausius mossotti also have some aect.

however these approximations are also related to the many body interactions

4

then consider the partition function (2) for the case of two conductors 1, 2
whose centroids are at a distance a. further assume that wick rotations
have been made so that we can use the euclidian form of z and of the prop-
agator ( 1
(xy)2 for 4d). let us next divide out z(a) by z(a  ) which
is equivalent to subtracting the casimir self energies4 of 1, 2:

ee(a)t

ee()t = r q dj (1)(x)q dj (2)(y)er j (1)(x)j (1)(x

(xx)2

)

er j (1)(x)j (2)(y)

(xy)2

er j (2)(y)j (2)(y

(yy)2

)

r q dj (1)(x)q dj (2)(y)er j (1)(x)j (1)(x)

(xx)2

er j (2) (y)j (2)(y)

(yy)2

in this expression the innite contributions j (1)(x)j(x)(1)

(9)
, x  x for
x, x  1 etc divide out and eq(9) is nite and well dened. in particular the
a2 with a =
coecient
min |xy|, x  1, y  2, the minimal distance between the conductors and
is nite.
(x1x2)2+(y1y2)2+(z1z2)2+(t1t2)2+2
with an innitesimal  introduced. this  will not aect the ratio in eq(9)

(xx)2 of the mixed productj (1)(x)j(x)(2) is bound by 1
in particular we write  = 1
42

(xx)2

1

1

the basic dierence between the problems of two disjoint objects and the
single object problem is that the rst is indeed nite and needs no renor-
malization5(though some regulator may help in its evaluation). this fact
is physically obvious since changing the relative placement of two distinct
object does not change the relative position of points belonging to the same
object. thus only pairs of points whose mutual distance is greater then a
change relative position and there can be no uv divergence. on the other
hand when considering changing the radius of a single sphere, say, we are
considering a process in which any pair of points including innitesimally
closed pairs change relative position and thus it is hardly surprising that the
uv divergence are much more severe. in the path integral approach, which
we use here, these diculties manifest themselves in ambiguity as to how to
relate the measures dj for dierent radii since these are in fact measures on
dierent spaces.

physically the problem is to identify the bulk energy term of the sphere
say, which is supposed to be subtracted in order to leave only the casimir part.
if we think of the sphere as representing a real conductor then this bulk term
is supposed to represent (at least part of) the binding (and surface) energy

4each of the casimir energies separately is quartically divergent
5in the context of nite temperature this point was recently elaborated by[9]

5

of the atoms making up the conductor. it is well known that this binding
energy is a result of residual electric interactions just like the van der waals
and the casimir interactions. therefore it is not surprising that we have a
diculty in nding a natural way of separating them.

it is often stated[5, 10] that the casimir force between two close by con-
ducting hemispheres is repulsive. this assertion is based on the positivity of
the known result for the casimir energy of a spherical conducting shell. much
eort and calculational skills have been devoted into the evaluation of the
casimir energies for conducting bodies of various shapes. there it was found
that for cylinder and parallelpipes of suciently large aspect ratio the casimir
energy is negative and becomes positive for a closed cylinder/parallelpipe of
smaller aspect ratio as the more spherical geometry is approached. clearly
no simple rule pertaining to curvature and/or topology can be used for the
sign and one needs to compute each case separately[8].6

it is conceivable that in kaluza klein models with compactied dimen-
sions the casimir energy density can provide positive or negative cosmological
constant.

however in the electromagnetic 3+1dim context we believe that the val-
ues and signs of casimir energies for the various closed shapes are at best of
academic interest only and irrelevant for the force between dierent bodies.
in all cases where the sign of the eect can be physically addressed by chang-
ing the relative distance between two objects, which are mainly electrically
or mainly magneticly polarizable, the casimir force will be attractive.

in particular we note that we cannot infer repulsion between two hemi-
spheres from the positive casimir energy for the sphere. the problem of a
single conducting shell and the problem of two close by conducting hemi-
spheres are completely dierent. based on the most naive physical intuition
one should expect that the force between the two hemispheres depends on
what is happening in the area where they are the closest to each other i.e.
near the edges. but clearly the edges are just the place where the two hemi-
spheres conguration is most drastically dierent from that of the spherical
shell. indeed let us consider two innitesimal yet ideally conducting equato-
rial rims at the boundaries of the hemispheres. the wavelength of modes
relevant to the interaction between these rims is    with  the separation

6in the discussion of eigenmodes inside cavities there is a well dened systematic hierar-
chy of volume surface,curvature etc terms which corresponds to the quartic etc divergences

6

between the rims. hence we may, in rst approximation, neglect most of the
hemispheres consisting of the more distant parts in evaluating the rim-rim
interaction. the interaction between two rims in vacuum is readily evaluated
(up to ln(/d) correction with d the rim thickness) to be f = #12rhc/3.
hc
this attraction exceeds fsphere = #2
r2 with #1,2 some numerical coecients
by vast (r/)3 factor. consequently the net force between two hemispheres
remain attractive.

some heuristic argument in favour of the tendendcy for repulsion amongst
the two hemispheres, follows from considering the surface charge on a con-
ductor placed in an electric eld and the aect of the extra eld generated by
this induced charge. it is easy to see that the normal component of this extra
eld will be directed outward or inward depending on whether the conductor
is concave or convex. as a result one may expect collective phenomena to
increase the attractive force between convex bodies and to decrease the force
between concave bodies (though realistic bodies cannot of course be glob-
ally concave).the fact that we ignored retardation in this argument is not a
serious drawback since the argument works in four-dimensions as well as in
three.

in spite of this reasoning we nd it hard to believe that the force can
actually change sign. we therefore conjecture (counter to common belief)
that the electric casimir force between two conducting objects of any shape
is always attractive. similarly we conjecture the same assertion holds for any
two objects on which a real scalar eld vanishes.

we next proceed to a more formal discussion of our conjectured univer-
sally attractive casimir forces between objects of similar electric properties
(say both with dielectric coecients  or both conducting7)

we can show that the energy of two conductors placed at any nite dis-
tance from each other is always lower then when their distance tends to
innity. it is easiest to keep track of the signs by expressing the energy using

the euclidian functional integral as eet = z = r dj exp(j    j) with

j current living only on the volume of the two objects. if we denote by j1, j2
the current in the rst and second conductor then by making a change of
variables (j1, j2)  (j1, j2) in the functional integral we can change the
sign of the term j1    j2 and by adding the two equivalent expressions for

7the form of the casimir polder interaction suggests that also bodies with both electric

and magnetic polarizabilities attract so long as the average (i)

e /(i)

b ratios are similar

7

z we nd:

eet = z = z dj1dj2 exp(j1    j1  j2    j2) cosh(j1    j2) (10)

only through the terms cosh(j1    j2) = coshr d3xd3y d

now the dependence of this on the relative position of the two objects is
2 j1(x, )(x 
y, )j2(y, ) note that although j() unlike j(t) is not real the combination
j1()j2() + j1()j2() which multiply (x  y, ) is real (reality would
be obvious if we use sine and cosine instead of exponential fourier transform
which may be a better choice when one wants to keep track of the signs).
since cosh of a real argument is always 1 we immediately conclude that
casimir energy of two objects at a nite distance from each other is always
smaller then when their distance tends to innity. hence as long as the two
objects are far they necessarily attract.

to prove however that the two objects keep attracting at all distances
we need to show that the derivative 
a e(a) of the energy as a function
of the relative separation does not change sign. we will next attempt to
motivate this much less obvious feature. to this end let us revert to the
original euclidian pure congural space expression for the interaction energy
with  = 1
(x1x2)2+(y1y2)2+(z1z2)2+(t1t2)2+2 where an innitesimal  was
42
introduced to avoid innite self interactions. approximating the volumes (or
surfaces) of the two objects by nite numbers n1, n2 of points we have:

1

ee(a)t = z y djl exp


m=1 j (2)

 1

l

2 pn2

l=1pn2

n1



1
2

n1

xl=1

1
m)2+(z 

lz 

(x

lx

1

j (1)

l

xm=1
m)2+2 j (2)

(xl  xm)2 + (zl  zm)2 + 2 j (1)
m 
m pn1

l=1pn2

m=1 j (1)

(xlx

m)2+(zlz 

1

l

(11)

m (cid:27)
m+a)2 j (2)

l

, j (2)

and likewise for ee()t . with j (1)
m the currents at the n1, n2 points
(~xl, zl) and (~xl, zl) on each of the conductors respectively. we envision sep-
aration along the z-axis and zm, zm are the distances along the z axis of
the points from two initial planes parallel to the x, y planes (so that both
zl  0, zl  0). we use ~xl = (xl, yl, tl) to indicate the other coordinates. a
is the relative displacement along the z-axis of the two planes (or objects)
from the initial tangency point.

8

taking the a derivative we nd


a

eet = z y djl

n1

n2

xl=1

xm=1

j (1)

l

2(zl + zm + a)

((xl  xm)2 + (zl  zm + a)2)2 j (2)

m exp {........}

1

(12)
the above expression breaks into n1n2 contributions corresponding to spe-
(.....)j (2)) factor
cic choices of l = l0, m = m0. thanks to the exp(j (1)
we have in each term separately the regions in the jl0, jm0 plane where the
signs of jl0 and jm0 are opposite yield a larger contribution to the dj (1)
l0 dj (2)
m0
integral (in absolute magnitude). because of the positivity of 2(zl + zm + a)
these dominant regions make then consistently a negative contribution to

aeet . since we have only n1 + n2 independent dj (1)dj (2) integrations
rather then n1n2 independent integrations on all j (1)
m0 pairs we cannot
utilize the above to rigorously deduce that the expression in (12) above is
negative. however since there is no obstruction to choosing also several j (1)
to be of opposite sign from several of j (2)
m , this is very strongly suggestive of
our claimed monotonic behaviour of e(a) and the negative fcasimir.

l0 j (2)

l

the above arguments can be readily extended to the vector case and also

to dielectrics.

 a
the p j (i)

(i) lagrange multiplier form suggests that we identify the js
with induced conserved electric currents. the opposite sign of these conforms
to the heuristic argument that in the two conducting plates say, the attraction
is due to charge patches and image charge of the opposite sign on the other
plate. it also allows us to understand why there is still residual attraction
between two parallel plates which conduct in perpendicular directions. while
the spatial parts of j1 and j2 are then orthogonal and do not contribute, the
temporal j 0

1 and j 0

2 are not.

coming back to the starting point of the present section we use the above
reasoning to nd the aect of other boundary conditions. the simplest ex-
ample in which this can be seen is when we demand that on one object the
eld  vanishes while on the other the time derivative  is zero.
in this
case most of the above reasoning goes the same way. the only important
dierence is that the term representing the interaction between the two ob-
r er2+m2 which is
jects is built out of the two point function h i  i 1
r er2+m2. this has
pure imaginary instead of the real function hi  1
the eect of transforming the hyperbolic cosine into a trigonometric cosine.

9

now since cos unlike cosh is not a monotonically increasing function of (the
absolute value of) its argument we cannot complete the argument to deduce
that the force (at least at large distances) is attractive.
in fact since for
small argument the function cos is decreasing we may conclude from the
above that the force will be repulsive provided that the mutual interaction
is small. this conclusion should be valid whenever the distance between the
the objects is large enough. by exactly the same argument it follows that
the force between an electric and a magnetic object is repulsive (at least for
large distances) simply because the euclidian correlation function hebi(r, )
is pure imaginary.

we remark that the imaginarity of h i,hebi is only a result of the i
factor which  and e picked up upon the wick rotation. had the euclid-
ian action including the lagrange multipliers terms been real we would have
necessarily obtained real j1-j2 interaction and hence an attractive force (at
least at large distances).

2) = 1

from the -function regularized sum p(n+ 1
to p n =  1

there is one more well known example of a repulsive casimir force we have
not addressed so far. this is the case of a scalar satisfying dirichlet boundary
conditions on one plate and neumann condition on another. (for a massless
scalar in 1+1 dimensions the repulsive nature of the force follows immediately
24 which is positive contrary
12 < 0 for dirichlet- dirichlet boundary conditions a rather
unintuitive argument). our previous computations might suggest trying to
enforce the neumann condition by adding a term of the form jz to the
action. this however is wrong since the neumann boundary condition is
not equivalent to demanding z = 0 over the plate. when the neumann
boundary condition is said to be satised on a plate it is meant that the
eld on one side of it is completely independent of the eld on the other side
while demanding z = 0 enforces the eld to have exactly the same value
on both sides. indeed demanding z = 0 (and  = 0 on the other plate)
would yield an attractive force (dependent on the rst plate width d and
explicitly given by8 e = 1
2kde2ka) ). the correct way to
enforce the ordinary neumann condition is by making the kinetic term ()2

(2)3 log(1  1

2 r d3k

8 in evaluating the self interaction we assumed j(z) to vary over the width of the plate
z d(z1  z2)j(z2)dz2 is constant over it, this forced j(z) to be a
(specic) second degree polynomial in z. this computation is in fact correct only for
d << a and therefore the nonlinear terms in d may be omitted.

in such a way that r 2

10

weight in the action tend to zero (rather then innity) inside the body i.e.

we may write the action in the form s = r (x)()2d4x where (x) vanishes
condition may be done similarly by adding a termra
the form ra

inside the neumann objects and is equal to 1 outside it. enforcing dirichlet
2 however since the
specic mode k = 0 is not too important we may as well use an extra term of
()2 i.e. we may take (dirichlet) = , (neumann) = 0.
using this point of view the dirichlet -neumann repulsion is similar to the
repulsion between para and dia-magnetic plates which is intuitively obvious.

(c)casimir radiation

we next proceed to the last topic of this paper namely casimir type radia-
tion.9 time dependent boundary conditions will in general result in radiation
even from neutral objects. the leading contribution is from pair production
process. the matrix element h0|k1, k2i for it is essentially hjji-the correla-
tor of the current we introduced as lagrange multipliers. indeed considering
for simplicity a scalar eld and repeating the standard steps leading to (1)
one easily nds hiji  hiji0 = ikjlhjkjli. where h..i0 denotes the
expectation value in the absence of the extra boundary conditions over a.
here j should be interpreted as a function j(x, t) which is dened all over
spacetime but vanishes identically outside the region a. hence we have

h0|k1, k2i = raa

d4xd4yeik1x+ik2yhj(x)j(y)i.

radiation is related to the asymptotic behaviour at large distances. at
such distances every object will look approximately pointlike hence it is
natural to consider in the following radiation from an accelerating small,
point like object. we will assume that the typical size a of this object is
small compared with the wavelength of the emitted radiation and compared
with its typical acceleration time. the rst assumption allows us to assume
that our j variable can be regarded as constant over the volume of the
emitting object so that it is a function j = j( ) of only the self time  along
the world line of the emitting object.the second assumption imply that the
self interaction of j is not eected (to rst approximation) by the fact that
our object is not static. thus in the leading approximation s  1
with the same  as in eq(3-6) and hj(1)j(2)i  (1  2). denoting the
emmiting object trajectory by x( ) we see that if a scalar eld is forced to

2 r j( )2d

9such issues have been discussed in the past by several authours see e.g.[11]

11

vanish on it the amplitude for particle pair creation is simpliy given by:

h0|k1, k2i = z d ei(k1+k2)x( )

for electromagnetic casimir radiation most of the the computation proceeds
along the same lines. the only dierence (except for extra indices) is the
appearance of the extra factor 12 as a result the need to relate the eld ~e
which actually vanishes on a to the eld a. thus we obtain:

(13)

(14)

h0|k1~1, k2~2i = 12~1 



  ~2z d ei(k1+k2)x( )

x = r sin( ), y = r cos( ), t =  / =
amplitude will turn into

for a particle moving in a circular motion of radius r and frequency 
1r22 the integral giving the
r d exp(ikkr sin( )  ikt ) = 2pn jn(kkr)(kt  n) where k = k1 +
k2 is the sum of the two emitted particles four momentum and kk is its
component in the plane of rotation.

the energy radiated per unit of time will therefore be

w = xn

2n

3

1

(2)3 z d3k1

2k1

d3k2
2k2

jn(kkr)2(kt  n/)a

(15)

where for a massless scalar a = 1 while for the electromagnetic case a =
k2
1k2
and
for the electromagnetic problem

2 + (~k1  ~k2)2. assuming r << 1 we nd for the scalar w = 2r26

30

wel =

2r210

567

(16)

the actual amount of radiation emitted under any normal circumstances
is very tiny. to estimate w consider the limit a =radius of spherical shell
a  r and when the sphere moves around the circle with the speed of light 10.
eq(16)implies that in this limit our rotating sphere acts as a photon produc-
tion machine which by churning the vacuum generates one (actually 1
567 )
photon pair of energy h per rotation i.e. during time t = 2
 . for other
-nonextreme -situations this should be reduced by 8( a
r )6. it is hard to envi-
sion acceleration of macroscopic bodies to speed higher then    =speed
of (valance)electrons, in which case emision rate is< 14
567  1033 phtons per
rotation.

10formally the derivation fails in this limit but we use it only to normalize the boundary

values

12

references

[1] h.b.g. casimir,on the attraction between two perfectly conducting

plates proc. k.ned. akad.wet. 51, 793-796(1948)

[2] h.g.b.casimir,d.polder,phys. rev.73,360(1948)

[3] r.golestanian and m.kardar, phys. rev. a58(1998)1713,6490 quant-

ph/9802017;phys. rev.lett.78(1997)3421;

[4] h.li and m.kardar, phys rev. lett 67,3275(1991); phys rev.

a46,6490(1992).

[5] s.k.lamoreaux, demonstration of the casimir force in the 0.6 to 6m

range,phys rev. lett. 78(1) 5-8(1997)

[6] e.m.lifshitz, sov.phys.jetp 2,73(1956); p.w. milonni, mei-li shih

conemporary phys, 1992,volume 33,number 5,p313-322

[7] o. kenneth, s. nussinov hep-th/9802149

[8] v.m.mostepanenko, n.n.trunov, the casimir eect and its application

clarendon press oxford 1997

[9] j. feinberg, a. mann, m. revzen. hep-th/9908149

[10] e.elizalde and a.romeo, am.j.phys. vol.59.no.8 711(1991)

[11] i.brevik,h.kolbenstvedt nouvo cimento b102,139(1988) and b103,

45(1989)

[12] hushwater thesis univesity of mariland 1997;and quant-ph/9909084

13

