hep-th/9912151
iassns-hep-99/99
su-itp-99/50
slac-pub-8314
nsf-itp-99-142
osu-m-99-13

0
0
0
2

 

n
a
j
 

4

 
 

2
v
1
5
1
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

open string instantons and superpotentials

shamit kachru1,2, sheldon katz3,

albion lawrence1,2,5 and john mcgreevy4

1school of natural sciences, institute for advanced study, princeton, nj 08540
2department of physics and slac, stanford university, stanford, ca 94305

3department of mathematics, oklahoma state university, stillwater, ok 74078

4department of physics, university of california at berkeley, berkeley, ca 94720

5institute for theoretical physics, university of california, santa barbara, ca 93106

we study the f-terms in n = 1 supersymmetric, d = 4 gauge theories arising from

d(p + 3)-branes wrapping supersymmetric p-cycles in a calabi-yau threefold. if p is even

the spectrum and superpotential for a single brane are determined by purely classical
(  0) considerations. if p = 3, superpotentials for massless modes are forbidden to
all orders in  and may only be generated by open string instantons. for this latter

case we nd that such instanton eects are generically present. mirror symmetry relates

even and odd p and thus perturbative and nonperturbative superpotentials; we provide a

preliminary discussion of a class of examples of such mirror pairs.

december 1999

1. introduction

the study of d-branes in calabi-yau threefolds is of both formal and phenomeno-

logical interest. as philosophical tools, calabi-yau threefolds provide a natural arena for

studying nonperturbative stringy geometry. d-branes are excellent probes of this geometry

as they are sensitive to structure well below the string scale (at weak string coupling) [1,2].

furthermore a deep understanding of mirror symmetry requires understanding its action

on d-branes [3,4,5].

the phenomenological interest is served by studying space-lling d-branes in type i
or type ii string theories, in congurations preserving n = 1 susy in four dimensions.1

these congurations fall into two classes [6,7]: 6-branes in type iia wrapping special

lagrangian cycles of the threefold, and odd-p-branes in type i or type iib wrapping even-

dimensional cycles. the latter congurations (up to orientifolds) can be written as coherent

sheaves on the threefold [3,4,8] (or its mirror) and so involve the same type of data as

heterotic compactications [9,10]. the d-brane limit allows one to study gauge eld data

when it is intrinsically stringy (much as landau-ginzburg compactications allow one to

study intrinsically stringy aspects of geometric data), via open string techniques.

in closed-string compactications on calabi-yau threefolds, worldsheet instanton ef-

fects are the most well-understood source of truly stringy physics. they drastically modify

the geometry at short distances: in addition they lead to interesting physical eects such
as the generation of nontrivial superpotentials in heterotic compactications [11,12].2 in

this work we will study the eects of open-string instantons on d-brane physics, in par-

ticular on the superpotential. for branes wrapping even-dimensional cycles, we will nd

that the superpotential can be determined from classical geometry; for branes wrapping

special lagrangian cycles it is generated entirely by nonperturbative worldsheet eects.

1 the standard caveat is in force here:

in order to satisfy gauss law for the various rr

charges, one should either consider branes wrapping cycles in non-compact calabi-yau spaces,

or consider congurations containing both branes and orientifolds. for our purposes the former

assumption will suce, but many of our considerations could also be applied to lower dimensional,

non space-lling branes wrapping the same cycles.

2 in fact, it has been proved in [13] that the most easily realized heterotic (0,2) models, those
realized as gauged linear sigma models [14,15], are not destabilized by worldsheet instantons. as

we will see in the following, it should be easier to nd examples of d-brane models which exhibit

disc instanton generated superpotentials.

1

this has interesting implications for mirror symmetry in the type ii compactica-

tions. to begin with, if a given mirror pair of cycles has massless deformations with a

nontrivial superpotential, then the classical moduli spaces will not match under the mirror

map. a holomorphic 2-cycle with its innitesimal holomorphic deformations obstructed

at some nontrivial order (so that a 5-brane wrapped around it will have massless chiral

elds with a superpotential) will have as its mirror a 3-cycle which has at directions to
all orders in . on the other hand, if we start with a special lagrangian cycle and nd

that worldsheet instantons destabilize or make nonsupersymmetric the d-branes wrapping

them, the mirror will respectively either not exist or will be some classically nonsuper-

symmetric conguration. this is reminiscent of a common feature of dualities of n = 1

gauge theories, where superpotentials generated by nonperturbative dynamics are dual

to tree-level superpotentials [16]. however, it is a relatively novel situation for n = 1

dualities of string vacua, where normally instanton eects map to instanton eects, as in

heterotic/f-theory duality [17]. here mirror symmetry should provide a powerful tool for

summing open string instantons, as it does for closed string worldsheet instantons [18].

note that the nonperturbative superpotentials we are discussing here are not explicable

in terms of gauge dynamics involving the (perturbative) d-brane gauge theory; we would

expect in some circumstances the instanton eects will be related to gauge instantons of

a non  perturbative d-brane gauge theory that arises at singular points in the brane

moduli space. this is analogous to the fact that in heterotic (0,2) models, worldsheet

instantons can sometimes be related to gauge instantons of nonperturbative gauge groups

arising from singular compactications [19].

in this paper we will begin to investigate disc instanton eects by asking whether

nonperturbative superpotentials are generically generated by worldsheet (disc) instantons.

we will nd a story similar to that of the heterotic string [12]: when the open string
instantons are isolated, nonvanishing (locally) runaway potentials may be generated.3

the plan of our paper is as follows: in 2 we will review the construction of n = 1

four-dimensional theories via space-lling d-branes wrapped on calabi-yau threefolds in

type ii string theory. after discussing the results determined by classical geometry, we

will discuss some constraints from string theory. first, at tree level the superpotentials are

3 however, in contrast to the heterotic string story, the classical moduli spaces of the brane
congurations we will study are naturally compact. hence, the superpotentials we nd will have

minima which are not at innity in eld space.

2

computable via topological open string theory, and the hypermultiplets of the background

closed-string theory decouple [20]. furthermore, we will nd that in the case of d6-branes

wrapping special lagrangian three-cycles, superpotentials are forbidden not only classically
but to all orders in , due to a peccei-quinn symmetry. superpotentials in these cases

can only be generated by topologically nontrivial disc instanton eects.

in 3 we will

discuss the generic superpotential terms that are allowed in the presence of an isolated

holomorphic disc. finally, in 4 we discuss promising directions for future work. further

results in explicit examples will appear in a companion paper [21].

there is a close relation between the ideas discussed in this paper and earlier work of

witten [22] and vafa [23]. as this work was being completed, we were also informed of

the related work [24] by mathematicians.

2. classical geometry of d-branes on cy3

we begin with d-brane congurations preserving four supercharges, to lowest order
in gs and , in type ii string theory on m  ir4 where m is a calabi-yau threefold. we
will assume that the d-branes ll all of spacetime so that we realize an n = 1, d = 4 gauge

theory.

the internal congurations preserving four supersymmetries fall into two classes [6,7]:

a-type branes wrapping special lagrangian submanifolds of the threefold, and b-type

branes which wrap holomorphic cycles of the calabi-yau. (the latter may have nontrivial

holomorphic gauge bundles living on them as well, corresponding to bound states with

lower-dimensional branes. we will for the most part ignore this possibility.) in the present

discussion these exist in the type iia and iib theories respectively. we will discuss the

associated gauge theories of each class in turn.

2.1. a-type branes

spectrum

in the large-volume, large-complex-structure limit, supersymmetric a-type branes

wrap special lagrangian submanifolds. let such a manifold  be described by a map

f :   m .

3

recall that special lagrangian submanifolds  are dened by the properties that:

dimir  =

1
2
f  = 0

dimir m

f (im ei) = 0

(2.1)

where  is the kahler form of m ,  is the standard holomorphic (3, 0) form, and ei is

some phase.

n d6-branes wrapping a single supersymmetric cycle   m have a u (n ) vector
multiplet arising from massless open string excitations polarized completely in ir4. mass-

less open string excitations polarized in m form adjoint u (n ) chiral multiplets. we will
focus on the case n = 1. to lowest order in , the counting of massless chiral elds has

been worked out.  lives in a family of deformations with dimension b1() [25] (c.f. also

[26] for a clear discussion). more precisely, each basis vector in the tangent space to the

space of deformations may be used to construct a nontrivial harmonic one-form on , and

vice-versa. of course the space of such deformations (which has real dimension b1())

cannot make up our set of chiral multiplets which are built from complex scalars: for ex-

ample b1() need not be even. however, deformations of at connections of the d6-brane

gauge eld on  also map one-to-one onto the space of harmonic one-forms on , roughly

because there is a wilson line of the u (1) gauge eld around each 1-cycle. thus for each
element of the space h1() of harmonic one-forms on  one has two real at directions

which may be described by a complex scalar [5]. in other words, we nd b1() massless

chiral multiplets, one for each non-trivial one-cycle or harmonic one-form on .

note that if we have branes wrapping several (mutually supersymmetric) 3-cycles,

then we may get additional matter from any intersection points, in bifundamentals of

the u (1)s of each cycle. a local example of this was discussed in [27]. in this work we

will discuss branes wrapping single primitive 3-cycles: however, as explained in [27],

interesting transitions to this more complicated case can occur as one varies background

(closed string) hypermultiplets.

a natural choice of coordinates on the moduli space of the wrapped d6 brane is the

following [23,28]. let {j} be a basis for h1(). choose minimal area discs dj subject to

the condition that

dj = j

4

(2.2)

and let

wj = zdj

 .

(2.3)

in other words, if there is a holomorphic disc in the relative homology class of d, then wj
will be the area. the wj provide b1() real coordinates. they are complexied by b1()
wilson lines

aj = zj

a

(2.4)

where a is the u (1) gauge eld on the wrapped brane. the coordinates in (2.3) and (2.4)

are the real and imaginary parts of scalar components of the b1() chiral multiplets j on
the brane:

j = wj + iaj +   

(2.5)

where    indicates higher components of the superelds.

superpotentials and worldsheet instantons

as noted above, it follows from mcleans theorem [25] that at lowest order in  the
brane wrapping  has a moduli space of dimension b1(). so far there may still be 
corrections which lift these at directions. to lift moduli, one would need to generate either

d-terms or f-terms in the low energy action; we will focus on the superpotential, since the

chiral multiplets j are neutral (at least at generic points in the classical moduli space of
the cycle) and do not appear in fi d-terms. at leading order in , the superpotential
w () identically vanishes. we now determine to what extent  corrections of any sort

are possible.

in fact, it turns out that there are no corrections to the open-string superpotential
to any nite order in : all contributions must come from nonperturbative corrections,

arising from topologically nontrivial congurations. the arguments are almost identical

to similar arguments for the heterotic string [11,12]. we will give two.

the rst argument is a string theory argument. the (0)-picture vertex operator for a

at connection a at zero momentum on the d6-brane has the form:

v = zd

a(x)x d

(2.6)

where x are coordinates on the brane and  coordinates on the worldsheet d. let a be

polarized completely internally, so that it corresponds to a choice of wilson lines around the

elements of h1(). if x(d) is a topologically trivial cycle on , then a can be written as

5

an exact form d. we see that v vanishes after an integration by parts. thus topologically

trivial disc amplitudes give no non-derivative couplings (such as superpotential terms) of
the imaginary parts of chiral multiplets, to all orders in . holomorphy thus requires the
superpotential vanish to all nite orders in .

if the boundary maps to a topologically non-trivial cycle j  , this argument
fails. such discs are non-trivial elements of the relative homology class h2(m, ). these
worldsheets will give terms weighted by the instanton action:

e(wj +iaj )/

(2.7)

where wj is the spacetime area of this disc as in (2.3), and aj is its partner wilson line (2.4).
the  dependence is decidedly non-perturbative. note that to obtain the contribution

(2.7) to the action, the map x() must be a holomorphic map from the disc to m with

the desired boundary, and with the normal derivative to x() at the boundary taking

values in the pullback of the normal bundle to ; this is a disc instanton. it follows from

standard arguments that only such holomorphic maps have the correct zero mode count

to contribute to a superpotential term in the spacetime theory.

the second argument is a spacetime argument. the space of u (1) wilson lines on a

circle is the dual circle. thus, any function of the chiral elds appearing in the eective

action must be invariant under discrete shifts of their imaginary parts. holomorphy then
requires that the superpotential be a power series in exp ([wj + iaj]/), which again
gives a nonperturbative dependence on .

examples of three-cycles

the best-known example arises in the strominger-yau-zaslow formulation of mirror

symmetry [5]: the claim is that any geometric calabi-yau with a geometric mirror can be
written as a bration of special lagrangian t 3s. mirror symmetry is berwise t-duality
on these t 3s. d3-branes wrapping these bers are mapped to d0-branes on the mirror.
the t 3 has b1 = 3 so all this is in accord with expectations: the mirror d0-brane and thus
the wrapped d3-brane should have a 3-dimensional complex moduli space (which is the

mirror threefold). many examples of special lagrangian three-cycles can be found as xed
loci of real structures. some examples, which are homeomorphic to irip3, are contained
in [6,20]. note that these have a z2 wilson line degree of freedom as 1(irip3) = z2.

in addition, there has been some discussion of local and non-compact models. ref. [28]

contains some general discussion of noncompact supersymmetric three-cycles. a simple

6

example with an isolated disc instanton is the following. take z1,2,3 as coordinates on c3,
and choose  and  to be the obvious kahler form and holomorphic three-form. then the

three-cycle  dened by

|z1|2  t = |z2|2 = |z3|2

im(z1z2z3) = 0, re(z1z2z3)  0

(2.8)

(2.9)

with t positive is special lagrangian, and dieomorphic to s1  ir2. a generator  of
h1() is given by the concrete choice

 : {(t1/2ei, 0, 0)}

(2.10)

where  runs from 0 to 2. a holomorphic disc with boundary  and area t is given by

dt : {(z1, 0, 0), |z1|2  t)}

(2.11)

2.2. b-type branes

in the large-volume, large-complex-structure limit, supersymmetric b-type branes

wrap holomorphic cycles of m . one may also examine bound states which can be de-

scribed as gauge bundles on the highest-dimensional branes (c.f. for example [20] for a

discussion). for simplicity we will focus on branes wrapping primitive cycles, and in our

examples we will discuss cases where c is a rational curve.

for n (space-lling) d-branes wrapping a given cycle c  m one again has a u (n )

vector multiplet arising from massless open strings polarized along the spacetime directions.

massless strings polarized along m give rise to adjoint chiral multiplets. again we will focus

on n = 1. for b-type branes wrapping c the innitesimal supersymmetric deformations

of the cycle are holomorphic sections of the normal bundle nc. the number of such
rst-order deformations is therefore the dimension of the space of holomorphic sections,
h 0(c, nc) (this is the cohomology group of the bundle nc, not a relative cohomology
group). these are the scalars in the massless chiral multiplets. there is no guarantee
that these deformations do not have an obstruction at higher order.4 such obstructions, if
they exist, correspond to elements of the group h 1(c, nc) [29]. more specically, given an
element of the cohomology group h 0(c, nc) one may try to construct a nite deformation

4 for e.g. c a curve of genus g  1, there are also 2g wilson line degrees of freedom which
parametrize the at u (1) bundles on c. these pair up into g chiral multiplets and provide exactly

at directions. similar comments apply if c is a four-cycle with b1(c) 6= 0.

7

by beginning with an innitesimal deformation and constructing a nite deformation as a
power series. h 1 measures the space of possible obstructions at each order in this series.
note that it may happen that although h 1 is nonvanishing, there is still a solution for this

power series and thus a family of cycles. in the end, an obstruction should appear as a

higher-order term in the superpotential for a brane wrapped around this cycle [20].

furthermore, deforming the complex structure of m can also cause obstructions to

(previously existing) deformations of c. the basic statement is as follows (c.f. [30,31]).

one may use the restriction map to c and the short exact sequence:

to write a map

0  tc  tm |c  nc  0

r : h 1(m, tm )  h 1(c, nc) .

(2.12)

(2.13)

if we perturb the complex structure of m to rst order by some element   h 1(m, tm ),
a deformation of c exists which preserves c as a holomorphic cycle if and only if r() =

0. note that couplings of (open-string) chiral multiplets to (background closed-string)

complex structure parameters in the superpotential are allowed and generic [20].

in the end, even counting these chiral multiplets is a harder problem on its face than

for a-type branes, as the number of moduli depends not only on the intrinsic topology of

the cycle but on the details of its embedding in m . (this is already apparent for rational

curves in the quintic  c.f. [32,33].) nonetheless, one may nd a lot of specic examples

for which computations are possible, especially for rational curves.

some additional constraints exist as for a-type branes. first, the computation of

the disc contribution to the superpotential can be reduced to a b-twisted open topological

eld theory calculation [20]. again the kahler parameters almost completely decouple from
indeed, the computations of the dimension of h 0(c, nc) and of the
obstruction depend completely on the complex structure. but in addition, all contributions

the superpotential:

to b-model computations come entirely from constant maps into the target space [34,22].

there are no worldsheet instanton corrections and tree level sigma model calculations will

suce: the superpotential can be deduced from classical geometry.

8

examples of holomorphic curves and superpotentials

many useful examples of holomorphic cycles exist in the literature. several can be

found or are referenced in [20]. we are particularly interested in two-cycles with nontrivial

obstructed deformations.

the canonical example is simply a small resolution of the singular hypersurface in c4:

xy = z2  t2n

(2.14)

(such a small resolution is consistent with the calabi-yau condition as the space is non-
compact.) if n = 1, then h 0(c, nc) = 0, and the curve is rigid. if n > 1, then h 0(c, nc)
is one-dimensional  the normal bundle to this curve is o(0)  o(2)  but there is an

obstruction at nth order to deforming this curve [35]. this phenomenon can be described
by a superpotential w () = n+1 [20].

it is easy to use w () to see the eect of a general deformation of complex structure

on c. we perturb w () to

wt() = n+1 + tp () + o(t2),

(2.15)

where p () is an arbitrary polynomial in  subject only to the genericity condition p (0) 6=
0. solving w 

t () = 0, we get n solutions for the vev

k(t) = e2ik/n(cid:18)

p (0)

n + 1(cid:19)1/n

t1/n + . . . ,

where the dots denote higher order terms in t. the geometric description of this perturba-

tion of curves with normal bundle o(0)  o(2) to n rigid rational curves was well known

[36]. the geometric perturbation of contractible curves with normal bundle o(1)  o(3)

to rigid curves has recently been worked out in [37] and can be rephrased in terms of

the perturbation of a superpotential if desired. the geometric description in the case of a

general o(1)  o(3) curve is not yet worked out, but the introduction of a superpotential

can be expected to clarify the geometry.

digression on holomorphic chern-simons theory

another way to arrive at the superpotential in examples like (2.14), (2.15) is by
studying a holomorphic analogue of the chern-simons action, discussed in [22,23].5 in the

5 we thank c. vafa for pointing this out to us, and d. diaconescu for related discussions.

9

following, we will suppress constants which enter harmlessly in our formulas. we think of

the calabi-yau m as being obtained from the total space of the normal bundle o(0) 

o(2) by a modication of the complex structure. we choose holomorphic coordinates

(z, z0, z1) on the normal bundle, with z being a coordinate on c, z0 being in o(0), and z1
in o(2). the curve c is identied with the zero section z0 = z1 = 0. the modication
of complex structure is realized as usual by perturbing  by a tensor ai
j, i.e. j 7 j +
ai
j is a t m valued (0, 1) form on m . we assume that the curve c remains
holomorphic, and want to understand which deformations zi = i(z) (i = 0, 1) remain
holomorphic. the space of c deformations of c is identied with the space (0, 1) of
c sections of the normal bundle nc. the relevant holomorphic chern-simons action is

ji, where ai

zc (cid:0)0(cid:0)  + ai

zi(cid:1) 1  1(cid:0)  + ai

zi(cid:1) 0(cid:1) .

note that in (2.16) we only use the index j = z in a. (2.16) expands as

zc

0 1 + 0az

z1 + 0a1

z (cid:0)1 0 + 1az

z0 + 1a0
z(cid:1) .

(2.16)

(2.17)

we make sense of this by respectively identifying 0, 1 with functions and (1, 0) forms on
c (as would be expected in the twisted brane worldvolume theory [38]), while respectively
identifying a0
z with (0, 1) and (1, 1) forms after pulling back to c. thus all the terms
in (2.17) are (1, 1) forms on c and can be integrated.

z, a1

the variations of (2.16) or (2.17) with respect to 0 and 1 give the conditions that
the corresponding curve in x is holomorphic. in fact, the action of the topological theory

on c actually becomes the superpotential in the four-dimensional n = 1 theory arising

from wrapping a d5 brane on c. this is because the holomorphic chern-simons theory

is the string eld theory for the open string topological b-model [22], and therefore its

action is the generating function of the topological correlation functions which give rise to

superpotential terms in the physical theory.

to illustrate this fact, we now show that we can choose our tensor a so that (2.17) be-
comes w () = n+1. since the obstructions to deforming c lie in h 1(nc) = h 1(o(2)),
we choose our a to have a1
z vanish (we can always choose
such a gauge). then the constant section (0, 1) = (t, 0) is holomorphic provided we put
tn = 0. so this a produces the required geometry.

0 dz  dz while the other ai

z = zn

the variation of (2.17) with respect to 1 shows that 0 is holomorphic. the variation
0 . substituting these back

of (2.17) with respect to 0 shows that 1 is a multiple of n

10

into (2.17) (and performing the integral over the curve c, which just produces a volume
factor) gives a multiple of n+1

, as claimed. this proves that for any o(0)  o(2) curve,

0

the superpotential will be a polynomial of degree k for some k (or will vanish identically)

 k is the only invariant of the complex structure in some neighborhood of the curve.

another example

another example which we will use was detailed in ref. [39] (see also sec. 9 of [31].)

here one has at a specic point in the complex structure moduli space an a1 singularity

bered over a genus-g curve s. at this point the collapsing cycles obviously form a family

which is precisely s. deformations of the complex structure of m destroy this family,

generically leaving 2g  2 isolated curves. one may nd 2g three-cycles by sweeping the
collapsing curves over the one-cycles of s, mapping h1(s) to h3(m ).6 this can be lifted
to a map from h (1,0)(s) into h (2,1)(m )  h 1(m, tm ) [39,31]. this gives g independent
rst-order deformations of complex structure.7 we can use the map r (2.13) to project the
relevant deformation onto h 1(n ) for each ber of this collapsing surface. now the spaces
h 1(n ) are the bers of a bundle over s, and this bundle is identied with the canonical

bundle of s. so (2.13) gets included in the sequence of maps

h (1,0)(s)  h 1(m, tm )  h 0(s, ks).

(2.18)

this says two things. first of all, rst order dierentials on s lead to rst order deforma-

tions of complex structure, realizing g deformations of complex structure. second, upon

perturbing by such a complex structure deformation, the only curves which survive the

deformation are those which are located at zeros of the associated section of ks . thus

generally we will nd a set of isolated curves with only massive chiral multiplets. however,

at codimension one in the complex structure moduli space, zeros of the section of ks will

6 this is closely related to the formula for the superpotential in [40]. fixing a point s0  s, then
a path from s0 to s  s sweeps out a 3-chain in m , which can be integrated over a holomorphic

3-form, dening a function of s. if we dene the potential this way in our context, there is a

multiplicative ambiguity from the choice of holomorphic 3-form, reected in the description in the
main text by the choice of isomorphism h (2,1)(m )  h 1(m, tm ).

7 if m arises from batyrevs construction of calabi-yau toric hypersurfaces by blowing up the
curve s of a1 singularities, these deformations of the complex structure of m are those which are

not realizable by polynomial/toric deformations.

11

coincide and the resulting curve will have higher multiplicity: their deformations will be

massless but obstructed at some higher, non-trivial order.

a superpotential which reects this geometry be constructed as follows. let the
complex structure deformation be induced as above from an element   h (1,0)(s). at
 = 0 the curve lives in a family which is precisely s so that a deformation of a curve at
z  s described by n can also be written as an element   t (1,0)
the superpotential as:

s. one may then write

z

w (; ) = h, i +

1
2!

hh, i, i +

1
3!

hhh, i, i, i +   

(2.19)

here  is the supereld associated to ,  is the the dolbeault operator on s and h, i is the

usual inner product between forms and vectors. it is understood that one is to evaluate

the inner product at the point p  s around which one is expanding, and convergence

follows from the convergence of the power series representation of . for s of genus g,

the expansion (2.19) can be truncated after 2g  1 terms without changing the location

and structure of the critical points. the closed string complex structure moduli act as

parameters in the superpotential, through the choice of .

let us explore the properties of (2.19) slightly more explicitly, to illustrate its features.

consider expanding (2.19) about some point on s where  has an expansion in a local

complex coordinate z

  zndz.

(2.20)

we can represent the scalar eld, which we are thinking of as a tangent vector to s, as
 

z with  complex. then, expanding (2.19) around z = 0, we nd

w ()  n+1.

for n = 0 (i.e. around generic points on s) there is no supersymmetric vacuum, while for

n > 0 there are supersymmetric vacua. for n = 1, the vacuum is massive; for n > 1 there

is a massless eld, and the vacuum splits into n1 massive vacua upon small perturbations

of the complex structure of m (just as in the situation of (2.15)). for s of genus g, 

will generically have 2g  2 isolated zeroes, giving rise to 2g  2 massive supersymmetric

vacua at generic points in the space of background closed string parameters. at various

codimensions in the closed string moduli space, as one further specializes the multiplicities

of the zeroes of , these 2g  2 vacua merge in various combinations to yield theories with

massless elds obstructed by higher order potentials.

12

a simpler way to write (2.19) locally on s is to write  = df for a locally dened
function on s. locally, such an f can be thought of as a function of . then we simply

have

w (, ) = f().

while this formula is simpler in form than (2.19), it does not capture the global structure

of the moduli space s.

the above considerations are easily adapted to the more general situation considered

in [39], where an an singularity is bered over s. if we denote the collapsing curve as
c1  . . .  cn , then for each cj we get g deformations of complex structure arising as
in (2.18), yielding gn complex moduli. but we also have connected subsets ck  ck+1 
. . .  ck+r to which the above analysis applies. but since the rst map in (2.18) depends
linearly on the individual cj, including these connected subsets does not give rise to any
new complex structure deformations. so we get n (n + 1)/2 superpotentials of the form

(2.19) on n (n + 1)/2 copies of s, each of which depends on the gn complex moduli (only

g of which appear in any one superpotential). each of these superpotentials controls the

obstructions to deforming curves of the form ck  ck+1  . . .  ck+r, and 2g  2 curves of
this type survive a generic deformation of complex structure.

3. disc instantons

type ii string theory in the presence of a d-brane on a given special lagrangian

submanifold has the same net number of worldsheet (and spacetime) supersymmetries as a

heterotic (0, 2) model; and as with heterotic (0,2) models, the nonrenormalization theorem

for the spacetime superpotential is spoiled by worldsheet instanton eects.

in light of

results for (0, 2) models [12], it is fair to ask whether the generic d6-brane conguration

is nonperturbatively stable.

we expect direct calculations of instanton eects to be dicult. but instantons in

supersymmetric theories generate fermion zero modes which provide selection rules for

cft correlators. using the rule of thumb that allowed terms are generic, we will see
that three-cycles with an isolated disc instanton are destabilized nonperturbatively.8 the

argument is quite similar to that for heterotic (0, 2) models.

8 holomorphic discs ending on special lagrangian cycles of calabi-yau threefolds are generi-

cally isolated [22].

13

the easiest way to count the zero modes for an isolated holomorphic disc is to begin

with the amplitude for the sphere and get the disc by orbifolding with respect to a real

involution, which will cut the number of zero modes in half. for an isolated sphere,

the superconformal symmetry together with an index theorem shows that there are four

holomorphic zero modes and four antiholomorphic zero modes [12,41], so we expect four

fermion zero modes on the disc.

consider a single d6-brane wrapping a special lagrangian three-cycle . the complex

modulus  = w+ia is associated with a cycle   h1(), using the notation and denitions

of 2.1. here we assume the isolated instanton corresponds to a disc d such that d =

 and d has minimal area. the most obvious, lowest-order term consistent with our

perturbative nonrenormalization theorem is the exponential

w () = e/

(3.1)

where  is the supereld corresponding to . this will clearly destabilize the wrapped

d6-brane, at least locally.

we will search for the superpotential (3.1) by examining small uctuations j away

from the above classical conguration 0 = . here j is an index in h1(). the lowest-

order terms directly computable via a cft correlator will be those arising from the cubic

term

we will focus on the term

ijke/

.

scubic = cz d4xijfk

(3.2)

where fk is the auxiliary eld in k. note that in the reduction to four dimensions, the

operators above are arrived at by contour integrals in , so c is proportional to a triple

integral.

the vertex operators which enter in the calculation of (3.2) are easily presented in the

covariant rns formalism [42] (c.f. [20] for a general discussion of the cft calculation of

open-string superpotential terms). the (1)-picture zero-momentum vertex operator for

the scalar component j is:

v (1),j


= j

(x)e 

14

(3.3)

where  is the bosonized superconformal ghost [42], j
 is the harmonic one-form (associated
to j) on the 3-cycle, and  is a fermion with dirichlet boundary conditions. the (0)-
picture vertex operator for the auxiliary eld is [43]:

v (0),j
f

=  (x)j

g .

(3.4)

here  is the the (3, 0) form, with the coordinates (but not the indices) restricted to .
equation (3.4) is obtained by applying the unit spectral ow operator  as in
[43,10].

the three-point function

hv (0),i



v (1),j


v (1),k
f

i

(3.5)

has the correct fermion and ghost number to be nonvanishing; in an instanton background,

the four fermions in the vertex operators in (3.5) can soak up the relevant zero modes.

note that we are computing the integrand of the triple integral dening c in eq. (3.2).

since holomorphic maps will preserve the order of marked points on the boundary, the

ordering of (3.5) will be xed for a given set of positions in this integrand.

this superpotential term can equivalently be computed as a correlator in the topolog-

ical a-model open string theory [22,20]. here one is computing the contribution to (3.5)

(or more familiarly, a yukawa coupling related to (3.5) by supersymmetry) in a sector

where the map of the worldsheet to spacetime is a disc whose boundary    is topolog-

ically nontrivial. the path integral localizes onto the space of holomorphic maps, and the

contribution is

i i i

dx1dx2dx3ai(x1)aj(x2)ak(x3)

(3.6)

(suppressed by the exponential of the area of the holomorphic disc), where the gauge elds
ai can be identied with the 1-forms i in (3.3). once again, for given positions in the
integrand, the ordering of the vertex operators for ai,j,k must match the ordering of x1,2,3
respectively.

the result is that the superpotential (3.1) is generic for an isolated instanton. with

some interpretation added, this statement matches a calculation in ref.

[22]. there it is

shown that the string eld theory for the topological open string a-model is equivalent

to chern-simons theory on  with instanton corrections to the action. this instanton

correction can be interpreted as precisely the superpotential we have calculated, as it

generates the topological correlator we have discussed. note that in [22], the dependence

15

on the area of the disc was added as a convergence factor, whereas in our discussion it is

required by spacetime supersymmetry.

the topological string theory representation of the superpotential allows us to write

the full worldsheet instanton contribution to the cft correlator (3.5). first, note that

while we have discussed ai as a harmonic form, we can modify it by adding a brst-trivial
piece to give it support only in an arbitrarily small neighborhood around a two-cycle i
which is poincare dual to i. the result is as follows. denote by d{na}
{ml}(i, j, k) the number of
holomorphic maps from a disc to m where the image d  m has the following properties:9

i) [d] = pl ml l.
ii) the vertex operators v i,j,k are mapped in cyclic order to intersections of  = d with
i,j,k respectively.10
iii) d pl mldl, which is a closed two cycle in m , is in the homology class pa naka.

then, the three-point function receives a contribution

f v j

 v k

hv i

 i  xml,na0

(cid:18)zd

i(cid:19) (cid:18)zd

j(cid:19) (cid:18)zd

k(cid:19) 

 d{na}

{ml}(i, j, k)

b1()

yl=1

eml(wl+ial)/

h1,1(m )

ya=1

enata

(3.7)

from disc instantons, where ta denotes the integral of the kahler form over ka (and for
simplicity we are setting the closed string background b-eld to zero). although we have

mostly used the language of the topological theory in deriving this result, it also holds for

the three-point function in the physical theory.

the same kind of instanton sum also appears in [23], where the interpretation in terms

of a superpotential for wrapped branes (and in particular the fact that these eects serve

to obstruct the deformations of branes wrapped on special lagrangian cycles) was not

discussed.

9 as with numbers of rational curves in mirror symmetry, the correct notion of d when there
are families of discs and/or including multiple covers would require much further discussion; we

will be content here to be schematic. a proposal for the multiple cover contribution has recently

been worked out by h. ooguri and c. vafa [44].

10 one has to be careful if two vertex operators correspond to the same cycle. the support
of a can be made arbitrarily small but nite. in this way nonzero contributions still generically

come from the vertex operator insertions mapping to dierent points in .

16

coupling to closed string background elds

it is clear from the form of the three-point functions (3.7) that the superpotential de-

pends on the closed string background kahler moduli, which enter through the worldsheet

instanton action eta . the dependence of the disc instanton generated superpotential on

kahler moduli, and the fact that it does not depend on the background complex structure

moduli in the iia theory, is consistent with the nonrenormalization result of [20].

we can directly probe the dependence of the superpotential on closed string moduli

by computing the cft correlator

hv (1,1),a

k

v (0),j
f

i

(3.8)

where v (1,1),a

k

is the vertex operator for a closed string kahler deformation. again,

the vertex operators in (3.8) can absorb the fermion zero modes which are present in

an instanton background. in fact, the mirror couplings of open strings to background

complex moduli in the superpotential generically exist at tree level in the b-model [20] 

this is clear from the examples of 2.2, where a small perturbation of complex structure

can obstruct families of holomorphic curves. the couplings (3.8) must then similarly exist,

but due to peccei-quinn symmetries they should arise at the non-perturbative level in

both the closed and open string worldsheet instanton expansions.

v a
k represents an integral (1,1) form a which could be used to perturb the kahler

form of m . we can choose a to have support only innitesimally near the four-cycle
la  m poincare dual to ka. then, (3.8) has the expansion

hv (1,1),a

k

v (0),j
f

i  xml,nb0

(cid:18)zd

a(cid:19)(cid:18)zd

j(cid:19) 

 d{nb}

{ml}(a, j)

b1()

yl=1

eml(wl+ial)/

h1,1(m )

yb=1

enbtb

(3.9)

where d{nb}

through la at the insertion point of v a

{ml}(a, j) counts the number of holomorphic maps to discs d  m which pass
f , and which in

k and j at the insertion point of v j

addition have [d] = pl mll and [d pl mldl] = pb nbkb.

17

4. discussion

space-lling d-branes wrapping supersymmetric cycles in calabi-yau manifolds pro-

vide one of the most natural classes of n = 1 supersymmetric models in string theory,

and are attractive as concrete realizations of brane world scenarios. in this paper, we

have shown that the theories which arise from d6 branes wrapping supersymmetric three-

cycles are in many ways analogous to heterotic (0,2) models. in particular, although they
are supersymmetric to all orders in , nonperturbative worldsheet eects can generate

superpotentials and, perhaps, break supersymmetry.

these models dier from heterotic theories, however, in that mirror symmetry provides

a dual description where the non-perturbative superpotential is computable at tree level

in sigma model perturbation theory. this should be a powerful tool: most known dualities

of n = 1 models, like heterotic/f-theory duality, relate instanton computations to other

instanton computations (with worldsheet instantons mapping to euclidean wrapped branes

of various sorts [17]). the present situation is considerably rosier, and it will be very

interesting to exploit this to sum up instantons in this class of n = 1 string vacua.

the cases discussed in 2.2 (on the b-model side) should provide ideal test cases. in

each case, one can realize (on a 5-brane wrapping a holomorphic curve) a theory with

massless chiral elds, constrained by a higher order superpotential. the mirror d6 theory

should provide us with an example of a brane wrapping a supersymmetric three-cycle 

with b1() > 0, but without a moduli space of the expected dimension. by the nonrenor-
malization theorem of 2.1, the moduli space on the a-model side must be lifted by a

disc instanton generated superpotential. work to explicitly construct the mirror cycles,

and compute the relevant superpotentials, is under way [21]. note that nonperturbative

superpotentials which obstruct deformations of branes wrapped on three-cycles can resolve

the puzzle for mirror symmetry raised by thomas in [45]. on the other hand, we expect
e.g. the supersymmetric t 3 used in [5] to derive mirror symmetry will survive instanton

corrections. in the mirror picture this is obvious (since deformations of a point are unob-

structed), and in the direct analysis presumably any holomorphic discs with boundary on
the t 3 would come in families and cancel in their contribution to the superpotential.

in the regime where there are small holomorphic discs, new interesting phenomena

should also occur. for instance, there are arguments in the mathematics literature that in

some cases the classical moduli spaces of special lagrangian three-cycles will be manifolds

with boundary (see 5 of [28]). this cannot be the case for physical applications of the

18

sort we have discussed, involving wrapped branes in string theory. the moduli space

(including wilson line degrees of freedom) is that of a 4d n = 1 supersymmetric d-

brane eld theory. assuming supersymmetry isnt broken, the quantum moduli space of

supersymmetric ground states must be a kahler manifold; there is no known dynamics that

can create boundaries at codimension one in the moduli space of 4d n = 1 supersymmetric

theories. the argument of [28] involves the fact that a holomorphic disc with boundary

in the three-cycle is becoming very small; therefore, it is likely that some analogue of the

phenomena discussed in [14] is occurring. just as one can use theta angles to go around

the boundaries of the classical kahler cone and nd intrinsically stringy landau-ginzburg

phases of calabi-yau compactications, it seems likely that one can use wilson lines to go

around the would-be boundary of moduli space discussed in [28] and nd new, quantum

supersymmetric three-cycles.

acknowledgements

we would like to thank p. aspinwall, d. brace, h. clemens, d.-e. diaconescu, m.

douglas, s. gukov, a. klemm, g. moore, d. morrison, t. pantev, r. plesser, e. silverstein

and c. vafa for interesting discussions about related subjects. this work was initiated at

the aspen center for physics. s. kachru and a. lawrence would like to acknowledge

the kind hospitality of n. seiberg and the institute for advanced study while the bulk

of this work was carried out. s. kachru was supported in part by the generosity of the

ambrose monell foundation, an a.p. sloan foundation fellowship and a doe oji award;

s. katz was supported in part by nsa grants mda904-98-1-0009 and mda904-00-1-0052;

a. lawrence was supported in part by the doe under contract de-ac03-76f00515, and

in part by the nsf via grant phy94-07194 through the institute for theoretical physics;

and j. mcgreevy was supported in part by the department of defense ndseg fellowship

program.

19

references

[1] s. shenker, another length scale in string theory?, hep-th/9509132.
[2] m.r. douglas, d. kabat, p.pouliot and s. shenker, d-branes and short distances in

string theory, nucl. phys. b485 (1997) 85, hep-th/9608024.

[3] m. kontsevich, homological algebra of mirror symmetry, proc. of the 1994 inter-
national congress of mathematicians, birkhauser (boston) 1995; alg-geom/9411018.
[4] d.r. morrison, mirror symmetry and the type ii string, nucl. phys. b proc. suppl.

46 (1996) 146, hep-th/9512016.

[5] a. strominger, s.-t. yau and e. zaslow, mirror symmetry is t-duality, nucl. phys.

b479 (1996) 243, hep-th/9606040.

[6] k. becker, m. becker and a. strominger, five-branes, membranes and nonperturba-

tive string theory, nucl. phys. b456 (1995) 130, hep-th/9507158.

[7] h. ooguri, y. oz and z. yin, d-branes on calabi-yau spaces and their mirrors,

nucl. phys. b477 (1996) 407, hep-th/9606112.

[8] j.a. harvey and g. moore, on the algebras of bps states, comm. math. phys.

197 (1998) 489, hep-th/9609017.

[9] e. witten, new issues in manifolds of su (3) holonomy, nucl. phys. b268 (1986)

79.

[10] j. distler and b. greene, aspects of (2,0) string compactications, nucl. phys.

b304 (1988) 1.

[11] x.-g. wen and e. witten, world-sheet instantons and the peccei-quinn symmetry,

phys. lett. b166 (1986) 397.

[12] m. dine, n. seiberg, x.-g. wen and e. witten, non-perturbative eects on the
string worldsheet i,ii, nucl. phys. b278 (1986) 769; nucl. phys. b289 (1987) 319.
[13] e. silverstein and e. witten, criteria for conformal invariance of (0,2) models,

nucl. phys. b444 (1995) 161, hep-th/9503212.

[14] e. witten, phases of n=2 theories in two-dimensions, nucl. phys. b403 (1993)

159, hep-th/9301042.

[15] j. distler and s. kachru, (0,2) landau-ginzburg theory, nucl. phys. b413 (1994)

213, hep-th/9309110.

[16] n. seiberg, electric-magnetic duality in supersymmetric non-abelian gauge the-

ories, nucl. phys. b435 (1995) 129, hep-th/9411149;
k. intriligator and n. seiberg, lectures on supersymmetric gauge theories and
electric-magnetic duality, hep-th/9509066.

[17] e. witten, nonperturbative superpotentials in string theory, nucl. phys. b474

(1996) 343, hep-th/9604030.

[18] p. candelas, x. de la ossa, p. green and l. parkes, a pair of calabi-yau manifolds

as an exactly soluble superconformal theory, nucl. phys. b359 (1991) 21.

20

[19] s. kachru, n. seiberg and e. silverstein, susy gauge dynamics and singularities

of 4d n = 1 string vacua, nucl. phys. b480 (1996) 170, hep-th/9605036;
s. kachru and e. silverstein, singularities, gauge dynamics and nonperturbative
superpotentials in string theory, nucl. phys. b482 (1996) 92, hep-th/9608194.
i. brunner, m.r. douglas, a. lawrence and c. romelsberger, d-branes on the quin-
tic, hep-th/9906200.

[20]

[21] work in progress.
[22] e. witten, chern-simons gauge theory as a string theory, in the floer memorial

volume, h. hofer et. al., eds., birkhauser (1995), boston, hep-th/9207094.

[23] c. vafa, extending mirror conjecture to calabi-yau with bundles, hep-th/9804131.
[24] k. fukaya, floer homology and mirror symmetry i, 1999 kyoto preprint, and

references therein.

[25] r. mclean, deformations of calibrated submanifolds, duke univ. phd thesis, duke

preprint 96-01: see www.math.duke.edu/preprints/1996.html.

[26] n.j. hitchin, the moduli space of special lagrangian submanifolds, dg-ga/9711002.
[27] s. kachru and j. mcgreevy, supersymmetric three-cycles and supersymmetry break-

ing, hep-th/9908135.

[28] d. joyce, on counting special lagrangian homology 3-spheres, hep-th/9907013.
[29] k. kodaira, a theorem of completeness of characteristic systems for analytic
families of compact submanifolds of compact manifolds, ann. math. 75 (1962)
146.

[30] d. burns, some background and examples in deformation theory, in complex man-
ifold techniques in theoretical physics, d. lerner and p. sommers eds., pitman
(1979).

[31] p. candelas, x. de la ossa, a. font, s. katz and d.r. morrison, mirror symmetry

for two-parameter models  i, nucl. phys. b416 (1994) 481, hep-th/9308083.

[32] s. katz, on the niteness of rational curves on quintic threefolds, comp. math. 60,

151 (1986).

[33] s. katz, rational curves on calabi-yau threefolds, in mirror symmetry i (s.-
t. yau, ed.), american mathematical society and international press (1999); alg-
geom/9312009.

[34] e. witten, topological sigma models, comm. math. phys. 118 (1988) 411.
[35] m. reid, minimal models of canonical 3-folds, pp. 131-180, advanced studies in

pure mathematics 1, ed. s. iitaka, kinokuniya (1983).

[36] r. friedman, simultaneous resolution of threefold double points, math. ann. 274

(1986), 671689.

[37] j. bryan, s. katz, and n.c. leung, multiple covers and the integrality conjecture

for rational curves in calabi-yau threefolds, math.ag/9911056.

21

[38] m. bershadsky, v. sadov and c. vafa, d-branes and topological field theories,

nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 420, hep-th/9511222.

[39] s. katz, d.r. morrison and m.r. plesser, enhanced gauge symmetry in type ii string

theory, nucl. phys. b477 (1996) 105, hep-th/9601108.

[40] e. witten, branes and the dynamics of qcd, nucl. phys. b507 (1997) 658-690,

hep-th/9706109.

[41] j. distler, resurrecting (0, 2) compactications, phys. lett. 188b (1987) 431.
[42] d. friedan, e.j. martinec and s.h. shenker, conformal invariance, supersymmetry

and string theory, nucl. phys. b271 (1986) 93.

[43] j.j. atick, l.j. dixon and a. sen, string calculation of fayet-iliopolous d-terms in

arbitrary supersymmetric compactications, nucl. phys. b292 (1987) 109.

[44] h. ooguri and c. vafa, knot invariants and topological strings, hep-th/9912123.
[45] r.p. thomas, an obstructed bundle on a calabi-yau 3-fold, math.ag/9903034.

22

