9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
8

 

 
 

2
v
8
5
0
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

on rg-ow and the cosmological constant.

erik verlinde

physics department, princeton university, princeton, nj 08544

abstract. from the ads/cft correspondence we learn that the eective action of
a strongly coupled large n gauge theory satises the hamilton-jacobi equation of 5d
gravity. using an analogy with the relativistic point particle, i construct a low energy
eective action that includes the einstein action and obeys a callan-symanzik-type
rg-ow equation. the ow equation implies that under quite general conditions the
einstein equation admits a at space-time solution, but other solutions with non-zero
cosmological constant are also allowed. i discuss the geometric interpretation of this
result in the context of warped compactications. this contribution is an expansion
of the talk presented at the conference and is based on work reported in [1] and [2].

1. introduction

the problem of the cosmological constant involves high energy as well as low energy
physics. it is not just sucient to have a zero cosmological constant at energies near the
planck scale, one also needs to explain the absence of vacuum contributions at much
lower energy scales. this low energy aspect of the cosmological constant problem is the
most puzzling, and seems to require a fundamental new insight in the basic principles of
eective eld theory, the renormalization group and gravity. string theory/m-theory, in
whatever form it will eventually be formulated, has to provide a solution to this problem
if it wants to earn a status as a true fundamental theory of our universe. this resolution
may depend on specic details of the underlying fundamental theory, but, whatever the
mechanism is at high energies, it must manifest itself in some way in low energy terms
as well.

so let us ask ourselves: what new insights did we get from string theory in
recent years that could shed new light on this question? clearly the most striking
progress that has been made is the growing evidence of an intimate connection between
quantum phenomena in gauge theory and classical aspects of gravity. famous recent
examples are d-branes, black hole entropy counting, matrix theory, and the ads/cft
correspondence. at a deeper level these fundamental breakthroughs in string theory
 and even less recent ones such as the green-schwarz anomaly cancellation  all
seem to go back to the old observation that open string loops are dual to closed
string propagators. it is a logical possibility that a quantum gauge theory/ classical
gravity connection of this kind also exists in our low energy world, and plays a role in
a cancellation mechanism for the cosmological constant.

on rg-ow and the cosmological constant.

2

2. the holographic correspondence and the hamilton-jacobi equation.

the clearest statement about the duality between gauge theory and gravity is made in
the framework of the ads/cft correspondence [3]. the statement is:
in the strong
coupling and large n limit certain 4-d gauge theories have a dual descriptions in terms
of 5-d supergravity theory dened on a space with a 4-d boundary. one of the main
ingredients in this correspondence is the identication of the classical supergravity
action, with specied boundary values for the metric g(x) and the scalars i(x), with
the generating function s0 of gauge theory correlators of gauge invariant observables
oi.

doi1(x1) . . .oin(xn)e =

1
g



i1(x1)



. . .

1
g

in(xn) s0 [  , g ].

(1)

it is a standard fact, well known in classical mechanics, that the classical action as a
function of the boundary values satises the hamilton-jacobi equation.
in a theory
with gravity this is a bit more subtle, since in that case the equations of motion imply
that the hamiltonian vanishes. so instead of a h-j equation there is a h-j constraint.
generically, the h-j equation is obtained by replacing the canonical momenta by the
derivatives of the action with respect to the conjugate variables. to write the h-j
constraint we introduce the bracket notation

ns0,s0o 

1

g   1

3(cid:16)g s0
g(cid:17)2

s0
g

s0
g 

1
2

s0
i

i!
s0



(2)

the variations are all with respect to the elds at the same point x. hence, the bracket
 which can also be dened for two dierent actions s1 and s2  is a local density on
space-time. in this notation the h-j constraint reads

ns0,s0o = ghv () + r +

1
2

()2i

(3)

the right hand side represents the local lagrangian density of the 5-d gravity theory with
potential v truncated to 4-d elds. the h-j equation (3) determines the behavior of
s0 under rescalings of the metric, and thus may be interpreted as an rg-ow equation.
indeed, it reduces to the standard callan-symanzik equation in a certain limit [1], and
it is in full accordance with earlier ideas on the holographic rg-ow [4]. the expression
(3) has obvious similarities with the 4d einstein action.
it has, however, a dierent
interpretation. the potential v () represents the vacuum energy contribution due to an
innitesimal rg-step. the other terms are interpreted in a similar way as modications
of newtons constant and the scalar coupling constants.

the h-j equation is derived from the classical 5-d einstein equations, and hence it is
limited to certain special 4-d gauge theories for which this approximation is reliable. now
let us for the purpose of this note consider a universe described by such a gauge theory,
but then coupled to gravity. is there something that the h-j constraint could teach us
about the cosmological constant in that universe? the action s0 is the eective action
induced by integrating out the gauge theory, and has to be added to the usual einstein
action possibly with cosmological term. the problem of the cosmological constant

on rg-ow and the cosmological constant.

3

arises because there is no immediate reason why the cosmological term contained in
the einstein action would cancel the vacuum energy of the gauge theory. the two
actions usually dont know much about each other. in this note we want to argue that
there actually is a natural relation between the einstein action and the eective action
of the gauge theory. to motivate the proposed relation i will use an analogy with the
classical relativistic point particle. so let us, as an inter-mezzo, briey discuss some
facts about the h-j equation for point particles.

3. inter-mezzo: hamilton-jacobi theory of the point particle.

i

the non-relativistic hamilton-jacobi equation may be regarded as
the wkb
approximation to the schrodinger equation, in which one writes the wave-function as
h s and keeps only the leading order in h. for a relativistic point particle one
 = e
can do the same for the klein-gordon equation. hence, the h-j equation for a free
relativistic point particle takes the form

1
c2 (ts0)2  (xs0)2 = m2c2

(4)

once the classical action s0(t, x) is known as a function of x at a given time t, one
can use the h-j equation to determine it for later or earlier times. the solution is not
unique, but depends on a choice of boundary conditions. for example, the classical
action for a trajectory from (x, t) to (y, t ) is

s0(t, x) = mcqc2(t  t)2  (y  x)2.

(5)

one easily veries that it satises the h-j equation.
it contains a rest-energy part
that diverges in the non-relativistic limit c  ; we have s0  mc2(t  t) +
m(y  x)2/2(t  t). we will nd that this rest-energy part plays an analogous role
as the vacuum energy of the 4d gauge theory.

the coordinates x and t represent the starting point of a trajectory, and should not
be regarded as variables to which the action has to be extremized: indeed, putting the
variations of the action s0 to zero would lead to nonsensical equations of motion. to
obtain an action with a sensible equation of motion, we should add the action of another
trajectory which has (x, t) as its end-point. let us choose as the additional term the
classical action se of a trajectory with a given velocity v and energy e

se(t, x) = e(cid:18)t 

v  x
c2 (cid:19) .

(6)

to obtain consistent equations of motion, we should demand that this action se satises
the same h-j equation. one easily checks that this gives the usual relativistic formula
for the energy e.

let us now consider the equations of motion that follow from total action

s(t, x) = se(t, x) + s0(t, x)

(7)

on rg-ow and the cosmological constant.

4

the equations for x are solved by the classical trajectory x(t) = y + v(t t ). somewhat
unexpectedly, the equation for t is automatically satised once we solve the equations
for x. this can be understood from the fact that the total action s satises a ow
equation. when we insert s0 = s  se again in the h-j equation, and use the explicit
form of se we obtain

(t + v  x)s = 

1
2m

(xs)2 +

1
2mc2 (ts)2

(8)

this ow equation ensures that when (x, t) is a point on a classical trajectory, that
(x + v, t + ) also is a point on that same classical trajectory.

finally, from the explicit expressions for s0 and se it follows that when we take
the limit c   while keeping v xed, the term mc2t in s0 is canceled by the leading
rest-energy part of e. this cancellation is automatically guaranteed by the fact that
both actions satisfy the same h-j equation. it is this kind of cancellation that we also
are

4. the einstein action and the rg ow equations.

i will now repeat the same steps for the h-j equation of 5d-gravity. first let us identify
the corresponding features of equation (4) and the more elaborate h-j equation (3) of
the 5d gravity theory. the analogue of the time t is obviously the conformal mode of the
metric, while the coordinates x represent the couplings  and the o-diagonal modes
of the metric. the role of the speed of light c is played by the (square root of) the
potential v . this potential represents the 5-d cosmological constant, and is also related
to the 4d vacuum energy contained in s0.

the magnitude of the vacuum energy term in s0, which is the analogue of the
energy term for the point particle, is restricted by the h-j equation. it is expected to be
sv , where ms denotes the cut-o scale the (square of) ms, which we
of the order m4
identify with the string scale, plays the role of the mass m in the point-particle analogy.
so removing the cut-o is analogous to taking the innite mass limit.

the large vacuum energy contained in the action s is not yet a point of concern,
since the action s0 is not an action that has to be extremized, in particular not with
respect to the conformal mode of the metric. to obtain sensible eld equations we do
like in the point particle case, and add an action se of the form

(9)

se = z g(cid:16)u() +

1

2() hr + ()2i + . . .(cid:17)

we denote this action by se, since we will indeed identify it with the einstein action.
the geometric interpretation of se in the ads/cft context will be explained below.
 the cut-o scale does not appear explicitly in our formulas, because it has been absorbed in the
metric through a substitution g  m2

s g.

on rg-ow and the cosmological constant.

5

for the moment we just follow what we did in the point-particle case, and require that
se satises the same h-j equation as s0. thus we have

nse,seo = ghv () + r +

1
2

()2i.

where we again used the bracket notation (2). this equation produces certain relations
between the 4-d potential u, newtons constant , and the 5-d potential v . following
the same argumentation as before we construct the total action

s = s0 + se

(11)
the fact that s0 and se both satisfy the same h-j equation is now expected to lead to
cancellations between the vacuum energy terms, just like the rest-energies canceled for
the point-particle. we will return to this point below.

the action s also satises a ow equation. by inserting s0 = s  se in the h-j

equation we get

(10)

(12)

2nse,so = ns,so

where we used the bracket notation for the case of two dierent actions. just like in the
point particle case we want to identify the left-hand-side with the ow of the action s.
to make the correspondence with an rg-ow equation more explicit we introduce the
quantities

1
g

se
g = (3g 

1
2

)

with  traceless and
se
i = i

1
g

(13)

(14)

the quantities ,  and i represent the ow velocities of the metric and the scalar
elds under the rg-transformations. note that the o-diagonal mode of the metric
also has been given a beta-function . this means that the geometry in general may
depend on the rg-scale in a way that diers from just a rescaling of the metric. in
terms of these quantities the ow equation becomes

(cid:16)2g 

g   

g  i 

i(cid:17)s = ns,so

(15)

here the right hand side represent a kind of anomaly term, which however vanishes on
shell. this equation is analogous to the point particle ow equation and guarantees that
the solutions to the eld equations describe rg-trajectories rather then particular eld
congurations. namely, if (g, i) solves the eld equations then (g + g, i + i)
also represents a solutions with

g =  (2g + )

i = i()

(16)

where  is an arbitrary innitesimal space-time dependent function. note that in this
framework it is natural to consider space-time dependent rg-ow equations, which
reects the fact that the formalism descents from 5d gravity.

on rg-ow and the cosmological constant.

6

the bracket of se with itself can be expressed entirely in the -factor and the

beta-functions i and . we have

nse,seo = 12 2(cid:18)1 

1
48

 

1
24

 2

i(cid:19)

(17)

thus the h-j constraint (10) gives a condition on the quantities on the right hand side.
the similarity with the point-particle case should be obvious. in fact, the form of this
relation suggests that there exist a lorentz type of symmetry that acts on the metric,
the scalar elds and on the beta-functions. the role of this symmetry is not yet clear
to us.

5. the einstein equations and the cosmological constant.

the eld equations that follow from the total eective action are the einstein equation
and the scalar eld equation

1

1
2

2 (cid:18)r 
(cid:18) 2

2i(cid:19) + 2

rg(cid:19) +

1
2

u()g = t 

 + h t i
3 hr + ()2i = iu + h oi i

i

(18)

(19)

where t 
 denotes the stress tensor of the scalar elds and hti and hoii are the
expectation values of the stress energy tensor and the operator oi in the gauge theory
to which the scalar eld i couples. as we just mentioned, the ow equation implies
that once we have a solution at a particular scale there is a solution along the whole
rg-trajectory. furthermore, the equations for the conformal mode of the metric are
automatically implied once we have solved the other eld equations.

these other equations do not depend on the cosmological constant, and naively one
may think therefore, that one can simply shift the cosmological constant and still have
a solution. this is not a valid procedure, however, since the solution of the other eld
equations determines the cosmological constant, and not visa versa  see also [7]. to
explain this point in more detail, let us have a closer look at the trace of the einstein
equation

1
2 r = 2u()  h t 

 i

(20)

where we have taken the elds i to be space-time independent. here the two terms
on right-hand-side together represents the cosmological constant. at rst sight there
appears to be no reason to suspect a relation between these two terms. however, in our
approach there is additional information in the form of the h-j equation. it is important
to realize that the h-j equation is not an equation of motion, but merely a condition
on the variations of both the s0 and se part of the action. so we may consider this
condition for any eld conguration, including a preferred one, such as at space with

on rg-ow and the cosmological constant.

7

constant scalar elds. in this case we nd the following identities for u and ht 
the h-j equations

i from

2u() = q12v () + 6(iu)2
i = q12v () + 6hoii2

ht 

for r = 0 and i = 0.

(21)

(22)

and

to derive this result we did not make use of the equations of motion. but now we
observe that when we do insert the equation of motion for , which for constant elds
reads

iu + hoii = 0

(23)

that both terms indeed cancel! however, this is no surprise, since we already knew that
once the other eld equations are solved that also the trace of the einstein equation
holds . indeed, in a similar way one could argue that there always is a solution to the
eld equations for any value of the cosmological constant. this is natural from the point
of view of the local ow equation, because metrics with dierent constant curvature are
related by a conformal rescaling.
in other words: there is whole family of solutions,
all related by the local rg-ow, among which there is in general one that looks like
at space. so even though we have not resolved the cosmological constant problem
completely, we did make important progress: we have now the possibility of having a
at space solution. this leaves the question of why nature would choose that particular
solution and not some other value for the cosmological constant. the answer to this
question requires more physical input, such as the boundary conditions in the uv and
in the ir. i will not say much about that here, and refer to [2] for more details on this
point.

6. geometric interpretation in terms of warped compactications.

the equations that we described have a natural geometric interpretation as a
compactication of the holographic ads/cft correspondence.
in the usual non-
compact ads/cft set-up gravity is decoupled from the dual boundary theory, because
the graviton modes that extend all the way to the uv boundary are not normalizable.
however, as pointed out in [5], this situation changes as soon as one truncates the uv
region by introducing a brane-like structure (a planck brane). as a result there will
exist normalizable modes of the 5-d metric that couple as 4-d gravitons to the dual
gauge theory with the correct gravitational strength [5, 6].

 this assumes that a solution exists. there are arguments that in a theory with an invariance of the
type (16) not all equations can be satised, unless one ne tunes the parameters in the action [7]. i
believe that these arguments do not apply here, since it would mean that there does not exist a solution
to the 5-d einstein equations for generic boundary conditions.

on rg-ow and the cosmological constant.

8



10



ir



uv

r = r

0



uv

r = r1

 ir

the warped compactication manifold is split up in two parts 0 and e by cutting at a
radial location r close to the end of the tube, or at a location r = r1 inside the tube.

instead of cutting o the uv-region with a real planck brane one can alternatively
consider the holographic region as a part of a bigger warped compactication manifold
with geometry

ds2 = a2(r)dxdx + hmn(r)drmdrn.

(24)

where the fth coordinate has become one of the coordinates of a compact 6-manifold
k6. this kind of warped geometry naturally arises in a class of type iib string
compactications based on type iib with a large number of d3 branes. these d3-
branes wrap the 4-d uncompactied world, and are localized as point-like objects inside
the k6. when a relatively large number of d3-branes are located near or at the same
point one typically gets a warped geometry of the kind (24), in which warp factor in
the neighbourhood of that point essentially depends only the radial distance r from the
d3-branes. by cutting the warped compactication manifold at some nite value of
r one splits the manifold in two parts: one part, which we call 0 describes the near
horizon region of the d3 branes, and the other part e the rest of the compactication
manifold.
in this geometric picture the two actions s0 and se can be identied with
the classical supergravity action of that part of the eld conguration that extends in
0 or in e.

let me now explain how the results in the previous subsection t in this geometric
picture. the 4d metric and elds i represent the values of the higher dimensional metric
and eld i at a particular slice in the geometry. the ow equation is a reection of
the arbitrariness in the choice of that slice. the generic existence of a at space-time
solution is due to the fact that it is possible to choose slices for which the 5d cosmological
term is entirely by the expansion (or contraction) of the warp factor a(r) and the ow
velocities of the scalar elds. the eective 4d cosmological constant is

 = a2v ()  12 a2 +

1
2

a2 2

i

(25)

where the dot denote dierentiation with respect to the radial coordinate. a cancellation
between these three terms seems to require ne tuning. but one easily checks that, for
space-time independent elds i, once these terms cancel at one value of r, they remain

on rg-ow and the cosmological constant.

9

equal at other values of r by the equations of motion. mathematically this calculation
is identical  except for the change from 4 to 5 dimensions and from a time to a radial
variable to the cosmological evolution of an inationary universe at critical density
(k = 0). indeed, it follows trivially from the friedman equations that a universe with a
at spatial geometry will stay at, even if some phase-transition occurs. one can also
see this fact in the hamilton-jacobi formalism. the ow velocities of a and i are given
by

a =

u a

and

i = iu,

1
6

while through the h-j equation the potential v is expressed as

v =

1
3

u 2 

1
2

(iu)2

adding the three contributions in (25) indeed gives a zero total result. this is precisely
the condition that was noted to be sucient to have stable brane-like structures with
vanishing curvatures [8]. but again, in a similar way one can also construct solutions
that have a constant non-zero curvature. the equations again look very much like the
friedman equations for an inationary universe with non-zero spatial curvature k 6= 0.
except now the curvature is that of the whole universe itself.

7. discussion and conclusions

the main result that we derived, the ow equation for the eective action, is based
on the assumption that the 5d gravity equations are applicable and describe the radial
propagation of the eective action. this requires that the gauge theory must have a
large coupling constant, and large enough gauge group, and furthermore our energy scale
should be small enough so that we can ignore string and quantum gravity corrections.
outside this low energy, strongly coupled, large n regime one should therefore expect
to get signicant modications of the ow equations. before discussing what we have
learned about the cosmological constant, let me describe what i expect some of these
corrections will look like.

first of all, 1/n corrections would change the ow equation (16) by adding a second
term which is expressed as a second order variation of the action s. this is analogous
to the transition of the h-j equation to the schroedinger equation. indeed, the ow
equation should in that case be derived from the wheeler-dewitt constraint rather
than the h-j constraint. although it is hard to give a precise denition of the wdw
equation, it does at least formally exhibit the same ow invariance. secondly, at some
energy scale we expect that the  corrections in the 5d gravity would also become
more important. one might try to add some higher derivative terms, but propably a
better way to do it is to go to a non-local form of the equation like a loop equation [10]
or use string eld theory. finally, when quantum gravity eects in 4d gravity become
important one has to go to the full string language, and think about the gauge theory

on rg-ow and the cosmological constant.

10

as open strings and the gravity part as closed strings. also in this case one expects to
have a ow equation that relates the generating function of open string amplitudes to
a part of the closed string action [9].

finally let us return to the issue of the cosmological constant. the ideas presented
in this note shed new light on the issue of the cosmological constant, but clearly more
work needs to be done to provide a solution to the problem. in geometric terms i have
shown that by embedding our 4d world as a slice in a higher dimensional space that
there is a natural way in which the vacuum energy that is generated by phase transition
is canceled by an ever decreasing (towards the ir) warp factor. via the h-j formalism
this translates to the statement that the potential u is compensated by the trace of the
stress energy tensor at all scales, once this is the case at one particular scale. both these
statements only hold if one restricts to a particular conformal frame of the metric, or in
terms of the warped geometry, to a particular slicing.

thus, in the presented scenario the remaining open question is to explain why
these particular slicings or conformal frames are the right ones. in a specic warped
compactication it is possible that one can identify such a preferred slicing due to the
presence of domain wall like structures that represent a physical transition at a certain
given scale, like a planck brane. it is also possible that a better understanding of 5d
holography  and possibly 4d holography  will reveal an underlying principle that can
be used to answer this questions. i will leave this question for future research.

8. acknowledments

id like to thank the organizers for a stimulating, well-organized and memorable strings
99 conference.

[1] j. de boer, e. verlinde and h. verlinde, on the holographic renormalization group.
[2] e. verlinde and h. verlinde, rg-ow, gravity, and the cosmological constant.
[3] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200; s. gubser, i. klebanov and
a. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from non-critical string theory, phys.lett.b428 (1998)
105, hep-th/9802109; e. witten, anti-de sitter space and holography, adv.theor.math.phys.2
(1998) 253, hep-th/9802150; l. susskind and e. witten, the holographic bound in anti-de
sitter space, hep-th/9805114.

[4] l. girardello, m. petrini, m. porrati, a. zaaroni, novel local cft and exact results on
perturbations of n=4 super yang mills from ads dynamics, hep-th/9810126. j. distler
and f. zamora, non-supersymmetric conformal field theories from stable anti-de sitter
spaces, hep-th/9810206; v. balasubramanian, p. krauss, space-time and the holographic
renormalization group, phys.rev.lett 83 (1999) 3605, hep-th/9903190, m. porrati, a.
starinets, rg fixed points in supergravity duals of 4-d field theory and asymptotically ads
spaces, phys.lett. b454 (1999) 77, hep-th/9903241; d. z. freedman, s. s. gubser, k. pilch, n.
p. warner, renormalization group flows from holographysupersymmetry and a c-theorem,
hep-th/9904017. l. girardello, m. petrini, m. porrati, a. zaaroni, the supergravity dual of
n = 1 super yang-mills theory, hep-th/9909047. o. dewolfe, d.z. freedman, s.s. gubser, a.
karch, modelling the fth dimension with scalars and gravity, hep-th/9909134.

[5] l. randall and r. sundrum, a large mass hierarchy from a small extra dimension, hep-

ph/9905221; an alternative to compactication, hep-th/9906064.

on rg-ow and the cosmological constant.

11

[6] h. verlinde, holography and compactication, hep-th/9906182
[7] s. weinberg, the cosmological constant problem, rev.mod.phys.61 (1989), 1-23.
[8] k. behrndt, domain walls of d=5 supergravity and xpoints of n=1 super yang mills, hep-
th/9907070, k. behrndt, m. cvetic, supersymmetric domain-wall world from d=5 simple
gauged supergravity, hep-th/9909058; k. skenderis, p. townsend, gravitational stability and
renormalization-group flow, hep-th/9909070; u. ellwanger, constraints on a brane-world
from the vanishing of the cosmological constant, hep-th/9909103;

[9] j. khoury, h. verlinde, unpublished.

[10] a.m. polyakov, in proc. strings 97, amsterdam, f.a. bais etal. eds.

