hep-th/9912279

9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
0
3

 

 
 

1
v
9
7
2
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

self-duality, ramond-ramond fields,

and k-theory

gregory moore

department of physics, yale university, new haven ct 06520 usa

edward witten

department of physics, caltech, pasadena, ca 91125

and

caltech-usc center for theoretical physics, univ. of southern california

just as d-brane charge of type iia and type iib superstrings is classied, respectively,
by k 1(x) and k(x), ramond-ramond elds in these theories are classied, respectively,
by k(x) and k 1(x). by analyzing a recent proposal for how to interpret quantum self-

duality of rr elds, we show that the dirac quantization formula for the rr p-forms,

when properly formulated, receives corrections that reect curvature, lower brane charges,

and an anomaly of d-brane world-volume fermions. the k-theory framework is important

here, because the term involving the fermion anomaly cannot be naturally expressed in

terms of cohomology and dierential forms.

 address after january 1, 2000: department of physics, rutgers university, piscataway

nj 08855-0849 usa.
 on leave from institute for advanced study, princeton nj 08540 usa.

december, 1999

1. introduction

the ramond-ramond (rr) elds of type iia superstring theory are dierential

forms g0, g2, g4, . . . of all even orders, while for type iib superstring theory, one has
rr elds g1, g3, g5, . . . of all odd orders. the total rr eld g = g0 + g2 + g4 + . . . or
g = g1 + g3 + g5 + . . . is, classically, self-dual.

self-duality alone introduces a number of subtleties in the study of the rr elds. for

example, one expects a dirac quantization condition for the gps, naively

zup

gp
2  z,

(1.1)

for every p-cycle up in spacetime. we will see that this statement receives modications

from several sources. self-duality makes the interpretation of any such statement delicate,
since classically one cannot impose the relation (1.1) for gp and the dual eld g10p = gp
at the same time; this point is explained in section 3 of [1].

the eects of self-duality are most obvious for the ve-form g5 of type iib. g5 is
self-dual, and this makes its dynamics particularly subtle, as has long been appreciated

[2]. one approach to the quantum mechanics of such a eld is to construct its quantum

partition function by identifying the right theta function, as suggested in [3] and developed

more explicitly in [4]. (references to a variety of other approaches to self-dual dynamics

can be found in [1].) except for this one case, one might hope at rst sight to eliminate
the subtleties of self-duality by eliminating the gp of p > 5 using g = g and treating the
gp of p < 5 (or rather, their potentials) as the independent variables.

but things are not so simple. eliminating the gps of p > 5 is unnatural since it is not

invariant under t -duality. moreover, the gps of dierent p are coupled in a subtle way

by the reinterpretation [5,6] of rr charges and (as we will argue) rr elds in k-theory.

this again makes it subtle to eliminate half of them.

the goal of the present paper is to explain what statements along the line of (1.1)

mean and what they say given the self-duality of rr elds and their interpretation in

k-theory. for this we need rst of all a precise framework for how to interpret rr elds

(as opposed to charges) in k-theory. this is the subject of section 2. in brief, we propose

that the cohomology class of the rr eld of type iia superstring theory in a spacetime x

is determined by an element of k(x), while for type iib it is determined by an element
of k 1(x). (the relation is stated in eqn. (2.17) below.) this is precisely the opposite
relation from the charges; we recall that rr charge of type iia takes values in k 1(x)

1

(with a compact support condition), while for type iib it takes values in k(x). in section

3, we discuss how we implement self-duality in k-theory. in this, we follow the framework

described in sections 3 and 4.3 of [1] (which are recommended as background to the present

paper); we summarize and amplify some key points. in particular, the mod 2 index of a

certain dirac operator plays an important role in this discussion. finally in section 4, we

apply this framework to the quantization conditions obeyed by the gps for type iia.

for the special case of g4, the shifted quantization law we get has been obtained before
by considering global anomalies of membranes [7]. (that derivation was formulated for

m -theory but applies equally in type iia.) the shifts we get in general are natural from

the standpoint of brane anomalies, even though we include no branes in the derivation.

the shifted quantization laws cannot in general be naturally stated in cohomology, because

there is in general no cohomological formula for the fermion global anomaly that enters in

the analysis. this is another reason that it is important to describe rr elds via k-theory

instead of cohomology.

indeed, nding a natural framework in which to formulate the shifted quantization

condition of g6 was the original goal of the present paper. we started with the anomaly
cancellation condition (4.4) and hoped to use it to understand just what kind of objects rr

elds are. this proved dicult because it was hard to understand the role of the fermion

anomaly. following progress on understanding self-duality of rr elds in k-theory [1], it

became clear, as we show in section 4, that in that framework the fermion anomaly term

in the quantization condition comes in automatically. an important role in the k-theory

framework is played by eqn. (2.17), which we motivate in section 2 in a fairly elementary

way using the same brane couplings that lead to eqn. (4.4). this formula was suggested

by d. freed as an interpretation of eqn. (4.4) with the fermion terms dropped.

in the present paper, the ns three-form eld h is assumed to vanish. including it

raises a number of new issues, some of which will hopefully be addressed elsewhere [8].

2. rr fields and k-theory

before considering type ii superstring theory, where the rr elds should really be
interpreted in k-theory, let us consider the theory of an ordinary (p  1)-form potential
cp1, with eld strength gp, in a (d +1)-dimensional spacetime x. (in superstring theory,
d = 9.) we will work rst on a spacetime x = rm , where r is the time direction and
m is the spatial manifold. we assume that there are branes in m of codimension p+1 that

2

serve as magnetic sources for cp1. (by replacing gp with gp in the following, we could
similarly consider electric sources.) in the presence of such a brane with worldvolume w ,

gp obeys

dgp = (w ),

(2.1)

where (w ) is a (p+1)-form delta function that is poincare dual to w . here we are writing

this formula in the simple form that would hold for ordinary p-form elds (as opposed to

the rr elds of type ii, for which there are additional terms whose import is discussed

below).

in general, for any brane worldvolume w in m , (w ) is a closed (p + 1)-form that
denes an element [w ]  h p+1(m ; z). thus, we interpret the brane charge in this situation
as an element of this cohomology group. (2.1) says that [w ] is of the form d(. . .), 1 so that

the cohomology class that represents the brane charge is zero (or else the equation for gp

has no solution).

if m is a compact manifold without boundary, this is the right answer: the total

brane charge is identically zero. the way this is often stated is that the total charge

associated with an abelian gauge symmetry vanishes on a compact manifold, since the

ux has nowhere to go.

for a setting in which the total brane charge is not zero, we consider the case that

m is noncompact with boundary n . we use the term boundary somewhat loosely; a
typical case of interest is that m = rd, and n is the sphere sd1 at innity.

even when m is not compact, (2.1) still implies that [w ] vanishes as an element
of h p+1(m ; z). however, if we assume that w is compact, we can consider [w ] as an
element of the compactly supported cohomology h p+1
cpct (m ; z). (2.1) says that the class of
[w ] vanishes in h p+1(m ; z), but it does not imply that [w ] vanishes in h p+1
cpct (m ; z). the
reason for this is that even if a g-eld obeying (2.1) exists, it may not vanish at innity.
vanishing of [w ] as an element of h p+1
of (2.1) that vanishes at innity.

cpct (m ; z) would imply that there exists a solution g

thus, we should regard the brane charge as an element of h p+1

cpct (m ; z) that vanishes
if mapped to h p+1(m ; z). the brane charge, in other words, takes values in the kernel of

the natural map

i : h p+1

cpct (m ; z)  h p+1(m ; z)

(2.2)

1 we assume that the equation (2.1), which is stated for dierential forms, is an approximation

to an equation that holds for the integral cohomology.

3

which is dened by forgetting that a cohomology class has compact support.

so far we have tried to dene the brane charge directly in terms of the brane world-

volume. however, it is often very useful in gauge theories to dene the charge in terms of

the behavior of the elds at innity  or in this case, in terms of the restriction of gp to

n . indeed, we have seen two paragraphs ago that the brane charge vanishes if gp vanishes

when restricted to n , strongly suggesting that the brane charge can be measured from the

restriction of gp to n .

we can get such a description of the brane charge using the long exact cohomology

sequence for the pair (m, n ). it reads

. . . h p(m ; z)

j

h p(n ; z)  h p+1(m, n ; z) ih p+1(m ; z)  . . . .

(2.3)

here the relative cohomology h p+1(m, n ; z) is the same as the cohomology with compact
support h p+1
boundary n . from (2.3), we learn that

cpct (m ; z). the map j is dened by restricting a cohomology class of m to the

ker(i) = h p(n ; z)/j(h p(m ; z)).

(2.4)

this shows that the brane charge is determined by the cohomology class of the g-eld in
h p(n ; z), but that elements of h p(n ; z) that arise by restricting to n a cohomology class

on m should be considered to represent zero brane charge. this has a simple intuitive

interpretation. a g-eld on n that extends over m as a closed p-form has no brane source

and so has not been created by branes. such a g-eld is measureable on n but does

not contribute to the brane charge, which takes values in the quotient indicated in (2.4).

analog in k-theory

now we move on to the type ii case, which diers in a few ways. there are g-elds

of all even or all odd p, the brane w supports a chan-paton gauge bundle, and there are

a number of subtle corrections to (2.1) involving lower brane charges [9,10,11,5].

thus, considering rst type iib, for branes of compact support in space, the brane

charge is an element of kcpct(m ), the compactly supported k-theory of m . to ensure

that the equation for the rr elds has a solution, the brane charge must map to zero in

k(m ). thus, the brane charge takes values in the kernel of the natural map

i : kcpct(m )  k(m )

4

(2.5)

which forgets that a k-theory class has compact support.

just as in the case that the brane charge is interpreted as a cohomology class, we

also want a description in which the brane charge is measured in terms of the rr elds

at innity. to see what form this must take, we look at the exact sequence that is the

k-theory counterpart of (2.3). it reads

. . .  k 1(m )

j

k 1(n )  k(m, n ) ik(m ) . . . ,

(2.6)

where again the relative k-group k(m, n ) is the same as kcpct(m ), and j is the map that

restricts a k-theory class on m to n . (this exact sequence has been used in computing
kcpct(m ) [12].) by the periodicity theorem, k 1 is the same as k 1. we see that the
group ker(i) in which the brane charge takes values has an alternative description:

ker(i) = k 1(n )/j(k 1(m )).

(2.7)

we interpret this the same way that we did in the case of cohomology. k 1(n ) classies
rr elds at innity, while k 1(m ) classies rr elds on m that do not have any brane
sources. an rr eld on n that extends (as an element of k 1) over m does not require
any brane sources, so the brane charges are classied by the quotient k 1(n )/j(k 1(m )).

this interpretation of (2.7) thus forces us to assert that type iib rr elds on m (or
n ) in the absence of branes are classied topologically by k 1(m ) or k 1(n ). this extends
the relation of k-theory to rr charges that has been asserted in previous work.

now we move on to the analogous situation for type iia. here, brane charge is
classied by k 1. more specically, a brane of compact support on m has a charge in
k 1
cpct(m ), and (after requiring that the equation for the rr elds has a solution) the

brane charge takes values in the kernel of

i : k 1

cpct(m )  k 1(m ).

(2.8)

once again, we can express the brane charge in terms of the elds at innity. the exact

sequence analogous to (2.6) is

. . .  k(m )

j

k(n )  k 1(m, n ) ik 1(m ) . . . ,

(2.9)

where again k 1(m, n ) is the same as k 1
brane charge takes values in

cpct(m ) and j is the restriction to n . hence the

ker(i) = k(n )/j(k(m )).

(2.10)

5

we interpret this to mean that for type iia in the absence of branes, the rr elds on m

(or n ) are classied topologically by k(m ) (or k(n )).

finally, for type i, d-brane charge is classied by ko(m ) with a compact support

condition. reasoning along the above lines leads to the conclusion that rr elds on
x = r  m are classied by ko1(m ).

the arguments we have given are slightly formal. but our conclusion that in the
absence of branes the rr elds on a spacetime x = r  m are classied in this way
by k-theory seems to be the only reasonable way to reconcile the interpretation of brane

charge in k-theory with the fact that in gauge theory, one expects to be able to measure
the charges in terms of the elds at innity. since including the rst factor in x = r m
does not change the k-groups, we can equally well say that for x of the form r  m ,
the rr elds are classied (for type iia, type iib, and type i, respectively) by k(x),
k 1(x), and ko1(x).

finally, we will take the additional leap of assuming that this result is not special to
the case of x = r  m that we have used to motivate the discussion. we will assume
that (in the absence of branes) the rr elds on an arbitrary spacetime x, not necessarily
of the form r  m , are classied topologically by k(x) or k 1(x) or ko1(x).

relation of k(x) to rr fields

this last statement raises the following question, which we will consider rst for type
iia. given an element x  k(x) that determines an rr eld g, what is the de rham
cohomology class of g?

to answer this question, we go back to the case that x = r  m . we consider
a collection of 8-branes and 8-branes with world-volume p  m , with p being a point
in r, and with arbitrary chan-paton bundles (e, f ). such congurations are classied

topologically (modulo brane creation and annihilation [13,14]) by the k-theory class x of

the pair (e, f ).

in crossing the branes, the de rham cohomology class of the rr elds jumps. the

jump is determined by the couplings of the rr elds to the brane. the relevant couplings

were determined in [10]. they are usually expressed as electric couplings for the total rr

potential c = c1 + c3 + . . .. the couplings are

zpm

c pba (ch(e)  ch(f )) ,

6

(2.11)

where ch is the chern character. here c2p1 is the potential for the rr eld g2p. (an
additional term is needed [15] to include the electric coupling of g0, since there is no
1-form potential of g0 in any standard sense; the eect of the addition is summarized
in eqn. (2.17) below.) a minus sign multiplies the second term of this expression because

8-branes have opposite sign couplings from 8-branes. because of this minus sign and the
fact that e  ch(e) is a linear map from bundles to cohomology classes, it follows that
the coupling on the right hand side in (2.11) depends only on the k-theory class x of the
pair (e, f ). we write the dierence ch(e)  ch(f ) more succinctly as ch(x), so we can
rewrite (2.11):

in the presence of this coupling, the equation of motion of the rr eld becomes

zpm

c pba ch(x).
d(g) = 2(p)pba ch(x),

(2.12)

(2.13)

(2.15)

(2.16)

where (p) is a delta function supported on p  m . this equation implies that g jumps
in crossing the brane. if we write gl and gr for the g-elds to the left and right of the

brane, the jump is given by

gr  gl = 2pba ch(x).

(both x and m are oriented, so there is a natural left and right.)

(2.14)

had we made a duality transformation, replacing g by g, then (2.11) would be
replaced by a magnetic coupling to the branes, which contributes to the bianchi identity.

with the magnetic coupling included, the bianchi identity becomes

and this implies a jump in g of the form

dg = 2(p)pba ch(x),
gr  gl = 2pba ch(x).

the magnetic coupling is more in the spirit of the derivation we gave above (in which

branes were introduced as magnetic sources), and we will take (2.16) as the basic relation.

of course, since g is supposed to be self-dual and the right hand side of (2.14) or (2.16)

is not self-dual, one should wonder what these equations mean. the most straightforward

approach is to use self-duality to eliminate (for example) g6, g8, and g10, treating the

7

independent elds as g0, g2, and g4. for g0, g2, and g4 one would use (say) the

magnetic coupling in (2.16), while the magnetic coupling of g6, g8, and g10 is included
via an electric coupling of the potentials c2p1, p  2, as in (2.11). in section 3, we will
follow a more general formalism in which one can take an arbitrary mutually commuting

set of rr periods as independent variables. in that framework, if m is a codimension 1

submanifold of a spacetime x, the restriction of a class in k(x) to k(m ) is a set of

commuting data that can be treated classically and is unconstrained by self-duality. in

this framework, we can interpret (2.16) as a formula for the jumps of the cohomology

classes of the gps for all p in crossing the brane.

now we can nally make our proposal for the rr eld determined by a k-theory

class. suppose that in this situation, the rr-elds are classied to the left of the branes

by a k-theory class a, and to the right of the branes by a k-theory class b = a + x. (2.16)

expresses the dierence between the g eld on the left and on the right. let us assume

that if a = 0 then g is zero (in de rham cohomology) to the left of the brane. then

(2.16) determines g to the right of the brane, and we interpret this as the rr eld of the

k-theory class b = x:

g(x)

2

=pba ch(x).

(2.17)

we will assume that this formula holds for arbitrary spacetimes x in the absence of branes,

and not just in the situation that we have used to motivate it.

we also need the type iib analog of (2.17). we propose that this is given by the same

formula, but interpreted as follows. the rr elds of type iib, in the absence of branes,

are determined by an element x  k 1(x). k 1(x) is the same as ek(s1x) (the subgroup
of k(s1  x) consisting of elements that are trivial if restricted to q  x for q a point in
s1). the chern character ch(x) is hence an element of the even-dimensional cohomology
of s1  x. upon integration over s1, it maps to an element of the odd-dimensional
cohomology of x. we will abbreviate this element as ch(x) (not showing the integration
over s1 in the notation). with this notational understanding, we propose (2.17) for both

type iia and type iib. given the type iia result, and assuming that the type iib

formula should have the same general form, this is the unique formula for type iib that

is consistent with the requirement of t -duality between type iia and type iib in case
x = s1  y for some y .

for type i, we again propose that the rr elds are determined for x  ko1(x) by

the same formula (2.17), interpreted along the lines suggested in the last paragraph.

8

k-theory and unbroken symmetries

as well as classifying the rr elds, we also want to classify their symmetries. we

begin again by recalling the case of ordinary p-form elds. a potential cp1 with curvature
gp has a gauge-invariance cp1  cp1 + dbp2, with bp2 a two-form gauge-parameter.
an unbroken gauge symmetry is a bp2 such that dbp2 = 0; they should be classied
mod bp2  bp2 + dap3 (for any (p 3)-form ap3) and modulo 2 shifts in the periods
of bp2. the group of unbroken gauge symmetries is h p2(x; u (1)). this group is not

necessarily connected. by considering the long exact sequence in cohomology derived from

the coecient sequence

0  z  r  u (1)  0,

(2.18)

one can show that its group of components h

p2

(x; u (1)) is the same as the torsion

subgroup h p1(x; z)tors of h p1(x; z).

the analog for type iia is that, while the rr elds are classied by k(x), the

unbroken gauge symmetries are classied by k 2(x; u (1)) (which by periodicity is the

same as k(x; u (1))), and its group of components is the torsion subgroup k 1(x)tors. in

faddeev-popov gauge xing, we will have to divide by the order of this group.

for type iib, the group of components of the unbroken rr gauge symmetry group

is k(x)tors, and for type i it is ko2(x)tors.

k-theory and cohomology

g/2 as determined in (2.17) is not an integral cohomology class, but (because of

fractions in the power series expansion of pba and ch) a rational one. we will interpret

the rr elds gp simply as p-forms, with no integral structure and no attempt to dene

the torsion part of gp. the integral structure is dened at the level of k-theory, and in

particular the torsion for rr elds of type iia (in the absence of branes) is simply the

torsion subgroup of k(x).

it is illuminating to consider briey some examples of how the passage from cohomol-

ogy to k-theory mixes the rr forms. (the examples that follow are not used in the rest

of the paper.) if for simplicity we consider a situation in which ba = 1 (getting rid of the

9

most complicated fractions) and g0 = g2 = 0, then (2.17) gives2

g4
2
g6
2

= c2(x)

=

c3(x)

2

.

(2.19)

thus, in this situation, g4/2 is integral, but g6/2 is in general half-integral. why is

this half-integrality not seen in the simplest cases of brane physics? the most obvious case
of quantization of g6 arises in measuring the ux on an s6 that links a d2-brane. (in this

case, ba, g0, and g2 are all zero or irrelevant, so our simplifying assumptions are valid.)

though c3(x) can be odd in general, it can be shown using the index theorem for the dirac
operator that c3 is even for any complex vector bundle on s6, so in this situation g6/2 is
integral. in general, c3(x) is not even, but obeys a relation c3(x) = sq2(c2(x)) mod 2, where
sq2 is a certain cohomology operation (a steenrod square). in view of (2.19), this means

that the half integral part of g6/2 is determined by g4. this correlation between g4

and g6 is a typical illustration of the dierences between k-theory and cohomology, and a

fact that must be taken into account, along with the electric-magnetic duality between g4

and g6, in any detailed investigation of their properties. this and many other subtleties

of the rr elds, which otherwise would have to be described piecemeal, are summarized

by deriving the rr elds from k-theory.

for another illustration of the consequences of reinterpreting the rr elds in k-

theory, we consider the torsion. there is no way in general to attribute elements of the

torsion subgroup of k(x), which we will call k(x)tors, to cohomology classes of x of a
denite degree. for example, for x = rp7 (which arises in some orbifold studies and was
considered in [12]), the even dimensional cohomology of x is the sum z  z2  z2  z2,
where the summands are h 0, h 2, h 4, and h 6. however, k(x) = z  z8, where the
summand z corresponds to h 0(x), but the summand z8 is the k-theory analog of h 2,
h 4, and h 6 combined. so, if rr elds are interpreted in k-theory, there is no way to

make sense separately of the torsion part of g2, g4, and g6. the generator of the z8
factor of k(rp7) is x = lo, where l is a nontrivial at line bundle over rp7 (it exists
and is unique because 1(rp7) = z2) and o is a trivial line bundle. c1(x) is the nontrivial
2 in terms of the formal roots xi of the chern polynomial, ch(x) = pi
exi . as we assume
xixj, c3 = pi<j<k
g2 = 0, we have pi

xi = 0. we also have c2 = pi<j

xixj xk, leading after

some algebra to the following formulas.

10

element of h 2(rp7; z2). the element 2x of k(rp7) has c1(2x) = 0, c2(2x) = c1(x)2 6= 0,
proving that 2x is nonzero in k(rp7). the element 4x has all chern classes zero, but is
nonetheless nonzero in k(rp7). this example thus also shows that k-theory elements

cannot always be classied by their chern classes.

3. self-duality, theta functions, and k-theory

3.1. partition function on a closed manifold

here we will describe how to interpret self-duality of quantum rr elds in the light

of k-theory. to be more precise, in the limit (small string coupling or large volume) in

which the rr elds can be treated as free elds, we will determine their quantum partition

function on a compact manifold x, in the absence of branes. the discussion is largely a

reprise of section 4.3 of [1], repeated here to make this paper more readable, and with some

extra details. for additional background about partition functions of self-dual p-forms for

p > 1, the reader may consult [4] as well as section 3 of [1]. we will carry out the discussion

for type iia, with brief comments later on type iib and type i.

the rst step is to introduce an antisymmetric bilinear form ( , ) on k(x). the
denition is simply that (x, y) is the index of the dirac operator on x with values in x y.
(y is obtained from y by complex conjugation of the bundles.) since the dimension of x is

of the form 4k + 2, the index i(w) of the dirac operator with values in a k-theory class w
obeys i(w) = i(w). hence (x, y) = (y, x). also, if x0 is a torsion class, so that nx0 = 0
for some integer n, then for any x,

(x, x0) =

1
n

(x, nx0) =

1
n

(x, 0) = 0.

(3.1)

hence, if k(x)tors is the torsion subgroup of k(x), the bilinear form ( , ) is well-dened

as a bilinear form on the lattice  = k(x)/k(x)tors. it can be shown by imitating the

proof of poincare duality given in [16] that the form ( , ) is unimodular on the lattice .

the idea in quantizing the theory will be to write the partition function as a sum over a

maximal commuting subgroup of k(x). here x and y are considered to commute if and

only if (x, y) = 0. (one may suspect that one should somehow construct operators bx and
by that only commute under that condition.) in view of (3.1), every maximal commutative
subgroup of k(x) includes k(x)tors. we can always (albeit not in a unique or natural
way) split k(x) as k(x) =   k(x)tors. given such a splitting, if 1 is a maximal

11

commutative sublattice of , then a maximal commutative subgroup of k(x) is 1 =
1  k(x)tors. every maximal commutative subgroup of k(x) can be presented in this
way. it is convenient to select a commuting sublattice 2 of  that is complementary to
1 (in the sense that  = 1  2).

we also dene a positive denite metric on . it is dened by the formula

|x|2 =zx

g(x)  g(x),

(3.2)

where g(x) is a sum of dierential forms gp of all even p dened as follows. g(x) is the

unique harmonic dierential form such that in de rham cohomology, g(x) is determined

from x by the formula obtained in section 2:

g(x)

2

=pba ch(x).

(3.3)

this metric depends on the metric on x, and has no particular integrality properties.

its attractive property is as follows. let t be the torus k(x; r)/, where k(x; r) =
k(x)z r. (thus, k(x; r) is isomorphic to rn, with n = 2k the sum of the even betti
numbers of x.) then the metric |x|2 determines a metric g on t, and the antisymmetric
form ( , ) determines a two-form  on t. the fact that ( , ) is integral and unimodular

means that  is integral and

zt

k
k!

= 1.

(3.4)

 is positive and of type (1,1) with respect to g, so together g and  determine a kahler

structure on x.

the last ingredient one needs to set up the theory is a z2-valued function  on k(x)

such that for all x, y  k(x),

(x + y) = (x)(y)(1)(x,y).

(3.5)

a natural such function was dened in [1] as follows. 3 for x an element of complex
k-theory, x  x is naturally dened as an element of the real k-group ko(x). now we
must use for the rst time the fact that the spacetime dimension in string theory (namely

3 a cocycle somewhat like  shows up in construction of vertex operator algebras from lattices,
with the following dierence. in that case, an  must be chosen, but the choice does not matter.

here, there is a distinguished  associated with the physical problem, and it is essential to nd

it.

12

10) is of the form 8k + 2. (our previous remarks are valid in any dimension of the form

4k + 2.) in dimension 8k + 2, there is a natural mod two function on ko(x), namely the

mod two index of the dirac operator, which we will denote as j. (concretely, if w is a real
vector bundle  such as x  x with x a complex vector bundle  then j(w) is the number
of positive chirality zero modes of the dirac operator on x with values in w, mod 2. j(w)

is independent of the metric of x but in general depends on the spin structure. in [17],

its dependence on the spin structure was expressed in terms of a relation similar to (3.5).)

in [1],  was dened as

(x) = (1)j(xx),

and was shown to obey the basic identity (3.5).

(3.5) together with (3.1) implies that if x0 is torsion, then

(x + x0) = (x)(x0).

(3.6)

(3.7)

when we construct the partition function as a sum over a maximal commuting subgroup

1 of k(x), (x) will enter as a sign factor in the sum. all the factors in the partition
function except (x) are invariant under x  x + x0. hence, given (3.7), the partition
function will vanish under x  x+x0 unless  is identically 1 when restricted to k(x)tors.
this vanishing cannot be removed by inserting local operators (as such operators do not

receive contributions from the torsion), and must be interpreted as a kind of global anomaly,

analogous to the anomaly discussed for m 5-branes in section 5.1 of [1].

we do not know whether there actually are ten-dimensional spin manifolds x such

that  is non-trivial on k(x)tors.

if this does occur, the anomaly can be canceled as

follows by wrapping a brane. (this paragraph is not essential in the rest of the paper.)

on k(x)tors,  is multiplicative as in (3.7), and so is a homomorphism from k(x)tors
to z2  u (1). the eect of a k-theory class that is torsion is purely to include phases
in the path integral for certain wrapped branes. (some examples of this are discussed
in detail in [18].) this suggests that the anomalous factor (1)h(x0) can be canceled by
wrapping a brane. to prove that this is so, rst recall from section 5.1 of [1] the situation

in cohomology. on a compact oriented d-manifold x, there is a pontryagin duality

h p(x; z)  h dp(x; u (1))  u (1).

(3.8)

13

the pairing here is given by the cup product followed by integration; the fact that it is a
pontryagin duality can be proved by following the proof of poincare duality given in [16].4
this duality induces a pontryagin duality between the torsion subgroup h p(x; z)tors of
h p(x; z), and the group h

(x; u (1)) of components of h dp(x; u (1)):

dp

h p(x; z)tors  h

dp

(x; u (1))  u (1).

(3.9)

dp

(x; u (1)) is isomorphic (under the bockstein  : h dp(x; u (1))  h dp+1(x; z))

h
to h dp+1(x; z)tors, so there is a pontryagin duality

h p(x; z)tors  h dp+1(x; z)tors  u (1).

(3.10)

these poincare duality statements have analogs for k-theory. 5 on an oriented even-

dimensional manifold x, the analog of (3.10) is the existence of a pontryagin duality

k(x)tors  k 1(x)tors  u (1).

(3.11)

the pairing here is just the physical coupling of a torsion rr eld (an element of k(x)tors)
to a torsion d-brane (which in type iia determines an element of k 1(x)tors). this
pontryagin duality means that the homomorphism  : k(x)tors  z2  u (1) is

x0  (1)(,x0),

(3.12)

for some two-torsion element   k 1(x)tors, where in (3.12) we write the pairing in an
additive notation. physically, this means that the anomaly will be canceled by wrapping
a type iia d-brane that represents the class   k 1(x). in section 2, we argued that on
a compact manifold x, the d-brane charge should vanish, but the anomaly means that

actually the d-brane charge should equal the two-torsion element . this is analogous

4 one must modify the argument in [16] by replacing hom( , r) by hom( , u (1)); the argument
goes through in the same way with this modication since hom( , u (1)), like hom( , r), maps

exact sequences to exact sequences.

5 indeed, the main points in the proof of poincare duality in [16] are that there are mayer-
vietoris sequences in cohomology theory and that poincare duality holds for rd. there are
analogous mayer-vietoris sequences in k-theory, and the duality statements above are all true
for rd. of course, in making such a duality statement on rd (or in general on a noncompact
oriented manifold) one must understand one of the two factors, such as h p or h dp in (3.8), to
be cohomology with compact support.

14

to the situation in [19]: classical reasoning seems to show that the restriction of the class

[h] of the ns three-form eld h to a d-brane world-volume q should vanish, but because

of an anomaly, [h] should actually equal the two-torsion element w3(q). the analogy is
clear from section 5.1 of [1], where the w3(q) term shows up from the restriction of  to

torsion.

for the rest of this paper, we restrict ourselves to the case that  is identically 1 when

restricted to k(x)tors. in this case, the sum over the torsion subgroup will give a factor

equal to the order of k(x)tors, which we will denote as n .

moreover, if  is identically 1 on k(x)tors, then it can be regarded in a natural fashion

as a function on the lattice  = k(x)/k(x)tors. a z2-valued function on this lattice

which obeys (3.5) determines (by a standard dierential-geometric construction that was
reviewed in [3]) a unitary line bundle l over t that has a connection with curvature form
. as  is of type (1, 1), l has a natural holomorphic structure. (3.4) together with the
riemann-roch theorem implies that l has a unique holomorphic section .

for any decomposition  = 1  2 of  in terms of commutative sublattices 1 and
2,  can be written as a sum over certain cosets of 1. this was explained in section 3
of [1]. to be more precise, because of the duality between 1 and 2, there exists   1
such that, for y  2, (y) = (1)(,y). the theta function is

 = xx1+ 1

2 

(x  /2) exp (i(x,  x)) ,

(3.13)

where  is the period matrix of the lattice  (with respect to its decomposition as 12).
for the analogous theory of self-dual p-forms, a fairly explicit explanation of how the period

matrix comes in is in [4].

once the theta function is constructed, the partition function of the rr elds (as-

suming that  = 1 for torsion elements) is

z =




.

(3.14)

here  is a determinant of the nonzero modes and is completely unaected by all of

the subtleties that we have discussed.  would be the same if rr elds were ordinary

dierential forms, not related to k-theory.  has been treated for a self-dual p form in
section 4 of [4]; for a self-dual three-form on t6, it has been explicitly incorporated in the

computation in [20].

15

one might expect in the numerator in (3.14) a factor of n from summing over

k(x)tors, but this factor is canceled in the following way.

in faddeev-popov gauge

xing, one must divide by the volume of the unbroken gauge symmetry group, which is

proportional to the number of components of that group. as we have argued in section 2,
the group of components of the unbroken rr gauge symmetry for type iia is k 1(x)tors.
the existence of the perfect pairing (3.11) means that the order of k 1(x)tors is the same

as the order of k(x)tors, so the factor in the numerator that comes from summing over

torsion is canceled by a similar factor in the denominator. this cancellation is invariant
under t -duality to type iib, which exchanges the roles of k 1(x)tors and k(x)tors!

the formula (3.13) shows that in writing the partition function as a sum over a

maximal commuting sublattice of , one in general has to sum over, roughly speaking,

half-integral elements of k(x). if one chooses to express the partition function as a sum

over certain rr elds via (3.3), the conditions on the rr elds that must be included in

the sum are much more complicated.

for type iib, one repeats this analysis, using k 1(x) instead of k(x); the denitions

of ( , ) and of  are given in [1]. the analogous construction for type i is as follows.
first we have to dene an antisymmetric bilinear form ( , ) on ko1(x). we recall that

ko1(x) = gko(s1  x), where gko(s1  x) is the subgroup of ko(s1  x) consisting
of elements that are trivial if restricted to px for p a point in s1. for x, y  gko(s1x),
we have x  y  gko(s1  s1  x). we dene (x, y) to be one half the index of the dirac
operator on s1  s1  x with values in x  y; this is an integer, as x  y is real and
s1  s1  x has dimension of the form 8k + 4. as for (x), we reason as in the discussion
of type iib in section 4.3 of [1]. x  x can be interpreted as an element of kr(s2  x),
where the involution used in dening kr is a reection of one coordinate on s2. by the
periodicity theorem, kr(s2  x) = ko(x), and we dene (x) = (1)j((x))), where
(x) is the image of x  x in ko(x) and j((x)) is its mod two index.

3.2. extension to a manifold with boundary

now we will make an important extension that goes beyond what has been said in [1].

the goal is to show, at least in part, that the formalism we have sketched above respects

the locality of quantum eld theory. (in what follows, we make use of a mathematical

result along the lines of [21]. see [22] for the roughly analogous but more subtle case of

the gluing behavior of the eta invariant.)

16

using the mod 2 index, we have dened the factor (x) on a closed manifold x. we

want to extend the denition to dene (x) on a manifold with boundary, in such a way

that if x1 and x2 have a common boundary component b (with opposite orientations),

and x is obtained by gluing together x1 and x2 along b, then  will be multiplicative in
the gluing. this multiplicativity means that for x  k(x), if x1 and x2 are the restrictions
of x to x1 and x2, then

(x) = (x1)(x2).

(3.15)

(one can also formulate a similar gluing law for the case that x1 has two boundary

components both isomorphic to y , and x is obtained by gluing them together.) however,

for a manifold x1 with boundary, (x1) will not be dened simply as an element of the
group z2. it will be dened as an element of a non-trivial principal z2 bundle p.

in general, let x be a ten-dimensional spin manifold with a boundary y , of dimension

nine. (we do not assume that y is connected.) if we write y for the restriction of x to y ,
then yy is a real vector bundle. in dimension 8k+1, the gamma matrices are real, and the
dirac operator dy =pi idi with values in the real bundle y  y is a real antisymmetric
(or antihermitian) operator. such an operator in general has a mod 2 index, but the mod 2
index of dy vanishes, since the mod 2 index is a bordism invariant, and y is the boundary
of the spin manifold x, over which y  y extends. we will only consider the case that
the mod 2 index is zero on each component of y ; some additional subtlety is involved in

extending the discussion when this is not true. under this hypothesis, for a generic metric
on y and connection on y, dy has no zero eigenvalues, and the fermion path integral for
fermions on y with values in yy is nonzero. this path integral, which is often denoted as
det dy , is most naturally understood as the pfaan of the real antisymmetric operator
dy , so we will write it as pf(dy ). this pfaan is subject to an anomaly. the absolute
value |pf(dy )| is naturally dened as a real number (for example, using zeta function
regularization), but there can be an anomaly in the sign of the pfaan. the most natural
way to describe mathematically this sign anomaly is to say that pf(dy ) is not a real
number, but takes values in a real line bundle, called the pfaan line bundle. we will

denote this line bundle as pf(y ). the structure group of the pfaan line bundle pf(y )
is the subgroup {1} of the real numbers (this is just a fancy way to say that pf(dy ) is
well-dened up to sign); this group is isomorphic to z2. so we can build a principal z2
bundle p(y ) over the parameter space (of metrics and gauge elds on y ) using the same
structure functions as those of pf(y ). for x  k(x), we will dene (x) as a section of

17

p(y ). both pf(y ) and p(y ) depend on y, but we do not show this in the notation. a
fancy way to express the relation between them is that pf(y ) = p(y ) z2 , with  a
trivial real line bundle on which z2 acts as the group {1}.

to facilitate the later discussion, we make a few observations about the dirac operator
on y . the hermitian operator idy has real eigenvalues, found by solving the eigenvalue
problem

idy  = ,   r.

(3.16)

let v be the space of all real spinor elds on y with values in y  y, and let vc be the
complexication of v . on v there is a positive denite metric

h1, 2i =zy

d9xg(1, 2),

(3.17)

where the metric ( , ) on the spinor elds is constructed using a trace on y  y and the
real structure of spinors on y . we extend h , i to a bilinear form on vc by using the
same formula without any complex conjugation. so idy is anti-hermitian in this inner
product, and hence if 1 and 2 are eigenvectors of idy with eigenvalues 1, 2, then
1h1, 2i = hidy 1, 2i = h1, idy 2i = 2h1, 2i. consequently,

h1, 2i = 0 unless 1 + 2 = 0.

(3.18)

for a generic metric on y , the eigenvalues in (3.16) are all nonzero, as we have observed
above. so if we let s+ and s be the subspaces of vc generated respectively by the
eigenvectors with positive and negative eigenvalue, we have a decomposition

vc = s+  s.

(3.19)

from (3.18) it follows that s are isotropic subspaces of vc, that is, h1, 2i = 0 for 1, 2
both in s+ or both in s, and moreover, they are maximal isotropic subspaces (since a
vector in s, for example, is never orthogonal to its complex conjugate, which is in s+).
to dene (x), we introduce the dirac operator dx on x using atiyah-patodi-singer
(aps) boundary conditions [23]. this means simply that we consider the operator dx
to act on spinor elds on x whose restriction to y is in s. for w  ko(x), we write
j(w) for the mod 2 index with values in w, that is, j(w) is the number mod 2 of positive
chirality zero modes of dx , with aps boundary conditions. we dene

(x) = (1)j(xx).

18

(3.20)

the right hand side is invariant under deformations of the metric on x and connection
on x, as long as we only consider data for which the operator idy has no zero eigenvalue.
there is no natural extension of the denition of s when idy develops a zero eigenvalue,
so in general (x) cannot be dened continuously as a z2-valued function. however, we

will see later that

(x)|pf(dy )|

(3.21)

always varies smoothly, even when one crosses the locus on which pf(dy ) develops a zero
eigenvalue. this means that (x)|pf(dy )| can be interpreted globally as a section of
pf(y ), and so (x) is globally a section of p(y ).

given the denition of (x), we can verify the gluing law in (3.15). we keep to

our assumption that all boundary components, including b, have zero mod 2 index. we

perform the computation using a convenient metric and gauge connection such that the
dirac operator db has no zero eigenvalues, and the metric on x looks near b like r b,
with this description being valid for a distance t (in the r direction) that is very long
compared to the size of b. for t  , since db has no zero modes, all zero modes of dx
grow or decay exponentially in the r direction, and converge for large t to zero modes on
x1 or on x2. hence, the number of eigenvalues of dx that converge to zero for t   is
the sum of the number of zero modes of dx1 and the number of zero modes of dx2 . this
implies that the mod 2 index is additive, and gives (3.15).6

the fact that (x) is an element of p(y ) has implications for the quantization of
the rr elds on y in a hamiltonian framework. in quantizing the zero modes of the rr
elds on y , one gets a one-dimensional space hy of quantum states for each y  k(y ).
supercially, it seems that hy is canonically a copy of c  one describes an rr quantum
state by giving a number for each y  but actually hy is isomorphic to p(y ) z2 c.
this follows from our formalism. since the restriction of x  k(x) to its boundary
values y  k(y ) consists of mutually commuting observables, the boundary values can be
simultaneously specied and treated classically. in doing so, the factor (x) is a factor
in the path integral, and since it takes values in p(y ), the path integral with boundary
values y is not a number but an element of p(y ) z2 c (where again, p(y ) depends on
y). since the path integral on a manifold with boundary should dene a quantum state in

6 if b has a nonzero mod 2 index, dx can have a zero mode that is not localized on either

side. more care is then needed both here and in the denition of (x).

19

the hilbert space of the boundary, the space of quantum ground states for given y must

be isomorphic to this.

verication of the main claim

finally, we must show that (3.21) varies smoothly as the data on y vary. we will

explain this by analogy with a nite dimensional situation. let v be a real vector space of
dimension 2k for some k with a positive denite inner product which we denote hv, wi for
v, w  v . let vc be the complexication of v , to which we extend h , i as a bilinear form,
and let s, s  be maximal isotropic subspaces of vc, that is, k-dimensional subspaces such
that hv, wi = 0 for v, w  s or v, w  s . then the dimension of the intersection s  s  is
invariant mod 2 under deformations of s and s  (as maximal isotropic subspaces). this
can be proved using the one-dimensional dirac operator on the unit interval i = [0, 1]

for a fermi eld  with values in v .

in one dimension, the spin representation is one-

dimensional, so the total number of components of  is the dimension 2k of v . there is no

room for curvature or holonomy, so we can take the dirac operator on the interval to be
just di = d/dt, 0  t  1. we impose boundary conditions that (0)  s and (1)  s .
the dirac operator with these boundary conditions is elliptic and skew-symmetric (here
one uses that s and s  are maximal isotropic), so it has a mod two index. a zero mode is a
t-independent fermion with values in the intersection s s , so the mod 2 index equals the
dimension of this intersection mod 2, and hence this dimension is a topological invariant

mod 2.

there actually are two connected families of maximal isotropic subspaces. once

we pick an orientation of v , they can be described as follows. upon picking a basis
s1, s2, . . . , sk for s, we consider s to be self-dual or anti-self-dual depending on whether
the k-form ds1ds2. . .dsk is self-dual or anti-self-dual. if s and s  are both self-dual or
both anti-selfdual, the intersection dimension is k mod 2 (this is clear upon taking s = s ),
and if they are of opposite types, the intersection dimension is k  1 mod 2. to verify the
last statement, consider the following modication of s. we can pick a basis such that s1
(as well as s1) is orthogonal to s2, s3, . . . , sk, and let s  be the maximal isotropic subspace
spanned by s1 and s2, s3, . . . , sk. then s  has opposite type from s and its intersection
with s has dimension k  1. if two maximal isotropic subspaces dier in this way (by
complex conjugating one basis vector), we say they dier by an elementary modication.

we will apply this formalism in an innite dimensional case in which v is the space of
all spinor elds on y with values in y  y. the perturbations we consider are suciently

20

soft so that the above concepts can be applied even though v is innite dimensional. (one

apparently cannot make sense of whether k is even or odd, however.) we take as above
s to be the maximal isotropic subspace of vc consisting of negative eigenvalues of idy .
we let w be the subspace of vc consisting of boundary values of solutions of the dirac
equation dx  = 0 for  a spinor eld on x valued in x  x. w is isotropic since for two
solutions 1, 2 of the dirac equation on x (we use the same name for the restriction to
y ) we have

h1, 2i =zy
=zx

d9xg(1, 2) =zx
d10xgi(1, i2)
d10xg ((dx1, 2) + (1, dx2)) = 0.

(3.22)

general considerations about elliptic operators show that w is maximal isotropic. with
aps boundary conditions, the space of zero modes of dx is the intersection w  s, so
the mod 2 index is the dimension of this intersection mod 2.

now suppose that by varying the metric or connection on y , we pass through a locus
l in eld space on which eigenvalues of dy pass through zero. generically, this is where
dy develops zero eigenvalues. the number of such eigenvalues will be even (since the
dimension of the null space of dy is a topological invariant mod 2) and generically will be
precisely 2. let 1 and 2 be the two zero modes at some point on l. near l, restricted
to this two-dimensional space, dy (being a real, antisymmetric matrix) looks like

(cid:18) 0




0(cid:19) ,

(3.23)

where generically  has a simple zero on l and changes sign as one crosses l. the linear
combination of 1 and 2 that is in s is 1 + i2 or 1  i2 depending on the sign of .
hence, s undergoes an elementary modication in crossing l. it follows that the mod 2
index j(x  x) changes by 1 in crossing l, so (x) = (1)j changes sign in this crossing.
the pfaan pf(dy ) is proportional to , so its absolute value |pf(dy )| is proportional to
|| and is not smooth on l. but (x)|pf(dy )|  pf(dy ) varies smoothly, as we wished to
show, since (x) changes sign precisely where pf(dy ) does.

4. application to rr periods in type iia

we will now explain an illuminating application of this formalism which gave, in fact,

the original motivation for writing the present paper.

21

let w be the worldvolume of a d-brane in type iia superstring theory on a ten-
dimensional spin manifold x. its dimension is of the form 2k  1 for some k. let nw be
the normal bundle to w . w is not necessarily spin (it should be spinc [19]). in any event,
because x is spin, letting s(w ) denote the spin bundle of w and s(nw ) denote the spin
bundle of nw , the tensor product s(w )  s(nw ) exists as an ordinary vector bundle.
the worldvolume fermions on w takes values in this bundle. the dirac operator dw is
real or pseudoreal depending on k, and in any event, the fermion path integral, which is
most naturally understood as a pfaan pf(dw ), is real. there is no problem in dening
(with zeta function regularization, for example) the absolute value |pf(dw )|, but the sign
may have an anomaly. mathematically, pf(dw ) is naturally dened as a section of a real
line bundle pf(w ) (the pfaan line bundle) over the appropriate space of elds. this

line bundle may be nontrivial.

the anomaly in the fermion path integral means concretely the following. if we go
around a loop in the space of w s, pf(dw ) might come back with the opposite sign. (in
varying w , one may also vary other data such as the metric on x. to keep the notation

simple, we will consider a loop of w s in a xed x. one can also let the chan-paton gauge

elds on w vary as one varies w , but we will omit this from the notation.)

when one goes around a loop in the space of w s, w sweeps out, if things are generic
enough, a 2k-dimensional submanifold u  x. to keep things simple, we will assume that
this is so. in going around the loop, pf(d) changes by

pf(d)  (1)(u)pf(d),

(4.1)

where, depending on the value of k, (u ) is the ordinary or mod 2 index of the dirac
operator dw . we give some details below on the proof of (4.1) and the precise index
theory formula for (u ).

the sign factor in (4.1) is the global anomaly, and when it is nonzero, it must be

canceled by the coupling of the brane to the rr elds. the relevant factor in the path

integral (from [9,10,11,5]) is

exp(cid:18)izw

changes by a factor

exp(cid:18)izu

with x the k-theory class of the gauge bundle on the brane. in going around a loop it

c qba(w )/ba(n ) ch (x)(cid:19) ,
g qba(u )/ba(n ) ch (x)(cid:19) .

22

(4.2)

(4.3)

thus, the condition that the argument of the path integral is single-valued in going around

a loop is that

(1)(u) exp(cid:18)izu

g qba(u )/ba(n )(cid:19) = 1

(4.4)

whenever u is the total space of a one-parameter family of brane world-volumes.

note that a one-parameter family of w s has topology u = ws1. but our discussion
below will show essentially that (4.4) is valid whenever a d-brane can be wrapped on

u . global anomalies for a one-parameter family of p-dimensional objects often give a

topological restriction that is valid in the physical problem for a wider class of (p + 1)-

manifolds than one can get, strictly, from a one-parameter family. this is such a case, and
indeed we will consider below an example with u = s2k. sometimes the extension beyond

what one learns directly from global anomalies can be proved using conditions of locality.

here we will get the more general result by implementing the formalism of section 3.

to try to keep things simple, we will consider a case in which only the highest di-

mension rr eld g2k contributes (for example, because the lower gs are zero). the
reason for considering this case is that it brings out a conceptual diculty that we want

to emphasize. the additional contributions from the lower gs make the formulas more

complicated, but do not aect this conceptual diculty.

if only g2k is relevant, the condition for anomaly cancellation is that

(1)(u) exp(cid:18)izu

g2k(cid:19) = 1.

(4.5)

if  were identically 0, this would give the naively expected condition that the periods

of g2k are integral multiples of 2. more generally, if there is a dierential form  in
spacetime such that

(u ) =zu



for all u , then the quantization condition g2k is shifted to

zu

g2k
2

=

1

2zu

 + integer,

(4.6)

(4.7)

so that it is not g2k but g2k +  that obeys conventional dirac quantization. one
can formulate a similar, though somewhat more abstract, statement if there exists not a
dierential form  but an element   h 4(x; z2) obeying (4.6).

the case of d2-branes was considered in [7]. (the discussion was actually carried

out in m -theory and was equivalent to a type iia discussion with g2 and g0 assumed to

23

vanish, as we have done in obtaining (4.5).) in this case, a  with the appropriate properties

exists: it is the dierential form that is related to the characteristic class p1(x)/2.

for a d4-brane, there is no such , even as an element of h 4(x; z2). (the problem
also has an analog for d8-branes once one allows the chan-paton bundle on w to vary.)
this is because there is no cohomological formula for the mod 2 index in six dimensions.7

for any given u , one can certainly nd a  such that (4.6) is true. but there is no  that

works for all u s.

thus, it seems impossible, or at least unreasonably complicated (involving, at best,

a variety of higher order cohomology operations) to state the appropriate quantization

condition for g6 if one interprets g6 as a dierential form and states the condition in
terms of cohomology. given the relations between rr charges and k-theory that have

emerged in the last few years, one wonders if a formalism based on k-theory would make

it easier to state the necessary quantization conditions. doing this was the original goal

of the present paper. for this, we have needed the explanation in section 2 of how the

rr elds are classied by k-theory, and the material that we have surveyed in section 3

concerning the interpretation of self-duality in the k-theory language.

an illustrative example

we will now make explicit what the formalism of sections 2 and 3 means as applied

to an illustrative example, and show that (4.5) is a consequence. (an extension of the

same reasoning shows that if suitably interpreted, (4.4) is a consequence of the formalism

in sections 2 and 3.)

we want to consider a simple example in which spacetime contains a 2k-sphere u
with normal bundle n . n is a real vector bundle of rank 10  2k. for suitable choice of
n , (u ) will be nonzero; we want to explore the quantization of the rr form g2k on u .
we could take the spacetime manifold x to be the total space of the bundle n .

however, the framework of section 3 is most straightforward for compact x. hence, we

replace n by a sphere bundle. this is done by adding a point at innity to each ber of
n  u . the bers are copies of r102k; compactifying each ber by adding a point at
innity, we compactify the total space of n to a manifold x that is a sphere bundle over
u , with bers s102k.

7 we are grateful to d. freed and m. j. hopkins for explaining this to us, and to hopkins
for explaining in detail how far one can go in the direction of such a formula and what sort of

topology is involved.

24

a homology basis of x is given by the following four classes: a point p  x; u ,
embedded in x as the zero section of n ; a ber f of the sphere bundle x  u ; and x
itself. these are all spin manifolds, so a brane wrapped on any one of them with trivial

chan-paton bundle gives an element of k(x). we denote the corresponding elements of

k(x) as [p], [u ], [f ], and [x]. using the atiyah-hirzebruch spectral sequence, it can be
shown k(x) = z4 with these four classes furnishing a basis. the bilinear form on k(x) is
given by ([p], [x]) = 1, ([u ], [f ]) = (1)k, with other components vanishing. (the factor
(1)k, which will not play an important role, comes from the complex conjugation of the
second factor in the denition of the antisymmetric form (x, y) on k(x).)

the z2-valued function  is completely determined by its value for the four basis
elements together with the fundamental relation (3.5). we will see that if v is any even-

dimensional spin submanifold of x and [v ] is the corresponding k-theory class, then

([v ]) = (1)(v ).

(4.8)

from this, it follows in the case at hand that ([v ]) is +1 if v is p, f , or x, while
([u ]) = (1)(u) is in general non-trivial. ((p) is zero because the dirac index on a
point, with values in an even rank bundle, is zero mod 2. (f ) is zero because f has

trivial normal bundle, and positive scalar curvature, so the relevant dirac operator has no

zero modes. finally, (x) is zero because x is a ber bundle with bers of positive scalar

curvature, so the dirac equation has no zero modes. the statements about (f ) and (x)

use the fact that the chan-paton bundles are trivial.)

given this, let us discuss the quantization of the rr periods. the theta function of

k(x) is constructed as a sum over a maximal commuting lattice 1, which we take to be
generated by [f ] and [x]. we take the complementary lattice 2 to be generated by [p]
and [u ]. the theta function is constructed as a sum over the coset 1
2 1, where
  1 is such that

2  + 1 in 1

(x) = (1)(,x)

(4.9)

for x  2. in view of (4.8) and the structure of the bilinear form ( , ), this means that

hence the theta function is constructed as a sum over the coset

 = [f ].

1
2

[f ] + 1 

1
2

1.

25

(4.10)

(4.11)

the theta function is constructed, in other words, as a sum over elements of the form

(n + (u )/2)[f ] + m[x]

(4.12)

with integers n and m.

concretely, [f ] corresponds to an rr form g2k (since f has codimension 2k) of delta

function support on f , such that

zu

g2k
2

= 1.

analogously, [x] corresponds to an rr form g0 such that

g0
2

= 1.

(4.13)

(4.14)

(4.12) shows that the theta function is constructed as a sum over elements of 1

2 1 that

correspond to rr forms with

zu

g2k
2

=

(u )

2

mod z.

(4.15)

in this sense, the mod 2 index shifts the quantization of the rr forms in the expected way.

4.1. computation of (u )

we still need to describe why the global anomaly (u ) is a mod 2 index, and to show

that ([u ]) is determined by the same mod 2 index.

the details of the evaluation of the global anomaly depend on the dimension of the
brane worldvolume w . the two cases in which dim (w ) is of the form 4n1 are somewhat
similar, so we consider them rst, followed by the two rather similar cases with dim (w )

of the form 4n + 1.

w of dimension 4n  1

if w is three-dimensional (the case already considered in [7]), then the spinors on w
are pseudoreal. the hermitian dirac operator idw = ii di on w with values in any
real bundle has an antiunitary complex conjugation symmetry  , with dw = dw  ,
and  2 = 1.8 if  is an eigenfunction of dw , then   is an eigenfunction with the same
8 in a local lorentz frame, one can take the gamma matrices to be the usual 2  2 pauli
sigma matrices, with 2 imaginary and the others real.  is then 2 times complex conjugation;
it commutes with ii di .

26

eigenvalue; it cannot be a multiple of  since   = c for complex c would imply, given
the properties of  , that cc = 1. hence the eigenvalues of dw appear in pairs. in our
case, the dirac operator dw that we want acts on spinors with values in s(nw ), where
nw is the normal bundle to w , and s(nw ) are the spinors of nw . nw has rank seven,

and s(nw ) is a real bundle.

now, when we go around a loop in the space of w s, eigenvalue pairs may pass through
zero. every time this occurs, the pfaan pf(dw ) changes sign. so (u ) = , where 
is the net number of times a pair of eigenvalues passes through zero from the positive to

negative direction. a one parameter family of dirac operators on w glue together to make
a dirac operator on u = s1  w (assuming the metric on w is kept xed in the family;
more generally, u is a ber bundle over s1 with bers copies of w , but we will not build this

into the notation). a standard argument relating spectral ow in three dimensions to dirac

zero modes in four dimensions [24] shows that the index i(s(nw )) of the dirac operator

with values in s(nw ) is 2, so (u ) = i(s(nw ))/2. this can be more conveniently

written as follows. the four-manifold u has in the string theory spacetime x a normal
bundle n of rank six; one has nw = t s1  n with t s1 the tangent bundle to s1. as
t s1 is trivial, it follows that the spin bundle s(nw ) of nw is the same as the spin bundle
s(n ) of n . but the description in terms of n gives a simplication; as n has even rank,
its spin bundle has a chiral decomposition as s(n ) = s+(n )s(n ). the two summands
are related by complex conjugation, and hence the index of the dirac operator with values

in s+(n ) equals that with values in s(n ). so i(s(nw ))/2 = i(s+(n )) = i(s(n )).
the nal result for (u ) is then in this case

(u ) = i(s+(n )) = i(s(n )).

(4.16)

if w is seven-dimensional, everything is the same except the details of constructing the
pseudoreal symmetry  . one can pick seven 8  8 gamma matrices i that are imaginary
and square to +1, so the hermitian dirac operator ii di on spinors of w is real. however,
we want the dirac operator on spinors on w with values in s(nw ), and (as nw has rank

three) the spinors of nw are pseudoreal. because of the pseudoreality of nw , there is again
a complex conjugation symmetry  of idw with  2 = 1.9 the rest of the argument is the
same. the eigenvalues of idw are paired by  , and in a one-parameter family of w s, there
9 if the generators of the su (2) structure group of nw are pauli matrices i with 2 imaginary

and the others real, then  is the product of complex conjugation with 2.

27

is again a possibility of spectral ow. so again if  is the net number of times an eigenvalue
pair passes through zero, then the number of sign changes of pf(dw ) is (u ) = . and
again,  is half the index of the dirac operator on u with values in s(nw ). once again,
letting n be the normal bundle to u = s1  w , we have s(nw ) = s+(n )  s(n ), and
the same reasoning leads again to (4.16).

w of dimension 4n + 1

now suppose that w is ve-dimensional. then (as the normal bundle to w is of

rank ve and spinors of so(5) are pseudoreal) the spinors on w and the spinors on its
normal bundle nw are both pseudoreal, so the dirac operator dw is real. this means
that the eigenvalues of the hermitian operator idw occur in pairs with opposite sign: if
idw  = , then idw  = . it is still true that the pfaan pf(dw ) changes sign
every time an eigenvalue pair crosses zero, but this time the eigenvalues in the pair are

crossing from opposite directions. we let  be the number of eigenvalue pair crossings
mod 2, so (u ) = . (in contrast to the case where w has dimension 4n  1, the number
of eigenvalue pair crossings is only a topological invariant mod 2 since eigenvalues are

crossing in opposite directions.)

the relation between a one parameter family of dirac operators on w and a dirac
operator on u = s1  w is now that the mod 2 spectral ow  on w , for spinors
with values in s(nw ), equals the mod two index of the dirac operator on u = s1  w ,
with values in the same bundle. we recall that this mod 2 index j(s(nw )) is dened

as the number of positive chirality zero modes of the dirac operator on u with values
in nw (regarded as a bundle on u ), mod 2. from nw = t s1  n , we again have
s(nw ) = s(n ) = s+(n )  s(n ), so j(s(nw )) = j(s+(n )) + j(s(n )). but the two
terms on the right are in general not equal, unlike the case when w has dimension 4n 1.
so our result is now

(u ) = j(s(n )) = j(s+(n )) + j(s(n )).

(4.17)

for w nine-dimensional, the analysis is much the same. one change is the explanation
of why dw is a real operator. so(9) and so(1) both have real spin representations, so
the spinors of w and of its normal bundle are both real, and hence dw is real.

the other change is that, since so(1) is trivial, the spinors of the normal bundle

are a trivial rank one real bundle. so to get an anomaly, we must let either the chan-

paton bundle on w or the metric on w vary. also, if we want to think of the total

28

space u = s1  w of a family of w s as a submanifold of the spacetime x (we could
consider more general cases if we adopt a somewhat more abstract notation), we must for

dimensional reasons take u = x. as a result, the normal bundle n to u in x is of rank

zero, and the notation in (4.17) needs some clarication. as there are no gamma matrices,

we consider the cliord algebra of a rank zero vector space to consist only of scalars; there

is only one irreducible representation, of dimension 1, so s+(n ) is a trivial one dimensional
bundle and s(n ) is empty. with this interpretation, (4.17) can be justied by the same

arguments, but is perhaps more clearly written as

(x) = j,

(4.18)

where x is endowed with a set of space-lling branes carrying a chan-paton bundle with
k-theory class x, and j is the mod two index of the dirac operator dx on spinors with
values in x  x. the justication for (4.18) is the same that we gave for w of dimension
ve: the number of sign changes of pf(dw ) in a one parameter family equals the number
 of level crossings, mod 2; and this in turn equals the mod 2 index of the dirac operator,

in this case on u = x.

summary

the main dierence between these various cases is that when w has dimension 4n1,
the anomaly is given by an ordinary index that can be computed using a dierential form.

this leads to the type of description given in [7] for w of dimension three  a shifted

quantization condition that can be expressed in terms of dierential forms. however, for

w of dimension 4n+1, we run into a mod 2 index that cannot be described cohomologically.

to make sense of the anomaly in these cases, the reinterpretation of the rr elds in k-

theory is extremely useful.

the above formulas for (u ) can be stated in a more unied way. for any vector

bundle t over u , let n+(t ) and n(t ) be the numbers of positive and negative chirality
zero modes of the dirac operator on u with values in t . then in all cases we have

(u ) = n+(s+(n ))  n+(s(n )) mod 2.

(4.19)

for u of dimension 4n + 2, this is equivalent to (4.17), since j(s(n )) = n+(s(n ))
mod 2. for u of dimension 4n, it is equivalent to (4.16), since i(s+(n )) = n+(s+(n )) 
n(s+(n )), and by complex conjugation n(s+(n )) = n+(s(n )). (4.19) is a convenient
expression for comparison with the computation that we are about to perform.

29

4.2. computation of 

finally, we want to show that for any even-dimensional spin submanifold v of x,

([v ]) = (1)(v ).

let n be the normal bundle of v and s(n ) the associated spin bundles. the class

x = [v ] is the k-theory class (s+(n ), s(n )) where s(n ) are understood as bundles

on x in the following sense. first, let r be a tubular neighborhood of v in x. then
there is a projection  : r  v , and one pulls back s+, s to bundles on r that we
will denote by the same names. then, away from the zero section of r, one has an
isomorphism t : s+  s via the usual tachyon eld t = ~  ~, where ~ are gamma
matrices on s+(n ) s(n ) (as usual, the gamma matrices reverse chirality and exchange
the two factors), and ~ are coordinates in the normal direction. using this isomorphism,
x = (s+, s) can be understood as a k-theory class on r that is trivial away from v

and hence (maintaining this triviality away from r) can be extended over x. concretely,
after perhaps replacing (s+(n ), s(n )) by (s+(n )  f, s(n )  f ) for some f , one can
extend s(n ) f over x such that the tachyon eld dened in r by t = ~  ~ 1 extends
over x and is an isomorphism away from v .

before attempting to compute the mod 2 index with values in x  x, we consider
a slightly simpler problem. suppose that we want to compute the index of the dirac

operator on x with values in the k-theory class x. the result we want to justify is

that the dirac operator on x, for spinors with values in x, has the same index as the

dirac operator on v for spinors with values in a trivial line bundle. one way to do the
computation is to consider the dirac operator idx on x, acting on s+(n )  s(n ), or
possibly (s+(n )  f )  (s(n )  f ). (in the computation we are about to perform, f
is irrelevant, as we will see momentarily). we perturb this operator to iedx = idx + wt ,
where t , which exchanges (s+(n ) f ) with (s(n ) f ), is the tachyon eld constructed
in the last paragraph, and w is a real number that varies from 0 to innity. for w = 0,
iedx = idx , and for w  , the fermions are everywhere very massive, except near v ,
vanishes. hence, eigenstates of iedx whose eigenvalue is small for w   are localized near
n , and are sections of s+(n ) s(n )  the details of the choice of f and the extension of
the bundles over x are irrelevant. the eigenvalue problem iedx  =  is solved, for large

w and small , by a kind of born-oppenheimer approximation. first one solves the dirac

where the mass term of the fermions with values in s(n ) (but not those with values in f )

equation in the normal directions. this equation has a unique zero mode 0  this is the

30

basic local fact used in building p-branes as bound states of (p + 2k)-branes for arbitrary k
[13,14]. then one solves the dirac equation on v with an ansatz  = v  0, with v
being a spinor eld on v . then v obeys an ordinary dirac equation on v (with values

in a trivial bundle as the line bundle generated by the 0s is trivial). so the low-lying

spectrum of iedx converges, for w  , to the spectrum of idv , and the two operators

have the same index.

for our present purposes, we want not the ordinary index with values in x but the
mod two index with values in x  x. first of all, with x = (s+(n ), s(n )), x is equal to
either x or x depending on whether complex conjugation maps s(n ) to themselves or
exchanges them. this depends on the rank of the normal bundle. in any event, the minus

sign will not aect the mod 2 index. now we need to compute the number of positive
chirality zero modes mod 2 of the dirac operator idx acting on x  x. for this, we again
introduce a tachyon perturbation, and replace idx by idx + wt . it is up to us to pick
a convenient t , and we pick t to be the same tachyon eld used in the last paragraph,

acting on x alone  we do not include any tachyon eld acting on x. the localization
argument for large w replaces the factor of x in x  x with the unique zero mode 0 in
the normal direction. so nally we reduce to a dirac operator idv on v with values in
x = (s+(n ), s(n )). hence the number of zero eigenvalues of idx on spinors with
values in x  x is n+(s+(n ))  n+(s(n )) mod 2. comparing with (4.19), we see that
this statement is equivalent to the claim (4.8) that we have aimed to justify.

4.3. some remarks on d-brane global anomalies

we have thus seen that by classifying rr elds by k-theory and properly interpreting

self-duality in the quantum theory, we get, without looking at d-branes, the results that

would be expected to follow from type iia d-brane global anomalies. it would be nice

also to look at the d-branes and show that their global world-volume anomalies cancel. to

do this eectively, one would like to have a natural way to describe couplings of d-branes

to rr elds in the k-theory language. not having this, we will content ourselves with

looking at a special case.

before analyzing the special case, we will try to describe its theoretical signicance.

on a closed manifold x, the total d-brane charge must vanish (assuming the torsion

anomaly described in section 3 does not come into play), so if we had a formalism in

which it was manifest that the anomalies depend only on the total d-brane charge, there

31

would be nothing to prove: the d-branes could not contribute to the anomalies, and the

discussion would reduce to the formalism we have presented.

even if x has a nonempty boundary y , we can use the reasoning of section 2. the

total d-brane charge in type iia is measured by the rr elds on y , which are classied
by a class in k(y ). near innity we suppose that x looks like ry . consider a collection
of d8-branes and d8-branes supported on p  y , where p is a point in y . suppose that
in the interior of x (in the compact part of x that is bounded by p  y ) the rr elds
vanish. the d8-d8 conguration is classied by an element y  k(p  y ) = k(y ). in
crossing the branes, the rr elds jump by y, so as we assume they vanish in the interior

of x, they are classied at innity by the element y of k(y ).

if we had a framework in which the anomalies manifestly depend only on the k-theory

classes of the branes, the above example would be universal, as it enables us to get any

desired set of rr elds at innity, and any set of branes that produce the same elds at

innity are in the same topological class. even though we do not have a formalism with

the requisite properties, it is still instructive to examine this example.

we can simplify the discussion further. we will assume that the theory has a rea-

sonable degree of locality so that we can cut and paste. using this, we can reduce to

the following simple situation. we let q be a point on r to the interior of p, so that
cutting x on q  y splits it into two pieces x1  x2 with the following properties. x1 is
equivalent topologically to x and contains no branes, and x2 contains the branes. in fact,
x2 is a copy of r+  y , and the d8  d8 system is wrapped on p  y for some p  r+.
q corresponds to the boundary 0 of r+, and the other end of r+ at innity corresponds
to the original boundary of x. we write yl and yr for the two ends of x2, roughly q  y
and   y . x1 and x2 can be glued on their common boundary yl = q  y to make
x. the path integral on x is a product of path integrals on x1 and x2 with a sum over
physical states on the common boundary.

as x1 contains no branes, the path integral on x1 is governed by the formalism of
sections 2 and 3. we gave the denition of the function  for a manifold with boundary

at the end of section 3.

the new ingredient is x2, which does contain branes, and has the two boundary
components yl and yr. on yl the rr elds are trivial, and on yr they are controlled

by the k-theory class y. according to the discussion in section 3, the rr path integral
on x2 should give not a number but a section of pf(y1)  pf(y2), where pf(y1) is the
pfaan line of the dirac operator on y1 with values in the k-theory class 0  0 = 0, and

32

pf(y2) is the pfaan line of the dirac operator on y2 with values in the k-theory class
y  y. actually, the pfaan line of the dirac operator with values in the k-theory class 0
is canonically trivial, so the path integral should take values in the pfaan line pf(y2), or
simply (as y2 is isomorphic to y ) pf(y ), where as in section 3, the k-theory class y  y
is understood in the denition of pf(y ).

what about the brane anomaly? the d8 d8 system contains worldvolume fermions
in the adjoint representation, that is, with values in y  y. so the brane path integral is a
section of the very same pfaan line pf(y ) that we have just met. all is in order. there

is no need to look for any additional anomaly cancellation mechanism. and that is just as

well, since, there being no cohomological formula for the global holonomy of pf(y ), this

would be an exceedingly dicult anomaly to cancel in a more conventional way.

work of gm was supported in part by doe grant de-fg-02-92er40704. gm also

thanks the institute for advanced study for hospitality and the monell foundation for

support during the initiation of this work. work of ew was supported in part by nsf

grant phy-9513835 and the caltech discovery fund. we are grateful to d. freed and

m. j. hopkins for encouraging us to express everything in terms of k-theory, and to m.

f. atiyah, d. freed, m. j. hopkins, g. segal, and i. singer for detailed explanations of

a variety of mathematical points. we also thank e. diaconescu for discussions about rr

elds.

33

references

[1] e. witten, duality relations among topological eects in string theory, hep-

th/9912086.

[2] n. marcus and j. h. schwarz, field theories that have no manifestly lorentz

invariant formulation, phys. lett. b115 (1982) 111.

[3] e. witten, fivebrane eective action in m -theory, j. geom. phys. 22 (1997) 103,

hep-th/9610234.

[4] m. henningson, b. e. w. nilsson, and p. salomonson, holomorphic factorization
of correlation functions in (4k + 2)-dimensional 2k-form gauge theory, hep-
th/9908107.

[5] g. moore and r. minasian, k theory and ramond-ramond charge, jhep

9711:002 (1997), hep-th/9710230.

[6] e. witten, d-branes and k theory, jhep 812:019 (1998), ehp-th/9810188.
[7] e. witten, on flux quantization in m theory and the eective action, j. geom.

phys. 22 (1997) 1, hep-th/9609122.

[8] e. diaconescu, g. moore, and e. witten, to appear.
[9] m. bershadsky, c. vafa, and v. sadov, d-branes and topological field theories,

nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 420.

[10] m. b. green, j. a. harvey, and g. moore, i-brane inow and anomalous couplings

on d-branes, class. quant. grav. 14 (1997) 47, hep-th/9605033.

[11] e. cheung and z. yin, anomalies, branes, and currents, nucl. phys. b517 (1998)

69, hep-th/9710206.

[12] s. gukov, k theory, reality, and orientifolds, hep-th/9901042.
[13] e. gava, k. s. narain, and m. h. sarmadi, on the bound states of p- and (p + 2)-

branes, nucl. phys. b504 (1997) 214, hep-th/9704006.

[14] a. sen, tachyon condensation on the brane-antibrane system, hep-th/9805170.
[15] m. b. green, c. m. hull, and p. k. townsend, d-brane wess-zumino actions, t du-
ality, and the cosmological constant, phys. lett. b382 (1996) 65, hep-th/9604110.

[16] r. bott and l. tu, dierential forms in algebraic topology (springer-verlag).
[17] m. f. atiyah, riemann surfaces and spin structures, ann. sci. ecole norm. sup.

4 (1971) 47.

[18] e. witten, baryons and branes in anti de sitter space, jhep 9807:006 (1998).
[19] d. s. freed and e. witten, anomalies in string theory with d-branes, hep-

th/9907189.

[20] l. dolan and c. r. nappi, a modular-invariant partition function for the five-

brane, nucl. phys. b530 (1998) 683, hep-th/9806016.

[21] d. s. freed, a gluing law for the index of the dirac operator, in global analysis

in modern mathematics, ed. k. uhlenbeck (publish or perish press, 1993.)

34

[22] x. dai and d. s. freed, -invariants and determinant lines, j. math. phys. 35
(1994) 5155; d. s. freed, determinant line bundles revisited, in geometry and
physics, ed. j. a. andersen et. al. (marcel dekker, 1997) 187.

[23] m. f. atiyah, patodi, and i. m. singer, spectral asymmetry and riemannian ge-

ometry, i math. proc. cam. phil. soc. (1975) 77 43.

[24] m. f. atiyah, v. k. patodi, and i. m. singer, spectral asymmetry and riemannian

geometry. iii, math. proc. camb. phil. soc. (1976) 79 71.

35

