1

9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
6
1

 

 
 

1
v
7
3
1
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

an insiders guide to quantum causal histories

fotini markopoulou
the blackett laboratory, imperial college,
prince consort road, south kensington, london sw7 2bz, u.k.
and
center for gravitational physics and geometry, department of physics,
the pennsylvania state university, university park, pa 16801, usa.

a review is given of recent work aimed at constructing a quantum theory of cosmology in which all observables
refer to information measurable by observers inside the universe. at the classical level the algebra of observables
should be modied to take into account the fact that observers can only give truth values to observables that
have to do with their backwards light cone. the resulting algebra is a heyting rather than a boolean algebra.
the complement is non-trivial and contains information about horizons and topology change. representation
of such observables quantum mechanically requires a many-hilbert space formalism, in which dierent observers
make measurements in dierent hilbert spaces. i describe such a formalism, called quantum causal histories;
examples include causally evolving spin networks and quantum computers.

1. introduction

a quantum theory of gravity is expected to also
be a satisfactory theory of quantum cosmology.
in turn, a quantum theory of cosmology would
only be acceptable if it admits a description fully
from within the universe itself. we may translate
this into the requirement that, in a satisfactory
quantum theory of gravity, the physical observ-
ables must refer to observations made inside the
universe.

this has immediate consequences. consider,
for example, the familiar construction of the
3-geometry wavefunction that is used in the
wheeler-dewitt equation. this describes the
quantum state of a spatial slice. however, in
a causal spacetime, only very special observers,
such as an observer at the nal singularity, can
have access to an entire slice. since there are no
observers outside the universe, this wavefunction
is not an observable quantity.

in [1], i argued that what is required to con-
struct a cosmological theory is internal observ-
ables, corresponding to observations made in-
side the universe. internal observations contain
only partial information about the universe, that
which is in the causal past of an observer at the

corresponding spacetime region. it then becomes
desirable to set up a framework for quantum grav-
ity in which all physical observables are internal.
to see how to do this we begin by understand-
ing the eect the requirement that all observables
are internal has on the structure of observables in
classical general relativity.

2. classical internal observables and their

algebra

let us start by considering only the causal
structure of the universe. to proceed it is con-
venient to approximate the causal structure of
spacetime by picking out a discrete set of events.
this gives us an approximate description of the
causal structure of the spacetime in terms of a
causal set [2]. this is s set of events p, q, r, . . ., or-
dered by a causal preceding relation p  q, which
is transitive (p  q and q  r imply that p  r),
is locally nite (given p  q the intersection of the
past of q and the future of p contains a nite num-
ber of events), and has no closed timelike loops
(if p  q and q  p, then p = q).

in such a causal set universe, the internal ob-
servables are functors from the causal set to the
category of sets2. details can be found in [1],

email address: fotini@ic.ac.uk.

2 a category is a collection of objects, and arrows between

2

here we will simply discuss examples. an prime
example of an internal observable then is the one
describing causal past. this is the functor

past : c  set,

(1)

that outputs events that have occurred.
it has
components at each event p which are the causal
past of p: past(p) = {r  c : r  p}. further, the
functor contains not only all these sets, but the
maps between them: past(p)  past(q), when-
ever p  q.

the internal observable past can be thought of
as a varying set, having components at each event
which are sets, all tied together by inclusion func-
tions. thus, the causal structure of the universe
is built into the observable. these are fundamen-
tally dierent than standard set-like observables.
this can be seen by considering the algebra of
internal observables.

the algebra of standard (xed time) observ-
ables is obtained by is called a heyting algebra.
as a result a theory with internal observables is
fundamentally dierent that a theory describing
a system external to the observers. it has a dif-
ferent logical structure. just as the boolean al-
gebra obeyed by set-like observables means that
physical propositions obey boolean logic, physical
propositions in a theory with internal observables
obey intuitionistic logic. its characteristic feature
is that, for some statement a, a 6= a. thus, the
requirement that physical observables must refer
to measurements made by observers in the uni-
verse has as a consequence the fact that the very
logic that observers use to describe what they see
must be modied. it should take into account the
fact that any single observer is only able to know
a subset of the true facts about their universe.

an immediate application of the heyting al-
gebra is in coding the causal topology.
it is
easy to check that in a universe with an ini-

the objects. there should be a unit, and the composition
of arrows should be associative. thus, a causal set is a
category (partial order) whose objects are the events, and
arrows are the causal relations. set is the category whose
objects are sets and whose arrows are maps between sets.
a functor can be thought of as a function from one
category to another that turns the objects of the rst into
objects of the second, while preserving the properties of
the arrows of the rst into the second.

tial event, which causally preceeds all the others,
future(p) = , for all p  c. in a universe with a
nal event, in the future of all others, past(p) = 
for all p  c. and for a universe with both,
both internal observables have all their compo-
nents empty. as a result, as described in [1], the
existence of horizons and topology change can be
deduced from the heyting complements.

3. the framework of quantum causal his-

tories

a quantum cosmological theory should involve
only internal observables; thus it should have an
algebra of observables whose classical limit is a
heyting algebra of the kind we just discussed.
but we know that the h  0 limit of the pro-
jection operators on an ordinary hilbert space is
a boolean algebra. therefore we need to look for
a formulation of quantum cosmology that is not
based on the usual single hilbert space formalism.
one possible way to proceed is to quantize the
causal structure by attaching hilbert spaces to
the events of a causal set. these can be thought
of as elementary planck-scale systems that inter-
act and evolve by rules that give rise to a discrete
causal history. an example of such a theory is
the causal evolution of spin networks [3], as we
will see in the next section. but let us rst give a
brief discussion of the basic features of quantum
causal histories (or qch for short).

3.1. hilbert spaces on the events

consider a causal set c. this is a spacetime
graph, with nodes which represent events, and
directed edges coding the causal ordering of the
nodes. let us interpret the events as elementary
quantum mechanical systems, which are to be en-
countered at planck scale. thus, we may attach
a hilbert space to each node of the causal set
graph, representing the elementary system that
we encounter at that node. since we are building
a theory with a fundamental discreteness in the
causal relations between these systems, thus as-
suming there is a lowest scale, it is reasonable
to expect that these hilbert spaces are nite-
dimensional. we have, therefore, built a causal
network of nite-dimensional hilbert spaces.

by the standard rules of quantum mechanics,
the combined state space of a set of events that
are acausal to each other is the tensor product of
the individual hilbert spaces.

when may we expect that there is unitary evo-
lution in this quantum causal history? it is not
dicult to check that this is only possible be-
tween acausal sets of events a and b that form a
complete pair a  b , that is, every event in b is
to the future of some event in a and every event
in a is to the past of some event in b, as shown
(ha = h1  h2 and hb = h3  h4  h5):

h
3

h
4

h
5

h
a

h
1

h
2

h
b

(2)

any information that reaches b has come
through a, and there is no event in the future of a
which is not related to b. information is therefore
conserved from a to b when a unitary evolution
map relates the two hilbert spaces.

it should be emphasized that this is local uni-
tary evolution, in the sense that the complete pair
a and b, in general, are localised spacelike regions
in the universe.
in the special case when the
causal set admits a global foliation into a set of
antichains (maximal sets of events in the causal
set that are all acausal to each other), there is
a linear sequence of unitary evolution operators
(this may be compared to quantum eld theory
on a globally hyperbolic spacetime).

consider the following conguration:

h
4

h
3

h
2

h
1

3

(3)

with evolution operator e : h1  h2  h3 
h4. next, select some state |2i  h2. this can
be extended to |1i  |2i in h1  h2 and then
evolved by e to some |i  h3 h4. finally, h4
can be traced out to leave a density matrix 3 =
trh4 |ih| in h3. that is, system 3 knows
about |2i, even though there is no causal link
from 2 to 3. this is a violation of the causal
relations of the underlying causal set.

there is a straightforward solution to this prob-
lem.
instead of attaching the hilbert spaces to
the events of the causal set, let us attach them to
the causal relations. we again take tensor prod-
ucts of hilbert spaces on edges that are acausal
to each other. any unitary operator in a history
where the hilbert spaces are on the edges can
be decomposed to a product of unitary operators
that live on the nodes of the causal set, going
from the composite hilbert space on the incom-
ing edges to that node to the composite hilbert
space on the outgoing ones, all of which respect
the causal structure of c. therefore, in a qch
with the hilbert spaces on the causal relations
and the operators on the events, the quantum
evolution strictly respects the underlying causal
set.

we may also note that promoting the nodes of
the causal set to evolution operators is consistent
with the intuition that an event in the causal set
denotes change, and so is most naturally repre-
sented by an operator.
in addition, since only
spacelike separated hilbert spaces are tensored
together, there is no single hilbert space, or wave-
function, for the entire universe.

3.2. hilbert spaces on the edges

closer inspection of the above model reveals
that the unitary evolution operators do not, in
general, respect local causality. as an example,

4. examples of quantum causal histories

we will now give specic examples of qch
models. to do so, we need to identify the hilbert

4

spaces and the complete pairs that are related
by the unitary evolution operators. the rst of
our two examples is causal spin network evolu-
tion, a model of quantum spatial geometry evolv-
ing causally. the second example considers iden-
tical
individual hilbert spaces which are two-
dimensional, and the resulting qch is a quantum
computer.

in [6], it was shown that, if the spin networks
were restricted to be of valence n, a small set of
generating evolution operators can be identied.
these are the 1-skeletons of the n-dimensional
pachner moves for piecewise linear triangulations
[7]. for example, in 2+1, the set of elementary
moves is shown below; in each pair the top and
bottom congurations are exchanged.

4.1. causal evolution of spin networks

spin networks were originally dened by pen-
rose as trivalent graphs with their edges labelled
by representations of su (2) [4]. from such ab-
stract labelled graphs, penrose was able to re-
cover directions (angles) in 3-dimensional eu-
clidean space. later, in loop quantum gravity,
spin networks were shown to be the basis states
for the spatial quantum geometry states [5]. the
quantum area and volume operators, expanded in
the spin network basis were shown to have a dis-
crete spectrum, with their eigenvalues depending
on the labels of the spin network present in the
region of space whose area, or volume, is being
measured.

in [6,3], spin network graphs were used as
model of quantum spatial geometry evolving
causally. this means that the nodes of the spin
network graph are the events in a causal set.

a causal spin network history is a quantum
causal history. to see this, we need to observe
that it has the following features. the hilbert
spaces are the spaces of intertwiners. an inter-
twiner labels a node of a spin network.
it is a
map from the tensor product of the representa-
tions labelling the edges incoming to that node
to the tensor product of the outgoing edges. the
possible intertwiners for a node in the spin net-
work form a vector space, the so-called space of
intertwiners3.

the intertwiner spaces of spacelike separated
nodes in the causal history are to be tensored to-
gether, with the representations on any connect-
ing edges summed over: vijkmno = pl vijkl 
vlmno when l labels the shared edge.

3for a trivalent node of an su (2) spin network, the inter-
twiner is unique. for a four-valent node, the intertwiner
space is nite-dimensional. for higher valence, continuous
parameters enter.

i

m

j

o

n

i

j

k

k

i

n

j

i

j

k

l

k

l

m

(4)

given an initial 3-valent spin network, to be
thought of as modeling a quantum spatial slice,
the causal history is built by repeated application
of the above moves. they change the spin net-
work locally, thus producing a discrete analogue
of multingered time evolution. thus, the ampli-
tude to go from an given initial spin network 1
to a nal one 2 can be expressed as the product
of the amplitudes for the pachner moves that oc-
cur in a spacetime history extrapolating between
the two spin networks, summed over the possible
extrapolating histories:

a12 = x

y

amove. (5)

histories 12

moves in a

given history

explicit expressions for the amplitudes amove for
the elementary moves have so far only been given
for a simple causal model in [8].

by construction, the pachner moves are always
moves between complete pairs (they are homs of
the spin network graph). thus, they can be con-
sistently promoted to unitary operators.

this completes the identication of causal spin
network histories as a qch model. the indi-
vidual hilbert spaces are the intertwiner spaces,
which are to be tensored when they are space-
like separated in the history. the local unitary
operators are the pachner moves.

having performed these identications, we may
note that several more models of the same type
have been explored in the literature. they are

graphs evolving under the above causal moves,
but with dierent sets of labels. trivalent graphs
labelled by ratios of integers give rise to sens
string networks [9,10]. using q-deformed spin net-
works, that is, spin networks labelled by repre-
sentations of suq(2) have a nite list of labels
that may appear on an edge [11]. in fact, spin
networks can be constructed that are labelled by
representations of any compact group [3], as well
as supersymmetry [12], and all give rise to quan-
tum causal histories when evolved causally.

4.2. quantum computers

possibly the simplest choice of

individual
hilbert spaces in a qch is to require that they
all are 2-dimensional: c2. having done so, it is
unavoidable to note that these spaces are qubits
and the history is a (very large) quantum com-
puter! a choice of local unitary operators is a
choice of quantum gates in a quantum computer.
the set of properties of the underlying causal set
is identical to the computers circuit.

given how hard the task of nding explicit ex-
pressions for suitable qch evolution operators,
this model provides the opportunity to use the
quantum gates used in quantum computing to
model quantum spacetime evolution.
it is pos-
sible that there is a relationship between the con-
ditions required for a quantum computer to run
for a long time and a quantum spacetime to have
a classical limit.

5. what a quantum causal history looks

like from the inside

we may now briey return to internal observ-
ables and outline how we expect they will appear
in qch. consider a qch with hilbert spaces la-
belling the causal relations, and let us interpret
them in a way that will help us set up internal
observables.

given some event p in the causal set, let q and
r be two events in the future of p. in the qch
on this causal set, there are two hilbert spaces
for the two causal relations, hpq and hpr respec-
tively. we will interpret the rst as the state
space of p as seen by q, and the second as the
state space of p as seen by r. the relation be-

5

tween the two should depend on the causal re-
lation between q and r. thus,
if s(p) is the
set of causal relations that start at p, there is a
hilbert space for every element of s(p), describing
how the an observer at the end of that particular
causal relation sees p.

we may then dene a generalised hilbert space
for p to be a functor hp : c  hilb, which
has as its elements the individual viewpoint
hilbert spaces,
linked together by consistency
maps that transform from the viewpoint of one
observer to the viewpoint of another. a standard
(not observer-dependent) description is recovered
when these consistency maps are identities. then
hp becomes a standard state space for p.

it is on such generalised hilbert spaces that the
quantum internal observables are expected to act.
a quantum internal observable should be a gener-
alized operator, by which is meant an operator on
each of the components of a generalized hilbert
space, related by the consistency maps. details
of this construction will appear elsewhere.

6. conclusions: general relativity as the

low energy limit of quantum gravity

in the above examples we have seen that the
requirement that all observables are internal has
non-trivial consequences for the structure of both
classical and quantum cosmological theories. one
should not forget, however, that any planck scale
quantum cosmological theory will have to have
general relativity as its low energy limit. we have
not discussed this aspect of quantum gravity here,
but progress on methods to obtain the low en-
ergy limit is needed in order to bring the devel-
opments described here to a conclusion. work is
in progress currently on methods to coarse grain
and renormalize quantum causal histories, which
will be reported elsewhere.

acknowledgments

i am grateful to john baez, louis crane,
sameer gupta, eli hawkins, chris isham, louis
kauman, renate loll, carlo rovelli and lee
smolin for discussions. i would also like to thank
abhay ashtekar for hospitality at the center for

6

gravitational physics and geometry during the
course of this work.
this work was

supported by nsf grant
phy/9423950 and phy/9514240, and a gift from
the jesse phillips foundation.

references

1. f. markopoulou, the internal logic of causal
sets: what the universe looks like from the
inside, commun. math. phys., to appear, gr-
qc/98011053.

2. l. bombelli, j. lee, d. meyer and r. sorkin,

phys. rev. lett. 59 (1987) 521.

3. f. markopoulou and l. smolin, phys. rev.

d58 (1998) 084032.

4. r penrose, in quantum theory and beyond,

t bastin (ed), c.u.p. 1971.

5. for a review of spin networks in loop quan-
tum gravity see c. rovelli, loop quantum
gravity, in living reviews, gr-qc/9710008.
6. f. markopoulou, dual formulation of spin

network evolution, gr-qc/9704013.

7. v. pachner, europ. j. combinatorics, 12

(1991) 129.

8. r. borrisov and s. gupta, phys.rev. d60

(1999) 024002.

9. f. markopoulou and l. smolin, phys. rev.

d58 (1998) 084033.

10. a. sen, jhep 9803 (1998) 005.
11. s. major and l. smolin, nucl.phys. b473

(1996) 267-290.

12. y. ling and l. smolin, supersymmetric spin
networks and quantum supergravity, hep-
th/9904016.

