preprint typeset in jhep style. - hyper version

sissa/155/99/ep/fm
spin-1999/32
hep-th/9912227

0
0
0
2

 

n
a
j
 

5

 
 

2
v
7
2
2
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

instantons and scattering in n = 4 sym in 4d

g.bonelli

spinoza institute, university of utrecht, leuvenlaan 4, 3584, ce utrecht, the
netherlands
e-mail: g.bonelli@phys.uu.nl

l.bonora, s.terna, a.tomasiello

international school for advanced studies (sissa/isas)
via beirut 24, 34014 trieste, italy, and infn, sezione di trieste
e-mail: bonora@sissa.it, terna@sissa.it, tomasiel@sissa.it

abstract: we study classical solutions (icinstantons) in n = 4 sym in 4d which, in the
strong coupling limit, correspond to complex twodimensional manifolds. asymptotically
in time the latter have boundaries represented by compact real threemanifolds. therefore
they lend themselves to an interpretation in terms of 3brane scattering. we suggest
that these solutions may represent scattering of d3branes of type iib theory in 10d. in
particular we show that the worldvolume theory on complex twodimensional manifolds
is the correct one for d3branes.

keywords: icinstantons, n = 4 supersymmetry, d3branes, brane scattering.

contents

1.

introduction

2.

interactioncarrying classical solutions
2.1
icinstanton equations as bps solutions
icinstanton equations from selfduality in 8d
2.2
2.3
icinstanton equations: other derivations and covariant form
2.4 general properties of icinstantons

3.

icinstantons
3.1 explicit construction of icinstantons
3.2 generalized icinstantons

4. spectral coverings and scattering

4.1 scattering of s3branes
4.2 scattering of t3branes.

5. expansion about a classical solution

5.1 summing over line bundles
5.2 counting zero modes

6. discussion

6.1 connection with matrix theory
6.2 other questions

1

2
4
4
5
6

7
9
10

11
12
13

14
18
19

21
22
23

1. introduction

in this paper we discuss a new type of classical solutions in n = 4 sym theory in 4d
with u (n ) gauge group. this theory is wellknown for its selfduality properties [1] and
its duality properties with type iib supergravity (superstring) theory via ads/cft cor-
respondence, [2], are still under intensive study. here we show that there is a (still unex-
plored) nonperturbative sector of the theory based on a new type of instantons. this is
partly parallel to what happens in n = (8, 8) 2d theory with gauge group u (n ), which has
been called matrix string theory (mst), [3]. in mst one nds classical solutions that,
in the strong coupling limit, become riemann surfaces with punctures, which are natural
candidates to represent scatterings of closed strings, [4, 5, 6]. this idea was conrmed by
the subsequent analysis in [7, 8, 9, 10]. this led to the identication of the strong coupling
limit of mst with perturbative type iia theory. the solutions in question were called
stringy or riemannian instantons.

1

similar classical solutions can be found in other dimensions. in this paper we deal with
4d. in view of these generalizations the world instanton may sound misleading, therefore we
will use for these new kind of solutions the term interactioncarrying instantons or simply
icinstantons. the reason we keep calling them generically instantons is due to the analogy
with ordinary instantons: just as the latter are thought to represent interpolating solutions
between dierent vacua, we think of icinstantons as interpolating solutions between given
initial and nal asymptotic states.

in this paper we construct such icinstantons in 4d sym and we suggest that the ic
instantons of n = 4 sym theory with gauge group u (n ), in the strong ym coupling limit,
may represent scattering processes involving 3branes, which we identify as d3branes of
type iib theory in 10 dimensions. in support of this suggestion we show that icinstantons
at strong coupling describe branched coverings of the 4 dimensional base manifold which we
assume to have a complex structure. these branched coverings are complex 2 dimensional
surfaces1 with boundaries which have the correct geometry to describe scatterings of 3
branes. moreover we show that the worldvolume theory on the surface is the correct
one for d3branes. finally we show that the sum over icinstantons gives rise to a series
weighted by powers of the inverse ym coupling constant, with an exponent given by the
euler characteristics of the corresponding surfaces. the analysis of this last part is largely
incomplete and what we report in this paper can only be considered as a preliminary
exploration on this subject.

the paper is organized as follows. in section 2 we introduce the notation and derive
in various ways the equations for icinstantons.
in section 3 we describe some general
properties for icinstantons. section 4 is devoted to the explicit construction of such
classical solutions; in particular we illustrate the factorization of icinstantons in a group
theoretical factor and a branched covering factor.
in the strong coupling limit only the
second factor is relevant. in section 5 we discuss some general properties and give a few
explicit examples of branched coverings. in section 6 we expand the sym action about
an icinstanton solution in the strong coupling limit: we nd that the dominant part of
the action is lifted to the covering surface, say , and becomes the action of n = 4 free
supersymmetric maxwell theory. we show that the amplitude induced by an icinstanton
corresponding to  is proportional to a power of the inverse ym coupling constant whose
exponent is the euler characteristics of . this result comes from a counting of zero modes
over . in section 7 we discuss the relation with matrix theory and other problematic or
unresolved questions.

2. interactioncarrying classical solutions

the minkowski action of n = 4 sym theory in 4d is

s = zx

d4x tr (cid:18)

1
4g2 f f  

1
2

dx idxi +

g2

4 (cid:2)x i, x j(cid:3)2

+

i
2

d

1throughout the paper, by surface without qualier we mean a complex twodimensional surface. when-

ever we want to indicate a real twodimensional surface we use the term riemann surface.

2

+

g

4 (cid:16)t ci(cid:2)x i, (cid:3)  ci(cid:2)x i, (cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17)

(2.1)

where i = 1, . . . , 6. x is a four dimensional manifold of the type x = r  m3, where m3
is a threedimensional compact manifold and r is the line  < x0 < . although the
action (2.1) can be studied on more general manifolds, we will consider in the following
essentially two examples: m3 = s3, the 3sphere, and m3 = t3, the 3torus dened by
periodic x1, x2, x3. we always suppose that x admit complex structures.

f  is the eld strength of the gauge eld a, the x i are n  n hermitean matrices
in the adjoint of u (n ); from a geometrical point of view, we understand the existence
of a vector bundle e, with structure group u (n ), so that x i are sections of ende. 
is an n  n matrix whose entries are both weyl spinors of so(1, 3) and vectors in the
fundamental of su (4): namely the s will act on the so(1, 3) spinorial indices, while
the is on the su (4) ones. since we make explicit use of them in the following, we write
down our denitions for the gamma matrices:

 = (cid:18) 0





0 (cid:19) ,

i = (cid:18) 0
i

i

0 (cid:19)

where 0 = 0 = 1, i = i are the pauli matrices; the i are the 88 6d gamma
matrices as in [11] and c is the 4d charge conjugation matrix; they satisfy the usual
anticommutation relations:

{, } = 2 ,
the supersymmetric transformations are

(cid:8)i, j(cid:9) = 2ij .

(2.2)

x i =

i

g (cid:16)t ci  ci(cid:17)

a = i(cid:0)  (cid:1)
 = 

1
g2 f    i [xi, xj] ij +

2
g

dxi0ci.

(2.3)

icinstantons in 2d can appear either as bps classical solutions of the sym theory or
as 4d selfdual systems reduced to 2 dimensions (by the way, this is another reason why
such solutions were called instantons). analogously, in 4d, icinstantons can be seen either
as classical solutions that preserve part of the supersymmetry or as 8d selfdual systems
reduced to 4d.

in the next subsection we will discuss classical solutions that preserve some super-
symmetry. we can follow two courses: either we use the minkowski supersymmetric
transformations (2.3) above, nd classical equations whose solutions preserve a fraction
of supersymmetry and wickrotate such equations to their euclidean form; or we can use
the euclidean version of the supersymmetry transformations and nd equations whose so-
lutions preserve some supersymmetry. for simplicity we take the second course but the
result is the same in both cases. however passing to the euclidean formulation introduces
a wellknown problem in supersymmetric theories. the euclidean transcription of a su-
persymmetric minkowski theory may considerably modify the supersymmetric properties

3

of the latter if weyl/majorana fermions are involved, which is the case here. there are
several recipes to deal with this problem, see [12] and references therein. we will follow
[12]: such an approach amounts to an eective doubling of the degrees of freedom of the
euclidean version with respect to the minkowski one.

with some abuse of language we will call the above solutions bps solutions, in the sense
of supersymmetry preserving solutions. this is substantially motivated by the fact that the
nal theory on the covering space at strong coupling will turn out to be supersymmetric
(see below).

2.1 icinstanton equations as bps solutions

we write rst the euclidean action in terms of the complex coordinates v = 1
w = 1

2 (x3 + ix4),

2 (x1 + ix2),

d2vd2w tr (cid:18)dvx idvx i + dwx id wx i 
s = zx
1
4g2 (f 2

2 (1dv1 + 2dv2)  2 (1d w2  2dw1)
2 (cid:16)t ci(cid:2)x i, (cid:3)  ci(cid:2)x i, (cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17)


w w  2fvwfv w  2fv wfvw)

vv + f 2

g

g2
2

[x i, x j ]2

(2.4)

next we write the euclidean version of the n = 4 supersymmetric transformations

i

x i =

g (cid:16)t ci  ci(cid:17)

a = (cid:16)  (cid:17)
 = 

1
g2 f    i [xi, xj ] ij 

2i
g

dxici

(2.5)

where, according to [12], we consider the variables  and  as independent from  and ,
respectively. the superscript t represents the transpose matrix and  stands for t .

we look for solutions that preserve 1

4 supersymmetry, by setting all fermions and all
x i, with i = 3, .., 6, to zero, and dening x = x 1 + ix 2 and x = x. the equations that
dene such solutions are

fvv + fw w  ig2[x, x] = 0
fvw = 0, fv w = 0,
dvx = 0 = dv x, dw x = 0 = d wx

(2.6)

(2.7)

(2.8)

we will refer to the solutions of these equations as icinstantons. analogous equations for
icantiinstantons can be obtained by an antiholomorphic involution. similar equations
were previously discussed, in the context of n = 4 theory, for compact manifolds by [13].
2.2 icinstanton equations from selfduality in 8d

selfdual ym solutions in 4d are the wellknown instantons. selfduality in 8d for the
ym curvature is less known and was studied a few years ago more as a curiosity than with

4

the real aim at applying it in physical problems, [14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. in components of the
curvature the selfduality condition reads:

f12 + f34 + f56 + f78 = 0

f13 + f42 + f57 + f86 = 0

f14 + f23 + f76 + f85 = 0

f15 + f62 + f73 + f48 = 0

f16 + f25 + f38 + f47 = 0

f17 + f82 + f35 + f64 = 0

f18 + f27 + f63 + f54 = 0

(2.9)

the antiselfduality equations are obtained from these by changing the sign of the rst
entry of each one.

let us reduce this system to 4d by keeping the dependence on x1, . . . , x4 and dropping
the dependence on the remaining coordinates. let us introduce the complex coordinates
v = 1
2 (x3 + ix4), set a7 = a8 = 0 and call x = a5  ia6. then the
system (2.9) becomes:

2 (x1 + ix2), w = 1

fvv + fw w + i[x, x] = 0
fvw = 0, fv w = 0, dvx = 0 = dv x, d wx = 0 = dw x

(2.10)

after an obvious rescaling, this is the system of equations found above as bps equations,
(2.6,2.7,2.8). the connection of these sets of equations with integrability is under study2.
in the following section we would like to discuss solutions of (2.10) for which x 6= 0,

i.e. icinstantons.

2.3 icinstanton equations: other derivations and covariant form

it is worth spending a few more words on the equations (2.62.8). we want to show here
other ways in which they can be derived. this gives us in particular the opportunity to
write them in covariant form. first we notice that they are dimensional reduction of a
single equation in 6d kahler manifold. the latter can be cast in covariant form using the
kahler form :

f =   f.

(2.11)

to see this, just use complex coordinates and write down its components; they can be
reexpressed as

  f = 0,

f (2,0) = f (0,2) = 0.

(2.12)

now it is very easy to see that the dimensional reduction of this is nothing but equations
(2.6-2.8). one can compare this with the situation in mst [6], where the instanton equa-
tions (hitchins equations) are dimensional reduction of the single self-duality equation in
4d, which decomposes just as in (2.12).

2we acknowledge useful discussions with c.constantinidis and l.ferreira on this point

5

one can take an even more general point of view and look for solutions which preserve
some fraction of supersymmetry in tendimensional sym. this yields more general instan-
ton equations. writing it explicitly in components, in 10d complex coordinates (z1 . . . z5),
they look

5

xi=1

fzi,zi = 0;

fzi,zj = 0 i < j,

(2.13)

which can be, again, rewritten in covariant form as f = 3  f . as particular cases,
taking some azi vanishing, we nd the 8d equation f = 2  f and the above mentioned
6d one.
if one dimensional reduces these to the dimension of interest, in this case 4, one has also
cases with more than one active scalar:

3

fvv + fw w  ig2
fvw = 0, fv w = 0,

xa=1

[xa, xa] = 0

dvxa = 0 = dvxa, dwxa = 0 = dwxa.

[xa, xb] = 0,

1  a < b  3

(2.14)

these, however, do not represent new solutions as far as the problem we study in this paper
is concerned. in fact, anticipating the discussion of the subsequent section, [xa, xb] = 0
implies that xa = y s xas1y 1, i.e. all xa are diagonalized by the same matrix y s.
this entails in particular that they all have the same monodromy. now, as we will see later,
each of these matrices xa denes a covering of the base space, and lifts to a holomorphic
section of the trivial line bundle over the covering.
it follows that the xas have to be
multiple of one another. therefore we can make a complex linear transformation and go
back to the situation with just one active complex scalar.

apart from this, the above equations open the way to interesting considerations, which
are however outside the mainstream of this paper. for this reason we limit ourselves here
to some concise remarks. let us stick in particular to the 6d case. if f is the curvature of

a connection on a vector bundle, the quantity r f    (where  is the volume form) is a
topological invariant, the degree, which can be thought of as the intersection [c1].[2] in ho-
mology and naturally generalizes the degree in two dimensions (= c1); one may easily show
that a holomorphic line bundle admits holomorphic sections i its degree vanishes. the
second equation in (2.12) just means that our connection denes a holomorphic structure
on the vector bundle which is integrable; the rst one means that the bundle has degree
zero. this condition ts into a more general framework. a connection is called hermitian-
yang-mills if, for some ,   f =  id. a theorem [21] gives necessary and sucient
conditions for solutions to these equations to exist in terms of a condition of stability. this
generalizes the results known in 4d for asd equations [19], in 2d (narasimhan-seshadri)
and for hitchin equations.

2.4 general properties of icinstantons

the system of equations (2.6,2.7,2.8) has various types of solutions. notice that, if we set
x = 0, (2.10) becomes the usual selfduality condition in 4d. therefore the set of solutions

6

of (2.10) will include in particular all the ordinary instantons of ym in 4d, compatible with
the topology of the base manifold. in principle we could consider solutions with x 6= 0
and nonvanishing instanton number. however the vector bundle e is such that c2(e) is
trivial, therefore we only consider solutions with vanishing instanton number.

let us now compute the action of a conguration that satises (2.10). starting from

(2.4) we get

sinst =

1

2 zx



this can be rewritten as

d2vd2w tr (cid:18)dvxdv x + dv xdvx + dwxd w x + dw xd wx +

g2
2

[x, x]2

1
2g2 (f 2

vv + f 2

w w  2fvwfv w  2fv wfvw)(cid:19)

(2.15)

sinst = sbulk + sboundary

sbulk = z d2vd2w tr(cid:18)dv xdvx + dw xd wx +

1
g2 fvwfv w

1

4g2 (fvv + fw w  ig2[x, x])2(cid:19)



sboundary = z d2vd2w tr(cid:18)dv(xdv x) + dw(xd w x) +

1

4g2 dk(av, aw)(cid:19) , (2.16)

where k is the chernsimons term corresponding to f  f . more explicitly

(fv wfvw  fvwfv w + fvvfw w) d2vd2w = dk(av, aw)

where d is the exterior derivative in 4d. one sees immediately that for an icinstanton
sbulk = 0.
it is wellknown that the chernsimons term in sboundary is equal to the
instanton number. therefore, since in this paper we only consider solutions with instanton
number 0, the chernsimons term does not contribute. the other term in sboundary is
usually divergent for the icinstantons solutions and apparently one cannot attach any
geometric meaning to it. on the other hand it is very easy to get rid of it by simply
saying that our starting action is (2.4), in which the rst two terms have been modied to
2(cid:16)x i{dv, dv}x i + x i{dw, d w}x i(cid:17). with these provisos the action of the icinstantons
 1
considered in this paper vanishes. a similar conclusion holds for icantiinstantons.

3. icinstantons

our purpose is to nd solutions (a, x) of (2.6,2.7,2.8). for deniteness let us consider a
concrete case, say x = r t3. the construction is parallel to the one carried out in [6, 8].
in the following we stick to the complex structure of the punctured sphere p1 times t2,
with local coordinates v and w. at times it is convenient to use the coordinate z = ev. we
start from the (simple) ansatz

av = ivy (y 1),

aw = iwy (y 1),

x = y 1m y

(3.1)

7

where y is a generic element in the complex group sl(n, c) and m species a branched
covering of the base manifold. a more general ansatz will be considered later on. as a
consequence of (3.1) the equations dvx = 0 = dv x are equivalent to

vm = 0 =  wm

(3.2)

which means that the matrix m is holomorphic in v, w. eq.3.2 guarantees that eqs.(2.8)
are satised.

the ansatz (3.1) is given in terms of two matrices, y and m . y will be called the
group theoretical factor, while m denes a general branched covering of the base manifold,
i.e. a two dimensional complex manifold. the factor y will be discussed below, while
branched coverings will be discussed later on. for the time being let us give some essential
information. let us consider the polynomial

px (y) = det(y  x) = yn +

n1
xi=0

yiai ,

where y is a complex indeterminate. the equation

px(y) = 0

can also be written as the matrix equation

x n + an1x n1 +  + a0 = 0 .

(3.3)

(3.4)

a diagonalizable matrix, which is solution of eq. (3.4), can always be cast in the canonical
form

an1 an2

m =





1
0
. . .
0

0
1
. . .
0

. . .
. . .
0
. . .
. . .

. . . a0
0
. . .
0
. . .
. . .
. . .
1
0

.





(3.5)

due to (3.2), we have vai = 0 =  wai, which means that the set of functions {ai} are
holomorphic in v, w, although they are allowed to have poles at z = 0 and z = . the
point is that, as we shall see in many examples, eq.(3.3) identies in the (y, z, w) space a
complex 2manifold (a surface) , which is an nsheeted branched covering of the base
manifold. the explicit form of the covering is given by the set {x(1)(z, w), . . . , x(n )(z, w)} of
eigenvalues of x. each eigenvalue spans a sheet. the projection map to the base cylinder
x will be denoted  :   x . the divisor (complex 1submanifold) where two eigenvalues
coincide is the branch locus. we can also dene branch cuts: they are 3d manifolds that
connect disconnected components of the branch locus.

we stress that the covering is independent of the coupling g.

8

3.1 explicit construction of icinstantons

the aim of the present subsection is to construct the group theoretical factor corresponding
to the most general covering. the construction is close to the one in [8], so we will be brief.
let us recall our ansatz (3.1). the group theoretical factor y takes values in the
complex group sl(n, c), while the matrix m determines the branched covering. the
dependence on the yang-mills coupling constant g is contained in the y factor, while
m does not depend on g. we set y = kl where l, the dressing factor, is expected
to tend to 1 in the strong coupling limit outside the branch locus, while k is a special
matrix, independent of g, endowed with the property that k1m k and km(k)1 are
simultaneously diagonalizable.

it is well-known, [4], that the matrix m can be diagonalized

m = s m s1,

m = diag(1, . . . , n )

by means of the following matrix s  sl(n, c):

n 
s =  1


where

n1
1
n2
1
. . .
1

n1
2
n2
2
. . .
1

. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .

n

. . . n1
. . . n2
n
. . .
. . .
1
. . .

,




 = y1i<jn

(i  j) .

(3.6)

(3.7)

(3.8)

 vanishes whenever two eigenvalues coincide. two coincident eigenvalues dene a com-
ponent of the branch locus of the covering. going around a branch locus and crossing a
branch cut in the v, wplane, produces a reshuing of the eigenvalues that can be repre-
sented via a monodromy matrix : m   m 1. correspondingly we have s  s1,
so that the singlevaluedness of m is preserved.

the explicit construction of k and l in the general case is given in [8] and will not be
reported here. the qualitative features are as follows. first one introduces a monodromy

invariant k such that k1s = u be unitary. to this end one sets k = ss and easily
veries that u is unitary. as it turns out, k may have singularities at the points of x
where any two eigenvalues of m coincide, i.e. at the branch locus of the spectral covering
(the elements of k contains as factors fractional powers of ||). therefore k1m k is
in general singular at these points. that is why we must introduce into the game a new
monodromy invariant matrix l, with the purpose of canceling the singularities of k1m k
in such a way that l1k1m kl be smooth and satisfy (2.6,2.7). let us denote again by
 the generic entry of l. for (2.6) to be satised  must satisfy, [8], an equation of the
wznw type with the following general structure

(vv + w w) + ...  (vv + w w) ln|| = (cid:16)vv  + w w (cid:17)() ,

(3.9)

where dots represent all the other terms, which are irrelevant in the cancellation of singu-
larities. in some equations (but not in all) the coecients in front of the deltafunction

9

terms may vanish. this term has support at the zeroes of , i.e. at the branch locus. the
equation fvw = 0 in (2.7), on the other hand, does not give rise to delta function terms:

vw + ... = 0

(3.10)

let us refer to the above equations collectively as the dressing equations.

by construction k is independent of g while l does depend on g. one can show that
in fact l  1 as g  , outside the zeroes of the discriminant. let us present a simple
argument in this sense.

the solution x exists with the required properties only if the dressing equations
admit solutions that vanish at v =  (to this end, of course, we have to exclude possible
branch locus components at t =  from the right hand side of eq.(3.9). to our best
knowledge, not much is known in the literature concerning the existence of such solutions.
based on the analysis of [7], we assume that the dressing equations do admit solutions
that vanish at v = . once one assumes this, it is rather easy to argue, on a completely
general ground, that in the strong coupling limit, g  , such solutions vanish outside the
zeroes of the discriminant. the argument goes as follows. consider a candidate solution of
(2.6,2.7) in which  = 0 outside the zeroes of the discriminant, for all the s. then, there,
l = 1, and x = k1m k. as noted previously, in such a situation [x, x] = 0, since both
x and x are simultaneously diagonalized by the matrix u = k1s. now we have to show
that also fvv and fw w vanish outside the zeroes of the discriminant if l = 1. in fact when
l = 1,

av = ik1vk = i(k1ss1)v(ss1k) = iu (v + av)u1 ,

where av = s1vs. but vs  0 due to holomorphicity of the eigenvalues of m . there-
fore fvv = 0. the same can be done for aw, therefore fw w = fvw = 0. in conclusion
(2.6,2.7) is identically satised by the ansatz l = 1 outside the zeroes of the discriminant.
since the solutions are uniquely determined by their boundary conditions, we can conclude
that, as g  , the only solution of the dressing equations outside the zeroes of the
discriminant, is the identically vanishing solution. we infer from this argument that the
solutions of the dressing equations for large g are concentrated around the branch locus
and become more and more spiky as g grows larger and larger. therefore the matrix l has
the properties we expect.

the previous argument hinges on the occurrence that, as g = , we have both
[x, x] = 0 and f vv = f w w = 0 (the superscript  obviously represents the strong
coupling value of a eld). other types of solutions can be envisaged, see below and [8].

3.2 generalized icinstantons

in this paper we will have to take into consideration more general solutions than those just
studied. instead of (3.1) let us start from

av = idvy (y 1),

aw = idwy (y 1),

x = y 1m y

(3.11)

10

where y is as before and the covariant derivative d is relative to a connection a which
commutes with m . as a consequence of this, we have again that the equations dvx =
0 = dv x imply (3.2). moreover, the connection a is diagonalized by s and

a = s as1

since any solution a, x must be smooth, the monodromy of a must be the same as the
monodromy of m , i.e. going around a branch locus produces a reshuing of the eigenvalues
that can be represented via the same monodromy matrix : a   a1.
the construction of such icinstantons carries through as before. the only remarkable
dierence is that in the strong coupling limit the connection a = u au1 does not
evaporate into a pure gauge as before. not only do we have a covering described by x,
but also a connection a valued in the cartan subalgebra.

in the strong coupling limit, instead of (2.6), in this case we nd

[x, x] = 0
f vv + f w w = 0

(3.12)

i.e. we obtain a nontrivial selfdual connection. of course we can do the same with
antiselfdual icinstantons and obtain strong coupling antiselfdual connections

an important proviso: a basic condition for us to call all the above solutions ic
instantons is that [x, x] 6= 0 for nite g: only in this case do they represent interpolating
solutions between genuine initial and nal brane congurations (see below).

4. spectral coverings and scattering

in the previous section we have seen that in the strong coupling limit any icinstanton
reduces to a branched covering of the base manifold x . in this section we analize a few
general facts and examples of branched coverings of 4manifolds (without any illusion of
completeness). we will see that, in parallel to what happens in mst, such coverings may
describe scatterings of d3branes. the idea is simple. the ic-instantons present in our
theory describe fourmanifolds of various topologies, which cover various base spaces; the
latter are topologically of the form r  m3, and so we may dene slices of the covering at
constant time. in general our icinstantons at t =  are represented by a disjoint union
of 3-manifolds of various topology and at t = + by another (in general dierent) disjoint
union. now, we interpret the t =  conguration as a set of incoming 3branes and
the t =  one as a set of outgoing 3branes. any icinstanton interpolates between two
such asymptotic congurations. if we want to describe a given scattering process we will
choose, among all the icinstantons, those with the given asymptotic structure, i.e. whose
slices at t   correspond to the assigned unions of 3manifolds.

we are therefore faced with two classication problems: 1) given a base manifold
x , classifying all possible branched coverings; 2) analyzing the eect of a change of base
manifold.

from a pathintegral point of view it is clear from the example of mst that we have
to sum over all the branched coverings of 1), which means a discrete sum over topologies

11

and an integration over moduli. we will argue later on that we have perhaps to sum also
over dierent base manifolds.

in this paper we will actually limit ourselves to analyzing two special cases of scattering
topology, with the purpose of illustrating these two problems. let us, however, point out
rst a general result. we will denote by  the complex surface associated to a given
instanton and by  the projection  :   x . as we will see later on any instanton
relevant for a given process will contribute to the path integral a term proportional to g,
where  is the euler characteristic of the 4-manifold . to compute , we can triangulate
the manifold in such a way that it gives a triangulation of the branch locus as well. doing
so we obtain the result

 = n x x(ri  1)ri,

(4.1)

where ri are the ramication orders at the branch loci ri, n is the order of the covering
and x is the base. we recall that in our case x = 0.
4.1 scattering of s3branes
the natural choice of base space is in this case r  s3. in this case, the complex structure
we can take is obviously c2{(0, 0)}. in terms of the complex coordinates (v, w) introduced
above the time is given by et = p|v|2 + |w|2. the characteristic polynomial depends on
both coordinates; the branch locus is a curve in c2  {(0, 0)}, given by some equation
(v, w) = 0, and its slices at constant time are generically unions of s1.

let us consider rst the asymptotics at t = . in a generic situation we expect the
inverse image of s3 under  to be a disjoint union of n copies of s3. but of course we are
interested in less trivial asymptotic congurations. this is so if the point at t =  belongs
to the branch locus. in such a situation we can use, for instance, the well-understood theory
that relates germs of plane curves (i.e. local forms of equations in c2) to knots and links
embedded in a small s3 around the origin [22]. let us review some of those results. first
of all, it is obvious that if the equation  = 0 has a constant term, a small sphere does not
intersect the branch locus. apart from this trivial case, the rule is that each component
of  as a polynomial corresponds to an s1, and the multiplicity of intersection of two
components is exactly the linking number of the corresponding s1. as for each single
component, its local puiseux expansion encodes the knot type of the corresponding s1s.
once we have understood the structure of the branch locus r, given that the number
of sheets of the covering is n , we need to know the action of the rst homotopy group
1(s3  r) on the discrete ber (the monodromy). from these data we can reconstruct
topologically the covering space. suppose, for deniteness, that the covering is totally
branched along a knot, and the monodromy is the generator of the cyclic group zn (cyclic
covering). an easy case we may analyze is that in which the knot is trivial; think indeed the
base s3 as r3 , choose a line in it as branch (from the point of view of s3 it is a circle)
and construct the branched covering as usual, attaching in sequence n copies of r3 along
the s1 (this is the same as the usual picture of a 2d branched covering, translated along
one more spatial direction). the covering space is again an r3 with a point at innity, so
it is an s3 as well.

12

to describe more complicated cases, there is a beautiful theory relating branched
coverings, knots and surgeries [20]. surgery is a technique that allows one to obtain any
3manifold from a sphere, cutting a solid 2torus constructed along a knot, and regluing
it in a dierent way. by applying it to the simple branched covering s3  s3 we just
described, one may induce other branched coverings m3  s3, branched along knots. in
fact, one may show that any m3 can be obtained as a covering of s3, with branch along
a knot. the problem is, however, that the knots obtainable as branches from complex
geometry are not of general type; they are called iterated torus knots. therefore we see
that the base r  s3 may give rise to many dierent topologies at t = , but we have
no guarantee that it gives rise to any desired topology for the incoming branes.

in some cases, there is a further method to understand the topological structure of the
scattering surface. if the equation of the covering p(y, v, w) = 0 is homogeneous in (y, v, w),
and if the coecient of yn is 1, we may map homeomorphically the solutions {|v|2 +|w|2 =
c, p = 0} above the 3sphere to solutions {|y|2 + |v|2 + |w|2 = c, p = 0}, exploiting the
fact that p(y, v, w) = 0  p(y, v, w) = 0. think of this as the stereographic projection
from a cylinder to the sphere inscribed in it. in this case it is simpler to understand the
topology: it is the intersection of a homogeneous equation in c3 with the sphere s5. the
homogeneous equation can be read as an equation in p2; s5 can be thought of as the u (1)
bundle inside op2(1), and so we get in this case that our brane has the topology of a
s1 bundle over a riemann surface (it is, in fact, just the s1 inside the line bundle which
embeds the riemann surface in p2).
for quasihomogeneous equations, a similar projection can be done; an analysis in terms
of weighted projective spaces is however less straightforward, and one has to resort to other
methods, [27].

the analysis carried out so far only concerns asymptotic branes (the t = + case is
analogous to the t =  one). at nite time it is still true that, given the structure of
the branch locus, we can single out the intermediate congurations but the analysis is in
general more dicult. in general, what happens is that the initial branes will join and
split in branes of the same or dierent topologies. as an example, consider the polynomial
yn = v2  w2  et0. the branch locus is absent for t < t0, and an unknotted s1 for t > t0.
so, by the above discussion, this describes n spheres which join to form one.

up to now, we tried to describe a scattering of spheres by considering the most natural
base r  s3, and we found scattering states of very general topology. but to be complete,
we should describe other bases, and see whether there are instantons with spheres as
asymptotic structure. as we said, this means that there should be a covering s3  m3
coming from the restriction at xed time of a complex branched covering. just as the
base r  s3 contributes to scattering of all manifolds, other bases may contribute to the
scattering of s3s. one would have to extend the theory we cited above [20] to base 3
manifolds dierent from s3. we will not try this here.

4.2 scattering of t3branes.
also in this case we begin with a base space r  t3. there are indeed complex structures
on it: think of this base as r4/, where  is a 3lattice spanned, say, by v1, v2, v3. now

13

take the standard complex structures on r4 = c2: we obtain, varying vi, dierent complex
structures. to be more precise, they are really dierent only modulo the action of gl(2, c)
and modular transformations. this general setting, however, yields results not dierent
from those obtained by taking the simplest choice among them: thinking of the base space
as (p1{0,}) times an elliptic curve c. we call z the coordinate on the rst factor (time
is given by et = |z|) and w the one on c.

the coverings are dened by the characteristic polynomial px, whose coecients ai
are holomorphic in z and w by 3.2. as functions of z, they are just meromorphic functions
on p1, with poles in the excluded points 0 and ; as functions of w, they are constant.
the resulting coverings are very simple: for each xed z, the covering space is nothing but
a disjoint union of 2-tori (the eigenvalues are constant in w); so the process is of the type
(scattering of strings)t 2, where the rst factor is exactly what was already examined in
mst [6, 7, 8]. this simply means that 3-tori are really scattering just along one of their
dimensions. since in this case the branches bi are tori, by (4.1) these processes all have
 = 0, and therefore contribute only to the zero-th order term in 1/g in the path integral.
this is the simplest possibility; but again we have to consider contribution from other
bases, with branched or unbranched coverings t3  m3. the rst idea is to use r  s3,
which we have considered above. we are not sure that there is actually a covering yielding
t3; the technique to construct it would be to analyze coverings along iterated torus knots,
coming from equations (v, w) = 0, and then construct a holomorphic covering having 
a discriminant. similar analysis should be done for other bases.

5. expansion about a classical solution

our purpose in this section is to expand the action about a classical icinstanton solution.
for deniteness we choose an instanton rather than an antiinstanton, but everything can
be repeated for the latter. the analysis is along the lines of [7], but there are impor-
tant dierences which we will try to emphasize while going rapidly through the repetitive
aspects.

as a rst step let us analyze the background part. the dependence on the coupling is
entirely contained in the factor l. we have seen that in the strong coupling limit l  1
outside the branch locus of the covering. since here we are interested in expanding the
action (2.4) in inverse powers of 1/g, and actually in singling out the dominant term in this
expansion (see below), we will consider the action (2.4) around a given classical solution
stripped of the above dressing factor, and exclude from the integration region the branch
locus on the base manifold, x . in other words we will consider from now on the action
(2.4) in which the relevant y is replaced by k and the integral extends over x0 which
is the initial x from which small tubular neighborhoods have been cut out around the
branch locus. said otherwise, we introduce in our integrated action a regulator (which will
eventually be removed).

after getting rid of the dressing factor, the classical background conguration is spec-
ied by x and a (see section 3.2). as expected, this conguration is singular exactly
at the branch locus. we have seen that m = s m s1. m is the matrix of eigenvalues of m

14

and of x, so we denote it equivalently by x. in the strong coupling limit x  u xu1,
where u = k1s is a unitary matrix and therefore simultaneously diagonalizes x and x.
corresponding to x we have av, aw.

u is nite in x0. therefore, with a gauge transformation, we can remove it from the

action dened in x0. this leads us to

 x and a diagonal,

for the classical background in the strong coupling limit.

let us return now to the bosonic action (2.4) (the fermionic part will be analyzed later
on) with the above understanding of the background part. to extract the strong coupling
eective theory, we rst rewrite the action in the following useful form

s(b) = z d2vd2w tr(cid:18)dvx i dvx i + dwx i d wx i 

g2
2

[x i , x j ]2  g2[x i , x][x i , x]

+dv xdvx + dw xd wx +

1
g2 fvwfv w 

1

4g2 (fvv + fw w  ig2[x, x])2(cid:19) ,

where i = 3, ..., 6. we now expand the action around a generic icconguration as follows

 = (b) + t + n  (b) +    + n ,

(5.1)

where (b) is the background value of the eld at innite coupling, t are the uctuations
along the cartan directions and n are the uctuations along the complementary directions
in the lie algebra u(n ). in the following we suppose we have carried out the operation
described above and by background value we refer to the diagonal representation.

the expansion of the action starts with quadratic terms in the uctuations and a drops
out from all the terms, except from the kinetic energy term of the (diagonal) yangmills
eld. to simplify the subsequent formulas we will drop a for the time being and resume
it later on.

to proceed further let us x the gauge. we use, in the strong coupling limit, the

following gaugexing term

sgf =

1

4g2 z d2vd2w tr g2

(5.2)

where

g = dvav + dvav + dwa w + dwaw + ig2([x, x] + [ x, x]) + 2ig2[xi , xi ] ,

(5.3)

and d is the covariant derivative with respect to a. next we introduce the faddeev
popov ghost and antighost elds c and c and expand them like all the other elds and add
to the action the corresponding faddeevpopov ghost term

sghost = 

1

2g2 z d2vd2w tr (cid:18)c

g
c

c(cid:19) ,

(5.4)

where  represents the gauge transformation with parameter c.

15

at this point, to single out the strong coupling limit of the action, we rescale the elds

in appropriate manner. precisely, we redene our elds as follows

av = gat

v + an

v, aw = gat

w + an

w, x = x + xt +

1
g

xn, x i = xi t +

1
g

xi n

and likewise for the conjugate variables. for the ghosts we set

c = gct + gcn,

c = gct +

1
g

cn .

after these rescalings the action becomes

s(b) = s(b)

sc + s(b)

n + o(cid:18) 1

g(cid:19) ,

where

s(b)

sc = zx0

d2vd2w tr (cid:2)vxi tvxi t + wxi t wxi t + vxtv xt + wxt w xt
w + wat

+vctvct + wct wct + vat

v + wat

w + vat

w wat

wvat

vvat

v wat

v(cid:3) (5.5)

s(b)
n is the purely quadratic term in the n uctuations. let us see this in detail.

s(b)
n has the form

sn = z d2vd2w tr (cid:2)xnqxn + xi nqxi n + an

vqan

v + an

wqan

w + cnqcn(cid:3) ,

(5.6)

where

q = ad x   adx  + adat

v  adat

v

+ adat

w  adat

w

+ adxi t  adxi t

there are no zero modes involved; therefore the integration gives a certain power of
the determinant of q. this has to be compared with the fermionic part of the action. so
let us look at the latter. after the rescaling  = t + 1g n, we have analogously

s(f ) = s(f )

sc + s(f )

n + o(cid:18) 1

g(cid:19)

where, ,

s(f )

sc = zx0

d2vd2wh2(cid:16)t

1vt

1 + t

2vt

2(cid:17)  2(cid:16)t

1 wt

2  t

1(cid:17)i
2wt

(5.7)

the fermionic odiagonal uctuations contribute quadratically in the following way. we
arrange the n

 and n in a unique spinor nt = (n

1, n

2, n

2),

1, n
n = z d2vd2w nta n ,
s(f )

(5.8)

16

where

a =




0

i

iadx 
iadat
iadat

w

v

iadx 

0

w

iadat
iadat

v

i iadat
iadat

w

0

iadx 

i

w

v iadat
iadat
iadx 

v

i

0




(5.9)

now let us observe that the components of this matrix commute with respect to the
action of the adjoint, and to the su (4) indices, so that we can directly compute the
determinant looking at it as a 4  4 matrix. taking into account the su (4) and lorentz
indices, we get

deta = (detq)8

(5.10)

as this is precisely the determinant provided by the path integration on fermions, we
now have to compare it with the bosonic one. this last turns out to be (detq)8, obtained
counting 6 scalars plus 4 gauge bosons minus 2 ghosts, and taking into account that the
number of bosons too has been doubled, as an eect of the wick rotation. so the nal net
contribution of the n elds to the partition function is 1.

as it was pointed out in [7], each separate entry of the diagonal matrix elds appearing
in (5.5) is not a true free eld, as it is not singlevalued. however each diagonal matrix
eld denes a unique (singlevalued) eld on the covering surface  of x (see appendix).
for example the matrices xi t represent scalar elds xi, the matrix at represents a oneform
eld a on  and so on. a boldface letter will be henceforth the hallmark of a welldened
bosonic eld on . as for  its global existence on  understands that the latter is a spin
manifold.

in conclusion the strong coupling theory represents a free u (1) gauge theory with

matter on :

s =

1

2 z

d4(cid:18) 1

2

xixi +

1
2

aa +

1
2

cc 

1
2

(cid:19)

(5.11)

where  are local coordinates on  (for example, z and w). the expression of the strong
coupling (5.11) is only symbolic.
it is in fact strictly valid only if  is a at manifold,
in which case we recover full n = 4 supersymmetry. but of course in general  will
not be at.
in the nonat cases (5.11) will only hold outside a neighborhood of the
ramication locus, in which the curvature is concentrated. the problem of course is not
how to extend the action (5.11) in such a way as to incorporate a nontrivial metric, which is
straightforward, but rather how to do it in a supersymmetric way, so as to obtain an n = 4
supersymmetric theory. this problem is analogous to the covariant formulation of green
schwarz superstring theory on a generic riemann surface, met in mst. the diculty of
such problems stems from the fact that, at rst sight, it would seem inevitable to introduce
supergravity on the worldvolume in order to guarantee supersymmetry. however this is
not necessary. in fact both these problems, as as well as other similar problems concerning
dbrane actions embedded in spacetime, have been solved using the superembedding
principle. an essential role is played by  symmetry, and the above mentioned diculty

17

is overcome by pulling back the (possibly trivial) metrics and gravitinos from the ambient
space, which are therefore nondynamical. all this ts very well in our approach, and we
limit ourselves to relying on the literature: the action will be an extension of (5.11) to
include the branch locus  possibly substituting the sym action with the corresponding
dbi one. in our specic case we have in mind [28] (for a review of this and related problems,
see [29]).

we remark that (5.11) contains the elds which are expected to live on a d3brane
and it is itself the low energy and low curvature action for a d3brane. we will further
comment on it later.

in (5.11) the gauge coupling constant is 1. however, as shown in [7], in the path
integral there is a nontrivial dependence on the original gauge coupling g which is due
to the integration over the zero modes. for our previous rescaling of the various elds
by powers of g involves, in particular, a rescaling of both the gauge and ghost diagonal
degrees of freedom. when dening the path integral we have to take this fact into account,
which amounts to rescaling it by an overall factor for any given instanton. this factor is a
power of g, the exponent being the number of zero modes for each rescaled eld with the
appropriate sign. it would seem therefore that we have to count the number of ghost and
gauge zero modes. however this would lead us to a wrong result for the reason explained
below.

5.1 summing over line bundles

eq. (5.11) does not tell the whole story. in fact in the previous subsection we have dropped
the diagonal connection a. reintroducing now this connection amounts to replacing a with
a + a, where a is a nontrivial selfdual or antiselfdual connection. since selfdual and
antiselfdual instantons lead to the same coverings, when selecting a denite interpolating
surface  (to represent a given scattering process) we have to allow for (i.e. to sum over)
all the icinstanton solutions that contain such a surface as a covering, both selfdual and
antiselfdual, and with all the possible nontrivial connections a. these are linebundle
connections (it is useful to clarify that the uctuation a is a 1form: added to a line bundle
connection it supplies another connection; in the treatment of the previous subsection it
was supposed to be added to the 0 connection, i.e. to represent a connection in the trivial
line bundle over ; in turn the uctuations xi as well as all the other uctuating elds are
section of trivial line bundles). in conclusion we have to sum over all line bundles on 
and integrate over all the connections in each line bundle.

there is another way one can view the same problem: we have to admit on  any line
bundle whose direct image under  coincides with the initial vector bundle e on x . the
construction is, roughly speaking, as follows. in a covering with n sheets, any line bundle
l generates an n component vector on x : its components are just the n lines that lie
over the same point of x . therefore to any line bundle over  there corresponds a vector
bundle e over x . the chern classes c1(e), c2(e) are connected to the chern class of l
via the grothendieckriemannroch theorem, but, in the case of a noncompact manifold
like x , these constraints may become irrelevant.

18

a clarication is in order concerning c1(e) (c2(e) is trivial, therefore c2(e) does not
need a comment). a nontrivial rst chern class on a brane worldvolume is usually
interpreted as the signal of the presence of a membrane. according to our interpretation
membranes are not present in the theory, and c1(e) is a pure geometrical feature of the
base manifold, which must be considered on the same footing as the complex structure and
the like. it is only if we sum over all nontrivial c1(e)s on the base that we are allowed
to sum over all the line bundles on the covering.

the correspondence we have just outlined is described in more detail and with more
appropriate language in appendix. summarizing, the spirit of our approach implies that
we have to allow for anything in  can be lifted from x , or, equivalently, for anything in
 can be projected down to something that lives in x . therefore, on , we have to allow
for all possible nontrivial line bundles. the path integral must include the sum over such
line bundles over , as well as the path integration over all the connections on such line
bundles.

a path integration with sum over all line bundles in a maxwell theory has already
been carried out in [30], see also [31], and we follow this calculation. for the sake of clarity
we partially reproduce it here.

the trick consists in passing to a dual formulation by introducing auxiliary elds and
enlarging the gauge symmetry. given a connection a on a line bundle l, one rst intro-
duces the auxiliary eld g , and requires the theory to be invariant under an extended
gauge symmetry whose local version is

a  a + ,

g  g + d

(5.12)

where  is a local oneform. in addition (global version) one requires that g be dened up
to closed twoforms. this is tantamount to asking that the integrals of g over twocycles
be dened up to integers. then, if f is the curvature of a, one denes the combination
f = f  g . f is clearly invariant under the generalized gauge transformation (5.12)
because f integrated over a twocycle gives an integer.
now one considers the series of dual line bundles l with dual connection v and

curvature w, and writes the action

i =

1

2 z

d4h(cid:18) i

4

w g + f+

 f+ + f f(cid:19)

(5.13)

where + and  denotes the selfdual and antiselfdual part of a two form, respectively.
there are two alternatives. on the one hand, integrating over v one obtains that dg = 0
and g has integral periods, which allows us to set g = 0, in view of (5.12); in this way we
get back the original lagrangian for a. on the other hand, using (5.12) one can simply set
a = 0, and end up with the dual formulation, where the basic elds are the connection v
and the twoform g.

5.2 counting zero modes

the dual formulation has the virtue of transforming the discrete summation over line
bundles into an integration over continuous elds. now we can see that the relevant zero

19

modes are those of the oneforms v together with the corresponding ghosts (the dual of
c), and the two forms g. looking at (5.13) and at the denition of f one sees that v
rescales inversely with respect to a, while g rescales in the same way. therefore the zero
modes of g and the ghosts of v will contribute with the same sign, while the zero modes of
v will contribute with the opposite sign to the overall factor in front of the path integral.
we are now ready to compute the latter.

let us recall that our surface  is a twodimensional complex variety with n punctures
(see section 4). if it were a compact surface we would say that there are 2b1 zero modes of
v, two zero modes of the ghosts and b2 zero modes of g, where b1, b2 are betti numbers
of . in conclusion we would get an overall factor g2b1b22. now since 2  2b1 + b2 is the
euler characteristics of a compact 4d manifold, and since a puncture takes away one unit
of euler characteristics (as can be seen for example by triangulating the manifold), we are
led to the conclusion that the overall factor in the presence of n puncture is g where
 = 2 2b1 + b2  n. this is the correct result and there are several ways one can convince
oneself of it. the easiest one is probably by use of a doubling construction, as in [7]. let
us rst make more precise the concept of puncture. the open surface  has boundaries bi
with i = 1, . . . , n, which are 3manifolds. for each bi let us consider the cone ci, which is
obtained from the cylinder bi  i, where i is a nite interval, by squeezing to a point
one of the boundaries of the cylinder. we can attach the boundaries of these cones to the
corresponding boundaries bi of  and obtain a compact surface c. since each bi has
euler characteristic 1, using additivity of the latter, we get    = c  n, where c is
the euler characteristic of the compact surface, i.e. c = 22b1 +b2. now let us turn to the
double of : one constructs a complex surface  endowed with an antianalytic involution
(locally this is z  z). roughly speaking the double is made of two copies of  attached
by the boundaries to form a compact surface: each boundary of one copy is attached to
the corresponding boundary of the other copy. denoting by a hat the quantities relevant
to the double and using again additivity of the euler characteristic, we have

 = 2  2b1 + b2 = 2 = 4  4b1 + 2b2  2n

now the number 2  2b1 + b2 is the total alternating sum of zero modes on the double.
since it can be expressed via the gaussbonnet theorem as an integral over , we expect
that the same integral over  would yield half of it, i.e. , thanks to the symmetry implied
by the antiinvolution. we expect therefore that the total number of zero modes on  with
the appropriate sign be given by , which is the result anticipated above.

now one can see that for all s considered in this paper as branched coverings of x ,
  0, therefore the sum over icinstantons gives rise to a series of nonnegative powers 3
of 1/g. this suggests that we interpret g3 = 1/g as the d3brane perturbative interaction
coupling, analogous to the string coupling of [7].

what we have shown so far is not enough to draw denite and unambiguous conclu-
sions, however we have seen that in the strong coupling limit of 4d sym theory there

3in mst the corresponding series is in terms of g

; however riemann surfaces with at least two punctures

have negative 

20

is room to describe scattering processes of d3branes. let us discuss a few general as-
pects of these processes. icinstantons become fourmanifolds with boundaries consisting
of threemanifolds. these geometrical congurations lend themselves to an interpretation
in terms of threebrane scattering. in turn this interpretation ts very well in the path
integral formalism, since it gives rise to a perturbative series in 1/g. it remains for us to
specify what are the amplitudes involved in these scattering of branes. like in the case of
string scattering, we will not really mean scattering of full branes but rather scattering of
particle states which represent brane excitations. although we do not know the spectrum
of states of a d3brane, in the case at hand we know plenty of such states: all the elds
xi, a as well as the fermions which appear in (5.11), together with their derivatives and
products are eligible to create such states. it is clear how to proceed: whenever we want to
represent scattering of 3branes excitations with given incoming and outgoing states, we
have to insert in the path integral the appropriate elds and evaluate the corresponding
amplitudes. of course this is not the end of the story, since one should then sum over all
the instantons that interpolate between the same initial and nal states, which means a
sum over the appropriate instanton topologies and, at xed topology, an integral over the
appropriate moduli space.

the states we have just mentioned are local states, i.e. they should be associated to
points of , not to boundary 3manifolds bi. suitable 4manifolds are obtained by attach-
ing cones ci to bi, as explained above, and smoothing out the result. alternatively, we
can imagine dieomorphisms that deform the boundaries to points, and restrict ourselves
to such congurations.

to end this section let us remark another dierence with mst. while in mst the euler
characteristics entirely determines the instanton topology, that is not so in the present case.
in fact since  = 22b1 +b2n, there may be and in fact there are manifolds with dierent
b1 and b2 but the same . therefore each term in the perturbative expansion in 1/g consist
in general of a sum over dierent topologies. this sum is potentially innite. however,
as long as n is nite, the number of topologies which is possible to realize as branched
coverings will be nite. therefore n may be considered as a regulator for these sums. in
this regard there is an interesting possibility: it is possible to introduce a parameter that
allows us to discriminate among the various terms of a sum corresponding to a given .
this is , the angle in front of the topological theta term, which can be introduced in the
theory in the usual way (see [30] for an analogous context). we will not do it here.

6. discussion

in the course of the paper we have set aside a few problems which we would like now
to comment on. the rst question we want to address is that of the interpretation of
the scattering theory we have digged out in the previous sections. we have found several
indications that it is a scattering theory of d3branes. let us further justify this claim in
the light of matrix theory.

21

6.1 connection with matrix theory

at least in the case x = r t3, the theory (2.4) can be easily derived from matrix theory,
[32, 34, 35, 36, 37], via compactication on a dual 3-torus, [38]. here we recall what is
essential to make this connection, following in particular [39] (see also [40, 41]).

matrix theory hinges on the idea that a system of n d0branes innitely boosted
along a xed direction, say the 11th, describes the essential features of m theory. each d0
brane has the 11-th component of the momentum p11  1/r11 far larger that the transverse
components (where r11 is interpreted as a large compactication radius for m theory). it is
expected that the matrix theory description of m theory becomes more and more faithful
as n becomes larger and larger. matrix theory is represented by supersymmetric quantum
mechanics of matrices (sym theory in 0+1 dimensions with gauge group u (n ) and 16
supercharges). compactication of mtheory on a circle of radius, say, r9 is expected to
lead to iia theory in the r9  0 limit. in matrix theory the corresponding operation
consists in compactifying the base manifold of sym theory on the dual radius, so that
one ends up with 1+1 dimensional sym theory with u (n ) gauge group and n = (8, 8)
supersymmetry, i.e. mst. that this leads to type iia theory in the strong ym coupling
limit is by now a wellknown result, which has been recalled in the introduction.

the next step is to compactify the base manifold of sym theory along some additional
dimensions. let us denote by ri the eld theory compactication radii and by ri the
corresponding mtheory radii. they are related by, see [39],

ri =

3
11

rir11

,

i = 9, 8, ...

(6.1)

where 11 is the 11th dimensional length scale. for example, if one compacties on a two
torus (i = 9, 8) and takes the limit r9, r8  0, one can convince oneself that one series of
massless states is produced, which is interpreted as a new dimension that opens up. this
new dimension plus the one implicit in the large n limit lead us back to 10 dimensions
in a type iib framework.
if, instead, we compactify on a threetorus (i = 9, 8, 7) and
take the limit r9, r8, r7  0 we can see that three new dimensions open up: in this case
dimensions and context are those of mtheory. the latter however is not the limit we are
interested in in this paper. we will rather consider the limit

r7, r8  0,

r9  .

(6.2)

it is easy to see that in this case only one series of massless states is produced, i.e. only
one new dimension opens up (instead of three). naturally we have to add the decompact-
ication related to r9 being very large and the new dimension implicit in the large n
limit. therefore the context of (6.2) is that of a 10 dimensional type iib theory. that
it describes d3branes can be seen by starting from matrix theory, which is theory of
d0branes, compactifying along the 7,8,9th directions and tdualizing the three circles.
the d0branes become d3branes wrapped around the threetorus. finally one takes the
limit (6.2) or the corresponding in the dual variables according to (6.1).

22

the ym theory we obtain is exactly (2.1). in fact the dependence on the compacti-

cation radii can be entirely collected in the dimensionless coupling constant

g2 =

3
11

r7r8r9

.

(6.3)

the action can be brought to the form (2.1) via a sequence of rescalings.

in conclusion, the connection with matrix theory tells us that the scattering theory
that looms through the previous sections, if conrmed by further analysis, can be inter-
preted as a scattering theory of d3branes in type iib theory in 10d.

6.2 other questions

in the previous subsection we have considered the case of rt3. toroidal compactications
are the most wellknown cases of compactications of matrix theory, [37]. our point of view
about matrix theory, however, is that its content is revealed and the information stored in
it can be retrieved by considering all possible compactications. this means that we should
analyze other compactications beside r  t3 and the ensuing icinstantons in order to
capture the full content of matrix theory. on the other hand, when studying a given d3
brane scattering process, we saw that icinstantons with the same in and out congurations
can come from dierent base manifolds. this creates a potential problem: which is the
right base manifold? one possible answer suggested by the previous considerations is that
we should perhaps sum over all instantons that interpolate between the relevant initial
and nal congurations, regardless of what base manifolds these instantons are originated
from.

one nal comment concerns the comparison with the scattering of macroscopic d
branes mediated by open strings stuck on them, which is the way scattering of macroscopic
dbranes has been described in the literature up to now, [42]. this is an open problem,
however the following remark might be helpful. in our approach a string mediated interac-
tion would imply manifolds of real dimensions two being exchanged among the interacting
strings, instead of manifolds of complex dimensions two, as in our case. we are clearly in
the presence of a limiting (singular) case of the scattering described in this paper. this can
be rephrased by saying that stringmediated d3brane scattering amplitudes may be a lim-
iting case of the general scheme presented here: they may become the leading contributions
under particular kinematical conditions.

appendix. mathematical description of the lifting.

to really describe the process we called lifting, it is convenient to start from the opposite,
i.e. how to push down a line bundle. given a covering  : m  m , one has an easy way
to get a line bundle on m from one on m , i.e. the pullback ; to push forward a line
bundle on m we have to resort to the machinery of sheaves, in a way that may, however,
be easily translated in simple terms.

let l the line bundle on m , and denote with the same symbol the sheaf of its holo-

morphic sections. now we dene the direct image sheaf l on m through the formula

l (u ) = l(1(u )),

(6.4)

23

where u are open sets on the base m ; this, as we will discuss in a moment, is the sheaf
of sections of a vector bundle. the correspondence is this: the holomorphic sections of the
vector bundle over u  m are given by the holomorphic sections of the line bundle over
the open set 1(u )  m .
if u is a disc that does not intersect the branch locus, 1(u ) consists of n (the order of
the covering) distinct discs. the sections of l over these n discs are simply n -uples of
functions; these are interpreted as the local sections of the vector bundle on the base, which
therefore has rank n . on a neighborhood of a branch point, the situation is dierent, since
there are less than n discs. so it would seem that the rank changes, and that the sheaf we
dened does not correspond to a vector bundle. let us analyze more closely what happens
in a situation of total branching, with a map from a disc u with coordinate z to a disc u
with coordinate w, branched k times: z 7 zk = w. any function on u can be written,
by the weierstrass preparation theorem, as s(z) = s1(zk) + zs2(zk) + . . . + zk1sk(zk); the
si are functions of w, so any function on uz gives k functions on u . this shows that the
rank is constant: the local sections of our direct image sheaf over a neighborhood of every
point are n holomorphic functions.

consider now a section y of the trivial line bundle over m (remember it is non compact,
in our case; on a compact manifold, we would have to take a non trivial line bundle and
slightly modify the whole construction, making another line bundle appear also on the
base). multiplication by it gives a map y : h 0(1(u ),l)  h 0(1(u ),l) and hence, by
denition of l  e, a map that we call x : h 0(u, e)  h 0(u, e). in a neighborhood of
a non branching point, a basis for the space of our local sections is given by local sections
for i 6= j. on this basis, x acts as
si of l over each of the discs ui, such that si|uj
are the eigenvalues of x, and si the
follows: x si = y|ui
si. this means that the y|ui
eigenvectors. on neighborhoods of the branch points, we would have to choose a dierent
basis of sections, as described above; however, by continuity it is still true that y is given
by the spectrum of x.

suppose now that we have a connection on l: this means, for each tangent vector v,
an endomorphism dv of the space of sections of l. to obtain a connection on e, consider
again the situation locally around a non branching point p  m ; given a tangent vector vp,
(dvp s)i is the n -uple having as components dvi si, where vi are the n counterimages of
vp. this means that we do the same analysis we did for y for each component of a, where
d + a is a local expression for the connection.
in a disc containing a branch point, the analysis is dierent due to the dierent basis;
we dont describe explicitly the computations here, but let us briey sketch the result.
pushing down the connection gives, in general, a connection on the base with poles; this
gives relations between the chern classes of l and of e, which agree with the results one
can nd by the grothendieck-riemann-roch theorem. on our non compact manifolds,
however, most of these conditions are uneective.

now that we have described what happens going downstairs, we can try to invert the
process. in our situation, we simply have a section x of a bundle end(e) over the base
manifold m , a connection over this bundle, and uctuations. we have to reconstruct the
covering manifold, the line bundle l, the connection over it, and the map y.

24

in m  c, it is given by the equation
the manifold is described by the spectrum of x:
det(x  y) = 0, and y is a well-dened function over it (it is one of the coordinates of the
ambient space m  c). to obtain the line bundle, consider the pullback x, section of
end(e), which is a rank n vector bundle over m . the eigenspace ker(x  y )  e
denes, completing by continuity also over the branching points, a line bundle l; this
is clearly the inverse of the construction we gave above, since we observed that the si
were indeed eigenvectors of x  we just put on m the eigenspace corresponding to its
eigenvalue.
what remains to be lifted is the connection, and all the uctuations of the elds. the
process is similar, and we describe it for the connection. take the connection on m : it is
a connection on end(e), but we may consider it as a connection on e (it is a matter of
choosing the representation on which it acts). pull it back to m : it denes a connection on
e. since we know that it commutes with x, it preserves eigenvalues, and so it denes
a connection on the line bundle. this is done with the eigenvalues of a, and so what we
described is nothing but the formalization of the process described in the text. on the
branches, the process is dierent, as we mentioned above; but its analysis is beyond our
scope now, since we know the connection outside branches by what we described, and over
the branches we know that the lifting gives the right number of delta functions to make
the relations between the chern classes of l and e match.

acknowledgements. we would like to thank f.nesti for collaboration in the pre-
liminary stage of this work and r.dijkgraaf, p.a.marchetti, p.pasti, c.reina, a.zampa
and, in particular, d.sorokin for helpful discussions. l.b. would like to thank the departa-
mento de fisica, universidade federal do espirito santo, vitoria, for the kind hospitality
extended to him during the early stage of this work. this work was partially supported
by ec tmr programme, grant fmrx-ct96-0012, and by the italian murst for the
program fisica teorica delle interazioni fondamentali.

references

[1] c. montonen and d.olive , phys.lett. 72b (1977) 117. p.goddard, j.nuyts and d.olive,

nucl.phys. b125 (1977) 1.

[2] j.maldacena, the large n limit of

superconformal eld theories and supergravity,

adv.theor.math.phys. 2 (1998) 231, [hep-th/9711200].

[3] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, matrix string theory, nucl.phys. b500 (1997) 43

[hep-th/9703030].

[4] t. wynter, gauge elds and interactions in matrix string theory phys.lett. b415 (1997) 349

[hep-th/9709029].

[5] s.b. giddings, f. hacquebord, h. verlinde, high energy scattering of d-pair creation in

matrix string theory nucl.phys. b537 (1999) 260 [hep-th/9804121].

[6] g. bonelli, l. bonora and f. nesti, matrix string theory, 2d instantons and ane toda eld

theory, phys.lett. b435 (1998) 303 [hep-th/9805071].

25

[7] g. bonelli, l. bonora and f. nesti, string interactions from matrix string theory, nucl.phys.

b538 (1999) 100 [hep-th/9807232].

[8] g. bonelli, l. bonora, f. nesti and a.tomasiello, matrix string theory and its moduli space

[hep-th/9901093], to be published in nucl.phys.b.

[9] g. bonelli, l. bonora, f. nesti and a.tomasiello, heterotic matrix string theory and riemann

surfaces [hep-th/9905092]

[10] t. wynter, high energy scattering amplitudes from matrix string theory, [hep-th/9905087].

[11] m.f.sohnius, introducing supersymmetry, phys.rep. 128 (1985) 39.

[12] p.van nieuwenhuizen and a.waldron, on euclidean spinors and wick

rotations,

[hep-th/9608174].

[13] c.vafa and e.witten a strong coupling test of sduality [hep-th/9408074].

[14] e.corrigan, c.devchand, d.b.fairlie and j.nuyts, firstorder equations for gauge elds in

spaces of dimension greater than four, nucl.phys. 214 (1983) 452.

[15] r.s.ward, completely solvable gauge eld equations in

greater than four, nucl.phys. b236 (1984) 381.

[16] d.fairlie, nuyts, spherically symmetric solution of gauge theories in eight dimensions, j.phys.

a17 (1984) 2867.

[17] s.fubini, h.nicolai, the octonionic instanton, phys. lett. b155 (1985) 369.

[18] l.baulieu, kanno, i.singer, special quantum eld theories in eight and other dimensions, com-

mun.math.phys. 194 (1998) 149-175, [hep-th/9704167]

[19] s. k. donaldson & p. b. kronheimer, the geometry of four-manifolds, oxford 1990.

[20] v. v. prasolov & a. b. sossinsky, knots, links, braids and 3-manifolds, ams, 1996.

[21] k. uhlenbeck & s. t. yau, on the existence of hermitian-yang-mills connections in stable

vector bundles, comm. in pure and appl. math., 39, s257-s293 (1986)

[22] e. brieskorn and h. knorrer, plane algebraic curves, birkhauser verlag, basel 1986.

[23] p. griths and j. harris, principles of algebraic geometry new york 1978.

[24] w.barth, c.peters and a. van de ven, compact complex surfaces, springerverlag, berlin

1984.

[25] r.hartshorne, algebraic geometry, springerverlag, new york 1977.

[26] i.m.gelfand, m.m.kapranov, a.v.zelevinsky, discriminants, resultants, and multidimensional

determinants, boston, birkhauser, 1994.

[27] l.h.kauman, on knots, ams 115.

[28] p.howe and e.sezgin, superbranes [hep-th/9607227].

i.a.bandos, d.p.sorokin and m.tonin, generalized action principle and supereld equations
of motion for d=10 dpbranes, [hep-th/9701127].

[29] d.p.sorokin, superbrane and superembeddings, [hep-th/9906142].

[30] e.witten, on sduality in abelian gauge theories [hep-th/9505186].

[31] m.rocek and e.verlinde, duality, quotients and currents, nucl.phys. b373 (1992) 630.

26

[32] t. banks, w. fischler, s.h. shenker and l. susskind, m theory as a matrix model: a

conjecture, phys.rev.d 55 (1997) 5112 [hep-th/9610043].

[33] l. susskind, another conjecture about m(atrix) theory, [hep-th/9704080].

[34] a. bilal, m(atrix) theory: a pedagogical introduction, [hep-th/9710136].

[35] t. banks ,matrix theory, [hep-th/9710231].

[36] d. bigatti and l. susskind, review of matrix theory, [hep-th/9712072].

[37] washington taylor

iv, lectures

on dbranes, gauge theory

and m(atrices),

[hep-th/9801182].

[38] w. taylor, d-brane field theory on compact spaces, phys.lett. b394 (1997) 283

[hep-th/9611042].

[39] s.sethi and l.susskind, rotational invariance in m(atrix) formulation of type iib theory,

[hep-th/9702101].

w.fischler, e.halyo, a.rajaraman and l.susskind, the incredible shrinking torus,
[hep-th/9703102].

[40] n.seiberg, notes on theories with 16 supercharges, [hep-th/9705117].

[41] o.j.ganor and s.sethi, new perspectives in yangmills theories with sixteen supersymmetries,

[hep-th/9712071]

[42] j.polchinski, tasi lectures on branes, [hep-th/9611050]

[43] n. hitchin, stable bundles and integrable systems, duke math. jour. 54 (1987) 91.

n. hitchin, lectures on riemann surfaces and integrable systems, notes by j.sawon.

27

