nbi-he-99-50
aei-1999-51

9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
9
2

 

 
 

1
v
7
6
2
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

on the relation between euclidean and lorentzian 2d quantum

gravity

j. ambjrn, j. correia and c. kristjansen1

the niels bohr institute

blegdamsvej 17, dk-2100 copenhagen , denmark

r. loll2

max-planck-institut fur gravitationsphysik (albert-einstein-institut),

am muhlenberg 1, 14476 golm, germany

abstract

starting from 2d euclidean quantum gravity, we show that one recovers 2d lorentzian
quantum gravity by removing all baby universes. using a peeling procedure to
decompose the discrete, triangulated geometries along a one-dimensional path, we
explicitly associate with each euclidean space-time a (generalized) lorentzian space-
time. this motivates a map between the parameter spaces of the two theories, un-
der which their propagators get identied. in two dimensions, lorentzian quantum
gravity can therefore be viewed as a renormalized version of euclidean quantum
gravity.

pacs codes: 02.10.eb, 04.20gz, 04.60.nc, 05.20.y
keywords: 2d gravity, random triangulations, lorentzian triangulations, transfer
matrix formalism, random walk, branched polymers

1e-mail: ambjorn, correia, kristjan@nbi.dk
2e-mail: loll@aei-potsdam.mpg.de

1

introduction

the role of baby universes in quantum gravity has been discussed extensively and
many conjectures have been made concerning their role in providing eective cou-
pling constants for eld theories as well as for gravity itself [1]. due to the lack
of a theory of (four-dimensional) quantum gravity, the integration over baby uni-
verses has never been performed in any explicit manner. however, there is a chance
that this idea can be realized in two dimensions, where quantum gravity is a renor-
malizable quantum eld theory. in this article we will show that starting from 2d
euclidean quantum gravity, there is indeed a sense in which one can integrate out
all baby universes. the resulting renormalized quantum theory coincides with the
theory of so-called lorentzian 2d quantum gravity.

the lorentzian quantum gravity model was introduced in order to have a path-
integral formulation where the lorentzian character of the metric is built in at a
fundamental level. it is also closer to canonical quantization methods, where from
the outset one works with globally hyperbolic space-times. the two-dimensional
model can be solved explicitly and is dierent from euclidean quantum gravity, by
which we will mean the theory dened by a path integral over euclidean geome-
tries. in the continuum limit, a typical geometry coming from the path integral of
lorentzian quantum gravity is two-dimensional [2, 3]. this is in contrast with the
situation in euclidean quantum gravity, where a typical geometry has an anomalous
fractal hausdor dimension of four [4].

we will be using a representation of euclidean quantum gravity in terms of
so-called dynamical triangulations. this method provides a reparameterization-
invariant regularization of the eld theory. the two-dimensional geometries will be
represented by equilateral triangulations (with edges of cut-o length a). the path
integral is performed by summing over all triangulations of a given topology. the
continuum limit is obtained as the lattice spacing a  0. we will then give an explicit
prescription for removing baby universes from a given euclidean triangulation. one
may view this procedure as analogous to the removal of tadpole graphs in a quantum
eld theory. the latter can usually be viewed as a redenition of the coupling
constants and a shift of the elds in the theory.
in our case the eect is more
drastic. we end up with a new, physically inequivalent theory.

2 the two-loop correlator and the peeling procedure

2.1 the euclidean case

we will investigate the relation between two-dimensional euclidean and lorentzian
quantum gravity by studying the distance-dependent two-loop correlator of the two
models. the distance between two links l and l in a given triangulation t is dened

1

as the length of the shortest path connecting l and l, taken along the links of the
dual lattice. furthermore, the distance between a link l and a loop l is dened as
the minimum distance of the link l to a link belonging to l. with these denitions
a loop l2 is said to have distance t to a loop l1 if all links in l2 have distance t to
the loop l1.

the distance-dependent two-loop correlation function g(l1, l2, t) is dened as

g(l1, l2, t) = xtt (l1,l2,t)

gn (t ),

(1)

where the sum goes over all triangulations of cylindrical topology with an exit loop
l2 of length l2 and an entrance loop l1 of length l1 containing a marked link, the
distance of l2 from l1 being equal to t. the quantity n (t ) is the number of
triangles in the triangulation t and g is related to the cosmological constant  by
g = e.

euclidean and lorentzian quantum gravity dier by the type of triangulations
allowed in (1). in the lorentzian case one only sums over triangulations which for
any t  t have only one (connected) loop at distance t from the entrance loop.
in the usual language of 2d quantum gravity this means that baby-universes are
forbidden. furthermore, in the lorentzian case a loop cannot shrink to length zero.
using the distinguished variable t as a time variable, we can divide the links into
space-like and (future-oriented) time-like, and equip every lorentzian triangulation
with a well-dened causal structure [2]. by contrast, in the euclidean case there
can be more than one loop at a given distance t from the entrance loop and the
above construction does not work. we note, however, that in [5] a suggestion of
introducing a notion of space-like and time-like edges for euclidean triangulations
was put forward. this lead to a model equivalent to 2d euclidean quantum gravity
coupled to ising spins.

it is well-known that a combinatorial identity can be derived for the euclidean
version of (1) by a so-called peeling procedure [6]. we will show that also in the
lorentzian case a peeling procedure can be dened, which in addition enables us
to set up a direct correspondence between the discrete euclidean and lorentzian
histories.

we start by reviewing briey the peeling formalism in the euclidean case. in
order to specify a peeling, one needs a set of moves that systematically remove
building blocks at a marked link on the boundary of a triangulation and a rule for
choosing a new marked link on the boundary after each move. we will work in the
class of so-called unrestricted euclidean triangulations which apart from triangles
also contain double links as building blocks. (unrestricted triangulations constitute
the class of triangulations appearing in the usual matrix model formulation of 2d
gravity.) this generalization does not aect any of the universal properties of the
model. consider now an unrestricted triangulation contributing to the sum in (1).

2

by denition it has an entrance loop with one marked link, which belongs either to
a triangle or a double link. if it belongs to a triangle we remove the triangle from
the triangulation. we distinguish three cases, according to whether the triangle
has one, two or three links in common with the boundary.
if it has more than
one boundary link, additional double links are created during the move, so that the
length of the original boundary loop is always increased by one (see fig.1, where
also the rule for link marking is specied). if the marked link belongs to a double

figure 1: the minimal decomposition. in the left column the boundary before the
decomposition and in the right column the boundary after the decomposition.

link we simply remove the double link. this will in general lead to a splitting of the
original loop into two. on each of the resulting loops we place a mark as shown in
fig. 1. we can choose either of the two loops as our new entrance loop, associating
the other one with a baby universe. this gives rise to the factor of two in eqn. (2)
below. (one or both loops may of course be trivial, i.e. consist of only a marked
point.) by this procedure we associate with each euclidean triangulation a unique
sequence of peeling moves. if the entrance loop has length l1, then on average l1
peeling steps will move the boundary one time step ahead. thus one identies the

deformation g(l1, l2, t) associated with a single peeling step with
this deformation fulls

1
l1


t

g(l1, l2, t).


t

g(l1, l2, t) = l1g(l1, l2, t)+gl1g(l1 +1, l2, t)+2

l12

xl=0

l1w (l)g(l1l2, l2, t), (2)

with the initial condition

g(l1, l2, t = 0) = l1,l2,

(3)

3

where w (l) is the disk amplitude dened by

w (l) = xtt (l)

gn (t ),

(4)

and the sum is over all (non-restricted) triangulations with one connected boundary
component of length l. let us introduce the generating functionals

g(z, y, t) =

w (z) =

1

zl1+1

1

yl2+1 g(l1, l2, t),



xl1,l2=0
xl=0



1
zl+1 w (l).

(5)

(6)

here z and y can be understood as boundary cosmological constants. then the
dierential equation (2) reads

with initial condition

where


t

g(z, y, t) =


z

(h(z)g(z, y, t)) ,

g(z, y, t = 0) =

1
zy

1

zy  1

,

h(z) = z  gz2  2w (z).

(7)

(8)

(9)

it is well known that in analogy with the procedure described above, it is possible
to derive a combinatorial identity for w (z) by removing a triangle or a double
link from a triangulation contributing to the sum in (4), see for instance [7]. the
combinatorial identity reads

(z  gz2)w (z)  1 + g(w1(g) + z) = (w (z))2 ,

where

w1(g) = xtt (1)

gn (t ).

(10)

(11)

here the terms proportional to g emerge when a triangle is removed whereas the
term (w (z))2 emerges when a double link is removed and the surface splits into two.
we note that if we set g = 0 we get

w (z) =

1

2(cid:16)z pz2  4(cid:17) ,

(12)

which is the well-known generating function for rooted branched polymers. these
appear exactly because of our inclusion of double links. for g 6= 0, w (z) is the
solution of a quadratic equation and the unknown constant w1(g) is determined by
noticing that the analyticity structure of w (z) should not change discontinuously
at g = 0. the solution for w (z) reads

w (z) =

1

2(cid:18)z  gz2 + g (z  c(g))q(z  c+(g))(z  c(g))(cid:19) ,

(13)

4

where c(g)  c+(g)  c(g) and where all three quantities can be expressed explicitly
in terms of g. at a certain value gc of g the radius of convergence of the series (4)
is reached and a continuum limit can be dened. setting

gc  g = a2,

(14)

where a2 is a scaling parameter with the dimension of area and  is the continuum
cosmological constant we have for g close to gc

1
2

a(cid:19) + o(a2),
c(g) = zc(cid:18)1 +
c+(g) = zc(cid:16)1  a(cid:17) + o(a2),
c(g) = c + o(a2).

(15)

(16)

(17)

it is now natural to introduce a continuum boundary cosmological constant z by

z = zc (1 + az) .

(18)

we thus have that h(z) exactly consists of the scaling part of 2w (z). introducing
a continuum time variable t by

t = z1/2

c

(zc  c)1/2 gc a1/2t,

(19)

one obtains a dierential equation for the continuum version g(z, y, t ) of the two-
loop correlator, namely,


t

g(z, y, t ) = 



z (cid:18)(cid:18)(z 

1
2

)qz + (cid:19) g(z, y, t )(cid:19) ,

with the initial condition

g(z, y, t ) =

1

z + y

.

(20)

(21)

note that the continuum cosmological constants  and z and the time t are only
dened up to positive multiplicative constants. we have used this freedom to bring
the propagator equation into the simple form (20).

2.2 the lorentzian case

one may invert the peeling procedure introduced in the previous section to obtain
a euclidean triangulation from a sequence of peeling moves. its geometry is given
in the form of a bulk cylindrical geometry connecting the entrance and exit loops,
decorated with baby universe out-growths. this is the case because some of the
peeling steps remove just a single triangle (which we now associate with the bulk
cylinder), while the removal of a double link in general amounts to the deletion of
an entire baby universe.

as mentioned earlier, the dierence between euclidean and lorentzian gravity
can be traced to the presence or absence of baby universes. there is already an

5

explicit construction of euclidean from lorentzian histories through the addition of
baby universes [2]. our current aim is to go the other way. the peeling procedure
suggests an obvious map from euclidean to lorentzian discrete geometries. given
a representation of a euclidean geometry as a sequence of peeling moves, consider a
step where a double link-cum-baby universe is removed, see fig. 2. decompose the

   

   

   


    

    

    


    

    

    


figure 2: a representation of a euclidean triangulation as a sequence of peeling
moves along a spiral-like one-dimensional curve. black rectangles are double links
and grey circles baby universes.

baby universe into a branched polymer attached to the marked link and a smaller
baby universe attached to the branched polymer in such a way that the branched
polymer consists of the largest possible number of links. next, replace the step
where the double link-cum-baby universe is removed by a step where only the double
link and the branched polymer is taken way. do the same for all similar steps in
the sequence of peeling moves. the resulting sequence of peeling moves obviously
represents a geometry without baby universes. it is clear that the class of geometries
one generates this way is larger than the class of lorentzian triangulations introduced
in [2]. firstly, it contains all of the regular lorentzian triangulations of [2], as can be
checked explicitly. secondly, the boundaries may now contain double links. we will
refer to this generalized class of geometries as lorentzian geometries. this will
be justied below by showing that they lead to a theory in the same universality
class as the original lorentzian model and the extensions discussed in [8]. the
dierential equation for the two-loop correlator of lorentzian geometries is obtained
by replacing 2w (z) in (9) by wbp (z), and thus reads

with initial condition

where


t

g(z, y, t) =



 z (cid:16)h(z) g(z, y, t)(cid:17) ,

g(z, y, t = 0) =

1
z y

1

1  z y

,

h(z) = z  gz2  wbp (z).

(22)

(23)

(24)

we have introduced tildes on all the lorentzian variables in order to distinguish
them from the euclidean ones let us note here that it is easy to generalize this

6

model of lorentzian quantum gravity to models with arbitrary polygons as building
blocks. using the newly developed technology of [9] it may be possible to solve all of
these models exactly. here we only consider the simplest model. we wish to locate
a critical point (gc, zc) at which we can dene a non-trivial continuum limit by the
scaling relations

g = gc(1  c1a2 ),

z = zc(cid:16)1 + c2a z(cid:17) ,

(25)

where c1 and c2 are numerical constants. the only way to obtain a non-trivial
dierential equation in the continuum limit is by demanding that h(z)  o(a2).
this determines the critical values of z and g to be
33
16

gc =

zc =

(26)

4
3

,

.

for later convenience we set c2 = 1
version t of t by

33/4 and c1 = 13

. we also introduce a continuum

t =

1
a

t .

(27)

note that the relative dimensions of the time variable and the area are dierent for
euclidean and lorentzian quantum gravity. then we derive the following evolution
equation for the continuum two-loop correlator g( z, y , t )


 t

g( z, y , t ) = 



 z (cid:16)(cid:16) z 2  (cid:17) g( z, y , t )(cid:17) ,

with initial condition

g( z, y , t ) =

1

z + y

.

(28)

(29)

this dierential equation coincides with the one derived in [2], using a completely
dierent strategy.

at the discrete level it may be dened as the sum pt=1

let us now turn to a discussion of the disk amplitude w (l) of lorentzian gravity.
g(l, l2 = 0, t). this reects
the fact that a lorentzian geometry with a regular initial spatial geometry at t = 0
can only terminate at a nite t if we allow for a singularity where space contracts
to a point.

we can derive a combinatorial identity for the generating functional w (z) in the
same way as for the euclidean disk amplitude w (z). the combinatorial identity
reads

(z  gz2) w (z)  1 + g( w1(g) + z) = wbp (z) w (z).

(30)

as in the case of the two-loop correlator, the only modication of the equation
concerns the term associated with the removal of a double link. if, in the euclidean
case, the marked link is part of a double link, we remove the double link and are
left with two disjoint disks. if, in the lorentzian case, the marked link is part of a

7

double link, we remove the double link and are left with one disk and one branched
polymer. in this case, by setting g = 0, we get

w (z) = wbp (z).

(31)

this underlines the consistency of our construction. for g 6= 0 on the other hand
we obtain

w (z) =

2(1  g( w1(g) + z))
z  2gz2 + z2  4

.

(32)

note that the denominator of (32) is equal to 2h(z). for g < 1
4 this function has one
zero z1(g), which behaves as 1
g + o(g) when g is close to zero. hence a pole appears
in the transition from (31) to (32) and we must choose the unknown constant w1(g)
4 the function h(z) acquires an additional
such that this pole is cancelled. at g = 1
zero, z2(g), and the critical point gc = 33
16 corresponds to the situation where the
two zeros z1(g) and z2(g) coincide. in the vicinity of the critical point we have the
expansions

z1(g) =

z2(g) =

+

4
3
4
3 

16
37/4 (gc  g)1/2,
16
37/4 (gc  g)1/2.

using (33), (34) and (25), we derive the continuum disk amplitude

(33)

(34)

(35)

w ( z) = lim
a0

a w (z) =

4

35/4

1

.

z +p

this expression coincides with the one found in [2] by completely dierent means.

3 renormalizing euclidean gravity to lorentzian grav-

ity

we will now show that it is possible to renormalize the euclidean coupling con-
stants and the euclidean time such that the equation governing the time evolution
of the euclidean two-loop function is mapped to the corresponding equation for the
lorentzian two-loop function.

we start from the discrete version of the dierential equation for the time devel-

opment of the euclidean universes, (7), and make an ansatz

z = z(z, g),

t =

1
b

t,

g = g(g),

(36)

where b may depend on g and g, but not on z or z. in principle it should be possible
to determine the required map between the coupling constants of the two theories
directly from the peeling procedure which maps euclidean to lorentzian histories.
however, it turns out to be simpler to use an indirect argument. if there exists a

8

transformation of the form (36) which maps the euclidean dierential equation into
the lorentzian dierential equation, then clearly it must include a wave-function
renormalization of the two-loop correlator

and furthermore

or, equivalently,

g(z, y, t)  (cid:18)  z

z(cid:19)1

g(z(z), y(y), bt),

b h(z)

 z
z

= h(z),

z

dz
h(z)

= bz

dz
h(z)

+ k,

(37)

(38)

(39)

where k is an integration constant.

using the explicit expressions (9) and (24) for h(z) and h(z), we can carry out

the integrations in (39) and nd

1



z  c(g)

log( 2(g) + (g)(z  c(g)) + 2p(g)p(z  c+(g))(z  c(g))
p(g)
= b
2g2 
1  2gz1(g)

2z1(g)(cid:16)z1(g)  3
4g(cid:17)

log(cid:20)qz1(g)2  4pz2  4 + z z1(g)  4(cid:21) + . . .
pz1(g)2  4

4g(cid:17)
4z1(g)2(cid:16)z1(g)  3

1  2gz2(g)
2z2(g)(cid:16)z2(g)  3
4g(cid:17)

log(z  z1(g)) +

)

1

+

here . . . means terms similar to the previous one with z1(g) replaced by z2(g), z3(g)
and z4(g) where z1(g), z2(g), z3(g) and z4(g) are the four roots of the polynomial
z4  1
g2 with z1(g) and z2(g) still playing the roles described on the previous
page. furthermore  and  are dened by

g z3 + 1

(40)

log(z  z2(g))

+ k,




(g) = (c(g)  c+(g))(c(g)  c(g)),
(g) = 2c(g)  c+(g)  c(g).

for any value of k, g, g and b, the relation (40) denes a mapping z = z(z). however,
not all values of b and k correspond to situations we can encounter in the peeling
procedure. firstly, the two theories have to approach criticality simultaneously,
since macroscopic surfaces and boundaries are created at the critical points. sec-
ondly, we insist on a canonical scaling dimension of the cosmological and boundary
cosmological constants. this amounts to saying that the scaling of the continuum
cosmological constants is governed by the same power of the lattice cut-o a. since
we have assumed that g is only a function of g, and not of z and z, this implies
that   , with a proportionality coecient independent of the cut-o.
in the
scaling limit all dependence on z3(g) and z4(g) disappears and using the scaling

9

relations (14)(18), (25), (33) and (34), we see that in order for the mapping to
persist in the continuum limit, b and k must scale according to

b = a1/21/4,

k = a1/21/4,

(41)

for two dimensionless constants  and . to x the relevant power of  in (41), we
have used the fact that b and k cannot depend on z or z. note that b and k behave
in a singular way when we approach the continuum limit. this is an unavoidable
consequence of interpolating between two universality classes of 2d geometries with
dierent scaling behaviour (recall that in the previous section we showed that t scales
as t  a1/2, whereas t  a1).

it is now straightforward to compute the continuum version of (40),

1


log


3 1/4qz +  + 
q 2

3 1/4qz +  
q 2




=



p

log( z +p
z p) +




,

(42)

where we have absorbed some additional numerical constants into  and . we will
argue that in order for this map to be associated with the cutting procedure we must
choose  = 0. taking the limit z   implies that the boundary length l  0.
now, a lorentzian boundary is shorter than a euclidean one, since it was obtained
from the latter by cutting away baby universes which at a given time contributed
to the boundary length. this is the physical motivation for requiring that z  
should imply z  , i.e.  = 0. moreover, a rescaling of both z and  with a

common factor allows us to choose

 =

1

q,

in such a way that the map (42) simplies to

3 qz + 

1/4

= r 2

,

z

p

and the relation between the continuum times t and t becomes

t =

t

1/4

.

(43)

(44)

(45)

one can of course verify directly that the (non-analytic) change of variables (44) and
(45) supplemented by the wave function renormalization (37) transforms eq. (20)
for euclidean quantum gravity into eq. (28) for lorentzian gravity.3. to map the
actual two-loop correlator of euclidean quantum gravity g0(z, y, t ) (i.e. the solution
to (20) with initial condition (21)) onto the actual two-loop correlator of lorentzian

3note that some additional constants have been absorbed into  in going from (40) to (42)

10

quantum gravity g0( x, y , t ) (i.e. the solution to (28) with initial condition (29))
an additional dressing factor is needed more precisely one has

g0( z, y , t ) = k( z(t, z), y ) g0(z, y, t ),

(46)

where

k( z(t, z), y ) =

z(t, z) + y

z( z(t, z)) + y (y ) qz + 
q z(t, z) + 

,

(47)

and where z(t, z) is the solution to characteristic equation for (20):

 z(t, z)

t

= (z 

1
2

)qz + ,

z(t = 0, z) = z.

(48)

summing up, we have shown that integrating over baby universes can be described
as a renormalization of the cosmological constants and the time variable combined
with a dressing of the two-loop correlator.

4 discussion

we have shown how one can analyze the geometric structure of lorentzian and eu-
clidean triangulations by representing them as a sequence of peeling moves dening
a one-dimensional spiral-like path. along this path, one meets in both cases ei-
ther triangles or double links. the dierence between the euclidean and lorentzian
cases is that in the former a double link may have a branched polymer plus an entire
baby universe attached to it whereas in the latter a double link can have at most
a branched polymer attached to it. at the level of sequences of peeling moves, this
allows us to dene a many-to-one map from euclidean to lorentzian geometries.
this is reminiscent of the situation one encounters in analyzing the fractal structure
of random walks versus branched polymers. there, moving along a path connecting
two vertices, in the random walk case one may have only a single link emerging at
each vertex. for the branched polymer case, there can be an entire polymer attached
at each vertex, see e.g. [7]. in this context it may be of interest to point out that
pure lorentzian quantum gravity has been proven to be equivalent to a model of
random walks [8].

this analogy is further strengthened by the nature of the continuum renormal-
ization of the coupling constants presented in section 3. apart from trivial rescal-
ings, only the boundary cosmological constant is subject to a renormalization. this
reects the fact that the peeling decomposition proceeds along a one-dimensional
path. moreover, the functional form of the relation between the lorentzian and
euclidean boundary cosmological constants is very similar to that between the cos-
mological constants of random walks and branched polymers, since in both cases
the cosmological constant of the simpler model has a square-root dependence on the

11

cosmological constant of the more extended model. furthermore, in both cases the
fractal dimension of the decorated system is twice that of the simpler system.

acknowledgements

j.a. acknowledges the support of maphysto, centre for mathematical physics,
funded by the danish national research foundation. j.c. acknowledges the sup-
port of the eu via grant erb 4001gt973188. c.k. acknowledges the support of
the carlsberg foundation.

references

[1] s. coleman, nucl. phys. b310 (1988) 643

[2] j. ambjrn and r. loll: non-perturbative lorentzian quantum gravity, causal-

ity and topology change, nucl. phys. b536 (1998) 407, hep-th/9805108.

[3] j. ambjrn, r. loll, j.l. nielsen and j. rolf: euclidean and lorentzian quan-
tum gravity: lessons from two dimensions, chaos solitons fractals 10 (1999)
177, hep-th/9806241.

[4] j. ambjrn and y. watabiki: scaling in quantum gravity, nucl.phys. b445

(1995) 129, hep-th/9501049.

[5] w. beirl and d.a. johnston: 2d lorentzian gravity as 2d euclidean gravity

with ising spins, hep-lat/9602009

[6] y. watabiki: construction of noncritical string eld theory by transfer ma-
trix formalism in dynamical triangulation, nucl. phys. b441 (1995) 119, hep-
th/9401096.

[7] j. ambjrn, b. durhuus and t. jonsson: quantum geometry. a statistical eld

theory approach, cambridge, uk: univ. pr. (1997) 363 p.

[8] p. di francesco, e. guitter and c. kristjansen: integrable 2d lorentzian grav-

ity and random walks, to appear in nucl. phys. b[fs], hep-th/9907084.

[9] m.g. harris and j.f. wheater: peeling and multi-critical matter coupled to

quantum gravity, hep-th/9911189

12

