9
9
9
1

 
c
e
d
1

 

 
 

1
v
8
0
0
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

local quantum theory beyond quantization

bert schroer

abstract. recent progress on a constructive approach to qft which is based
on modular theory is reviewed and compared with the standard quantization
approaches.

talk given at quantum theory and symmetries goslar, germany, july

1999

1. local quantum physics beyond quantization

the slow but steadily increasing impact of the tomita-takesaki modular the-
ory on qft over the last 20 years has presently reached a stage of maturity where
it promises to reshape the conceptual basis of local quantum physics[1]. origi-
nally linked to kubo-martin-schwinger (kms) thermal properties which charac-
terize quantum statistical systems in the thermodynamic limit [2], it became soon
an important mathematical concept in the pivotal1 issue of localization [4] and
there exists by now an impressive body of structural results obtained by modular
methods, most of them have been reviewed in [1].

the main goal in qft is however not the structural results for their own sake,
but rather the classication of families of nontrivial eld theories and their con-
structive mathematical control; the structural theorems are basically intuition- and
condence-creating intermediate steps in that conquest. in this area we are in my
view presently arriving at an important change of paradigm in the development
of qft. the new message is that not only are wedge-localized algebras important
structural building blocks in qft (a fact which is not totally surprising in view of
the importance of the rindler wedge in unruhs discussion of the thermal hawking-
like aspect of the light-front horizon), but there are even concepts which allow to
classify and construct interacting wedge algebras as subalgebras of all operators
in the (incoming) fock space of massive particles [5]. having a covariant net of
wedge algebras (by acting with the poincare-group on a standard wedge algebra),
the nontriviality in the setting of algebraic qft just amounts to show that suitable
intersections (representing geometrically double cones) are not exhausted by mul-
tiples of the identity. in particular one notices the existence problem approached
in this way is not directly threatened by short distance problems [6].

key words and phrases. quantum field theory, s-matrix, unruh eect, tomita modular

theory .

1dierent from qm which has to rely on an added interpretive setting, most of its physical
interpretation, thanks to causality of observables and localization of states [3], is already contained
within qft.

1

2

bert schroer

before explaining three basic new concepts which allow to pursue such a pro-
gram (and to analytically control it for nontrivial factorizing massive models in two
dimensions), it may be helpful to review the standard approach and highlight some
of its weak points. the qft of almost all of the textbooks uses a parallelism to clas-
sical eld theory usually referred to as quantization 2. this is most evident in the
canonical approach in the early days of qft (dirac, heisenberg, pauli and fermi),
but it also remained visible in the renormalization theory of tomonaga, feynman,
schwinger and dyson as well as in the subsequent functional integral approach
based on euclidean actions. even the so called causal approach of stueckelberg,
bogoliubov and shirkov is not entirely independent of classical ideas (although it
goes a long way in this direction) because the implementation of interactions by
coupling free elds in a fock space is still in analogy to classical eld theory.

such quantization approaches usually involve some amount of artistry in the
sense that not all of the key requirements from which one starts are reected in the
physical results. the physical (renormalized) operators simply do not fulll (unless
the model happens to be superrenormalizable, which is certainly not the case for
the more interesting models) canonical commutation relations or functional inte-
gral representations. the only commutation structure which survives is spacelike
(anti)commutativity and einstein causality. in qm the situation is much better
since e.g. path integral formulation has a solid mathematical basis. but even there
it is not advisable to use it outside the quasiclassical approximation; it is extremely
impractical to present a course on qm with rich illustrations in such a setting.
artistry as contained in the functional integral approach beyond qm is helpful as
long as the people who use it take it as a temporary recipe, and not for the ultimate
denition of what constitutes qft.

the safest framework as far as avoiding such pitfalls is the so called algebraic
approach. it places the causality and localization structure into the center of the
stage and links it inexorably with the notions of commutants in the theory of
von neumann algebras. it does not ban the good old quantum elds completely,
but attributes to them an auxiliary status analogous to coordinates in dierential
geometry. one may use elds for the generation of algebras, but there is nothing
intrinsic or unavoidable about them [7][8]. it may be helpful to remind oneself that
the use of coordinates preceded the elegant intrinsic style of modern dierential
geometry and even nowadays problem-adapted coordinates are frequently used.

the problem with aqft up to recent times was of course that in trying to
nd a framework which avoids the above mentioned artistry3, it suered from an
often criticized lack of practicality and constructiveness even in such cases where
its proponents used the word constructive instead of axiomatic in the titles of
their papers. in the following i would like to convince the reader that we are in the
middle of a process of change: the use of modular theory is rendering aqft more
computable and less esoteric.

2this word covers a variety of dierent meanings ranging from the rigorous functorial deni-
tion in connection with ccr and car algebras over classical test function spaces for free elds,
to the present more artistic use for the implementation of interactions via lagrangians. the use
in the title of the talk is the latter.

3the prototype of a a balanced formulation of a quantum theory is of course the opera-
tor/hilbert space formulation of qm. aqft tries to achieve such a balance in the presence of
relativistic causality/localization.

local quantum theory beyond quantization

3

this turn of events was made possible because of three recent concepts which
went beyond the above mentioned result of bisognano and wichmann and which
are schematically explained in the sequel.

1. it is possible to convert the unique wigner one particle representations (m, s)
directly into the net of free eld algebras, thus avoiding the intermediary use
of eld coordinatizations altogether [5][9]. the construction uses the fact
that the wigner theory of the positive energy representation of the connected
part of the poincare-group augmented by spacetime reections on the rim of
a wedge allows to introduce an unbounded antilinear involutory pre-tomita
operator s

(1.1)

s = kj

1

2

hr(w ) = real span {  h; s = }

and to dene a net of closed real subspaces hr(w ) of the complex wigner
representation space h. in case of integer spin the requirement that k = 1
and jhr(w ) = hr(w opp) agrees with the geometric opposite real localiza-
tion subspace, whereas for semiinteger spin k is a phase factor related to the
so-called klein twist operator which preempts the statistics on the level of
the wigner theory. for d  1 + 3 the net of real hilbert spaces generated by
poincare transformations is then carried directly the net of wedge aliated
von neumann algebras by the weyl (ccr) resp. the car functor and the
hawking-unruh thermal aspect of modular localization becomes manifest
[5].

in the case of d=1+2 and non semiinteger (anyone=nonquantized) spin,
the braid group statistics phase is already visible in the pre-tomita theory
in wigner space.
in this case there exists no functor, the multiparticle
space does not have tensor product structure and the would be elds with
braid group statistics applied to the vacuum need the vacuum polarization
clouds to maintain the very braid group statistics. this net of localized
algebras cannot be obtained in the above functorial way (i.e. by rigorous
quantization) but has to be obtained by a method similar to that used in
the subsequent interacting case.

2. for interacting bosonic/fermionic massive particles the tomita involution j
for the interacting wedge algebra has the following representation in terms
of the incoming free jin

(1.2)

j = sscatjin

this relation can be derived from the tcp transformation of the s-matrix
sscat and the close relation of j to the tcp operator. in d=1+1 theories j is
equal to the tcp operator. the prerequisite is the validity and completeness
of the scattering theory which requires the standard mass gap assumption
(as in the lsz scattering theory). the other modular object of the pair
(a(w ), ) is the lorentz boost this, as the entire connected part of the
poincare group, is independent of interactions (at least in the bookkeeping
based on scattering theory).

3. the interacting wedge algebra has polarization free generators (pfgs) f (f )
[5][6] which create massive one particle state vectors with a mass gap from

4

(1.3)

the vacuum.

bert schroer

f (f ) = one  particle vector

this property should be seen in the context of the following intrinsic charac-
terization of the presence of interactions (private communication by d. buch-
holz): operators associated to algebras localized in regions whose causally
completion is smaller than a wedge (i.e. the smallest region which admits
a l-boost automorphism) and which have a nonvanishing one-particle com-
ponent if acting on the vacuum create in addition a nontrivial (interaction-
determined) charge neutral polarization cloud (unless the net is interaction
free i.e. permits a free eld generation). the existence of pfgs is another
illustration of the magic ability of qft to maximally utilize the breakdown
of a physical argument (in this case a proof) for the unfolding of a new un-
expected phenomenon. the pfg-generators can be explicitely charaterized
in terms of their vacuum expectations. although they are determined in
terms of the s-matrix (including the so-called bound state poles4), they
enter the vacuum expectation values in a novel nested fashion which gives
rise to nondiagonal inclusive processes (referring to the diagonal inclusive
processes in cross sections) [6]. the vacuum restricted to the wedge algebra
generated by the pfgs is a thermal kms state of the type investigated by
unruh. for factorizing d=1+1 models (examples: sine (sinh)-gordon) the
pfgs coalesce with a kms representation of the zamolodchikov-faddeev
algebra thus equipping the latter for the rst time with a spacetime inter-
pretation [5][6].

this collection of obtained results requires some further comments. the net of
wedge algebras dened in terms of the previous pfg construction is not sucient
in order to extract the physics. it is well known in algebraic qft that the full
physical information is contained in the net of double cone algebras and not yet
in the wedge algebras. the calculation of the former by intersections of wedge
algebras is an unusual step, for which presently ecient techniques are missing. it
is the step from real particle (on-shell) creation contained in the s-matrix to the
virtual polarization clouds which constitute the characteristic feature of qft. it is
amazing that the wedge idea allows to divide the original problem into two parts:
the on-shell wedge algebra structure which is reminiscent of some relativistic qm
(with channel coupling between channels of dierent particle numbers) whereas the
o-shell double cone problem is qft par excellence. the wedge situation gives
some justication to the (otherwise quite meaningless) particle/eld duality which
sometimes is invoked in analogy to the quantum mechanical particle/wave duality.
the wedge localization is the only one in which the two notions coexist: the particle
notion in the on-shell property of the wedge algebra and the eld aspect in the fact
that the algebra has no annihilators and upon forming intersections leads to the
full o-shell virtual particle structure in a natural way (i.e. without any further
input). everything is already preempted by the net of wedge algebras: either the
double cone algebras are void (only multiples of the identity) in which case there

4strictly speaking the hierarchy of elementary versus bound particle states ceises to make
sense in qft where it must be replaced by the hierarchy of charges. it has no intrinsic meaning
to say e.g. that a particular particle is a soliton independent of the chosen description (there are
in general various descriptions) unless the soliton charge explains all the other charges by fusion
and is not itself the result of more fundamental charge fusion.

local quantum theory beyond quantization

5

is no local qft compatible with the wedge data, or the net of local observables
exists and is unique.

it turns out that to decide which case appears in a given situation is quite
hard, even in the d=1+1 factorizing situation where the s-matrix commutes with
the incoming particle number. the point is that the intersection condition which
can be formulated as a vanishing commutator

(1.4)

[a, fa(f )] = 0

a  a(w ), fa(f )  a(wa)

where f (f ) are the wedge generators (see [6] for the notation) and a denotes a spa-
tial translation of w into itself wa  w. the coecient functions of a contained
in the double cone relative commutant in terms of the z-f algebra generators can
be computed and one nds the so-called kinematical pole relation which describes
the structure of the multiparticle polarization clouds in terms of matrix elements
of a in the zamolodchikov basis. with other word the present formalism for the
calculation of the algebra of operators in the relative commutant a(w )  a(wa)
only determines them as bilinear forms, which is not enough to calculate e.g. their
correlation functions. to specialists this problem is well known from the karowski-
weisz-smirnov bootstrap-formfactor approach, where the control of convergence
properties in the construction of correlation function has (apart from some too
simple cases as the ising order/disorder elds) remains as an unresolved issue.
in our formulation with nonpointlike nite localization regions the problem looks
somewhat simpler since (according to the payley-wiener theorem) the momentum-
space fall-o properties are better. there is however another quite fundamental
idea which one expects to lead to signicant simplications. this is the idea to
study instead of the wedge algebras for massive d=1+1 models their chiral confor-
mal holographic projections. intuitively this is related to light cone physics, but the
standard methods in this area are not good enough for the present purpose. the
conceptually as well as mathematically satisfactory method to handle such holo-
graphic problems is the method of modular inclusions of subfactors [10]. these are
subfactors (in the language of von neumann algebras) inside a larger factor whose
modular group fullls a certain consistency condition with respect to the action
of the larger modular automorphism on the subfactor. the main theorem is that
such situations are isomorphic to chiral conformal theories in the sense of aqft.
it turns out that if one takes in the above construction of relative commutants
instead of a spacelike a one of the two lightlike translations a one is precisely in
that situation of a modular inclusion. the associated chiral theory is localized on
the light cone. for the main theorem and its prove the reader is referred to the
literature [12][13]. it needs to be stressed that this holographic association of a
chiral conformal qft to a massive theory is quite dierent from its short distance
universality class. whereas the elds of the latter generally decompose into tensor
products belonging to the two light rays, the holographic chiral theory remembers
its origin because it admits in addition to the 3 geometric moebius transformations
another hidden (nongeometric) automorphism. this corresponds to the on w
locally acting opposite (-) light ray translation which if transferred to the (+) ray
becomes spread out i.e. totally fuzzy. here we used the equality

(1.5)

a(r+) = a(w )

6

bert schroer

between (half the) the light ray algebra and the wedge algebra has been made [6] as
well as the fact that the natural nets for both algebras are nonlocal relative to each
other. the mass operator is neither given by p+ nor by p (which separately have
a gapless spectrum), but rather by the product of the geometric with the hidden
generator p+p.

this kind of holography has a generalization to higher dimensions, but instead
of a (d  1) dimensional light front theory (as one would have naively expected),
the formalism suggests to take (d  1) identical chiral theories carefully placed in
a suitable relative position in a common hilbert space. a more appropriate ter-
minology would be to speak of a chiral scanning of a higher dimensional theory.
all this seems to be extremely powerful in a constructive approach, but it has
not yet been explored. the modular method applied to d=1+1 factorizing sys-
tems in conjunction with its chiral holographic projection, with the aim to obtain
complete mathematical constructive control over this interesting class of nontrivial
2-dimensional models is what i am presently working on [6].

2. future prospects

the only way of giving some more hints in a page-limited conference report is

to mention some of the dreams which this new approach lends itself to.

 a purely eld-theoretic classication and construction of chiral

theories based on modular theory

the present constructions are using special (ane) algebras which did
not originate in qft and which have no known higher dimensional gener-
alizations. on the other hand the exchange algebra which is of pure eld
theoretical origin is (unlike its special case of ccr and car algebra) incom-
plete in that its distribution theoretical character at colliding points remains
unspecied. with some hindsight and artistry on monodromy, one is able
to compute 4-point functions for the family of minimal models [14][15], but
this is a far shot from. on the other hand a modular construction would
start as the exchange algebras from the statistics data (r-matrices obtained
by classifying markov traces5 on the universal braid group b,  topologi-
cal eld theory) and use them (instead of the ) for the modular construction
of the haline algebra. by moebius transformation (instead of intersec-
tions) one should be able to obtain the charge-carrying (which carry the
plectonic charges) operators for arbitrary small regions. in this way an old
dream 74/75 of swieca and myself could still come true which consisted in
the hope to classify the conformal block decompositions by purely eld theo-
retic methods (unlike the later use of representation theory of special (ane)
algebras) and in this way convert chiral qft into a bona de theoretical
laboratory of general qft. this dream would also include the understand-
ing of the very peculiar and special friedan-qiu-shenker quantization in the
energy-momentum tensor as a consequence of the more universal (dhr-
jones-wenzl) statistics quantization.

 a theory of free plektons

it has been known for some time, that the d=1+2 carriers of braid group
statistics must have a semiinnite spacelike string localization and that they

5this method (in the special case for which the braid group degenerates into the permutation

group p) appears already in the 70/71 dhr work [7]

local quantum theory beyond quantization

7

obey a spin-statistics theorem. unlike chiral theories, 3-dim. theories do al-
low for deformation parameters (coupling strength whose continuous change
have no eect on the superselection rules). it is an educated guess that there
exist free plektons in the sense that they have vanishing cross sections al-
though their s-matrix is not one but rather piecewise constant and equal
to one of the r-matrices (with all the caveats related to the very deni-
tion of scattering matrices in the absence of a fock space tensor structure!).
such an s would still commute with the incoming particle number (as in
the d=1+1 factorizing case) and would be used in a modular approach in
order to construct pfg wedge algebra generators and, via intersections, to
obtain spacelike cone localized (string-like) plektonic operators. although
without real particle creation, such a free plektonic theory would (unlike
free bosons and fermions) have a rich virtual vacuum polarization struc-
ture [16]. the nonrelativistic limit should be carried out in such a way
that the spin-statistics connection remains intact. the nonrelativistic limit
would maintain its eld theoretic vacuum polarization structure (necessary
to upheld the spin-statistics relation) and the result would therefore not be
consistent with the well-known leinaas-myrrheim or aharonov-bohm (in
wilczeks approach) quantum mechanical description. plektons are also too
noncommutative in order to permit a well-dened lagrangian quantization
description.

 holographic or scanning methods for higher dimensional construc-

tions

dicult problems as the classication and constructive determination
of higher dimensional qfts often render themselves more susceptible to
solution if one succeeds to chop them into several easier pieces. the small-
est and best understood kind of qft is certainly chiral qft. according to
previous comments, one may hope that a nite collection of chiral theories in
carefully arranged relative positions (modular intersections and inclusions)
in a common hilbert space may contain all the necessary information for
the construction of a higher dimensional qft.

such a construction, if feasible, would sharpen a paradigm which underlies
aqft6: the new physical reality (of aqft or local quantum physics) is not that
of a manifold with a material content (the newtonian reality which extends into
relativity and qm), but is rather thought of as coming about through relations
between objects which themselves have no individuality (like the monades of leib-
nitz). in technical-mathematical language the physical reality of local nets comes
about by modular inclusions/intersections (and more general kinds of relative posi-
tioning) of the unique hypernite type iii1 von neumann factors which (apart from
being able to be contained in each other and form intersections) behave in many
respects as points in geometry.

references

[1] h.-j. borchers, on the revolutionization of quantum field theory by tomitas modular
theory, university of goettingen preprint, april 1999, invited contribution to the issue
2000 of jmp

[2] r. haag n. m. hugenholtz and m. winnink, commun. math. phys. 5, (1967) 215

6this has been formulated on dierent occasions in past articles and conference reports by

r. haag

8

bert schroer

[3] b. schroer, jpa 32, (1999) 5937
[4] j. bisognano and e. h. wichmann, j. math. phys. 16, (1975) 1007
[5] b. schroer, annals of physics 275, no2 (1999) 190
[6] b. schroer, new concepts in particle physics from solution of an old problem hep-

th/9908021

[7] r. haag, local quantum physics, springer 1992
[8] d. buchholz and r. haag, the quest for understanding in relativistic quantum physics,
university of goettingen preprint october 1999, invited contribution to the issue 2000 of
jmp

[9] r. brunetti, d. guido and r. longo, first quantization via bw property, in preparation

[10] h.-w. wiebrock, commun. math. phys. 158, (1993) 537
[11] d. guido, r. longo and h.-w. wiesbrock, comm. math. phys. 192, (1998) 217
[12] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, looking beyond the thermal horizon: hidden symmetries

in chiral models, hep-th/9901031, rev. in math. phys. in print

[13] d. guido, r. longo, j.e. roberts and r. verch, charged sectors, spin and statistics in

quantum field theory on curved spacetimes, math-ph/9906019, and referces therein

[14] k.-h. rehren and b. schroer, nucl. phys. b 312, (1989) 715
[15] a. n. schellekens and s. yankielowicz, j. of mod. phys. a 5, (1990) 2903
[16] j. mund, lett. math. phys. 43, (1998) 319

institut fur theoretische physik, fu-berlin, arnimallee 14, 14195 berlin, ger-

many, presently: cbpf, rua dr. xavier sigaud, 22290-180 rio de janeiro, brazil

e-mail address: schroer@cbpf.br.

