0
0
0
2

 

n
u
j
 

6
1

 
 

2
v
6
7
2
2
1
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

niig-dp-99-04
december, 1999

four-dimensional planck scale is not

universal in fifth dimension in

randall-sundrum scenario

takaaki ozeki1 and noriyuki shimoyama2

department of physics, niigata university, niigata 950-2182, japan

abstract

it has recently been proposed that the hierarchy problem can be solved by
considering the warped fth dimension compactied on s1/z2. many studies
in the context have assumed a particular choice for an integration constant 0
that appears when one solves the ve-dimensional einstein equation. since 0
is not determined by the boundary condition of the ve-dimensional theory,
0 may be regarded as a gauge degree of freedom in a sense. to this time, all
indications are that the four-dimensional planck mass depends on 0. in this
paper, we carefully investigate the properties of the geometry in the randall-
sundrum model, and consider in which loction y the four-dimensional planck
mass is measured. as a result, we nd a 0-independent relation between
the four-dimensional planck mass mpl and the ve-dimensional fundamental
mass scale m , and remarkably enough, we can take m to the tev region when
we consider models with the standard model conned on a distant brane. we
also conrm that the physical masses on the distant brane do not depend on
0 by considering a bulk scalar eld as an illustrative example. the resulting
mass scale of the kaluza-klein modes is on the order of m .

1ozeki@muse.hep.sc.niigata-u.ac.jp
2simoyama@muse.hep.sc.niigata-u.ac.jp

1 introduction

the vast gap between the electroweak scale and the planck scale, known as the
hierarchy problem, remains as a major mystery in particle physics. recently, it
has been suggested that large compactied extra dimensions may provide a solution
to the hierarchy problem.[1] the relation between the four-dimensional planck scale
mpl and the higher dimensional scale m is given by m 2
pl = m n+2vn, where vn is
the volume of the extra compactied dimensions. if vn is large enough, m can be
on the order of several tev. unfortunately, this scenario alone does not completely
solve the problem. the original hierarchy can be translated into another hierarchy
between m and the compactication scale r1

.

c = v 1/n

n

in ref. [2], randall and sundrum (rs) proposed an alternative scenario based
on an extra dimension compactied on s1/z2 with three-branes located at two
boundaries. standard model elds are assumed to be conned on a distant three-
brane, while gravitons propagate in the ve-dimensional bulk. the background
metric takes the form

ds2 = gm n dxm dxn = e2(y)dxdx + dy2,

(1)

where xm = (x, y) is the coordinate of the ve-dimensional spacetime. by the
solving the ve-dimensional einstein equation, the function (y) is found.

(y) = k|y| + 0,

(2)

where k is the curvature scale related to the ve-dimensional cosmological constant
. it was then shown that the eective planck mass in four dimensions is given by
the formula

m 2

pl =

m 3
k

(1  e2krc)e20,

(3)

where rc is the radius of the fth dimension.

two points are to be noted here. the rst point is that according to the above
formula (3), the four-dimensional planck mass is universal; it takes the same value
on both branes located at dierent boundaries. on the other hand, it was argued
that mass scales on the distant brane located at y = rc are rescaled by the warp
factor ekrc . it is this dierence that generates the hierarchy

mw
mpl 

mekrc

m  1.

1

(4)

the second point to be noted is that the formula (3) apparently contains the inte-
gration constant 0, which is left undetermined by the boundary condition of the
ve-dimensional theory. moreover, a certain kind of symmetry under the exchange
of two boundaries is not manifest in this formula (3), as is pointed out in ref.[4].

in this paper, we argue that these two points are intimately related. we carefully
discuss the induced metric and the brane coordinates, and point out that the value
of the four-dimensional planck mass diers for hidden and visible brane; that is,it
is non-universal. as a result, we nd that the four-dimensional planck mass does
not depend on 0, and exchanging-symmetry is manifest.

this paper is organized as follows. after a review of the rs model in 2, we
present our formula for the planck mass in 3. in 4, we apply our prescription for
a bulk scalar eld as an example and examine the masses of its kaluza-klein (kk)
modes.[5] we show that these masses are also independent of 0. as a result, in the
k > 0 scenario, we can adjust m to the tev region since the planck mass as the
gravitational coupling constant on the distant brane should be set to 1018 gev, and
we nd that the mass of the kk modes is on the order of m. section 5 is devoted
to conclusion and discussion.

2 rs model

first, we review the derivation of the four-dimensional planck mass within the sce-
nario of ref.[2].

the background metric of the model takes the form

ds2 = gm n dxm dxn = e2(y)dxdx + dy2,

(5)

where xm = (x, y) is the coordinate of the ve-dimensional spacetime, and the fth
dimension is compactied on s1/z2 with radius rc. the fundamental region of the
fth dimension is given by 0  y  rc. a set of three-branes is located at each
xed point y = yi of s1/z2. the brane at y0 = 0 is called a hidden brane, and
the brane at y1 = rc is called visible. here and hereafter, we use the subscripts
i = 0, 1 for quantities at y = 0, rc, respectively.

the action is

s = sgravity + sbrane,

sgravity = z d4xz rc

rc

dygn + 2m 3ro ,

2

sbrane = xi=0,1z d4xqg(i)nl(i)  v(i)o ,

(6)

where g(i)
brane tensions v(i) are subtracted from the three-brane lagrangians.

(x) = g (x, y = yi) is the induced metric on the i-th brane, and the

with the metric (5), the ve-dimensional einstein equation reduces to two dif-

ferential equations for (y) (using  = y) :

((y))2 = 
24m 3 ,
(y) = xi=0,1

v(i)
12m 3 (y  yi).

the solution to (7) is given by

with

(y) = k|y| + 0,

k = s 
24m 3 .

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

here, 0 is the integration constant which is not determined by the boundary con-
dition of the ve-dimensional theory.1 conventionally, this integration constant 0
is omitted by saying that it just amounts to an overall constant rescaling of x. for
any value of 0, the consistency of the solution (9) with the second equation (8)
requires that the brane tensions and bulk cosmological constant are related by

k =

v(0)
24m 3 = 

v(1)
24m 3 .

(11)

following to ref.[2], we consider a uctuation h of the minkowski spacetime metric
, and replace  by a four-dimensional metric g =  + h. then we have

se = z d4xz rc

rc

dy 2m 3e2(y)gr(g) +   

 2m 2

plz d4xgr(g) +    ,

(12)

1the integration constant 0 might be determined by the fundamental theory in higher

dimensions.[6]

3

where r(g) denotes the four-dimensional scalar curvature constructed from g.
this gives the formula (3) for the universal four-dimensional planck mass,2

m 2

pl =

m 3
k

(1  e2krc)e20.

(13)

we stress that this expression for the planck mass depends on the integration con-
stant 0. with the choice 0 = 0, as in ref.[2], the above expression reduces to

m 2

pl =

m 3
k

(1  e2krc).

(14)

with this choice, one is forced to take m to be of the order of mpl  1018 gev
when considering k > 0.
as pointed out in ref.[4], we are free to choose the y-independent constant 0 in
eq. (9). the particular choice 0 = krc/2 was made so as to meet the requirement
that the expression for mpl is manifestly invariant with the respect to the change
k  k, which amounts to exchanging the role of the two boundaries. then, the
four-dimensional planck mass can be written

m 2

pl =

2m 3

k

sinh(2krc).

(15)

as was noted in ref.[4], however, it is almost certainly true that a change of 0
has no net physical eect and must not change the values of four-dimensional physi-
cal quantities. therefore the physical quantities should have the above exchanging-
symmetry without choosing 0. in other words, physical quantities, including planck
mass, should have the following two properties. first, they are independent of 0.
second, they are not aected by the above brane-exchanging.

in the next section, we present a prescription that naturally realizes these two

properties.

3 four-dimensional eective planck mass

as stated above, the choice of 0 has no net physical eect, and it must not change
the values of physical quantities. that is, all the physical quantities, including the
planck mass, must be independent of 0. in this sense 0 may be regarded as a gauge

2we use the normalizaton of ref.[2].

4

degree of freedom. in particular, the 0-independence of the four-dimensional planck
mass may be understood by the following argument. observe that 0 determines
the ratio of the length scales of the fth-dimensional direction and four-dimensional
direction at y = 0. therefore, after we have integrated over the full fth dimension
when calculating mpl, the freedom of this ratio will be invisible in the eective
theory.

to nd the four-dimensional planck mass more carefully, it is important to make
it clear in which location y the four-dimensional planck mass is measured. to this
end, we need to reconsider the choice of the brane coordinate and the induced metric.
we rst recall the general situation. when the i-th brane with the brane coor-
is embedded into ve-dimensional spacetime by x = x(i) and y = yi,

dinate 
i
the induced metric on it is given by

g(i)
 (i) =

xm

i

xn

i

gm n (x = x (i) , y = yi) .

(16)

in the discussion given in 2, the implicit choice x = 
g(y = yi).

i was made so that g(i)

 =

when the ne-tuning conditions (11) are satised, the branes are at and the
induced metrics generally take the form g(i)
 = e2, with the x-independent
constant . in view of eq. (16), the corresponding brane coordinates are uniquely
determined by 
i = eix (up to a poincare transformation). therefore, when dis-
cussing a four-dimensional eective theory on the brane, one should use the correct
set of the induced metric and brane coordinate as

(cid:16)g(i)
 = e2, 

i = eix(cid:17) .

(17)

this is the point of our treatment. with this correct set, we can determine the
relation of the ve-dimensional scale m and the four-dimensional planck scale mpl(i)
on the i-th brane by integrating over the fth dimension as

sef f = 2m 3z d4xz rc

rc

dy e2(y)gr (g; x) +   

= 2m 2

pl(i)z d4iqg(i)r(cid:16)g(i); i(cid:17) +    ,

(18)

where r(cid:16)g(i), i(cid:17) is the four-dimensional scalar curvature constructed from the in-

i . we note that, following ref.[2], we dene

 and the coordinate 

duced metric g(i)

5

mpl as a coecient of the einstein-hilbert (eh) term. this is a proper denition of
graviton self-couplings contained in the eh term. alternatively, we can determine
mpl from the graviton coupling to the matter stress tensor. we conrmed that both
methods yield the same result, given below.

we now determine the relation between mpl and the ve-dimensional quantities
m, kandrc by using the set (17). for deniteness, let us choose  = 0 so that the
induced metric is precisely minkowskian (as is usual in eld theory in at space-
time). this means that we choose (, 
i = eix) as the induced metric and brane
coordinate. with this choice, we change the integration variables to 
i = eix
and contract the indices with g(i)

 = . we then obtain

sef f = z d4iz rc

rc

dy 2m 3e2((y)i )qg(i)r(g(i); i) +   

 2m 2

pl(i)z d4iqg(i)r(g(i); i) +    ,

where i = (yi). it follows that

m 2

pl(i) = z rc

rc

dym 3e2((y)i )

= m 3e2(i0)z rc

rc

dye2k|y|

=

m 3
k

(1  e2krc)e2(i0).

with (20), it is clear that mpl(i) is independent of 0. explicitly, we nd

on the brane at y = 0 and

m 2

pl(0) =

m 3
k

(1  e2krc)

m 2

pl(1) =

m 3
k

(e2krc  1)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

on the brane y = rc. note that these expressions are transformed into each other
by exchanging k with k. thus our results naturally possess the two properties
stated in the previous section.
we note that our expression (21) for the brane at y = 0 coincides with eq. (14),
which is derived by simply neglecting 0. therefore in this case, we have explicitly

6

conrmed the naive expectation that 0 may be absorbed by the rescaling of x, since
our expression (21) takes account of 0 by using the correct set (, 
i=0 = e0x)
of the induced metric and brane coordinate.

the same is not true for the expression (22), however. when we consider the
scenario of ref.[2], in which standard model elds are assumed to be conned on
the brane at y = rc with a negative tension, the naive expectation is no longer
correct, and the original expression (14) should be modied to our (22). the origin
of the discrepancy can be understood as follows. if one tries to absorb 0 by the
rescaling 
i=1 = e0x as in the y = 0 case, the induced metric  cannot be used,
since (, 
i=1 = e0x) is not the correct set of the induced metric and brane
coordinate. the correct set is (, 
i=1 = e1x). usihg this correct set, one nds
that the planck scale at y = rc is given by our formula (22).

the most important aspect of the rs model is that it gives rise to a localized
graviton eld.[3] our results (21) and (22) can naturally be understood from this
fact; the small planck scale mpl(0) arises because of the localized graviton in the
fth dimension near the brane of positive tension, while the large planck scale
mpl(1) arises because of the small overlap of the graviton with the brane of negative
tension.3

a striking feature of our results (21) and (22) is that the relative size of four
and ve-dimensional planck scales crucially depends on the location at which mpl is
measured. in the model in which standard model elds are conned on the positive
tension brane at y = 0, as in ref.[3], we have the relation (21), from which m is of
the same order as mpl(0)  1019 gev, that is, m  mpl(0). this conclusion is the
same as that in the original proposal, of course. in the model in which standard
model elds are conned on the negative tension brane at y = rc, as in ref.[2],
however, we now have our modied relation (21), which gives

m 2

pl(1) 

m 3
k

e2krc.

(23)

we see that the fundamental mass scale m becomes much smaller than the planck
scale, unlike in the original proposal.[2] as a result, it is perfectly possible that the
fundamental scale m lies in the tev region. we need to use the expressions (21)
and (22) of the four-dimensional planck mass properly, depending on the model
employed.

3to be precise, mp1(1) should be identied as the planck scale in models with the standard
model conned on the brane at y = rc, and mpl(0) should be identied as that in models with
the sm conned at y = 0. in any case, we have only one planck scale in a given model.

7

4 physical mass scale

in order to check from another viewpoint that the physical quantities are indepen-
dent of 0, we consider a massless bulk scalar eld as an illustrative example, and
examine the masses of the kk modes. extensions to the case of a massive bulk
scalar eld and a bulk gauge eld are straightforward.

the action is given by

sscalar = 
1

=

1

2 z d5xggm n m n 
2 z d5xe2( + e2ye4y),

where   . the kk mode expansion is

(x, y) = xn0

n(x)n(y),

where the mode functions n(y) are chosen to satisfy

d

dy  e4 d

dy! n(y) = m 2

ne2n(y)

(24)

(25)

(26)

with mass eigenvalues mn. the solutions to this equation are related to bessel
functions j2 and y2 of order two.[5] we should be careful with eq. (26) however,
since it still contains 0. as the orthnormality condition for n, let us take

z rc

rc

dye2mn = mne2i.

then we have

sscalar =

1

2 xn0z d4x e2in(  m 2

n)n .

(27)

(28)

from our point of view, the action should be described by using the i-th brane
coordinate x
i = eix. then, the four-dimensional volume element d4x and the
dierential operator  are replaced by d4xi = d4xe4i and i = e2i, respectively:

sscalar =

1

2 xn0z d4xi 

n(cid:16)i  e2im 2

n(cid:17) 

n .

(29)

8

we nd that canonically-normalized elds in four dimensions are 
and the physical masses of the kk modes are given by

n(xi) = n(x),

m 2

n(i)  e2im 2

n(i) .

to clarify the physical meaning of (30), let us rewrite (26) as

d

dy  e4ky d

dy! n = (cid:16)m 2

ne20(cid:17) e2kyn  m2

ne2kyn .

(30)

(31)

with m2
that m2
therefore the 0 dependence cancels out in eq. (30) as

n regarded as an eigenvalue, this equation is independent of 0. this implies
n depends on the parameters k and rc, but not on 0; m2
n(k, rc).

n = m2

m 

n(i) = mnei = mne(i0) .

(32)

the mass spectrum of the kk modes is determined by the boundary condition
(d/dy) n (y = rc) = 0. in particular, we are interested in the mass
n(1), as measured on the visible brane. to this end, note that eq. (31) is

at y = rc,
scale m 
precisely the same equation that treated in ref.[5], where it was shown that

mn  kekrc = ke(10).

therefore the mass scale of the kk modes is estimated as

m 

n(1)  k  m  mpl(1) .

(33)

(34)

we thus conrm that the mass scale of the kk modes is signicantly smaller than
the planck scale  1018 gev. we remark, however, that our interpretations is quite
dierent from the usual one,

mn  k  m  mpl .

(35)

5 conclusions

the most important point in our treatment is to make the brane coordinate transfor-
mation, by which the induced metric on each brane becomes the minkowski metric
. when measured with such brane coordinates, the four-dimensional planck mass

9

becomes dierent on each brane. we found that the four-dimensional planck mass,
when calculated by this procedure, does not depend on the integration constant
0. we showed that the masses of the kk modes are also independent of 0 for a
massless bulk scalar. this holds for any kinds of elds. moreover, the exchanging-
symmetry is manifest in our expression for the planck masses. on the brane with
negative tension, the planck mass is always much larger than on the brane with pos-
itive tension. this fact is interpreted as reecting the smallness of the gravitational
coupling constant, that is, the small overlap of the graviton with the brane with
negative tension. when we identify the brane of negative tension with the visible
brane, the fundamental scale m can be signicantly smaller than the planck mass,
and the masses of the kk modes are of the same order as m in the massless bulk
scalar. we can summarize the above statement as follows. when we estimate the
values of physical quantities, we must multiply by the warp factor corresponding to
their mass dimension to the values in the bulk. this rule is not exceptional to the
planck mass.

the most striking result is that the fundamental scale m in the ve-dimensional
theory can be signicantly smaller than that was supposed so far. for instance, it
can lie in the tev region. given this, it will be interesting to nd direct evidence
for the extra dimension in the randall-sundrum-type scenario. high-energy accel-
erator experiments in the near future might directly prove the existence of the extra
dimension.

acknowledgements

we are grateful to h. nakano, a. kageyama and t. hirayama for useful discussions
and suggestions. we also thank k.-i. izawa for helpful comments.

references

[1] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, the hierarchy problem
and new dimensions at a millimeter, phys. lett. b429 (1998) 263, hep-
ph/9803315.
i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, new dimen-
sions at a millimeter to a fermi and superstrings at a tev phys. lett. b436
(1998), 257, hep-ph/9804398.

10

[2] l. randall and r. sundrum, a large mass hierarchy from a small extra

dimension, phys. rev. lett. 83 (1999) 3370, hep-th/9905221.

[3] l. randall and r. sundrum, an alternative to compactication, phys. rev.

lett. 83 (1999) 4690, hep-th/9906064.

[4] k.r. dienes, e. dudas and t. gherghetta, anomaly-induced gauge unica-
tion and brane/bulk coupling in gravity-localized theories, hep-ph/9908530.

[5] w.d. goldberger and m. wise, bulk field in the randall-sundrum compact-

ication scenario, phys. rev. d60 (1999) 107505, hep-ph/9907218.

[6] e. verlinde and h. verlinde, rg-flow, gravity, and the cosmological con-

stant, hep-th/9912018.

11

